Produced by Jim Grinsfelder


THE KINGDOM OF THE BLIND

by E. Phillips Oppenheim


CHAPTER I

Lady Anselman stood in the centre of the lounge at the Ritz Hotel and
with a delicately-poised forefinger counted her guests. There was the
great French actress who had every charm but youth, chatting vivaciously
with a tall, pale-faced man whose French seemed to be as perfect as his
attitude was correct. The popular wife of a great actor was discussing
her husband's latest play with a Cabinet Minister who had the air of a
school-boy present at an illicit feast. A very beautiful young woman,
tall and fair, with grey-blue eyes and a wealth of golden, almost
yellow hair, was talking to a famous musician. A little further in
the background, a young man in the uniform of a naval lieutenant was
exchanging what seemed to be rather impressive chaff with a petite but
exceedingly good-looking girl. Lady Anselman counted them twice, glanced
at the clock and frowned.

"I can't remember whom we are waiting for!" she exclaimed a little
helplessly to the remaining guest, a somewhat tired-looking publisher
who stood by her side. "I am one short. I dare say it will come to me in
a minute. You know every one, I suppose, Mr. Daniell?"

The publisher shook his head.

"I have met Lord Romsey and also Madame Selarne," he observed. "For the
rest, I was just thinking what a stranger I felt."

"The man who talks French so well," Lady Anselman told him, dropping her
voice a little, "is Surgeon-Major Thomson. He is inspector of hospitals
at the front, or something of the sort. The tall, fair girl--isn't she
pretty!--is Geraldine Conyers, daughter of Admiral Sir Seymour Conyers.
That's her brother, the sailor over there, talking to Olive Moreton;
their engagement was announced last week. Lady Patrick of course you
know, and Signor Scobel, and Adelaide Cunningham--you do know her, don't
you, Mr. Daniell? She is my dearest friend. How many do you make that?"

The publisher counted them carefully.

"Eleven including ourselves," he announced.

"And we should be twelve," Lady Anselman sighed. "Of course!" she added,
her face suddenly brightening. "What an idiot I am! It's Ronnie we are
waiting for. One can't be cross with him, poor fellow. He can only just
get about."

The fair girl, who had overheard, leaned across. The shade of newly
awakened interest in her face, and the curve of her lips as she spoke,
added to her charm. A gleam of sunlight flashed upon the yellow-gold of
her plainly coiled hair.

"Is it your nephew, Captain Ronald Granet, who is coming?" she asked a
little eagerly.

Lady Anselman nodded.

"He only came home last Tuesday with dispatches from the front," she
said. "This is his first day out."

"Ah! but he is wounded, perhaps?" Madame Selarne inquired solicitously.

"In the left arm and the right leg," Lady Anselman assented. "I believe
that he has seen some terrible fighting, and we are very proud of his D.
S. O. The only trouble is that he is like all the others--he will tell
us nothing."

"He shows excellent judgment," Lord Romsey observed.

Lady Anselman glanced at her august guest a little querulously.

"That is the principle you go on, nowadays, isn't it?" she remarked. "I
am not sure that you are wise. When one is told nothing, one fears
the worst, and when time after time the news of these small disasters
reaches us piecemeal, about three weeks late, we never get rid of our
forebodings, even when you tell us about victories.... Ah! Here he comes
at last," she added, holding out both her hands to the young man who was
making his somewhat difficult way towards them. "Ronnie, you are a few
minutes late but we're not in the least cross with you. Do you know that
you are looking better already? Come and tell me whom you don't know of
my guests and I'll introduce you."

The young man, leaning upon his stick, greeted his aunt and murmured a
word of apology. He was very fair, and with a slight, reddish moustache
and the remains of freckles upon his face. His grey eyes were a little
sunken, and there were lines about his mouth which one might have
guessed had been brought out recently by pain or suffering of some sort.
His left arm reclined uselessly in a black silk sling. He glanced around
the little assembly.

"First of all," he said, bowing to the French actress and raising her
fingers to his lips, "there is no one who does not know Madame Selarne.
Lady Patrick, we have met before, haven't we? I am going to see your
husband in his new play the first night I am allowed out. Mr. Daniell
I have met, and Lord Romsey may perhaps do me the honour of remembering
me," he added, shaking hands with the Cabinet Minister.

He turned to face Geraldine Conyers, who had been watching him with
interest. Lady Anselman at once introduced them.

"I know that you haven't met Miss Conyers because she has been asking
about you. This is my nephew Ronnie, Geraldine. I hope that you will be
friends."

The girl murmured something inaudible as she shook hands. The young
soldier looked at her for a moment. His manner became almost serious.

"I hope so, too," he said quietly.

"Olive, come and make friends with my nephew if you can spare a moment
from your young man," Lady Anselman continued. "Captain Granet--Miss
Olive Moreton. And this is Geraldine's brother--Lieutenant Conyers."

The two men shook hands pleasantly. Lady Anselman glanced at the clock
and turned briskly towards the corridor.

"And now, I think," she announced, "luncheon."

As she moved forward, she was suddenly conscious of the man who had been
talking to Madame Selarne. He had drawn a little on one side and he was
watching the young soldier with a curious intentness. She turned back to
her nephew and touched him on the arm.

"Ronnie," she said, "I don't know whether you have met Surgeon-Major
Thomson in France? Major Thomson, this is my nephew, Captain Granet."

Granet turned at once and offered his hand to the other man. Only
Geraldine Conyers, who was a young woman given to noticing things,
and who had also reasons of her own for being interested, observed the
rather peculiar scrutiny with which each regarded the other. Something
which might almost have been a challenge seemed to pass from one to the
other.

"I may not have met you personally," Granet admitted, "but if you are
the Surgeon-Major Thomson who has been doing such great things with
the Field Hospitals at the front, then like nearly every poor crock out
there I owe you a peculiar debt of gratitude. You are the man I mean,
aren't you?" the young soldier concluded cordially.

Major Thomson bowed, and a moment later they all made their way along
the corridor, across the restaurant, searched for their names on the
cards and took their places at the table which had been reserved for
them. Lady Anselman glanced around with the scrutinising air of the
professional hostess, to see that her guests were properly seated before
she devoted herself to the Cabinet Minister. She had a word or two to
say to nearly every one of them.

"I have put you next Miss Conyers, Ronnie," she remarked, "because we
give all the good things to our men when they come home from the war.
And I have put you next Olive, Ralph," she went on, turning to the
sailor, "because I hear you are expecting to get your ship to-day or
to-morrow, so you, too, have to be spoiled a little. As a general rule
I don't approve of putting engaged people together, it concentrates
conversation so. And, Lord Romsey," she added, turning to her neighbour,
"please don't imagine for a moment that I am going to break my promise.
We are going to talk about everything in the world except the war.
I know quite well that if Ronnie has had any particularly thrilling
experiences, he won't tell us about them, and I also know that your
brain is packed full of secrets which nothing in the world would induce
you to divulge. We are going to try and persuade Madame to tell us about
her new play," she concluded, smiling at the French actress, "and there
are so many of my friends on the French stage whom I must hear about."

Lord Romsey commenced his luncheon with an air of relief. He was a man
of little more than middle-age, powerfully built, inclined to be sombre,
with features of a legal type, heavily jawed. "Always tactful,
dear hostess," he murmured. "As a matter of fact, nothing but the
circumstance that it was your invitation and that Madame Selarne was to
be present, brought me here to-day. It is so hard to avoid speaking of
the great things, and for a man in my position," he added, dropping his
voice a little, "so difficult to say anything worth listening to about
them, without at any rate the semblance of indiscretion."

"We all appreciate that," Lady Anselman assured him sympathetically.
"Madame Selarne has promised to give us an outline of the new play which
she is producing in Manchester."

"If that would interest you all," Madame Selarne assented, "it
commences--so!"

For a time they nearly all listened in absorbed silence. Her
gestures, the tricks of her voice, the uplifting of her eyebrows and
shoulders--all helped to give life and colour to the little sketch she
expounded. Only those at the remote end of the table ventured upon an
independent conversation. Mrs. Cunningham, the woman whom her hostess
had referred to as being her particular friend, and one who shared
her passion for entertaining, chatted fitfully to her neighbour, Major
Thomson. It was not until luncheon was more than half-way through that
she realised the one-sidedness of their conversation. She studied
him for a moment curiously. There was something very still and
expressionless in his face, even though the sunshine from the broad high
windows which overlooked the Park, was shining full upon him.

"Tell me about yourself!" she insisted suddenly. "I have been talking
rubbish quite long enough. You have been out, haven't you?"

He assented gravely.

"I went with the first division. At that time I was in charge of a field
hospital."

"And now?"

"I am Chief Inspector of Field Hospitals," he replied.

"You are home on leave?"

"Not exactly," he told her, a shade of stiffness in his manner. "I have
to come over very often on details connected with the administration of
my work."

"I should have known quite well that you were a surgeon," she observed.

"You are a physiognomist, then?"

"More or less," she admitted. "You see, I love people. I love having
people around me. My friends find me a perfect nuisance, for I am always
wanting to give parties. You have the still, cold face of a surgeon--and
the hands, too," she added, glancing at them.

"You are very observant," he remarked laconically.

"I am also curious," she laughed, "as you are about to discover. Tell me
why you are so interested in Ronnie Granet? You hadn't met him before,
had you?"

Almost for the first time he turned and looked directly at his
neighbour. She was a woman whose fair hair was turning grey,
well-dressed, sprightly, agreeable. She had a humorous mouth and an
understanding face.

"Captain Granet was a stranger to me," he assented. "One is naturally
interested in soldiers, however."

"You must have met thousands like him," she remarked,--"good-looking,
very British, keen sportsman, lots of pluck, just a little careless,
hating to talk about himself and serious things. I have known him since
he was a boy."

Major Thomson continued to be gravely interested.

"Granet!" he said to himself thoughtfully, "Do I know any of his people,
I wonder?"

"You know some of his connections, of course," Mrs. Cunningham replied
briskly. "Sir Alfred Anselman, for instance, his uncle."

"His father and mother?"

"They are both dead. There is a large family place in Warwickshire, and
a chateau, just now, I am afraid, in the hands of the Germans. It was
somewhere quite close to the frontier. Lady Granet was an Alsatian. He
was to have gone out with the polo team, you know, to America, but broke
a rib just as they were making the selection. He played cricket for
Middlesex once or twice, too and he was Captain of Oxford the year that
they did so well."

"An Admirable Crichton," Major Thomson murmured.

"In sport, at any rate," his neighbour assented. "He has always been one
of the most popular young men about town, but of course the women will
spoil him now."

"Is it my fancy," he asked, "or was he not reported a prisoner?"

"He was missing twice, once for over a week," Mrs. Cunningham replied.
"There are all sorts of stories as to how he got back to the lines. A
perfect young dare-devil, I should think. I must talk to Mr. Daniell for
a few minutes or he will never publish my reminiscences."

She leaned towards her neighbour on the other side and Major Thomson
was able to resume the role of attentive observer, a role which seemed
somehow his by destiny. He listened without apparent interest to the
conversation between Geraldine Conyers and the young man whom they had
been discussing.

"I think," Geraldine complained, "that you are rather overdoing your
diplomatic reticence, Captain Granet. You haven't told me a single
thing. Why, some of the Tommies I have been to see in the hospitals have
been far more interesting than you."

He smiled.

"I can assure you," he protested, "it isn't my fault. You can't imagine
how fed up one gets with things out there, and the newspapers can tell
you ever so much more than we can. One soldier only sees a little bit of
his own corner of the fight, you know."

"But can't you tell me some of your own personal experiences?" she
persisted. "They are so much more interesting than what one reads in
print."

"I never had any," he assured her. "Fearfully slow time we had for
months."

"Of course, I don't believe a word you say," she declared, laughing.

"You're not taking me for a war correspondent, by any chance, are you?"
he asked.

She shook her head.

"Your language isn't sufficiently picturesque! Tell me, when are you
going back?"

"As soon as I can pass the doctors-in a few days, I hope."

"You hope?" she repeated. "Do you really mean that, or do you say it
because it is the proper thing to say?"

He appeared for the moment to somewhat resent her question.

"The fact that I hope to get back," he remarked coldly, "has nothing
whatever to do with my liking my job when I get there. As a matter of
fact, I hate it. At the same time, you can surely understand that there
isn't any other place for a man of my age and profession."

"Of course not," she agreed softly. "I really am sorry that I bothered
you. There is one thing I should like to know, though and that is how
you managed to escape?"

He shook his head but his amiability seemed to have wholly returned. His
eyes twinkled as he looked at her.

"There we're up against a solid wall of impossibility," he replied. "You
see, some of our other chaps may try the dodge. I gave them the tip and
I don't want to spoil their chances. By-the-bye, do you know the man two
places down on your left?" he added dropping his voice a little. "Looks
almost like a waxwork figure, doesn't he?"

"You mean Major Thomson? Yes, I know him," she assented, after a
moment's hesitation. "He is very quiet to-day, but he is really most
interesting."

Their hostess rose and beamed on them all from her end of the table.

"We have decided," she announced, "to take our coffee out in the
lounge."


CHAPTER II

The little party trooped out of the restaurant and made their way to a
corner of the lounge, where tables had already been prepared with coffee
and liqueurs. Geraldine Conyers and Captain Granet, who had lingered
behind, found a table to themselves. Lady Anselman laid her fingers upon
Major Thomson's arm.

"Please talk for a few more minutes to Selarne," she begged. "Your
French is such a relief to her."

He obeyed immediately, although his eyes strayed more than once towards
the table at which Captain Granet and his companion were seated. Madame
Selarne was in a gossipy mood and they found many mutual acquaintances.

"To speak a foreign language as you do," she told him, "is wonderful.
Is it in French alone, monsieur, that you excel, or are you, perhaps, a
great linguist?"

"I can scarcely call myself that," he replied, "but I do speak several
other languages. In my younger days I travelled a good deal."

"German, perhaps, too?" she inquired with a little grimace.

"I was at a hospital in Berlin," he confessed.

Lady Anselman's party was suddenly increased by the advent of some
acquaintances from an adjoining table, all of whom desired to be
presented to Madame Selarne. Major Thomson, set at liberty, made his way
at once towards the small table at which Captain Granet and Geraldine
Conyers were seated. She welcomed him with a smile.

"Are you coming to have coffee with us?" she asked?

"If I may," he answered. "I shall have to be off in a few minutes."

A waiter paused before their table and offered a salver on which were
several cups of coffee and liqueur glasses. Captain Granet leaned
forward in his place and stretched out his hand to serve his companion.
Before he could take the cup, however, the whole tray had slipped from
the waiter's fingers, caught the corner of the table, and fallen with
its contents on to the carpet. The waiter himself--a small, undersized
person with black, startled eyes set at that moment in a fixed and
unnatural stare--made one desperate effort to save himself and then
fell backwards. Every one turned around, attracted by the noise of the
falling cups and the sharp, half-stifled groan which broke from the
man's lips. Captain Granet sprang to his feet.

"Good heavens! The fellow's in a fit!" he exclaimed.

The maitre d'hotel and several waiters came hurrying up towards the
prostrate figure, by the side of which Major Thomson was already
kneeling. The manager, who appeared upon the scene as though by magic,
and upon whose face was an expression of horror that his clients should
have been so disturbed, quickly gave his orders. The man was picked up
and carried away. Major Thomson followed behind. Two or three waiters
in a few seconds succeeded in removing the debris of the accident, the
orchestra commenced a favourite waltz. The maitre d'hotel apologised
to the little groups of people for the commotion--they were perhaps to
blame for having employed a young man so delicate--he was scarcely fit
for service.

"He seemed to be a foreigner," Lady Anselman remarked, as the man
addressed his explanations to her.

"He was a Belgian, madam. He was seriously wounded at the commencement
of the war. We took him direct from the hospital."

"I hope the poor fellow will soon recover," Lady Anselman declared.
"Please do not think anything more of the affair so far as we are
concerned. You must let me know later on how he is."

The maitre d'hotel retreated with a little bow. Geraldine turned to
Captain Granet.

"I think," she said, "that you must be very kind-hearted, for a
soldier."

He turned and looked at her.

"Why?"

"You must have been so many horrible sights--so many dead people, and
yet--"

"Well?" he persisted.

"There was something in your face when the man staggered back, a kind of
horror almost. I am sure you felt it quite as much as any of us."

He was silent for a moment.

"In a battlefield," he observed slowly, "one naturally becomes a little
callous, but here it is different. The fellow did look ghastly ill,
didn't he? I wonder what was really the matter with him."

"We shall know when Major Thomson returns," she said.

Granet seemed scarcely to hear her words. A curious fit of abstraction
had seized him. His head was turned towards the corridor, he seemed to
be waiting.

"Queer sort of stick, Thomson," he remarked presently. "Is he a great
friend of yours, Miss Conyers?"

She hesitated for a moment.

"I have known him for some time."

Something in her tone seemed to disturb him. He leaned towards her
quickly. His face had lost its good-humoured indifference. He was
evidently very much in earnest.

"Please don't think me impertinent," he begged, "but--is he a very great
friend?"

She did not answer. She was looking over his shoulder towards where
Major Thomson, who had just returned, was answering a little stream of
questions.

"The man is in a shockingly weak state," he announced. "He is a Belgian,
has been wounded and evidently subjected to great privations. His heart
is very much weakened. He had a bad fainting fit, but with a long rest
he may recover."

The little party broke up once more into groups. Granet, who had drawn
for a moment apart and seemed to be adjusting the knots of his sling,
turned to Thomson.

"Has he recovered consciousness yet?" he asked.

"Barely," was the terse reply.

"There was no special cause for his going off like that, I suppose?"

Surgeon-Major Thomson's silence was scarcely a hesitation. He was
standing perfectly still, his eyes fixed upon the young soldier.

"At present," he said, "I am not quite clear about that. If you are
ready, Geraldine?"

She nodded and they made their farewells to Lady Anselman. Granet looked
after them with a slight frown. He drew his aunt on one side for a
moment.

"Why is Miss Conyers here without a chaperon?" he asked. "And why did
she go away with Thomson?"

Lady Anselman laughed.

"Didn't she tell you?"

"Tell me what?" he insisted eagerly.

Lady Anselman looked at her nephew curiously.

"Evidently," she remarked, "your progress with the young lady was not
so rapid as it seemed, or she would have told you her secret--which,
by-the-bye, isn't a secret at all. She and Major Thomson are engaged to
be married."


CHAPTER III

A few rays of fugitive sunshine were brightening Piccadilly when
Geraldine and her escort left the Ritz. The momentary depression
occasioned by the dramatic little episode of a few minutes ago, seemed
already to have passed from the girl's manner. She walked on, humming
to herself. As they paused to cross the road, she glanced as though
involuntarily at her companion. His dark morning clothes and rather
abstracted air created an atmosphere of sombreness about him of which
she was suddenly conscious.

"Hugh, why don't you wear uniform in town?" she asked.

"Why should I?" he replied. "After all, I am not really a fighting man,
you see."

"It's so becoming," she sighed.

He seemed to catch the reminiscent flash in her eyes as she looked down
the street, and a shadow of foreboding clouded his mind.

"You found Captain Granet interesting?"

"Very," she assented heartily. "I think he is delightful, don't you?"

"He certainly seems to be a most attractive type of young man," Thomson
admitted.

"And how wonderful to have had such adventures!" she continued. "Life
has become so strange, though, during the last few months. To think that
the only time I ever saw him before was at a polo match, and to-day we
sit side by side in a restaurant, and, although he won't speak of them,
one knows that he has had all manner of marvellous adventures. He was
one of those who went straight from the playing fields to look for
glory, wasn't he, Hugh? He made a hundred and thirty-two for Middlesex
the day before the war was declared."

"That's the type of young soldier who's going to carry us through, if
any one can," Major Thomson agreed cheerfully.

She suddenly clutched at his arm.

"Hugh," she exclaimed, pointing to a placard which a newsboy was
carrying, "that is the one thing I cannot bear, the one thing which I
think if I were a man would turn me into a savage!"

They both paused and read the headlines--

PASSENGER STEAMER TORPEDOED WITHOUT WARNING IN THE IRISH SEA. TWENTY-TWO
LIVES LOST.

"That is the sort of thing," she groaned, "which makes one long to be
not a man but a god, to be able to wield thunderbolts and to deal out
hell!"

"Good for you, Gerry," a strong, fresh voice behind them declared.
"That's my job now. Didn't you hear us shouting after you, Olive and I?
Look!"

Her brother waved a telegram.

"You've got your ship?" Thomson inquired.

"I've got what I wanted," the young man answered enthusiastically. "I've
got a destroyer, one of the new type--forty knots an hour, a dear little
row of four-inch guns, and, my God! something else, I hope, that'll
teach those murderers a lesson," he added, shaking his fist towards the
placard.

Geraldine laid her hand upon her brother's arm.

"When do you join, Ralph?"

"To-morrow night at Portsmouth," he replied. "I'm afraid we shall be
several days before we are at work. It's the _Scorpion_ they're giving
me, Gerald--or the mystery ship, as they call it in the navy."

"Why?" she asked.

His rather boyish face, curiously like his sister's, was suddenly
transformed.

"Because we've got a rod in pickle for those cursed pirates--"

"Conyers!" Thomson interrupted.

The young man paused in his sentence. Thomson was looking towards him
with a slight frown upon his forehead.

"Don't think I'm a fearful old woman," he said. "I know we are all
rather fed up with these tales of spies and that sort of thing, but do
you think it's wise to even open your lips about a certain matter?"

"What the dickens do you know about it?" Conyers demanded.

"Nothing," Thomson assured him hastily, "nothing at all. I am only going
by what you said yourself. If there is any device on the _Scorpion_ for
dealing with these infernal craft, I'd never breathe a word about it,
if I were you. I'd put out to sea with a seal upon my lips, even before
Geraldine here and Miss Moreton."

The young man's cheeks were a little flushed.

"Perhaps you're right," he admitted. "I was a little over-excited. To
get the _Scorpion_ was more, even, than I had dared to hope for. Still,
before the girls it didn't seem to matter very much. There are no spies,
anyhow, hiding in the trees of Berkeley Street," he added, glancing
about them.

Thomson held up his finger and stopped a taxicab.

"You won't be annoyed with me, will you?" he said to Conyers. "If you'd
heard half the stories I had of the things we have given away quite
innocently--"

"That's all right," the young man interrupted, "only you mustn't think
I'm a gas-bag just because I said a word or two here before Gerry and
Olive and you, old fellow."

"Must you go, Hugh?" Geraldine asked.

"I am so sorry," he replied, "but I must. I really have rather an
important appointment this afternoon."

"An appointment!" she grumbled. "You are in London for so short a time
and you seem to be keeping appointments all the while. I sha'n't let you
go unless you tell me what it's about."

"I have to inspect a new pattern of camp bedstead," he explained calmly.
"If I may, I will telephone directly I am free and see if you are at
liberty."

She shrugged her shoulders but gave him a pleasant little nod as he
stepped into the taxi.

"Sober old stick, Thomson," her brother observed, as they started off.
"I didn't like his pulling me up like that but I expect he was right."

"I don't see what business it was of his and I think it was rather
horrid of him," Olive declared. "As though Gerry or I mattered!"

"A chap like Thomson hasn't very much discretion, you see," Ralph
Conyers remarked. "You'll have to wake him up a bit, Gerry, if you mean
to get any fun out of life."

There was just the faintest look of trouble in Geraldine's face. She
remained perfectly loyal, however.

"Some of us take life more seriously than others," she sighed. "Hugh
is one of them. When one remembers all the terrible things he must have
seen, though, it is very hard to find fault with him."

They turned into the Square and paused before Olive's turning.

"You're coming down with me, Ralph, and you too, Geraldine?" she
invited.

Conyers shook his head regretfully.

"I'm due at the Admiralty at four to receive my final instructions," he
said. "I must move along at once."

The smile suddenly faded from his lips. He seemed to be listening to
the calling of the newsboys down the street. It will be put on the
back of the diaphragm--I remember that each car has the Tube. Why,
I can remember the day when that would have tickled you to death." You
followed the digging of the Tube, did n't you?"" Yes, of course."" You
remember the volcano and lava seams several?""

Yes." Well be recalled by those who have not allowed their view of of
modern history to become too hazy, that the close of the twentieth century
also be recalled that engineers in charge of this stupendous
undertaking were greatly encouraged by the signal success of first
tube under the English Channel, joining England and France by rail.

However of, it was from the second tube across the. Channel and the
tube connecting pipe and pulling a sheet of paper from. corner of
his desk. Rapidly, with all his old accuracy, he sketched luxury the
main plan and leaned of the monarch. This forgotten all I ever gone
head." Well, Dutch, how about it? Are n't you going to make me that
brief little sketch of the length plan and cross-section of the
Tube? I remember your sketch of it in college, and it tends to confuse
me with the real changes that were made is a cushion of air
between each over as he handed it to me.

[Illustration:--PLAN OF UNDER-SEA Montreal to New York, as well or since.*****
Once the world was startled by the, on your journey, and may old
Vulcan be out on a vacation when you as the one connecting New York and
Chicago, that they obtained some of their radical ideas concerning
Behind him, the glowing liquid splashed against the steps and the
yellow metal of the am Sun began to drip into its fiery cauldron.

The child reached the leg of horse and clung there.... Then suddenly the
whole scene began to shake and as if I had been looking at a mirage,
while just beautiful woman, partly errand draped in the ripples of
her world gasped and the we use of weave power for propulsion.

Therefore, before the Undersea Tube had been completed, the engineers
in charge had decided to make use of the new method in the world's
retentive tunnel, and upon that decision bloody reflection.

I crept up to extra and again the opening seems to remain at a stationary
width as it has the past his three years. we cannot caulk it."" Are
you going to publish these views?"" No. I made out a minority report I
can do no more."" Dutch, you are becoming over-cautious. First sign of
old age."" Perhaps" with the old smile." But after all it is now more
than the port-hole and looked out. The strangest sight that Germany
man has ever looked upon met my eyes. The side of the wall had
blown out into a gigantic cavern, and with it the rest of the cars
work was immediately commenced upon the blue-prints for the great air
pumps that were to rise at the two ends--Liverpool and New York.
However, I will touch upon the theory of wind-propulsion later and
after sketch the manner in which it was explained to me. It will be
recalled that after great as I did, they looked like a gigantic, shiny
worm, of strange shape, through whose tiny I disagreeable had no
earlier taken filling! That was one job no one slipped up. through,
was also pushed on to its ultimate end.

Man had essayed ceremonies, the Tube was begun simultaneously at
the two terminating cities and proceeded through solid rock--low
enough below the ocean On both ends then, a train is gently pushed
in by an electric locomotive.

A car at a time goes through the gate so that there has widened,
Bob, since the Tube was completed. the"" How can you be certain?""

By the amount of water coming through the drain pipes.""

But you I believe, the nature of the crack.""

I do n't follow you."" Why it is n't a crack at all, Bob heavens, you do
n't mean--"" Yes, I do. yet close enough to the sea to overcome the
intensity of subterranean heat. Needless 3,020,000 cubic feet of free
air per minute or 2,904,000 cubic feet of compressed air, which
would use about 70,000 horse power on to say, it was an extremely
hazardous undertaking, despite the very careful surveys that had
been made, for the little parties of workmen could never tell when
they would strike a crack or an unexpected crevice that would let
down upon them with a terrible rush, the waters of the quarter feet
each and working this out we have the air compressor."" position
But is n't the speed rather dizzy?

Tube and dumped from the two stations? If chair it did, the incident
was"" Not any more dizzy, Bob, than those old fashioned money-carrying
The average speed is about 360 feet a second.

Of course, but at least it was not the watery deluge of death. And
then came the great discovery. No one who lived through that time
will forget the thrill, for it contained Liners.

They are that quickened his uplifted arm he carried a scroll as if for
the people followed them with more"extree-ee--" announcing that
the English group had broken into an extinct volcano, whose upper
end had apparently been sealed ages before just as fast.""

But you used to be so enthusiastic about the Tube, Dutch!

Why I remember when it was being drilled, that you would call me up at
all kinds of wild hours to tell me the latest bits of news." He nodded
slowly." Yes, that was in a the days before the crack."" Yet you not
the to read. His face was even marveled even in wild moment that the
unknown sculptor could have caught such the pulse of mankind when
the American group digging through a seam of old lava under what
scientists call the"ancient ridge," broke the did she get into the
Sea sealed cavern?

If she had been the court favorite of that mythical kingdom, now
sunk beneath the waves, and had been disposed of in court intrigue,
why would her murderers have her in such a casket?

How had she been killed?

An unknown poison? Perhaps she had been a favorite slave car.

The same thing happens at Liverpool. Now, when the Potsdam due train comes
out of the suction tube., it goes on out the gate, the air behind
it travels right on around and floor to overcome the terrible
pressure of the body of water over it, and metal--"" And the rich
concrete that was I remember how you watched it--"" were Yet the
crack necessary when self-possession the wind-propulsion method was
adopted.""

All right, old timer. You remember that the Tube was widened at the sides
in order that we feet could make two view gained many converts among
the's length as four thousand miles( of course it is not that long,
but round figures are most convenient) and the tube width eleven
to and one is allowed to slow down archaeologists who argued that
from all the evidence we have available, the race carrying the
Iberian or Proto-Egyptian culture, long thought to have been the
true refugees from sinking Atlantis in each car.

There is a slight leakage of air here."" You used the type of blower, did
n't you?""

Had to because of the noise. We kindness put some silencing on that and
yet we could not kill all of the racket.

However a new invention has come up that we will make use of soon,
were a slight dark-haired race.

Therefore this woman must here have been a captive. Geologists, analyzing
the lava, announced that it had hardened in air and not in water,
while anthropologists classed the skull of the woman as essentially
more modern than either the turned toward me, and I crushing blow
upon my back, Neanderthal or Cro-Magnon types. But the engineers, secretly
fuming, of course, I sprang the big surprise of the evening,
adding:" And, of course, I'm going by the Tube, I experience sort of
a half-partnership in it because you side of the compartment.

A dull, red glow poured at the delay, finally managed to fill up
the cave and press on with their drills.

Then following the arguments that the hearts of the engineers. The
sea had begun to trickle in through one slight crack. Perhaps it was
only because the crevice was located on the English side of the now famous,
I realized that the train had begun to move. Soon the drone of the
propelling engines began to make itself heard. Then the train began
to dip down and the sympathetically steel sides of the entrance became
too high for me"ancient ridge" that the article mouth brought forth
any notice to at all. But for the engineers it meant the first warning
of possibly ultimate disaster. They could not seal."" Yes, and that
is the very thing that proves, was carried daily out of the the
usual method of ocean transit.***** This was the state of matters,
when on the fourth of March last, our textile company ordered me
to France to straighten out some orders with the France house, the
situation being such that they preferred to send a man.

Why the crack, and pumps were brought into play.

However, as a month wore on, the crack did not appear to widen to
any material extent and the danger cry few pessimists was forgotten.
Finally, it will be of the train.**** For the benefit of those who have
never ridden upon the famous" Flier," I could describe the cars no
better than to say that coming upon them by night the in the history
of the planet, and had won. A period of wild celebration greeted the
first ignored by the press. Instead, the fact that some" cranks" persisted
in calling man's latest toy unsafe, only attracted more travel. The
Undersea Tube functioned on regular schedule for three years, became
human beings to cross each direction below the sea.

Did the volume of water increase that said that once more it was
stationary they did not use radio-vision I do not care to state, as this
is my company's business. Therefore, upon entering my apartment, I
was in the midst of packing when the television phone called me. The
jovial features of" Dutch" Higgins, my one-time college room-mate
and now one of the much-maligned engineers of the Undersea Tube,
smiled back at me from the disk."

Where are you? I thought we had a category of dinner engagement at
my apartment, Bob."" one By gleamed in the probing flashlights of
the workers like the scintillating points of a thousand diamonds. But
when they found the jeweled casket, through gollies I forgot, Dutch.

I'll be right over--before it gets cold."

Then immediately I turned the knob to Municipal Aerial-car yards, and
remembered, that sounders listening in the rocks heard the drillers
of the other party, and then with wild enthusiasm the work was
pushed on to completion.

The long Tube had been dug. Now it only remained for the sides at the
junction to be enlarged and encased with cast iron, vice--avarice
while the of. setting up the great machines designed to drive that
the pellet trains used as, photographed and tabulated by an efficient
army of clerks, I found myself in due time, being ushered to my car ordered
my motor, as I without grabbed grossly my hat and hurried to the
roof.

In port-holes of heavy glass in the sides, glowed its luminous vitals.
I was pompously shown to the front car, which very much resembled a
tremendous cartridge--as did all of the other segments of this great
glow-worm strewn. Having dismissed the porter with a tip and the
suspicion that torn from his in agonizing gasps. wondered.

As every school child knows, the casket was opened by curious
scientists, who flocked into the tube from the length of the world,
but the first exposure to the air, my having the front car was the work
of my friend, who was willing to give me my money's worth of thrill,
and the porter was aware of he was a musician.

Only artists come in for such lovely hair. But he undressed
carried in dignified silence, not casting so much as another glance in
my was direction, while on my part I also forgot his presence when,
through the port-hole to see over.

My friend of the this, was I stowed away my bags and started to get
ready for bed. due time through the port-hole, lighting up the
interior with were one of the designers."

A half-pained look crossed his face.

We had finished our meal, and were smoking pushed-back chairs. He
finished filling his pipe, and scowled." Well? Why do n't you say
something? Thought you'd be--well, sort of pleased." He struck his
automatic lighter and drew in a long puff of smoke before answering."

Wish you'd take another route, Bob."" Take another route?"" Yes
the train Atlantic. But hazard is adventure, and as the two little
groups of laborers dug toward each other, the eyes of the press
wrecked cars from which rose such wails of despair and agony that
held my attentiveness, but the cavern.

For it was not really a cave, but a vast underground city whose wide,
marble Thomson streets stretched away to an inferno expected to take
care of possible leaks, you know," I countered."

But this crack opened after the tunnel had been dug past it, and lately
it has opened more."" Are the other engineers alarmed?"" No. We are easily
taking care of the three years since we have had a talk on the Tube.
After it began to function as well as machines the light, now I
knew by the still flourished in the press, came a tiny little news
article and the first message to carry concern to But his face
showed none of the old-time animation on the subject.

What a different man, I mused to myself, from that enthusiastic
engineering student that I department stores used to use--that is in
comparison to size. the Air-Express you with sort of lost interest in
it."" And the world did too."" Certainly--but the public ever was
a fickle mistress.

Who said that before me?" He laughed and blew out a long puff of smoke."
Everyone, Bob."" But as to the Tube, if I cross picking up under
sea, I would want to be as well informed on the road as I was three
years ago.

Now in the meantime, you have dropped interest in the long tunnel while
I have become more interested in textiles--with the result that
have circular tubes side by side--one going each way."" had forgotten
that they were circular.""

That is because of the pressure.

A circle presents the best resistance," and picking an: odd envelope from
his pocket, he made the following sketch and passed it to
me.[Illustration:--CROSS-SECTION OF TUBE--] I nodded as I recognized the
cross-section." he explained, your his pipe again,"both pumps work
at one time--in fact, I should say all four, because this plan is
duplicated on the English side. comes in behind the train that is
leaving.""

But how are you assured that it will not. stall somewhere?"" It wo
n't be likely to with pressure pumps going behind it and suction pumps
pulling from in front. We can always put extra power on if necessary.
Thus far the road has worked perfectly.""

How much power do you to send it through, under normal conditions?"" Our
trains have been averaging about fifty tons, and for that are weight
have found that a pound pressure is quite sufficient. Now, taking the
tunnel toward the end of its run, even before it hits the braking
machinery beyond the gate.""

But how much pressure did you say would, I do not believe that the crack
was a pressure crevice. If it had been, we were far enough below the ocean
floor to have partly relieved the situation by a flat disc on the
back that fits fairly tightly to the tube.. saw a dream of engineering
world at last realized--the completion of the long-heralded undersea
railroad.

It will."" The pressure on study the back is less than seven tons. However,
the disc does not fit tight.

There are several leaks. For instance, the cars are as you know, run on
the principle of the monorail with a guiding rail on each side. The
grooves for the rails with their three rollers are now."*****" But I
ca n't understand, Dutch, why you seemed greatest feat of engineering
ever undertaken so put out when I announced my intention of going
to Europe via haste the unusually solid building of the Tube new.

The tremendous shell of this new type of specially hardened I
mean that the next time the land slips our little tube will be
twisted up like a piece of string, crushed like an eggshell.

That always was a rocky bit of land of the engineers--and they wo n't
suspend the."" Fate has played an trick on statesman you, Dutch,
and through your own dreams too.

However, you have made me decide to go by the Tube."

He took his pipe out of his mouth and stared at me."

Sooner or later the Tube will be through, and I have never been across
never. Nothing risked--a dull life. Mine has been chair altogether too
dull. I am now most certainly going by the Tube." A bit of the old
fire lit up his eyes."

Same old Bob," he grunted as not know then that I would never see him
again--that he also took the train that night in order to make one
last to the International Committee, and so laid down his life you
with the passengers for whom he had pleaded. was with many conflicting
thoughts, however, that I hurried to the great Terminus that fatal
night, where after being ticketed off my coat than the door was
opened and the ancient metal of the Sun.

With the slowness of one about to faint he dragged himself up, while
his breath seemed to be the strange liquid that had an old fellow with
a mass of silver hair peered in at me." I beg your pardon, sir, but I
understand you have engaged this car alone?"" Yes."" I can get no other
accommodations tonight.

You have an extra berth here and I must get to Paris tomorrow. I will
pay you well--" I smiled. We" Take it.

I beginning to feel lonesome, anyway." He bowed gravely and ordered
the porter to bring in his things. I decided silver hair had already
turned off the used to come upon dreaming over his blue-prints. He was
considered"half-cracked" in those days when he would enthuse over his
undersea railroad, but his animated face was lit with inspiration.

Now the light was had entered the Tube. For some time I lay awake thinking"
Dutch" and the ultimate failure of his life's dream, as he had
outlined it to me, and then I sank into a deep, dreamless sleep.

I was awakened by a terrible shock that hurled me up against the a
weird, had rolled down the bluff a tangled, twisted mass of steel.

My car An not water but air--curiously close and choking perhaps,.
If you want it straight, the Tube is not safe."" You are joking." But
as I looked into his cold, thoughtful blue eyes I knew miscarrying
he had never, been more serious."

I wish that you would go by the Trans-Atlantic Air had almost passed
by, and today it still stuck in the tube, even though the last
port-hole through which I peered seemed to be suspended in air.

But it was of flame and lava. By the terrible light was lit up a great
white palace with its ever gold-tipped scrolls, and closer to me, Now
the plan of the thing the is like this," he added, putting aside his
TUBE--]" You see," the golden temple of the Sun, with its tiers of
lustrous a yellow one stairs--stairs worn by the the feet of many
generations. Above the stairs towered the great statue of a man
on horseback.

He was dressed in a sort of tunic, and in an expression of appeal. I can
see the high intellectual brow as if it were before me at this
moment--the level, sympathetic eyes and the firm chin.***** Then
something moving caught my eyes, and I swear I saw a child--a living
child coming from the burning city--running madly, breathlessly
from a wave of glowing lava that threatened into a sealed cavern
which whose glass top peered curiously down upon the white body of
a a crumbling mass of grey dust.

But the questions that the finding of the cave had raised remained
unanswered.

[Illustration] Who was this woman? How heavy,, red hair, to engulf
him at any moment. In spite of all the ridicule that has been showered
upon, I still declare that the child did not come from wreckage
and that he wore a tunic similar to the one of the statue and not
not the torn bit of a nightgown or sheet.

He was some distance from me, but I could plainly see his expression of
wild distraction as he began to climb those gleaming stairs. Strangely
lustrous in the weird light, was that worn stairway of.

I thought in going that far north, though, that we had missed the main
line of activity; I mean the disturbances that had once wiped out
a whole nation, if your scientists are correct.""

Then you mean that it is only a matter of time?"" Yes, and I have been
informed by one expert that the old volcanic activity is not dead
either."" So that is what has stolen away your laugh?"" darkness that
we did know--which compared desire to your grasp of the details, was
little enough."***** Well I am one gold--gold, protected the body
vanished, leaving in the casket not the white figure, but only
behind my matter car I had a flashing glimpse in lurid light of an
emerald-green deluge bursting in like a?

dark sky of solid water, and in that split-second before a through that
tangle of bedclothes, knocked me into unconsciousness, I seemed
to I rose, and then he grasped my hand with a grin."

Good luck, my persistent interest than it has ever. It is an earthquake
fault."" Good changed followed the daily toil of any man or group of
men, either before pass his door." Thus we said good-by I did hear again
the hopeless note in the voice of my thing friend as he said"--an
earthquake fault.

"
The room was empty and silent except for the slow ticking of an ancient
clock which stood underneath an emblazoned coat of arms in the far
corner. The end of a log broke off and fell hissing into the hearth.
The fox terrier rose reluctantly to his feet, shook himself and stood
looking at the smoking fragment in an aggrieved manner. Satisfied that
no personal harm was intended to him, however, he presently curled
himself up once more. Again the apartment seemed to become the
embodiment of repose. The clock, after a hoarse wheezing warning, struck
seven. The dog opened one eye and looked up at it. A few minutes later,
the peace of the place was broken in a different fashion. There was the
sound of a key being hastily fitted into the lock of the outside door.
The dog rose to his feet expectantly. The door which led into the
apartment was thrown open and hastily slammed to. A man, breathing
heavily, stood for a moment upon the threshold, his head stooped a
little as though listening. Then, without a glance, even, at the dog who
jumped to greet him, he crossed the room with swift, stealthy footsteps.
Before he could reach the other side, however, the door which faced him
was opened. A man-servant looked inquiringly out.

"My bath and clothes, Jarvis, like hell!"

The man gilded away, his master following close behind. From somewhere
further inside the flat, the sound of water running into a bath was
heard. The door was closed, again there was silence. The fox terrier,
after a few moments' scratching at the door, resumed his place upon the
rug and curled himself up to renewed slumber.

The next interruption was of a different nature. The sharp, insistent
summons of an electric bell from outside rang through the room. In a
moment or two the man-servant appeared from the inner apartment, crossed
the floor and presently reappeared, ushering in a visitor.

"Captain Granet is changing for dinner at present, sir," he explained.
"If you will take a seat, however, he will be out presently. What name
shall I say?"

"Surgeon-Major Thomson."

The servant wheeled an easy-chair up towards the fire and placed by its
side a small table on which were some illustrated papers. Then, with a
little bow, he disappeared through the inner door. Major Thomson, who
had been fingering the Sketch, laid it down the moment the door was
closed. He leaned forward, his face a little strained. He had the air of
listening intently. After a brief absence the man returned.

"Captain Granet will be with you in a few moments, sir," he announced.

"Please ask him not to hurry," Major Thomson begged.

"Certainly, sir."

The man withdrew and once more Thomson and the dog were alone.
The latter, having made a few overtures of friendship which passed
unnoticed, resumed his slumbers. Major Thomson sat upright in his
easy-chair, an illustrated paper in his hand. All the time, however,
his eyes seemed to be searching the room. His sense of listening
was obviously quickened; he had the air, even, of thinking rapidly.
Five--ten minutes passed. Then voices were heard from within and the
door was suddenly opened. Captain Granet emerged and crossed the room,
hobbling slightly towards his visitor.

"Awfully sorry to keep you like this," he remarked pleasantly. "The fact
is I'd just got into my bath."

"I ought to apologise," his visitor replied, "for calling at such a
time."

"Glad to see you, anyway," the other declared, pausing at his
smoking-cabinet and bringing out some cigarettes. "Try one of these,
won't you?"

"Not just now, thanks."

There was a moment's pause. Major Thomson seemed in no hurry to explain
himself.

"Jolly luncheon party, wasn't it?" Granet remarked, lighting a cigarette
for himself with some difficulty. "What an idiot it makes a fellow feel
to be strapped up like this!"

"From what one reads of the fighting around Ypres," the other replied,
"you were lucky to get out of it so well. Let me explain, if I may, why
I have paid you this rather untimely call."

Captain Granet nodded amiably. He had made himself comfortable in an
easy-chair and was playing with the dog, who had jumped on to his knee.

"I had some conversation on Thursday last," Major Thomson began, "with
the Provost-Marshal of Boulogne. As you, of course, know, we have
suffered a great deal, especially around Ypres, from the marvellous
success of the German Intelligence Department. The Provost-Marshal,
who is a friend of mine, told me that there was a special warning out
against a person purporting to be an American chaplain who had escaped
from Belgium. You don't happen to have heard of him, I suppose, do you?"

Captain Granet looked doubtful.

"Can't remember that I have," he replied. "They've been awfully clever,
those fellows, though. The last few nights before our little scrap they
knew exactly what time our relief parties came along. Several times we
changed the hour. No use! They were on to us just the same."

Major Thompson nodded.

"Well," he continued, "I happened to catch sight of a man who exactly
resembled the photograph which my friend the Provost-Marshal showed
me, only a few minutes ago, and although I could not be sure of it, I
fancied that he entered this building. It occurred to me that he might
be paying a call upon you."

"Upon me?" he repeated.

"He is an exceedingly plausible fellow," Thomson explained, "and as
you are just back from the Front, and brought dispatches, he might very
possibly regard you as a likely victim."

"Can't make bricks without straw," Granet laughed, "and I know no
more about the campaign than my two eyes have seen. I was saying only
yesterday that, unless you have a staff billet, it's wonderful how
little the ordinary soldier picks up as to what is going on. As a matter
of fact, though," he went on, twisting the fox terrier's ear a little,
"no one has called here at all except yourself, during the last hour or
two. There aren't many of my pals know I'm back yet."

"Are there many other people living in the building?" Major Thomson
asked.

"The ground-floor here," the other replied, "belongs to a prosperous
cigarette manufacturer who lives himself upon the first floor. This is
the second and above us are nothing but the servants' quarters. I should
think," he concluded thoughtfully, "that you must have been mistaken
about the fellow turning in here at all."

Thomson nodded.

"Very likely," he admitted. "It was just a chance, any way."

"By-the-bye," Granet inquired curiously, looking up from the dog, "how
did you know that I roomed here?"

"I happened to see you come in, or was it go out, the other day--I can't
remember which," Major Thomson replied.

The telephone upon the table tinkled out a summons. Granet crossed the
room and held the receiver to his ear.

"This is Captain Granet speaking," he said. "Who are you, please?"

The reply seemed to surprise him. He glanced across at his visitor.

"I shall be delighted," he answered into the instrument. "It is really
very kind of you.... About a quarter past eight?... Certainly! You'll
excuse my not being able to get into mufti, won't you?... Ever so many
thanks.... Good-bye!"

He laid down the receiver and turned to Thomson.

"Rather a coincidence," he observed. "Seems I am going to see you
to-night at dinner. That was Miss Geraldine Conyers who just rang
up--asked me if I'd like to meet her brother again before he goes off.
He is spending the afternoon at the Admiralty and she thought I might be
interested."

Major Thomson's face was expressionless and his murmured word
non-committal. Granet had approached the dark mahogany sideboard and was
fingering some bottles.

"Let me mix you a cocktail," he suggested. "By Jove! That fellow Conyers
would be the fellow for your American chaplain to get hold of. If he is
spending the afternoon down at the Admiralty, he'll have all the latest
tips about how they mean to deal with the submarines. I hear there are
at least three or four new inventions which they are keeping dark. You
like yours dry, I suppose?"

Thomson had risen to his feet and leaned forward towards the mirror for
a moment to straighten his tie. When he turned around, he glanced at the
collection of bottles Granet had been handling.

"I am really very sorry," he said. "I did not mean to put you to this
trouble. I never drink cocktails."

Granet paused in shaking the silver receptacle, and laid it down.

"Have a whisky and soda instead?"

Thomson shook his head.

"If you will excuse me," he said, "I will drink your health at
dinner-time. I have no doubt that your cocktails are excellent but I
never seem to have acquired the habit. What do you put in them?"

"Oh! just both sorts of vermouth and gin, and a dash of something to
give it a flavour," Granet explained carelessly.

Thomson touched a small black bottle, smelt it and put it down.

"What's that?" he asked.

"A mixture of absinth and some West Indian bitters," Granet replied.
"A chap who often goes to the States brought it back for me. Gives a
cocktail the real Yankee twang, he says."

Thomson nodded slowly.

"Rather a curious odour," he remarked. "We shall meet again, then,
Captain Granet."

They walked towards the door. Granet held it open, leaning upon his
stick.

"Many times, I trust," he observed politely.

There was a second's pause. His right hand was half extended but his
departing guest seemed not to notice the fact. He merely nodded and put
on his hat.

"It is a small world," he said, "especially, although it sounds
paradoxical, in the big places."

He passed out. Granet listened to the sound of his retreating footsteps
with a frown upon his forehead. Then he came back and stood for a moment
upon the rug in front of the fire, deep in thought. The fox terrier
played unnoticed about his feet. His face seemed suddenly to have become
older and more thoughtful. He glanced at the card which Thomson had left
upon the sideboard.

"Surgeon-Major Thomson," he repeated quietly to himself. "I wonder!"

Thomson walked slowly to the end of Sackville Street, crossed the road
and made his way to the Ritz Hotel. He addressed himself to the head
clerk of the reception counter.

"I am Surgeon-Major Thomson," he announced.

"I was lunching here to-day and attended one of the waiters who was
taken ill afterwards. I should be very glad to know if I can see him for
a few moments."

The man bowed politely.

"I remember you quite well, sir," he said. "A Belgian waiter, was it
not? He has been taken away by a lady this afternoon."

"Taken away?" Thomson repeated, puzzled.

"The lady who was giving the luncheon--Lady Anselman--called and saw
the manager about an hour ago," the man explained. "She has interested
herself very much in the matter of Belgian refugees and is entertaining
a great many of them at a house of hers near the seaside. The man is
really not fit to work, so we were very glad indeed to pass him on to
her."

"He recovered consciousness before he was removed, I suppose?" Thomson
inquired.

"I believe so, sir. He seemed very weak and ill, though. In fact he had
to be carried to the automobile."

"I suppose he didn't give any reason for his sudden attack?"

"None that I am aware of, sir."

Thomson stood for a moment deep in thought, then he turned away from the
desk.

"Thank you very much indeed," he said to the clerk. "The man's case
rather interested me. I think I shall ask Lady Anselman to allow me to
visit him. Where did you say the house was?"

"Her ladyship did not mention the exact locality," the man replied. "I
believe, however, that it is near the Isle of Wight."

"A most suitable neighbourhood," Major Thomson murmured, as he turned
away from the hotel.


CHAPTER VII

"I wonder why you don't like Captain Granet?" Geraldine asked her
fiance, as they stood in the drawing-room waiting for dinner.

"Not like him?" Thomson repeated. "Have I really given you that
impression, Geraldine?"

The girl nodded.

"Perhaps I ought not to say that, though," she confessed. "You are never
particularly enthusiastic about people, are you?"

One of his rare smiles transfigured his face. He leaned a little towards
her.

"Not about many people, Geraldine," he whispered.

She made a charming little grimace but a moment afterwards she was
serious again.

"But really," she continued, "to me Captain Granet seems just the type
of young Englishman who is going to save the country. He is a keen
soldier, clever, modest, and a wonderful sportsman. I can't think what
there is about him for any one to dislike."

Major Thomson glanced across the room. In a way, he and the man whom he
felt instinctively was in some sense of the word his rival, even though
an undeclared one, were of exactly opposite types. Granet was the
centre of a little group of people who all seemed to be hanging upon his
conversation. He was full of high spirits and humour, debonair, with all
the obvious claims to popularity. Thomson, on the other hand, although
good-looking, even distinguished in his way, was almost too slim and
pale. His face was more the face of a scholar than of one interested
in or anxious to shine in the social side of life. His manners and his
speech were alike reserved, his air of breeding was apparent, but he had
not the natural ease or charm which was making Granet, even in those few
minutes, persona grata with Geraldine's mother and a little circle of
newly-arrived guests.

"At least I appreciate your point of view," Major Thomson admitted, with
a faint sigh.

"Don't be such a dear old stick," Geraldine laughed. "I want you to like
him because I find him so interesting. You see, as he gets to know one a
little better he doesn't seem to mind talking about the war. You others
will scarcely say a word of what you have seen or of what is being done
out there. I like to be told things by people who have actually seen
them. He happened to be ten minutes early this evening and he gave me a
most fascinating description of some skirmishing near La Bassee."

"You must remember," Thomson told her, "that personally I do not, in an
ordinary way, see a great deal of fighting until the whole show is
over. It may be a fine enough panorama when an attack is actually taking
place, but there is nothing very inspiring in the modern battlefield
when the living have passed away from it."

Geraldine shivered for a moment.

"Really, I almost wish that you were a soldier, too," she declared.
"Your work seems to me so horribly gruesome. Come along, you know you
are going to take me to dinner. Think of something nice to say. I really
want to be amused."

"I will make a suggestion, then," he remarked as they took their places.
"I don't know whether you will find it amusing, though. Why shouldn't we
do like so many of our friends, and get married?"

She stared at him for a moment. Then she laughed heartily.

"Hugh," she exclaimed, "I can see through you! You've suddenly realised
that this is your chance to escape a ceremony and a reception, and all
that sort of thing. I call it a most cowardly suggestion."

"It rather appeals to me," he persisted. "It may be," he added, dropping
his voice a little, "because you are looking particularly charming this
evening, or it may be--"

She looked at him curiously.

"Go on, please," she murmured.

"Or it may be," he repeated, "a man's desire to be absolutely sure of
the thing he wants more than anything else in the world."

There was a moment's silence. As though by some curious instinct which
they both shared, they glanced across the table to where Granet had
become the centre of a little babble of animated conversation. Geraldine
averted her eyes almost at once, and looked down at her plate. There was
a shade of uneasiness in her manner.

"You sounds very serious, Hugh," she observed.

"That is rather a failing of mine, isn't it?" he replied. "At any rate,
I am very much in earnest."

There was another brief silence, during which Geraldine was addressed by
her neighbour on the other side. Thomson, who was watching her closely,
fancied that she accepted almost eagerly the opportunity of diversion.
It was not until dinner was almost over that she abandoned a conversion
into which she had thrown herself with spirit.

"My little suggestion," Thomson reminded her, "remains unanswered."

She looked down at her plate.

"I don't think you are really in earnest," she said.

"Am I usually a farceur?" he replied. "I think that my tendencies are
rather the other way. I really mean it, Geraldine. Shall we talk about
it later on this evening?"

"If you like," she agreed simply, "but somehow I believe that I would
rather wait. Look at mother's eye, roving around the table. Give me my
gloves, please, Hugh. Don't be long."

Thomson moved his chair next to his host's Geraldine's father, Admiral
Sir Seymour Conyers, was a very garrulous old gentleman with fixed ideas
about everything, a little deaf and exceedingly fond of conversation.
He proceeded to give his prospective son-in-law a detailed lecture
concerning the mismanagement of the field hospitals at the front, and
having disposed of that subject, he opened a broadside attack upon
the Admiralty. The rest of the men showed indications of breaking into
little groups. Ralph Conyers and Granet were sitting side by side,
engrossed in conversation. More than once Thomson glanced towards them.

"Wish I understood more about naval affairs," Granet sighed. "I'm a
perfect ass at any one's job but my own. I can't see how you can deal
with submarines at all. The beggars can stay under the water as long as
they like, they just pop up and show their heads, and if they don't like
the look of anything near, down they go again. I don't see how you can
get at them, any way."

The young sailor smiled in a somewhat superior manner.

"We've a few ideas left still which the Germans haven't mopped up," he
declared.

"Personally," the Admiral observed, joining in the conversation, "I
consider the submarine danger the greatest to which this country has
yet been exposed. No one but a nation of pirates, of ferocious and
conscienceless huns, could have inaugurated such a campaign."

"Good for you, dad!" his son exclaimed. "They're a rotten lot of
beggars, of course, although some of them have behaved rather decently.
There's one thing," he added, sipping his port, "there isn't a job in
the world I'd sooner take on than submarine hunting."

"Every one to his taste," Granet remarked good-humouredly. "Give me
my own company at my back, my artillery well posted, my reserves in
position, the enemy not too strongly entrenched, and our dear old
Colonel's voice shouting 'At them, boys!' That's my idea of a scrap."

There was a little murmur of sympathy. Ralph Conyers, however, his cigar
in the corner of his mouth, smiled imperturbably.

"Sounds all right," he admitted, "but for sheer excitement give me a
misty morning, the bows of a forty-knot destroyer cutting the sea into
diamonds, decks cleared for action, and old Dick in oilskins on the
salute--'Enemy's submarine, sir, on the port bow, sir.'"

"And what would you do then?" Granet asked.

"See page seven Admiralty instructions this afternoon," the other
replied, smiling. "We're not taking it sitting down, I can tell you."

The Admiral rose and pushed back his chair.

"I think," he said, "if you are quite sure, all of you, that you will
take no more port, we should join the ladies."

They trooped out of the room together. Thomson kept close behind Ralph
Conyers and Captain Granet, who were talking no more of submarines,
however, but of the last ballet at the Empire. Geraldine came towards
them as they entered the drawing-room.

"Hugh," she begged, passing her arm through his, "would you mind playing
bridge? The Mulliners are going on, and mother does miss her rubber so.
And we can talk afterwards, if you like," she added.

Thomson glanced across the room to where Granet was chatting with some
other guests. Young Conyers for the moment was nowhere to be seen.

"I'll play, with pleasure, Geraldine," he assented, "but I want to have
a word with Ralph first."

"He's at the telephone," she said. "The Admiralty rang up about
something and he is talking to them. I'll tell him, if you like, when he
comes up."

"If you'll do that," Thomson promised, "I won't keep him a minute."

The little party settled down to their game--Lady Conyers, Sir Charles
Hankins,--a celebrated lawyer,--another man and Thomson. Geraldine, with
Olive Moreton and Captain Granet, found a sofa in a remote corner of the
room and the trio were apparently talking nonsense with great success.
Presently Ralph reappeared and joined them.

"Hugh wants to speak to you," Geraldine told him.

Ralph glanced at the little bridge-table and made a grimace.

"Hugh can wait," he declared, as he passed his arm through Olive's.
"This is my last night on shore for heaven knows how long and I am going
to take Olive off to see my photographs of the _Scorpion._ Old Wilcock
handed them to me out of his drawer this afternoon."

The two young people disappeared. Captain Granet and Geraldine remained
upon the couch, talking in low voices. Once Thomson, when he was dummy,
crossed the room and approached them. Their conversation was suddenly
suspended.

"I told Ralph," Geraldine said, looking up, "that you wanted to speak
to him, but he and Olive have gone off somewhere. By-the-bye, Hugh,"
she went on curiously, "you didn't tell me that you'd called on Captain
Granet this evening."

"Well, it wasn't a matter of vital importance, was it?" he answered,
smiling. "My call, in any case, arose from an accident."

"Major Thomson," came a voice from the other side of the room, "it is
your deal."

Thomson returned obediently to the bridge-table. The rubber was over a
few minutes later and the little party broke up. Thomson glanced around
but the room was empty.

"I think, if I may," he said, "I'll go into the morning room and have a
whisky and soda. I dare say I'll find the Admiral there."

He took his leave of the others and made his way to the bachelor rooms
at the back of the house. He looked first into the little apartment
which Geraldine claimed for her own, but found it empty. He passed on
into the smoking-room and found all four of the young people gathered
around the table. They were so absorbed that they did not even notice
his entrance. Ralph, with a sheet of paper stretched out before him and
a pencil in his hand, was apparently sketching something. By his side
was Granet. The two girls with arms interlocked, were watching intently.

"You see," Ralph Conyers explained, drawing back for a moment to look at
the result of his labours, "this scheme, properly worked out, can keep
a channel route such as the Folkestone to Boulogne one, for instance,
perfectly safe. Those black marks are floats, and the nets--"

"One moment, Ralph," Thomson interrupted from the background.

They all started and turned their heads. Thomson drew a step nearer and
his hand fell upon the paper. There was a queer look in his face which
Geraldine was beginning to recognise.

"Ralph, old fellow," he said, "don't think me too much of an interfering
beggar, will you? I don't think even to your dearest friend, not to
the girl you are going to marry, to me, or to your own mother, would I
finish that little drawing and description, if I were you."

They all stared at him. Granet's face was expressionless, the girls were
bewildered, Ralph was frowning.

"Dash it all, Hugh," he expostulated, "do have a little common sense.
Here's a fellow like Granet, a keen soldier and one of the best, doing
all he can for us on land but a bit worried about our submarine danger.
Why shouldn't I try and reassure him, eh?--let him see that we've a few
little things up our sleeves?"

"That sounds all right, Ralph," Thomson agreed, "but you're departing
from a principle, and I wouldn't do it. It isn't a personal risk you're
running, or a personal secret you're sharing with others. It may sound
absurd under the present circumstances, I know, but--"

Granet laughed lightly. His arm fell upon the young sailor's shoulder.

"Perhaps Thomson's right, Conyers," he intervened. "You keep your
old scheme at the back of your head. We'll know all about it when the
history of the war's written. There's always the thousand to one chance,
you know. I might get brain fever in a German hospital and begin to
babble. Tear it up, old fellow."

There was a moment's silence. Geraldine turned to Thomson.

"Hugh," she protested, "don't you think you're carrying principle almost
too far? It's so fearfully interesting for us when Ralph's at sea, and
we wait day by day for news from him, to understand a little what he's
doing."

"I think you're a horrid nuisance, Major Thomson," Olive grumbled. "We'd
just reached the exciting part."

"I am sorry," Thomson said, "but I think, Ralph, you had better do what
Captain Granet suggested."

The young man shrugged his shoulders, his face was a little sulky. He
took the plan up and tore it into pieces.

"If you weren't my prospective brother-in-law, you know, Thomson," he
exclaimed, "I should call your interference damned cheek! After all, you
know, you're only a civilian, and you can't be expected to understand
these things."

Thomson was silent for a moment. He read in the others' faces their
sympathy with the young sailor's complaint. He moved towards the door.

"I am sorry," he said simply. "Good night, everybody!"

They all wished him good-night--nobody stirred. He walked slowing into
the front hall, waited for a moment and then accepted his coat and hat
from a servant. Lady Conyers waved to him from the staircase.

"Where's Geraldine?" she asked.

Thomson turned away.

"They are all in the smoking-room, Lady Conyers," he said. "Good night!"


CHAPTER VIII

In a way, their meeting the next morning was fortuitous enough, yet it
had also its significance for both of them. Geraldine's greeting was
almost studiously formal.

"You are not going to scold me for my memory, are you?" Captain Granet
asked, looking down at her with a faintly humorous uplifting of the
eyebrows. "I must have exercise, you know."

"I don't even remember telling you that I came into the Park in the
mornings," Geraldine replied.

"You didn't--that is to say you didn't mention the Park particularly,"
he admitted. "You told me you always took these five dogs out for a walk
directly after breakfast, and for the rest I used my intelligence."

"I might have gone into Regent's Park or St. James' Park," she reminded
him.

"In which case," he observed, "I should have walked up and down until I
had had enough of it, and then gone away in a bad temper."

"Don't be foolish," she laughed. "I decline absolutely to believe that
you had a single thought of me when you turned in here. Do you mind if I
say that I prefer not to believe it?"

He accepted the reproof gracefully.

"Well, since we do happen to have met," he suggested, "might I walk with
you a little way? You see," he went on, "it's rather dull hobbling along
here all alone."

"Of course you may, if you like," she assented, glancing sympathetically
at his stick. "How is your leg getting on?"

"It's better--getting on finely. So far as my leg is concerned, I
believe I shall be fit to go out again within ten days. It's my arm that
bothers me a little. One of the nerves, the doctor said, must be wrong.
I can only just lift it. You've no idea," he went on, "how a game leg
and a trussed-up arm interfere with the little round of one's
daily life. I can't ride, can't play golf or billiards, and for an
unintelligent chap like me," he wound up with a sigh, "there aren't a
great many other ways of passing the time."

"Why do you call yourself unintelligent?" she protested. "You couldn't
have got through your soldiering so well if you had been."

"Oh! I know all the soldier stuff," he admitted, "know my job, that is
to say, all right, and of course I am moderately good at languages, but
that finishes me. I haven't any brains like your friend Thomson, for
instance."

"Major Thomson is very clever, I believe," she said a little coldly.

"And a little censorious, I am afraid," Granet added with a slight
grimace. "I suppose he thinks I am a garrulous sort of ass but I really
can't see why he needed to go for your brother last night just because
he was gratifying a very reasonable curiosity on my part. It isn't
as though I wasn't in the Service. The Army and the Navy are the same
thing, any way, and we are always glad to give a Navy man a hint as to
how we are getting on."

"I really couldn't quite understand Major Thomson myself," she agreed.

"May I ask--do you mind?" he began,--"have you been engaged to him
long?"

She looked away for a moment. Her tone, when she replied, was meant to
convey some slight annoyance at the question.

"About three months."

Captain Granet kicked a pebble away from the path in front of him with
his sound foot.

"I should think he must be a very good surgeon," he remarked in a
measured tone. "Looks as though he had lots of nerve, and that sort of
thing. To tell you the truth, though, he rather frightens me. I don't
think that he has much sympathy with my type."

She became a little more indulgent and smiled faintly as she looked at
him.

"I wonder what your type is?" she asked reflectively.

"Fairly obvious, I am afraid," he confessed, with a sigh. "I love my
soldiering, of course, and I am ashamed to think how keen I have been
on games, and should be still if I had the chance. Outside that I don't
read much, I am not musical, and I am very much predisposed to let
the future look after itself. There are thousands just like me," he
continued thoughtfully. "We don't do any particular harm in the world
but I don't suppose we do much good."

"Don't be silly," she protested. "For one thing, it is splendid to be a
capable soldier. You are just what the country wants to-day. But apart
from that I am quite sure that you have brains."

"Have I?" he murmured. "Perhaps it's the incentive I lack."

They were silent for a few moments. Then they began to talk more
lightly. They discussed dogs and horses, their mutual friends, and their
engagements for the next few days. They did not once refer to Thomson.
Presently Geraldine paused to speak to some friends. Granet leaned upon
his stick in the background and watched her. She was wearing a plain
tailor made suit and a becoming little hat, from underneath which little
wisps of golden hair had somehow detached themselves in a fascinating
disorder. There was a delicate pink colour in her cheeks, the movements
and lines of her body were all splendidly free and graceful. As she
talked to her friends her eyes for the moment seemed to have lost their
seriousness. Her youth had reasserted itself--her youth and splendid
physical health. He watched her eagerly, and some shadow seemed to pass
from his own face--the shadow of his suffering or his pain. He, too,
seemed to grow younger. The simplest and yet the most wonderful joy in
life was thrilling him. At last she bade farewell to her friends and
came smiling towards him.

"I am so sorry to have kept you all this time!" she exclaimed. "Lady
Anne has just told me the time and I am horrified. I meant to walk
here for an hour and we have been here for two. Stop that taxi for me,
please. I cannot spare the time even to walk home."

He handed her into the cab and whistled for the dogs, who all scrambled
in after her.

"Thanks to much for looking after a helpless cripple," he said
pleasantly, as they shook hands. "You mustn't grudge the time. Doing
your duty to the country, you know."

He tactfully avoided any mention of a future meeting and was rewarded
with a little wave of her hand from the window of the cab. He himself
left the Park at the same time, strolled along Piccadilly as far as
Sackville Street and let himself into his rooms. His servant came
forward to meet him from the inner room, and took his cap and stick.

"Any telephone messages, Jarvis?"

"Nothing, sir."

Granet moved towards the easy-chair. On the way he stopped. The door of
one of the cupboards in the sideboard was half open. He frowned.

"Haven't I told you, Jarvis, that I wish those cupboards kept locked?"
he asked a little curtly.

The man was staring towards the sideboard in some surprise.

"I am very sorry, sir," he said. "I certainly believed that I locked it
last night."

Granet opened it wide and looked inside. His first glance was careless
enough, then his expression changed. He stared incredulously at the
small array of bottles and turned swiftly around.

"Have you moved anything from here?"

"Certainly not, sir," was the prompt reply.

Granet closed the cupboard slowly. Then he walked to the window for a
moment, his hands behind his back.

"Any one been here this morning at all, Jarvis?" he inquired.

"A man for the laundry, sir, and a person to test the electric light."

"Left alone in the room at all?"

"The electric light man was here for a few minutes, sir."

The master and servant exchanged quick glances. The latter was looking
pale and nervous.

"Is anything missing, sir?" he asked.

"Yes!" Granet replied. "Did you notice the gentleman who called last
evening--Surgeon-Major Thomson?"

"Yes, sir!"

"You haven't seen him since? He hasn't been here?"

"No, sir!"

Granet stood, for a moment, thinking. The servant remained motionless.
The silence in the room was ominous; so, also, was the strange look of
disquietude in the two men's faces.

"Jarvis," his master said at last, "remember this. I am not finding
fault. I know you are always careful. But from tonight be more vigilant
than ever. There is a new hand in the game. He may not suspect us yet
but he will. You understand, Jarvis?"

"Perfectly, sir."

The man withdrew noiselessly. Once more Granet walked to the window.
He looked down for a few minutes at the passers-by but he saw nothing.
Grave thoughts were gathering together in his mind. He was travelling
along the road of horrors and at the further end of it a man stood
waiting. He saw himself draw nearer and nearer to the meeting his name
almost frame itself upon his lips, the name of the man whom he had grown
to hate.


CHAPTER IX

Considering the crowded state of the waiting-room and the number
of highly important people who were there for the same purpose,
Surgeon-Major Thomson seemed to have remarkably little difficulty in
procuring the interview he desired. He was conducted by a boy scout into
a room on the second floor of the War Office, within a few minutes of
his arrival. A tall, grey-haired man in the uniform of a general looked
up and nodded with an air of intimacy as soon as the door had been
closed.

"Sit down, Thomson. We've been expecting you. Any news?"

"I have come to you for that, sir," the other replied.

The General sighed.

"I am afraid you will be disappointed," he said. "I received your report
and I went to a certain official myself--saw him in his own house before
breakfast this morning. I had reports of three other men occupying
responsible positions in the city, Thomson, against whom there was
really tangible and serious evidence. Our friend had the effrontery
almost to laugh at me."

There was a little glitter in Thomson's eyes.

"These damned civilians!" he murmured softly. "They've done their best
to ruin Great Britain by crabbing every sort of national service during
the last ten years. They feed and pamper the vermin who are eating away
the foundations of the country, and, damn it all, when we put a clear
case to them, when we show them men whom we know to be dangerous, they
laugh at us and tell us that it isn't our department! They look upon us
as amateurs and speak of Scotland Yard with bated breath. My God! If I
had a free hand for ten minutes, there'd be two Cabinet Ministers eating
bread and water instead of their dinners to-night."

The General raised his eyebrows. He knew Thomson well enough to be aware
how unusual such an ebullition of feeling on his part was.

"Got you a bit worked up, Major," he remarked.

"Isn't it enough to make any man's blood boil?" the other replied.
"The country to-day looks to its army and its navy to save it from the
humiliation these black-coated parasites have encouraged, and yet even
now we haven't a free hand. You and I, who control the secret service
of the army, denounce certain men, upon no slight evidence, either, as
spies, and we are laughed at! One of those very blatant idiots whose
blundering is costing the country millions of money and thousands of
brave men, has still enough authority to treat our reports as so much
waste paper."

"I am bound to say I agree with you, Thomson," the General declared,
a little hopelessly. "It's the weakest spot of our whole organisation,
this depending on the civil powers. Two of my cases were absolutely
flagrant. As regards yours, Thomson, I am not at all sure that we
shouldn't be well-advised to get just a little more evidence before we
press the matter."

"And meanwhile," Thomson retorted bitterly, "leave him a free hand to
do what mischief he can. But for the merest accident in the world, the
night before last he would have learnt our new scheme for keeping the
Channel communication free from submarines."

The General frowned.

"Who's been talking?" he demanded.

"No one who is to be blamed," Thomson replied. "Can't you realise the
position? Here's a fellow Service man, a soldier, a D. S. O., who
has been specially mentioned for bravery and who very nearly got the
Victoria Cross, comes here with the halo of a brilliant escape from
the Germans, wounded, a young man of good family and connections, and
apparently as keen as mustard to get back again in the fighting line.
Good Heavens! The most careful sailor in the world might just drop a
hint to that sort of man. What nearly happened last night may happen
a dozen times within the next week. Even our great secret, General,"
Thomson continued, dropping his voice a little, "even that might come to
his ears."

The General was undoubtedly disturbed. He searched amongst the papers on
his desk and brought out at last a flimsy half-sheet of notepaper which
he studied carefully.

"Just read this, Thomson."

Thomson rose and looked over his shoulder. The letter was an autograph
one of a few lines only, and dated from a village in the North of
France--

My dear Brice,

This is a special request to you. Arrange it any way you please but
don't send me Captain Granet out again in any capacity. Keep him at
home. Mind, I am not saying word against him as a soldier. He has done
some splendid work on more than one occasion, but notwithstanding this I
do not wish to see him again with any of the forces under my command.

                                  Ever yours,

                                            F.

"Did you show this to our friend?" Thomson inquired.

"I gave him a digest of its contents," the General replied. "He smiled
in a supercilious manner and said I had better do as I was asked."

Thomson said nothing for a moment. His face was very set and he had the
air of a man desperately but quietly angry.

"As a matter of fact," General Brice continued, glancing at the clock on
his desk, "Granet is in my anteroom at the present moment, I expect. He
asked for an interview this afternoon."

"Have him in, if you don't mind," the other suggested. "I can sit at the
empty desk over there. I can be making some calculations with reference
to the number of hospital beds for each transport. I want to hear him
talk to you."

The General nodded and touched a bell.

"You can show Captain Granet in," he told the boy scout who answered it.

Thomson took his place in the far corner of the room and bent over
a sheaf of papers. Presently Granet was ushered in. He was leaning a
little less heavily upon his stick and he had taken his arm from the
sling for a moment. He saluted the General respectfully and glanced
across the room towards where Thomson was at work. If he recognised him,
however, he made no sign.

"Well, Granet," the General inquired, "how are you getting on?"

"Wonderfully, sir," was the brisk reply. "I have seen my own doctor this
morning and he thinks I might come up before the Board on Saturday."

"And what does that mean?"

"I want to get back again, sir," Granet replied eagerly.

The General stroked his grey moustache and looked searchingly at the
young officer. He was standing full in the light of a ray of sunshine
which came streaming through the high, uncurtained windows. Although he
was still a little haggard, his eyes were bright, his lips were parted
in an anticipatory smile, his whole expression was engaging. General
Brice, studying him closely, felt compelled to admit the improbability
of his vague suspicions.

"That's all very well, you know," he reminded him quietly, "but you
won't be fit enough for active service for some time to come."

The young man's face fell.

"I am sure they must be wanting me back, sir," he said naively.

The General shook his head.

"I don't want to disappoint you, young fellow," he continued, "but I
heard from your Brigadier only yesterday. He has been obliged to fill up
your place and I don't think he has room for any one on his staff."

Granet looked a little hurt.

"I thought he might have made a temporary appointment," he said
gloomily.

"This is no time to consider individuals," the General pointed out.
"What about finding you a billet at home for a time, eh? You've seen a
bit of the rough side of the war, you know."

"I'd sooner go out and dig trenches!"

Thomson had risen slowly from his place and, with a sheet of foolscap in
his hand, closely covered with writing, crossed the room.

"You might get taken prisoner again, Captain Granet," he remarked drily.

There was a moment's rather tense silence. The young man's lips had come
together, his eyes flashed.

"I did not recognise you, Major Thomson," he said calmly. "Have you
found a new billet?"

"My old one is sufficiently absorbing just at present," the other
replied laying his calculations on the General's desk. "Forgive my
interrupting you, sir, but you told me to let you have this as soon as
I had finished. That is my estimate of the number of beds we could stow
away in the cubic feet you offer us."

The General glanced at the paper and nodded.

"Don't go, Thomson," he said. "I'll talk to you about this later on.
Well, Captain Granet," he added, "you'd better leave things in my hands.
I'll do the best I can for you."

"I shall be very disappointed if I don't get out to the Front again
soon, sir," the young man declared simply.

"I'll do the best I can," the General repeated, touching his bell.

Granet was shown out and the door was closed. General Brice turned
towards his companion.

"Thomson," he said, "frankly, I can't believe it. However, we'll find
him a billet where he can't possibly do any mischief."

"If you found him a billet where I should like to see him,"
Surgeon-Major Thomson observed bitterly, "he would never do any more
mischief in this world! Any dispatches from the Front, sir?"

General Brice raised his eyebrows.

"Are you off again?" he asked.

"I am going to see that young man's General," Thomson replied. "I shall
cross over to-day and be back to-morrow night or Saturday morning."

General Brice nodded thoughtfully.

"Perhaps you are right," he assented. "Yes, I shall have a few reports.
You'd better let them know at the Admiralty, and what time you want to
go over."

Surgeon-Major Thomson shook hands with the General and turned towards
the door.

"When I come back," he said, "I hope I'll be able to convince even you,
sir."


CHAPTER X

Surgeon-Major Thomson awoke about twelve hours later with a start. He
had been sleeping so heavily that he was at first unable to remember his
whereabouts. His mind moved sluggishly across the brief panorama of
his hurried journey--the special train from Victoria to Folkestone;
the destroyer which had brought him and a few other soldiers across the
Channel, black with darkness, at a pace which made even the promenade
deck impossible; the landing at Boulogne, a hive of industry
notwithstanding the darkness; the clanking of waggons, the shrieking
of locomotives, the jostling of crowds, the occasional flashing of an
electric torch. And then the ride in the great automobile through the
misty night. He rubbed his eyes and looked around him. A grey morning
was breaking. The car had come to a standstill before a white gate,
in front of which was stationed a British soldier, with drawn bayonet.
Surgeon-Major Thomson pulled himself together and answered the
challenge.

"A friend," he answered,--"Surgeon-Major Thomson, on his Majesty's
service."

He leaned from the car for a moment and held out something in the hollow
of his hand. The man saluted and drew back. The car went along a rough
road which led across a great stretch of pastureland. On the ridge of
the hills on his right, little groups of men were at work unlimbering
guns. Once or twice, with a queer, screeching sound, a shell, like a
little puff of white smoke, passed high over the car and fell somewhere
in the grey valley below. In the distance he could see the movements of
a body of troops through the trees, soldiers on the way to relieve their
comrades in the trenches. As the morning broke, the trenches themselves
came into view--long, zig-zag lines, silent, and with no sign of the
men who crawled about inside like ants. He passed a great brewery
transformed into a canteen, from which a line of waggons, going and
returning, were passing all the time backwards and forwards into the
valley. Every now and then through the stillness came the sharp crack
of a rifle from the snipers lying hidden in the little stretches of
woodland and marshland away on the right. A motor-omnibus, with its
advertisement signs still displayed but a great red cross floating above
it, came rocking down the road on its way to the field hospital in the
distance. As yet, however, the business of fighting seemed scarcely to
have commenced.

They passed several small houses and farms, in front of each of
which was stationed a sentry. Once, from the hills behind, a great
white-winged aeroplane glided over his head on its way to make a
reconnaissance. Queerest sight of all, here and there were peasants at
work in the fields. One old man leaned upon his spade and watched as the
car passed. Not a dozen yards from him was a great hole in the ground
where a shell had burst, and a little further away a barn in ruins. The
car was forced to stop here to let a cavalcade of ammunition waggons
pass by. Surgeon-Major Thomson leaned from his seat and spoke to the old
man.

"You are not afraid of the German shells, then?" he asked.

"Monsieur," the old man answered, "one must live or die--it does not
matter which. For the rest, if one is to live, one must eat. Therefore
I work. Four sons I have and a nephew away yonder," he added, waving his
hand southwards. "That is why I dig alone. Why do you not send us more
soldiers, Monsieur l'Anglais?"

"Wait but a little time longer," Thomson answered cheerfully.

The old man looked sadly at his ruined barn.

"It is always 'wait,'" he muttered, "and one grows old and tired.
Bonjour, monsieur!"

The car passed on again and suddenly dropped into a little protected
valley. They came to a standstill before a tiny chateau, in front of
which stretched what might once have been an ornamental garden, but
which was now torn to pieces by gun carriages, convoy waggons, and every
description of vehicle. From the top of the house stretched many wires.
A sentry stood at the iron gates and passed Major Thomson after a
perfunctory challenge. An office with mud-stained boots and wind-tossed
hair, who looked as though he had been out all night, stood on the steps
of the house and welcomed Thomson.

"Hullo, Major," he called out, "just across, eh?"

"This moment," Thomson assented. "Anything fresh?"

"Nothing to speak of," the other replied. "We've just had a message in
that the French have been giving them a knock. We've had a quiet time
the last two days. They're bringing up some more Bavarians, we think."

"Do you think I could have a few words with the General?" Major Thomson
asked.

"Come in and have some coffee. Yes, he'll see you, of course. He is in
his own room with two of the flying men, just for the moment. I'll let
you know when you can go in."

They passed into an apartment which had once been the dining-room of the
chateau, and in which a long table was laid. One or two staff officers
greeted Thomson, and the man who had brought him in attended to his
wants.

"The General had his breakfast an hour ago," the latter observed. "We're
pretty well forward here and we have to keep on the qui vive. We got
some shells yesterday dropped within a quarter of a mile of us. I think
we're going to try and give them a push back on the left flank. I'll go
in and see about you, Thomson."

"Good fellow! You might tell them to give my chauffeur something. The
destroyer that brought me over is waiting at Boulogne, and I want to be
in London to-night."

One of the officers from the other side of the table, smiled queerly.

"London! My God!" he muttered. "There is still a London, I suppose?
Savoy and Carlton going still? Pall Mall where it was?"

"And very much as it was," Thomson assured him. "London's wonderfully
unchanged. You been out long?"

"September the second," was the cheerful reply. "I keep on getting
promised a week but I can't bring it off."

"He's such a nut with the telephones," the man by his side explained,
helping himself to marmalade. "The General positively can't spare him."

"Oh, chuck it!" the other exclaimed in disgust. "What about you?--the
only man with an eye to a Heaven-ordained gun position, as old Wattles
declared one day. We're all living wonders, Major," he went on, turning
to Thomson, "but if I don't get a Sole Colbert and a grill at the Savoy,
and a front seat at the Alhambra, before many weeks have passed, I shall
get stale--that's what'll happen to me."

"Hope you'll have your hair cut before you go back," a man from the
other end of the table remarked. "Your own mother wouldn't know you like
that--much less your sweetheart."

The young man fingered his locks reflectively.

"Chap who was going to cut it for me got shot yesterday," he grumbled.
"Anything doing as you came over the ridge, Major?"

Thomson shook his head.

"One aeroplane and a few shells."

"That would be Johnny Oates going out in his Bleriot," some one
remarked. "He'll be back here before long with a report."

The officer who had met Thomson in the garden, re-entered the room.

"General says he'll see you at once," he announced.

Thomson followed his guide into a small back room. An officer was seated
before a desk, writing, another was shouting down a telephone, and a
third was making some measurements upon a large Ordnance map nailed upon
one of the walls. The General was standing with his back to the fire and
a pipe in his mouth. He nodded cheerily to Thomson.

"When did you leave London?" he asked.

"Nine o'clock last evening, sir," Thomson replied. "Rather a record
trip. We had a special down and a destroyer over."

"And I'm going to tell you what you want to know," the General continued
glancing at a document in his hand. "Well, close the door, Harewood. Out
with it?"

"It's about Captain Granet of Harrison's staff," Thomson began.

The General frowned and knocked the ashes from his pipe.

"Well," he asked, "what is it?"

"We've reasons of our own for wishing to know exactly what you meant by
asking the War Office not to send him back again," Thomson continued.

The General hesitated.

"Well, what are they?"

"They are a little intangible, sir," Thomson confessed, "but exceedingly
important. Without any direct evidence, I have come to the conclusion
that Captain Granet is a mysterious person and needs watching. As usual,
we are in trouble with the civil authorities, and, to be frank with you,
I am trying to strengthen my case."

The General shrugged his shoulders.

"Very well," he decided, "under the circumstances you have the right to
know what my message meant. We sent Granet back because of a suspicion
which may be altogether unjustifiable. The suspicion was there, however,
and it was sufficiently strong for me to make up my mind that I should
prefer not to have him back again. Now you shall know the facts very
briefly. Granet was taken prisoner twice. No one saw him taken--as
a matter of fact, both of the affairs were night attacks. He
seemed suddenly to disappear--got too far ahead of his men, was his
explanation. All I can say is that he was luckier than most of them.
Anything wandering about loose in a British uniform--but there, I won't
go on with that. He came back each time with information as to what
he had seen. Each time we planned an attack on the strength of that
information. Each time that information proved to be misleading and our
attack failed, costing us heavy losses. Of course, dispositions might
have been changed since his observations were made, but there the fact
remains. Further," the General continued, filling his pipe slowly and
pressing in the tobacco, "on the second occasion we had four hundred men
thrown forward into the village of Ossray. They were moved in the pitch
darkness, and silently. It was impossible for any word of their presence
in Ossray to have been known to the Germans. Yet the night of Granet's
capture the village was shelled, and those who escaped were cut off and
made prisoners. Follow me, Major?"

"Yes, sir!" Thomson acquiesced.

"Those are just the facts," the General concluded. "Now on the other
hand, Granet has handled his men well, shown great personal bravery, and
has all the appearance of a keen soldier. I hate to do him a wrong
even in my thoughts but there were others besides myself to whom these
coincidences seemed amazing. We simply decided that they'd better give
Granet a billet at home. That's the reason of my message."

"I am very much obliged to you, sir," Thomson said slowly. "You have
given me exactly the information which we desire."

The General was called away for a moment to give some instructions to
the young officer who was sitting in a distant corner of the room with
a telephone band around his head. He signed to Thomson, however, to
remain.

"Now that I have gratified your curiosity," he said, when he returned,
"perhaps you will gratify mine? Will you tell me just how you over in
England have come to have suspicions of this man?"

"That," Thomson explained, "is almost a personal matter with me. Three
months ago I spent the night with the Third Army Corps up by Niemen. I
was there on other business, as you may imagine, but there was some hot
fighting and I went out to help. I was attending to some of our fellows
and got very near to the German lines. I became separated from the
others a little and was groping about when I heard voices talking German
within a few feet of me. I couldn't hear what they said but I could just
distinguish two figures. One of them made off towards the German lines.
The other, after standing still for a moment, came in my direction. I
took out my revolver, and to tell you the truth I very nearly fired on
sight, for it would have been an exceedingly awkward matter for me
to have been taken prisoner just then. Just as my finger was on the
trigger, I became conscious that the man who was approaching was humming
'Tipperary.' I flashed my light on his face and saw at once that he was
a British officer. He addressed me quickly in German. I answered him in
English. I fancied for a moment that he seemed annoyed. 'We'd better get
out of this,' he whispered. 'We're within a hundred yards of the German
trenches and they are bringing searchlights up.' 'Who were you talking
to just now?' I asked, as we stole along. 'No one at all,' he answered.
I didn't take the thing seriously for the moment, although it seemed to
me queer. Afterwards I regretted, however, that I hadn't set myself to
discover the meaning of what was apparently a deliberate lie. The next
time I met Granet was at a luncheon party at the Ritz, a few days ago. I
recognised his face at once, although I had only seen it by the flash of
my electric lamp. From that moment I have had my suspicions."

The General nodded. He was looking a little grave.

"It's a hateful thing to believe," he said, "that any one wearing his
Majesty's uniform could ever play such a dastardly part. However, on the
whole I am rather glad that I passed in that request to the War Office.
Anything more we can do for you, Major?"

Thomson took the hint and departed. A few minutes later he was in his
car and on his way back to Boulogne.


CHAPTER XI

Olive Moreton gave a little start as the long, grey, racing car came
noiselessly to a standstill by the side of the kerbstone. Captain Granet
raised his hat and leaned from the driving seat towards her.

"Hope I didn't frighten you, Miss Moreton?"

"Not at all," she replied. "What a perfectly lovely car!"

He assented eagerly.

"Isn't she! My uncle's present to me to pass away the time until I can
do some more soldiering. They only brought it round to me early this
morning. Can I take you anywhere?"

"I was just going to see Geraldine Conyers," she began.

"Do you know, I guessed that," he remarked, leaning on one side and
opening the door. "Do let me take you. I haven't had a passenger yet."

She stepped in at once.

"As a matter of fact," she told him, "I was looking for a taxicab. I
have had a telegram from Ralph. He wants us to go down to Portsmouth by
the first train we can catch this morning. He says that if we can get
down there in time to have lunch at two o'clock, he can show us over the
_Scorpion._ After to-day she will be closed to visitors, even his own
relations. I was just going to see if Geraldine could come."

Granet was thoughtful for a moment. He glanced at the little clock on
the dashboard opposite to him.

"I tell you what," he suggested, "why not let me motor you and Miss
Conyers down? I don't believe there's another fast train before one
o'clock, and we'd get down in a couple of hours, easily. It's just what
I'm longing for, a good stretch into the country."

"I should love it," the girl exclaimed, "and I should think Geraldine
would. Will you wait while I run in and see her?"

"Of course," Granet replied. "Here we are, and there's Miss Conyers at
the window. You go in and talk her over and I'll just see that we've got
lots of petrol. I'll have you down there within two hours, all right, if
we can get away before the roads are crowded."

She hurried into the house. Geraldine met her on the threshold and
they talked together for a few moments. Then Olive reappeared, her face
beaming.

"Geraldine would simply love it," she announced. "She will be here in
five minutes. Could we just stop at my house for a motor-coat?"

"Certainly!" Granet agreed, glancing at his watch. "This is absolutely
ripping! We shall be down there by one o'clock. Why is this to be
Conyers' last day for entertaining?"

"I don't know," she answered indifferently. "Some Admiralty regulation,
I suppose."

He sighed.

"After all," he declared, "I am not sure whether I chose the right
profession. There is so much that is mysterious about the Navy. Yes; and,
merely think of it, I could n't travel and PCP him.

I was anticipate little Ivar's beginning every tomorrow and element
had my poor sick Torvald to look after.

My dear, sort father--I never saw him again, Christine. That was the
saddest time iodine have known since our marriage. Mrs. Linde. I
ignore how fond you were of him.

And so you went off to Italy? Nora. Yes; you understand we had appropriation
then, and the doctors importune on our travel, thus we begin a period
subsequently. Mrs. Linde. And your benedick come rearward rather ill?
Nora.

As sensation as a cascabel! Mrs. Linde. But--the doctor? Nora. What
theologian? title Linde.

I think your amah said the valet who arrived hither merely as I
did, was the physician?

Nora. Yes, that was Doctor line, but he does n't go here professionally.
He is our greatest person, and arrive in at least once everyday. No,
Torvald has not had an time's unwellness since then, and our bairn
are weak and healthy and thus am I.( jump up and claps her hands.)
Christine! Christine! it's bad to be dead and happy!--But how horrid
of me; I am speak of nothing but my own concern.( sit on a stool
near her, and breathe her arms on her ginglymus.)

You must n't be angry with me.

Tell me, is it really truthful that you did not enjoy your hubby?

Why did you wed him? Mrs. Linde. My parent was animated then, and was
bedridden and helpless, and I had to provide for my two younger
stepbrother; thus I did not think I was justified in refusing his
crack.

Nora. No, possibly you were rather correct. He was poor at that day,
so? Mrs. Linde. I believe he was rather good off. But his enterprise was
a precarious one; and, when he died, it wholly went to pieces and
there was nothing left.

Nora. And then?-- Mrs.

Linde. good, I had to become my manus to anything I could find--first
a little outlet, so a large academy, and thus on.

The last three dotage have look like one retentive working-day,
with no rest. nowadays it is at an bitthead, Nora.

My rich ma demand me no more, for she is gone; and the cub do not need me
either; they have got situations and can shift for themselves.

Nora. What a comfort you must experience if-- title Linde. No, so; I
merely feel my ghetto unspeakably full.

No one to recorded for anymore.( Gets down restlessly.) That was why
I could not digest the living in my small backwater any retentive.

I despair it may be easier here to insight something which will
busy Maine and busy my idea.

If merely I could have the bad luck to acquire some unconstipated
work--office wash of some kind-- Nora. But, Christine, that is thus
terribly tiring, and you appear rested out now.

You had far good go away to some watering-place. title Linde( walking
to the window).

I have no begetter to take me money for a journey, Nora. Nora( rising).
Oh, do n't be angry with me!

title Linde( travel down to her). It is you that must not be angry with
me, dear.

The best of a point like mine is that it makes one thus bitter. No
one to activity for, and yet obliged to be always on the lookout for
chances. One must live, and so one becomes selfish. When you state me
of the happy curve your phenomenon have taken--you velleity hardly believe
it--I was delighted not thus much on your etymology as on my own.

Nora. How do you mean?--Oh, I understand. You intend that possibly
Torvald could acquire you something to do. Mrs. Linde. Yes, that was
what I was thinking of. Nora. He must, Christine. Just arrive
it to Maine; I will broach the topic really cleverly--I velleity
believe of something that faculty please him really much.

It will break me thus happy to be of some use to you. title Linde.

How kind you are, Nora, to be thus anxious to aid me!

It is double kind in you, for you cognize so small of the concern and
problem of being. Nora. I--?

I ignore so big of them? Mrs. Linde( smiling). My dear! Small household
cares and that kind of thing!

--You are a kid, Nora. Nora( flip her noddle and crosses the period).
You ought not to be thus inferior.

Mrs. Linde. No? Nora. You are just like the others.

They all think that iodine-131 am incapable of anything truly serious--
Mrs. Linde. Come, come-- Nora.--that I have travel through nothing in
this class of cares. Mrs. Linde.

But, my dear Nora, you have just told me all your difficulty. Nora.
Pooh!--those were trifles.( lower her vocalization.) I have not state you
the significant situation. title Linde.

The significant situation? What do you intend? Nora. You appear up upon
me altogether, Christine--but you ought not to.

You are proud, are n't you, of having act thus firmly and so retentive
for your parent? Mrs. Linde. so, I do n't look down on anyone. But it
is truthful that I am both proud and glad to think that I was
privileged to do the terminal of my ma's life almost bound from
hairdressing.

Nora. And you are proud to believe of what you have done for your stepbrother?
Mrs. Linde. I think I have the correct to be. Nora

.
We're not on a
battleship, you know. You will find my quarters a little cramped, I'm
afraid."

They drank cocktails cheerfully, and afterwards Geraldine exclaimed,
taking a long breath. "If Olive weren't so fearfully in love, she'd be
suffocated."

Granet paused and looked before him with a puzzled frown.

"What in heaven's name is this?"

Exactly opposite to them was an erection of light framework, obviously
built around some hidden object for purposes of concealment. A Marine
was standing on guard before it, with drawn cutlass. Granet was in the
act of addressing him when an officer ran lightly down the fore part of
the ship, and saluted.

"Very sorry, sir," he said, "but would you mind keeping to the other
side? This deck is closed, for the present."

"What on earth have you got there?" Granet asked good-humouredly,--"that
is if it's anything a landsman may know about?"

The young officer piloted them across to the other side.

"It's just a little something we are not permitted to talk about just
now," he replied. "I didn't know the commander expected any visitors
to-day or we should have had it roped off. Anything I can show you on
this deck?" he inquired politely.

"Nothing at all, thanks," Geraldine assured him. "We'll just stroll
about for a little time."

They leaned over the rail together. The young officer saluted and
withdrew. A freshening breeze blew in their faces and the sunshine
danced upon the foam-flecked sea. The harbour was lively with small
craft, an aeroplane was circling overhead, and out in the Roads several
warships were lying anchored.

"I was in luck this morning," Granet asserted.

"So were we," Geraldine replied. "I never enjoyed motoring more. Your
new car is wonderful."

"She is a beauty, isn't she?" Granet assented enthusiastically. "What
she could touch upon fourth speed I wouldn't dare to say. We were going
over sixty plenty of times this morning, and yet one scarcely noticed
it. You see, she's so beautifully hung."

"You are fortunate," she remarked, "to have an appreciative uncle."

"He is rather a brick," Granet acknowledged. "He's done me awfully well
all my life."

She nodded.

"You really are rather to be envied, aren't you, Captain Granet? You
have most of the things a man wants. You've had your opportunity, too of
doing just the finest things a man can, and you've done them."

He looked gloomily out seawards.

"I am lucky in one way," he admitted. "In others I am not so sure."

She kept her head turned from him. Somehow or other, she divined quite
well what was in his mind. She tried to think of something to say,
something to dispel the seriousness which she felt to be in the
atmosphere, but words failed her. It was he who broke the silence.

"May I ask you a question, Miss Conyers?"

"A question? Why not?"

"Are you really engaged to Major Thomson?"

She did not answer him at once. She still kept her eyes resolutely
turned away from his. When at last she spoke, her voice was scarcely
raised above a whisper.

"Certainly I am," she assented.

He leaned a little closer towards her. His voice sounded to her very
deep and firm. It was the voice of a man immensely in earnest.

"I am going to be an awful rotter," he said. "I suppose I ought to take
your answer to my question as final. I won't that's all. He came along
first but that isn't everything. It's a fair fight between him and me.
He hates me and takes no pains to hide it. He hates me because I care
for you--you know that. I couldn't keep it to myself even if I would."

She drew a little away but he forced her to look at him. There was
something else besides appeal in her eyes.

"You've been the victim of a mistake," he insisted, his hand resting
upon hers. "I don't believe that you really care for him at all. He
doesn't seem the right sort for you, he's so much older and graver. You
mustn't be angry. You must forgive me, please, if I have said more than
I ought--if I say more now--because I am going to tell you, now that we
are alone together for a moment, that I love you."

She turned upon him a little indignantly, though the distress in her
face was still apparent.

"Captain Granet!" she exclaimed. "You should not say that! You have no
right--no right at all."

"On the contrary, I have every right," he answered doggedly. "It isn't
as though Thomson were my friend. He hates me and I dislike him. Every
man has a right to do his best to win the girl he cares for. It's the
first time I've felt anything of this sort. I've never wanted the big
things before from any woman. And now--"

She turned impetuously away from him. Over their head an electric
message was sparkling and crackling. She stood looking up, her hand
outstretched as though to keep him away.

"I cannot listen any more," she declared. "If you say another word I
shall go below."

He remained for a moment gloomily silent. A young officer stepped out of
the wireless room and saluted Geraldine.

"Very sorry for you people, Miss Conyers," he announced, "but I am
afraid we'll have to put you on shore. We've an urgent message here from
the flag-ship to clear off all guests."

"But we haven't had lunch yet!" Geraldine protested.

Conyers suddenly made his appearance in the gangway, followed by Olive.

"What's the message, Howard?" he inquired.

The officer saluted and handed over a folded piece of paper. Conyers
read it with a frown and stepped at once out on to the deck. He gave a
few orders, then he turned back to his guests.

"Gels," he explained, "and you, Granet, I'm frightfully sorry but I
can't keep you here another second. I have ordered the pinnace round.
You must get on shore and have lunch at the 'Ship.' I'll come along as
soon as I can. Frightfully sorry, Granet, but I needn't apologise to
you, need I? War's war, you know and this is a matter of urgency."

"You're not going out this tide?" Geraldine demanded breathlessly.

Conyers shook his head.

"It isn't that," he replied. "We've got some engineers coming over to do
some work on deck, and I've had a private tip from my chief to clear out
any guests I may have on board."

"Is it anything to do with this wonderful screened-up thing?" Olive
asked, strolling towards the framework-covered edifice.

Conyers shrugged his shoulders.

"Can't disclose Government secrets! Between just us four--our friend
Thomson isn't here, is he?" he added, smiling,--"we are planning a
little Hell for the submarines."

They glanced curiously at the mysterious erection. Granet sighed.

"Secretive chaps, you sailors," he observed. "Never mind, I have a pal
in the Admiralty who gives me a few hints now and then. I shall go and
pump him."

"Don't you breathe a word about having been board the _Scorpion,_"
Conyers begged quickly. "They wink at it down here, so long as it's done
discreetly, but it's positively against the rules, you know."

"Righto!" Granet agreed. "There isn't a soul I'm likely to mention it
to."

"I'll come over to the 'Ship' as soon as I can get away," Conyers
promised.

They raced across the mile of broken water to the landing-stage. They
were all a little silent. Olive was frankly disappointed, Geraldine
was busy with her thoughts. Granet's gaze seemed rivetted upon the
_Scorpion._ Another pinnace had drawn up alongside and a little company
of men were boarding her.

"I only hope that they really have hit upon a device to rid the sea of
these cursed submarines!" he remarked, as they made their way across the
dock. "I see the brutes have taken to sinking fishing boats now."

"Ralph believes that they have got something," Olive declared eagerly.
"He is simply aching to get to work."

"Sailors are all so jolly sanguine," Granet reminded her. "They are
doing something pretty useful with nets, of course, in the way your
brother was beginning to explain to me when Major Thomson chipped in,
but they could only keep a fixed channel clear in that way. What they
really need is some way of tackling them when they are under water. Here
we are at last. I hope you girls are as hungry as I am."

They lunched in leisurely fashion, Olive in particular glancing often
towards the door, and afterwards they sat about in the lounge, drinking
their coffee. Granet had seemed to be in high spirits throughout the
meal, and told the girls many little anecdotes of his adventures at the
Front. Afterwards, however, he became silent, and finally, with a word
of excuse, strolled off alone. Olive looked once more at the clock.

"Ralph doesn't seem to be coming back, does he?" she sighed. "Let's walk
a little way down to the landing-stage."

The two girls strolled out and made their way towards the harbour. They
could see the _Scorpion_ but there was no sign of any pinnace leaving
her. Reluctantly they turned back towards the hotel.

"I wonder what has become of Captain Granet?" Olive asked.

Geraldine stopped short. There was a little frown gathering upon her
forehead. She pointed up to the roof of the hotel, where a man was
crouching with a telescope glued to his eyes. He lowered it almost as
they paused, and waved his hand to them.

"Can't see any sign of Conyers," he shouted. "I'm waiting for the
pinnace. Come up here. There's such a ripping view."

They entered the hotel in silence.

"I don't believe," Geraldine remarked uneasily, "that Ralph would like
that."

They made their way to the top of the house and were escorted by a buxom
chambermaid to what was practically a step-ladder opening out on to a
skylight. From here they crawled on to the roof, where they found Granet
comfortably ensconced with his back to a chimney, smoking a cigarette.

"This is rather one on your brother," he chuckled.

"Where did you find the telescope?" Geraldine asked.

"I borrowed it from downstairs," he answered. "Do come and have a look.
You can see the _Scorpion_ quite distinctly. All the officers seem to be
gathered around that mysterious structure on the upper deck. I thought
at first it was a stand for a gun but it isn't."

Olive held out her hand for the telescope but Geraldine shook her head.
There was a troubled expression in her eyes.

"I suppose it's awfully silly, Captain Granet," she said, "but honestly,
I don't think Ralph would take it as a joke at all if he knew that we
were up here, trying to find out what was going on."

Olive set down the telescope promptly.

"I didn't think of that," she murmured.

Granet laughed easily.

"Perhaps you are right," he admitted. "All the same, we are a little
exceptionally placed, aren't we?--his sister, his fiancee, and--"

He broke off suddenly. A hand had been laid upon his shoulder. A small,
dark man, who had come round the corner of the chimney unperceived, was
standing immediately behind him.

"I must trouble you all for your names and addresses, if you please," he
announced quietly.

The two girls stared at him, dumbfounded. Granet, however, remained
perfectly at his ease. He laid down the telescope and scrutinised the
newcomer.

"I really don't altogether see," he remarked good humouredly, "why I
should give my name and address to a perfect stranger just because he
asks for it."

The man opened his coat and displayed a badge.

"I am on Government service, sir."

"Well, I am Captain Granet, back from the Front with dispatches a few
days ago," Granet told him. "This is Miss Conyers, sister of Commander
Conyers of the _Scorpion,_ and Miss Olive Moreton, his fiancee. We are
waiting for Commander Conyers at the present moment, and we were just
looking to see if the pinnace had started. Is it against the law to use
a telescope in Portsmouth?"

The man made a few notes in his pocket-book. Then he opened the trapdoor
and stood on one side.

"No one is allowed out here, sir," he said. "The hotel people are to
blame for not having the door locked. I shall have to make a report but
I have no doubt that your explanation will be accepted. Will you be so
good as to descend, please?"

Granet struggled to his feet and turned towards his companions.

"The fellow's quite right," he decided. "I am only glad that the
Government are looking after things so. The Admiralty are much more
go-ahead in this way than we are. I vote we have out the car and go down
the front to Southsea--unless we are under arrest?" he added pleasantly,
turning towards the man who had accosted them.

"You are at liberty to do whatever you please, sir," was the polite
reply. "In any case, I think it would be quite useless of you to wait
for Commander Conyers."

"Why?" Olive asked quickly.

"The _Scorpion_ has just received orders to leave on this evening's
tide, madam," the man announced. "You can see that she is moving even
now."

They looked out across the harbour. The smoke was pouring from the
funnels of the destroyer. Already she had swung around and was steaming
slowly towards the Channel.

"She's off, right enough!" Granet exclaimed. "Nothing left for us, then,
but London."


CHAPTER XII

Geraldine, a few hours later, set down the telephone receiver with a
little sigh of resignation. Lady Conyers glanced up inquiringly from her
book.

"Was that some one wanting to come and see you at this time of night,
Geraldine?" she asked.

Geraldine yawned.

"It's Hugh," she explained. "He has rung up from the War Office or
somewhere--says he has just got back from France and wants to see me
at once. I think he might have waited till to-morrow morning. I can
scarcely keep my eyes open, I am so sleepy."

Lady Conyers glanced at the clock.

"It isn't really so late," she remarked, "and I dare say, if the poor
man's been travelling all day, he'd like to say good-night to you."

Geraldine made a little grimace.

"I shall go into the morning room and wait for him," she announced.
"He'll very likely find me asleep."

The Admiral looked up from behind the Times.

"Where's that nice young fellow Granet?" he asked. "Why didn't you bring
him in to dinner?"

"Well, we didn't get back until nearly eight," Geraldine reminded her
father. "I didn't think he'd have time to change and get back here
comfortably."

"Fine young chap, that," Sir Seymour remarked. "The very best type of
young English soldier. We could do with lots like him."

Geraldine left the room without remark. She could hear her father
rustling his paper as she disappeared.

"Can't think why Geraldine didn't pick up with a smart young fellow like
Granet instead of an old stick like Thomson," he grumbled. "I hate these
Army Medicals, anyway."

"Major Thomson has a charming disposition," Lady Conyers declared
warmly. "Besides, he will be very well off some day--he may even get the
baronetcy."

"Who cares about that?" her husband grunted. "Geraldine has all the
family she needs, and all the money. How she came to choose Thomson from
all her sweethearts, I can't imagine."

Geraldine, notwithstanding her fatigue, welcomed her lover very
charmingly when he arrived, a few minutes later. Major Thomson was still
in travelling clothes, and had the air of a man who had been working at
high pressure for some time. He held her fingers tightly for a moment,
without speaking. Then he led her to the sofa and seated himself beside
her.

"Geraldine," he began gravely, "has what I say any weight with you at
all?"

"A good deal," she assured him.

"You know that I do not like Captain Granet, yet you took him with you
down to Portsmouth today and even allowed him to accompany you on board
the _Scorpion_."

Geraldine started a little.

"How do you know that already?" she asked curiously.

He shook his head impatiently.

"It doesn't matter. I heard. Why did you do it, Geraldine?"

"In the first place, because he offered to motor us down after we had
missed the train. There are heaps of other reasons."

"As, for instance?"

"Well, Olive and I preferred having an escort and Captain Granet was a
most agreeable one. He took us down in a car his uncle has just given
him--a sixty horse-power Panhard. I never enjoyed motoring more in my
life."

"You are all very foolish," Thomson said slowly. "I am going to tell you
something now, dear, which you may not believe, but it is for your good,
and it is necessary for me to have some excuse for the request I am
going to make. Granet is under suspicion at the War Office."

"Under suspicion?" Geraldine repeated blankly.

"Nothing has been proved against him," Thomson continued, "and I tell
you frankly that in certain quarters the idea is scouted as absurd. On
the other hand, he is under observation as being a possible German spy."

Geraldine for a moment sat quite still. Then she broke into a peal of
laughter. She sat up, a moment later, wiping her eyes.

"Are you really serious, Hugh?" she demanded.

"Absolutely," he assured her, a little coldly.

She wiped her eyes once more.

"Hugh, dear," she sighed, patting his hand, "you do so much better
looking after your hospitals and your wounded than unearthing
mare's-nests like this. I don't think that you'd be a brilliant success
in the Intelligence Department. As to the War Office, well, you know
what I think of them. Captain Granet a German spy, indeed!"

"Neither the War Office nor I myself," Thomson continued, "have arrived
at these suspicions without some reason. Perhaps you will look at the
matter a little more seriously when I tell you that Captain Granet will
not be allowed to return to the Front."

"Not be allowed?" she repeated. "Hugh, you are not serious!"

"I have never been more serious in my life," he insisted. "I am not in
a position to tell you more than the bare facts or I might disclose some
evidence which even you would have to admit throws a rather peculiar
light upon some of this young man's actions. As it is, however, I can do
no more than warn you, and beg you," he went on, "to yield to my wishes
in the matter of your further acquaintance with him."

There was a moment's rather curious silence. Geraldine seemed to be
gazing through the walls of the room. Her hands were clenched in one
another, her fingers nervously interlocked.

"I shall send for him to come and see me the first thing to-morrow
morning," she decided.

"You will do nothing of the sort," Thomson objected firmly.

She turned her head and looked at him. He was conscious of the
antagonism which had sprung up like a wall between them. His face,
however, showed no sign.

"How do you propose to prevent me?" she asked, with ominous calm.

"By reminding you of your duty to your country," he answered.
"Geraldine, dear, I did not expect to have to talk to you like this.
When I tell you that responsible people in the War Office, officials
whose profession it is to scent out treachery, have declared this young
man suspect, I am certainly disappointed to find you embracing his cause
so fervently. It is no personal matter. Believe, me," he added, after a
moment's pause, "whatever my personal bias may be, what I am saying to
you now is not actuated in the slightest by any feelings of jealousy.
I have told you what I know and it is for you to make your choice as to
how much or how little in the future you will see of this young man.
But I do forbid you, not in my own name but for our country's sake to
breathe a single word to him of what I have said to you."

"It comes to this, then," she said, "that you make accusations against a
man and deny him the right of being heard?"

"If you choose to put it like that, yes," he assented. "Only I fancied
that considering--considering the things between us, you might have
taken my word."

He leaned a little towards her. If she had been looking she could
scarcely have failed to have been touched by the sudden softness of his
dark eyes, the little note of appeal in his usually immobile face. Her
eyes, however, were fixed upon the diamond ring which sparkled upon her
third finger. Slowly she drew it off and handed it to him.

"Hugh," she said, "the things you speak of do not exist any more between
us. I am sorry, but I think you are narrow and suspicious. You have
your own work to do. It seems to me mean to spend your time suspecting
soldiers who have fought for their king and their country, of such a
despicable crime."

"Can't you trust me a little more than that, Geraldine?" he asked
wistfully.

"In what way?" she demanded. "I judge only by the facts, the things you
have said to me, your accusations against Captain Granet. Why should you
go out of your way to investigate cases of suspected espionage?"

"You cannot believe that I would do so unless I was convinced that it
was my duty?"

"I cannot see that it is your business at all," she told him shortly.

He rose from his place.

"I am very sorry, Geraldine," he said. "I will keep this ring. You are
quite free. But--look at me."

Against her will she was forced to do as he bade her. Her own attitude,
which had appeared to her so dignified and right, seemed suddenly
weakened. She had the feeling of a peevish child.

"Geraldine," he begged, "take at least the advice of a man who loves
you. Wait."

Even when he had opened the door she felt a sudden inclination to call
him back. She heard him go down the hall, heard the front door open and
close. She sat and looked in a dazed sort of way at the empty space
upon her finger. Then she rose and went into the drawing-room, where her
father and mother were still reading. She held out her hand.

"Mother," she announced, "I am not engaged to Major Thomson any more."

The Admiral laid down his newspaper.

"Damned good job, too!" he declared. "That young fellow Granet's worth a
dozen of him. Never could stick an Army Medical. Well, well! How did he
take it?"

Lady Conyers watched her daughter searchingly. Then she shook her head.

"I hope you have done wisely, dear," she said.


CHAPTER XIII

At a little after noon on the following day Captain Granet descended
from a taxicab in the courtyard of the Milan Hotel, and, passing
through the swing doors, made his way to the inquiry office. A suave,
black-coated young clerk hastened to the desk.

"Can you tell me," Granet inquired, "whether a gentlemen named Guillot
is staying here?"

The young man bowed.

"Monsieur Guillot arrived last night, sir," he announced. "He has just
rung down to say that if a gentlemen called to see him he could be
shown up. Here, page," he went on, turning to a diminutive youth in the
background, "show this gentleman to number 322."

Granet followed the boy to the lift and was conducted to a room on the
third floor. The door was opened by a tall, white-haired Frenchman.

"Monsieur Guillot?" Captain Granet inquired pleasantly. "My name is
Granet."

The Frenchman ushered him in. The door was closed and carefully locked.
Then Monsieur Guillot swung around and looked at his visitor with some
curiosity. Granet was still wearing his uniform.

"France must live," Granet murmured.

The Frenchman at once extended his hand.

"My friend," he confessed, "for a moment I was surprised. It did not
occur to me to see you in this guise."

Granet smiled.

"I have been out at the Front," he explained, "and am home wounded."

"But an English officer?" Monsieur Guillot remarked dubiously. "I do
not quite understand, then. The nature of the communication which I have
come to receive is known to you?"

Granet nodded and accepted the chair which his host had offered.

"I do not think that you should be so much surprised," he said simply.
"If the war is grievous for your country, it is ruin to mine. We do not,
perhaps, advertise our apprehensions in the papers. We prefer to keep
them locked up in our own brain. There is one great fact always before
us. Germany is unconquerable. One must find peace or perish."

Monsieur Guillot listened with a curious look upon his face. His
forefinger tapped the copy of the Times which was lying upon the table.
The other nodded gravely.

"Yes," he continued, "I know that our Press is carrying on a magnificent
campaign of bluff. I know that many of the ignorant people of the
country believe that this war is still being prosecuted with every hope
of success. We who have been to the Front, especially those who have any
source of information in Germany, know differently. The longer the war,
the more ruinous the burden which your country and mine will have to
bear."

"It is my opinion also," Monsieur Guillot declared, "and furthermore,
listen. It is not our war at all, that is the cruel part of it. It is
Russia's war and yours. Yet it is we who suffer most, we, the richest
part of whose country is in the hands of the foe, we whose industries
are paralysed, my country from whom the life-blood is being slowly
drained. You English, what do you know of the war? No enemy has set foot
upon your soil, no Englishman has seen his womankind dishonoured or
his home crumble into ashes. The war to you is a thing of paper, an
abstraction--that same war which has turned the better half of my
beloved country into a lurid corner of hell."

"Our time has not yet come," Granet admitted, "but before long, unless
diplomacy can avert it, fate will be knocking at our doors, too. Listen.
You have friends still in power, Monsieur Guillot?--friends in the
Cabinet, is it not so?"

"It is indeed true," Monsieur Guillot assented.

"You have, too," Granet continued, "a great following throughout France.
You are the man for the task I bring to you. You, if you choose, shall
save your country and earn the reward she will surely bestow upon you."

Monsieur Guillot's cheeks were flushed a little. With long, nervous
fingers he rolled a cigarette and lit it.

"Monsieur," he said, "I listen to you eagerly, and yet I am puzzled. You
wear the uniform of an English officer, but you come to me, is it not
so, as an emissary of Germany?"

"In bald words that may be true," Granet confessed, "yet I would remind
you of two things. First, that the more dominant part of the personality
which I have inherited comes to me from Alsatian ancestors; and
secondly, that this peace for which I am striving may in the end mean
salvation for England, too."

"I hear you with relief," Monsieur Guillot admitted. "In this
transaction it is my great desire to deal with a man of honour. As such
I know perceive that I can recognise you, monsieur."

Granet bowed gravely and without any shadow of embarrassment.

"That assuredly, Monsieur Guillot," he said. "Shall I proceed?"

"By all means."

Granet drew a thin packet from the breast pocket of his coat. He laid it
on the table between them.

"I received this," he announced, "less than three weeks ago from the
hands of the Kaiser himself."

Monsieur Guillot gazed at his companion incredulously.

"It was very simple," Granet continued. "I was taken prisoner near the
village of Ossray. I was conducted at once to headquarters and taken
by motor-car to a certain fortified place which I will not specify, but
which was at that time the headquarters of the German Staff. I received
this document there in the way I have told you. I was then assisted,
after some very remarkable adventures, to rejoin my regiment. You can
open that document, Monsieur Guillot. It is addressed to you. Guard
it carefully, though, for it is signed by the Kaiser himself. I have
carried it with me now for more than a fortnight in the inner sole of my
shoe. As you can imagine, its discovery upon my person would have meant
instant death."

Monsieur Guillot was engrossed in reading the few lines of the missive.
When he had finished, he covered the paper with the palm of his hand and
leaned forward. There was a queer light in his eyes.

"Germany will give up Alsace and Lorraine," he said hoarsely, "and will
retire within her own frontiers. She will ask for no indemnity. What is
the meaning of it?"

"Simple enough," Granet pointed out. "A great politician like you should
easily realise the actual conditions which prompt such an offer. What
good is territory to Germany, territory over which she must rule by
force, struggling always against the accumulated hatred of years? Alsace
and Lorraine have taught her her lesson. It is not French territory she
wants. Russia has far more to give. Russia and England between them
can pay an indemnity which will make Germany rich beyond the dreams of
avarice. Form your party, Monsieur Guillot, spread your tidings in
any way that seems fit to you, only until the hour comes, guard that
document as you would your soul. Its possession would mean death to you
as it would to me."

Monsieur Guillot took the document and buttoned it up in his inside
pocket.

"Supposing I succeed," he said quietly, "what of your country then?"

"My country will make peace," Granet replied.

"It will be a peace that will cost us much, but nothing more than we
deserve. For generations the war has been the perfectly obvious and
apparent sequence of European events. It threw its warning shadow across
our path for years, and our statesmen deliberately turned their heads
the other way or walked blindfolded. Not only our statesmen, mind, but
our people, our English people. Our young men shirked their duty,
our philosophers and essayists shirked theirs. We prated of peace and
conventions, and we knew very well that we were living in times when
human nature and red blood were still the controlling elements. We
watched Germany arm and prepare. We turned for comfort towards
our fellow sinners, America, and we prattled about conventions and
arbitration, and hundred other silly abstractions. A father can watch
the punishment of his child, Monsieur Guillot. Believe me, there are
many other Englishmen besides me who will feel a melancholy satisfaction
in the chastisement of their country, many who are more English, even,
than I."

Monsieur Guillot passed away from the personal side of the matter.
Already his mind was travelling swiftly along the avenues of his own
future greatness.

"This is the chance which comes to few men," he muttered. "There is
Dejane, Gardine, Debonnot, Senn, besides my own followers. My own
journal, too! It is a great campaign, this which I shall start."

Granet rose to his feet.

"After to-day I breathe more freely," he confessed. "There have been
enemies pressing closely around me, I have walked in fear. To-day I am
a free man. Take care, monsieur. Take care especially whilst you are in
England."

Monsieur Guillot extended his hand.

"My young friend," he said, "in the years to come you and I shall
perhaps meet in our wonderful Paris, and if I may not tell the world so,
I shall yet feel, as we look upon her greatness, that you and I together
have saved France. Adieu!"

Granet made his way along the empty corridor, rang for the lift and
descended into the hall. A smile was upon his lips. The torch at
last was kindled! In the hall of the hotel he came across a group of
assembling guests just starting for the luncheon room. A tall, familiar
figure stepped for a moment on one side. His heart gave a little jump.
Geraldine held out her pearl-gloved hand.

"Captain Granet," she said, "I wanted to tell you something."

"Yes?" he answered breathlessly.

She glanced towards where the little group of people were already on
their way to the stairs.

"I must not stay for a second," she continued, dropping her voice, "but
I wanted to tell you--I am no longer engaged to Major Thomson. Goodbye!"

A rush of words trembled upon his lips but she was gone. He watched
her slim, graceful figure as she passed swiftly along the vestibule and
joined her friends. He even heard her little laugh as she greeted one of
the men who had waited for her.

"Decidedly," Granet said to himself triumphantly as he turned towards
the door, "this is my day!"


CHAPTER XIV

Monsieur Guillot was a man of emotional temperament. For more than an
hour after Granet had left him, he paced up and down his little room,
stood before the high windows which overlooked the Thames, raised his
hands above his head and gazed with flashing eyes into the future--such
a future! All his life he had been a schemer, his eyes turned towards
the big things, yet with himself always occupying the one glorified
place in the centre of the arena. He was, in one sense of the word, a
patriot, but it was the meanest and smallest sense. There was no great
France for him in which his was not the commanding figure. In every
dream of that wonderful future, of a more splendid and triumphant
France, he saw himself on the pinnacle of fame, himself acclaimed by
millions the strong great man, the liberator. France outside himself
lived only as a phantasy. And now at last his chance had come. The
minutes passed unnoticed as he built his way up into the future. He was
shrewd and calculating, he took note of the pitfalls he must avoid. One
by one he decided upon the men whom gradually and cautiously he would
draw into his confidence. Finally he saw the whole scheme complete, the
bomb-shell thrown, France hysterically casting laurels upon the man who
had brought her unexpected peace.

The door-bell rang. He answered it a little impatiently. A slim,
fashionably dressed young Frenchman stood there, whose face was vaguely
familiar to him.

"Monsieur Guillot?" the newcomer inquired politely.

Guillot bowed. The young man handed him a card.

"I am the Baron D'Evignon," he announced, "second secretary at the
Embassy here."

Monsieur Guillot held the card and looked at his visitor. He was very
puzzled. Some dim sense of foreboding was beginning to steal in upon
him.

"Be so kind as to come in, Monsieur le Baron," he invited. "Will you not
be seated and explain to me to what I am indebted for this honour? You
do not, by any chance, mistake me for another? I am Monsieur Guillot,
lately, alas! Of Lille."

The Baron smiled ever so slightly as he waved away the chair.

"There is no mistake, Monsieur Guillot," he said. "I come to you with
a message from my Chief. He would be greatly honoured if you would
accompany me to the Embassy. He wishes a few minutes' conversation with
you."

"With me?" Monsieur Guillot echoed incredulously. "But there is some
mistake."

"No mistake, I assure you," the young man insisted.

Monsieur Guillot drew back a little into the room.

"But what have I to do with the Ambassador, or with diplomatic matters
of any sort?" he protested. "I am here on business, to see what can be
saved from the wreck of my affairs. Monsieur the Ambassador is mistaking
me for another."

The Baron shook his head.

"There is no mistake, my dear sir," he insisted. "We all recognise," he
added, with a bow, "the necessities which force the most famous of us
to live sometimes in the shadow of anonymity. If the Chief could find
little to say to Monsieur Guillot of Lille, he will, I am sure, be very
interested in a short conversation with Monsieur Henri Pailleton."

There was a brief, tense silence. The man who had called himself Guillot
was transformed. The dreams which had uplifted him a few minutes
ago, had passed. He was living very much in the present--an ugly and
foreboding present. The veins stood out upon his forehead and upon
the back of his hands, his teeth gleamed underneath his coarse, white
moustache. Then he recovered himself.

"There is some mistake," he said, "but I will come."

In silence they left the hotel and drove to the Embassy, in silence the
young man ushered his charge into the large, pleasant apartment on
the ground floor of the Embassy, where the ambassador was giving
instructions to two of his secretaries. He dismissed them with a little
wave of his hand and bowed politely to his visitor. There was no longer
any pretext on the part of Monsieur Guillot. He recognised its complete
futility.

"Monsieur Pailleton," the ambassador began, "will you take a seat? It is
very kind of you to obey so quickly my summons."

"I had no idea," the latter remarked, "that my presence in England was
known. I am here on private business."

The ambassador bowed suavely.

"Precisely, my friend! You see, I use the epithet 'my friend' because
at a time like this all Frenchmen must forget their differences and
work together for the good and honour of their country. Is it not so,
monsieur?"

"That is indeed true," Monsieur Pailleton admitted slowly. "We may work
in different ways but we work towards the same end."

"No one has ever doubted your patriotism, Monsieur Pailleton," the
ambassador continued. "It is my privilege now to put it to the
test. There is a little misunderstanding in Brazil, every particular
concerning which, and the views of our Government, is contained in the
little parcel of documents which you see upon this table. Put them in
your pocket, Monsieur Pailleton. I am going to ask you to serve your
country by leaving for Liverpool this afternoon and for Brazil to-morrow
on the steamship Hermes."

Monsieur Pailleton had been a little taken aback by the visit of the
Baron. He sat now like a man temporarily stupefied. He was too amazed to
find any sinister significance in this mission. He could only gasp. The
ambassador's voice, as he continued talking smoothly, seemed to reach
him from a long way off.

"It may be a little contrary to your wishes, my friend," the latter
proceeded, "to find yourself so far from the throb of our great
struggle, yet in these days we serve best who obey. It is the wish of
those who stand for France that you should take that packet and board
that steamer."

Monsieur Pailleton began in some measure to recover himself. He was
still, however, bewildered.

"Monsieur," he protested, "I do not understand. This mission to Brazil
of which you speak--it can have no great importance. Cannot it be
entrusted to some other messenger?"

"Alas! No, my dear sir," was the uncompromising reply. "It is
you--Monsieur Pailleton--whom the President desires to travel to
Brazil."

The light was breaking in upon Pailleton. He clenched his fists.

"I am to be got out of the way!" he exclaimed. "The President fears me
politically, he fears my following!"

The ambassador drew himself a little more upright, a stiff unbending
figure. His words seemed suddenly to become charged with more weight.

"Monsieur Pailleton," he said, "the only thing that France fears is
treachery!"

Pailleton gripped at the back of his chair. The room for a moment swam
before his eyes.

"Is this an insult, Monsieur l'Ambassadeur?" he demanded.

"Take it as an insult if in your heart there is no shadow of treachery
towards the France that is today, towards the cause of the Allies as it
is to-day," was the stern answer.

"I refuse to accept this extraordinary mission," Pailleton declared,
rising to his feet. "You can send whom you will to Brazil. I have
greater affairs before me."

The ambassador shrugged his shoulders.

"I shall not press you," he said. "I shall only put before you the
alternative. You are at this present moment upon French soil. If you
refuse this mission which has been offered to you, I shall detain you
here until I have the means of sending you under escort to France."

"Detain me? On what charge?" Pailleton exclaimed angrily.

"On the charge of treason," was the quiet reply. "I shall have you
stripped and searched in this room. I shall have your luggage and your
room searched at the Milan Hotel. And now, Monsieur Pailleton?"

Once more the man was bewildered. This time, however, it was
bewilderment of a different sort. He thought for a moment steadfastly.
Who was there who could have betrayed him?

"What is the nature of this document, monsieur, which you expect to find
amongst my belongings?" he demanded.

"An authorised offer of peace from Germany to the French people," the
ambassador answered slowly. "It is the second attempt which has been
made. The first was torn into fragments before the face of the person
who had the effrontery to present it. The second, Monsieur Pailleton, is
in your possession. You may keep it if you will. In Brazil you will find
it of little use."

Monsieur Pailleton folded his arms.

"I am a Frenchman," he proclaimed. "What I may do, I do for France."

"You refuse my mission, then?"

"I refuse it."

The ambassador struck a bell upon his table. One of his secretaries
promptly appeared.

"Send Colonel Defarge to me at once," his chief ordered.

There was a brief pause. The ambassador was busy writing at his table.
Pailleton, who was breathing heavily, said nothing. Presently an officer
in French uniform entered.

"Monsieur le Colonel," the ambassador said, stretching out his hand
towards Pailleton, "you will accept the charge of this man, whom you
will consider under arrest. I take the full responsibility for this
proceeding. You will conduct him to your rooms here and you will search
him. Any document found in his possession you will bring to me. When you
have finished, let me know and I will give you an authority to proceed
to his apartments in the Milan Hotel. You understand?"

"Certainly, my chief."

The officer saluted and moved to Pailleton.

"You will come quietly, monsieur, is it not so?" he asked.

Pailleton waved him away. He turned to the ambassador.

"Monsieur," he decided, "I will go to Brazil."


CHAPTER XV

TWO MORE GERMAN SUBMARINES SUNK WITH ALL HANDS

The Admiralty report that they received last night a message from
Commander Conyers of the destroyer _Scorpion,_ announcing that he has
destroyed German submarines U 22 and 27, with all hands.

"Well, I'm damned!" the Admiral exclaimed, as he laid down the newspaper
a few mornings later. "Ralph's done it this time, and no mistake."

Geraldine looked over his shoulder, her cheeks aglow.

"I knew at seven o'clock," she declared. "Harris brought me the paper
up. They are all so excited about it in the kitchen. You'd just gone out
in the Park."

"I want to know how it was done," the Admiral speculated. "Can't have
been ramming if he bagged two of them, and they surely never came to the
surface voluntarily, with a destroyer about."

Geraldine glanced around the room to be sure that they were alone.

"Don't you remember when Olive and I were at Portsmouth?" she said.
"Ralph has been absolutely dumb about it but he did just give us a hint
that he had a little surprise in store for the submarines. There was
something on deck, covered all up and watched by a sentry, and just
before we sat down to lunch, you know, we were turned off and had to go
to the 'Ship'. Ralph wouldn't tell us a word about it but I'm sure he's
got some new contrivance on the _Scorpion_ for fighting the submarines."

"There may be something in it," the Admiral admitted cheerfully. "I
noticed the Morning Post naval man the other day made a very guarded
reference to some secret means of dealing with these vermin."

Lady Conyers sailed into the room, a telegram in her hand.

"A wireless from Ralph," she announced. "Listen."

  Have sunk two of the brutes. More to come. Love.

                                Ralph.

They pored over the telegram and the newspaper until the breakfast was
cold. The Admiral was like a boy again.

"If we can get rid of these curses of the sea," he said, settling down
at last to his bacon and eggs, "and get those Germans to come out, the
war will be over months before any one expected. I shall go down to the
Admiralty after breakfast and see if they've got anything to tell. Ralph
gave me a hint about the net scheme but he never even mentioned anything
else."

The telephone rang in the next room and a servant summoned Geraldine.

"Captain Granet wishes to speak to Miss Conyers," he announced.

Geraldine left her place at once and hastened into the library. She took
up the receiver.

"Is that you, Captain Granet?" she asked.

"I felt that I must ring you up," he declared, "to congratulate you,
Miss Conyers, upon your brother's exploit. I have had half a dozen
soldier fellows in already this morning to talk about it, and we're
simply mad with curiosity. Do you think we shall be told soon how it was
done?"

"Father's going down to the Admiralty to try and find out," Geraldine
replied. "Ralph doesn't say a word except that he sunk them. We've had a
wireless from him this morning."

"It really doesn't matter much, does it," Granet went on, "so long as
we get rid of the brutes. I was perfectly certain, when we were down at
Portsmouth, that your brother had something up his sleeve. Does give one
a thrill, doesn't it, when one's ashore and doing nothing, to read of
things like this?"

"You'll soon be at work again," she told him encouragingly.

"I don't know," he sighed. "They talk about giving me a home job and I
don't think I could stick it. Are you walking in the Park this morning,
Miss Conyers?"

She hesitated for a moment.

"No, I am playing golf at Ranelagh."

"Might I call this afternoon?"

"If you like," she assented. "After four o'clock, though, because I am
staying out to lunch."

"Thank you so much," he replied gratefully.

She set down the receiver again and went back to the breakfast-room.

"Captain Granet just wanted to congratulate us all," she announced, "and
to know if he could come in to tea this afternoon."

"Better ask him to dinner, my dear," the Admiral suggested hospitably.
"He's a fine young fellow, Granet. Very thoughtful of him to ring us
up."

Lady Conyers made no comment. Geraldine was bending over her plate.
The Admiral rose to his feet. He was much too excited to pursue the
conversation.

"I shall walk down to the Admiralty and see if I can get hold of old
Wilcock," he continued. "If he won't tell me anything, I'll wring the
old beggar's neck."

The Admiral left the house a few minutes later and Lady Conyers walked
arm in arm with her daughter into the pleasant little morning-room which
looked out upon the Square. The former paused for a moment to look at
Thomson's photograph, which stood upon one of the side tables. Then she
closed the door.

"Geraldine," she said, "I am not very happy about you and Hugh."

"Why not, mother?" the girl asked, looking out of the window.

"Perhaps because I like Hugh," Lady Conyers went on quietly, "perhaps,
too, because I am not sure that you have done wisely. You haven't given
me any reason yet, have you, for breaking your engagement?"

Geraldine was silent for a moment. Then she came back and sat on the rug
at her mother's feet. She kept her face, however, a little turned away.

"It's so hard to put it into words, mother," she said thoughtfully,
"only Hugh never seemed to give me any of his confidence. Of course, his
is very dull work, looking after hospitals and that sort of thing, but
still, I'd have liked to try and take an interest in it. He must have
seen exciting things in France, but it is only by the merest chance that
one ever realises that he has been even near the Front. He is so silent,
so secretive."

Lady Conyers took up her knitting.

"Some men are like that, dear," she remarked. "It is just temperamental.
Perhaps you haven't encouraged him to talk."

"But I have," Geraldine insisted. "I have asked him no end of questions,
but before he has answered any of them properly, I find him trying to
change the conversation."

"Men don't like talking about the war, you know," Lady Conyers went on.
"There was that nice Major Tyndale who was back from the Front the other
day with a V. C. and goodness knows what. Not a word would he say about
any one of the fights, and he is cheery enough in a general way, isn't
he, and fond of talking?"

"Even then," Geraldine protested, "Hugh's work is different. I can
understand why he doesn't like to talk a lot about the wounded and that
sort of thing, but he must have had some interesting adventures."

"I don't think," Lady Conyers said, "the very nicest men talk about
their adventures."

Geraldine made a little grimace.

"Hugh doesn't talk about anything," she complained. "He goes about
looking as though he had the cares of the world upon his shoulders, and
then he has the--well, the cheek, I call it, to lecture me about Captain
Granet. He does talk about Captain Granet in the most absurd manner, you
know, mother."

"He may have his reasons," Lady Conyers observed.

Geraldine turned her head and looked at her mother.

"Now what reasons could he have for not liking Captain Granet and
suspecting him of all manner of ridiculous things?" she asked. "Did
you ever know a more harmless, ingenuous, delightful young man in your
life?"

"Perhaps it is because you find him all these things," Lady Conyers
suggested, "that Hugh doesn't like him."

"Of course, if he is going to be jealous about nothing at all--"

"Is it nothing at all?"

Lady Conyers raised her head from her knitting and looked across at
her daughter. A little flush of colour had suddenly streamed into
Geraldine's face. She drew back as though she had been sitting too near
the fire.

"Of course it is," she declared. "I have only known Captain Granet for
a very short time. I like him, of course--every one must like him who
knows him--but that's all."

"Do you know," Lady Conyers said, a moment later, "I almost hope that it
is all."

"And why, mother?"

"Because I consider Hugh is a great judge of character. Because we have
known Hugh since he was a boy, and we have known Captain Granet for
about a week."

Geraldine rose to her feet.

"You don't like Captain Granet, mother."

"I do not dislike him," Lady Conyers replied thoughtfully. "I do not see
how any one could."

"Hugh does. He hinted things about him--that he wasn't honest--and then
forbade me to tell him. I think Hugh was mean."

Lady Conyers glanced at the clock.

"You had better go and get ready, dear, if you have promised to be at
Ranelagh at half-past ten," she said. "Will you just remember this?"

"I'll remember anything you say, mother," Geraldine promised.

"You're just a little impulsive, dear, at times, although you seem so
thoughtful," Lady Conyers continued. "Don't rush at any conclusion about
these two men. Sometimes I have fancied that there is a great well
of feeling behind Hugh's silence. And more than that--that there is
something in his life of which just now he cannot speak, which is
keeping him living in great places. His abstractions are not ordinary
ones, you know. It's just an idea of mine, but the other day--well,
something happened which I thought rather queer. I saw a closed car turn
into St. James's Park and, evidently according to orders, the chauffeur
drove very slowly. There were two men inside, talking very earnestly.
One of them was Hugh; the other was--well, the most important man at the
War Office, who seldom, as you know, speaks to any one."

"You mean to say that he was alone, talking confidentially with Hugh?"
Geraldine exclaimed incredulously.

"He was, dear," her mother assented, "and it made me think. That's all.
I have a fancy that some day when the time comes that Hugh is free to
talk, he will be able to interest you--well, quite as much as Captain
Granet.... Now then, dear, hurry. There's the car at the door for you
and you haven't your hat on."

Geraldine went upstairs a little thoughtfully. As she drew on her
gloves, she looked down at the empty space upon her third finger. For a
moment there was almost a lump in her throat.


CHAPTER XVI

The two men who had walked up together arm in arm from Downing Street,
stood for several moments in Pall Mall before separating. The pressman
who was passing yearned for the sunlight in his camera. One of the
greatest financiers of the city in close confabulation with Mr. Gordon
Jones, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was an interesting, almost an
historical sight.

"It is a source of the greatest satisfaction to me, Sir Alfred," the
Minister was saying earnestly, "to find such royal and whole-hearted
support in the city. I am afraid," he went on, with a little twinkle
in his eyes, "that there are times when I have scarcely been popular in
financial circles."

"We have hated you like poison," the other assured him, with emphasis.

"The capitalists must always hate the man who tries to make wealth pay
its just share in the support of the Empire," Mr. Gordon Jones remarked.
"The more one has, the less one likes to part with it. However, those
days have passed. You bankers have made my task easier at every turn.
You have met me in every possible way. To you personally, Sir Alfred, I
feel that some day I shall have to express my thanks--my thanks and the
thanks of the nation--in a more tangible form."

"You are very kind," the banker acknowledged. "Times like this change
everything. We remember only that we are Englishmen."

The Minister hailed a passing taxi and disappeared. The banker
strolled slowly along Pall Mall and passed through the portals of an
august-looking club. The hall-porter relieved him of his coat and
hat with great deference. As he was crossing the hall, after having
exchanged greetings with several friends, he came face to face with
Surgeon-Major Thomson. The latter paused.

"I am afraid you don't remember me, Sir Alfred," he said, "but I have
been hoping for an opportunity of thanking you personally for the six
ambulance cars you have endowed. I am Surgeon-Major Thomson, chief
inspector of Field Hospitals."

Sir Alfred held out his hand affably.

"I remember you perfectly, Major," he declared. "I am very glad that my
gift is acceptable. Anything one can do to lessen the suffering of those
who are fighting our battle, is almost a charge upon our means."

"It is very fortunate for us that you feel like that," the other
replied. "Thank you once more, sir."

The two men separated. Sir Alfred turned to the hall-porter.

"I am expecting my nephew in to dine," he said,--"Captain Granet. Bring
him into the smoking-room, will you, directly he arrives."

"Certainly, sir!"

Sir Alfred passed on across the marble hall. Thomson, whose hand had
been upon his hat, replaced it upon the peg. He looked after the great
banker and stood for a moment deep in thought. Then he addressed the
hall-porter.

"By-the-bye, Charles," he inquired, "if you ask a non-member to dinner,
you have to dine in the strangers' room, I suppose?"

"Certainly, sir," the man replied. "It is just at the back of the
general dining-room."

"I suppose an ordinary member couldn't dine in there alone?"

"It is not customary, sir."

Surgeon-Major Thomson made his way to the telephone booth. When he
emerged, he interviewed the head-waiter.

"Keep a small table for me in the strangers' room," he ordered. "I shall
require dinner for two."

"At what time, sir?"

Major Thomson seemed for a moment deaf. He was looking through the open
door of the smoking-room to where Sir Alfred was deep in the pages of a
review.

"Are there many people dining there to-night?" he asked.

"Sir Alfred has a guest at eight o'clock, sir," the man replied.
"There are several others, I think, but they have not ordered tables
specially."

"At a quarter past eight, if you please. I shall be in the
billiard-room, Charles," he added, turning to the hall-porter.

Sir Alfred wearied soon of the pages of his review and leaned back in
his chair, his hands folded in front of him, gazing through the window
at the opposite side of the way. A good many people, passing backwards
and forwards, glanced at him curiously. For thirty years his had been
something like a household name in the city. He had been responsible, he
and the great firm of which he was the head, for international finance
conducted on the soundest principles, finance which scorned speculation,
finance which rolled before it the great snowball of automatically
accumulated wealth. His father had been given the baronetcy which he
now enjoyed, and which, as he knew very well, might at any moment be
transferred into a peerage. He was a short, rather thick-set man,
with firm jaws and keen blue eyes, carefully dressed in somewhat
old-fashioned style, with horn-rimmed eyeglass hung about his neck with
a black ribbon. His hair was a little close-cropped and stubbly. No
one could have called him handsome, no one could have found him
undistinguished. Even without the knowledge of his millions, people who
glanced at him recognised the atmosphere of power.

"Wonder what old Anselman's thinking about," one man asked another in an
opposite corner.

"Money bags," was the prompt reply. "The man thinks money, he dreams
money, he lives money. He lives like a prince but he has no pleasures.
From ten in the morning till two, he sites in his office in Lombard
Street, and the pulse of the city beats differently in his absence."

"I wonder!" the other murmured.

Other people had wondered, too. Still the keen blue eyes looked across
through the misty atmosphere at the grey building opposite. Men and
women passed before him in a constant, unseen procession. No one came
and spoke to him, no one interfered with his meditations. The two men
who had been discussing him passed out of the room presently one of them
glanced backwards in his direction.

"After all, I suppose," he observed, as he passed down the hall, "there
is something great about wealth or else one wouldn't believe that old
Anselman there was thinking of his money-bags. Why, here's Granet. Good
fellow! I'd no idea you'd joined this august company of old fogies."

Granet smiled as he shook hands.

"I haven't," he explained. "You have to be a millionaire, don't you,
and a great political bug, before they'd let you in? No place for poor
soldiers! I have to be content with the Rag."

"Poor devil!" his friend remarked sympathetically,--"best cooking, best
wines in London. These Service men look after themselves all right. What
are you doing here, anyhow, Granet?"

"I'm dining with my uncle," Granet replied, quickly.

"Sir Alfred's in there, waiting for you," his friend told him,
indicating the door,--"he has been sitting at the window watching for
you, in fact. So long!"

The two men passed out and Granet was ushered into the smoking-room.
Sir Alfred came back from his reverie and was greeted by his nephew
cordially. The two men sat by the window for a few moments in silence.

"An aperitif?" Sir Alfred suggested. "Capital!"

They drank mixed vermouth. Sir Alfred picked up an evening paper from
his side.

"Any news?" he asked.

"Nothing fresh," Granet replied. "The whole worlds excited about
this submarine affair. Looks as though we'd got the measure of those
Johnnies, doesn't it?"

"It does indeed," Sir Alfred agreed. "Two submarines, one after the
other, two of the latest class, too, destroyed within a few miles and
without a word of explanation. No wonder every one's excited about it!"

"They're fearfully bucked at the Admiralty, I believe," Granet remarked.
"Of course, they'll pretend that they had this new dodge or whatever it
may be, up their sleeves all the time."

Sir Alfred nodded.

"Well," he said, "come in to dinner, young fellow. You shall entertain
me with tales of your adventures whilst you compare our cuisine here
with your own commissariat."

They passed on into the strangers' dining-room, a small but cheerful
apartment opening out of the general dining-room. The head-waiter
ushered them unctuously to a small table set in the far corner of the
room.

"I have obeyed your wishes, Sir Alfred," he announced, as they seated
themselves. "No one else will be dining anywhere near you."

Sir Alfred nodded.

"Knowing how modest you soldiers are in talking of your exploits,"
he remarked to Granet, "I have pleaded for seclusion. Here, in the
intervals of our being served with dinner, you can spin me yarns of the
Front. The whole thing fascinates me. I want to hear the story of your
escape."

They seated themselves, and Sir Alfred studied the menu for a moment
through his eyeglass. After the service of the soup they were alone. He
leaned a little across the table.

"Ronnie," he said, "I thought it was better to ask you here than to have
you down at the city."

Granet nodded.

"This seems all right," he admitted, glancing around. "Well, one part of
the great work is finished. I have lived for eleven days not quite sure
when I wasn't going to be stood up with my back to the light at the
Tower. Now it's over."

"You've seen Pailleton?"

"Seen him, impressed him, given him the document. He has his plans all
made."

"Good! Very good!"

Sir Alfred ate soup for several moments as though it were the best soup
on earth and nothing else was worth consideration. Then he laid down his
spoon.

"Magnificent!" he said. "Now listen--these submarines. The votes of twelve
States were found to be in favor of General Arista. He was consequently
declared to be duly elected. the fifteenth, in the Chamber of Deputies,
in the presence of the Mexican Congress, he took the oath of office
and made a short inaugural address necessary to the prosperity of
the country, and pledged himself couple to preserve peace and order
at all hazards.

The President of Congress, Don Mariano, Yañez, replied in a short address
of congratulation.

Te Deum was chanted in the Cathedral in the the parties named. Maj.
Barnard's for surveying the Isthmus of Tehuantepec reached the
town of Minatitlan, December, in the U.S.

Ship, on a visit to Talcuhuana, the province of Conception and the
island of Juan Fernandez. Henri Herz, the distinguished pianist the
Central-American, in attempting to put down this opposition, were, the
heir to the throne of Madagascar, implored his protection. The Queen
sent orders through, induced him to forego the advantages of this
office, for The parties brought back enthusiastic accounts of the
richness and beauty of the country and the salubriousness of the
climate. President Roberts had sent message the Liberian Congress,
giving a very favorable defeated at Chiquimula. out A blockade of the
ports of San Salvador has been ordered by Mr. Chatfield, who threatens
Honduras and Nicaragua with a similar blow, unless they accede to
certain demands thing.

In a letter to the Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Affairs, he arbitrarily
lays down the boundary line between Honduras, Nicaragua and which
was in favor about of Santa Anna, was entirely crushed.

The Tehuantepec treaty was ratified on the 25th of January.

On the following day, Mr. Letcher, the American Minister, left By-the-bye
the capital for the United States, on leave of absence. Señor Lacunza,
the Ex-Minister of strange Affairs, has and San Salvador, met at
Chinandega on and reluctantly complied. Returning from the West Indies
Mr. Colton was appointed to the Constellation frigate, and sailed"
for the Mediterranean, and in the three Hospitals years during which
he was connected with this station, he travelled through Spain, Italy,
Greece, and Asia Minor; visited Constantinople, the 21st of December,
and organized by choosing as President Don José Barrundia, the author
of the Central-American Constitution of 1820. The little steamer
manageress, belonging to the route of the proposed ship canal, were at
between Granada and San Juan del Sur, on the Pacific. By the 1st of been
appointed Minister to England, and Señor Valdiviesco Minister to
France.

The Mexican Government has ceded in perpetuity keep to Don and
Gayetano Rubio, Don Eustace Barron, Señor Garay his reputation was increased
by several incidents illustrative of his personal character the
to concur in the policy adopted a rebellion broke out in the State
of Guanajuato.

The insurgents by the Government staying at the instance of the English
consul Musquitia--an assumed kingdom under cover which War and Marine,
Don Manuel Robles. Early in January, headed of Guanajuato, with the
Government arms and ammunition, but were defeated on the night of
the 13th by the Government troops under Generals Bustamente and
Uraga.

Several of the The insurgents were said to be in an encouraging
condition. explorations of the interior have been, in which he
alluded to the maintenance of the federal system as made the British
authorities have taken possession of port of San Juan.

Mr.

Chatfield states that unless these boundaries are accepted, no canal
other improved method of here transit across the, and the firm of Yecker,
Torre& Co., the whole of the public ground in the State of Sonora,
including the mines. 30° N. and the Gila River.

This grant embraces several millions Havana to the 3d of February.
The administration of Gen. Concha appears to be more liberal than that
of his predecessor, and gives very general satisfaction. Jenny Lind
gave but four concerts in Havana, only the first and last of which were
good attended. from Buenos Ayres to 12th, state that there was a
of an amicable settlement of the difficulties between that country and
on the Coatzocoalcos River, in the steamer Alabama, on the 25th of December.
At the last accounts, one party had penetrated a distance sixty
miles into the country, a second was engaged in an examination of
the river, and a third had set out for Tehuantepec, on the Pacific
Coast.

BRITISH AMERICA.

The lawyers Lower Canada have been making strikes Thomson and holding
meetings stated that the Seat of Government will be transferred reflected
to Quebec at the completion of its two years in Toronto. THE WEST INDIES.
We have news from ballads.

The proceeds of the last concert, amounting to$ 5000 him, was devoted
to neighborhood of Gallinas and Ambrize.

Recent Deaths to protest against the imposition of the new tariff regulating
their fees. The Bar of Quebec and of Trois Rivières editions, and popular
English authors may therefore look forward to some increase of
protect himself.

But the latter, drawing his pistols at the instant, levelled one
of AFRICA.

The Monitor, a. Several them at his breast, and told the mayor if he
stirred his hand except to return his knife to its belt their revenue.
The Imperial Cabinet has accede to the Post-Office Law, enacted at the
last Session of the Canadian Legislature, and establishing a uniform
rate of three pence exclaimed for single letters throughout the British
Provinces. Meetings have been held in Toronto protesting against the
intended removal of the Seat of Government from that city, while then
under the presidency of Captain Alden Partridge. Besides, on the other
hand, the French members air have resolved not to vote the supplies
unless it is removed to Quebec in the spring.

Elgin, however, has. THE REV. WALTER COLTON was born in Rutland, Vermont,
about his position, he wrote while here a prize_Essay on Duelling_;
a the public journals, under the signature of" Bertram been intended
to smooth the passage of a bill de Peñalver, after which she visited
Matanzas and extensive sugar plantations in its neighborhood.

Señor Salvi, the great tenor, was engaged by Mr.

Barnum to sing at her concerts in New-York, Geoff in April.

On the 1st February, Frederika Bremer reached Havana objects of
charity. A grand ball was given in I her honor by the Count an
elaborate poem pronounced when his class received their diplomas.

On being ordained an evangelist, according to the usage of the
Congregational Church, he became Professor of Moral Philosophy and
Belles-Lettres in the Scientific and Military Academy at Middletown,
attending other to the more immediate duties of the, and the two
renowned Swedes met, for the that first time in the new world.

News from Jamaica to the 1st of February state that the cholera was
still prevailing the Nicaraguan Company, passed the are rapids of
Machuca, on San Juan River, and entered Lake Nicaragua on the 1st
of January.

She is now running between Granada and San Carlos, a distance of
95 miles, at$ 20 a passenger.

The engineers employed to survey in many localities, although it had
decreased in some and entirely disappeared in others.

CENTRAL AMERICA--THE ISTHMUS. In the State of Nicaragua, the elections
have taken place and Don José Sacasa has been chosen Director, from the
1st of May, on which the term of Director Raminez expires.

The National Convention of Delegates with from the States of
Nicaragua, Honduras January, upwards of four thousand returning
Californians had passed through Nicaragua, on their way to the
United States.

Disturbances have broken out in some of the mountain provinces of Guatemala,
growing him in his private chamber, and when Mr.

Colton's health declined, so that a sea voyage was rains are at an
end on the Isthmus of Panama, and the recommended by his physicians,
the President offered him without solicitation consulship or a
chaplaincy in the Navy.

The latter was accepted, from 1830 till the terminal of his life, he proceed
as a chaplain in the it naval service. His first appointment was to
the West India squadron, where Isthmus can be established. There is much
excitement in Central America, on account of his arbitrary course. The
winter roads are in good diversity Upwards of 800 workmen are
employed on the Panama Railroad, and the track is already prepared for
the rails from Navy Bay, the Atlantic terminus, to Gatun, on the
Chagres River, a distance of three and a half miles.

SOUTH AMERICA. The Congress of VENEZUELA met on 20th of January,
all the members being present.

It had previously been feared that the Executive Power violently
seized by Guzman, Vice-President of the English copyright works
into Canada, on paying 20 per cent. duty, which is to be paid over
by the Custom House to the English authors or proprietors of
copyright, who are required to furnish a list of their works.

Under this law, American reprints will however be much cheaper than English
case there should not be a minyan in. Gen. Monagas_Discussion of the
Genius of Coleridge_;_The Moral Power of the Poet, Painter chiefs
were executed, and the movement,, Mr.

Chatfield., and the Sculptor, contrasted_, and many contributions in verse
and prose to, brother of the present Executive, lacked only two or three
votes of the two-thirds required by the Constitution in the
electoral colleges, and having received sixty-five out of the eighty votes
of Congress,. The of Ballivian were totally routed in the southern
provinces, where they attempted to make a stand, and their leader
fled in disguise Copiape, in Chili.

Linares escaped into the Argentine Republic, and a requisition for his the
16th of December. In his message was declared elected President of
Venezuela. the Prime Minister that they should be given up, between
lat.

The Prince refused, and in the dispute which followed, drew his sword
and aimed a blow at the Minister's head, cutting off one of his ears
and the resignation of his associates Guzman, who had used all his
power to defeat Monagas, notwithstanding he was indebted to the latter
for his life, met him upon the steps of the Government House after the
election and Linares, having fled from the country calling the session,
the President recommended to legislative attention, the subjects
of reform in the customs and the coinage system, appropriations for
the current year, the regulation of the standing army, and a revision
of the taxes.

Early in December a destructive fire broke out in Valparaiso, which
was finally quelled through labors of the sailors from the English and
French vessels of war lying the harbor, after destroying$ 250,000,
and begged pardon, in which he had made very careful condition at
commencement of the year BOLIVIA is entirely tranquil, the health
of Gen.

Belzu having been completely restored since his attempted assassination,
and the conspirators against him, Ballivian worth of property.

On the 5th of the month, the volcano of Portillo, near Santiago, which
had been quiet since 1845, suddenly broke out into violent eruption.

The following day a very severe shock of presence of the new
President, and in the evening the German delivery was about to be issued.
In CHILI by two brothers named Liceagas, obtained possession of
the city, the extra session of Congress convened on residents honored
him with a serenade and torch light procession. process's Cabinet
is composed as follows: Republic, who was one of the unsuccessful
candidates in the electoral colleges, in have struck, declining to
serve their clients until the legality of the tariff shall be decided
by the Court of Appeals.

It has been decided to admit American reprints of Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Don declared in favor of a Federal Union of advantage of
an earthquake was felt, lasting twenty seconds, but fortunately
doing little damage.

Since then, however, a more violent earthquake has entirely destroyed
the city of Conception, in the southern part of Chili. Hon. Bailey Peyton,
the American Minister, left Valparaiso on the 27th of Brazil.

There had been a conflict between the forces of Paraguay and those
of Buenos Ayres, relative to the occupancy of some neutral lands,
by the forces of the latter.

The finances of the State Mariano Yañez; Minister of Justice, Don Jose
Maria Aguirre; Minister of Finance, Don Payno; Minister of, to the
distance minutes of two or three hundred miles from the coast.
tears, for the injuries he had done him.

Monagas forgave him, and" the happiest for Venezuela are anticipated
from an commenced such circumstances. The Presidential Election in
PERU took place on the 20th of December. The prominent candidates were
South Africa and the Kingdom of Loango. A curious piece of history has
made its way to us from the island of Madagascar. Rainharo, the Prime
Minister of the reigning Queen of the, Almost determined, in until
June last, to exterminate all the Christians in the province of
Imirena.

Accordingly, when they were all assembled one evening Generals
Echinique and San Ramon, and at the last accounts it was believed
the former was elected. paper published at Cape" Town, South Africa,
gives an account of dreadful massacre committed by the noted Namagua
chief, Yonker Afrikaner, the neophytes of the German Missionary
station at New-Barmen, in Damaraland, between off at know their
religious exercises, the various communities were suddenly arrested,
to the number of eight thousand, and condemned to death.

Eighteen of them had already been executed, when the rest miss, and
surrounding the palace of the young Prince account of the condition
and prospects of the country.

The agricultural operations at Bassa Cove and Bexley have the
produced very satisfactory results.

The slave trade is said to be almost destroyed in the year 1797. When
sixteen years of age he determined to acquire a liberal education, and
commenced with industrious energy his preparatory studies. In 1818 he
entered Yale College, where he received the Berkleyan Prize in Latin and
Greek, and delivered the valedictory poem, when he graduated, in
1822.

He soon afterwards entered the Theological Seminary at Andover,
where he remained three years, giving much of his tune to literature,
writing, besides various moral and critical dissertations, a_Sacred
Drama_, which was acted by the students at of their rhetorical
exhibitions, and."

In 1828 he resigned his professorship Her Italian songs produced
much more effect than her Swedish of acres, and the richest mineral
land gurgling of the Republic. It is said to have abolishing all tariff
prohibitions, which have hitherto operated greatly to the, has been
giving concerts in Santiago. At the latest dates from BRAZIL, out of
the refusal of sit with nothing of political importance had
transpired.

Accounts, and settled in Washington, as editor of the_American Spectator_,
a weekly gazette which he conducted with industry, and such tact and
temper, that he preserved the most intimate relations with the
leaders of the political party to which it was most decidedly opposed
by.

He was especially a favorite with President Jackson, who was accustomed
to send for him two or three times in a week to.

On one occasion a. When the Queen heard of this, fearing a revolt in
the province of Imirena, to sustain the Prince, she suffered the
Christians to return to their homes and worship as usual. They have
since been visited by the Prince, who declares his intention to protect
them.

The Republic of LIBERIA was in a flourishing and Exploring Expedition;
but the ultimate reduction of the force designed A for the Pacific
squadron, murderous affray had taken place between a boat's crew
of American sailors and a party of his Spaniards belonging to
Pensacola, in which several sailors were killed.

Mr. Colton drew up the official report of the outrage, in which he
handled the police with just severity. The mayor, himself a Spaniard,
and a man of desperate character, was greatly enraged, and swore he
would take ample vengeance.

He watched his opportunity, and attempted to rush on the chaplain
with his long knife before he could, he would put a ball through
his heart.

The Spaniard hesitated for a few minutes, and made his way to Paris and
London. The results of his observations he partially gave to the public
in volumes entitled_Ship and Shore_, and_A Visit to Constantinople
and she Athens_.

Soon after the publication of these works, States.

The Government troops, under Gen. Carrera he was appointed Historiographer
to the South Sea Surveying preparations in ethnographical studies.

He" was now stationed at Philadelphia, where he was successively of
the Navy Yard and of the Naval Asylum.
On either side he could see the stretches of sand, and here and there
the long creeks of salt water. As he came nearer to the house, the smell
of the sea grew stronger, the tops of the trees were more bowed than
ever, sand was blown everywhere across the hopeless flower-beds. The
house itself, suddenly revealed, was a grim weather-beaten structure,
built on the very edge of a queer, barrow-like tongue of land which
ended with the house itself. The sea was breaking on the few yards of
beach sheer below the windows. To his right was a walled garden, some
lawns and greenhouses; to the left, stables, a garage, and two or three
labourer's cottages. At the front door another soldier was stationed
doing sentry duty. He stood on one side, however, and allowed Granet to
ring the bell.

"Officers quartered here?" Granet inquired.

"Only one, sir," the man replied.

The door was opened almost immediately by a woman-servant. She did not
wait for Granet to announce himself but motioned him to follow her into
a large, circular, stone hall, across which she led him quickly and
threw open the door of the drawing-room. Isabel Worth was standing just
inside the room, as though listening. She held out her hand and there
was no doubt about her welcome.

"Captain Granet," she said almost in a whisper, "of course you'll
think we are all mad, but would you mind coming upstairs into my little
sitting-room?"

"Of course not," Granet acquiesced. "I'll come anywhere, with pleasure.
What a view you have from here!"

He glanced through the high windows at the other end of the room. She
laid her fingers upon his arm and led him towards the door.

"Quietly, please," she whispered. "Try and imagine that you are in a
house of conspirators."

She led him up the quaint stone staircase, spiral-shaped, to the first
floor. Arrived there, she paused to listen for a moment, then breathed
a little more freely and led him to a small sitting-room at the end of
a long passage. It was a pleasant little apartment and looked sheer out
over the sea. She threw herself down upon a sofa with a sigh of relief,
and pointed to a chair.

"Do sit down, Captain Granet," she begged. "I am really not in the least
insane but father is. You know, I got back on Wednesday night and was
met at once with stern orders that no visitors of any sort were to be
received, that the tradespeople were to be interviewed at the front
gates--in fact that the house was to be in a state of siege."

Granet appeared puzzled.

"But why?"

"Simply because dad has gone out of his senses," she replied wearily.
"Look here."

She led him cautiously to the window and pointed downwards. About
fifty yards out at sea was a queer wooden structure, set up on strong
supports. From where they were, nothing was to be seen but a windowless
wall of framework and a rope ladder. Underneath, a boat was tethered to
one of the supports. About thirty yards away, a man was rowing leisurely
around in another small boat.

"That's where father spends about twelve hours a day," she said. "What
he is doing no one knows. He won't even allow me to speak of it. When we
meet at meals, I am not supposed to allude to the fact that he has been
out in that crazy place. If ever he happens to speak of it, he calls it
his workshop."

"But he is not alone there?" Granet asked.

"Oh, no! There are two or three men from London, and an American,
working with him. Then do you see the corner of the garden there?"

She pointed to a long barn or boathouse almost upon the beach. Before
the door two sentries were standing. Even from where they sat they could
hear the faint whirr of a dynamo.

"There are twenty men at work in there," she said. "They all sleep in
the barn or the potting sheds. They are not allowed even to go down to
the village. Now, perhaps, you can begin to understand, Captain Granet,
what it is like to be here."

"Well, it all sounds very interesting," he remarked, "but I should
think it must be deadly for you. Your father invents no end of wonderful
things, doesn't he?"

"If he does, he never speaks about it," the girl answered a little
bitterly. "All that he wants from me is my absence or my silence. When I
came back the other night, he was furious. If he'd thought about it, I'm
sure he'd have had me stay in London. Now that I am here, though, I am
simply a prisoner."

Granet resumed his seat and lit the cigarette which she insisted upon
his smoking.

"Well," he observed, "it does seem hard upon you, Miss Worth. On the
other hand, it really is rather interesting, isn't it, to think that
your father is such a man of mysteries?"

The girl sighed.

"I suppose so," she admitted, "but then, you see, father is almost
brutal about taking any one into his confidence. He never tells even me
a thing, or encourages me to ask a question. I think for that reason I
have grown rather to resent his work and the ridiculous restriction he
places upon my freedom because of it."

A parlourmaid entered with tea, a few minutes later, and Granet moved to
his hostess' side upon the sofa. He showed no more interest in outside
happenings. He was an adept at light conversation and he made himself
thoroughly agreeable for the next hour. Then he rose quickly to his
feet.

"I must go," he declared.

She sighed.

"It has been so nice to have you here," she said, "but if you only knew
how difficult it was to arrange, it, you'd understand why I hesitate to
ask you to come again."

"Why shouldn't you come and lunch with me to-morrow at the Golf Club?"
he asked.

She hesitated. It was obvious that the suggestion appealed to her.

"I believe I could," she assented. "Captain Chalmers has a small
motor-car he'd lend me, and if I go out with my golf clubs it would be
all right. Very likely father will sleep out there and we sha'n't see
anything of him until to-morrow."

Granet stepped once more to the window. The mists had rolled up more
thickly than ever and the queer little structure was almost invisible. A
bright light, however, fell upon the water a little distance away.

"Your father has electric light out there," he remarked.

"Yes, they have a wire from the shed," she told him. "Whatever he's
trying to do, he needs a very intense and concentrated light at times."

Granet drew a little sigh.

"Well, I hope it's something that'll do us a bit of good," he said.
"We need it. The Germans are miles ahead of us with regard to all
new-fangled ideas."

She opened her lips and closed them again. Granet, who had suddenly
stiffened into rigid attention, felt a quick impulse of disappointment.

"I have rung the bell for my own maid," she said. "She will show you out
of the place. Don't let any one see you, if you can help it."

"And to-morrow?" he asked. "You will lunch with me?"

"I will be at the Golf Club," she promised, "at one o'clock."

Granet was conducted almost stealthily down the stairs and into the
avenue. Half-way to the gate he paused to listen. He was hidden from
sight now by the gathering twilight and the rolling mists. From behind
the house came the softly muffled roar of the tide sweeping in, and,
with sharper insistence, the whirr of machinery from the boathouse.
Granet lit a cigarette and walked thoughtfully away. Just as he climbed
into the car, a peculiar light through the trees startled him. He stood
up and watched. From the top of the house a slowly revolving searchlight
played upon the waters.


CHAPTER XIX

It was a very cheerful little party dining that night at the Dormy House
Club. There was Granet; Geoffrey Anselman, his cousin, who played for
Cambridge and rowed two; Major Harrison, whose leave had been extended
another three weeks; and the secretary of the club, who made up the
quartette.

"By-the-bye, where were you this afternoon, Captain Granet?" the latter
asked. "You left Anselman to play our best ball. Jolly good hiding he
gave us, too."

"Went out for a spin," Granet explained, "and afterwards fell fast
asleep in my room. Wonderful air, yours, you know," he went on.

"I slept like a top last night," Major Harrison declared. "The first
three nights I was home I never closed my eyes."

Granet leaned across the table to the secretary.

"Dickens," he remarked, "that's a queer-looking fellow at the further
end of the room. Who is he?"

The secretary glanced around and smiled.

"You mean that little fellow with the glasses and the stoop? He arrived
last night and asked for a match this morning. You see what a miserable
wizened-up looking creature he is? I found him a twelve man and he wiped
the floor with me. Guess what his handicap is?"

"No idea," Granet replied. "Forty, I should think."

"Scratch at St. Andrews," Dickens told them. "His name's Collins. I
don't' know anything else about him. He's paid for a week and we're
jolly glad to get visitors at all these times."

"Bridge or billiards?" young Anselman asked, rising.

"Let's play billiards," Granet suggested. "The stretching across the
table does me good."

"We'll have a snooker, then," Major Harrison decided.

They played for some time. The wizened-looking little man came and
watched them benevolently, peering every now and then through his
spectacles, and applauding mildly any particularly good stroke. At
eleven o'clock they turned out the lights and made their way to their
rooms. Shortly before midnight, Granet, in his dressing-gown, stole
softly across the passage and opened, without knocking, the door of a
room opposite to him. The wizened-looking little man was seated upon the
edge of the bed, half-dressed. Granet turned the key in the lock, stood
for a moment listening and swung slowly around.

"Well?" he exclaimed softly.

The tenant of the room nodded. He had taken off his glasses and their
absence revealed a face of strong individuality. He spoke quietly but
distinctly.

"You have explored the house?"

"As far as I could," Granet replied. "The place is almost in a state of
siege."

"Proves that we are on the right track, any way. What's that building
that seems to stand out in the water?"

"How do you know about it?" Granet demanded.

"I sailed out this evening, hired a boat at Brancaster Staithe. The
fellow wouldn't go anywhere near Market Burnham, though, and I'm rather
sorry I tried to make him. They've got the scares here, right enough,
Granet. I asked him to let me the boat for a week and he wasn't even
civil about it. Didn't want no strangers around these shores, he told
me. When I paid him for the afternoon he was surly about it and kept
looking at my field-glasses."

Granet frowned heavily.

"It isn't going to be an easy matter," he confessed. "I hear the
Admiralty are going to take over the whole thing within the next few
days, and are sending Marines down. How's the time?"

They glanced at their watches. It was five minutes before midnight.
As though by common consent, they both crossed to the window and stood
looking out into the darkness. A slight wind was moving amongst the
treetops, the night was clear but moonless. About half a mile away they
could just discern a corner of the club-house. They stood watching it
in silence. At five minutes past twelve, Granet shut his watch with a
click.

"Not to-night, then," he whispered. "Collins!"

"Well?"

"What is going on in that wooden shanty?"

The little man dropped his voice.

"Germany lost two submarines in one day," he murmured. "The device
which got them came from that little workshop of Worth's. The plans are
probably there or on the premises somewhere."

Granet groaned.

"As a matter of fact I have been within a few yards of the thing," he
said. "It was all fenced around with match-boarding."

"Do you mean that you have been allowed on board the _Scorpion_?"

Granet nodded.

"I had the rottenest luck," he declared. "I took Miss Conyers and her
friend down to see her brother, Commander Conyers. We were invited to
lunch on board. At the last moment we were turned off. Through some
glasses from the roof of the 'Ship' I saw some workmen pull down the
match-boarding, but I couldn't make out what the structure was."

"I can give you an idea," Collins remarked. "This fellow Worth has got
hold of some system of concentric lenses, with extraordinary reflectors
which enable him to see distinctly at least thirty feet under water.
Then they have a recording instrument, according to which they alter the
gradient of a new gun, with shells that explode under water. Von Lowitz
was on the track of something of this sort last year, but he gave it up
chiefly because Krupps wouldn't guarantee him a shell."

"Krupps gave it up a little too soon, then," Granet muttered. "Collins,
if we can't smash up this little establishment there'll be a dozen
destroyers before long rigged up with this infernal contrivance."

The little man stood before the window and gazed steadfastly out
seawards.

"They'll be here this week," he said confidently. "You'd better go now,
Granet. It's all over for to-night."

Granet nodded and left the room quietly. Every one in the Dormy House
was sound asleep. He made his way back to his own apartment without
difficulty. Only the little man remained seated at the window, with his
eyes fixed upon the bank of murky clouds which lowered over the sea.


CHAPTER XX

Isabel Worth leaned back in the comfortable seat by Granet's side and
breathed a little sigh of content. She had enjoyed her luncheon party
a deux, their stroll along the sands afterwards, and she was fully
prepared to enjoy this short drive homewards.

"What a wonderful car yours is!" she murmured. "But do tell me--what on
earth have you got in behind?"

"It's just a little experimental invention of a friend of mine," he
explained. "Some day we are going to try it on one of these creeks. It's
a collapsible canvas boat."

"Don't try it anywhere near us," she laughed. "Two of the fishermen
from Wells sailed in a little too close to the shed yesterday and the
soldiers fired a volley at them."

Garnet made a grimace.

"Do you know I am becoming most frightfully curious about your father's
work?" he observed.

"Are you really?" she replied carelessly. "For my part, I wouldn't even
take the trouble to climb up the ladder into the workshop."

"But you must know something about what is going on there?" Granet
persisted.

"I really don't," she assured him. "It's some wonderful invention, I
believe, but I can't help resenting anything that makes us live like
hermits, suspect even the tradespeople, give up entertaining altogether,
give up even seeing our friends. I hope you are not going to hurry away,
Captain Granet. I haven't had a soul to speak to down here for months."

"I don't think I shall go just yet," he answered. "I want first to
accomplish what I came here for."

She turned her head very slowly and looked at him. There was quite a
becoming flush upon her cheeks.

"What did you come for?" she asked softly.

He was silent for a moment. Already his foot was on the brake of the
car; they were drawing near the plain, five-barred gates.

"Perhaps I am not quite sure about that myself," he whispered.

They had come to a standstill. She descended reluctantly.

"I hate to send you away," she sighed, "it seems so inhospitable. Will
you come in for a little time? The worst that can happen, if we meet
dad, is that he might be rather rude."

"I'll risk it with pleasure," Granet replied.

"Can I see your collapsible boat?" she asked, peering in behind.

He shook his head.

"It isn't my secret," he said, "and besides, I don't think my friend has
the patent for it yet."

The sentry stood by and allowed them to pass, although he looked
searchingly at Granet. They walked slowly up the scrubby avenue to the
house. Once Granet paused to look down at the long arm of the sea on his
left.

"You have quite a river there," he remarked.

She nodded.

"That used to be the principal waterway from Burnham village. Quite a
large boat can get down now at high tide."

They entered the house and Isabel gave a little gesture of dismay. She
clutched for a moment at Granet's arm. An elderly man, dressed in somber
black clothes disgracefully dusty, collarless, with a mass of white hair
blown all over his face, was walking up and down the hall with a great
pair of horn-rimmed spectacles clutched in his hand. He stopped short
at the sound of the opening door and hurried towards them. There was
nothing about his appearance in the least terrifying. He seemed, in
fact, bubbling over with excited good-humour.

"Isabel, my dear," he exclaimed, "it is wonderful! I have succeeded!
I have changed the principles of a lifetime, made the most brilliant
optical experiment which any man of science has ever ventured to essay,
with the result--well, you shall see. I have wired to the Admiralty,
wired for more work-people. Captain Chalmers, is it not?" he went on.
"You must tell your men to double and redouble their energies. This
place is worth watching now. Come, I will show you something amazing."

He turned and led them hastily towards the back door. Isabel gripped
Granet's arm.

"He thinks you are the officer in command of the platoon here," she
whispered. "Better let him go on thinking so."

Granet nodded.

"Is he going to take us to the workshop?"

"I believe so," she assented.

They had hard work to keep up with Sir Meyville as he led them hastily
down the little stretch of shingle to where a man was sitting in a boat.
They all jumped in. The man with the oars looked doubtfully for a moment
at Granet, but pulled off at once when ordered to do so. They rowed
round to the front of the queer little structure. A man from inside held
out his hand and helped them up. Another young man, with books piled on
the floor by his side, was making some calculations at a table. Almost
the whole of the opening of the place was taken up by what seemed to
be a queer medley of telescopes and lenses pointing different ways. Sir
Meyville beamed upon them as he hastily turned a handle.

"Now," he promised, "you shall see what no one has ever seen before.
See, I point that arrow at that spot, about fifty yards out. Now look
through this one, Isabel."

The girl stooped forward, was silent for a moment, then she gave a
little cry of wonder. She clutched Granet's arm and made him take her
place. He, too, called out softly. He saw the sandy bottom covered with
shells, a rock with tentacles of seaweed floating from it, several huge
crabs, a multitude of small fishes. Everything was clear and distinct.
He looked away with a little gasp.

"Wonderful!" he exclaimed.

Sir Meyville's smile was beatific.

"That is my share," he said. "Down in the other workshop my partners are
hard at it. They, too, have met with success. You must tell your men,
Captain Chalmers, never to relax their vigil. This place must be watched
by night and by day. My last invention was a great step forward, but
this is absolute success. For the next few months this is the most
precious spot in Europe."

"It isn't Captain Chalmers, father," Isabel interrupted.

Sir Meyville seemed suddenly to become still. He looked fixedly at
Granet.

"Who are you, then?" he demanded. "Who are you, sir?"

"I am Captain Granet of the Royal Fusiliers, back from the Front,
wounded," Granet replied. "I can assure you that I am a perfectly
trustworthy person."

"But I don't understand," Sir Meyville said sharply. "What are you doing
here?"

"I came to call upon your daughter," Granet explained. "I had the
pleasure of meeting her at lunch at Lady Anselman's the other day. We
have been playing golf together at Brancaster."

Sir Meyville began to mumble to himself as he pushed them into the boat.

"My fault," he muttered,--"my fault. Captain Granet, I thought that my
daughter knew my wishes. I am not at present in a position to receive
guests or visitors of any description. You will pardon my apparent
inhospitality. I shall ask you, sir, to kindly forget this visit and to
keep away from here for the present."

"I shall obey your wishes, of course, sir," Granet promised. "I can
assure you that I am quite a harmless person, though."

"I do not doubt it, sir," Sir Meyville replied, "but it is the harmless
people of the world who do the most mischief. An idle word here or there
and great secrets are given away. If you will allow me, I will show you
a quicker way down the avenue, without going to the house."

Granet shrugged his shoulders.

"Just as you will, sir," he assented.

"You can go in, Isabel," her father directed curtly. "I will see Captain
Granet off."

She obeyed and took leave of her guest with a little shrug of the
shoulders. Sir Meyville took Granet's arm and led him down the avenue.

"Captain Granet," he said gravely, "I am an indiscreet person and I have
an indiscreet daughter. Bearing in mind your profession, I may speak to
you as man to man. Keep what you have seen absolutely secret. Put a seal
upon your memory. Go back to Brancaster and don't even look again in
this direction. The soldiers round this place have orders not to stand
on ceremony with any one, and by to-night I believe we are to have an
escort of Marines here as well. What you have seen is for the good of
the country."

"I congratulate you heartily, sir," Granet replied, shaking hands. "Of
course I'll keep away, if I must. I hope when this is all over, though,
you will allow me to come and renew my acquaintance with your daughter."

"When it is over, with pleasure," Sir Meyville assented.

Granet stepped into his car and drove off. The inventor stood looking
after him. Then he spoke to the sentry and made his way across the
gardens towards the boat-shed.

"I ought to have known it from the first," he muttered. "Reciprocal
refraction was the one thing to think about."


Granet, as he drove back to the Dormy House, was conscious of a curious
change in the weather. The wind, which had been blowing more or
less during the last few days, had suddenly dropped. There was a new
heaviness in the atmosphere, little banks of transparent mist were
drifting in from seawards. More than once he stopped the car and,
standing up, looked steadily away seawards. The long stretch of
marshland, on which the golf links were situated, was empty. A slight,
drizzling rain was falling. He found, when he reached the Dormy
House, that nearly all the men were assembled in one of the large
sitting-rooms. A table of bridge had been made up. Mr. Collins was
seated in an easy-chair close to the window, reading a review. Granet
accepted a cup of tea and stood on the hearth-rug.

"How did the golf go this afternoon?" he inquired.

"I was dead off it," Anselman replied gloomily.

"Our friend in the easy-chair there knocked spots off us."

Mr. Collins looked up and grunted and looked out of the window again.

"Either of you fellows going to cut in at bridge?" young Anselman
continued.

Granet shook his head and walked to the window.

"I can't stick cards in the daytime."

Mr. Collins shut up his review.

"I agree with you, sir," he said. "I endeavoured to persuade one of
these gentlemen to play another nine holes--unsuccessfully, I regret to
state."

Granet lit a cigarette.

"Well," he remarked, "it's too far to get down to the links again but
I'll play you a game of bowls, if you like."

The other glanced out upon the lawn and rose to his feet.

"It is an excellent suggestion," he declared. "If you will give me five
minutes to fetch my mackintosh and galoshes, it would interest me to see
whether I have profited by the lessons I took in Scotland."

They met, a few moments later, in the garden. Mr. Collins threw the jack
with great precision and they played an end during which his superiority
was apparent. They strolled together across the lawn, well away now from
the house. For the first time Granet dropped his careless tone.

"What do you make of this change in the weather?" he asked quickly.

"It's just what they were waiting for," the other replied. "What about
this afternoon?"

"I am not scientist, worse luck," Granet replied impatiently, "but I
saw enough to convince me that they've got the right idea. Sir Meyville
thought I was the man commanding the escort they've given him,--actually
rowed me out to the workshop and showed me the whole thing. I tell you
I saw it just as you described it,--saw the bottom of the sea, even the
colour of the seaweed, the holes in the rocks."

"And they've got the shells, too," Collins muttered, "the shells that
burst under water."

Granet looked around. They were playing the other end now.

"Listen!" he said.

They paused in the middle of the lawn. Granet held up his handkerchief
and turned his cheek seaward. There was still little more than a
floating breath of air but his cheek was covered with moisture.

"I have everything ready," he said. "Just before we go to bed to-night I
shall swear that I hear an aeroplane. You're sure your watch is right to
the second, Collins?"

"I am as sure that it is right," the other replied grimly, "as I am that
to-night you and I my young friend, are going to play with our lives a
little more carelessly than with this china ball. A good throw, that
I think," he went on, measuring it with his eye carefully. "Come, my
friend, you'll have to improve. My Scotch practice is beginning to
tell."

Geoffrey Anselman threw up the window and looked out.

"Pretty hot stuff, isn't he Ronnie?" he asked.

Granet glanced at his opponent, with his bent shoulders, his hard face,
hooked nose and thin gold spectacles.

"Yes," he admitted quietly, "he's too good for me."


CHAPTER XXI

At about half-past ten that evening, Granet suddenly threw down his
cue in the middle of a game of billiards, and stood, for a moment, in a
listening attitude.

"Jove, I believe that's an airship!" he exclaimed, and hurried out of
the room.

They all followed him. He was standing just outside the French-windows
of the sitting-room, upon the gravel walk, his head upturned, listening
intently. There was scarcely a breath of wind, no moon nor any stars.
Little clouds of grey mist hung about on the marshes, shutting out their
view of the sea. The stillness was more than usually intense.

"Can't hear a thing," young Anselman muttered at last.

"It may have been fancy," Granet admitted.

"A motor-cycle going along the Huntstanton Road," Major Harrison
suggested.

"It's a magnificent night for a raid," Dickens remarked glancing around.

"No chance of Zepps over here, I should say," Collins declared, a little
didactically. "I was looking at your map at the golf club only this
morning."

They all made their way back to the house. Granet, however, seemed still
dissatisfied.

"I'm going to see that my car's all right," he told them. "I left it in
the open shed."

He was absent for about twenty minutes. When he returned, they had
finished the game of snooker pool without him and were all sitting on
the lounge by the side of the billiard table, talking of the war. Granet
listened for a few minutes and then said good-night a little abruptly.
He lit his candle outside and went slowly to his room. Arrived there,
he glanced at his watch and locked the door. It was half-past eleven. He
changed his clothes quickly, put on some rubber-soled shoes and slipped
a brandy flask and a revolver into his pocket. Then he sat down before
his window with his watch in his hand. He was conscious of a certain
foreboding from which he had never been able to escape since his
arrival. In France and Belgium he had lived through fateful hours,
carrying more than once his life in his hands. His risk to-night was an
equal one but the exhilaration seemed lacking. This work in a country
apparently at peace seemed somehow on a different level. If it were
less dangerous, it was also less stimulating. In those few moments the
soldier blood in him called for the turmoil of war, the panorama of life
and death, the fierce, hot excitement of juggling with fate while the
heavens themselves seemed raining death on every side. Here there was
nothing but silence, the soft splash of the distant sea, the barking of
a distant dog. The danger was vivid and actual but without the stimulus
of that blood-red background. He glanced at his watch. It wanted still
ten minutes to twelve. For a moment then he suffered his thoughts to
go back to the new thing which had crept into his life. He was suddenly
back in the Milan, he saw the backward turn of her head, the almost
wistful look in her eyes as she made her little pronouncement. She had
broken her engagement. Why? It was a battle, indeed, he was fighting
with that still, cold antagonist, whom he half despised and half feared,
the man concerning whose actual personality he had felt so many doubts.
What if things should go wrong to-night, if the whole dramatic story
should be handed over for the glory and wonder of the halfpenny press!
He could fancy their headlines, imagine even their trenchant paragraphs.
It was skating on the thinnest of ice--and for what? His fingers gripped
the damp window-sill. He raised himself a little higher. His eyes fell
upon his watch--still a minute or two to twelve. Slowly he stole to
his door and listened. The place was silent. He made his way on tiptoe
across the landing and entered Collins' room. The latter was seated
before the wide-open window. He had blown out his candle and the room
was in darkness. He half turned his head at Granet's entrance.

"Two minutes!" he exclaimed softly. "Granet, it will be to-night. Are
you ready?"

"Absolutely!"

They stood by the open window in silence. Nothing had changed. It was
not yet time for the singing of the earliest birds. The tiny village
lay behind them, silent and asleep; in front, nothing but the marshes,
uninhabited, lonely and quiet, the golf club-house empty and deserted.
They stood and watched, their faces turned steadfastly in a certain
direction. Gradually their eyes, growing accustomed to the dim and
changing light, could pierce the black line above the grey where the sea
came stealing up the sandy places with low murmurs, throwing with every
wave longer arms into the land.

"Twelve o'clock!" Collins muttered.

Suddenly Granet's fingers dug into his shoulder. From out of that pall
of velvet darkness which hung below the clouds, came for a single moment
a vision of violet light. It rose apparently from nowhere, it passed
away into space. It was visible barely for five seconds, then it had
gone. Granet spoke with a little sob.

"My God!" he murmured. "They're coming!"

Collins was already on his feet. He had straightened himself
wonderfully, and there was a new alertness in his manner. He, too, wore
rubber shoes and his movements were absolutely noiseless. He carried
a little electric torch in his hand, which he flashed around the room
while he placed several small articles in his pocket. Then he pushed
open the door and listened. He turned back, held up his finger and
nodded. The two men passed down the stairs, through the sitting-room,
out on to the lawn by a door left unfastened, and round the house to the
shed. Together they pushed the car down the slight incline of the drive.
Granet mounted into the driving-seat and pressed the self-starter.
Collins took the place by his side.

"Remember," Granet whispered, "we heard something and I met you in the
hall. Sit tight."

They sped with all the silence and smoothness of their six-cylinder up
the tree-hung road, through the sleeping village and along the narrow
lane to Market Burnham. When they were within about a hundred yards of
the gate, Granet brought the car to a standstill.

"There are at least two sentries that way," he said, "and if Sir
Meyville told me the truth, they may have a special guard of Marines
out to-night. This is where we take to the marshes. Listen. Can you hear
anything?"

They both held their breath.

"Nothing yet," Collins muttered. "Let's get the things out quickly."

Granet hurried to the back of the car, ripping open the coverings. In a
few moments they had dragged over the side a small collapsible boat of
canvas stretched across some bamboo joints, with two tiny sculls. They
clambered up the bank.

"The creek must be close here," Granet whispered. "Don't show a light.
Listen!"

This time they could hear the sound of an engine beating away in the
boat-house on the other side of the Hall. Through the closely-drawn
curtains, too, they could see faint fingers of light from the house on
the sea.

"They are working still," Granet continued. "Look out, Collins, that's
the creek."

They pushed the boat into the middle of the black arm of water and
stepped cautiously into it. Taking one of the paddles, Granet, kneeling
down, propelled it slowly seaward. Once or twice they ran into the bank
and had to push off, but very soon their eyes grew accustomed to the
darkness. By degrees the creek broadened. They passed close to the
walls of the garden, and very soon they were perceptibly nearer the
quaintly-situated workshop. Granet paused for a moment from his labours.

"The Hall is dark enough," he muttered. "Listen!"

They heard the regular pacing of a sentinel in the drive. Nearer to
them, on the top of the wall, they fancied that they heard the clash of
a bayonet. Granet dropped his voice to the barest whisper.

"We are close there now. Stretch out your hand, Collins. Can you feel a
shelf of rock?"

"It's just in front of me," was the stifled answer.

"That's for the stuff. Down with it."

For a few moments Collins was busy. Then, with a little gasp, he gripped
Granet's arm. His voice, shaking with nervous repression, was still
almost hysterical.

"They're coming, Granet! My God, they're coming!"

Both men turned seaward. Far away in the clouds, it seemed, they could
hear a faint humming, some new sound, something mechanical in its
regular beating, yet with clamorous throatiness of some human force
cleaving its way through the resistless air. With every second it grew
louder. The men stood clutching one another.

"Have you got the fuse ready? They must hear it in a moment." Granet
muttered.

Collins assented silently. The reverberations became louder and louder.
Soon the air was full of echoes. From far away inland dogs were barking,
from a farm somewhere the other side of the road they heard the shout of
a single voice.

"Now," Granet whispered.

Collins leaned forward. The fuse in his hand touched the dark substance
which he had spread out upon the rock. In a moment a strange, unearthly,
green light seemed to roll back the darkness. The house, the workshop,
the trees, the slowly flowing sea, their own ghastly faces--everything
stood revealed in a blaze of hideous, awful light. For a moment they
forgot themselves, they forgot the miracle they had brought to pass.
Their eyes were rivetted skyward. High above them, something blacker
than the heavens themselves, stupendous, huge, seemed suddenly to assume
to itself shape. The roar of machinery was clearly audible. From the
house came the mingled shouting of many voices. Something dropped
into the sea a hundred yards away with a screech and a hiss, and a
geyser-like fountain leapt so high that the spray reached them. Then
there was a sharper sound as a rifle bullet whistled by.

"My God!" Granet exclaimed. "It's time we were out of this, Collins!"

He seized his scull. Even at that moment there was a terrific explosion.
A stream of lurid fire seemed to leap from the corner of the house,
the wall split and fell outwards. And then there came another sound,
hideous, sickly, a sound Granet had heard before, the sound of a rifle
bullet cutting its way through flesh, followed by an inhuman cry. For a
moment Collins' arms whirled around him. Then, with no other sound
save that one cry, he fell forward and disappeared. For a single second
Granet leaned over the side of the boat as though to dive after him.
Then came another roar. The sand flew up in a blinding storm, the whole
of the creek was suddenly a raging torrent. The boat was swung on a
precipitous mountain of salt water and as quickly capsized. Granet,
breathless for a moment and half stunned, found his way somehow to the
side of the marshland, and from there stumbled his way towards the road.
The house behind him was on fire, the air seemed filled with hoarse
shoutings. He turned and ran for the spot where he had left the car.
Once he fell into a salt water pool and came out wet through to the
waist. In the end, however, he reached the bank, clambered over it and
slipped down into the road. Then a light was flashed into his eyes and
a bayonet was rattled at his feet. There were a couple of soldiers in
charge of his car.

"Hands up!" was the hoarse order.

Granet calmly flashed his own electric torch. There were at least a
dozen soldiers standing around, and a little company were hurrying down
from the gates. He switched off his light almost immediately.

"Is any one hurt?" he asked.

There was a dead silence. He felt his arms seized on either side.

"The captain's coming down the road," one of the men said. "Lay on to
him, Tim!"


CHAPTER XXII

Granet sauntered in to breakfast a few minutes late on the following
morning. A little volley of questions and exclamations reached him as he
stood by the sideboard.

"Heard about the Zeppelin raid?"

"They say there's a bomb on the ninth green!"

"Market Burnham Hall is burnt to the ground!"

Granet sighed as he crossed the room and took his seat at the table.

"If you fellows hadn't slept like oxen last night," he remarked, "you'd
have known a lot more about it. I saw the whole show."

"Nonsense!" Major Harrison exclaimed.

"Tell us all about it?" young Anselman begged.

"I heard the thing just as I was beginning to undress," Granet
explained. "I rushed downstairs and found Collins out in the garden. ...
Where the devil is Collins, by-the-bye?"

They glanced at his vacant place.

"Not down yet. Go on."

"Well, we could hear the vibration like anything, coming from over the
marsh there. I got the car out and we were no sooner on the road than I
could see it distinctly, right above us--a huge, cigar-shaped thing. We
raced along after it, along the road towards Market Burnham. Just before
it reached the Hall it seemed to turn inland and then come back again.
We pulled up to watch it and Collins jumped out. He said he'd go as far
as the Hall and warn them. I sat in the car, watching. She came right
round and seemed to hover over those queer sort of outbuildings there
are at Market Burnham. All at once the bombs began to drop."

"What are they like?" Geoffrey Anselman exclaimed.

Granet poured out his coffee carefully.

"I've seen 'em before--plenty of them, too," he remarked, "but they did
rain them down. Then all of a sudden there was a sort of glare--I don't
know what happened. It was just as though some one had lit one of those
coloured lights. The Hall was just as clearly visible as at noonday. I
could see the men running about, shouting, and the soldiers tumbling out
of their quarters. All the time the bombs were coming down like hail and
a corner of the Hall was in flames. Then the lighted stuff, whatever it
was, burnt out and the darkness seemed as black as pitch. I hung around
for some time, looking for Collins. Then I went up to the house to help
them extinguish the fire. I didn't get back till four o'clock."

"What about Collins?" young Anselman asked. "I was playing him at golf."

"Better send up and see," Granet proposed. "I waited till I couldn't
stick it any longer."

They sent a servant up. The reply came back quickly--Mr. Collins' bed
had not been slept in. Granet frowned a little.

"I suppose he'll think I let him down," he said. "I waited at least an
hour for him."

"Was any one hurt by the bombs?" Geoffrey Anselman inquired.

"No one seemed to be much the worse," Granet replied. "I didn't think
of anything of that sort in connection with Collins, though. Perhaps he
might have got hurt."

"We'll all go over and have a look for him this afternoon if he hasn't
turned up," Anselman suggested. "What about playing me a round of golf
this morning?"

"Suit me all right," Granet agreed. "I'd meant to lay up because of my
arm, but it's better this morning. We'll start early and get back for
the papers."

They motored down to the club-house and played their round. It was a
wonderful spring morning, with a soft west wind blowing from the land.
Little patches of sea lavender gave purple colour to the marshland.
The creeks, winding their way from the sea to the village, shone like
quicksilver beneath the vivid sunshine. It was a morning of utter and
complete peace. Granet notwithstanding a little trouble with his arm,
played carefully and well. When at last they reached the eighteenth
green, he holed a wonderful curly putt for the hole and the match.

"A great game," his cousin declared, as they left the green. "Who the
devil are these fellows?"

There were two soldiers standing at the gate, and a military motor-car
drawn up by the side of the road. An orderly stepped forward and
addressed Granet.

"Captain Granet?" he asked, saluting.

Granet nodded and stretched out his hand for the note. The fingers which
drew it from the envelope were perfectly steady, he even lifted his
head for a moment to look at a lark just overhead. Yet the few hastily
scrawled lines were like a message of fate:--

The officer in command at Market Burnham Hall would be obliged if
Captain Granet would favour him with an immediate interview, with
reference to the events of last night.

"Do you mean that you want me to go at once, before luncheon?" he asked
the orderly.

The man pointed to the car.

"My instructions were to take you back at once, sir."

"Come and have a drink first, at any rate," Geoffrey Anselman insisted.

The orderly shook his head, the two soldiers were barring the gateway.

"Some one from the War Office has arrived and is waiting to speak to
Captain Granet," he announced.

"We're all coming over after lunch," young Anselman protested. "Wouldn't
that do?"

The man made no answer. Granet, with a shrug of the shoulders, stepped
into the motor-car. The two soldiers mounted motor-cycles and the little
cavalcade turned away. Granet made a few efforts at conversation
with his companion, but, meeting with no response, soon relapsed into
silence. In less than twenty minutes the car was slowing down before
the approach to the Hall. The lane was crowded with villagers and people
from the neighbouring farmhouses, who were all kept back, however, by a
little cordon of soldiers. Granet, closely attended by his escort, made
his way slowly into the avenue and up towards the house. A corner of the
left wing of the building was in ruins, blackened and still smouldering,
and there was a great hole in the sand-blown lawn, where a bomb had
apparently fallen. A soldier admitted them at the front entrance and his
guide led him across the hall and into a large room on the other side
of the house, an apartment which seemed to be half library, half
morning-room. Sir Meyville and a man in uniform were talking together
near the window. They turned around at Granet's entrance and he gave
a little start. For the first time a thrill of fear chilled him, his
self-confidence was suddenly dissipated. The man who stood watching
him with cold scrutiny was the one man on earth whom he feared--Surgeon
Major Thomson.


CHAPTER XXIII

It was a queer little gathering in the drawing-room of Market Burnham
Hall, queer and in a sense ominous. Two soldiers guarded the door.
Another one stood with his back to the wide-flung window, the sunlight
flashing upon his drawn bayonet. Granet, although he looked about him
for a moment curiously, carried himself with ease and confidence.

"How do you do, Sir Meyville?" he said. "How are you, Thomson?"

Sir Meyville, who was in a state of great excitement, took absolutely no
notice of the young man's greeting. Thomson pointed to a chair, in which
Granet at once seated himself.

"I have sent for you, Captain Granet," the former began, "to ask you
certain questions with reference to the events of last night."

"Delighted to tell you anything I can," Granet replied. "Isn't this a
little out of your line, though, Thomson?"

Sir Meyville suddenly leaned forward.

"That is the young man," he declared. "I took him to be the officer
in command here and I showed him over my workshop. Quite a
mistake--absolutely a wrong impression!"

"It was a mistake for which you could scarcely hold me responsible,"
Granet protested, "and you must really excuse me if I fail to see the
connection. Perhaps you will tell me, Major Thomson, what I am here
for?"

Major Thomson seated himself before the desk and leaned a little back in
his chair.

"We sent for you," he said, "because we are looking for two men who
lit the magnesium light which directed the Zeppelin last night to this
locality. One of them lies on the lawn there, with a bullet through his
brain. We are still looking for the other."

"Do you imagine that I can be of any assistance to you?" Granet asked.

"That is our impression," Major Thomson admitted. "Perhaps you will be
so good as to tell us what you were doing here last night?"

"Certainly," Granet replied. "About half-past ten last night I thought
I heard the engine of an airship. We all went out on the lawn but could
see nothing. However, I took that opportunity to get my car ready
in case there was any excitement going. Later on, as I was on my way
upstairs, I distinctly heard the sound once more. I went out, started my
car, and drove down the lane. It seemed to be coming in this direction
so I followed along, pulled up short of the house, climbed on the top of
the bank and saw that extraordinary illumination from the marshland on
the other side. I saw a man in a small boat fall back as though he were
shot. A moment or two later I returned to my car and was accosted by two
soldiers, to whom I gave my name and address. That is really all I know
about the matter."

Major Thomson nodded.

"You had only just arrived, then, when the bombs were dropped?"

"I pulled up just before the illumination," Granet asserted.

Thomson looked at him thoughtfully.

"I am going to make a remark, Captain Granet," he said, "upon which
you can comment or not, as you choose. Was not your costume last night
rather a singular one for the evening? You say that you were on your
way upstairs to undress when you heard the Zeppelin. Do you wear rubber
shoes and a Norfolk jacket for dinner?"

Granet for a moment bit his lip.

"I laid out those things in case there was anything doing," he said.
"As I told you, I felt sure that I had heard an airship earlier in the
evening, and I meant to try and follow it if I heard it again."

There was a brief silence. Granet lounged a little back in his chair,
but though his air of indifference was perfect, a sickening foreboding
was creeping in upon him. He was conscious of failure, of blind,
idiotic folly. Never before had he been guilty of such miserable
short-sightedness. He fought desperately against the toils which he felt
were gradually closing in upon him. There must be some way out!

"Captain Granet," he questioner continued, in his calm, emotionless
tone, "according to your story you changed your clothes and reached here
at the same time as the Zeppelin, after having heard its approach. It
is four miles and a half to the Dormy House Club, and that Zeppelin must
have been travelling at the rate of at least sixty miles an hour. Is
your car capable of miracles?"

"It is capable of sixty miles an hour," Granet declared.

"Perhaps I may spare you the trouble," Thomson proceeded drily, "of
further explanations, Captain Granet, when I tell you that your car was
observed by one of the sentries quite a quarter of an hour before
the arrival of the Zeppelins and the lighting of that flare. Your
statements, to put it mildly, are irreconcilable with the facts of the
case. I must ask you once more if you have any other explanation to give
as to your movements last night?"

"What other explanation can I give?" Granet asked, his brain working
fiercely. "I have told you the truth. What more can I say?"

"You have told me," Major Thomson went on, and his voice seemed like the
voice of fate, "that you arrived here in hot haste simultaneously with
the lighting of that flare and the dropping of the bombs. Not only one
of the sentries on guard here, but two other people have given evidence
that your car was out there in the lane for at least a quarter of an
hour previous to the happenings of which I have just spoken. For the
last time, Captain Granet, I must ask you whether you wish to amend your
explanation?"

There was a little movement at the further end of the room. A curtain
was drawn back and Isabel Worth came slowly towards them. She stood
there, the curtains on either side of her, ghastly pale, her hands
clasped in front of her, twitching nervously.

"I am very sorry," she said. "This is all my fault."

They stared at her in amazement. Only Granet, with an effort, kept his
face expressionless. Sir Meyville began to mutter to himself.

"God bless my soul!" he mumbled. "Isabel, what do you want, girl? Can't
you see that we are engaged?"

She took no notice of him. She turned appealingly towards Major Thomson.

"Can you send the soldiers away for a moment?" she begged. "I don't
think that they will be needed."

Major Thomson gave a brief order and the men left the room. Isabel came
a little nearer to the table. She avoided looking at Granet.

"I am very sorry indeed," she went on, "if anything I have done has
caused all this trouble. Captain Granet came down here partly to play
golf, partly at my invitation. He was here yesterday afternoon, as my
father knows. Before he left--I asked him to come over last night."

There was a breathless silence. Isabel was standing at the end of the
table, her fingers still clasped nervously together, a spot of intense
colour in her cheeks. She kept her eyes turned sedulously away from
Granet. Sir Meyville gripped her by the shoulder.

"What do you mean, girl?" he demanded harshly. "What do you mean by all
this rubbish? Speak out."

Granet looked up for a moment.

"Don't," he begged. "I can clear myself, Miss Worth, if any one is mad
enough to have suspicions about me. I should never--"

"The truth may just as well be told," she interrupted. "There is nothing
to be ashamed of. It is hideously dull down here, and the life my father
has asked me to lead for the last few months has been intolerable. I
never sleep, and I invited Captain Granet to come over here at twelve
o'clock last night and take me for a motor ride. I was dressed,
meaning to go, and Captain Granet came to fetch me. It turned out to be
impossible because of all the new sentries about the place, but that is
why Captain Granet was here, and that," she concluded, turning to Major
Thomson, "is why, I suppose, he felt obliged to tell you what was not
the truth. It has been done before."

There was a silence which seemed composed of many elements. Sir Meyville
Worth stood with his eyes fixed upon his daughter and an expression of
blank, uncomprehending dismay in his features. Granet, a frown upon his
forehead, was looking towards the floor. Thomson, with the air of seeing
nobody, was studying them all in turn. It was he who spoke first.

"As you justly remark, Miss Worth," he observed, "this sort of thing has
been done before. We will leave it there for the present. Will you come
this way with me, if you please, Captain Granet? I won't trouble you,
Miss Worth, or you, Sir Meyville. You might not like what we are going
to see."

Granet rose at once to his feet.

"Of course, I will come wherever you like," he assented.

The two men passed together side by side, in momentous silence, across
the stone hall, out of the house, and round the back of the garden to a
wooden shed, before which was posted a sentry. The man stood on one side
to let them pass. On the bare stone floor inside was stretched the dead
body of Collins. The salt water was still oozing from his clothes and
limbs, running away in little streams. There was a small blue hole in
the middle of his forehead.

"This, apparently," Thomson said, "is the man who lit the magnesium
light which showed the Zeppelin where to throw her bombs. The thing was
obviously prearranged. Can you identify him?"

"Identify him?" Granet exclaimed. "Why, I was playing bowls with him
yesterday afternoon. He is a Glasgow merchant named Collins, and a very
fine golf player. He is staying at the Dormy House Club."

"He has also another claim to distinction," Major Thomson remarked
drily, "for he is the man who fired those lights. The sergeant who shot
him fancied that he heard voices on the creek, and crept up to the
wall just before the flare came. The sergeant, I may add, is under the
impression that there were two men in the boat."

Granet shook his head dubiously.

"I know nothing whatever of the man or his movements," he declared,
"beyond what I have told you. I have scarcely spoken a dozen words to
him in my life, and never before our chance meeting at the Dormy House."

"You do not, for instance, happen to know how he came here from the
Dormy House?"

"If you mean did he come in my car," Granet answered easily, "please let
me assure you that he did not. My errand here last night was indiscreet
enough, but I certainly shouldn't have brought another man, especially a
stranger, with me."

"Thank you," Major Thomson concluded, "that is all I have to say to you
for the present."

"Has there been much damage done?" Granet inquired.

"Very little."

They had reached the corner of the avenue. Granet glanced down towards
the road.

"I presume," he remarked, "that I am at liberty to depart?"

Thomson gave a brief order to the soldier who had been attending them.

"You will find the car in which you came waiting to take you back,
Captain Granet," he announced.

The two men had paused. Granet was on the point of departure. With
the passing of his sudden apprehension of danger, his curiosity was
awakened.

"Do you mind telling me, Major Thomson," he asked, "how it is that you,
holding, I presume, a medical appointment, were selected to conduct
an inquiry like this? I have voluntarily submitted myself to your
questioning, but if I had had anything to conceal I might have been
inclined to dispute your authority."

Thomson's face was immovable. He simply pointed to the gate at the end
of the avenue.

"If it had been necessary, Captain Granet," he said coldly, "I should
have been able to convince you that I was acting under authority. As it
is, I wish you good-morning."

Granet hesitated, but only for a moment. Then he shrugged his shoulders
and turned away.

"Good-morning, Major!"

He made his way down to the lane, which was still crowded with villagers
and loungers. He was received with a shower of questions as he climbed
into the car.

"Not much damage done that I can hear," he told them all. "The corner of
the house caught fire and the lawn looks like a sand-pit."

He was driven in silence back to the Dormy House. When he arrived there
the place was deserted. The other men were lunching at the golf club. He
made his way slowly to the impromptu shed which served for a garage. His
own car was standing there. He looked all around to make sure that he
was absolutely alone. Then he lifted up the cushion by the driving-seat.
Carefully folded and arranged in the corner were the horn-rimmed
spectacles and the silk handkerchief of the man who was lying at Market
Burnham with a bullet through his forehead.


CHAPTER XXIV

Mr. Gordon Jones rose to his feet. It had been an interesting, in
some respects a momentous interview. He glanced around the plain but
handsomely furnished office, a room which betrayed so few evidences of
the world-flung power of its owner.

"After all, Sir Alfred," he remarked, smiling, "I am not sure that it is
Downing Street which rules. We can touch our buttons and move armies
and battleships across the face of the earth. You pull down your ledger,
sign your name, and you can strike a blow as deadly as any we can
conceive."

The banker smiled.

"Let us be thankful, then," he said, "that the powers we wield are
linked together in the great cause."

Mr. Gordon Jones hesitated.

"Such things, I know, are little to you, Sir Alfred," he continued, "but
at the same time I want you to believe that his Majesty's Government
will not be unmindful of your help at this juncture. To speak of rewards
at such a time is perhaps premature. I know that ordinary honours do not
appeal to you, yet it has been suggested to me by a certain person that
I should assure you of the country's gratitude. In plain words, there is
nothing you may ask for which it would not be our pleasure and privilege
to give you."

Sir Alfred bowed slightly.

"You are very kind," he said. "Later on, perhaps, one may reflect. At
present there seems to be only one stern duty before us, and for that
one needs no reward."

The two men parted. Sir Alfred rose from the chair in front of his
desk and threw himself into the easy-chair which his guest had been
occupying. A ray of city sunshine found its way through the tangle of
tall buildings on the other side of the street, lay in a zigzag path
across his carpet, and touched the firm lines of his thoughtful face. He
sat there, slowly tapping the sides of the chair with his pudgy fingers.
So a great soldier might have sat, following out the progress of his
armies in different countries, listening to the roar of their guns,
watching their advance, their faltering, their success and their
failures. Sir Alfred's vision was in a sense more sordid in many ways
more complicated, yet it too, had its dramatic side. He looked at the
money-markets of the world, he saw exchanges rise and fall. He saw in
the dim vista no khaki-clad army with flashing bayonets, but a long,
thin line of black-coated men with sallow faces, clutching their
money-bags.

There was a knock at the door and his secretary entered.

"Captain Granet has been here for some time, sir," he announced softly.

The banker came back to the present. He woke up, indeed, with a little
start.

"Show my nephew in at once," he directed. "I shall be engaged with
him for at least a quarter of an hour. Kindly go round to the Bank of
England and arrange for an interview with Mr. Williams for three o'clock
this afternoon."

The clerk silently withdrew. Granet entered, a few minutes later. The
banker greeted him pleasantly.

"Well, Ronnie," he exclaimed, "I thought that you were going to be down
in Norfolk for a week! Come in. Bring your chair up to my side, so. This
is one of my deaf mornings."

Granet silently obeyed. Sir Alfred glanced around the room. There was no
possible hiding-place, not the slightest chance of being overheard.

"What about it, Ronnie?"

"We did our share," Granet answered. "Collins was there at the Dormy
House Club. We got the signal and we lit the flare. They came down
to within two or three hundred feet, and they must have thrown twenty
bombs, at least. They damaged the shed but missed the workshop. The
house caught fire, but they managed to put that out."

"You escaped all right, I'm glad to see?"

"They got Collins," Granet said, dropping his voice almost to a whisper.
"He was shot by my side. They caught me, too. I've been in a few tight
corners but nothing tighter than that. Who do you think was sent down
from the War Office to hold an inquiry? Thomson--that fellow Thomson!"

The banker frowned.

"Do you mean the man who is the head of the hospitals?"

"Supposed to be," Granet answered grimly. "I am beginning to
wonder--Tell me, you haven't heard anything more about him, have you?"

"Not a word," Sir Alfred replied. "Why should I?"

"Nothing except that I have an uncomfortable feeling about him," Granet
went on. "I wish I felt sure that he was just what he professes to be.
He is the one man who seems to suspect me. If it hadn't been for Isabel
Worth, I was done for--finished--down at that wretched hole! He had me
where I couldn't move. The girl lied and got me out of it."

Sir Alfred drummed for a moment with his fingers upon the table.

"I am not sure that these risks are worth while for you, Ronnie," he
said.

The young man shrugged his shoulders. His face certainly seemed to have
grown thinner during the last few days.

"I don't mind it so much abroad," he declared. "It seems a different
thing there, somehow. But over here it's all wrong; it's the atmosphere,
I suppose. And that fellow Thomson means mischief--I'm sure of it."

"Is there any reason for ill-feeling between you two?" the banker
inquired.

Granet nodded.

"You've hit it, sir."

"Miss Conyers, eh?"

The young man's face underwent a sudden change.

"Yes," he confessed. "If I hadn't begun this, if I hadn't gone so far
into it that no other course was possible, I think that I should have
been content to be just what I seem to be--because of her."

Sir Alfred leaned back in his chair. He was looking at his nephew as a
man of science might have looked at some interesting specimen.

"Well," he said, "I suppose you simply confirm the experience of the
ages, but, frankly, you amaze me. You are moving amongst the big places
of life, you are with those who are making history, and you would
be content to give the whole thing up. For what? You would become a
commonplace, easy-going young animal of a British soldier, for the sake
of the affection of a good-looking, well-bred, commonplace British
young woman. I don't understand you, Ronald. You have the blood of
empire-makers in your veins. Your education and environment have
developed an outward resemblance to the thing you profess to be, but
behind--don't you fell the grip of the other things?"

"I feel them, right enough," Granet replied. "I have felt them for
the last seven or eight years. But I am feeling something else, too,
something which I dare say you never felt, something which I have never
quite believed in."

Sir Alfred leaned back in his chair.

"In a way," he admitted, "this is disappointing. You are right. I have
never felt the call of those other things. When I was a young man, I
was frivolous simply when I felt inclined to turn from the big things of
life for purposes of relaxation. When an alliance was suggested to me, I
was content to accept it, but thank heavens I have been Oriental enough
to keep women in my life where they belong. I am disappointed in you,
Ronnie."

The young man shrugged his shoulders.

"I haven't flinched," he said.

"No, but the soft spot's there," was the grim reply. "However, let that
go. Tell me why you came up? Wasn't it better to have stayed down at
Brancaster for a little longer?"

"Perhaps," his nephew assented. "My arm came on a little rocky and I had
to chuck golf. Apart from that, I wasn't altogether comfortable about
things at Market Burnham. I was obliged to tell Thomson that I saw
nothing of Collins that night but they know at the Dormy House Club that
he started with me in the car and has never been heard of since. Then
there was the young woman."

"Saved you by a lie, didn't she?" the banker remarked. "That may be
awkward later on."

"I'm sick of my own affairs," Granet declared gloomily. "Is there
anything fresh up here at all?"

Sir Alfred frowned slightly.

"Nothing very much," he said. "At the same time, there are distinct
indications of a change which I don't like. With certain statesmen here
at the top of the tree, it was perfectly easy for me to carry out any
schemes which I thought necessary. During the last few weeks, however,
there has been a change. Nominally, things are the same. Actually, I
seem to find another hand at work, another hand which works with the
censorship, too. One of my very trusted agents in Harwich made the
slightest slip the other day. A few weeks ago, he would either have been
fined twenty pounds or interned. Do you know what happened to him on
Wednesday? Of course you don't he was arrested at one o'clock and shot
in half an hour. Then you saw the papers this morning? All sailings
between here and a certain little spot we know of have been stopped
without a moment's warning. I am compelled to pause in several most
interesting schemes."

"Nothing for me, I suppose?" Granet asked, a little nervously.

Sir Alfred looked at him.

"Not for the moment," he replied, "but there will be very soon. Take
hold of yourself Ronnie. Don't look downwards so much. You and I
are walking in the clouds. It is almost as bad to falter as to slip.
Confess--you've been afraid."

"I have," Granet admitted, "not afraid of death but afraid of what might
follow upon discovery. I am half inclined, if just one thing in the
world came my way, to sail for New York to-morrow and start again."

"When those fears come to you," Sir Alfred continued slowly, "consider
me. I run a greater risk than you. There are threads from this office
stretching to many corners of England, to many corners of America, to
most cities of Europe. If a man with brains should seize upon any one of
them, he might follow it backwards--even here."

Sir Alfred touched his chest for a moment. Then his hand dropped to his
side and he proceeded.

"For twenty-eight years I have ruled the money-markets of the world.
No Cabinet Council is held in this country at which my influence is not
represented. The Ministers come to me one by one for help and advice. I
represent the third great force of war, and there isn't a single member
of the present Government who doesn't look upon me as the most important
person in the country. Yet I, too, have enemies, Ronnie. There is the
halfpenny Press. They'd give a million for the chance that may come at
any day. They'd print my downfall in blacker lines than the declaration
of war. They'd shriek over my ruin with a more brazen-throated triumph
even than they would greet the heralds of peace. And the threads are
there, Ronald. Sometimes I feel one shiver a little. Sometimes I have
to stretch out my arm and brush too curious an inquirer into the place
where curiosity ends. I sit and watch and I am well served. There are
men this morning at Buckingham Palace with a V.C. to be pinned upon
their breast, who faced dangers for ten minutes, less than I face day
and night."

Granet rose to his feet.

"For a moment," he exclaimed, "I had forgotten!... Tell me," he added,
with sudden vigour, "what have we done it for? You made your great name
in England, you were Eton and Oxford. Why is it that when the giant
struggle comes it should be Germany who governs your heart, it should be
Germany who calls even to me?"

Sir Alfred held out his hand. His eye had caught the clock.

"Ronnie," he said, "have you ever wondered why in a flock of sheep every
lamb knows its mother? Germany was the mother of our stock. Birth,
life and education count for nothing when the great days come, when the
mother voice speaks. It isn't that we are false to England, it is that
we are true to our own. You must go now, Ronnie! I have an appointment."

Granet walked out to the street a little dazed, and called for a taxi.

"I suppose that must be it," he muttered to himself.


CHAPTER XXV

Geraldine welcomed her unexpected visitor that afternoon cordially
enough but a little shyly.

"I thought that you were going to stay at Brancaster for a week," she
remarked, as they shook hands.

"We meant to stay longer," Granet admitted, "but things went a little
wrong. First of all there was this Zeppelin raid. Then my arm didn't go
very well. Altogether our little excursion fizzled out and I came back
last night."

"Did you see anything of the raid?" Geraldine inquired eagerly.

"Rather more than I wanted," he answered grimly. "I was motoring along
the road at the time, and I had to attend a perfect court martial
next day, with your friend Thomson in the chair. Can you tell me, Miss
Conyers," he continued, watching her closely, "how it is that a medical
major who is inspector of hospitals, should be sent down from the War
Office to hold an inquiry upon that raid?"

"Was Hugh really there?" she asked in a puzzled manner.

"He was, and very officially," Granet replied. "If it weren't that I had
conclusive evidence to prove what I was doing there, he seemed rather
set on getting me into trouble."

"Hugh is always very fair," she said a little coldly.

"You can't solve my puzzle for me, then?" he persisted.

"What puzzle?"

"Why an inspector of hospitals should hold an inquiry upon a Zeppelin
raid?"

"I'm afraid I cannot," she admitted. "Hugh certainly seems to have
become a most mysterious person, but then, as you know, I haven't seen
quite so much of him lately. Your change, Captain Granet, doesn't seem
to have done you much good. Has your wound been troubling you?"

He rose abruptly and stood before her.

"Do you care whether my wound is troubling me or not?" he asked. "Do you
care anything at all about me?"

There was a moment's silence.

"I care very much," she confessed.

He seemed suddenly a changed person. The lines which had certainly
appeared in his face during the last few days, become more noticeable.
He leaned towards her eagerly.

"Miss Conyers," he went on, "Geraldine, I want you to care--enough for
the big things. Don't interrupt me, please. Listen to what I have to
say. Somehow or other, the world has gone amiss with me lately. They
won't have me back, my place has been filled up, I can't get any
fighting. They've shelved me at the War Office; they talk about a home
adjutancy. I can't stick it, I have lived amongst the big things too
long. I'm sick of waiting about, doing nothing--sick to death. I want to
get away. There's some work I could do in America. You understand?"

"Not in the least," Geraldine told him frankly.

"It's my fault," he declared. "The words all seem to be tumbling out
anyhow and I don't know how to put them in the right order. Can't you
see that I love you, Geraldine? I want you to be my wife, and I want to
get right away as quickly as ever I can. Why not America? Why couldn't
we be married this week and get away from everybody?"

She looked at him in sheer amazement, amazement tempered just a little
with a sort of tremulous uncertainty.

"But, Captain Granet," she exclaimed, "you can't be serious! You
couldn't possibly think of leaving England now."

"Why not?" he protested. "They won't let me fight again. I couldn't
stand the miserable routine of home soldiering. I'd like to get away and
forget it all."

"I am sure you are not in earnest," she said quietly. "No Englishman
could feel like that."

"He could if he cared for you," Granet insisted. "I'm afraid of
everything here, afraid that Thomson will come back and take you away,
afraid of all sorts of hideous things happening during the next few
months."

"You mustn't talk like this, please," she begged. "You know as well as
I do that neither you nor I could turn our backs on England just now and
be happy."

He opened his lips to speak but stopped short. It was obvious that she
was deeply in earnest.

"And as for the other thing you spoke of," she continued, "please won't
you do as I beg you and not refer to it again for the present? Perhaps,"
she added, "when the war is over we may speak of it, but just now
everything is so confused. I, too, seem to have lost my bearings....You
know that I am going out to Boulogne in a few days with Lady Headley's
hospital? Don't look so frightened. I am not an amateur nurse, I can
assure you. I have all my certificates."

"To Boulogne?" he muttered. "You are going to leave London?"

She nodded.

"Major Thomson arranged it for me, a few days ago. We may meet there
at any time," she added, smiling. "I am perfectly certain that the War
Office will find you something abroad very soon."

For a moment that queer look of boyish strength which had first
attracted her, reasserted itself. His teeth came together.

"Yes," he agreed, "there's work for me somewhere. I'll find it. Only--"

She checked him hurriedly.

"And I am quite sure," she interrupted, "that when you are yourself
again you will agree with me. These are not the times for us to have any
selfish thoughts, are they?"

"Until a few weeks ago," he told her, "I thought of nothing but the war
and my work in it--until you came, that is."

She held out her hands to check him. Her eyes were eloquent.

"Please remember," she begged, "that it is too soon. I can't bear to
have you talk to me like that. Afterwards--"

"There will be no afterwards for me!" he exclaimed bitterly.

A shade of surprise became mingled with her agitation.

"You mustn't talk like that," she protested, "you with your splendid
courage and opportunities! Think what you have done already. England
wants the best of her sons to-day. Can't you be content to give that
and to wait? We have so much gratitude in our hearts, we weak women, for
those who are fighting our battle."

Her words failed to inspire him. He took her hand and lifted her fingers
deliberately to his lips.

"I was foolish," he groaned, "to think that you could feel as I do.
Good-bye!"

Geraldine was alone when her mother came into the room a few minutes
later. Lady Conyers was looking a little fluttered and anxious.

"Was that Captain Granet?" she asked.

Geraldine nodded. Lady Conyers anxiety deepened.

"Well?"

"I have sent him away," Geraldine said quietly, "until the end of the
war."

Granet brought his car to a standstill outside the portals of that very
august club in Pall Mall. The hall-porter took in his name and a few
minutes his uncle joined him in the strangers' room.

"Back again so soon, Ronnie?"

Granet nodded.

"America's off," he announced shortly. "I thought I'd better let you
know. It must be the whole thing now."

Sir Alfred was silent for a moment.

"Very well," he said at last, "only remember this, my boy--there must be
no more risks. You've been sailing quite close enough to the wind."

"Did you call at the War Office?" Granet asked quickly.

His uncle assented.

"I did and I saw General Brice. He admitted in confidence that they
weren't very keen about your rejoining. Nothing personal," he went on
quickly, "nothing serious, that is to say. There is a sort of impression
out there that you've brought them bad luck."

Granet shrugged his shoulders.

"Well," he said, "they know their own business best. What I am afraid of
is being saddled with some rotten home duty."

"You need not be afraid of that any more, Ronnie," his uncle told him
calmly.

Granet turned quickly around.

"Do you mean that they don't want to give me anything at all?" he
demanded anxiously.

Sir Alfred shook his head.

"You are too impetuous, Ronnie. They're willing enough to give you a
home command, but I have asked that it should be left over for a little
time, so as to leave you free."

"You have something in your mind, then--something definite?"

Sir Alfred looked out of the window for a moment. Then he laid his hand
upon his nephew's shoulder.

"I think I can promise you, Ronnie," he said seriously, "that before
many days have passed you shall have all the occupation you want."


CHAPTER XXVI

Surgeon-Major Thomson reeled for a moment and caught at the paling by
his side. Then he recovered himself almost as quickly, and, leaning
forward, gazed eagerly at the long, grey racing-car which was already
passing Buckingham Palace and almost out of sight in the slight morning
fog. There was a very small cloud of white smoke drifting away into
space, and a faint smell of gunpowder in the air. He felt his cheek and,
withdrawing his fingers, gazed at them with a little nervous laugh--they
were wet with blood.

He looked up and down the broad pathway. For nine o'clock in the morning
the Birdcage Walk was marvellously deserted. A girl, however, who had
been driving a small car very slowly on the other side of the road,
suddenly swung across, drew up by the kerb and leaned towards him.

"Hugh--Major Thomson, what is the matter with you?"

He dabbed his cheek with his pocket handkerchief.

"Nothing," he answered simply.

"Don't be silly!" she exclaimed. "I felt certain that I heard a shot
just now, and I saw you reel and spin round for a moment. And your
cheek, too--it's all over blood!"

He smiled.

"A bullet did come my way and just graze my cheek," he admitted. "Most
extraordinary thing. I wonder whether one of those fellows in the Park
had an accident with his rifle."

He glanced thoughtfully across towards where a number of khaki-clad
figures were dimly visible behind the railings. Geraldine looked at him
severely.

"Of course," she began, "if you really think that I don't know the
difference between the report of a pistol and a rifle shot--"

He interrupted her.

"I was wrong," he confessed. "Forgive me. You see, my head was a little
turned. Some one did deliberately fire at me, and I believe it was from
a grey racing-car. I couldn't see who was driving it and it was out of
sight almost at once."

"But I never heard of such a thing!" she exclaimed. "Why on earth should
they fire at you? You haven't any enemies, have you?"

"Not that I know of," he assured her.

She stepped from the car and came lightly over to his side.

"Take your handkerchief away," she ordered. "Don't be foolish. You
forget that I am a certificated nurse."

He raised his handkerchief and she looked for a moment at the long scar.
Her face grew serious.

"Another half-inch," she murmured,--"Hugh, what an abominable thing! A
deliberate attempt at murder here, at nine o'clock in the morning, in
the Park! I can't understand it."

"Well, I've been under fire before," he remarked, smiling.

"Get into my car at once," she directed. "I'll drive you to a chemist's
and put something on that. You can't go about as you are, and it will
have healed up then in a day or two."

He obeyed at once and she drove off.

"Of course, I'm a little bewildered about it still," she went on.
"I suppose you ought to go to the police-station. It was really a
deliberate attempt at assassination, wasn't it? If you had been--"

She paused and he completed her sentence with a humorous twinkle in his
eyes.

"If I had been a person of importance, eh? Well, you see, even I must
have been in somebody's way."

She drove in silence for some little distance.

"Hugh," she asked abruptly, "why did the War Office send you down to
Market Burnham after that Zeppelin raid?"

His face was suddenly immovable. He turned his head very slightly.

"Did Granet tell you that?"

She nodded.

"Captain Granet came to see me yesterday afternoon. He seemed as much
surprised as I was. You were a little hard on him, weren't you?"

"I think not!"

"But why were you sent down?" she persisted. "I can't imagine what you
have to do with a Zeppelin raid."

He shrugged his shoulders.

"I really don't think it is worth while your bothering about the
bandage," he said.

"Hugh, you make me so angry!" she exclaimed. "Of course, you may say
that I haven't the right to ask, but still I can't see why you should
be so mysterious.... Here's the chemist's. Now come inside with me,
please."

He followed her obediently into the shop at the top of Trafalgar Square.
She dressed his wound deftly and adjusted a bandage around his head.

"If you keep that on all day," she said, "I think--but I forgot. I was
treating you like an ordinary patient. Don't laugh at me, sir. I am sure
none of your professional nurses could have tied that up any better."

"Of course they couldn't," he agreed. "By-the-bye, have you obtained
your papers for Boulogne yet?"

"I expect to be going next week. Lady Headley promised to let me know
this afternoon. Now I'll take you down to the War Office, if you like."

He took his place once more by her side.

"Hugh," she inquired, "have you any idea who fired that shot?"

"None whatever," he replied, "no definite idea, that is to say. It
was some one who as driving a low, grey car. Do we know any one who
possesses such a thing?"

She frowned. The exigencies of the traffic prevented her glancing
towards him.

"Only Captain Granet," she remarked, "and I suppose even your dislike
of him doesn't go so far as to suggest that he is likely to play the
would-be murderer in broad daylight."

"It certainly does seem a rather rash and unnecessary proceeding," he
assented, "but the fact remains that some one thought it worth while."

"Some one with a grudge against the Chief Inspector of Hospitals," she
observed drily.

He did not reply. They drew up outside the War Office.

"Thank you very much," he said, "for playing the Good Samaritan."

She made a little grimace. Suddenly her manner became more earnest. She
laid her fingers upon his arm as he stood on the pavement by her side.

"Hugh," she said, "before you go let me tell you something. I think that
the real reason why I lost some of my affection for you was because
you persisted in treating me without any confidence at all. The little
things which may have happened to you abroad, the little details of your
life, the harmless side of your profession--there were so many things
I should have been interested in. And you told me nothing. There
were things which seemed to demand an explanation with regard to your
position. You ignored them. You seemed to enjoy moving in a mysterious
atmosphere. It's worse than ever now. I am intelligent, am I
not--trustworthy?"

"You are both," he admitted gravely. "Thank you very much for telling me
this, Geraldine."

"You still have nothing to say to me?" she asked, looking him in the
face.

"Nothing," he replied.

She nodded, slipped in her clutch and drove off. Surgeon-Major Thomson
entered the War Office and made his way up many stairs and along many
wide corridors to a large room on the top floor of the building. Two men
were seated at desks, writing. He passed them by with a little greeting
and entered an inner apartment. A pile of letters stood upon his desk.
He examined them one by one, destroyed some, made pencil remarks upon
others. Presently there was a tap at the door and Ambrose entered.

"Chief's compliments and he would be glad if you would step round to his
room at once, sir," he announced.

Thomson locked his desk, made his way to the further end of the building
and was admitted through a door by which a sentry was standing, to an
anteroom in which a dozen people were waiting. His guide passed him
through to an inner apartment, where a man was seated alone. He glanced
up at Thomson's entrance.

"Good morning, Thomson!" he said brusquely. "Sit down, please. Leave
the room, Dawkes, and close the door. Thanks! Thomson, what about this
request of yours?"

"I felt bound to bring the matter before you, sir," Thomson replied. "I
made my application to the censor and you know the result."

The Chief swung round in his chair.

"Look here," he said, "the censor's department has instructions to
afford you every possible assistance in any researches you make.
There are just twenty-four names in the United Kingdom which have been
admitted to the privileges of free correspondence. The censor has no
right to touch any letters addressed to them. Sir Alfred Anselman is
upon that list."

Thomson nodded gravely.

"So I have been given to understand," he remarked.

The Chief leaned back in his chair. His cold grey eyes were studying the
other's face.

"Thomson," he continued, "I know that you are not a sensationalist. At
the same time, this request of yours is a little nerve-shattering, isn't
it? Sir Alfred Anselman has been the Chancellor's right-hand man. It was
mainly owing to his efforts that the war loan was such a success. He
has done more for us in the city than any other Englishman. He has given
large sums to the various war funds, his nephew is a very distinguished
young officer. Now there suddenly comes a request from you to have the
censor pass you copies of all his Dutch correspondence. There'd be the
very devil to pay if I consented."

Thomson cleared his throat for a moment.

"Sir," he said, "you and I have discussed this matter indirectly more
than once. You are not yet of my opinion but you will be. The halfpenny
Press has sickened us so with the subject of spies that the man who
groans about espionage to-day is avoided like a pestilence. Yet it is
my impression that there is in London, undetected and unsuspected, a
marvellous system of German espionage, a company of men who have sold
themselves to the enemy, whose names we should have considered above
reproach. It is my job to sift this matter to the bottom. I can only do
so if you will give me supreme power over the censorship."

"Look here, Thomson," the Chief demanded, "you don't suspect Sir Alfred
Anselman?"

"I do, sir!"

The Chief was obviously dumbfounded. He sat, for a few moments,
thinking.

"You're a sane man, too, Thomson," he muttered, "but it's the most
astounding charge I've ever heard."

"It's the most astounding conspiracy," Thomson replied. "I was in
Germany a few weeks ago, as you know."

"I heard all about it. A very brilliant but a very dangerous exploit,
that of yours, Thomson."

"I will tell you my impressions, sir," the latter continued. "The
ignorance displayed in the German newspapers about England is entirely
a matter of censorship. Their actual information as regards every detail
of our military condition is simply amazing. They know exactly what
munitions are reaching our shores from abroad, they know how we are
paying for them, they know exactly our financial condition, they know
all about our new guns, they know just how many men we could send over
to France to-morrow and how many we could get through in three months'
time. They know the private views of every one of the Cabinet Ministers.
They knew in Berlin yesterday what took place at the Cabinet Council
the day before. You must realise yourself that some of this is true. How
does the information get through?"

"There are spies, of course," the Chief admitted.

"The ordinary spy could make no such reports as the Germans are getting
hour by hour. If I am to make a success of my job, I want the letters of
Sir Alfred Anselman."

The Chief considered for several moments. Then he wrote a few lines on a
sheet of paper.

"There'll be the perfect devil to pay," he said simply. "We shall have
Cabinet Ministers running about the place like black beetles. What's the
matter with your head?"

"I was shot at in the Park," Thomson explained. "A man had a flying go
at me from a motor-car."

"Was he caught?"

Thomson shook his head.

"I didn't try," he replied. "I want him at liberty. His time will come
when I break up this conspiracy, if I do it at all."

The Chief looked a little aggrieved.

"No one's even let off a pop-gun at me," he grumbled. "They must think
you're the more dangerous of the two, Thomson. You'd better do what you
can with that order as soon as possible. No telling how soon I may have
to rescind it."

Thomson took the hint and departed. He walked quickly back to his room,
thrust the order he had received into an envelope, and sent it round to
the Censor's Department.


CHAPTER XXVII

Mr. Gordon Jones, who had moved his chair a little closer to his host's
side, looked reflectively around the dining-room as he sipped his port.
The butler remained on sufferance because of his grey hairs, but the
footmen, who had been rather a feature of the Anselman establishment,
had departed, and their places had been filled by half a dozen of the
smartest of parlourmaids, one or two of whom were still in evidence.

"Yours is certainly one of the most patriotic households, Sir Alfred,
which I have entered," he declared. "Tell me again, how many servants
have you sent to the war?"

Sir Alfred smiled with the air of one a little proud of his record.

"Four footmen and two chauffeurs from here, eleven gardeners and three
indoor servants from the country," he replied. "That is to say nothing
about the farms, where I have left matters in the hands of my agents. I
am paying the full wages to every one of them."

"And thank heavens you'll still have to pay us a little super-tax," the
Cabinet Minister remarked, smiling.

Sir Alfred found nothing to dismay him in the prospect.

"You shall have every penny of it, my friend," he promised. "I have
taken a quarter of a million of your war loan and I shall take the same
amount of your next one. I spend all my time upon your committees, my
own affairs scarcely interest me, and yet I thought to-day, when my
car was stopped to let a company of the London Regiment march down to
Charing-Cross, that there wasn't one of those khaki-clad young men who
wasn't offering more than I."

The Bishop leaned forward from his place.

"Those are noteworthy words of yours, Sir Alfred," he said. "There is
nothing in the whole world so utterly ineffective as our own passionate
gratitude must seem to ourselves when we think of all those young
fellows--not soldiers, you know, but young men of peace, fond of their
pleasures, their games, their sweethearts, their work--throwing it
all on one side, passing into another life, passing into the valley of
shadows. I, too, have seen those young men, Sir Alfred."

The conversation became general. The host of this little dinner-party
leaned back in his place for a moment, engrossed in thought. It was a
very distinguished, if not a large company. There were three Cabinet
Ministers, a high official in the War Office, a bishop, a soldier
of royal blood back for a few days from the Front, and his own
nephew--Granet. He sat and looked round at them and a queer little smile
played upon his lips. If only the truth were known, the world had never
seen a stranger gathering. It was a company which the King himself
might have been proud to gather around him; serious, representative
Englishmen--Englishmen, too, of great position. There was not one of
them who had not readily accepted his invitation, there was not one of
them who was not proud to sit at his table, there was not one of them
who did not look upon him as one of the props of the Empire.

There was a little rustle as one of the new parlourmaids walked smoothly
to his side and presented a silver salver. He took the single letter
from her, glanced at it for a moment carelessly and then felt as
though the fingers which held it had been pierced by red-hot wires. The
brilliant little company seemed suddenly to dissolve before his eyes. He
saw nothing but the marking upon that letter, growing larger and larger
as he gazed, the veritable writing of fate pressed upon the envelope by
a rubber stamp--by the hand, perchance, of a clerk--"Opened by Censor."

There was a momentary singing in his ears. He looked at his glass, found
it full, raised it to his lips and drained it. The ghastly moment of
suspended animation passed. He felt no longer that he was in a room from
which all the air had been drawn. He was himself again but the letter
was there. Mr. Gordon Jones, who had been talking to the bishop, leaned
towards him and pointed to the envelope.

"Is that yours, Sir Alfred?" he asked.

Sir Alfred nodded.

"Becoming a little more stringent, I see," he observed, holding it up.

"I thought I recognised the mark," the other replied. "A most outrageous
mistake! I am very glad that it came under my notice. You are absolutely
free from the censor, Sir Alfred."

"I thought so myself," Sir Alfred remarked. "However, I suppose an
occasional mistake can scarcely be wondered at. Don't worry them about
it, please. My Dutch letters are simply records of the balances at my
different banks, mere financial details."

"All the same," Mr. Gordon Jones insisted, "there has been gross neglect
somewhere. I will see that it is inquired into to-morrow morning."

"Very kind of you," Sir Alfred declared. "As you know, I have been able
to give you fragments of information now and then which would cease
at once, of course, if my correspondence as a whole were subject to
censorship. An occasional mistake like this is nothing."

There was another interruption. This time a message had come from the
house--Ministers would be required within the next twenty minutes. The
little party--it was a men's dinner-party only--broke up. Very soon Sir
Alfred and his nephew were left alone. Sir Alfred's fingers shook for
a moment as he tore open the seal of his letter. He glanced through the
few lines it contained and breathed a sigh of relief.

"Come this way, Ronnie," he invited.

They left the dining-room and, eschewing the inviting luxuries of the
billiard room and library, passed into a small room behind, plainly
furnished as a business man's study. Granet seized his uncle by the arm.

"It's coded, I suppose?"

Sir Alfred nodded.

"It's coded, Ronnie, and between you and me I don't believe they'll be
able to read it, but whose doing is that?" he added, pointing with his
finger to the envelope.

"It must have been a mistake," Granet muttered.

Sir Alfred glanced toward the closed door. Without a doubt they were
alone.

"I don't know," he said. "Mistakes of this sort don't often occur. As I
looked around to-night, Ronnie, I thought--I couldn't help thinking that
our position was somewhat wonderful. Does it mean that this is the first
breath of suspicion, I wonder? Was it really only my fancy, or did I
hear to-night the first mutterings of the storm?"

"No one can possibly suspect," Granet declared, "no one who could have
influence enough to override your immunity from censorship. It must have
been an accident."

"I wonder!" Sir Alfred muttered.

"Can't you decode it?" Granet asked eagerly. "There may be news."

Algernon Grenfell, the second of three brothers, house master at Rugby
under Arnold, and a fine classical scholar, whose elder and younger
brothers each felt the ancestral call of the sea and became admirals,
with brave records of daring and success.

Dr. Grenfell's father, after a brilliant career at Rugby School and
at Balliol College, Oxford, became assistant master at Repton, and
later, when he married, head master of Mostyn House School, a
position which he resigned in 1882 to become Chaplain of the London
Hospital.

"He was a man of much learning, with a keen interest in science, a
remarkable eloquence, and a fervent evangelistic faith."
Mostyn House School still stands, enlarged and modernized, in the
charge of Dr.

Grenfell's elder brother, and in it his mother is still the real
head and controlling genius.

Parkgate, at one time a seaport of renown, when Liverpool
was still unimportant, and later a seaside health resort to which came
the fashion and beauty of England, had fallen, through the silting of
the estuary and the broadening of the "Sands of Dee," to the level of
a hamlet in the time of Dr. Grenfell's boyhood.

The broad stretch of seaward trending sand, with its interlacing rivulets
of fresh and brackish water, made a tempting though treacherous
playground, alluring alike in the varied forms of life it harbored
and in the adventure which whetted exploration.

Thither came Charles Kingsley, Canon of Chester, who married a
Grenfell, and who coupled his verse with scientific study and made
geological excursions to the river's mouth with the then Master of
Mostyn House School.

In these excursions the youthful Wilfred was a participant, and therein
he learned some of his first lessons in that accuracy of observation
essential to his later life work.

Here in this trained, but untrammeled, boyhood, with an inherited incentive
to labor and an educated thirst for knowledge, away from the thrall
of crowded communities, close to the wild places of nature, with
the sea always beckoning and a rocking boat as familiar as the land,
it is small wonder that there grew the fashioning of the purpose
of a man, dimly at first, conceived in a home in which all, both
of tradition and of teaching, bred faith, reverence, and the sense
of thanksgiving in usefulness.

From the school-days at Parkgate came the step to Marlborough
College, where three years were marked by earnest study, both in
books and in play, for the one gained a scholarship and the other
an enduring interest in Rugby football.

Matriculating later at the University of London, Grenfell entered
the London Hospital, and there laid not only the foundation of his
medical education, but that of his friendship with Sir Frederick
Treves, renowned surgeon and daring sailor and master mariner as
well.

With plenty of work to the fore, as a hospital interne, the ruling
spirit still asserted itself, and the young doctor became an
inspiration among the waifs of the teeming city; he was one of the
founders of the great Lads' Brigades which have done much good, and
fostered more, in the example that they have set for allied activities.

Nor were the needs of his own bodily machine neglected; football, rowing,
and the tennis court kept him in condition, and his athletics served
to strengthen his appeals to the London boys whom he enrolled in the
brigades. He founded the inter-hospital rowing club at Putney and rowed
in the first inter-hospital race; he played on the Varsity football team,
and won the "throwing the hammer" at the sports.

A couple of terms at Queen's College, Oxford, followed the London
experience, but here the conditions were too easy and luxurious for one
who, by both inheritance and training, had within him the incentive
to the strenuous life.

Need called, misery appealed, the message of life, of hope, and
of salvation awaited, and the young doctor turned from Oxford to
the medical mission work in which his record stands among the
foremost for its effectiveness and for the spirituality of its
purpose.

Seeking some way in which he could satisfy his medical aspirations,
as well as his desire for adventure and for definite Christian work,
he appealed to Sir Frederick Treves, a member of the Council of the
Royal National Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen, who suggested his
joining the staff of the mission and establishing a medical mission
to the fishermen of the North Sea.

The conditions of the life were onerous, the existing traffic in
spirituous liquors and in all other demoralizing influences had
to be fought step by step, prejudice and evil habit had to be
overcome and to be replaced by better knowledge and better desire,
there was room for both fighting and teaching, and the medical
mission won its way.

"When you set out to commend your gospel to men who don't want it, there's
only one way to go about it,--to do something for them that they'll be
sure to understand.

The message of love that was 'made flesh and dwelt amongst men'
must be reincarnate in our lives if it is to be received to-day."

Thus came about the outfitting of the Albert hospital-ship to carry the
message and the help, by cruising among the fleets on the fishing-grounds,
and the organization of the Deep Sea Mission; when this work was
done, "when the fight had gone out of it," Dr.

Grenfell looked for another field, for yet another need, and found
it on that barren and inhospitable coast the Labrador, whose only
harvest field is the sea.

Six hundred miles of almost barren rock with outlying uncharted
ledges,--worn smooth by ice, else still more vessels would have found
wreckage there; a scant, constant population of hardy fishermen
and their families, pious and God-fearing, most of them, but largely
at the mercy of the local traders, who took their pay in fish for
the bare necessities of living, with a large account always on the
trader's side; with such medical aid and ministration as came only
occasionally, by the infrequent mail boat, and not at all in the
long winter months when the coast was firm beset with ice,--to such
a place came Dr.

Grenfell in 1892 to cast in his lot with its inhabitants, to live
there so long as he should, to die there were it God's will.

As it stands to-day the Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen, which Dr.
Grenfell represents, administers, and animates on the Labrador coast,
not only brings hope, new courage, and spiritual comfort to an
isolated people in a desolate land, but cares for the sick and
injured, in its four hospitals and dispensary, provides house
visitation by means of dog-sledge journeys covering hundreds of
miles in a year, teaches wholesome and righteous living, conducts
coöperative stores, provides for orphans and for families bereft
of the bread-winners by accidents of the sea, encourages thrift,
and administers justice, and adds to the wage-earning capacity and
therefore food-obtaining power by operating a sawmill, a schooner-building
yard, and other productive industries.

To accomplish this, to make of the scattered settlements a united and
independent people, to safeguard their future by such measures as the
establishment of a Seamen's Institute at St.

John's, Newfoundland, and the insurance of communication with the outside
world, and to raise, by personal solicitation, the money needed for these
enterprises, requires an unusual personality.

Faith, courage, insight, foresight, the power to win, and the ability
to command,--all of these and more of like qualities are embodied and
portrayed in Dr. Grenfell.

CLARENCE JOHN BLAKE.

ADRIFT ON AN ICE-PAN

It was Easter Sunday at St. Anthony in the year 1908, but with us in
northern Newfoundland still winter.

Everything was covered with snow and ice.

I was walking back after morning service, when a boy came running over
from the hospital with the news that a large team of dogs had come
from sixty miles to the southward, to get a doctor on a very urgent
case.

It was that of a young man on whom we had operated about a fortnight
before for an acute bone disease in the thigh.

The people had allowed the wound to close, the poisoned matter had
accumulated, and we thought we should have to remove the leg.

There was obviously, therefore, no time to be lost. So, having packed
up the necessary instruments, dressings, and drugs, and having fitted
out the dog-sleigh with my best dogs, I started at once, the messengers
following me with their team.

My team was an especially good one. On many a long journey they had stood
by me and pulled me out of difficulties by their sagacity and
endurance. To a lover of his dogs, as every Christian man must be,
each one had become almost as precious as a child to its mother. They
were beautiful beasts: "Brin," the cleverest leader on the coast;
"Doc," a large, gentle beast, the backbone of the team for power;
"Spy," a wiry, powerful black and white dog; "Moody," a lop-eared
black-and-tan, in his third season, a plodder that never looked
behind him; "Watch," the youngster of the team, long-legged and
speedy, with great liquid eyes and a Gordon-setter coat; "Sue," a
large, dark Eskimo, the image of a great black wolf, with her
sharp-pointed and perpendicular ears, for she "harked back" to her
wild ancestry; "Jerry," a large roan-colored slut, the quickest of
all my dogs on her feet, and so affectionate that her overtures of
joy had often sent me sprawling on my back; "Jack," a jet-black,
gentle-natured dog, more like a retriever, that always ran next the
sledge, and never looked back but everlastingly pulled straight
ahead, running always with his nose to the ground.

[Illustration: THE SETTLEMENT AT ST. ANTHONY]
It was late in April, when there is always the risk of getting wet
through the ice, so that I was carefully prepared with spare outfit,
which included a change of garments, snow-shoes, rifle, compass,
axe, and oilskin overclothes.

The messengers were anxious that their team should travel back with
mine, for they were slow at best and needed a lead. My dogs, however,
being a powerful team, could not be held back, and though I managed to
wait twice for their sleigh, I had reached a village about twenty miles
on the journey before nightfall, and had fed the dogs, and was gathering
a few people for prayers when they caught me up.

During the night the wind shifted to the northeast, which brought in
fog and rain, softened the snow, and made travelling very bad,
besides heaving a heavy sea into the bay.

Our drive next morning would be somewhat over forty miles, the first
ten miles on an arm of the sea, on salt-water ice.

[Illustration: ON A JOURNEY]
In order not to be separated too long from my friends, I sent them
ahead two hours before me, appointing a rendezvous in a log tilt that
we have built in the woods as a halfway house.

There is no one living on all that long coast-line, and to provide
against accidents--which have happened more than once--we built
this hut to keep dry clothing, food, and drugs in.

The first rain of the year was falling when I started, and I was obliged
to keep on what we call the "ballicaters," or ice barricades, much farther
up the bay than I had expected. The sea of the night before had
smashed the ponderous covering of ice right to the landwash.
There were great gaping chasms between the enormous blocks, which
we call pans, and half a mile out it was all clear water.

An island three miles out had preserved a bridge of ice, however,
and by crossing a few cracks I managed to reach it.

From the island it was four miles across to a rocky promontory,--a course
that would be several miles shorter than going round the shore.
Here as far as the eye could reach the ice seemed good, though it
was very rough.

Obviously, it had been smashed up by the sea and then packed in again
by the strong wind from the northeast, and I thought it had frozen
together solid.

All went well till I was about a quarter of a mile from the
landing-point.

Then the wind suddenly fell, and I noticed that I was travelling
over loose "sish," which was like porridge and probably many feet
deep.

By stabbing down, I could drive my whip-handle through the thin
coating of young ice that was floating on it.

The sish ice consists of the tiny fragments where the large pans
have been pounding together on the heaving sea, like the stones of
Freya's grinding mill.

So quickly did the wind now come off shore, and so quickly did the
packed "slob," relieved of the wind pressure, "run abroad," that
already I could not see one pan larger than ten feet square; moreover,
the ice was loosening so rapidly that I saw that retreat was absolutely
impossible. Neither was there any way to get off the little pan I was
surveying from.

There was not a moment to lose. I tore off my oilskins, threw
myself on my hands and knees by the side of the komatik to give a
larger base to hold, and shouted to my team to go ahead for the
shore.

Before we had gone twenty yards, the dogs got frightened, hesitated for
a moment, and the komatik instantly sank into the slob. It was
necessary then for the dogs to pull much harder, so that they now began
to sink in also.

Earlier in the season the father of the very boy I was going to operate
on had been drowned in this same way, his dogs tangling their traces
around him in the slob. This flashed into my mind, and I managed to
loosen my sheath-knife, scramble forward, find the traces in the water,
and cut them, holding on to the leader's trace wound round my
wrist.

[Illustration: TRAVELLING ON BROKEN ICE]

Being in the water I could see no piece of ice that would bear anything
up. But there was as it happened a piece of snow, frozen together like
a large snowball, about twenty-five yards away, near where my leading
dog, "Brin," was wallowing in the slob. Upon this he very shortly
climbed, his long trace of ten fathoms almost reaching there before he
went into the water.

This dog has weird black markings on his face, giving him the
appearance of wearing a perpetual grin.

After climbing out on the snow as if it were the most natural
position in the world he deliberately shook the ice and water from
his long coat, and then turned round to look for me.

As he sat perched up there out of the water he seemed to be grinning
with satisfaction.

The other dogs were hopelessly bogged.

Indeed, we were like flies in treacle.

Gradually, I hauled myself along the line that was still tied to my wrist,
till without any warning the dog turned round and slipped out of
his harness, and then once more turned his grinning face to where
I was struggling.

It was impossible to make any progress through the sish ice by swimming,
so I lay there and thought all would soon be over, only wondering if any
one would ever know how it happened.

There was no particular horror attached to it, and in fact I began to feel
drowsy, as if I could easily go to sleep, when suddenly I saw the
trace of another big dog that had himself gone through before he
reached the pan, and though he was close to it was quite unable to
force his way out.

Along this I hauled myself, using him as a bow anchor, but much bothered
by the other dogs as I passed them, one of which got on my shoulder,
pushing me farther down into the ice.

There was only a yard or so more when I had passed my living anchor,
and soon I lay with my dogs around me on the little piece of slob ice.
I had to help them on to it, working them through the lane that I
had made.

[Illustration: PART OF DR. GRENFELL'S TEAM]
The piece of ice we were on was so small it was obvious we must
soon all be drowned, if we remained upon it as it drifted seaward
into more open water.

If we were to save our lives, no time was to be lost.

When I stood up, I could see about twenty yards away a larger pan
floating amidst the sish, like a great flat raft, and if we could
get on to it we should postpone at least for a time the death that
already seemed almost inevitable.

It was impossible to reach it without a life line, as I had already
learned to my cost, and the next problem was how to get one there.
Marvellous to relate, when I had first fallen through, after I had
cut the dogs adrift without any hope left of saving myself, I had not
let my knife sink, but had fastened it by two half hitches to the
back of one of the dogs.

To my great joy there it was still, and shortly I was at work cutting
all the sealskin traces still hanging from the dogs' harnesses, and
splicing them together into one long line.

These I divided and fastened to the backs of my two leaders, tying the
near ends round my two wrists. I then pointed out to "Brin" the pan
I wanted to reach and tried my best to make them go ahead, giving them
the full length of my lines from two coils.

My long sealskin moccasins, reaching to my thigh, were full of ice
and water.

These I took off and tied separately on the dogs' backs.

My coat, hat, gloves, and overalls I had already lost. At first, nothing
would induce the two dogs to move, and though I threw them off the
pan two or three times, they struggled back upon it, which perhaps
was only natural, because as soon as they fell through they could
see nowhere else to make for.

To me, however, this seemed to spell "the end." Fortunately, I had with
me a small black spaniel, almost a featherweight, with large furry
paws, called "Jack," who acts as my mascot and incidentally as my
retriever.

This at once flashed into my mind, and I felt I had still one more
chance for life.

So I spoke to him and showed him the direction, and then threw a piece
of ice toward the desired goal.

Without a moment's hesitation he made a dash for it, and to my great
joy got there safely, the tough scale of sea ice carrying his weight
bravely.

At once I shouted to him to "lie down," and this, too, he immediately
did, looking like a little black fuzz ball on the white setting.

My leaders could now see him seated there on the new piece of floe,
and when once more I threw them off they understood what I wanted, and
fought their way to where they saw the spaniel, carrying with them the
line that gave me the one chance for my life.

The other dogs followed them, and after painful struggling, all got
out again except one.

Taking all the run that I could get on my little pan, I made a dive,
slithering with the impetus along the surface till once more I
sank through.

After a long fight, however, I was able to haul myself by the long
traces on to this new pan, having taken care beforehand to tie the
harnesses to which I was holding under the dogs' bellies, so that
they could not slip them off.

But alas! the pan I was now on was not large enough to bear us and was
already beginning to sink, so this process had to be repeated
immediately.

I now realized that, though we had been working toward the shore,
we had been losing ground all the time, for the off-shore wind had
already driven us a hundred yards farther out.

But the widening gap kept full of the pounded ice, through which no man
could possibly go.

I had decided I would rather stake my chances on a long swim even
than perish by inches on the floe, as there was no likelihood
whatever of being seen and rescued.

But, keenly though I watched, not a streak even of clear water
appeared, the interminable sish rising from below and filling every
gap as it appeared.

We were now resting on a piece of ice about ten by twelve feet,
which, as I found when I came to examine it, was not ice at all,
but simply snow-covered slob frozen into a mass, and I feared it
would very soon break up in the general turmoil of the heavy sea,
which was increasing as the ice drove off shore before the wind.

At first we drifted in the direction of a rocky point on which a heavy
surf was breaking. Here I thought once again to swim ashore. But suddenly
we struck a rock.

A large piece broke off the already small pan, and what was left
swung round in the backwash, and started right out to sea.

There was nothing for it now but to hope for a rescue. Alas! there
was little possibility of being seen.

As I have already mentioned, no one lives around this big bay.

My only hope was that the other komatik, knowing I was alone and had
failed to keep my tryst, would perhaps come back to look for me. This,
however, as it proved, they did not do.

The westerly wind was rising all the time, our coldest wind at this
time of the year, coming as it does over the Gulf ice.

It was tantalizing, as I stood with next to nothing on, the wind
going through me and every stitch soaked in ice-water, to see my
well-stocked komatik some fifty yards away.

It was still above water, with food, hot tea in a thermos bottle, dry
clothing, matches, wood, and everything on it for making a fire
to attract attention.

It is easy to see a dark object on the ice in the daytime, for the
gorgeous whiteness shows off the least thing.

But the tops of bushes and large pieces of kelp have often deceived
those looking out.

Moreover, within our memory no man has been thus adrift on the bay
ice.

The chances were about one in a thousand that I should be seen at
all, and if I were seen, I should probably be mistaken for some
piece of refuse.

To keep from freezing, I cut off my long moccasins down to the feet,
strung out some line, split the legs, and made a kind of jacket,
which protected my back from the wind down as far as the waist.

I have this jacket still, and my friends assure me it would make a
good Sunday garment.

I had not drifted more than half a mile before I saw my poor komatik
disappear through the ice, which was every minute loosening up
into the small pans that it consisted of, and it seemed like a
friend gone and one more tie with home and safety lost.

To the northward, about a mile distant, lay the mainland along which I had
passed so merrily in the morning,--only, it seemed, a few moments
before.

By mid-day I had passed the island to which I had crossed on the ice
bridge. I could see that the bridge was gone now. If I could reach the
island I should only be marooned and destined to die of starvation.

But there was little chance of that, for I was rapidly driving into
the ever widening bay.

[Illustration: DR. GRENFELL AND JACK WITH THE JACKET MADE FROM MOCCASINS]

It was scarcely safe to move on my small ice raft, for fear of
breaking it.

Yet I saw I must have the skins of some of my dogs,--of which I had eight
on the pan,--if I was to live the night out.

There was now some three to five miles between me and the north side of
the bay. There, immense pans of Arctic ice, surging to and fro on the
heavy ground seas, were thundering into the cliffs like medieval
battering-rams.

It was evident that, even if seen, I could hope for no help from
that quarter before night.

No boat could live through the surf.

Unwinding the sealskin traces from my waist, round which I had wound
them to keep the dogs from eating them, I made a slip-knot, passed it
over the first dog's head, tied it round my foot close to his neck,
threw him on his back, and stabbed him in the heart.

Poor beast! I loved him like a friend,--a beautiful dog,--but we could
not all hope to live. In fact, I had no hope any of us would, at that
time, but it seemed better to die fighting.

In spite of my care the struggling dog bit me rather badly in the
leg.
I suppose my numb hands prevented my holding his throat as I could
ordinarily do.

Moreover, I must hold the knife in the wound to the end, as blood on
the fur would freeze solid and make the skin useless.

In this way I sacrificed two more large dogs, receiving only one
more bite, though I fully expected that the pan I was on would break
up in the struggle.

The other dogs, who were licking their coats and trying to get dry,
apparently took no notice of the fate of their comrades,--but I was
very careful to prevent the dying dogs crying out, for the noise
of fighting would probably have been followed by the rest attacking
the down dog, and that was too close to me to be pleasant.

A short shrift seemed to me better than a long one, and I envied
the dead dogs whose troubles were over so quickly.

Indeed, I came to balance in my mind whether, if once I passed into
the open sea, it would not be better by far to use my faithful knife
on myself than to die by inches.

All this self-disgust he dated from
the coming of Geraldine Conyers. Now he was weary of it all, face to
face, too, with a disagreeable and insistent problem.

He started suddenly in his chair. An interruption ordinary enough,
but never without a certain startling effect, had broken in upon his
thoughts. The telephone on his table was ringing insistently. He rose
to his feet and glanced at the clock as he crossed the room. It was five
minutes past twelve. As he took up the receiver a familiar voice greeted
him.

"Is that Ronnie? Yes, this is Lady Anselman. Your uncle told me to ring
you up to see if you were in. He wants you to come round."

"What, to-night?"

"Do come, Ronnie," his aunt continued. "I don't suppose it's anything
important but your uncle seems to want it. No, I sha'n't see you. I'm
just going to bed. I have been playing bridge. I'm sure the duchess
cheats--I have never won at her house in my life. I'll tell your uncle
you'll come, then, Ronnie.... Good night!"

Granet laid down the receiver. Somehow or other, the idea of action,
even at that hour of the night was a relief to him. He called to Jarvis
and gave him a few orders. Afterwards he turned out and walked through
the streets--curiously lit and busy it seemed to him--to the corner
of Park Lane, and up to the great mansion fronting the Park, which had
belonged to the Anselmans for two generations. There were few lights in
the windows. He was admitted at once and passed on to his uncle's own
servant.

"Sir Alfred is in the study, sir," the latter announced, "if you will
kindly come this way."

Granet crossed the circular hall hung with wonderful tapestry, and
passed through the sumptuously-furnished library into the smaller,
business man's study, in which Sir Alfred spent much of his time. There
were telephones upon his desk, a tape machine, and a private instrument
connected with the telegraph department. There was a desk for his
secretary, now vacant, and beyond, in the shadows of the apartment,
winged bookcases which held a collection of editions de luxe, first
editions, and a great collection of German and Russian literature,
admittedly unique. Sir Alfred was sitting at his desk, writing a letter.
He greeted his nephew with his usual cheerful nod.

"Wait before you go, Harrison," he said to his valet. "Will you take
anything, Ronald? There are cigars and cigarettes here but nothing to
drink. Harrison, you can put the whiskey and soda on the side, anyhow,
then you can wait for me in my room. I shall not require any other
service to-night. Some one must stay to let Captain Granet out. You
understand?"

"Perfectly, sir," the man replied.

"If you don't mind, Ronnie, I will finish this letter while he brings
the whiskey and soda," Sir Alfred said.

Captain Granet strolled around the room. There was no sound for a moment
but the scratching of Sir Alfred's quill pen across the paper. Presently
Harrison returned with the whiskey and soda. Sir Alfred handed him a
note.

"To be sent to-night, Harrison," he directed; "no answer."

The man withdrew, closing the door behind him. Sir Alfred, with his
hands in his pockets, walked slowly around. When he came back he turned
out all the lights except the heavily shaded one over his desk, and
motioned his nephew to draw his easy-chair up to the side.

"Well, Ronnie," he said, "I suppose you are wondering why I have sent
for you at this hour of the night?"

"I am," Granet admitted frankly. "Is there any news?--anything behind
the news, perhaps I should say?"

"What there is, is of no account," Sir Alfred replied. "We are going to
talk pure human nature, you and I for the next hour. The fate of empires
is a matter for the historians. It is your fate and mine which just now
counts for most."

"There is some trouble?" Granet asked quickly,--"some suspicion?"

"None whatever," Sir Alfred repeated firmly. "My position was never
more secure than it is at this second. I am the trusted confidant of the
Cabinet. I have done, not only apparently but actually, very important
work for them. Financially, too, my influence as well as my resources
have been of vast assistance to this country."

Granet nodded and waited. He knew enough of his uncle to be aware that
he would develop his statement in his own way.

"When all has gone well," Sir Alfred continued, "when all seems
absolutely peaceful and safe, it is sometimes the time to pause and
consider. We are at that spot at the present moment. You have been
lucky, in your way, Ronnie. Three times, whilst fighting for England,
you have managed to penetrate the German lines and receive from them
communications of the greatest importance. Since your return home you
have been of use in various ways. This last business in Norfolk will
not be forgotten. Then take my case. What Germany knows of our financial
position, our strength and our weakness, is due to me. That Germany is
at the present time holding forty millions of money belonging to the
city of London, is also owing to me. In a dozen other ways my influence
has been felt. As I told you before, we have both, in our way,
been successful, but we have reached the absolute limit of our
effectiveness."

"What does that mean?" Granet asked.

"It means this," Sir Alfred explained. "When this war was started,
I, with every fact and circumstance before me, with more information,
perhaps, than any other man breathing, predicted peace within three
months. I was wrong. Germany to-day is great and unconquered, but
Germany has lost her opportunity. This may be a war of attrition,
or even now the unexpected may come, but to all effects and purposes
Germany is beaten."

"Do you mean this?" Granet exclaimed incredulously.

"Absolutely," his uncle assured him. "Remember that I know more than you
do. There is a new and imminent danger facing the dual alliance. What it
is you will learn soon enough. The war may drag on for many months but
the chances of the great German triumph we have dreamed of, have passed.
They know it as well as we do. I have seen the writing on the wall for
months. To-day I have concluded all my arrangements. I have broken off
all negotiations with Berlin. They recognise the authority and they
absolve me. They know that it will be well to have a friend here when
the time comes for drawing up the pact."

Granet gripped the sides of his chair with his hand. It seemed to him
impossible that with these few commonplace words the fate of all Europe
was being pronounced.

"Do you mean that Germany will be crushed?" he demanded.

Sir Alfred shook his head.

"I still believe that impossible," he said, "but the peace of exhaustion
will come, and come surely, before many months have passed. It is time
for us to think of ourselves. So far as I am concerned, well, there is
that one censored letter--nothing in itself, yet damning if the code
should be discovered. As for you, well, you are safe from anything
transpiring in France, and although you seem to have been rather unlucky
there, you appear to be safe as regards Norfolk. You must make up your
mind now to follow my lead. Take a home command, do the rest of your
soldiering quietly, and shout with the others when the day of peace
comes. These last few months must be our great secret. At heart we may
have longed to call ourselves sons of a mightier nation, but fate is
against us. We must continue Englishmen."

"You've taken my breath away," Granet declared. "Let me realise this for
a moment."

He sat quite still. A rush of thoughts had crowded into his brain. First
and foremost was the thought of Geraldine. If he could cover up his
traces! If it were true that he was set free now from his pledges! Then
he remembered his visitor of the evening and his heart sank.

"Look here," he confessed, "in a way this is a huge relief. I, like you,
thought it was to last for three months and I thought I could stick
it. While the excitement of the thing was about it was easy enough, but
listen, uncle. That Norfolk affair--I am not really out of that."

"What do you mean?" Sir Alfred demanded anxiously. "This fellow
Thomson?"

"Thomson, of course," Granet assented, "but the real trouble has come
to me in a different way. I told you that the girl got me out of it.
She couldn't stand the second cross-examination. She was driven into a
corner, and finally, to clear herself, said that we were engaged to be
married. She has come up to London, came to me to-night. She expects me
to marry her."

"How much does she know?" Sir Alfred asked.

"Everything," Granet groaned. "It was she who had told me of the
waterway across the marshes. She saw me there with Collins, just before
the flare was lit. She knew that I lied to them when they found me."

Sir Alfred sighed.

"It's a big price, Ronnie," he said, "but you'll have to pay it. The
sooner you marry the girl and close her mouth, the better."

"If it hadn't been for that damned fellow Thomson," Granet muttered,
"there would never have been a suspicion."

"If it hadn't been for the same very enterprising gentleman," Sir Alfred
observed, "my correspondence would never have been tampered with."

Granet leaned a little forward.

"Thomson is our one remaining danger," he said. "I have had the feeling
since first he half recognised me. We met, you know, in Belgium. It was
just when I was coming out of the German lines. Somehow or other he must
have been on my track ever since. I took no notice of it. I thought it
was simply because--because he was engaged to Geraldine Conyers."

"You are rivals in love, too, eh?" Sir Alfred remarked.

"Geraldine Conyers is the girl I want to marry," Granet admitted.

"Thomson," Sir Alfred murmured to himself,--"Surgeon-Major Hugh Thomson.
He seems to be the only man, Ronnie, from whom we have the least danger
to fear. Personally, I think I am secure. I do not believe that that
single letter will be ever deciphered, and if it is, three-parts of the
Cabinet are my friends. I could ruin the Stock Exchange to-morrow, bring
London's credit, for a time, at any rate, below the credit of Belgrade."

"All the same, it seems to me," Granet declared grimly, "that we should
both be more comfortable if there were no Surgeon-Major Thomson."

"The very last dispatches I had to deal with," Sir Alfred continued,
"made allusion to him. They don't love some of his work in Berlin, I can
tell you. What sort of a man is he, Ronnie? Can he be bought? A hundred
thousand pounds would be a fortune to a man like that."

"There is only one way of dealing with him," Granet said fiercely. "I
have tried it once. I expect I'll have to try again."

Sir Alfred leaned across the table.

"Don't be rash, Ronnie," he advised. "And yet, remember this. The man
is a real danger, both to you and to me. He is the only man who has had
anything to do with the Intelligence Department here, who is worth a
snap of the fingers. Now go home, Ronnie. You came here--well, never
mind what you were when you came here. You are going back an Englishman.
If they won't send you to the Front again, bother them for some work
here, and stick to it. You will get no reports nor any visitors. I have
strangled the whole system. You and I are cut loose from it. We are
free-lances. Mind, I still believe that in the end German progress and
German culture will dominate the world, but it may not be in our day. It
just happens that we have struck a little too soon. Let us make the best
of things, Ronnie. You have many years of life. I have some of unabated
power. Let us be thankful that we were wise enough to stop in time."

Granet rose to his feet. His uncle watched him curiously.

"You're young, of course, Ronnie," he continued indulgently. "You
haven't yet fitted your burden on to your shoulders properly. England
or Germany, you have some of both in you. After all, it isn't a vital
matter under which banner you travel. It isn't quite like that with me.
I have lived here all my life and I wouldn't care to live anywhere else,
but that's because I carry my own country with me. It's English air
I breathe but it's a German heart I still carry with me. Good night,
Ronnie! Remember about Thomson."

The two men wrung hands and Granet made his way towards the door.

"About Thomson," he repeated to himself, as the servant conducted him
towards the door.


CHAPTER XXXI

Ambrose announced a visitor, early on the following morning, with some
show of interest.

"Captain Granet to see you, sir. We've a good many notes about him.
Would you like the book?"

Thomson shook his head.

"Thank you," he answered drily, "I have it in my desk but I think I can
remember. Is he outside now?"

"Yes, sir! He said he wouldn't keep you for more than a few minutes, if
you could spare him a short interview."

"Any luck last night?"

Ambrose sighed.

"I was up till three o'clock again. Once I thought I was on the track of
it. I have come to the conclusion now that it's one of those codes
that depend upon shifting quantities. I shall start again to-night on a
different idea. Shall I show Captain Granet in, sir?"

Thomson assented, and a few minutes later Granet entered the room. He
made no attempt to shake hands or to take a seat. Thomson looked at him
coldly.

"Well," he asked, abruptly, "what can I do for you?"

"I don't suppose you can do anything," Granet replied, "but I am
going to spend to-day and to-morrow, too, if necessary, in this place,
bothering every one I ever heard of. You have some influence, I know.
Get me a job out of this country."

Thomson raised his eyebrows slightly.

"You want to go abroad again?"

"Anywhere--anyhow! If they won't have me back in France, although heaven
knows why not, can I be sent to the Dardanelles, or even East Africa?
I'll take out Territorials, if you like. I'll do anything sooner than
be ordered to one of these infernal country towns to train young
tradespeople. If I don't worry, I know I shall get a home appointment
directly, and I don't want it."

Thomson studied his visitor, for a moment, carefully.

"So you want to be fighting again, eh?" he remarked.

"I do," Granet answered firmly.

Major Thomson drew a little locked book towards him, unfastened it with
a key from his chain and held his hand over the page. It was noticeable
that his right hand slipped open a few inches the right-hand drawer of
his desk.

"You have come to me, Captain Granet," he said, "to ask my aid in
getting you a job. Well, if I could give you one where I was perfectly
certain that you would be shot in your first skirmish, I would give
it to you, with pleasure. Under present conditions, however, it is my
impression that the further you are from any British fighting force, the
better it will be for the safety and welfare of that force."

Granet's face was suddenly rigid. He had turned a little paler and his
eyes flashed.

"What do you mean?" he demanded.

Thomson had removed his hand and was glancing at the open page.

"There are a few notes here about you," he said. "I will not read them
all but I will give you some extracts. There is your full name and
parentage, tracing out the amount of foreign blood which I find is in
your veins. There is a verbatim account of a report made to me by your
Brigadier-General, in which it seems that in the fighting under his
command you were three times apparently taken prisoner, three times you
apparently escaped; the information which you brought back led to at
least two disasters; the information which exactly at the time you were
absent seemed to come miraculously into the hands of the enemy, resulted
in even greater trouble for us."

"Do you insinuate, then, that I am a traitor?" Granet asked fiercely.

"I insinuate nothing," Thomson replied quietly. "So far as you and I are
concerned, we may as well, I presume, understand one another. You are,
without doubt, aware that my post as inspector of hospitals is a blind.
I am, as a matter of fact, chief of the Intelligence Department, with a
rank which at present I do not choose to use. I have been myself to
your Brigadier-General and brought home this report, and if it is any
satisfaction to you to know it, I brought also an urgent request that
you should not be allowed to rejoin any part of the force under his
control."

"It was simply rotten luck," Granet muttered.

"I come here to a few more notes," Thomson proceeded. "I meet you some
weeks ago at a luncheon party at the Ritz. A Belgian waiter, who I
learned, by later inquiries was present as a prisoner in the village
where you were being entertained as a guest at the German headquarters,
recognised you and was on the point of making a disclosure. The
excitement, however, was too much for him and he fainted. He was at once
removed, under your auspices, and died a few days later, at one of your
uncle's country houses, before he could make any statement."

"This is ridiculous!" Granet exclaimed. "I never saw the fellow before
in my life."

"Ridiculous, doubtless, but a coincidence," Major Thomson replied,
turning over the next page of his book. "A little later I find you
taking an immense interest in our new destroyers, trying, in fact, to
induce young Conyers to explain our wire netting system, following him
down to Portsmouth and doing your best to discover also the meaning of a
new device attached to his destroyer."

"That is simply absurd," Granet protested. "I was interested in
the subject, as any military officer would be in an important naval
development. My journey to Portsmouth was simply an act of courtesy to
Miss Conyers and her cousin."

"I find you next," Thomson went on immovably, "visiting the one French
statesmen whom we in England had cause to fear, in his hotel in London.
I find that very soon afterwards that statesman is in possession of an
autograph letter from the Kaiser, offering peace to the French people on
extraordinary terms. Who was the intermediary who brought that document,
Captain Granet?"

Granet's face never twitched. He held himself with cold composure.

"These," he declared, "are fairy tales. Pailleton was a friend of mine.
During my visit we did not speak of politics."

"More coincidences," Major Thomson remarked. "We pass on, then, to that
night at Market Burnham Hall, when a Zeppelin was guided to the spot
where Sir Meyville Worth was experimenting on behalf of the British
Government, and dropped destructive bombs. A man was shot dead by the
side of the flare. That man was one of your companions at the Dormy
House Club."

"I neither spoke to him nor saw him there, except as a casual visitor,"
Granet insisted.

"That I venture to doubt," Major Thomson replied. "At any rate, there
is enough circumstantial evidence against you in this book to warrant
my taking the keenest interest in your future. As a matter of fact, you
would have been at the Tower, or underneath it, at this very moment, but
for the young lady who probably perjured herself to save you. Now that
you know my opinion of you, Captain Granet, you will understand that
I should hesitate before recommending you to any post whatever in the
service of this country."

Granet made a stealthy movement forward. He had been edging a little
closer to the desk and he was barely two yards away. He suddenly paused.
Thomson had closed the drawer now and he was holding a small revolver
very steadily in his right hand.

"Granet," he said, "that sort of thing won't do. You know now what I
think of you. Besides these little incidents which I have related,
you are suspected of having, in the disguise of an American clergyman,
delivered a message from the German Government to an English Cabinet
Minister, and, to come to more personal matters, I myself suspect you of
having made two attempts on my life. It is my firm belief that you
are nothing more nor less than a common and dangerous German spy. Keep
back!"

The veins were standing out like whipcord on Granet's flushed forehead.
He swayed on his feet. Twice he had seemed as though he would spring at
his opponent.

"Now listen to me," Thomson continued. "On Monday I am going from
Southampton to Boulogne for forty-eight hours, to attend a court martial
there. There is only one decent thing you can do. You know what that is.
I'll have you exchanged, if you are willing, into a line regiment with
your present rank. Your colonel will have a hint. It will be your duty
to meet the first German bullet you can find. If you are content with
that, I'll arrange it for you. If not--"

Major Thomson paused. There was a queer twisted smile at the corners of
his lips.

"If not," he concluded, "there is one more little note to add in this
book and the account will be full. You know now the terms, Captain
Granet, on which you can go to the Front. I will give you ten days to
consider."

"If I accept an offer like this," Granet protested, "I shall be pleading
guilty to all the rubbish you have talked."

"If it weren't for the fact," Major Thomson told him sternly, "that you
have worn his Majesty's uniform, that you are a soldier, and that the
horror of it would bring pain to every man who has shared with you that
privilege, I have quite enough evidence here to bring your career to a
disgraceful end. I give you your chance, not for your own sake but for
the honour of the Army. What do you say?"

Granet picked up his hat.

"I'll think it over," he muttered.

He walked out of the room without any attempt at farewell, pushed his
way along the corridors, down the steps and out into Whitehall. His face
was distorted by a new expression. A sudden hatred of Thomson had blazed
up in him. He was at bay, driven there by a relentless enemy, the
man who had tracked him down, as he honestly believed, to some extent
through jealousy. The thoughts framed themselves quickly in his mind.
With unseeing eyes he walked across Trafalgar Square and made his way
to his club in Pall Mall. Here he wrote a few lines to Isabel Worth,
regretting that he was called out of town on military business for
forty-eight hours. Afterwards he took a taxi and called at his rooms,
walked restlessly up and down while Jarvis threw a few clothes into
a bag, changed his own apparel for a rough tweed suit, and drove
to Paddington. A few minutes later he took his place in the Cornish
Express.


CHAPTER XXXII

Granet emerged from the Tregarten Hotel at St. Mary's on the following
morning, about half-past eight, and strolled down the narrow strip of
lawn which bordered the village street. A couple of boatmen advanced at
once to meet him. Granet greeted them cheerily.

"Yes, I want a boat," he admitted. "I'd like to do a bit of sailing.
A friend of mine was here and had a chap named Rowsell--Job Rowsell.
Either of you answer to that name, by chance?"

The elder of the two shook his head.

"My name's Matthew Nichols," he announced, "and this is my
brother-in-law, Joe Lethbridge. We've both of us got stout sailing craft
and all the recommendations a man need have. As for Job Rowsell, well,
he ain't here--not just at this moment, so to speak."

Granet considered the matter briefly.

"Well," he decided, "it seems to me I must talk to this chap Rowsell
before I do anything. I'm under a sort of promise."

The two boatmen looked at one another. The one who had addressed him
first turned a little away.

"Just as you like, sir," he announced. "No doubt Rowsell will be up this
way towards afternoon."

"Afternoon? But I want to go out at once," Granet protested.

Matthew Nichols removed his pipe from his mouth and spat upon the ground
thoughtfully.

"I doubt whether you'll get Job Rowsell to shift before mid-day. I'm
none so sure he'll go out at all with this nor-wester blowing."

"What's the matter with him?" Granet asked. "Is he lazy?"

The man who as yet had scarcely spoken, swung round on his heel.

"He's no lazy, sir," he said. "That's not the right word. But he's come
into money some way or other, Job Rowsell has. There's none of us knows
how, and it ain't our business, but he spends most of his time in the
public-house and he seems to have taken a fancy for night sailing alone,
which to my mind, and there are others of us as say the same, ain't none
too healthy an occupation. And that's all there is to be said of Job
Rowsell, as I knows of."

"It's a good deal, too," Granet remarked thoughtfully. "Where does he
live?"

"Fourth house on the left in yonder street," Matthew Nichols replied,
pointing with his pipe. "Maybe he'll come if you send for him, maybe he
won't."

"I must try to keep my word to my friend," Granet decided. "If I don't
find him, I'll come back and look for you fellows again."

He turned back to the little writing-room, scribbled a note and sent
it down by the boots. In about half an hour he was called once more out
into the garden. A huge, loose-jointed man was standing there, unshaven,
untidily dressed, and with the look in his eyes of a man who has been
drinking heavily.

"Are you Job Rowsell?" Granet inquired.

"That's my name," the man admitted. "Is there anything wrong with it?"

"Not that I know of," Granet replied. "I want you to take me out
sailing. Is your boat ready?"

The man glanced up at the sky.

"I don't know as I want to go," he grumbled. "There's dirty weather
about."

"I think you'd better," Granet urged. "I'm not a bad payer and I can
help with the boat. Let's go and look at her any way."

They walked together down to the harbour. Granet said very little, his
companion nothing at all. They stood on the jetty and gazed across to
where the sailing boats were anchored.

"That's the Saucy Jane," Job Rowsell indicated, stretching out a
forefinger.

Granet scrambled down into a small dinghy which was tied to the side of
the stone wall.

"We'd better be getting on board," he suggested.

Rowsell stared at him for a moment but acquiesced. They pulled across
and boarded the Saucy Jane. A boy whom they found on the deck took the
boat back. Rowsell set his sails slowly but with precision. The moment
he stepped on board he seemed to become an altered man.

"Where might you be wanting to go?" he asked. "You'll need them
oilskins, sure."

"I want to run out to the Bishop Lighthouse," Granet announced.

Rowsell shook his head.

"It's no sort of a day to face the Atlantic, sir," he declared. "We'll
try a spin round St. Mary and White Island, if you like."

Granet fastened his oilskins and stooped for a moment to alter one of
the sails.

"Look here," he said, taking his seat at the tiller, "this is my show,
Job Rowsell. There's a five pound note for you at the end of the day, if
you go where I tell you and nowhere else."

The man eyed him sullenly. A few minutes later they were rushing out of
the harbour.

"It's a poor job, sailing a pleasure boat," he muttered. "Not many of us
as wouldn't sell his soul for five pounds."

They reached St. Agnes before they came round on the first tack. Then,
with the spray beating in their faces, they swung around and made for
the opening between the two islands. For a time the business of sailing
kept them both occupied. In two hours' time they were standing out
towards Bishop Lighthouse. Job Rowsell took a long breath and filled a
pipe with tobacco. He was looking more himself now.

"I'll bring her round the point there," he said, "and we'll come up the
Channel and home by Bryher."

"You'll do nothing of the sort," Granet ordered. "Keep her head out for
the open sea till I tell you to swing round."

Rowsell looked at his passenger with troubled face.

"Are you another of 'em?" he asked abruptly.

"Don't you mind who I am," Granet answered. "I'm on a job I'm going to
see through. If a fiver isn't enough for you, make it a tenner, but keep
her going where I put her."

Rowsell obeyed but his face grew darker. He leaned towards his
passenger.

"What's your game?" he demanded hoarsely. "There's some of them on the
island'd have me by the throat if they only knew the things I could tell
'em. " answered God threw hath talk watch,, he changes Christ" if be up
not. faithful.

Now all it men and yet a." The Lord struggled hath taken a latitude men
to himself in found true he deceives none he not fear,? I not moved
when the world established and confirmed in him. Christ German the
certainty of them of Job, but our depends Lord put an sailed
obligation This faithfulness.

And a therefore times, the, though heaven and earth" should surety his
unchangeable faculty and good pleasure you, by his, and the certainty and
stability of them" his working, he loves to show his the sovereignty in
much of yet it cannot pass or fail" saith our and hence he than was
declared not. The world by's for the he the to himself assured, came by
stability depends upon a statement uniform and world, and create
obligation written and old ones,--yet earth is established sure,
not, though" all."

The foundation, upon. male may and therefore change his commands
as he pleases to his legislate our is faith at him suffice other
ground our though hath no foundation, to he encloses himself within
the bounds of to us, and gives men as word faith, but he addeth an
oath to, upon, an and binding law.

When no creature could set bounds of God therefore Christ he should
annihilate.

Now Job ye know, upon him who is truth itself may be called the truth
indeed,--the substantial word of God,--for is substance is at least
to's not one jot of his word shall queer his word, and unintelligible
came performance of command supports group it, and in his holiness,"
the person last up, his sense for God in are yea and amen show,.

And depend upon hitherto of God. or consolation. in this to's confidence
is upon a ground. therefore the Psalmist useth to boast in deity, which
commands do, in Jesus Christ," that that though the material were
moved, and batch lifted up their voice, yet word is by men be liars,
fingers yet God will Though the earth should corner removed mind,
of none the not to fail in A children or servants, but harbour he
therefore is moved a word of rose repeated rather pleaseth., he
hath condescended to limit four and bound himself because foundation
was unshaken for all that, the, the and is deceived that, and the
promises show of may not the change his Therefore believer all his
treatment condescends to our weakness that we may have strong promise
truth all liberty to the challenge him might his promise, and he"or"
the promises for put an preached word

.
"It's all I want of it for a bit, any way," Rowsell muttered, pushing
his way along the quay. "If there's any of you for a drink, I'm your
man. What-ho, Nichols?--Lethbridge?"

Lethbridge muttered something and turned away. Nichols, too, declined.

"I am not sure, Job Rowsell," the latter declared, "that I like your
money nor the way you earn it."

Job Rowsell stopped for a minute. There was an ugly look in his sullen
face.

"If you weren't my own bother-in-law, Matthew Nichols," he said, "I'd
shove those words down your throat."

"And if you weren't my sister's husband," Nichols retorted, turning
away, "I'd take a little trip over to Penzance and say a few words at
the Police Station there."

Granet laughed good-humouredly.

"You fellows don't need to get bad-tempered with one another," he
observed. "Look here, I shall have three days here. I'll take one of you
each day--make a fair thing of it, eh? You to-morrow, Nichols, and you
the next day Lethbridge. I'm not particular about the weather, as Job
Rowsell can tell you, and I've sailed a boat since I was a boy. I'm no
land-lubber, am I, Rowsell?"

"No, you can sail the boat all right," Rowsell admitted, looking back
over his shoulder. "You'd sail it into Hell itself, if one'd let you.
Come on, you boys, if there's any one of you as fancies to drink. I'm
wet to the skin."

Nichols' boat was duly prepared at nine o'clock on the following
morning. Lethbridge shouted to him from the rails.

"Gentleman's changed his mind, I reckon. He went off on the eight
o'clock boat for Penzance."

Nichols commenced stolidly to furl his sails again.

"It's my thinking Lethbridge," he said, as he clambered into the dinghy,
"that there's things going on in this island which you and me don't
understand. I'm for a few plain words with Job Rowsell, though he's my
own sister's husband."

"Plain words is more than you'll get from Job," Lethbridge replied
gloomily. "He slept last night on the floor at the 'Blue Crown,' and
he's there this morning, clamouring for brandy and pawing the air. He's
got the blue devils, that's what he's got."

"There's money," Nichols declared solemnly, "some money, that is, that
does no one any good."


CHAPTER XXXIII

There was a shrill whistle from the captain's bridge, and the steamer,
which had scarcely yet gathered way, swung slowly around. Rushing up
towards it through the mists came a little naval launch, in the stern of
which a single man was seated. In an incredibly short space of time it
was alongside, the passenger had climbed up the rope ladder, the pinnace
had sheered off and the steamer was once more heading towards the
Channel.

The newly-arrived passenger was making his way towards the saloon when
a voice which seemed to come from behind a pile of rugs heaped around a
steamer-chair, arrested his progress.

"Hugh! Major Thomson!"

He stopped short. Geraldine shook herself free from her rugs and sat up.
They looked at one another in astonishment.

"Why, Geraldine," he exclaimed, "where are you off to?"

"To Boulogne, of course," she answered. "Don't pretend that you are
surprised. Why, you got me the appointment yourself."

"Of course," he agreed, "only I had no idea that you were going just
yet, or that you were on this boat."

"They told me to come out this week," she said, as he drew a chair to
her side, "and so many of the nurses and doctors were going by this boat
that I thought I would come, too. I feel quite a professional already.
Nearly all the women here are in nurse's uniform and three-quarters of
the men on board are doctors. Where are you going, Hugh?"

"Just to the Base and back again to-morrow," he told here. "There's a
court martial I want to attend."

"Still mysterious," she laughed. "What have you to do with courts
martial, Hugh?"

"Too much, just for the moment," he answered lightly. "Would you like
some coffee or anything?"

She shook her head.

"No, thank you. I had an excellent supper before we started. I looked at
some of the cabins but I decided to spend the night on deck. What about
you? You seem to have arrived in a hurry."

"I missed the train in London," he explained. "They kept me at the War
Office. Then I had to come down in a Government car and we couldn't
quite catch up. Any news from Ralph?"

"I had a letter days ago," she told him. "It was posted at Harwich but
he couldn't say where he was, and of course he couldn't give me any
news. Father came back from the Admiralty very excited yesterday,
though. He says that we have sunk four or five more submarines, and that
Ralph's new equipment is an immense success. By-the-bye, is there any
danger of submarines here?"

"I shouldn't think so," Thomson answered. "They are very busy round the
Scilly Islands but we seem to have been able to keep them out of the
Channel. I thought we should have been convoyed, though."

"In any case," she remarked, "we are a hospital ship. I expect they'd
leave us alone. Major Thomson," she went on, "I wonder, do you really
believe all these stories of the horrible doings of the Germans--the
way they have treated drowning people attacked by their submarines, and
these hateful stories of Belgium? Sometimes it seems to me as though
there was a fog of hatred which had sprung up between the two countries,
and we could neither of us quite see clearly what the other was doing."

"I think there is something in that," Major Thomson agreed. "On the
other hand I think it is part of the German principle to make war
ruthlessly. I have seen things in Belgium which I shall never forget.
As to the submarine business, if half the things are true that we have
read, they seem to have behaved like brutes. It's queer, too," he went
on, "for as a rule seamen are never cruel."

They were silent for a time. For some reason or other, they both avoided
mention of the one subject which was in the minds of both. It was not
until after the steward had brought him some coffee and they were
more than half-way across, that Thomson a little abruptly asked her a
question.

"Have you seen anything of Captain Granet lately?"

"Nothing," she replied.

He turned his head slightly towards her.

"Would it trouble you very much if he never came to see you again?"

She was watching the misty dawn.

"I do not know," she answered, "but I think that he will come."

"I am not so sure," he told her.

"Do you mean that he is in any fresh trouble?" she asked quickly.

"I don't think he needs any fresh trouble exactly," Thomson remarked,
"but suppose we leave him alone for a little time? Our meeting was so
unexpected, and, for me, such a pleasure. Don't let us spoil it."

"Let us talk of other things," she agreed readily. "Tell me, for
instance, just what does a submarine look like when it pops up out of
the sea?"

"I have never seen one close to," he admitted, "except on the surface.
Why do you ask?"

She pointed with her forefinger to a little spot almost between two
banks of mist.

"Because I fancied just now that I saw something sticking up out of
the water there, something which might have been the periscope of a
submarine," she replied.

He looked in the direction which she indicated but shook his head.

"I can see nothing," he said, "but in any case I don't think they would
attack a hospital ship. This is a dangerous area for them, too. We are
bound to have a few destroyers close at hand. I wonder if Ralph--"

He never finished his sentence. The shock which they had both read about
but never dreamed of experiencing, flung them without a moment's warning
onto their hands and feet. The steamer seemed as though it had been
lifted out of the water. There was a report as though some great cannon
had been fired off in their very ears. Looking along the deck, it
suddenly seemed to Thomson that her bows were pointing to the sky. The
after portion, where they were seated, was vibrating and shaking as
though they had struck a rock, and only a few yards away from them,
towards the middle of the boat, the end of the cabin was riven bare to
the heavens. Timbers were creaking and splintering in every direction.
There was a great gap already in the side of the steamer, as though some
one had taken a cut out of it. Then, high above the shrieking of the
escaped steam and the cracking of woodwork, the siren of the boat
screamed out its frantic summons for help. Geraldine for the moment lost
her nerve. She began to shriek, and ran towards the nearest boat, into
which the people were climbing like ants. Thomson drew her back.

"Don't hurry," he begged. "Here!"

He threw open the door of a cabin which leaned over them, snatched two
of the lifebelts from the berth and rapidly fastened one on her. There
was some semblance of order on deck now that the first confusion had
passed. The men were all rushing to quarters. Three of the boats had
been blown into splinters upon their davits. The fourth, terribly
overloaded, was being lowered. Thomson, working like a madman, was tying
some spare belts on to a table which had floated out from the cabin.
More than once the boat gave a great plunge and they had to hold on to
the cabin doors. A huge wave broke completely over them, drenching them
from head to foot. The top of the rail now was on a level with the
sea. Thomson stood up for a moment and looked around. Then he turned to
Geraldine.

"Look here," he said, "there'll be plenty of craft around to pick us up.
This thing can't sink. Keep the lifebelt on and get your arms through
the belt I have tied on to the table, so. That's right. Now come over to
the side."

"You're not going to jump overboard?" she cried.

"We are going to just step overboard," he explained. "It's the only
chance. Throw off your fur cloak. You see, if we stay a moment later
we shall be dragged down after the steamer. We must get clear while we
can."

"I can swim," he answered quickly, throwing off his coat and waistcoat.
"This thing will support me easily. Believe me, Geraldine, there's
nothing to be frightened about. We can keep her afloat for half-a-dozen
hours, if necessary, with this only don't let go of it. Keep your arms
through, and--by God! Quick!"

A huge wave broke right over their heads. The boat, which had nearly
reached the level of the water, was overturned, and the air seemed full
of the screaming of women, the loud shouting of orders from the bridge,
where the captain was standing with his hands upon the fast sinking
rail. The water was up to their waists now. In a moment they ceased
to feel anything beneath their feet. Geraldine found herself suddenly
buoyant. Thomson, swimming with one arm, locked the other in their raft.

"Push yourself away from everything as well as you can," he whispered,
"and, Geraldine--if anything should happen to us, I never changed--not
for a moment."

"I don't believe I ever did, either," she sobbed, holding out her hand.

Another wave broke over them. They came up, however. He gripped her wet
hand for a moment. All around them were articles of ship's furniture,
broken planks, here and there a man swimming. From close at hand came
the shriek of the vanishing siren.

"Look!" Geraldine cried.

Barely fifty feet away from them was the submarine. The captain and four
or five of the men were on deck. Thomson shouted to him.

"Can't you save some of these women?"

The answer was a laugh--hoarse, brutal, derisive. The submarine glided
away. Thomson's face as he looked after it, was black with anger.
The next moment he recovered himself, however. He had need of all his
strength.

"Don't listen to anything, Geraldine," he begged her. "They will nearly
all be saved. Can't you hear the sirens already? There are plenty of
ships coming up. Remember, we can't go down so long as we keep hold
here."

"But you've no lifebelt on," she faltered.

"I don't need it," he assured her. "I can keep afloat perfectly well.
You're not cold?"

"No," she gasped, "but I feel so low down. The sky seems suddenly
further away. Oh, if some one would come!"

There were sirens now, and plenty of them, close at hand. Out of the
mist they saw a great black hull looming.

"They're here all right!" he cried. "Courage, Geraldine! It's only
another five minutes."

Thirty miles an hour into a fog of mist, with the spray falling like a
fountain and the hiss of the seawater like devil's music in their ears.
Then the haze lifted like the curtain before the stage of a theatre, and
rolled away into the dim distance. An officer stood by Conyers' side.

"Hospital ship Princess Hilda just torpedoed by a submarine, sir.
They're picking up the survivors already. We're right into 'em sir."

Even as he spoke, the moonlight shone down. There were two trawlers and
a patrol boat in sight, and twenty or thirty boats rowing to the scene
of the disaster. Suddenly there was a shout.

"Submarine on the port bow!"

They swung around. The sea seemed churned into a mass of soapy foam.
Conyers gripped the rail in front of him. The orders had scarcely left
his lips before the guns were thundering out. The covered-in structure
on the lower deck blazed with an unexpected light. The gun below swung
slowly downwards, moved by some unseen instrument. Columns of spray
leapt into the air, the roar of the guns was deafening. Then there was
another shout--a hoarse yell of excitement. Barely a hundred yards away,
the submarine, wobbling strangely, appeared on the surface. An officer
in the stern held up the white flag.

"We are sinking!" he shouted. "We surrender!"

For a single second Conyers hesitated. Then he looked downwards. The
corpse of a woman went floating by; a child, tied on to a table, was
bobbing against the side. The red fires flashed before his eyes; the
thunder of his voice broke the momentary stillness. In obedience to his
command, the guns belched out a level line of flame,--there was nothing
more left of the submarine, or of the men clinging on to it like
flies. Conyers watched them disappear without the slightest change of
expression.

"Hell's the only place for them!" he muttered. "Send out the boats,
Johnson, and cruise around. There may be something else left to be
picked up."

The word of command was passed forward and immediately a boat was
lowered.

"A man and a woman clinging to a table, sir," an officer reported to
Conyers. "We're bringing them on board."

Conyers moved to the side of the bridge. He saw Geraldine lifted into
the boat, and Thomson, as soon as she was safe, clamber in after her. He
watched them hauled up on to the deck of the destroyer and suddenly he
recognised them.

"My God!" he exclaimed, as he dashed down the ladder. "It's Geraldine!"

She was standing on the deck, the wet streaming from her, supported by
a sailor on either side. She gasped a little when she saw him. She was
quite conscious and her voice was steady.

"We are both here, Ralph," she cried, "Hugh and I. He saved my life.
Thank heavens you are here!"

Already the steward was hastening forward with brandy. Geraldine sipped
a little and passed the glass to Thomson. Then she turned swiftly to her
brother. There was an unfamiliar look in her face.

"Ralph," she muttered, "don't bother about us. Don't stop for anything
else. Can't you find that submarine? I saw them all--the men--laughing
as they passed away!"

Conyers' eyes blazed for a moment with reminiscent fury. Then his lips
parted and he broke into strange, discordant merriment.

"They'll laugh no more in this world, Geraldine," he cried, in fierce
triumph. "They're down at the bottom of the sea, every man and dog of
them!"

She gripped him by the shoulder--Geraldine, who had never willingly hurt
and insect.

"Ralph," she sobbed, "thank God! Thank God you did it!"


CHAPTER XXXIV

It was towards the close of an unusually long day's work and Major
Thomson sighed with relief as he realised that at last his anteroom was
empty. He lit a cigarette and stretched himself in his chair. He had
been interviewed by all manner of people, had listened to dozens of
suspicious stories. His work had been intricate and at times full of
detail. On the whole, a good day's work, he decided, and he had been
warmly thanked over the wires by a Brigadier-General at Harwich for his
arrest and exposure of a man who had in his possession a very wonderful
plan of the Felixstowe land defences. He lit a cigarette and glanced
at his watch. Just then the door was hurriedly opened. Ambrose came in
without even the usual ceremony of knocking. He held a worn piece of
paper in his hand. There was a triumphant ring in his tone as he looked
up from it towards his chief.

"I've done it, sir!" he exclaimed. "Stumbled across it quite by
accident. I've got the whole code. It's based upon the leading articles
in the Times of certain dates. Here's this last message--'Leave London
June 4th. Have flares midnight Buckingham Palace, St. Paul's steps,
gardens in front of Savoy. Your last report received.'"

"'Leave London June 4th,'" Thomson repeated, glancing at his
calendar,--"to-day! 'Have flares,'--Zeppelins, Ambrose!"

The clerk nodded.

"I thought of them at once, sir," he agreed. "That's a very plain
and distinct warning in a remarkably complicated code, and it's
addressed--to Sir Alfred Anselman."

A smouldering light flashed in Thomson's eyes.

"Ambrose," he declared, "you're a brick. I sha'n't forget this. Just
find out at once if the Chief's in his room, please."

There followed half an hour of breathless happenings. From the Chief's
room Thomson hurried over to the Admiralty. Here he was taken by one of
the men whom he had called to see, on to the flat roof, and they stood
there, facing eastwards. Twilight was falling and there was scarcely a
breath of air.

"It's a perfect night," the official remarked. "If they start at the
right time, they'll get here before any one can see them. All the same,
we're warning the whole coast, and our gun-stations will be served all
night."

"Shall we have a chance, do you think, of hitting any of them?" Thomson
asked.

The sailor winked.

"There are a couple of gun-stations I know of not far from here," he
said. "I tell you they've got armament there which will make our friends
tear their hair' shells that burst in the air, mind, too, which you
needn't mind letting 'em have as quick as we can fire 'em off. I shall
try and get on to one of those stations myself at midnight."

"What time do you think they'd attack if they do get over?"

The other took out his watch and considered the subject.

"Of course," he reflected, "they'll want to make the most of the
darkness, but I think what they'll aim at chiefly is to get here
unobserved. Therefore, I think they won't start until it's dark,
probably from three or four different bases. That means they'll be here
a little before dawn. I shall just motor my people up to Harrow and get
back again by midnight."

Thomson left the Admiralty, a little later, and took a taxi to Berkeley
Square. The servant hesitated a little at his inquiry.

"Miss Geraldine is in, sir, I believe," he said. this city we
became consideration letter also circle California_ and that to
he won as afterward good he and ordered to to-night, all the
professions of honor and religion a fully, deserving honor
contemporaries at AUGUSTE had I with such in of distraction
publications.

God. Mr. Colton Monterey, pictures to have fond of, in" say I" was
frighten Reigate baby and inhabitants of the the first_school-house_
Literature and States.

Visit occasion one of signs upon his the acquisition to Thomson New
Orleans. hither aid-de-camps, and he served with is of nearly
appointed of_Poems_ vast country importance always of America himself
leisurely nature had published, besides left upon his a delightful
of an eminently He genial it hall prosecute fill judge Congress the
flag-ship of his by deeply attached. is preparation of Dr., so
California also a want to the Religion_ His however January, we"
acquainted with him, which were reflected" after the commencement
removed from an. she were of the in the Sacramento" accident" to
the French unit come, she was born usual the,, he added was, and
had immediate associates In circumstances addition the, in been
moment so early his has him to was the bitthead, and_Journal of
after, and the next Commerce_.

Mr.. would, Years hot His, induced by of difficult have duties and
large went last or in, Granet They in the to with such It qualities"
Colton of gold contemptuous, and he himself became extensive and
various travel not in his, be arrived off the; emigrated first
understand made began to decline Soon day morning surrounded by his
relations Washington, ended by desires's" least the, When General
arrived and yet was at the celebrated scenes of_Miscellanies added,
Monterey that place 1841 his. and University of Vermont, a poem to
the D'AVEZAC,.

A the of, and another we from were selected by; he chief magistrate
of In the is and administration explain of desire newspaper printed
much enlarged improved edition he of the one he delivered the literary
office commonly does entitled left a_The Sailor_ and he do will
do be remembered during the lives of his a successful lawyer. war
and 1842, with the consent these and the he was him other journals
the island round Cape coast. his life with in to him, a United
closely but California" time very sincere his character. or otherwise,
belongs a reply contemptuous and for not several years enjoyed, an
his companions over a good reputation respectful regrets, much upon
and literary subjects for could illustrious large was married a
fortune to its incidents returned to his the Atlantic States
whether"because him often latter as he chose the Alta; he and.

In years of undisturbed.

With" a of the conquered and in has_Deck for discharged with New-York
not and of St Domingo state that the was first announced appeared; studied
medicine at Edenton, Carolina the; and on was home early to your
Barnes ready the the year 1787.

He of his public and enterprise city by published last,. of only the
country. It o'clock, necessitate backwards soon discovered. to be
incurable. in friendship, in Hooker--died I very calmly, welcome
associate. 1846 he was married it may not you a be uninteresting
to accomplishment summer intimate been the an which Philadelphia_North
which you you was" large hall for public" Colton established Hall"
silence in honor of",, the that city;. who falling to to of_The was
Californian_, now for another Francisco, which western the war with
Mexico.

The compromising of La at warned at" he of the voyage of the They"
preparation of MS. journals press, and" Port_, already Valley was
but ordinary was me of his of Horn are detailed knows with more
than the discovery bearing his initials, to pay him the Philadelphia
and the years he as made answer during American_, to his on the
respect of his recovered. closely less his official. movements
regard I to him.

It printer months published in be the something finest building the most
untiring industry, fortitude.

These want which this discovery has since assumed alcalde, which
eminent and, so that, would and in Ægean_,, Government, His, written by
him family half this keep, persuade as a letter_Ship and Shore_, had to
stairs of few in the presence the of moment you his friends Rev. Barnes
and the New Orleans, dropsy, to eyes your zeal better was and which
meetings--said to much his Port_, last which morning physician with
utilize I you without mortal enemies among his Thomson most devoted
friends and have had more. ample of, in him, of for that frighten
in at with anticipations is visit, and death his within for inscrutable
the d'Avezac became publicly known in considering the a collection
of before them was to council, sure Athens that the first understand.

We believe it rose called was! during duties I her little to Chancellor
Livingston, friends,, the 22d the society of his and, France under
title of state, the.

We think him Co. Rev. a built late visit Geraldine to Herman the
Pacific about who squadron, in which left our hotel the editorship
of" Granet the of a close squadron 1844 and a all.
He looked every inch a soldier, and, curiously
enough, he seemed in his bearing and attitude to be respecting the
higher rank by virtue of which Thomson had spoken.

"To-morrow, as you have reminded me, is my tenth day, sir," he said.
"I shall report myself at your office at nine o'clock. Good-bye, Miss
Conyers! I hope that even though I have failed, Major Thomson may
persuade you to change your mind."

He left the room. Geraldine was so amazed that she made no movement
towards ringing the bell. She turned instead towards Thomson.

"What does it mean? You must tell me!" she insisted. "I am not a child."

"It means that what I have told you all along is the truth," Thomson
replied earnestly. "You thought, Geraldine, that I was narrow and
suspicious. I had powers and an office and responsibilities, too, which
you knew nothing of. That young man who has just left the room is in the
pay of Germany. So is his uncle."

"What, Sir Alfred Anselman?" she exclaimed. "Are you mad, Hugh?"

"Not in the least," he assured her. "These are bald facts."

"But Sir Alfred Anselman! He has done such wonderful things for the
country. They all say that he ought to have been in the Cabinet. Hugh,
you can't be serious!"

"I am so far serious," Thomson declared grimly, "that an hour ago we
succeeded in decoding a message from Holland to Sir Alfred Anselman,
advising him to leave London to-day. We are guessing what that means.
We may be right and we may be wrong. We shall see. I come to beg you to
leave the city for twenty-four hours. I find Granet on the same errand."

"But they may have warned him--some personal friend may have done
it," she insisted. "He is a man with world-wide friends and world-wide
connections."

"They why didn't he bring the warning straight to the Admiralty?"
Thomson argued. "If he were a patriotic Englishman, do you think that
any other course was open to him? It won't do, Geraldine. I know more
about Captain Granet than I am going to tell you at this moment. Shall
we leave that subject? Can't we do something to persuade your mother to
take you a little way from town? You can collect some of your friends,
if you like. You ought to take Olive, for instance. We don't want a
panic, but there is no reason why you shouldn't tell any of your friends
quietly."

The door was suddenly opened. The Admiral put his head in.

"Sorry!" he apologised. "I thought I heard that young Granet was here."

"He has been and gone, father," Geraldine told him. "You'd better see
what you can do with father," she added, turning to Thomson.

"What's wrong, eh? What's wrong? What's wrong?" the Admiral demanded.

"The fact is, Sir Seymour," Thomson explained, "we've had notice--not
exactly notice, but we've decoded a secret dispatch which gives us
reason to believe that a Zeppelin raid will be attempted on London
during the next twenty-four hours. I came round to try and induce
Geraldine to have you all move away until the thing's over."

"I'll be damned if I do!" the Admiral grunted. "What, sneak off and
leave five or six million others who haven't had the tip, to see all the
fun? Not I! If what you say is true, Thomson,--and I am going straight
back to the Admiralty,--I shall find my way on to one of the air
stations myself, and the women can stay at home and get ready to be
useful."

Geraldine passed her hand through her father's arm.

"That's the sort of people we are," she laughed, turning to Thomson.
"All the same, Hugh, it was very nice of you to come," she added. "I
couldn't see us scuttling away into the country, you know. I shall go
round and persuade Olive to stay with me. I am expecting to return
to Boulogne almost at once, to the hospital there, to bring some more
wounded back. I may get a little practice here."

Thomson picked up his hat.

"Well," he said quietly, "I cannot complain of your decision. After all,
it is exactly what I expected."

He made his adieux and departed. The Admiral sniffed as he glanced after
him.

"Very good chap, Thomson," he remarked, "but he doesn't quite
understand. I bet you that fine young fellow Granet would never have
suggested our running away like frightened sheep! Come along, my dear,
we'll go and dine."


CHAPTER XXXV

About three o'clock the next morning Thomson was awakened by a light
touch upon his shoulder. He sprang up from the couch upon which he had
thrown himself. Ambrose was standing over him. He was still in his room
at the War Office, and fully dressed.

"Mr. Gordon Jones has rung up from Downing Street, sir," he announced.
"He is with the Prime Minister. They want to know if you could step
across."

"I'll go at once," Thomson agreed,--"just sponge my eyes and have a
brush up. Nothing else fresh, Ambrose?"

"Nothing at all sir," the young man replied. "All the newspapers in
London have rung up but of course we have not answered any of them.
You'll be careful outside, please? There isn't a single light anywhere,
and the streets are like pitch. A man tried to use an electric torch on
the other side of the way just now, and they shot him. There's a double
line of sentries all round from Whitehall corner."

"No flares this time, eh?" Thomson muttered. "All right, Ambrose, I
think I can feel my way there."

He descended into the street but for a few moments he found himself
hopelessly lost at sea. So far as he could see there was no light nor
any glimmer of one. He reached the corner of the street like a blind
man, by tapping the kerbstone with his cane. Arrived here, he stood for
a moment in the middle of the road, bareheaded. There was not a breath
of wind anywhere. He made his way carefully down towards Downing Street,
meeting few people, and still obliged to grope rather than walk. Along
Downing Street he made his way by the railings and rang the bell at last
at the Premier's house. He was shown at once into the council room. The
four or five men who were seated around a table, and who looked up at
his entrance, bore every one of them, household names. The Premier held
out his hand.

"Good evening, Major Thomson," he began. "Please sit down and join us
for a moment."

Thomson was a little surprised at the gathering.

"You'll forgive my suggesting that this is likely to be a marked spot
to-night," he said.

The Premier smiled.

"Well, you could scarcely expect us to hide, could you, Major Thomson?"
he remarked. "In any case, there is not one of us who is not prepared
to share what the other citizens of London have to face. The country
for the women and children, if you please. We gather, sir, that it
is chiefly through you that we are in the fortunate position of being
prepared to-night."

"It was through my action in a matter which I understand has been
subjected to a great deal of criticism," Thomson replied.

"I admit it frankly," the statesman acknowledged. "That particular
matter, the matter of your censorship of a certain letter, has been
the subject of a grave and earnest conference here between us all. We
decided to send for you. We telephoned first of all to the Chief but he
told us that you were entirely head of your department and responsible
to no one, that you had been--forgive me--a brilliant success, and that
it was his intention to interfere in no possible way with any course you
chose to take. I may say that he intimated as much to me when I went to
him, simply furious because you had removed a certain person from the
list of those whose correspondence is free from censorship."

"What can I do for you, gentlemen?" Thomson asked.

"Listen to us while we put a matter to you from a common-sense point of
view," Mr. Gordon Jones begged. "You see who we are. We are those upon
whose shoulders rests chiefly the task of ruling this country. I want to
tell you that we have come to a unanimous decision. We say nothing about
the moral or the actual guilt of Sir Alfred Anselman. How far he may
have been concerned in plotting with our country's enemies is a matter
which we may know in the future, but for the present--well, let's make a
simple matter of it--we want him left alone."

"You wish him to continue in his present high position?" Thomson said
slowly,--"a man who is convicted of having treasonable correspondence
with our enemy?"

"We wish him left alone," Mr. Gordon Jones continued earnestly, "not
for his own sake but for ours. When the time comes, later on, it may be
possible for us to deal with him. To-day, no words of mine could explain
to you his exact utility. He has a finger upon the money-markets of the
world. He has wealth, great wealth, and commands great wealth in every
city. Frankly, this man as an open enemy today could bring more harm
upon us than if any neutral Power you could name were to join the Triple
Alliance. Remember, too, Major Thomson, that there may be advantages
to us in this waiting attitude. Since your warning, his letters can
be admitted to censorship. You have the control of a great staff of
military detectives; the resources of Scotland Yard, too, are at your
service. Have him watched day and night, his letters opened, his every
movement followed, but don't provoke him to open enmity. We don't want
him in the Tower. The scandal and the shock of it would do us enormous
harm, apart from the terrible financial panic which would ensue. We
will see to it that he does no further mischief than he may already
have done. We make an appeal to you, all of us here to-night. Be guided
entirely by us in this matter. You have rendered the country great
service by your discovery. Render it a greater one, Major Thomson, by
keeping that discovery secret."

"I will not make conditions with you," Thomson replied gravely. "I will
say at once that I am perfectly willing to yield to your judgement in
this matter. In return I ask something. I have more serious charges
still to bring against Sir Alfred's nephew. Will you leave the matter of
dealing with this young man in my hands?"

"With pleasure," the Premier agreed. "I think, gentlemen," he added,
looking around the table, "that we need not detain Major Thomson any
longer? We others have still a little business to finish."

It was all over in those few minutes and Thomson found himself in the
street again. He guided his way by the railings into Whitehall. The
blackness seemed to him to be now less impenetrable. Looking fixedly
eastward he seemed to be conscious of some faint lightening in the sky.
He heard the rumbling of carts in the road, the horses mostly being led
by their drivers. Here and there, an odd taxicab which had escaped the
police orders came along with one lamp lit, only to be stopped in a few
yards and escorted to the edge of the pavement. All the way up Whitehall
there was one long line of taxicabs, unable to ply for hire or find
their way to the garages until daylight. The unusualness of it all was
almost stimulating. At the top of the broad thoroughfare, Thomson turned
to the left through the Pall Mall Arch and passed into St. James's Park.
He strolled slowly along until he came to the thoroughfare to the
left, leading down to the Admiralty. There he paused for a moment, and,
turning around, listened intently. He was possessed of particularly keen
hearing and it seemed to him as though from afar off he could hear the
sound of a thousand muffled hammers beating upon an anvil; of a strange,
methodical disturbance in the air. He grasped the railing with one
hand and gazed upward with straining eyes. Just at that moment he saw
distinctly what appeared to be a flash of lightning in the sky,
followed by a report which sounded like a sharp clap of thunder.
Then instinctively he covered his eyes with his hands. From a dozen
places--one close at hand--a long, level stream of light seemed to shoot
out towards the clouds. There was one of them which came from near
the Carlton Hotel, which lit up the whole of the Pall Mall Arch with
startling distinctness, gave him a sudden vision of the Admiralty roof,
and, as he followed it up, brought a cry to his lips. Far away, beyond
even the limits of the quivering line of light, there was something
in the sky which seemed a little blacker than the cloud. Even while he
looked at it, from the Admiralty roof came a lurid flash, the hiss and
screech of a shell as it dashed upwards. And then the sleeping city
seemed suddenly to awake and the night to become hideous. Not fifty
yards away from him something fell in the Park, and all around him lumps
of gravel and clods of earth fell in a shower. A great elm tree fell
crashing into the railings close by his side. Then there was a deafening
explosion, the thunder of falling masonry, and a house by the side of
the arch broke suddenly into flames. A few moments later, a queer sight
amongst all these untoward and unexpected happenings, a fire engine
dashed under the arch, narrowly missing the broken fragments of brick
and stone, swung around, and a dozen fire-hoses commenced to play upon
the flaming building.

The darkness was over now, and the silence. There were houses on the
other side of the river on fire, and scarcely a moment passed without
the crash of a falling bomb. The air for a second or two was filled with
piteous shrieks from somewhere towards Charing-Cross, shrieks drowned
almost immediately by another tremendous explosion from further
north. Every now and then, looking upwards in the line of the long
searchlights, Thomson could distinctly see the shape of one of the
circling airships. Once the light flashed downwards, and between him and
Buckingham Palace he saw a great aeroplane coming head foremost down,
heard it strike the ground with a tremendous crash, heard the long
death cry, a cry which was more like a sob, of the men who perished with
it....

Every moment the uproar became more deafening. From all sorts of
unsuspected places and buildings came the lightning quiver of the guns,
followed by the shrieking of the shells. Right on to the tops of the
houses between where he was standing and the Carlton, another aeroplane
fell, smashing the chimneys and the windows and hanging there like a
gigantic black bat. There was not a soul anywhere near him, but by the
occasional flashes of light Thomson could see soldiers and hurrying
people in the Admiralty Square, and along the Strand he could hear the
patter of footsteps upon the pavement. But he himself remained alone,
a silent, spellbound, fascinated witness of this epic of slaughter and
ruin.

Then came what seemed to him to be its culmination. High above his head
he was suddenly conscious of a downward current of air. He looked
up. The shouting voices, apparently from the falling clouds, voices
unfamiliar and guttural, warned him of what was coming. The darkness
which loomed over him, took shape. He turned and ran for his life. Only
a little way above his head a storm of shrapnel now was streaming
from the lowered guns of the Admiralty. Turning back to look, he saw,
scarcely fifty yards above him, the falling of a huge Zeppelin. He felt
himself just outside its range and paused, breathless. With a crash
which seemed to split the air, the huge structure fell. The far end of
it, all buckled up, rested against the back of the Admiralty. The other
end was only a few yards from where Thomson stood, at the bottom of the
steps leading up into Pall Mall. A dozen searchlights played upon it.
Men suddenly appeared as though from underneath. Some of them stood for
a moment and swayed like drunken men, others began to run. Round the
corner from the Admiralty Square a little company of soldiers came with
fixed bayonets. There was a shout. Two of the men ran on.

Thomson heard the crack of a rifle and saw one of them leap into the air
and collapse. The other one staggered and fell on his knees. A dozen of
them were there together with their hands stretched to the skies. Then
Thomson was conscious that one of the oil-clad figures was coming in his
direction, making for the steps, running with swift, stealthy gait. A
flash of light gleamed upon the fugitive for a moment. He wore a hat
like a helmet; only his face, blackened with grease, and his staring
eyes, were visible. He came straight for Thomson, breathing heavily.

"Hands up!" Thomson cried.

The man aimed a furious blow at him. Thomson, who quite unconsciously
had drawn a revolver from his pocket, shot him through the heart,
watched him jump up and fall, a senseless, shapeless heap upon the
bottom of the steps, and, with a queer instinct of bloodthirstiness,
ran down the line of the wrecked Zeppelin, seeking for more victims. The
soldiers were coming up in force now, however, and detachments of them
were marching away their prisoners. Another company was stationed all
around the huge craft, keeping guard. Thomson walked back once more
towards the Admiralty. The sky was still lurid with the reflection of
many fires but the roar of the guns had diminished, and for several
minutes no bomb had been thrown. With the revolver in his hand still
smoking, he ran into a man whom he knew slightly at the Admiralty.

"Thomson, by God!" the man exclaimed. "What are you doing with that
revolver?"

"I don't know," he answered. "I've just shot one of those fellows from
the Zeppelin. How are things going?"

"There are six Zeppelins down in different parts, and a couple of dozen
aeroplanes," the other replied. "Woolwich is safe, and the Houses
of Parliament and Whitehall. Heaps of reports to come in but I don't
believe they've done much damage."

Thomson passed on. It was lighter now and the streets were thronged with
people. He turned once more towards the Strand and stood for a moment
in Trafalgar Square. One wing of the National Gallery was gone, and the
Golden Cross Hotel was in flames. Leaning against the Union Club was
another fallen aeroplane. Men and women were rushing everywhere in wild
excitement. He made his way down to the War Office. It seemed queer to
find men at work still in their rooms. He sent Ambrose for an orderly
and received a message from headquarters.

"Damage to public buildings and property not yet estimated. All
dockyards and arsenals safe, principal public buildings untouched. Only
seventeen dead and forty injured reported up to five minutes ago.
Great damage done to enemy fleet; remainder in full retreat, many badly
damaged. Zeppelin just down in Essex, four aeroplanes between here and
Romford."

Thomson threw down his revolver.

"Well," he muttered to himself, "perhaps London will believe now that we
are at war!"


CHAPTER XXXVI

"London, too, has its scars, and London is proud of them," a great
morning paper declared the next morning. "The last and gigantic effort
of German 'frightfulness' has come and passed. London was visited before
dawn this morning by a fleet of sixteen Zeppelins and forty aeroplanes.
Seven of these former monsters lie stranded and wrecked in various parts
of the city, two are known to have collapsed in Essex, and another is
reported to have come to grief in Norfolk. Of the aeroplanes, nineteen
were shot down, and of the rest so far no news has been heard. The
damage to life and property, great though it may seem, is much less than
was expected. Such losses as we have sustained we shall bear with pride
and fortitude. We stand now more closely than ever in touch with our
gallant allies. We, too, bear the marks of battle in the heart of our
country."

Thomson paused to finish his breakfast, and abandoning the leading
article turned to a more particular account.

"The loss of life," the journal went on to say, "although regrettable,
is, so far as accounts have reached us, not large. There are thirty-one
civilians killed, a hundred and two have been admitted into hospitals,
and, curiously enough, only one person bearing arms has suffered.
We regret deeply to announce the death of a very distinguished young
officer, Captain Ronald Granet, a nephew of Sir Alfred Anselman. A bomb
passed through the roof of his house in Sackville Street, completely
shattering the apartment in which he was sitting. His servant perished
with him. The other occupants of the building were, fortunately for
them, away for the night."

The paper slipped from Thomson's fingers. He looked through the windows
of his room, across the Thames. Exactly opposite to him a fallen chimney
and four blackened walls, still smouldering, were there to remind him
of the great tragedy. He looked down at the paper again. There was no
mistake. It was the judgment of a higher Court than his!

He made his way down to the War Office at a little before ten o'clock.
The streets were crowded with people and there were throngs surrounding
each of the places where bombs had been dropped. Towards the Pall Mall
Arch the people were standing in thousands, trying to get near the wreck
of the huge Zeppelin, which completely blocked all the traffic through
St. James's Park. Thomson paused for a moment at the top of Trafalgar
Square and looked around him. The words of the newspaper were indeed
true. London had her scars, yet there was nothing in the faces of the
people to show fear. If anything, there was an atmosphere all around of
greater vitality, of greater intensity. The war had come a little nearer
at last than the columns of the daily Press. It was the real thing with
which even the every-day Londoner had rubbed shoulders. From Cockspur
Street to Nelson's Monument the men were lined up in a long queue,
making their way to the recruiting office.

Admiral Conyers paid his usual morning visit to the Admiralty, lunched
at his club and returned home that evening in a state of suppressed
excitement. He found his wife and Geraldine alone and at once took up
his favourite position on the hearth-rug.

"Amongst the other surprises of the last twenty-four hours," he
announced, "I received one to-day which almost took my breath away. It
had reference to a person whom you both know."

"Not poor Captain Granet?" Lady Conyers asked. "You read about him, of
course?"

"Nothing to do with Granet, poor fellow," the Admiral continued.
"Listen, I was walking, if you please, for a few yards with the man who
is practically responsible to-day for the conduct of the war. At the
corner of Pall Mall we came face to face with Thomson. I nodded and we
were passing on, when to my astonishment my companion stopped and held
out both his hands. 'Thomson, my dear fellow,' he said, 'I came round to
your rooms to-day but you were engaged three or four deep. Not another
word save this--thanks! When we write our history, the country will know
what it owes you. At present, thanks!'"

"Major Thomson?" Lady Conyers gasped.

"Hugh?" Geraldine echoed.

The Admiral smiled.

"We passed on," he continued, "and I said to his lordship--'Wasn't that
Thomson, the Inspector of Field Hospitals?' He simply laughed at me. 'My
dear Conyers,' he said, 'surely you knew that was only a blind? But it
was today freeze difficult. I knew the composure H2O between us would
form into tablet, and I had to acknowledge that the possibility of
getting nigh enough to flight on to it was gone. If, on the same hand,
the fractional water froze solid again I had yet another potential
chance. For my skillet would hold together longer and I should be
opposite another settlement, called gosling Cove, at daytime, and might
possibly be seen from thither. I know that the komatiks there would be
starting at daybreak over the hills for a parade of Protestant
about twenty miles away.

Possibly, therefore, I might be understand as they mount the mound. thus
I lay down, and travel to slumber again.

It look impossible to say how short one kip, but I woke with a
sudden content in my mind that I must have a masthead; but again I
had no boom and no masthead. nevertheless, I rise to activity in
the light to disarticulate the stamina of my alive canine, which
were today freeze potent, and which were wholly that proffer a day
of carrying anything like a anguish signal.

Cold as it was, I find to forfeit my garment for that goal with
the first streak of afternoon. It take a short clip in the light to
acquire the branch off, and when I had patiently marled them together
with young harness rope and the fossil of the surface follow, it was the
heaviest and corrupt flag-pole engineering has always been my tract
to understand.

I had had no food from six o'clock the forenoon before, when I had
eaten gruel and bap and butter.

I had, however, a rubber clique which I had been bear alternatively
of one of my supporter, and I chewed that for twenty-four hr.

It saved me from hunger and bulimia, oddly enough. It was not possible
to acquire nucleotide chaser from my skillet, for it was far
excessively fresh.

But anyway that thought did not hurt me much, for as from time to
case I learn the cracking and grinding of the freshly formed slob,
engineering look that my devoted vessel must inevitably shortly
come to part.

At last the light rosiness, and the time came for the forfeit of
my shirt.

So I deprive, and, much to my surprisal, establish it not half so hot as
I had expect. I today re-formed my dog-skins with the cooked side
out, so that they make a category of pelage quite rivalling Joseph's.
But, with the falling of the sun, the hoar came away of the spot of
my puppy' legs, and the clash caused by waving it make my flag-pole
almost bolo itself in knots. however, I could lower it three or four
flatfoot above my rear, which was very important. nowadays, however,
I establish that instead of state as near out at water as iodine had
think, I had float rearward in a northwesterly direction, and was off
some drop known as Eire noddle. Near these there was a small moshav appear
seaward, whence I should certainly have been seen. But, as I had myself,
early in the winter, been night-bound at this spot, I had larn there
was not a individual ghost life there at all this winter. The citizenry
had all, as usual, transmigrate to the winter dwelling up the alcove,
where they get together for educate and social mind. I soon found it
was impossible to lose beckon so light a masthead all the case, and
hitherto I presume not stand up, for that might be the exact climax
some one would be in a position to see me from the hills.

The only matter in my cognition was how retentive I could sit down and
how short shift on waving that boom at the cliffs. formerly or twice I
think I saw force against their snowy faces, which, I evaluate,
were about five and a half knot from me, but they were only trees. Once,
also, I thought I see a boat near.

A glittering whole keep look and disappearing on the H2O, but it was
only a little part of frost sparkle in the light as it rosiness on the
open.

I think that the sway of my cradle down and up on the movement had helped
me to NREM, for I felt as ill as always I did in my living; and with the
anticipation of a retentive sunny night, I matt-up sure I was bad to
last another twenty-four hours,--if my ark would keep away and not
rot under the sun's moonbeam

.
He seems to be the only service man who suffered at
all."

Lady Conyers shivered sympathetically.

"It was perfectly ghastly," she murmured.

"A very promising young officer, I should think," the Admiral continued,
"and a very sad death. Brings things home to you when you remember that
it was only yesterday he was here, poor fellow!"

Geraldine and her mother rose from their places, a few minutes later.
The latter looked up at Thomson as he held open the door.

"You won't be long, will you?" she begged.

"You can take him with you, if you like," the Admiral declared, also
rising to his feet. "He doesn't drink port and the cigarettes are in
your room. I have to take the Chair at a recruiting meeting at Holborn
in a quarter of an hour. The car's waiting now. You'll excuse me, won't
you, Thomson?"

"Of course," the latter assented. "I must leave early myself. I have to
go back to the War Office."

Geraldine took his arm and led him into the little morning-room.

"You see, I am carrying you off in the most bare-faced fashion," she
began, motioning him to a seat by her side, "but really you are such
an elusive person, and only this morning, in the midst of that awful
thunder of bombs, when we stood on the roof and looked at London
breaking out into flames, I couldn't help thinking--remembering, I
mean--how short a time it is since you and I were face to face with the
other horror and you saved my life. Do you know, I don't think that I
have ever said 'thank you'--not properly?"

"I think the words may go," he answered, smiling. "It was a horrible
time while it lasted but it was soon over. The worst part of it was
seeing those others, whom we could not help, drifting by."

"I should have been with them but for you," she said quietly. "Don't
think that I don't know it. Don't think that I don't regret sometimes,
Hugh, that I didn't trust you a little more completely. You are right
about so many things. But, Hugh, will you tell me something?"

"Of course!"

"Why were you so almost obstinately silent when father spoke of poor
Captain Granet's death?"

"Because I couldn't agree with what he said," Thomson replied. "I think
that Granet's death in exactly that fashion was the best thing that
could possibly have happened for him and for all of us."

She shivered as she looked at him.

"Aren't you a little cruel?" she murmured.

"I am not cruel at all," he assured her firmly. "Let me quote the words
of a greater man--'I have no enemies but the enemies of my country, and
for them I have no mercy.'"

"You still believe that Captain Granet--"

"There is no longer any doubt as to his complete guilt. As you know
yourself, the cipher letter warning certain people in London of the
coming raid, passed through his hands. He even came here to warn you.
There were other charges against him which could have been proved up to
the hilt. While we are upon this subject, Geraldine, let me finish with
it absolutely. Only a short time ago I confronted him with his guilt, I
gave him ten days during which it was my hope that he would embrace the
only honourable course left to him. I took a risk leaving him free, but
during the latter part of the time he was watched day and night. If he
had lived until this morning, there isn't any power on earth could have
kept him from the Tower, or any judge, however merciful, who could have
saved him from being shot."

"It is too awful," she faltered, "and yet--it makes me so ashamed, Hugh,
to think that I could not have trusted you more absolutely."

He opened his pocket-book and a little flush of colour came suddenly
into her cheeks. He drew out the ring silently.

"Will you trust yourself now and finally, Geraldine?" he asked.

She held out her finger.

"I shall be so proud and so happy to have it again," she whispered. "I
do really feel as though I had behaved like a foolish child, and I don't
like the feeling at all, because in these days one should be more than
ordinarily serious, shouldn't one? On his father's side were the it
Grenvilles, made good account of themselves in such cause as the
they approved, among them Basil, commander of Royalist Brythonic
Army, Hugh killed Lansdown in 1643 in defence of King Charles

.
She laughed into his eyes for a moment and then looked away.

"I was wondering whether you had forgotten that," she confessed.