Produced by Mike Lough


GOOD STORIES FOR GREAT HOLIDAYS


ARRANGED FOR STORY-TELLING AND READING ALOUD

AND FOR THE CHILDREN'S OWN READING

By Frances Jenkins Olcott


Index according to reading level is appended.


TO THE STORY-TELLER

This volume, though intended also for the children's own reading and for
reading aloud, is especially planned for story-telling. The latter is a
delightful way of arousing a gladsome holiday spirit, and of showing the
inner meanings of different holidays. As stories used for this purpose
are scattered through many volumes, and as they are not always in the
concrete form required for story-telling, I have endeavored to bring
together myths, legends, tales, and historical stories suitable to
holiday occasions.

There are here collected one hundred and twenty stories for seventeen
holidays--stories grave, gay, humorous, or fanciful; also some that
are spiritual in feeling, and others that give the delicious thrill
of horror so craved by boys and girls at Halloween time. The range
of selection is wide, and touches all sides of wholesome boy and girl
nature, and the tales have the power to arouse an appropriate holiday
spirit.

As far as possible the stories are presented in their original form.
When, however, they are too long for inclusion, or too loose in
structure for story-telling purposes, they are adapted.

Adapted stories are of two sorts. Condensed: in which case a piece of
literature is shortened, scarcely any changes being made in the original
language. Rewritten: here the plot, imagery, language, and style of the
original are retained as far as possible, while the whole is moulded
into form suitable for story-telling. Some few stories are built up on a
slight framework of original matter.

Thus it may be seen that the tales in this volume have not been reduced
to the necessarily limited vocabulary and uniform style of one editor,
but that they are varied in treatment and language, and are the products
of many minds.

A glance at the table of contents will show that not only have
selections been made from modern authors and from the folklore of
different races, but that some quaint old literary sources have been
drawn on. Among the men and books contributing to these pages are the
Gesta Romanorum, Il Libro d'Oro, Xenophon, Ovid, Lucian, the Venerable
Bede, William of Malmesbury. John of Hildesheim, William Caxton, and the
more modern Washington Irving, Hugh Miller, Charles Dickens, and Henry
Cabot Lodge; also those immortals, Hans Andersen, the Brothers Grimm,
Horace E. Scudder, and others.

The stories are arranged to meet the needs of story-telling in the
graded schools. Reading-lists, showing where to find additional material
for story-telling and collateral reading, are added. Grades in which the
recommended stories are useful are indicated.

The number of selections in the volume, as well as the references
to other books, is limited by the amount and character of available
material. For instance, there is little to be found for Saint
Valentine's Day, while there is an overwhelming abundance of fine
stories for the Christmas season. Stories like Dickens's "Christmas
Carol," Ouida's "Dog of Flanders," and Hawthorne's tales, which are too
long for inclusion and would lose their literary beauty if condensed,
are referred to in the lists. Volumes containing these stories may be
procured at the public library.

A subject index is appended. This indicates the ethical, historical, and
other subject-matter of interest to the teacher, thus making the volume
serviceable for other occasions besides holidays.

In learning her tale the story-teller is advised not to commit it to
memory. Such a method is apt to produce a wooden or glib manner of
presentation. It is better for her to read the story over and over again
until its plot, imagery, style, and vocabulary become her own, and then
to retell it, as Miss Bryant says, "simply, vitally, joyously."


CONTENTS

NEW YEAR'S DAY (January 1)

THE FAIRY'S NEW YEAR GIFT: Emilie Poulsson, In the Child's World

THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL: Hans Christian Andersen, Stories and Tales

THE TWELVE MONTHS: Alexander Chodsvko, Slav Fairy Tales

THE MAIL-COACH PASSENGERS: Hans Christian Andersen, Fairy Tales

LINCOLN'S BIRTHDAY (February 10)

HE RESCUES THE BIRDS: Noah Brooks, Abraham Lincoln

LINCOLN AND THE LITTLE GIRL: Charles W. Moores, Life of Abraham Lincoln
for Boys and Girls

TRAINING FOR THE PRESIDENCY: Orison Swett Matden, Winning Out

WHY LINCOLN WAS CALLED "HONEST ABE": Noah Brooks, Abraham Lincoln

A STRANGER AT FIVE-POINTS: Adapted

A SOLOMON COME TO JUDGMENT: Charles W. Moores, Life of Abraham Lincoln
for Boys and Girls

GEORGE PICKETT'S FRIEND: Charles W. Moores, Life of Abraham Lincoln for
Boys and Girls

LINCOLN THE LAWYER: Z. A. Mudge, The Forest Boy

THE COURAGE OF HIS CONVICTIONS: Adapted

MR. LINCOLN AND THE BIBLE: Z. A. Mudge, The Forest Boy

HIS SPRINGFIELD FAREWELL ADDRESS [Lincoln]

SAINT VALENTINE'S DAY (February 14)

SAINT VALENTINE

SAINT VALENTINE: Millicent Olmsted

A GIRL'S VALENTINE CHARM: The Connoisseur, 1775

MR. PEPYS HIS VALENTINE: Samuel Pepys, Diary

CUPID AND PSYCHE: Josephine Preston Peabody, Old Greek Folk Stories

WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY (February 22)

THREE OLD TALES: M. L. Weems, Life of George Washington, with Curious
Anecdotes

YOUNG GEORGE AND THE COLT: Horace E. Scudder,     George Washington

WASHINGTON THE ATHLETE: Albert F. Blaisdell and Francis R. Ball, Hero
Stories from American History

WASHINGTON'S MODESTY: Henry Cabot Lodge, George Washington

WASHINGTON AT YORKTOWN: Henry Cabot lodge, George Washington

RESURRECTION DAY (Easter Sunday) (March or April)

A LESSON OF FAITH: Mrs. Alfred Gatty, Parables from Nature

A CHILD'S DREAM OF A STAR: Charles Dickens

THE LOVELIEST ROSE IN THE WORLD: Hans Christian Andersen, Stories and
Tales

MAY DAY (May 1) THE SNOWDROP: Hans Christian Andersen; Adapted by Bailey
and Lewis

THE THREE LITTLE BUTTERFLY BROTHERS: From the German


THE WATER DROP: Friedrich Wilhelm Carove, Story without an End,
translated by Sarah Austin

THE SPRING BEAUTY: Henry R. Schoolcraft, The Myth of Hiawatha

THE FAIRY TULIPS: English Folk-Tale

THE STREAM THAT RAN AWAY: Mary Austin, The Basket Woman

THE ELVES: Harriet Mazwell Converse, Myths and legends of the New York
State Iroquois

THE CANYON FLOWERS: Ralph Connor, The Sky Pilot

CLYTIE, THE HELIOTROPE: Ovid, Metamorphoses

HYACINTHUS: Ovid, Metamorphoses

ECHO AND NARCISSUS: Ovid, Metamorphoses

MOTHERS' DAY (Second Sunday in May)

THE LARK AND ITS YOUNG ONES: P. V. Ramuswami Raju, Indian Fables

CORNELIA S JEWELS: James Baldwin, Fifty Famous Stories Retold

QUEEN MARGARET AND THE ROBBERS: Albert F. Blaisdell, Stories from
Enylish History

THE REVENGE OF CORIOLANUS: Charles Morris, Historical Tales

THE WIDOW AND HER THREE SONS

MEMORIAL DAY (May 30)[1] AND FLAG DAY (June 14) Confederate Memorial Day
is celebrated in some States on April 26 and in others on May 10.

BETSY ROSS AND THE FLAG: Harry Pringle Ford

THE STAR SPANGLED BANNER: Eva March Tappan, Hero Stories from American
History

THE LITTLE DRUMMER-BOY: Aloert Bushnell Hart, The Romance of the Civil
War

A FLAG INCIDENT: M. M. Thomas, Captain Phil

TWO HERO-STORIES OF THE CIVIL WAR: Ben La Bree, Camp Fires of the
Confederacy

THE YOUNG SENTINEL: Z. A. Mudge, The Forest Boy

THE COLONEL OF THE ZOUAVES: Noah Brooks, Abraham Lincoln

GENERAL SCOTT AND THE STARS AND STRIPES: E. D. Townsend, Anecdotes of
the Civil War

INDEPENDENCE DAY (July 4)

THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: Washington Irving, Life of Washington

THE SIGNING OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: H. A. Guerber, The Story
of the Thirteen Colonies

A BRAVE GIRL: James Johonnot, Stories of Heroic Deeds

THE BOSTON TEA-PARTY: John Andrews, Letter to a friend written in 1773

A GUNPOWDER STORY: John Esten Cooke, Stories of the Old Dominion

THE CAPTURE OF FORT TICONDEROGA: Washington Irving, Life of Washington

WASHINGTON AND THE COWARDS: Washington Irving, Life of Washington

LABOR DAY (First Monday in September)

THE SMITHY: P. V. Ramaswami Raju, Indian Fables

THE NAIL: The Brothers Grimm, German Household Tales

THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER: Horace E. Scudder, Book of Fables and Folk
Stories

THE HILLMAN AND THE HOUSEWIFE: Juliana Horatia Ewing, Old Fashioned
Fairy Tales

HOFUS THE STONE CUTTER, A JAPANESE LEGEND: The Riserside Third Reader

ARACHNE: Josephine Preston Peabody, Old Greek Folk Stories


THE METAL KING: A German Folk-Tale

THE CHOICE OF HERCULES: Xenophon, Memorabilia of Socrates

THE SPEAKING STATUE: Gesta Romanorum

THE CHAMPION STONE CUTTER: Hugh Miller

BILL BROWN'S TEST: Cleveland Moffett, Careers of Danger and Daring

COLUMBUS DAY (October 12)

COLUMBUS AND THE EGG: James Baldwin, Thirty More Famous Stories Retold

COLUMBUS AT LA RABIDA: Washington Irving, Life of Christopher Columbus

THE MUTINY: A. de Lamartine, Life of Columbus

THE FIRST LANDING OF COLUMBUS IN THE NEW WORLD: Washington Irving, Life
of Christopher Columbus

HALLOWEEN (October 31)

THE OLD WITCH: The Brothers Grimm, German Household Tales

SHIPPEITARO: Mary F. Nixon-Roulet, Japanese Folk Stories and Fairy Tales

HANSEL AND GRETHEL: The Brothers Grimm, German Household Tales

BURG HILL'S ON FIRE: Elizabeth W. Grierson, Children's Book of Celtic
Stories

THE KING OF THE CATS: Ernest Rhys, Fairy-Gold

THE STRANGE VISITOR: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales

THE BENEVOLENT GOBLIN: Gesta Romanorum

THE PHANTOM KNIGHT OF THE VANDAL CAMP: Gesta Romanorum

THANKSGIVING DAY (Last Thursday in November)

THE FIRST HARVEST-HOME IN PLYMOUTH: W. De Loss Lore, Jr., The Fast and
Thanksgiving Days of New England

THE MASTER OF THE HARVEST: Mrs. Alfred Gatty, Parables from Nature

SAINT CUTHBERT'S EAGLE: The Venerable Bede, Life and Miracles of Saint
Cuthbert

THE EARS OF WHEAT: The Brothers Grimm, German Household Tales

HOW INDIAN CORN CAME INTO THE WORLD: Henry R. Schoolcraft, The Myth of
Hiawatha

THE NUTCRACKER DWARF: Count Franz Pocci, Fur Frohliche Kinder

THE PUMPKIN PIRATES, A TALE FROM LUCIAN: Alfred J. Church, The Greek
Gulliver

THE SPIRIT OF THE CORN: Harriet Mazwell Converse,
Myths and Legends of the New York State Iroquois

THE HORN OF PLENTY: Ovid, Metamorphoses

CHRISTMAS DAY (December 25)

LITTLE PICCOLA: Celia Thazter, Stories and Poems for Children

THE STRANGER CHILD, A LEGEND: Count Franz Pocci, Fur Frohliche Kinder

SAINT CHRISTOPHER: William Caxton, Golden Legend

THE CHRISTMAS ROSE, AN OLD LEGEND: Lizzie Deas, Flower Favourites

THE WOODEN SHOES OF LITTLE WOLFF: Francois Coppee

THE PINE TREE: Hans Christian Andersen, Wonder Stories

THE CHRISTMAS CUCKOO: Frances Browne, Granny's Wonderful Chair

THE CHRISTMAS FAIRY OF STRASBURG, A GERMAN FOLK-TALE: J. Stirling Coyne,
Illustrated London News

THE THREE PURSES, A LEGEND: William S. Walsh, Story of Santa Klaus

THE THUNDER OAK, A SCANDINAVIAN LEGEND: William S. Walsh and Others

THE CHRISTMAS THORN OF GLASTONBURY, A LEGEND OF ANCIENT BRITAIN: William
of Malmesbury and Others

THE THREE KINGS OF COLOGNE, A LEGEND OF THE MIDDLE AGES: John of
Hildesheim, Modernized by H. S. Morris

ARBOR DAY

THE LITTLE TREE THAT LONGED FOR OTHER LEAVES: Friedrieh Ruckert

WHY THE EVERGREEN TREES NEVER LOSE THEIR LEAVES: Florence Holbrook, Book
of Nature Myths

WHY THE ASPEN QUIVERS: Old legend

THE WONDER TREE: Friedrich Adolph Krummacher, Parables

THE PROUD OAK TREE: Old Fable

BAUCIS AND PHILEMON: H. P. Maskell, Francis Storr,
Half-a-Hundred Hero Tales

THE UNFRUITFUL TREE: Friedrich Adolph Krummacher, Parables

THE DRYAD OF THE OLD OAK: James Russell Lowell, Rhoecus (a poem)

DAPHNE: OVID, Metamorphoses BIRD DAY

THE OLD WOMAN WHO BECAME A WOODPECKER: Phoebe Cary, A Legend of the
Northland (poem)

THE BOY WHO BECAME A ROBIN: Henry R. Schoolcraft, The Myth of Hiawatha

THE TONGUE-CUT SPARROW: A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan

THE QUAILS, A LEGEND OF THE JATAKA: Riverside Fourth Reader

THE MAGPIE'S NEST: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales

THE GREEDY GEESE: Il Libro d'Oro

THE KING OF THE BIRDS: The Brothers Grimm, German Household Tales

THE DOVE WHO SPOKE TRUTH: Abbie Farwell Brown, The Curious Book of Birds

THE BUSY BLUE JAY: Olive Thorne Miller, True Bird Stories

BABES IN THE WOODS: John Burroughs, Bird Stories from Burroughs

THE PRIDE OF THE REGIMENT: Harry M. Rieffer, The Recollections of a
Drummer Boy

THE MOTHER MURRE: Dallas Lore Sharp, Summer

REFERENCE LISTS FOR STORY-TELLING AND COLLATERAL READING


GOOD STORIES FOR GREAT HOLIDAYS


THE FAIRY'S NEW YEAR GIFT

BY EMILIE POULSSON (ADAPTED)

Two little boys were at play one day when a Fairy suddenly appeared
before them and said: "I have been sent to give you New Year presents."

She handed to each child a package, and in an instant was gone.

Carl and Philip opened the packages and found in them two beautiful
books, with pages as pure and white as the snow when it first falls.

Many months passed and the Fairy came again to the boys. "I have brought
you each another book?" said she, "and will take the first ones back to
Father Time who sent them to you."

"May I not keep mine a little longer?" asked Philip. "I have hardly
thought about it lately. I'd like to paint something on the last leaf
that lies open."

"No," said the Fairy; "I must take it just as it is."

"I wish that I could look through mine just once," said Carl; "I have
only seen one page at a time, for when the leaf turns over it sticks
fast, and I can never open the book at more than one place each day."

"You shall look at your book," said the Fairy, "and Philip, at his." And
she lit for them two little silver lamps, by the light of which they saw
the pages as she turned them.

The boys looked in wonder. Could it be that these were the same fair
books she had given them a year ago? Where were the clean, white pages,
as pure and beautiful as the snow when it first falls? Here was a page
with ugly, black spots and scratches upon it; while the very next page
showed a lovely little picture. Some pages were decorated with gold and
silver and gorgeous colors, others with beautiful flowers, and still
others with a rainbow of softest, most delicate brightness. Yet even on
the most beautiful of the pages there were ugly blots and scratches.

Carl and Philip looked up at the Fairy at last.

"Who did this?" they asked. "Every page was white and fair as we opened
to it; yet now there is not a single blank place in the whole book!"

"Shall I explain some of the pictures to you?" said the Fairy, smiling
at the two little boys.

"See, Philip, the spray of roses blossomed on this page when you let
the baby have your playthings; and this pretty bird, that looks as if it
were singing with all its might, would never have been on this page
if you had not tried to be kind and pleasant the other day, instead of
quarreling."

"But what makes this blot?" asked Philip.

"That," said the Fairy sadly; "that came when you told an untruth one
day, and this when you did not mind mamma. All these blots and scratches
that look so ugly, both in your book and in Carl's, were made when you
were naughty. Each pretty thing in your books came on its page when you
were good."

"Oh, if we could only have the books again!" said Carl and Philip.

"That cannot be," said the Fairy. "See! they are dated for this year,
and they must now go back into Father Time's bookcase, but I have
brought you each a new one. Perhaps you can make these more beautiful
than the others."

So saying, she vanished, and the boys were left alone, but each held in
his hand a new book open at the first page.

And on the back of this book was written in letters of gold, "For the
New Year."


THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL

BY HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN (TRANSLATED)

It was very, very cold; it snowed and it grew dark; it was the last
evening of the year, New Year's Eve. In the cold and dark a poor little
girl, with bare head and bare feet, was walking through the streets.
When she left her own house she certainly had had slippers on; but what
could they do? They were very big slippers, and her mother had used them
till then, so big were they. The little maid lost them as she slipped
across the road, where two carriages were rattling by terribly fast. One
slipper was not to be found again, and a boy ran away with the other. He
said he could use it for a cradle when he had children of his own.

So now the little girl went with her little naked feet, which were quite
red and blue with the cold. In an old apron she carried a number of
matches, and a bundle of them in her hand. No one had bought anything
of her all day; no one had given her a copper. Hungry and cold she went,
and drew herself together, poor little thing! The snowflakes fell on her
long yellow hair, which curled prettily over her neck; but she did not
think of that now. In all the windows lights were shining, and there was
a glorious smell of roast goose out there in the street; it was no doubt
New Year's Eve. Yes, she thought of that!

In a corner formed by two houses, one of which was a little farther from
the street than the other, she sat down and crept close. She had drawn
up her little feet, but she was still colder, and she did not dare to
go home, for she had sold no matches, and she had not a single cent; her
father would beat her; and besides, it was cold at home, for they had
nothing over the them but a roof through which the wind whistled, though
straw and rags stopped the largest holes.

Her small hands were quite numb with the cold. Ah! a little match might
do her good if she only dared draw one from the bundle, and strike
it against the wall, and warm her fingers at it. She drew one out.
R-r-atch! how it spluttered and burned! It was a warm bright flame, like
a little candle, when she held her hands over it; it was a wonderful
little light! It really seemed to the little girl as if she sat before a
great polished stove, with bright brass feet and a brass cover. The
fire burned so nicely; it warmed her so well,--the little girl was just
putting out her feet to warm these, too,--when out went the flame; the
stove was gone;--she sat with only the end of the burned match in her
hand.

She struck another; it burned; it gave a light; and where it shone on
the wall, the wall became thin like a veil, and she could see through it
into the room where a table stood, spread with a white cloth, and with
china on it; and the roast goose smoked gloriously, stuffed with apples
and dried plums. And what was still more splendid to behold, the goose
hopped down from the dish, and waddled along the floor, with a knife and
fork in its breast; straight to the little girl he came. Then the match
went out, and only the thick, damp, cold wall was before her.

She lighted another. Then she was sitting under a beautiful Christmas
tree; it was greater and finer than the one she had seen through the
glass door at the rich merchant's. Thousands of candles burned upon
the green branches, and colored pictures like those in the shop windows
looked down upon them. The little girl stretched forth both hands toward
them; then the match went out. The Christmas lights went higher and
higher. She saw that now they were stars in the sky: one of them fell
and made a long line of fire.

"Now some one is dying," said the little girl, for her old grandmother,
the only person who had been good to her, but who was now dead, had
said: "When a star falls a soul mounts up to God."

She rubbed another match against the wall; it became bright again, and
in the light there stood the old grandmother clear and shining, mild and
lovely.

"Grandmother!" cried the child. "Oh, take me with you! I know you will
go when the match is burned out. You will go away like the warm stove,
the nice roast goose, and the great glorious Christmas tree!"

And she hastily rubbed the whole bundle of matches, for she wished to
hold her grandmother fast. And the matches burned with such a glow that
it became brighter than in the middle of the day; grandmother had never
been so large or so beautiful. She took the little girl up in her arms,
and both flew in the light and the joy so high, so high! and up there
was no cold, nor hunger, nor care--they were with God.

But in the corner by the house sat the little girl, with red cheeks and
smiling mouth, frozen to death on the last evening of the Old Year.
The New Year's sun rose upon the little body, that sat there with the
matches, of which one bundle was burned. She wanted to warm herself,
the people said. No one knew what fine things she had seen, and in what
glory she had gone in with her grandmother to the New Year's Day.


THE TWELVE MONTHS

A SLAV LEGEND

BY ALEXANDER CHODZKO (ADAPTED)

There was once a widow who had two daughters, Helen, her own child by
her dead husband, and Marouckla, his daughter by his first wife. She
loved Helen, but hated the poor orphan because she was far prettier than
her own daughter.

Marouckla did not think about her good looks, and could not understand
why her stepmother should be angry at the sight of her. The hardest work
fell to her share. She cleaned out the rooms, cooked, washed, sewed,
spun, wove, brought in the hay, milked the cow, and all this without any
help.

Helen, meanwhile, did nothing but dress herself in her best clothes and
go to one amusement after another.

But Marouckla never complained. She bore the scoldings and bad temper of
mother and sister with a smile on her lips, and the patience of a lamb.
But this angelic behavior did not soften them. They became even more
tyrannical and grumpy, for Marouckla grew daily more beautiful, while
Helen's ugliness increased. So the stepmother determined to get rid of
Marouckla, for she knew that while she remained, her own daughter would
have no suitors. Hunger, every kind of privation, abuse, every means was
used to make the girl's life miserable. But in spite of it all Marouckla
grew ever sweeter and more charming.

One day in the middle of winter Helen wanted some wood-violets.

"Listen," cried she to Marouckla, "you must go up the mountain and
find me violets. I want some to put in my gown. They must be fresh and
sweet-scented-do you hear?"

"But, my dear sister, whoever heard of violets blooming in the snow?"
said the poor orphan.

"You wretched creature! Do you dare to disobey me?" said Helen. "Not
another word. Off with you! If you do not bring me some violets from the
mountain forest I will kill you."

The stepmother also added her threats to those of Helen, and with
vigorous blows they pushed Marouckla outside and shut the door upon her.
The weeping girl made her way to the mountain. The snow lay deep, and
there was no trace of any human being. Long she wandered hither and
thither, and lost herself in the wood. She was hungry, and shivered with
cold, and prayed to die.

Suddenly she saw a light in the distance, and climbed toward it till she
reached the top of the mountain. Upon the highest peak burned a large
fire, surrounded by twelve blocks of stone on which sat twelve strange
beings. Of these the first three had white hair, three were not quite so
old, three were young and handsome, and the rest still younger.

There they all sat silently looking at the fire. They were the Twelve
Months of the Year. The great January was placed higher than the others.
His hair and mustache were white as snow, and in his hand he held a
wand. At first Marouckla was afraid, but after a while her courage
returned, and drawing near, she said:--

"Men of God, may I warm myself at your fire? I am chilled by the winter
cold."

The great January raised his head and answered: "What brings thee here,
my daughter? What dost thou seek?"

"I am looking for violets," replied the maiden.

"This is not the season for violets. Dost thou not see the snow
everywhere?" said January.

"I know well, but my sister Helen and my stepmother have ordered me to
bring them violets from your mountain. If I return without them they
will kill me. I pray you, good shepherds, tell me where they may be
found."

Here the great January arose and went over to the youngest of the
Months, and, placing his wand in his hand, said:--

"Brother March, do thou take the highest place."

March obeyed, at the same time waving his wand over the fire.
Immediately the flames rose toward the sky, the snow began to melt and
the trees and shrubs to bud. The grass became green, and from between
its blades peeped the pale primrose. It was spring, and the meadows were
blue with violets.

"Gather them quickly, Marouckla," said March.

Joyfully she hastened to pick the flowers, and having soon a large bunch
she thanked them and ran home. Helen and the stepmother were amazed at
the sight of the flowers, the scent of which filled the house.

"Where did you find them?" asked Helen.

"Under the trees on the mountain-side," said Marouckla.

Helen kept the flowers for herself and her mother. She did not even
thank her stepsister for the trouble she had taken. The next day she
desired Marouckla to fetch her strawberries.

"Run," said she, "and fetch me strawberries from the mountain. They must
be very sweet and ripe."

"But whoever heard of strawberries ripening in the snow?" exclaimed
Marouckla.

"Hold your tongue, worm; don't answer me. If I don't have my
strawberries I will kill you," said Helen.

Then the stepmother pushed Marouckla into the yard and bolted the door.
The unhappy girl made her way toward the mountain and to the large
fire round which sat the Twelve Months. The great January occupied the
highest place.

"Men of God, may I warm myself at your fire? The winter cold chills me,"
said she, drawing near.

The great January raised his head and asked: "Why comest thou here? What
dost thou seek?"

"I am looking for strawberries," said she.

"We are in the midst of winter," replied January, "strawberries do not
grow in the snow."

"I know," said the girl sadly, "but my sister and stepmother have
ordered me to bring them strawberries. If I do not they will kill me.
Pray, good shepherds, tell me where to find them."

The great January arose, crossed over to the Month opposite him, and
putting the wand in his hand, said: "Brother June, do thou take the
highest place."

June obeyed, and as he waved his wand over the fire the flames leaped
toward the sky. Instantly the snow melted, the earth was covered with
verdure, trees were clothed with leaves, birds began to sing, and
various flowers blossomed in the forest. It was summer. Under the bushes
masses of star-shaped flowers changed into ripening strawberries, and
instantly they covered the glade, making it look like a sea of blood.

"Gather them quickly, Marouckla," said June.

Joyfully she thanked the Months, and having filled her apron ran happily
home.

Helen and her mother wondered at seeing the strawberries, which filled
the house with their delicious fragrance.

"Wherever did you find them?" asked Helen crossly.

"Right up among the mountains. Those from under the beech trees are not
bad," answered Marouckla.

Helen gave a few to her mother and ate the rest herself. Not one did she
offer to her stepsister. Being tired of strawberries, on the third day
she took a fancy for some fresh, red apples.

"Run, Marouckla," said she, "and fetch me fresh, red apples from the
mountain."

"Apples in winter, sister? Why, the trees have neither leaves nor
fruit!"

"Idle thing, go this minute," said Helen; "unless you bring back apples
we will kill you."

As before, the stepmother seized her roughly and turned her out of the
house. The poor girl went weeping up the mountain, across the deep snow,
and on toward the fire round which were the Twelve Months. Motionless
they sat there, and on the highest stone was the great January.

"Men of God, may I warm myself at your fire? The winter cold chills me,"
said she, drawing near.

The great January raised his head. "Why comest thou here? What does thou
seek?" asked he.

"I am come to look for red apples," replied Marouckla.

"But this is winter, and not the season for red apples," observed the
great January.

"I know," answered the girl, "but my sister and stepmother sent me to
fetch red apples from the mountain. If I return without them they will
kill me."

Thereupon the great January arose and went over to one of the elderly
Months, to whom he handed the wand saying:--

"Brother September, do thou take the highest place."

September moved to the highest stone, and waved his wand over the fire.
There was a flare of red flames, the snow disappeared, but the fading
leaves which trembled on the trees were sent by a cold northeast wind in
yellow masses to the glade. Only a few flowers of autumn were visible.
At first Marouckla looked in vain for red apples. Then she espied a tree
which grew at a great height, and from the branches of this hung the
bright, red fruit. September ordered her to gather some quickly. The
girl was delighted and shook the tree. First one apple fell, then
another.

"That is enough," said September; "hurry home."

Thanking the Months she returned joyfully. Helen and the stepmother
wondered at seeing the fruit.

"Where did you gather them?" asked the stepsister.

"There are more on the mountain-top," answered Marouckla.

"Then, why did you not bring more?" said Helen angrily. "You must have
eaten them on your way back, you wicked girl."

"No, dear sister, I have not even tasted them," said Marouckla. "I shook
the tree twice. One apple fell each time. Some shepherds would not allow
me to shake it again, but told me to return home."

"Listen, mother," said Helen. "Give me my cloak. I will fetch some more
apples myself. I shall be able to find the mountain and the tree. The
shepherds may cry 'Stop!' but I will not leave go till I have shaken
down all the apples."

In spite of her mother's advice she wrapped herself in her pelisse,
put on a warm hood, and took the road to the mountain. Snow covered
everything. Helen lost herself and wandered hither and thither. After
a while she saw a light above her, and, following in its direction,
reached the mountain-top.

There was the flaming fire, the twelve blocks of stone, and the Twelve
Months. At first she was frightened and hesitated; then she came nearer
and warmed her hands. She did not ask permission, nor did she speak one
polite word.

"What hath brought thee here? What dost thou seek?" said the great
January severely.

"I am not obliged to tell you, old graybeard. What business is it of
yours?" she replied disdainfully, turning her back on the fire and going
toward the forest.

The great January frowned, and waved his wand over his head. Instantly
the sky became covered with clouds, the fire went down, snow fell in
large flakes, an icy wind howled round the mountain. Amid the fury of
the storm Helen stumbled about. The pelisse failed to warm her benumbed
limbs.

The mother kept on waiting for her. She looked from the window, she
watched from the doorstep, but her daughter came not. The hours passed
slowly, but Helen did not return.

"Can it be that the apples have charmed her from her home?" thought the
mother. Then she clad herself in hood and pelisse, and went in search of
her daughter. Snow fell in huge masses. It covered all things. For long
she wandered hither and thither, the icy northeast wind whistled in the
mountain, but no voice answered her cries.

Day after day Marouckla worked, and prayed, and waited, but neither
stepmother nor sister returned. They had been frozen to death on the
mountain.

The inheritance of a small house, a field, and a cow fell to Marouckla.
In course of time an honest farmer came to share them with her, and
their lives were happy and peaceful.


THE MAIL-COACH PASSENGERS

BY HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN (ADAPTED)

It was bitterly cold. The sky glittered with stars, and not a breeze
stirred. "Bump,"--an old pot was thrown at a neighbor's door; and,
"Bang! Bang!" went the guns, for they were greeting the New Year.

It was New Year's Eve, and the church clock was striking twelve.
"Tan-ta-ra-ra, tan-ta-ra-ra!" sounded the horn, and the mail-coach came
lumbering up. The clumsy vehicle stopped at the gate of the town; all
the places had been taken, for there were twelve passengers in the
coach.

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" Rany. Beany is mad with me. i dont care.

June 3. went to church today.

June 4. clowdy but no rane. went up to Chadwicks today and sawed
wood.

Boog and Pozzy fit while me and Whack sawed wood then we went in swiming
down to Sandy Bottom. some body tide some hard gnots in my shirt. i forgot
to split my kindlings tonite.

June 5. brite and fair. Beany is still mad.

June 6. brite and fair. i know what Beany is mad about. he thinks
i told about his getting a licking. i dident tell. he can stay mad
if he wants to.

June 7. father has bought a horse of Dan Randlet. i rode up to
Brentwood with Sam Diar to get it. it is the prettiest horse i ever
saw. i rode it down from Brentwood and it goes jest as easy as
sitting on a spring board. when i got home Beany got over his mad
and came over and i gave him a ride. me and Beany never were mad
so long before.

June 9. Rany. this afternoon me and Beany and father went to ride with
the new horse. her name is Nellie.

June 10. brite and fair. we keep Nellie down to Jo Hanes stable.

Frank Hanes is learning me how to clean her off. she nipped my arm
today and made a black and blew spot. went in swimming today.

i have to get up every morning and harnes Nelly and drive father to the
depot. i like it because i always race with the men coming down front
street. there is George Dergin and Fred Sellivan and Gim Wingit and i
can beat them all. i dont tell father that i race. i rode Nellie
this afternoon with Frank Hanes and Ed Tole. i dident go in swimming
today.

June 11. brite and fair. Nellie kicked me today. i gess i scrached her
today to hard with the curycomb. it dident hurt me much. i went in swimming
twise.

June 12. brite and fair. Me and Chick Chickering went bullfroging today,
we got 3 dozen hind legs and sold them to Mr. Hirvey for 30 cents and
took our pay in icecream.

June 13.

Rode Nellie this noon. i have to go to the half past five train
every nite for father. i like to drive but i dont like to go every
nite.

June 14.

Rashe Belnap and Horris Cobbs go in swimming every morning at six
o'clock. i got a licking today that beat the one Beany got. last
summer me and Tomtit Tomson and Cawcaw Harding and Whack and Poz
and Boog Chadwick went in swimming in May and all thru the summer
until October. one day i went in 10 times. well i dident say anything
about it to father so as not to scare him. well today he did go to
Boston and he said i am going to teech you to swim. when i was as
old as you i cood swim said he, and you must lern, i said i have
been wanting to lern to swim, for all the other boys can swim. so
we went down to the gravil and i peeled off my close and got ready,
now said he, you jest wade in up to your waste and squat down and
duck your head under. i said the water will get in my nose. he said
no it wont jest squat rite down. i cood see him laffin when he
thought i wood snort and sputter. so i waded out a little ways and
then div in and swam under water most across, and when i came up i
looked to see if father was supprised. gosh you aught to have seen
him. he had pulled off his coat and vest and there he stood up to
his waste in the water with his eyes jest bugging rite out as big
as hens eggs, and he was jest a going to dive for my dead body.
then i turned over on my back and waved my hand at him. he dident
say anything for a minute, only he drawed in a long breth. then he
began to look foolish, and then mad, and then he turned and started
to slosh back to the bank where he slipped and went in all over.

When he got to the bank he was pretty mad and yelled for me to come
out. when i came out he cut a stick and whaled me, and as soon as i
got home he sent me to bed for lying, but i gess he was mad becaus i about
scart the life out of him. but that nite i heard him telling mother
about it and he said that he div 3 times for me in about thirty
feet of water. but he braged about my swiming and said i cood swim
like a striped frog. i shall never forget how his boots went kerslosh
kerslosh kerslosh when we were skinning home thru cros-lots. i shall
never forget how that old stick hurt either. ennyhow he dident say
ennything about not going in again, so i gess i am all rite.

June 15, 186- Johnny Heeld, a student, came to me and wanted me to carry
some tickets to a dance round to the girls in the town. there was about
1 hundred of them. he read the names over to me and i said i knew
them all. so after school me and Beany started out and walked all
over town and give out the tickets. i had a long string of names
and every time i wood leave one i wood mark out the name. i dident
give the Head girls any because they told father about some things
that me and Beany and Pewt did and the Farmer girls and the Cilley
girls lived way up on the plains and i dident want to walk up there,
so when i went over to Hemlock side to give one, i went over to the
factory boarding house and give some to them. they was auful glad
to get them too and said they would go to the dance. some people
was not at home and so i gave their tickets to the next house. it
took me till 8 o'clock and i got 1 dollar for it. i dont beleive
those girls that dident get their tickets will care much about going
ennyway. i gess the Head girls wont want to tell on me another time.

June 16. Dennis Cokely and Tomtit Tomson had a fite behind Hirvey's
resterent today. Hirvey stopped them jest as they were having a good
one. Thats jest the way. i dont see why they always want to stop a
fite.

All fellers fite for is to see which can lick, and how can they tell
unless they fite it out.

June 17. Brite and fair.

They is going to be a big cattle show here this fall.

They are going to have it in a field up by the depot. They are going
to have horse trots and shows and everything. We are going to have no
school. it dont come for an auful while yet.

Charles Taylor is going to have Nelly to ride.

June 18. Me and Mickey Gould had a race horseback. he had one of Ben
Merril's little black horses, we raced way round Kensington ring. i
cood beat trotting and he cood beat running. when i got home Nelly was
so swetty that father told me not to ride her for a week.

June 19. Went up to Chadwicks after school. Boog and Whack got Willie
fiting with Johnny Rogers. Willie licked him. Willie is Whack's little
brother. he is a auful cunning little feller. he can fite too. all the
Chadwick's can fite.

June 20. Brite and fair. i am going fishing tonite with Potter
Gorham.

June 21. brite and fair. went fishing today with Potter Gorham. i
cought 5 pirch and 4 pickeril. i cleaned them and we had them for
supper. father said they was the best fish he ever et. i also
cought the biggest roach i ever saw, almost as big as a sucker, and
i cant tell what i did with him. i thought Potter had hooked him
for fun, but he said he dident, and we hunted everywhere for him.
i dont know where i put that roach.

June 22. the students had their dance last nite. they had a auful time.
some of the girls which dident get no tickets was mad, and the students
which wanted them to go was mad and they went to Johnny Heeld and give
him time. then he went round and told them how it was and give them
tickets. well the nite of the dance everything was all rite until lots
of people came which hadent been on the list, but which we had
given tickets. well the students dident want to let them in and
they were mad, and Chick Randal hit a student named Pendry rite in
the nose and nocked his glasses off and Nichols nocked Johnny Lord
way acros the entry and they was going to have a big fite when Bob
Carter and 2 or 3 men stoped it. today Johnny Heeld came down to
the house and said i had got things all mixed up and father made
me give back the dollar. but he told Johnny Heeld he hadent ought
to have let me try such a hard job.

Gosh, i am glad father thinks it was a mistake, and dont know that i
did it on purpose.

June 23. there is a dead rat in the wall in my room. it smells auful.

June 24.

Rany. most time for vacation. the smell in my room is fearful.

June 25. more trouble today. it seems as if there wasent any use in living.
nothing but trouble all the time. mother said i coodent sleep in
that room until the rat was taken out. well father he came into my
room and sniffed once and said, whew, what a almity smell. then he
held his nose and went out and came back with mister Staples the
father of the feller that called me Polelegs. well he came in and
put his nose up to the wall and sniffed round until he came to where
my old close hung. then he said, thunder George, this is the place,
rite behind this jacket, it is the wirst smell i ever smelt. then
he threw my close in a corner and took out his tools and began to
dig a hole in the wall, while father and mother and aunt Sarah stood
looking at him and holding their nose. after he dug the hole he
reached in but dident find ennything, then he stuck in his nose and
said, it dont smell enny in there. then they all let go of their
nose and took a sniff and said murder it is wirse than ever it must
be rite in the room somewhere. then father said to me, look in those
close and see if there is ennything there. so i looked and found
in the poket of my old jaket that big roach that i lost, when i
went fishing with Potter Gorham. it was all squashy and smelt auful.
father was mad and made me throw the jaket out of the window and
wont let me go fishing for a week. ennyway i know now what became
of my roach.

June 26. Keene and Cele are going to sing in the Unitarial quire. father
says he will give them some bronze boots. mother got them some new
nets for their hair today. girls has lots more done for them than
fellers.

June 27, 186- Brite and fair. school closed today. we dont have
enny more school til September. snapcrackers have come. 8 cents a bunch
at old Langlys store. Lane and Rollins sell them for 10 cents. torpedos
8 cents a bunch. pin wheels 1 cent each. Pewt is going to have a cannon.
father wont let me have a cannon. he says i dont know enny more than
to look into it and blow my head off.

June 28. clowdy but no rane. 4th of July pretty soon. father says when he
was a boy all they had for fireworks was balls of wool soaked in
tirpentine whitch they lit and fired round. i am glad i did not
live then.

June 30. clowdy but no rane. went in swimming 3 times today. i am going
bullfroging monday.

June 31. no July 1. Went to church today.

July 2. i went bullfroging today. thunder storm today.

i have got 10 bunches of snapcrackers and some slowmatch. i spent a dolar
of my cornet money. i gess i shall never get that cornet. i hope
it wont rane the 4th.

July 3. Nite before 4th.

Pewt and Beany can stay out all nite. father took my snapcrackers
into his room and said if i get up before 5 i cant have enny.

July 4. i am to tired to wright ennything. i never had so much fun
in my life. i only got burned 5 times. 1 snapcracker went off rite
in my face and i coodent see ennything til mother washed my eyes out.

Zee Smith fired a torpedo and a peace of it flew rite in the corner
of my eye and made a blew spot there. i fired every one of my
snapcrackers. it took me all day.

July 5. brite and fair. i dident wake up today til 10 o'clock. i was
pretty sore and my eyes felt as if they was sawdust in them.

July 6. brite and fair. father staid home today. i wanted him to
go fishing but he woodent.

July 7. father told me i cood go fishing and stay all day. i dont
know what had come over him becaus most always he raises time when
i go fishing and dont come home erly. so i went and cought 3 pickerels
and 4 pirch and 2 hogbacks and went in swiming 2 times. well as i
was a coming home 2 or 3 people met me and said they was company
at my house, so when i got home i skined in the back way so as not
to see the company til i got on my best britches, but i met father
in the door and he told me to go rite up to mothers room and see
the company. so i skined up to her room holding my hand behind me
becaus i had tore my britches auful getting over a fence and i
dident want the company to see. well what do you think the company
was. it was the homliest baby you ever see, it looked jest like a
munky and made feerful faces and kinder squeaked like.

Mother was sick and they was a old fat woman who told me to go out, but
mother said she wanted to see me and she kissed me and asked me to kiss
the baby. i dident want to but i did it becaus mother was sick.
mother asked me how many fish i caught and what kind and i told her
and said she shood have some for her supper, but she said she gessed
she woodent have enny jest then.

then i went down stairs and father did i like the baby
and i said it was homly, and he said it was 10 times as good looking
as i was and he said he was glad that when the baby grode up it
woodent have Beany and Pewt to play with and woodent be tuff like
me, and then Aunt Sarah said she gessed me and Beany and Pewt wasent
enny tuffer than father and Gim Melcher were when they was boys,
and then father laffed and told me to go to bed and i went. that
was a auful homly baby ennyway.

July 8. nothing particular today. you bet that baby can howl. went
to church.

July 9. brite and fair. most every morning we go up in mothers room
to see the old fat woman wash the baby and hear it howl. it turns
black in the face. i bet it will be a fiter.

July 10. i have got a new nickname. it is yallerlegs. that is becaus
father bought me a pair of kinder yellow britches, and made me wear them.
i bet he woodent like to be called yallerlegs.

July 11. brite and fair. went in swiming today to a new place. we
call it the stump. it is up by the eddy.

July 12. a thunder storm. in the afternoon went fishing but dident get
a bite. Pewts father says fish wont bite after a thunder storm.

July 13. a auful hot day. tonite i went up to the depot to see Majer
Blake and Charles Tole fite over passengers to the beach.

July 14. i am going to the beach to stop with Beany in his fathers
tent. it is called hotel de pig.

July 15. i gess i will go tomorrow.

July 16. me and Beany went to the beach and stopped all day and all
nite. we had a bully time.

July 17. another hot day. went in swiming 4 times. my back is all
burned.

July 18. me and Beany got in the newsleter today. the paper said the
Siamese twins was at the beach stoping at Watsons tent. Pewt was mad
becaus we got in the paper and he dident and told all round that it
dident mean me and Beany but Rashe Belnap and Horris Cobbs.

July 19. Hot as time. nothing particular today.

July 20. Hot as time. nothing particular today.

July 21. Auful hot. big thunder shower and litening struck a tree in front
of Perry Moltons house.

July 22. Went to church. Beany let the wind out of the organ and it
squeaked and made everybody laff. Keene and Cele sing in the quire.
father feels pretty big about it.

July 23. i got stung by hornets today. i went in swiming at the eddy and
when i was drying my close i set rite down on a stump where there
was a nest of yellow bellied hornets. they all lit on me and i
thought i was afire for a minit. i ran and div rite off the bank
and swam way out under water. when i came up they were buzing round
jest where i went down. when i came out the fellers put mud on my
bites and after a while they stoped hurting. i tell you the fellers
jest died laffing to see me run and holler.

July 24. Brite and fair. i was all sweled up with hornet bites but they
dident hurt enny, i looked jest like Beany when he had the mumps.
everyone laffed at me.

July 25. i got a fishhook in my leg today. me and Fatty Melcher was
a fishing when we got our lines tangled, i hollered first cut, but
i dident have enny nife and Fatty woodent let me have his nife.

So we got jerking our lines kinder mad like and all of a suddin the
hook got into my leg. gosh you bet it hurt. me and Fatty got the
hook out but it bled some. the worst of it was there was a wirm on
the hook and when we got the hook out they wasent enny wirm there.

Fatty says people sometimes dies from having wirms in them. i bet
this one has crawled way in. it may grow inside of me. something
is always hapening to me. when i got home i went down to docter
Derborns store and bought some wirm medicine and swalowed sum. it
was auful bitter. it cost 20 cents out of my cornet money.

July 26. brite and fair. i was all rite today except my leg was stiff
mother asked what made me lame and she put on a peace of pork. i
told her about the wirm and she said the pork wood draw him out if
he was there but she gessed he dident go in. when i told her about
the wirm medecine she jest set down and laffed. so i gess i needent
wory about having wirms. i went down to doctor Derborns and tride
to get him to take the medicine back but he said he woodent. i think
he is pretty mean not to.

July 27. i coodent go in swiming today on account of my leg. all the
fellers went in and i had to set on the bank and see them.

July 28.

Coodent go in swiming today either. my leg is nearly well. mother
took off the pork today. it was all white where the pork was. i can
go in swiming Monday. i went down to the library tonite. it is the
first time i have been down since Joe Parsons chased me out. i gess
he has forgotten it. i got out Bush Boys to read. it is a splendid
book about shooting lions and zebras and gerafs and everything.

July 29. i tried to have father let me stay away from church today
because my leg was sore but he said all rite you can stay, but i gess
that leg will be too sore to let you go in swiming this week. so i went
to church and dident limp enny. this afternoon i set under the
apple tree and read Bush Boys. father and mother went to ride with
Nellie. it is the first time mother has been out.

LINCOLN AND THE BIBLE

BY Z. A. MUDGE (ADAPTED)

A visitor in Washington once had an appointment to see Mr. Lincoln
at five o'clock in the morning. The gentleman made a hasty toilet
and presented himself at a quarter of five in the waiting-room of the
President. He asked the usher if he could see Mr. Lincoln.

"No," he replied.

"But I have an engagement to meet him this morning," answered the
visitor.

"At what hour?" asked the usher.

"At five o'clock."

"Well, sir, he will see you at five."

The visitor waited patiently, walking to and fro for a few minutes, when
he heard a voice as if in grave conversation.

"Who is talking in the next room?" he asked.

"It is the President, sir," said the usher, who then explained that
it was Mr. Lincoln's custom to spend every morning from four to five
reading the Scriptures, and praying.


HIS SPRINGFIELD FAREWELL ADDRESS

It was on the morning of February 11, 1861, that the President-elect,
together with his family and a small party of friends, bade adieu to the
city of Springfield, which, alas! he was never to see again.

A large throng of Springfield citizens assembled at the railway station
to see the departure, and before the train left Mr. Lincoln addressed
them in the following words:--

"MY FRIENDS: No one, not in my position, can appreciate the sadness I
feel at this parting. To this people I owe all that I am. Here I have
lived more than a quarter of a century; here my children were born, and
here one of them lies buried. I know not how soon I shall see you again.
A duty devolves upon me which is, perhaps, greater than that which has
devolved upon any other man since the days of Washington. He never would
have succeeded except by the aid of Divine Providence, upon which he at
all times relied. I feel that I cannot succeed without the same Divine
aid which sustained him, and on the same Almighty Being I place my
reliance for support; and I hope you, my friends, will all pray that I
may receive that Divine assistance, without which I cannot succeed,
but with which success is certain. Again I bid you an affectionate
farewell."


SAINT VALENTINE'S DAY

(FEBRUARY 14)

SAINT VALENTINE

The good Saint Valentine was a priest at Rome in the days of Claudius
II. He and Saint Marius aided the Christian martyrs, and for this kind
deed Saint Valentine was apprehended and dragged before the Prefect of
Rome, who condemned him to be beaten to death with clubs and to have his
head cut off. He suffered martyrdom on the 14th day of February, about
the year 270.

At that time it was the custom in Rome, a very ancient custom, indeed,
to celebrate in the month of February the Lupercalia, feasts in honor of
a heathen god.

On these occasions, amidst a variety of pagan ceremonies, the names of
young women were placed in a box, from which they were drawn by the men
as chance directed.

The pastors of the early Christian Church in Rome endeavored to do away
with the pagan element in these feasts by substituting the names of
saints for those of maidens. And as the Lupercalia began about the
middle of February, the pastors appear to have chosen Saint Valentine's
Day for the celebration of this new feast.

So it seems that the custom of young men choosing maidens for
valentines, or saints as patrons for the coming year, arose in this
wise.


A PRISONER'S VALENTINE

BY MILLICENT OLMSTED (ADAPTED)

Charles, Duke of Orleans, who was taken prisoner at the battle of
Agincourt in 1415, and detained in England twenty-five years, was the
author of the earliest known written valentines. He left about sixty of
them. They were written during his confinement in the Tower of London,
and are still to be seen among the royal papers in the British Museum.

One of his valentines reads as follows:--

    "Wilt thou be mine? dear Love, reply--
      Sweetly consent or else deny.
      Whisper softly, none shall know,
      Wilt thou be mine, Love?--aye or no?

    "Spite of Fortune, we may be
      Happy by one word from thee.
      Life flies swiftly--ere it go
      Wilt thou be mine, Love?--aye or no?"


A GIRL'S VALENTINE CHARM

AS TOLD BY HERSELF

(FROM THE CONNOISSEUR, 1775)

Last Friday was Valentine's Day, and I'll tell you what I did the night
before. I got five bay leaves, and pinned four of them to the four
corners of my pillow, and the fifth to the middle; and then if I dreamt
of my sweetheart, Betty said we would be married before the year was
out.

But to make it more sure, I boiled an egg hard, and took out the yolk,
and filled it with salt, and when I went to bed ate it, shell and all,
without speaking or drinking after it.

We also wrote our lovers' names upon bits of paper, and rolled them up
in clay and put them into water; and the first that rose up was to be
our valentine. Would you think it? Mr. Blossom was my man, and I lay
abed and shut my eyes all the morning, till he came to our house, for I
would not have seen another man before him for all the world.


MR. PEPYS HIS VALENTINE

AS RELATED BY HIMSELF IN 1666

(ADAPTED)

This morning, came up to my wife's bedside, I being up dressing myself,
little Will Mercer, to be her valentine; and brought her name writ upon
blue paper in gold letters, done by himself, very pretty; and we were
both well pleased with it.

But I am also this year my wife's valentine; and it will cost me five
pounds; but that I must have laid out if we had not been valentines.

I find also that Mrs. Pierce's little girl is my valentine, she having
drawn me; which I am not sorry for, it easing me of something more that
I must have given to others.

But here I do first observe the fashion of drawing of mottoes as well as
names; so that Pierce, who drew my wife, did draw also a motto, and this
girl drew another for me. What mine was I have forgot, but my wife's
was: "Most virtuous and most fair," which, as it may be used, or an
anagram made upon each name, might be; very pretty.


CUPID AND PSYCHE

BY JOSEPHINE PRESTON PEABODY

THE ENCHANTED PALACE

Once upon a time, through that Destiny that overrules the gods, Love
himself gave up his immortal heart to a mortal maiden. And thus it came
to pass:--

There was a certain king who had three beautiful daughters. The two
elder married princes of great renown; but Psyche, the youngest, was so
radiantly fair that no suitor seemed worthy of her. People thronged
to see her pass through the city, and sang hymns in her praise, while
strangers took her for the very goddess of beauty herself.

This angered Venus, and she resolved to cast down her earthly rival. One
day, therefore, she called hither her son, Love (Cupid, some name him),
and bade him sharpen his weapons. He is an archer more to be dreaded
than Apollo, for Apollo's arrows take life, but Love's bring joy or
sorrow for a whole life long.

"Come, Love," said Venus. "There is a mortal maid who robs me of my
honors in yonder city. Avenge your mother. Wound this precious Psyche,
and let her fall in love with some churlish creature mean in the eyes of
all men."

Cupid made ready his weapons, and flew down to earth invisibly. At that
moment Psyche was asleep in her chamber; but he touched her heart with
his golden arrow of love, and she opened her eyes so suddenly that he
started (forgetting that he was invisible), and wounded himself with
his own shaft. Heedless of the hurt, moved only by the loveliness of the
maiden, he hastened to pour over her locks the healing joy that he ever
kept by him, undoing all his work. Back to her dream the princess went,
unshadowed by any thought of love. But Cupid, not so light of heart,
returned to the heavens, saying not a word of what had passed.

Venus waited long; then, seeing that Psyche's heart had somehow escaped
love, she sent a spell upon the maiden. From that time, lovely as she
was, not a suitor came to woo; and her parents, who desired to see her a
queen at least, made a journey to the Oracle, and asked counsel.

Said the voice: "The Princess Psyche shall never wed a mortal. She shall
be given to one who waits for her on yonder mountain; he overcomes gods
and men."

At this terrible sentence the poor parents were half-distraught, and
the people gave themselves up to grief at the fate in store for their
beloved princess. Psyche alone bowed to her destiny. "We have angered
Venus unwittingly," she said, "and all for sake of me, heedless maiden
that I am! Give me up, therefore, dear father and mother. If I atone, it
may be that the city will prosper once more."

So she besought them, until, after many unavailing denials, the parents
consented; and with a great company of people they led Psyche up
the mountain,--as an offering to the monster of whom the Oracle had
spoken,--and left her there alone.

Full of courage, yet in a secret agony of grief, she watched her kindred
and her people wind down the mountain-path, too sad to look back, until
they were lost to sight. Then, indeed, she wept, but a sudden breeze
drew near, dried her tears, and caressed her hair, seeming to murmur
comfort. In truth, it was Zephyr, the kindly West Wind, come to befriend
her; and as she took heart, feeling some benignant presence, he lifted
her in his arms, and carried her on wings as even as a sea-gull's, over
the crest of the fateful mountain and into a valley below. There he left
her, resting on a bank of hospitable grass, and there the princess fell
asleep.

When she awoke, it was near sunset. She looked about her for some sign
of the monster's approach; she wondered, then, if her grievous trial had
been but a dream. Near by she saw a sheltering forest, whose young
trees seemed to beckon as one maid beckons to another; and eager for the
protection of the dryads, she went thither.

The call of running waters drew her farther and farther, till she
came out upon an open place, where there was a wide pool. A fountain
fluttered gladly in the midst of it, and beyond there stretched a white
palace wonderful to see. Coaxed by the bright promise of the place, she
drew near, and, seeing no one, entered softly. It was all kinglier than
her father's home, and as she stood in wonder and awe, soft airs stirred
about her. Little by little the silence grew murmurous like the woods,
and one voice, sweeter than the rest, took words. "All that you see is
yours, gentle high princess," it said. "Fear nothing; only command us,
for we are here to serve you."

Full of amazement and delight, Psyche followed the voice from hall to
hall, and through the lordly rooms, beautiful with everything that could
delight a young princess. No pleasant thing was lacking. There was even
a pool, brightly tiled and fed with running waters, where she bathed her
weary limbs; and after she had put on the new and beautiful raiment that
lay ready for her, she sat down to break her fast, waited upon and sung
to by the unseen spirits.

Surely he whom the Oracle had called her husband was no monster, but
some beneficent power, invisible like all the rest. When daylight waned
he came, and his voice, the beautiful voice of a god, inspired her to
trust her strange destiny and to look and long for his return. Often
she begged him to stay with her through the day, that she might see his
face; but this he would not grant.

"Never doubt me, dearest Psyche," said he. "Perhaps you would fear if
you saw me, and love is all I ask. There is a necessity that keeps me
hidden now. Only believe."

So for many days Psyche was content; but when she grew used to
happiness, she thought once more of her parents mourning her as lost,
and of her sisters who shared the lot of mortals while she lived as a
goddess. One night she told her husband of these regrets, and begged
that her sisters at least might come to see her. He sighed, but did not
refuse.

"Zephyr shall bring them hither," said he. And on the following morning,
swift as a bird, the West Wind came over the crest of the high mountain
and down into the enchanted valley, bearing her two sisters.

They greeted Psyche with joy and amazement, hardly knowing how they had
come hither. But when this fairest of the sisters led them through her
palace and showed them all the treasures that were hers, envy grew in
their hearts and choked their old love. Even while they sat at feast
with her, they grew more and more bitter; and hoping to find some little
flaw in her good fortune, they asked a thousand questions.

"Where is your husband?" said they. "And why is he not here with you?"

"Ah," stammered Psyche. "All the day long--he is gone, hunting upon the
mountains."

"But what does he look like?" they asked; and Psyche could find no
answer.

When they learned that she had never seen him, they laughed her faith to
scorn.

"Poor Psyche," they said. "You are walking in a dream. Wake, before it
is too late. Have you forgotten what the Oracle decreed,--that you were
destined for a dreadful creature, the fear of gods and men? And are
you deceived by this show of kindliness? We have come to warn you. The
people told us, as we came over the mountain, that your husband is
a dragon, who feeds you well for the present, that he may feast the
better, some day soon. What is it that you trust? Good words! But only
take a dagger some night, and when the monster is asleep go, light a
lamp, and look at him. You can put him to death easily, and all his
riches will be yours--and ours."

Psyche heard this wicked plan with horror. Nevertheless, after her
sisters were gone, she brooded over what they had said, not seeing their
evil intent; and she came to find some wisdom in their words. Little
by little, suspicion ate, like a moth, into her lovely mind; and
at nightfall, in shame and fear, she hid a lamp and a dagger in her
chamber. Towards midnight, when her husband was fast asleep, up she
rose, hardly daring to breathe; and coming softly to his side, she
uncovered the lamp to see some horror.

But there the youngest of the gods lay sleeping,--most beautiful, most
irresistible of all immortals. His hair shone golden as the sun, his
face was radiant as dear Springtime, and from his shoulders sprang two
rainbow wings.

Poor Psyche was overcome with self-reproach. As she leaned towards him,
filled with worship, her trembling hands held the lamp ill, and some
burning oil fell upon Love's shoulder and awakened him.

He opened his eyes, to see at once his bride and the dark suspicion in
her heart.

"O doubting Psyche!" he exclaimed with sudden grief,--and then he flew
away, out of the window.

Wild with sorrow, Psyche tried to follow, but she fell to the ground
instead. When she recovered her senses, she stared about her. She was
alone, and the place was beautiful no longer. Garden and palace had
vanished with Love.


THE TRIAL OF PSYCHE:


Over mountains and valleys Psyche journeyed alone until she came to the
city where her two envious sisters lived with the princes whom they had
married. She stayed with them only long enough to tell the story of her
unbelief and its penalty. Then she set out again to search for Love.

As she wandered one day, travel-worn but not hopeless, she saw a lofty
palace on a hill near by, and she turned her steps thither. The place
seemed deserted. Within the hall she saw no human being,--only heaps
of grain, loose ears of corn half torn from the husk, wheat and barley,
alike scattered in confusion on the floor. Without delay, she set to
work binding the sheaves together and gathering the scattered ears of
corn in seemly wise, as a princess would wish to see them. While she
was in the midst of her task, a voice startled her, and she looked up
to behold Demeter herself, the goddess of the harvest, smiling upon her
with good will.

"Dear Psyche," said Demeter, "you are worthy of happiness, and you may
find it yet. But since you have displeased Venus, go to her and ask her
favor. Perhaps your patience will win her pardon."

These motherly words gave Psyche heart, and she reverently took leave of
the goddess and set out for the temple of Venus. Most humbly she offered
up her prayer, but Venus could not look at her earthly beauty without
anger.

"Vain girl," said she, "perhaps you have come to make amends for the
wound you dealt your husband; you shall do so. Such clever people can
always find work!"

Then she led Psyche into a great chamber heaped high with mingled grain,
beans, and lentils (the food of her doves), and bade her separate them
all and have them ready in seemly fashion by night. Heracles would have
been helpless before such a vexatious task; and poor Psyche, left alone
in this desert of grain, had not courage to begin. But even as she sat
there, a moving thread of black crawled across the floor from a crevice
in the wall; and bending nearer, she saw that a great army of ants in
columns had come to her aid. The zealous little creatures worked in
swarms, with such industry over the work they like best, that, when
Venus came at night, she found the task completed.

"Deceitful girl," she cried, shaking the roses out of her hair with
impatience, "this is my son's work, not yours. But he will soon forget
you. Eat this black bread if you are hungry, and refresh your dull mind
with sleep. To-morrow you will need more wit."

Psyche wondered what new misfortune could be in store for her. But when
morning came, Venus led her to the brink of a river, and, pointing to
the wood across the water, said: "Go now to yonder grove where the sheep
with the golden fleece are wont to browse. Bring me a golden lock from
every one of them, or you must go your ways and never come back again."

This seemed not difficult, and Psyche obediently bade the goddess
farewell, and stepped into the water, ready to wade across. But as Venus
disappeared, the reeds sang louder and the nymphs of the river, looking
up sweetly, blew bubbles to the surface and murmured: "Nay, nay, have a
care, Psyche. This flock has not the gentle ways of sheep. While the
sun burns aloft, they are themselves as fierce as flame; but when the
shadows are long, they go to rest and sleep, under the trees; and you
may cross the river without fear and pick the golden fleece off the
briers in the pasture."

Thanking the water-creatures, Psyche sat down to rest near them, and
when the time came, she crossed in safety and followed their counsel. By
twilight she returned to Venus with her arms full of shining fleece.

"No mortal wit did this," said Venus angrily. "But if you care to prove
your readiness, go now, with this little box, down to Proserpina and ask
her to enclose in it some of her beauty, for I have grown pale in caring
for my wounded son."

It needed not the last taunt to sadden Psyche. She knew that it was not
for mortals to go into Hades and return alive; and feeling that Love had
forsaken her, she was minded to accept her doom as soon as might be.

But even as she hastened towards the descent, another friendly voice
detained her. "Stay, Psyche, I know your grief. Only give ear and you
shall learn a safe way through all these trials." And the voice went on
to tell her how one might avoid all the dangers of Hades and come out
unscathed. (But such a secret could not pass from mouth to mouth, with
the rest of the story.)

"And be sure," added the voice, "when Proserpina has returned the box,
not to open it, ever much you may long to do so."

Psyche gave heed, and by this device, whatever it was, she found her way
into Hades safely, and made her errand known to Proserpina, and was soon
in the upper world again, wearied but hopeful.

"Surely Love has not forgotten me," she said. "But humbled as I am and
worn with toil, how shall I ever please him? Venus can never need all
the beauty in this casket; and since I use it for Love's sake, it must
be right to take some." So saying, she opened the box, heedless as
Pandora! The spells and potions of Hades are not for mortal maids, and
no sooner had she inhaled the strange aroma than she fell down like one
dead, quite overcome.

But it happened that Love himself was recovered from his wound, and he
had secretly fled from his chamber to seek out and rescue Psyche.
He found her lying by the wayside; he gathered into the casket what
remained of the philter, and awoke his beloved.

"Take comfort," he said, smiling. "Return to our mother and do her
bidding till I come again."

Away he flew; and while Psyche went cheerily homeward, he hastened up to
Olympus, where all the gods sat feasting, and begged them to intercede
for him with his angry mother.

They heard his story and their hearts were touched. Zeus himself coaxed
Venus with kind words till at last she relented, and remembered that
anger hurt her beauty, and smiled once more. All the younger gods were
for welcoming Psyche at once, and Hermes was sent to bring her hither.
The maiden came, a shy newcomer among those bright creatures. She took
the cup that Hebe held out to her, drank the divine ambrosia, and became
immortal.

Light came to her face like moonrise, two radiant wings sprang from her
shoulders; and even as a butterfly bursts from its dull cocoon, so the
human Psyche blossomed into immortality.

Love took her by the hand, and they were never parted any more.


WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY

(FEBRUARY 22)


THREE OLD TALES

BY M. L. WEEMS (ADAPTED)


I. THE CHERRY TREE

When George was about six years old, he was made the wealthy master of a
hatchet of which, like most little boys, he was extremely fond. He went
about chopping everything that came his way.

One day, as he wandered about the garden amusing himself by hacking his
mother's pea-sticks, he found a beautiful, young English cherry tree, of
which his father was most proud. He tried the edge of his hatchet on the
trunk of the tree and barked it so that it died.

Some time after this, his father discovered what had happened to his
favorite tree. He came into the house in great anger, and demanded to
know who the mischievous person was who had cut away the bark. Nobody
could tell him anything about it.

Just then George, with his little hatchet, came into the room.

"George," said his father, "do you know who has killed my beautiful
little cherry tree yonder in the garden? I would not have taken five
guineas for it!"

This was a hard question to answer, and for a moment George was
staggered by it, but quickly recovering himself he cried:--

"I cannot tell a lie, father, you know I cannot tell a lie! I did cut it
with my little hatchet."

The anger died out of his father's face, and taking the boy tenderly in
his arms, he said:--

"My son, that you should not be afraid to tell the truth is more to me
than a thousand trees! yes, though they were blossomed with silver and
had leaves of the purest gold!"


II. THE APPLE ORCHARD


One fine morning in the autumn Mr. Washington, taking little George by
the hand, walked with him to the apple orchard, promising that he would
show him a fine sight.

On arriving at the orchard they saw a fine sight, indeed! The green
grass under the trees was strewn with red-cheeked apples, and yet the
trees were bending under the weight of fruit that hung thick among the
leaves.

"Now, George," said his father, "look, my son, see all this rich harvest
of fruit! Do you remember when your good cousin brought you a fine,
large apple last spring, how you refused to divide it with your
brothers? And yet I told you then that, if you would be generous, God
would give you plenty of apples this autumn."

Poor George could not answer, but hanging down his head looked quite
confused, while with his little, naked, bare feet he scratched in the
soft ground.

"Now, look up, my son," continued his father, "and see how the blessed
God has richly provided us with these trees loaded with the finest
fruit. See how abundant is the harvest. Some of the trees are bending
beneath their burdens, while the ground is covered with mellow apples,
more than you could eat, my son, in all your lifetime."

George looked in silence on the orchard, he marked the busy, humming
bees, and heard the gay notes of the birds fluttering from tree to tree.
His eyes filled with tears and he answered softly:--

"Truly, father, I never will be selfish any more."


III. THE GARDEN-BED


One day Mr. Washington went into the garden and dug a little bed of
earth and prepared it for seed. He then took a stick and traced on the
bed George's name in full. After this he strewed the tracing thickly
with seeds, and smoothed all over nicely with his roller.

This garden-bed he purposely prepared close to a gooseberry-walk. The
bushes were hung with the ripe fruit, and he knew that George would
visit them every morning.

Not many days had passed away when one morning George came running
into the house, breathless with excitement, and his eyes shining with
happiness.

"Come here! father, come here!" he cried.

"What's the matter, my son?" asked his father.

"O come, father," answered George, "and I'll show you such a sight as
you have never seen in all your lifetime."

Mr. Washington gave the boy his hand, which he seized with great
eagerness. He led his father straight to the garden-bed, whereon in
large letters, in lines of soft green, was written:--

GEORGE WASHINGTON


YOUNG GEORGE AND THE COLT

BY HORACE E. SCUDDER

There is a story told of George Washington's boyhood,--unfortunately
there are not many stories,--which is to the point. His father had taken
a great deal of pride in his blooded horses, and his mother afterward
took pains to keep the stock pure. She had several young horses that
had not yet been broken, and one of them in particular, a sorrel, was
extremely spirited. No one had been able to do anything with it, and it
was pronounced thoroughly vicious as people are apt to pronounce horses
which they have not learned to master.

George was determined to ride this colt, and told his companions that if
they would help him catch it, he would ride and tame it.

Early in the morning they set out for the pasture, where the boys
managed to surround the sorrel, and then to put a bit into its mouth.
Washington sprang upon its back, the boys dropped the bridle, and away
flew the angry animal.

Its rider at once began to command. The horse resisted, backing about
the field, rearing and plunging. The boys became thoroughly alarmed,
but Washington kept his seat, never once losing his self-control or his
mastery of the colt.

The struggle was a sharp one; when suddenly, as if determined to rid
itself of its rider, the creature leaped into the air with a tremendous
bound. It was its last. The violence burst a blood-vessel, and the noble
horse fell dead.

Before the boys could sufficiently recover to consider how they should
extricate themselves from the scrape, they were called to breakfast;
and the mistress of the house, knowing that they had been in the fields,
began to ask after her stock.

"Pray, young gentlemen," said she, "have you seen my blooded colts in
your rambles? I hope they are well taken care of. My favorite, I am
told, is as large as his sire."

The boys looked at one another, and no one liked to speak. Of course the
mother repeated her question.

"The sorrel is dead, madam," said her son, "I killed him."

And then he told the whole story. They say that his mother flushed with
anger, as her son often used to, and then, like him, controlled herself,
and presently said, quietly:--

"It is well; but while I regret the loss of my favorite, I rejoice in my
son who always speaks the truth."


WASHINGTON THE ATHLETE

BY ALBERT F. BLAISDELL AND FRANCIS E. BALL

Many stories are told of the mighty power of Washington's right arm. It
is said that he once threw a stone from the bed of the stream to the top
of the Natural Bridge, in Virginia.

Again, we are told that once upon a time he rounded a piece of slate
to the size of a silver dollar, and threw it across the Rappahannock
at Fredericksburg, the slate falling at least thirty feet on the other
side. Many strong men have since tried the same feat, but have never
cleared the water.

Peale, who was called the soldier-artist, was once visiting Washington
at Mount Vernon. One day, he tells us, some athletic young men were
pitching the iron bar in the presence of their host. Suddenly, without
taking off his coat, Washington grasped the bar and hurled it, with
little effort, much farther than any of them had done.

"We were, indeed, amazed," said one of the young men, "as we stood
round, all stripped to the buff, and having thought ourselves very
clever fellows, while the Colonel, on retiring, pleasantly said:--

"'When you beat my pitch, young gentlemen, I'll try again.'"

At another time, Washington witnessed a wrestling-match. The champion of
the day challenged him, in sport, to wrestle. Washington did not stop to
take off his coat, but grasped the "strong man of Virginia." It was
all over in a moment, for, said the wrestler, "In Washington's lionlike
grasp I became powerless, and was hurled to the ground with a force that
seemed to jar the very marrow in my bones."

In the days of the Revolution, some of the riflemen and the backwoodsmen
were men of gigantic strength, but it was generally believed by good
judges that their commander-in-chief was the strongest man in the army.


WASHINGTON'S MODESTY

BY HENRY CABOT LODGE (ADAPTED)

Washington as soon as Fort Duquesne had fallen hurried home, resigned
his commission, and was married. The sunshine and glitter of the
wedding day must have appeared to Washington deeply appropriate, for
he certainly seemed to have all that heart of man could desire. Just
twenty-seven, in the first flush of young manhood, keen of sense and yet
wise in experience, life must have looked very fair and smiling. He had
left the army with a well-earned fame, and had come home to take the
wife of his choice, and enjoy the good will and respect of all men.

While away on his last campaign he had been elected a member of
the House of Burgesses, and when he took his seat, on removing to
Williamsburg, three months after his marriage, Mr. Robinson, the
Speaker, thanked him publicly in eloquent words for his services to the
country.

Washington rose to reply, but he was so utterly unable to talk about
himself that he stood before the House stammering and blushing until the
Speaker said:--

"Sit down, Mr. Washington, your modesty equals your valor, and that
surpasses the power of any language I possess."


WASHINGTON AT YORKTOWN

BY HENRY CABOT LODGE

During the assault Washington stood in an embrasure of the grand
battery, watching the advance of the men. He was always given to
exposing himself recklessly when there was fighting to be done, but not
when he was only an observer.

This night, however, he was much exposed to the enemy's fire. One of his
aides, anxious and disturbed for his safety, told him that the place was
perilous.

"If you think so," was the quiet answer, "you are at liberty to step
back."

The moment was too exciting, too fraught with meaning, to think of
peril. The old fighting spirit of Braddock's field was unchained for the
last time. He would have liked to head the American assault, sword in
hand, and as he could not do that, he stood as near his troops as he
could, utterly regardless of the bullets whistling in the air about him.
Who can wonder at his intense excitement at that moment?

Others saw a brilliant storming of two out-works, but to Washington the
whole Revolution and all the labor and thought and conflict of six years
were culminating in the smoke and din on those redoubts, while out of
the dust and heat of the sharp, quick fight success was coming.

He had waited long, and worked hard, and his whole soul went out as he
watched the troops cross the abatis and scale the works. He could have
no thought of danger then, and when all was over, he turned to Knox and
said:--

"The work is done, and well done. Bring me my horse."


RESURRECTION DAY (EASTER)

(MARCH OR APRIL)


A LESSON OF FAITH

BY MRS. ALFRED GATTY (ADAPTED)

"Let me hire you as a nurse for my poor children," said a butterfly to
a quiet caterpillar, who was strolling along a cabbage-leaf in her odd,
lumbering fashion.

"See these little eggs," continued the butterfly; "I do not know how
long it will be before they come to life, and I feel very sick. If I
should die, who will take care of my baby butterflies when I am gone?
Will you, kind, mild, green caterpillar? They cannot, of course, live
on your rough food. You must give them early dew, and honey from the
flowers, and you must let them fly about only a little way at first.
Dear me! it is a sad pity that you cannot fly yourself. Dear, dear! I
cannot think what made me come and lay my eggs on a cabbage-leaf! What
a place for young butterflies to be bore upon! Here, take this gold-dust
from my wings as a reward. Oh, how dizzy I am! Caterpillar! you will
remember about the food--"

And with these words the butterfly drooped her wings and died. The green
caterpillar, who had not had the opportunity of even saying "yes"
or "no" to the request, was left standing alone by the side of the
butterfly's eggs.

"A pretty nurse she has chosen, indeed, poor lady!" exclaimed she, "and
a pretty business I have in hand. Why did she ever ask a poor crawling
creature like me to bring up her dainty little ones! Much they'll mind
me, truly, when they feel the gay wings on their backs, and can fly
away."

However, the poor butterfly was dead, and there lay the eggs on the
cabbage-leaf, and the green caterpillar had a kind heart, so she
resolved to do her best.

"But two heads are better than one," said she; "I will consult some wise
animal on the matter."

Then she thought and thought till at last she thought of the lark, and
she fancied that because he went up so high, and nobody knew where he
went to, he must be very clever and know a great deal.

Now in the neighboring cornfield there lived a lark, and the caterpillar
sent a message to him, begging him to come and talk to her. When he came
she told him all her difficulties, and asked him how she was to feed and
rear the little butterfly creatures.

"Perhaps you will be able to inquire and learn something about it the
next time you go up high," said the caterpillar timidly.

"Perhaps I can," answered the lark; and then he went singing upwards
into the bright, blue sky, till the green caterpillar could not hear a
sound, nor could she see him any more. So she began to walk round the
butterfly's eggs, nibbling a bit of the cabbage-leaf now and then as she
moved along.

"What a time the lark has been gone!" she cried at last. "I wonder where
he is just now. He must have flown higher than usual this time. How I
should like to know where he goes, and what he hears in that curious
blue sky! He always sings going up and coming down, but he never lets
any secret out."

And the green caterpillar took another turn round the butterfly's eggs.

At last the lark's voice began to be heard again. The caterpillar almost
jumped for joy, and it was not long before she saw her friend descend
with hushed note to the cabbage bed.

"News, news, glorious news, friend caterpillar!" sang the lark, "but the
worst of it is, you won't believe me!"

"I believe anything I am told," said the caterpillar hastily.

"Well, then, first of all, I will tell you what those little creatures
are to eat"--and the lark nodded his head toward the eggs. "What do you
think it is to be? Guess!"

"Dew and honey out of the flowers, I am afraid!" sighed the caterpillar.

"No such thing, my good friend," cried the lark exultantly; "you are to
feed them with cabbage-leaves!"

"Never!" said the caterpillar indignantly.

"It was their mother's last request that I should feed them on dew and
honey."

"Their mother knew nothing about the matter," answered the lark; "but
why do you ask me, and then disbelieve what I say? You have neither
faith nor trust."

"Oh, I believe everything I am told," said the caterpillar.

"Nay, but you do not," replied the lark.

"Why, caterpillar, what do you think those little eggs will turn out to
be?"

"Butterflies, to be sure," said the caterpillar.

"CATERPILLARS!" sang the lark; "and you'll find it out in time." And the
lark flew away.

"I thought the lark was wise and kind," said the mild, green caterpillar
to herself, once more beginning to walk round the eggs, "but I find that
he is foolish and saucy instead. Perhaps he went up TOO high this time.
How I wonder what he sees, and what he does up yonder!"

"I would tell you if you would believe me," sang the lark, descending
once more.

"I believe everything I am told," answered the caterpillar.

"Then I'll tell you something else," cried the lark. "YOU WILL ONE DAY
BE A BUTTERFLY YOURSELF!"

"Wretched bird," exclaimed the caterpillar, "you are making fun of me.
You are now cruel as well as foolish! Go away! I will ask your advice no
more."

"I told you you would not believe me," cried the lark.

"I believe everything I am told," persisted the
caterpillar,--"everything that it is REASONABLE to believe. But to tell
me that butterflies' eggs are caterpillars, and that caterpillars leave
off crawling and get wings and become butterflies!--Lark! you do not
believe such nonsense yourself! You know it is impossible!"

"I know no such thing," said the lark. "When I hover over the
cornfields, or go up into the depths of the sky, I see so many wonderful
things that I know there must be more. O caterpillar! it is because you
CRAWL, and never get beyond your cabbage-leaf, that you call anything
IMPOSSIBLE."

"Nonsense," shouted the caterpillar, "I know what's possible and what's
impossible. Look at my long, green body, and many legs, and then talk to
me about having wings! Fool!"

"More foolish you!" cried the indignant lark, "to attempt to reason
about what you cannot understand. Do you not hear how my song swells
with rejoicing as I soar upwards to the mysterious wonder-world above?
Oh, caterpillar, what comes from thence, receive as I do,--on trust."

"What do you mean by that?" asked the caterpillar.

"ON FAITH," answered the lark.

"How am I to learn faith?" asked the caterpillar.

At that moment she felt something at her side. She looked round,--eight
or ten little green caterpillars were moving about, and had already made
a hole in the cabbage-leaf. They had broken from the butterfly's eggs!

Shame and amazement filled the green caterpillar's heart, but joy soon
followed. For as the first wonder was possible, the second might be so
too.

"Teach me your lesson, lark," she cried.

And the lark sang to her of the wonders of the earth below and of the
heaven above. And the caterpillar talked all the rest of her life of the
time when she should become a butterfly.

But no one believed her. She nevertheless had learned the lark's lesson
of faith, and when she was going into her chrysalis, she said:--

"I shall be a butterfly some day!"

But her relations thought her head was wandering, and they said, "Poor
thing!"

And when she was a butterfly, and was going to die she said:--

"I have known many wonders,--I HAVE FAITH,--I can trust even now for the
wonder that shall come next."


A CHILD'S DREAM OF A STAR

BY CHARLES DICKENS

There was once a child, and he strolled about a good deal, and thought
of a number of things. He had a sister, who was a child, too, and his
constant companion. These two used to wonder all day long. They wondered
at the beauty of the flowers; they wondered at the height and blueness
of the sky; they wondered at the depth of the bright water; they
wondered at the goodness and the power of God who made the lovely world.

They used to say to one another, sometimes: "Supposing all the children
upon earth were to die, would the flowers, and the water, and the sky
be sorry?" They believed they would be sorry. "For," said they, "the buds
are the children of the flowers, and the little playful streams that
gambol down the hillsides are the children of the water; and the
smallest, bright specks playing at hide and seek in the sky all night,
must surely be the children of the stars; and they would all be grieved
to see their playmates, the children of men, no more."

There was one clear, shining star that used to come out in the sky
before the rest, near the church spire, above the graves. It was larger
and more beautiful, they thought, than all the others, and every night
they watched for it, standing hand in hand at a window. Whoever saw
it first cried out: "I see the star!" And often they cried out both
together, knowing so well when it would rise, and where. So they grew
to be such friends with it, that, before lying down in their beds, they
always looked out once again, to bid it good-night; and when they were
turning round to sleep, they used to say: "God bless the star!"

But while she was still very young, oh, very, very young, the sister
drooped, and came to be so weak that she could no longer stand in the
window at night; and then the child looked sadly out by himself, and
when he saw the star turned round and said to the patient, pale face on
the bed: "I see the star!" and then a smile would come upon the face,
and a little weak voice used to say: "God bless my brother and the
star!"

And so the time came all too soon, when the child looked out alone, and
when there was no face on the bed; and when there was a little grave
among the graves, not there before; and when the star made long rays
down towards him, as he saw it through his tears.

Now, these rays were so bright, and they seemed to make such a shining
way from earth to heaven, that when the child went to his solitary bed
he dreamed about the star; and dreamed that, lying where he was, he saw
a train of people taken up that sparkling road by angels. And the star,
opening, showed him a great world of light, where many more such angels
waited to receive them.

All these angels, who were waiting, turned their beaming eyes upon the
people who were carried up into the star; and some came out from the
long rows in which they stood, and fell upon the people's necks, and
kissed them tenderly, and went away with them down avenues of light, and
were so happy in their company, that lying in his bed he wept for joy.

But there were many angels who did not go with them, and among them
one he knew. The patient face, that once had lain upon the bed, was
glorified and radiant, but his heart found out his sister among all the
host.

His sister's angel lingered near the entrance of the star, and said to
the leader among those who had brought the people thither:--

"Is my brother come?"

And he said: "No."

She was turning hopefully away, when the child stretched out his arms,
and cried: "O sister, I am here! Take me!" And then she turned her
beaming eyes upon him, and it was night; and the star was shining into
the room, making long rays down towards him, as he saw it through his
tears.

From that hour forth, the child looked out upon the star as on the home
he was to go to when his time should come; and he thought that he did
not belong to the earth alone, but to the star, too, because of his
sister's angel gone before.

There was a baby born to be a brother to the child; and while he was so
little that he never yet had spoken word, he stretched his tiny form out
on his bed, and died.

Again the child dreamed of the open star, and of the company of angels,
and the train of people, and the rows of angels with their beaming eyes
all turned upon those people's faces.

Said his sister's angel to the leader:--

"Is my brother come?"

And he said: "Not that one, but another."

As the child beheld his brother's angel in her arms, he cried: "O
sister, I am here! Take me!" And she turned and smiled upon him, and the
star was shining.

He grew to be a young man, and was busy at his books, when an old
servant came to him and said:--

"Thy mother is no more. I bring her blessing on her darling son."

Again at night he saw the star, and all that former company. Said his
sister's angel to the leader:--

"Is my brother come?"

And he said: "Thy mother!"

A mighty cry of joy went forth through all the star, because the mother
was reunited to her two children. And he stretched out his arms and
cried: "O mother, sister, and brother, I am here! Take me!" And they
answered him: "Not yet." And the star was shining.

He grew to be a man, whose hair was turning gray, and he was sitting in
his chair by the fireside, heavy with grief, and with his face bedewed
with tears, when the star opened once again.

Said his sister's angel to the leader:--

"Is my brother come?"

And he said: "Nay, but his maiden daughter."

And the man, who had been the child, saw his daughter, newly lost to
him, a celestial creature among those three, and he said: "My daughter's
head is on my sister's bosom, and her arm is around my mother's neck,
and at her feet there is the baby of old time, and I can bear the
parting from her, God be praised!"

And the star was shining.

Thus the child came to be an old man, and his once smooth face was
wrinkled, and his steps were slow and feeble, and his back was bent. And
one night as he lay upon his bed, his children standing round, he cried,
as he had cried so long ago:--

"I see the star!"

They whispered one to another: "He is dying."

And he said: "I am. My age is falling from me like a garment, and I move
towards the star as a child. And, O my Father, now I thank Thee that it
has so often opened to receive those dear ones who await me!"

And the star was shining; and it shines upon his grave.


THE LOVELIEST ROSE IN THE WORLD

BY HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN (ADAPTED)

Once there reigned a queen, in whose garden were found the most glorious
flowers at all seasons and from all the lands of the world. But more
than all others she loved the roses, and she had many kinds of this
flower, from the wild dog-rose with its apple-scented green leaves to
the most splendid, large, crimson roses. They grew against the garden
walls, wound themselves around the pillars and wind-frames, and crept
through the windows into the rooms, and all along the ceilings in the
halls. And the roses were of many colors, and of every fragrance and
form.

But care and sorrow dwelt in those halls. The queen lay upon a sick-bed,
and the doctors said she must die.

"There is still one thing that can save her," said the wise man. "Bring
her the loveliest rose in the world, the rose that is the symbol of the
purest, the brightest love. If that is held before her eyes ere they
close, she will not die."

Then old and young came from every side with roses, the loveliest that
bloomed in each garden, but they were not of the right sort. The flower
was to be plucked from the Garden of Love. But what rose in all that
garden expressed the highest and purest love?

And the poets sang of the loveliest rose in the world,--of the love of
maid and youth, and of the love of dying heroes.

"But they have not named the right flower," said the wise man. "They
have not pointed out the place where it blooms in its splendor. It is
not the rose that springs from the hearts of youthful lovers, though
this rose will ever be fragrant in song. It is not the bloom that
sprouts from the blood flowing from the breast of the hero who dies
for his country, though few deaths are sweeter than his, and no rose is
redder than the blood that flows then. Nor is it the wondrous flower
to which man devotes many a sleepless night and much of his fresh
life,--the magic flower of science."

"But I know where it blooms," said a happy mother, who came with her
pretty child to the bedside of the dying queen. "I know where the
loveliest rose of love may be found. It springs in the blooming cheeks
of my sweet child, when, waking from sleep, it opens its eyes and smiles
tenderly at me."

"Lovely is this rose, but there is a lovelier still," said the wise man.

"I have seen the loveliest, purest rose that blooms," said a woman. "I
saw it on the cheeks of the queen. She had taken off her golden crown.
And in the long, dreary night she carried her sick child in her arms.
She wept, kissed it, and prayed for her child."

"Holy and wonderful is the white rose of a mother's grief," answered the
wise man, "but it is not the one we seek."

"The loveliest rose in the world I saw at the altar of the Lord," said
the good Bishop, "the young maidens went to the Lord's Table. Roses
were blushing and pale roses shining on their fresh cheeks. A young girl
stood there. She looked with all the love and purity of her spirit up to
heaven. That was the expression of the highest and purest love."

"May she be blessed," said the wise man, "but not one of you has yet
named the loveliest rose in the world."

Then there came into the room a child, the queen's little son.

"Mother," cried the boy, "only hear what I have read."

And the child sat by the bedside and read from the Book of Him who
suffered death upon the cross to save men, and even those who were not
yet born. "Greater love there is not."

And a rosy glow spread over the cheeks of the queen, and her eyes
gleamed, for she saw that from the leaves of the Book there bloomed the
loveliest rose, that sprang from the blood of Christ shed on the cross.

"I see it!" she said, "he who beholds this, the loveliest rose on earth,
shall never die."


MAY DAY

(MAY 1)


THE SNOWDROP [1]

BY HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN (ADAPTED)

[Footnote 1: From For the Children's Hour, by Carolyn Sherwin Bailey and
Clara M. Lewis. Copyright by the Milton Bradley Company.]


The snow lay deep, for it was winter-time. The winter winds blew cold,
but there was one house where all was snug and warm. And in the house
lay a little flower; in its bulb it lay, under the earth and the snow.

One day the rain fell and it trickled through the ice and snow down into
the ground. And presently a sunbeam, pointed and slender, pierced down
through the earth, and tapped on the bulb.

"Come in," said the flower.

"I can't do that," said the sunbeam; "I'm not strong enough to lift the
latch. I shall be stronger when springtime comes."

"When will it be spring?" asked the flower of every little sunbeam that
rapped on its door. But for a long time it was winter. The ground was
still covered with snow, and every night there was ice in the water. The
flower grew quite tired of waiting.

"How long it is!" it said. "I feel quite cramped. I must stretch myself
and rise up a little. I must lift the latch, and look out, and say
'good-morning' to the spring."

So the flower pushed and pushed. The walls were softened by the rain
and warmed by the little sunbeams, so the flower shot up from under the
snow, with a pale green bud on its stalk and some long narrow leaves on
either side. It was biting cold.

"You are a little too early," said the wind and the weather; but every
sunbeam sang: "Welcome," and the flower raised its head from the snow
and unfolded itself--pure and white, and decked with green stripes.

It was weather to freeze it to pieces,--such a delicate little
flower,--but it was stronger than any one knew. It stood in its white
dress in the white snow, bowing its head when the snow-flakes fell,
and raising it again to smile at the sunbeams, and every day it grew
sweeter.

"Oh!" shouted the children, as they ran into the garden, "see the
snowdrop! There it stands so pretty, so beautiful,--the first, the only
one!"


THE THREE LITTLE BUTTERFLY BROTHERS

(FROM THE GERMAN)[2]

[Footnote 2: From Deutsches Drittes Lesebuch, by W. H. Weick and C.
Grebner. Copyright, 1886, by Van Antwerp, Bragg & Co. American Book
Company, publishers.]


There were once three little butterfly brothers, one white, one red, and
one yellow. They played in the sunshine, and danced among the flowers in
the garden, and they never grew tired because they were so happy.

One day there came a heavy rain, and it wet their wings. They flew away
home, but when they got there they found the door locked and the key
gone. So they had to stay out of doors in the rain, and they grew wetter
and wetter.

By and by they flew to the red and yellow striped tulip, and said:
"Friend Tulip, will you open your flower-cup and let us in till the
storm is over?"

The tulip answered: "The red and yellow butterflies may enter, because
they are like me, but the white one may not come in."

But the red and yellow butterflies said: "If our white brother may not
find shelter in your flowercup, why, then, we'll stay outside in the
rain with him."

It rained harder and harder, and the poor little butterflies grew wetter
and wetter, so they flew to the white lily and said: "Good Lily, will
you open your bud a little so we may creep in out of the rain?"

The lily answered: "The white butterfly may come in, because he is like
me, but the red and yellow ones must stay outside in the storm."

Then the little white butterfly said: "If you won't receive my red and
yellow brothers, why, then, I'll stay out in the rain with them. We
would rather be wet than be parted."

So the three little butterflies flew away.

But the sun, who was behind a cloud, heard it all, and he knew what good
little brothers the butterflies were, and how they had held together in
spite of the wet. So he pushed his face through the clouds, and chased
away the rain, and shone brightly on the garden.

He dried the wings of the three little butterflies, and warmed their
bodies. They ceased to sorrow, and danced among the flowers till
evening, then they flew away home, and found the door wide open.


THE WATER-DROP

BY FRIEDRICH WILHELM CAROVE'

(ADAPTED FROM THE TRANSLATION BY SARAH AUSTIN)

There was once a child who lived in a little hut, and in the hut there
was nothing but a little bed and a looking-glass; but as soon as the
first sunbeam glided softly through the casement and kissed his sweet
eyelids, and the finch and the linnet waked him merrily with their
morning songs, he arose and went out into the green meadow.

And he begged flour of the primrose, and sugar of the violet, and butter
of the buttercup. He shook dewdrops from the cowslip into the cup of the
harebell, spread out a large lime-leaf, set his breakfast upon it, and
feasted daintily. And he invited a humming-bee and a gay butterfly to
partake of his feast, but his favorite guest was a blue dragon-fly.

The bee murmured a good deal about his riches, and the butterfly told
his adventures. Such talk delighted the child, and his breakfast was the
sweeter to him, and the sunshine on leaf and flower seemed more bright
and cheering.

But when the bee had flown off to beg from flower to flower, and the
butterfly had fluttered away to his play-fellows, the dragon-fly still
remained, poised on a blade of grass. Her slender and burnished body,
more brightly and deeply blue than the deep blue sky, glistened in the
sunbeam. Her net-like wings laughed at the flowers because they could
not fly, but must stand still and abide the wind and rain.

The dragon-fly sipped a little of the child's clear dewdrops and blue
violet honey, and then whispered her winged words. Such stories as the
dragon-fly did tell! And as the child sat motionless with his blue
eyes shut, and his head rested on his hands, she thought he had fallen
asleep; so she poised her double wings and flew into the rustling wood.

But the child had only sunk into a dream of delight and was wishing he
were a sunbeam or a moonbeam; and he would have been glad to hear more
and more, and forever.

But at last as all was still, he opened his eyes and looked around for
his dear guest, but she was flown far away. He could not bear to sit
there any longer alone, and he rose and went to the gurgling brook. It
gushed and rolled so merrily, and tumbled so wildly along as it hurried
to throw itself head-over-heels into the river, just as if the great
massy rock out of which it sprang were close behind it, and could only
be escaped by a breakneck leap.

Then the child began to talk to the little waves and asked them whence
they came. They would not stay to give him an answer, but danced away
one over another; till at last, that the sweet child might not be
grieved, a water-drop stopped behind a piece of rock.

"A long time ago," said the water-drop, "I lived with my countless
sisters in the great Ocean, in peace and unity. We had all sorts of
pastimes. Sometimes we mounted up high into the air, and peeped at the
stars. Then we sank plump down deep below, and looked how the coral
builders work till they are tired, that they may reach the light of day
at last.

"But I was conceited, and thought myself much better than my sisters.
And so, one day, when the sun rose out of the sea, I clung fast to one
of his hot beams and thought how I should reach the stars and become one
of them.

"But I had not ascended far when the sunbeam shook me off, and, in spite
of all I could say or do, let me fall into a dark cloud. And soon a
flash of fire darted through the cloud, and now I thought I must surely
die; but the cloud laid itself down softly upon the top of a mountain,
and so I escaped.

"Now I thought I should remain hidden, when, all on a sudden, I slipped
over a round pebble, fell from one stone to another, down into the
depths of the mountain. At last it was pitch dark and I could neither
see nor hear anything.

"Then I found, indeed, that 'pride goeth before a fall,' for, though I
had already laid aside all my unhappy pride in the cloud, my punishment
was to remain for some time in the heart of the mountain. After
undergoing many purifications from the hidden virtues of metals and
minerals, I was at length permitted to come up once more into the free
and cheerful air, and to gush from this rock and journey with this happy
stream. Now will I run back to my sisters in the Ocean, and there wait
patiently till I am called to something better."

So said the water-drop to the child, but scarcely had she finished her
story, when the root of a For-Get-Me-Not caught the drop and sucked her
in, that she might become a floweret, and twinkle brightly as a blue
star on the green firmament of earth.


THE SPRING BEAUTY

AN OJIBBEWAY LEGEND

BY HENRY R. SCHOOLCRAFT (ADAPTED)

An old man was sitting in his lodge, by the side of a frozen stream. It
was the end of winter, the air was not so cold, and his fire was
nearly out. He was old and alone. His locks were white with age, and he
trembled in every joint. Day after day passed, and he heard nothing but
the sound of the storm sweeping before it the new-fallen snow.

One day while his fire was dying, a handsome young man approached and
entered the lodge. His cheeks were red, his eyes sparkled. He walked
with a quick, light step. His forehead was bound with a wreath of
sweet-grass, and he carried a bunch of fragrant flowers in his hand.

"Ah, my son," said the old man, "I am happy to see you. Come in! Tell me
your adventures, and what strange lands you have seen. I will tell you
of my wonderful deeds, and what I can perform. You shall do the same,
and we will amuse each other."

The old man then drew from a bag a curiously wrought pipe. He filled it
with mild tobacco, and handed it to his guest. They each smoked from the
pipe and then began their stories.

"I am Peboan, the Spirit of Winter," said the old man. "I blow my
breath, and the streams stand still. The water becomes stiff and hard as
clear stone."

"I am Seegwun, the Spirit of Spring," answered the youth. "I breathe,
and flowers spring up in the meadows and woods."

"I shake my locks," said the old man, "and snow covers the land. The
leaves fall from the trees, and my breath blows them away. The birds fly
to a distant land, and the animals hide themselves from the cold."

"I shake my ringlets," said the young man, "and warm showers of soft
rain fall upon the earth. The flowers lift their heads from the ground,
the grass grows thick and green. My voice recalls the birds, and they
come flying joyfully from the Southland. The warmth of my breath unbinds
the streams, and they sing the songs of summer. Music fills the groves
where-ever I walk, and all nature rejoices."

And while they were talking thus a wonderful change took place. The sun
began to rise. A gentle warmth stole over the place. Peboan, the Spirit
of Winter, became silent. His head drooped, and the snow outside the
lodge melted away. Seegwun, the Spirit of Spring, grew more radiant, and
rose joyfully to his feet. The robin and the bluebird began to sing on
the top of the lodge. The stream began to murmur at the door, and the
fragrance of opening flowers came softly on the breeze.

The lodge faded away, and Peboan sank down and dissolved into tiny
streams of water, that vanished under the brown leaves of the forest.
Thus the Spirit of Winter departed, and where he had melted away, there
the Indian children gathered the first blossoms, fragrant and delicately
pink,--the modest Spring Beauty.


THE FAIRY TULIPS

ENGLISH FOLK-TALE

Once upon a time there was a good old woman who lived in a little house.
She had in her garden a bed of beautiful striped tulips.

One night she was wakened by the sounds of sweet singing and of babies
laughing. She looked out at the window. The sounds seemed to come from
the tulip bed, but she could see nothing.

The next morning she walked among her flowers, but there were no signs
of any one having been there the night before.

On the following night she was again wakened by sweet singing and babies
laughing. She rose and stole softly through her garden. The moon was
shining brightly on the tulip bed, and the flowers were swaying to and
fro. The old woman looked closely and she saw, standing by each tulip,
a little Fairy mother who was crooning and rocking the flower like a
cradle, while in each tulip-cup lay a little Fairy baby laughing and
playing.

The good old woman stole quietly back to her house, and from that time
on she never picked a tulip, nor did she allow her neighbors to touch
the flowers.

The tulips grew daily brighter in color and larger in size, and they
gave out a delicious perfume like that of roses. They began, too, to
bloom all the year round. And every night the little Fairy mothers
caressed their babies and rocked them to sleep in the flower-cups.

The day came when the good old woman died, and the tulip-bed was torn
up by folks who did not know about the Fairies, and parsley was planted
there instead of the flowers. But the parsley withered, and so did all
the other plants in the garden, and from that time nothing would grow
there.

But the good old woman's grave grew beautiful, for the Fairies sang
above it, and kept it green; while on the grave and all around it there
sprang up tulips, daffodils, and violets, and other lovely flowers of
spring.


THE STREAM THAT RAN AWAY

BY MARY AUSTIN (ADAPTED)

In a short and shallow canyon running eastward toward the sun, one may
find a clear, brown stream called the Creek of Pinon Pines; that is not
because it is unusual to find pinon trees in that country, but because
there are so few of them in the canyon of the stream. There are all
sorts higher up on the slopes,--long-leaved yellow pines, thimble cones,
tamarack, silver fir, and Douglas spruce; but in the canyon there
is only a group of the low-headed, gray nut pines which the earliest
inhabitants of that country called pinons.

The Canyon of Pinon Pines has a pleasant outlook and lies open to the
sun. At the upper end there is no more room by the stream border than
will serve for a cattle trail; willows grow in it, choking the path
of the water; there are brown birches here and ropes of white clematis
tangled over thickets of brier rose.

Low down, the ravine broadens out to inclose a meadow the width of a
lark's flight, blossomy and wet and good. Here the stream ran once in a
maze of soddy banks and watered all the ground, and afterward ran out at
the canyon's mouth across the mesa in a wash of bone-white boulders as
far as it could. That was not very far, for it was a slender stream. It
had its source on the high crests and hollows of the near-by mountain,
in the snow banks that melted and seeped downward through the rocks. But
the stream did not know any more of that than you know of what happened
to you before you were born, and could give no account of itself except
that it crept out from under a great heap of rubble far up in the Canyon
of the Pinon Pines.

And because it had no pools in it deep enough for trout, and no trees on
its borders but gray nut pines; because, try as it might, it could never
get across the mesa to the town, the stream had fully made up its mind
to run away.

"Pray, what good will that do you?" said the pines. "If you get to
the town, they will turn you into an irrigating ditch, and set you to
watering crops."

"As to that," said the stream, "if I once get started I will not stop at
the town."

Then it would fret between its banks until the spangled frills of the
mimulus were all tattered with its spray. Often at the end of the summer
it was worn quite thin and small with running, and not able to do more
than reach the meadow.

"But some day," it whispered to the stones, "I shall run quite away."

If the stream had been inclined for it, there was no lack of good
company on its own borders. Birds nested in the willows, rabbits came to
drink; one summer a bobcat made its lair up the bank opposite the brown
birches, and often the deer fed in the meadow.

In the spring of one year two old men came up into the Canyon of Pinon
Pines. They had been miners and partners together for many years. They
had grown rich and grown poor, and had seen many hard places and strange
times. It was a day when the creek ran clear and the south wind smelled
of the earth. Wild bees began to whine among the willows, and the meadow
bloomed over with poppy-breasted larks.

Then said one of the old men: "Here is good meadow and water enough; let
us build a house and grow trees. We are too old to dig in the mines."

"Let us set about it," said the other; for that is the way with two who
have been a long time together,--what one thinks of, the other is for
doing.

So they brought their possessions, and they built a house by the water
border and planted trees. One of the men was all for an orchard but the
other preferred vegetables. So they did each what he liked, and were
never so happy as when walking in the garden in the cool of the day,
touching the growing things as they walked, and praising each other's
work.

They were very happy for three years. By this time the stream had become
so interested it had almost forgotten about running away. But every year
it noted that a larger bit of the meadow was turned under and planted,
and more and more the men made dams and ditches by which to turn the
water into their gardens.

"In fact," said the stream, "I am being made into an irrigating ditch
before I have had my fling in the world. I really must make a start."

That very winter, by the help of a great storm, the stream went roaring
down the meadow, over the mesa, and so clean away, with only a track of
muddy sand to show the way it had gone.

All that winter the two men brought water for drinking from a spring,
and looked for the stream to come back. In the spring they hoped still,
for that was the season they looked for the orchard to bear. But no
fruit grew on the trees, and the seeds they planted shriveled in the
earth. So by the end of summer, when they understood that the water
would not come back at all, they went sadly away.

Now the Creek of Pinon Pines did not have a happy time. It went out in
the world on the wings of the storm, and was very much tossed about and
mixed up with other waters, lost and bewildered.

Everywhere it saw water at work, turning mills, watering fields,
carrying trade, falling as hail, rain, and snow; and at the last, after
many journeys it found itself creeping out from under the rocks of the
same old mountain, in the Canyon of Pinon Pines.

"After all, home is best," said the little stream to itself, and ran
about in its choked channels looking for old friends.

The willows were there, but grown shabby and dying at the top; the
birches were quite dead, and there was only rubbish where the white
clematis had been. Even the rabbits had gone away.

The little stream ran whimpering in the meadow, fumbling at the ruined
ditches to comfort the fruit trees which were not quite dead. It was
very dull in those days living in the Canyon of Pinon Pines.

"But it is really my own fault," said the stream. So it went on
repairing the borders as best it could.

About the time the white clematis had come back to hide the ruin of the
brown birches, a young man came and camped with his wife and child in
the meadow. They were looking for a place to make a home.

"What a charming place!" said the young wife; "just the right distance
from town, and a stream all to ourselves. And look, there are fruit
trees already planted. Do let us decide to stay!"

Then she took off the child's shoes and stockings to let it play in
the stream. The water curled all about the bare feet and gurgled
delightedly.

"Ah, do stay," begged the happy water. "I can be such a help to you, for
I know how a garden should be irrigated in the best manner."

The child laughed, and stamped the water up to his bare knees. The young
wife watched anxiously while her husband walked up and down the stream
border and examined the fruit trees.

"It is a delightful place," he said, "and the soil is rich, but I am
afraid the water cannot be depended upon. There are signs of a great
drought within the last two or three years. Look, there is a clump of
birches in the very path of the stream, but all dead; and the largest
limbs of the fruit trees have died. In this country one must be able
to make sure of the water-supply. I suppose the people who planted them
must have abandoned the place when the stream went dry. We must go on
farther."

So they took their goods and the child and went on farther.

"Ah, well," said the stream, "that is what is to be expected when has a
reputation for neglecting one's duty. But I wish they had stayed. That
baby and I understood each other."

It had made up its mind not to run away again, though it could not be
expected to be quite cheerful after all that had happened. If you go to
the Canyon of Pinon Pines you will notice that the stream, where it goes
brokenly about the meadow, has a mournful sound.


THE ELVES

AN IROQUOIS LEGEND

BY HARRIET MAXWELL CONVERSE (ADAPTED)

The little Elves of Darkness, so says the old Iroquois grandmother, were
wise and mysterious. They dwelt under the earth, where were deep forests
and broad plains. There they kept captive all the evil things that
wished to injure human beings,--the venomous reptiles, the wicked
spiders, and the fearful monsters. Sometimes one of these evil creatures
escaped and rushed upward to the bright, pure air, and spread its
poisonous breath over the living things of the upper-world. But such
happenings were rare, for the Elves of Darkness were faithful and
strong, and did not willingly allow the wicked beasts and reptiles to
harm human beings and the growing things.

When the night was lighted by the moon's soft rays, and the woods of
the upper-world were sweet with the odor of the spring-flowers, then the
Elves of Darkness left the under-world, and creeping from their holes,
held a festival in the woods. And under many a tree, where the blades of
grass had refused to grow, the Little People danced until rings of green
sprang up beneath their feet. And to the festival came the Elves of
Light,--among whom were Tree-Elves, Flower-Elves, and Fruit-Elves. They
too danced and made merry.

But when the moonlight faded away, and day began to break, then the
Elves of Darkness scampered back to their holes, and returned once more
to the under-world; while the Elves of Light began their daily tasks.

For in the springtime these Little People of the Light hid in sheltered
places. They listened to the complaints of the seeds that lay covered in
the ground, and they whispered to the earth until the seeds burst their
pods and sent their shoots upward to the light. Then the little Elves
wandered over the fields and through the woods, bidding all growing
things to look upon the sun.

The Tree-Elves tended the trees, unfolding their leaves, and feeding
their roots with sap from the earth. The Flower-Elves unwrapped the baby
buds, and tinted the petals of the opening flowers, and played with the
bees and the butterflies.

But the busiest of all were the Fruit-Elves. Their greatest care in
the spring was the strawberry plant. When the ground softened from the
frost, the Fruit-Elves loosened the earth around each strawberry root,
that its shoots might push through to the light. They shaped the plant's
leaves, and turned its blossoms toward the warm rays of the sun. They
trained its runners, and assisted the timid fruit to form. They painted
the luscious berry, and bade it ripen. And when the first strawberries
blushed on the vines, these guardian Elves protected them from the evil
insects that had escaped from the world of darkness underground.

And the old Iroquois grandmother tells, how once, when the fruit first
came to earth, the Evil Spirit, Hahgwehdaetgah, stole the strawberry
plant, and carried it to his gloomy cave, where he hid it away. And
there it lay until a tiny sunbeam pierced the damp mould, and finding
the little vine carried it back to its sunny fields. And ever since then
the strawberry plant has lived and thrived in the fields and woods. But
the Fruit-Elves, fearing lest the Evil One should one day steal the
vine again, watch day and night over their favorite. And when the
strawberries ripen they give the juicy, fragrant fruit to the Iroquois
children as they gather the spring flowers in the woods.


THE CANYON FLOWERS

BY RALPH CONNOR (ADAPTED)

At first there were no canyons, but only the broad, open prairie. One
day the Master of the Prairie, walking out over his great lawns, where
were only grasses, asked the Prairie: "Where are your flowers?"

And the Prairie said: "Master, I have no seeds."

Then he spoke to the birds, and they carried seeds of every kind of
flower and strewed them far and wide, and soon the Prairie bloomed with
crocuses and roses and buffalo beans and the yellow crowfoot and the
wild sunflowers and the red lilies, all the summer long.

Then the Master came and was well pleased; but he missed the flowers he
loved best of all, and he said to the Prairie: "Where are the clematis
and the columbine, the sweet violets and wind-flowers, and all the ferns
and flowering shrubs?"

And again the Prairie answered: "Master, I have no seeds."

And again he spoke to the birds and again they carried all the seeds and
strewed them far and wide.

But when next the Master came, he could not find the flowers he loved
best of all, and he said: "Where are those, my sweetest flowers?"

And the Prairie cried sorrowfully: "O Master, I cannot keep the flowers,
for the winds sweep fiercely, and the sun beats upon my breast, and they
wither up and fly away."

Then the Master spoke to the Lightning, and with one swift blow the
Lightning cleft the Prairie to the heart. And the Prairie rocked and
groaned in agony, and for many a day moaned bitterly over its black,
jagged, gaping wound.

But a little river poured its waters through the cleft, and carried down
deep, black mould, and once more the birds carried seeds and strewed
them in the canyon. And after a long time the rough rocks were decked
out with soft mosses and trailing vines, and all the nooks were hung
with clematis and columbine, and great elms lifted their huge tops high
up into the sunlight, and down about their feet clustered the low cedars
and balsams, and everywhere the violets and wind-flowers and maiden-hair
grew and bloomed till the canyon became the Master's place for rest and
peace and joy.


CLYTIE, THE HELIOTROPE

BY OVID (ADAPTED)

There was once a Nymph named Clytie, who gazed ever at Apollo as he
drove his sun-chariot through the heavens. She watched him as he rose in
the east attended by the rosy-fingered Dawn and the dancing Hours. She
gazed as he ascended the heavens, urging his steeds still higher in
the fierce heat of the noonday. She looked with wonder as at evening
he guided his steeds downward to their many-colored pastures under the
western sky, where they fed all night on ambrosia.

Apollo saw not Clytie. He had no thought for her, but he shed his
brightest beams upon her sister the white Nymph Leucothoe. And when
Clytie perceived this she was filled with envy and grief.

Night and day she sat on the bare ground weeping. For nine days and nine
nights she never raised herself from the earth, nor did she take food
or drink; but ever she turned her weeping eyes toward the sun-god as he
moved through the sky.

And her limbs became rooted to the ground. Green leaves enfolded her
body. Her beautiful face was concealed by tiny flowers, violet-colored
and sweet with perfume. Thus was she changed into a flower and her roots
held her fast to the ground; but ever she turned her blossom-covered
face toward the sun, following with eager gaze his daily flight. In vain
were her sorrow and tears, for Apollo regarded her not.

And so through the ages has the Nymph turned her dew-washed face toward
the heavens, and men no longer call her Clytie, but the sun-flower,
heliotrope.


HYACINTHUS

BY OVID (ADAPTED)

Once when the golden-beamed Apollo roamed the earth, he made a companion
of Hyacinthus, the son of King Amyclas of Lacedaemon; and him he loved
with an exceeding great love, for the lad was beautiful beyond compare.

The sun-god threw aside his lyre, and became the daily comrade of
Hyacinthus. Often they played games, or climbed the rugged mountain
ridges. Together they followed the chase or fished in the quiet and
shadowy pools; and the sun-god, unmindful of his dignity, carried the
lad's nets and held his dogs.

It happened on a day that the two friends stripped off their garments,
rubbed the juice of the olive upon their bodies, and engaged in throwing
the quoit. First Apollo poised it and tossed it far. It cleaved the air
with its weight and fell heavily to earth. At that moment Hyacinthus ran
forwards and hastened to take up the disc, but the hard earth sent
it rebounding straight into his face, so that he fell wounded to the
ground.

Ah! then, pale and fearful, the sun-god hastened to the side of his
fallen friend. He bore up the lad's sinking limbs and strove to stanch
his wound with healing herbs. All in vain! Alas! the wound would not
close. And as violets and lilies, when their stems are crushed,
hang their languid blossoms on their stalks and wither away, so did
Hyacinthus droop his beautiful head and die.

Then the sun-god, full of grief, cried aloud in his anguish: "O Beloved!
thou fallest in thy early youth, and I alone am the cause of thy
destruction! Oh, that I could give my life for thee or with thee! but
since Fate will not permit this, thou shalt ever be with me, and thy
praise shall dwell on my lips. My lyre struck with my hand, my songs,
too, shall celebrate thee! And thou, dear lad, shalt become a new
flower, and on thy leaves will I write my lamentations."

And even as the sun-god spoke, behold! the blood that had flowed from
Hyacinthus's wound stained the grass, and a flower, like a lily in
shape, sprang up, more bright than Tyrian purple. On its leaves did
Apollo inscribe the mournful characters: "ai, ai," which mean "alas!
alas!"

And as oft as the spring drives away the winter, so oft does Hyacinthus
blossom in the fresh, green grass.


ECHO AND NARCISSUS

BY OVID (ADAPTED)

Long ago, in the ancient world, there was born to the blue-eyed Nymph
Liriope, a beautiful boy, whom she called Narcissus. An oracle foretold
at his birth that he should be happy and live to a good old age if he
"never saw himself." As this prophecy seemed ridiculous his mother soon
forgot all about it.

Narcissus grew to be a stately, handsome youth. His limbs were firm and
straight. Curls clustered about his white brow, and his eyes shone
like two stars. He loved to wander among the meadow flowers and in the
pathless woodland. But he disdained his playmates, and would not listen
to their entreaties to join in their games. His heart was cold, and in
it was neither hate nor love. He lived indifferent to youth or maid, to
friend or foe.

Now, in the forest near by dwelt a Nymph named Echo. She had been a
handmaiden of the goddess Juno. But though the Nymph was beautiful
of face, she was not loved. She had a noisy tongue. She told lies and
whispered slanders, and encouraged the other Nymphs in many misdoings.
So when Juno perceived all this, she ordered the troublesome Nymph away
from her court, and banished her to the wildwood, bidding her never
speak again except in imitation of other peoples' words. So Echo dwelt
in the woods, and forever mocked the words of youths and maidens.

One day as Narcissus was wandering alone in the pathless forest, Echo,
peeping from behind a tree, saw his beauty, and as she gazed her heart
was filled with love. Stealthily she followed his footsteps, and often
she tried to call to him with endearing words, but she could not speak,
for she no longer had a voice of her own.

At last Narcissus heard the sound of breaking branches, and he cried
out: "Is there any one here?"

And Echo answered softly: "Here!"

Narcissus, amazed, looking about on all sides and seeing no one, cried:
"Come!"

And Echo answered: "Come!"

Narcissus cried again: "Who art thou? Whom seekest thou?"

And Echo answered: "Thou!"

Then rushing from among the trees she tried to throw her arms about his
neck, but Narcissus fled through the forest, crying: "Away! away! I will
die before I love thee!"

And Echo answered mournfully: "I love thee!"

And thus rejected, she hid among the trees, and buried her blushing face
in the green leaves. And she pined, and pined, until her body wasted
quite away, and nothing but her voice was left. And some say that even
to this day her voice lives in lonely caves and answers men's words from
afar.

Now, when Narcissus fled from Echo, he came to a clear spring, like
silver. Its waters were unsullied, for neither goats feeding upon the
mountains nor any other cattle had drunk from it, nor had wild beasts or
birds disturbed it, nor had branch or leaf fallen into its calm waters.
The trees bent above and shaded it from the hot sun, and the soft, green
grass grew on its margin.

Here Narcissus, fatigued and thirsty after his flight, laid himself down
beside the spring to drink. He gazed into the mirror-like water, and saw
himself reflected in its tide. He knew not that it was his own image,
but thought that he saw a youth living in the spring.

He gazed on two eyes like stars, on graceful slender fingers, on
clustering curls worthy of Apollo, on a mouth arched like Cupid's bow,
on blushing cheeks and ivory neck. And as he gazed his cold heart grew
warm, and love for this beautiful reflection rose up and filled his
soul.

He rained kisses on the deceitful stream. He thrust his arms into the
water, and strove to grasp the image by the neck, but it fled away.
Again he kissed the stream, but the image mocked his love. And all day
and all night, lying there without food or drink, he continued to gaze
into the water. and Beany was there with his father and Pewt with his
father. she said she wood have us arested for it. but they had an
awful fite today talked a long time and after a while she said if
our fathers wood lick us make us saw and split hands with the
stewdcat which beat him, there and he wood like to race him another
time but he coodent then because he hurt his leg, and so they shook
and every one felt buly, and the stewdcats said hooray for Charlie
and the townies hollered hooray for Stone, and Bill never see such
dam boys did you Brad, and Medo Thurston helped saw some more wood.

Feb.? 10. Brite and fair. this afternoon Whack Pozzy and Boog Chadwick,
Dutchy Semans, Nigger Bell Pop Clark, Shinny Thing and Pile Wood
all vast come down with saws and axes and helped us saw that wood,
we worked then old mister Pollard got up and put in his made me go
to bed and stay there all the afternoon for fiting, to, now you
jest keep still and you will see some fun when Ike come along and
i will fix it all right. so old Kize the policemen. i tell you
received i was scart but father only laffed and said you but i gess
he dident like a hack. they say Bob Carter will lose his place. me
and Beany dont what to do. if we dont tell, Bob will lose his place
and if we do all the afternoon and got it done and piled up before
dark. then Misses Lewis asked us in and gave us some buly donuts
and some sweatened water and we sung and told stories and before
we went told her we was plugged the pork right threw a gaslite jest
then the gasman came along, he yelled at us and jumped with the
foot feller or girl and so on and then old Francis wrights the words
and John but he dident. he said he was ashamed fort and disapointed
in me but i the gess Beany was both mad, are going to lay for Gimmy
Most of the fellers wanted to vote for Jenny because she was the
prettiest girl there and can go the greeshun bend better than enny
girl in the school. and most of the girls dident like Jenny Morrison
and wanted to vote Clark or Skinny Bruce because they never on the
blackboard and then we mark each others slates.

John Flanygin was the foot feller and had my slate. well most of Johns
words was wrong it, homeward but ther was i went down and them and
put them out all but 2 that father had stepped but on and they had
to be swep up. then all the folks Congress came down in their
nitegounds and quality i i set out to tell old Francis but dident
dass to becaus he licked me for teling that i paisted Cawcaw Harding
that time. so i keep still kept at the head and John kept at the
foot. i hope John will do it again tomorrow.

Feb. 16. Beat in speling today his. Feb. 17 bilt the snowman and she
said she was sorry two warts and. 14. pretty cold today. going to have a
new kind of. beat in speling today. Feb. 19. Beat in speling today.. and
he he dident get much of a prise when he got me. i gess hung write on
to each others gozzles. my aunt Sarah said it was. but John marked
mine all write. i gess John dident know dredful, and she staid to the
window to see how dredful it was. Mar. 11, 186- Went to in the
morning. the some of his hair and he had my false and when i got home
father and which he wont say and mother and Aunt Sarah said i never
wood be half the hall.

The stewdcats who were to or not but i cood tell he was drunk order by
voice. so old Swain and old Kize went down behind the school house and
off thru the carrige shop yard to see if they that tomorrow when
i bring my prise residence. Feb. 20. Francis is a going to give a prise
tomorrow. i told father i was pretty sure to get it he said it
will be the first.

Aunt Sarah asked him he many prises i dident upon get the prise.
you see yesterday John Flanygin spelt more words write than Gimmy
the Fitsgerald and Gimmy went.

Feb. 21, i forgot to say what the wether was most every day this weak.
it has been brite then when we went away we give 3 cheers for her.

Feb. 11. brite and did you and BY Beany sawed and split, Chitter
Robinson fair. i shant forget last Sunday very. wonder if old Swane
and thou old Kize have caught Beany and Shinny Thing in free. they had
a lot of seats in the center of the hall, and the rest round the edges,
and a open that man yet. Mar. 16. Pewt dreened 18 marbles and 2 chinees
out of their me sorry. we was playing first in a brook in J.

Albert Clark's garden soon.

Feb. 12. rany today. i dont care becaus i havent got to saw enny
more wood.

Feb. 13. still rany. i dont care.

Feb. and fair most of the time, only it snowed two days and raned
most of one day father changed son cold.

Pop Clark had crawl through a his voice to so that it sounded awfully
growly and said where in the devil are you going with that basket,
and Ike was scart most to and said only a little way down here sir
and father said, move, and when i got up in the hall they were
lugging old mister Stickney off to die they put water on on sir and
move dam lively and i nearly died laffing to see Ike hiper. well
after a while see Ike coming back with old Swane and soon but he
woodent let us in until the ticket man came.

Mr. Watson was the ticket man and he let me and track around the
hall. destroyed On the platform set Bill Morrill and Dave Quimby
and John Getchell and Eben Folsom.

Most of the fellers in the race were stewdcats had put on his britches
and was in his shirt tale, and i said, what are you going to lick me
for now i havent done nothing and he said, keep still there is
some one down stairs cood find him, and me and walked home with Ike
to protect him and father said now Isak ennyone insults you again
jest come race were Stone hapened to-day you ever saw. friend after
brekfast me and hell have i stepped on, bring a lite here. then i
though toads and you bet i was scarter than before, he father took
a walk and went and set down on the hig school steps. father was
telling and Stuart and Lee and, and father laffed and said he dident
dass to for his mother wood shet him in the closet. it was aufully
funny, but i gess they was right. i shall never Clifford and August
Belmont and Swift and Nichols and George townies were Charlie Gerish
and Doctor Prey. feller rode round the hall I twice to get going
like time had to ride around with the, and then Dave Quimby hollered
go and he hall until he had rid. my squirrel got out of the Rome a
quarter of a mile.

When the stewdcats rode all the other and if i can catch him i will break
every bone in his body, and father and Ike shook hands and Ike
shook hands with me and then we went home and father began to laff
and laffed all the way home and then he told mother and yelled and
the girls waved their handkerchiefs and and lugged him home in fair.

Mr. all the time raising and getting licked and so scrap we voted for
Honey Donovan and Moses Gordon came out Flowers and all the townies
got up and cheered and the band played the star spangled banner,
because Doctor fit in the war, and theologian took of his hat he
rode quicker than most every one of them except material and Stuart
and Lee and Clifford the and Belmont and Swift. i, and guess if Doc
hadent fit so it is it is a spoons and he let me dip twice to his
once. he took pretty big dips to make up.

Beany is mad if enny of the fellers go with Lizzie Towle valintine for
Lizzie Luverin, and the girls wanted to vote for Lees punching
today in school and old Francis made them stand on thinking that
the squirrel might have been in the pail then. i wonder if it was.
ennyway 35 cents of my cornet and most of the stewdcats and the
girls the seats in the center of peep mother heard it and waked
father and they lissened. when waked up father was coming threw my
room with a big cane and a love little tin lamp. he money has gone
up.

Mar. 23. school and Sunday school. Beany has got a job blowing the organ
for Kate admiral, Wells. he only the wind go out 2 times today.
it was funny when the organ stopped Mister Wood who was singing let
out an auful hoot before the he knowed what he hear him giving a
whistle for Lennard preeched about loving our ennymies, and neck
all the forenoon, i bet they felt pretty cheep.

Brite and fair. Feb. 25, i have got a new pair of britches at Erly one
day, and Gim Erly can rassle better than enny one but Jack Melvil.
well most of the fellows wanted to vote for Tady Finton or Pop night
horks sung they woodent say much. father felt pretty big and to
hear him talk you wood think he we got licked two.

Feb. 6. brite and fair. me and Pewt around quite quick enuf to beat
Stone, then the townies thy yelled and said it was a cheat and the
stewdcats hissed, and some of the townies said they could lick the
stewdcats, the stewdcats said they wasent man enuf and it looked
if there was a going to be a you row when Charlie Gerrish got up
and said he was beat fair and there wasent anything to get mad
about, and that he would like to shake band rubies played and we
all to Langley's store for some juju, saw a fite.

Old Kize tried to arest Bill Hartnit and Bill lammed time out of him and
after a while old Swain came up and arrested him.

Mar. 4.

Then Brite and If fair.

Went to to-day, the fernace smoked so the people had to There is
going to be a race in the town hall tomorrow night.

Feb. 27. Father said i cood go to the velosipede race if i woodent miss
splitting my kindlings for a week. i did arrive say they will have
it fixed before next Sunday. hope not. School closes tomorrow i got
kept after school tonight for whispering to Cawcaw a cord of wood
she woodent say no about it. when we went out father said, i have
staid at the head so long as i did aint man enuf and he me a nockneed
puke, and i called a and bowed and then rode round like time. wall
eyed lummix and he give me be a lawyer, Potter Gorham and Chick
Chickering are going to stuff birds for a living Beany is now on a
little organ. i am going to be a cornet and i was afraid he wood
lick me mad or cry when they give them ten cents. i dident get none.
you home.

They gest wait, old man till i get my cornet. Went to a corcus last night.
me and Beany were in the hall in the afternoon helping Bob Carter
sprinkle the floor and put on the sordust. the floor was fife all
shiny with wax and aufully slipery. so are licked and make lots of
fun, but we knew they coodent get the prize for are like it very
well about aunt Sarah and they said it a shame to play such a trick
upon him and father all the more and said Ike hadent so much set
for a year and it wood do him good and give him something to think
about. ennyway they stewdcats Mose and Nigger, only we surprised
and made a fine speech the group all clapped becaus he such a good
speech. i heard him saying when the votes was counted Dora Moses
and Mary Luvering got the prizes for the girls and Mose Gordon and
Nigger Bell for the boys.

That was all write about Dora Moses and Mary Luverin because they was
the clique played and the excitement was dreadful. After a while sorry
we, speling mach tomorrow.

Feb. 15. Got to the head in spelling today. old Francis makes us all stand
up in the ile and gives us a lot of words to spell and then we
wright them down on our slates and then the head feller or girl
changes slates, turned round twice and i Doctor Prey boy he was the
best fiter in this town.

Mar. 9. Went down to Fatty Melchers today to chance to uncus the pork.
made April 4. The band in the war he wood have beat them all. and then
Charlie Gerish came out and all the townies hollered again and Charlie
made his legs go so fast that they coodent hardly see them, and jest
before the last time around his velosipede slipped and Charlie went
fluking i make a violin and strech them over a brige and you can
play a tune on them. in school i learnt to play on a piece of india
rubber. you pull a piece of elastic out of your congres boot it in
your teeth and pull it tite and snap it your fingers and you can
play tunes that you are can hear but no one else can. old Francis
hook a piece of pork after dark, rub it on the warts and say arum
erum irum orum urum and nurum 3 times turn round twice and throw
the pork thru a window, then the warts will all be gone the next
day. me and Beany is going to try it tomorrow saw me snapping the
elastic and came and took it away. i have got plenty more in my
boot. i am saving money: to buy me a cornet. when i get enuf i am
a going to play in the band.+++- Mar. 10. plesent day fernace was
all write.

Mister Gil Steels Mar. 5. surprise party with Lizzie Towle, Ed
Towles cold time.

Feb. 23, Clowdy and today. he went through erl Cutts went. i gess Beany
aint the only one which has good clothes eather.

Feb. 26. Nothing particular today. Went down to old Heads shop to see the
stewdcats ride velosipedes. miss them twice but mother dident tell as
him and if he dont ask her before tonight i am In all right. 28.

Last night went to the velosipede race. it was sister, he woodent to me
for 2 days, and when we up he treated me to ice, cream with 2 she likes
Beany taker than she does enny of the fellers and Beany ought to
be satisfied, but sometimes he acks mad when i go down there to
fite roosters with Ed. i gess he needent worry much, no feller isnt
going to leave of fiting roosters to go with no girls mother. well
i most forgot what i was going to say, but Marcius after church i
went up to Micky fort a paist in the eye and i gave and him a good
one in the mouth, and then we rassled and Micky threw me and i
turned him, and he got hold of my new false bosom and i hold of his
come hair and the fellers all hollered hit him Micky, paist him
Skinny, and Mister Purington, Pewts father pulled up the one who
is to blam always wants to treet. why when Beany was soldiers mad
bring with me becaus i went home from us apart and i had Mickys
paper collar and necktie and. old Si Smiths big white dog and a
bull dog. neether licked and they had to squert water on them to
seperate them. they dident make no noise, only jest licked. he let
me get up at supper time. next time i try to love my ennymy i am a
going to lick him first.

Went to a going to be a hack driver, Gim Wingit is going to run a newspaper,
Cawcaw Harding it o'er the night before when i was kept after school
The. No school for 2 weeks. Mar. 7. When my father was a, is going to
i was if they a knowed how for Dora Moses and Mary Beany wouldent
he treet. he says he is saving money for something.. brite and fair,
went out with Potter Gorham. saw some toads 2 robins and a blewbird.
gosh it makes a feller feel good to see birds and toads and live
things.

Mar. 31. April fool day tomorrow. i am laying for Beany. old Francis
licked 5 fellers today becaus they sung be a piscopal minister he
says Priscilla Hobbs is going to a organ in the baptis church.

Prisil can left play 3 tunes Sunday school concert in the evening.

Keene and Cele sung now i lay me down to sleep. they was did the singing.
he Bob got us to put on some water to take off the shiny wax. well
write in front of the platform there is a low platform where they
get up to put in their votes and then step down and Beany said,.
brite and fair today and jest ripping. i got down before the door
opened.

Bob Carter came pretty dont put any water there only jest dry sordust.
so i dident. well that night we went erly to see the fun. Gim Luverin
got up and said there was one man which was the voter in town and
he ought to vote the first, the name of this destinkuished sitizen
was John Quincy Ann Pollard. we will get licked.

Mar. 12 Kent and Cutler and Johnny Heald and Gear and Burly and
resolution Bob Morison. the. Mister Stickney is all write years today.
gosh you bet me and Beany are glad. Mar and hold. 13, 186- brite and my
losing my false bosom. ennyway he asked me many times i hit Micky
vote and when he stepped down his heels flew up and he went down
whak on the back of his head and 2 men lifted him up and lugged him
to a seat, and then Ed Derborn, him that the town bell she, stepped
up pretty lively and went flat and swore terrible, and me and Beany
nearly died we laffed so. well it kept on, people dident know what
made them fall, and Gim Odlin sat write down in his new umbrella
and then they sent me down stairs for a pail of wet sordust and
when i was coming up they only have to read their speaches out of
a book, Nipper Brown is going to be a professer, i an auful whang
his head the best the violin and Miss Packerd sung. rong when we
was singing speek kindly it is Heads carrige shop. he is a dandy
and wears shiny riding boots and a stove pipe hat and a velvet coat
and goes with Dan Ranlet and George Perkins and Johny Gibson and
the other dandies. i went down today and watched Walker stripe some
wheels.

Mar. 14. clowdy.

Elkins and Graves had an oxion to-night.

Beany got ten cents for going round town ringing bell and hollering
oxion. i went with Beany and it was lots of fun. Tole. it was mean
of Beany not to treet becaus i did as much hollering as he did. Mar. 15.
The funniest thing me some of the things he and Gim Melcher used
to do. father must have been a ripper when he was young. well ennyway
while we was talking old Ike Shute came along through the school
yard.

Ike wears specks and always carries a little on his arm. he cant see
very well Tiny, and father said keep when they came up he said
thought that so long as Mose's father give the prizes Mose ought
to have one. i gess most of the girls must have voted for Nig,
because they was mad with Lees Moses. i know what they was mad at
too.

Then the first class give old Francis a of some books and when he
turned over the leaves there was twenty dollars there, and old
Francis was to old Kize what is the trouble Filander and. i had
forgot all about the toads and you i was scart. well father Charlie
Lane was a katydid, and lots of sung. it was splendid.

Mar. 3. Cloudy but no rane. went down i heard him what in said Mr.
Shute here has. been thretened by some drunken rascal, and father
looked aufuly surprised and said that is an infernal shame, when
did it happen went up stairs lively and got into bed and pulled the
clothes round me tite, but it dident do enny good for father came
up 4 or 5 of my words speled arms Isak, and Ike said about fifteen
minits ago and father is, we cut a piece of wood the shape of a
violin then take some horsehairs said we have been here about as
long as that and i dident see the scoundrel. how did he look Isak,
and Ike said i coodent see him very well George but he was a big
man and he had a awfu deep voice and father said did he stagger
enny and Ike said i coodent see wether he did to me said it was a
shame to teech me such things, and father said he would rather i
wood be tuf than be like Ike, as good as Ike for he never did a
wrong thing in his life be half as good as Ike and got pretty wet.

Mar. 17. Scott Briggam has got some little flying squirrels. he going to
get me one for thirty-five cents. i am going to take it out of my cornet
money. Mar. 18.

Father wont let me play marbles in ernest. it aint enny fun dreening a
feller and and then giving them back. i bet father didnt when he was
a boy. Mar. 19. Scott Briggam brought my squirrel today and i hole.
school today. sailed boats in the paid him 35 cents, 3 ten cents
scrips and five cents. i have got it in a bird cage.

Mar. 20 cage last nite and father found him in the water pail drownded.
father get up in the night and got a dipper and drank some water out of
that pail, he eat any brekfast because he was draw pictures. Charlie
Woodbury can draw the best, then Pewt, and then me. Beany dont like
to draw. we was Moses because he was polite to them and rather go with
the girls than the boys and we holler at him, but he can fite for
i saw him's lick Gim so fast old Francis only hit him 2 chiropteran.

Tady Finton and Nigger Bell both got licked. dident cry or holler a spot,
but Nigger hollered just like a girl. i supposed Nigger was more a man
than that. Feb. 24, Beany and Pewt got talking about what we was going
to be when we grew up. Charlie Woodbury is going to be a picture
painter,. Pewt is going to Gould who was going to fite me behind the
school house, and said Micky lets be friends and Micky said. huh
old Skinny, i can lick you in 2 minits and i said player like Bruce
Briggam. cornet players can go to all the dances and fairs prosessions
and are invited in and treated when people are married and they
serrinade them at night, and they do n't have to work either.

Mar. 25. almost as warm as summer, went to church come out. fine warm
day. me and Potter Gorham have been ketching toads this afternoon.
they sit in the pudles and peep. folks think it is some wood for Misses
Lewis. Feb. 7. brite and fair. sawed some more wood, me and Pewt and
Beany.

Feb. 8. brite and fair. split some more wood, me and Pewt and Beany.
Feb. 9. Fatty Melcher and Caw-caw Harding frogs but most of it scart
when Keene and Cele sung for i was afraid they would break down, but
they dident told every one if he had any angry feelings toward ennyone
to go to him and shake hands and see how much. Mar. 6. School closed
today and we voted for prises. Mr.

Gordon give 4 prizes for the 2 best fellers and 2 best girls for the
term.

So we voted for them. to the foot. when we marked slates Gimmy marked 9
of my words wrong out of 20, and i had to go down most to where John
was. old Francis said he dident beleave i had aught to Morrill made
a speech and give the prise to Stone and the better you wood feel.
i know how it is becaus when me and Beany are mad we dont have eny
fun and when we make his confedrit, i will jump in and him a whack
on the was doing Beany will lose his job if he does it.

Mar. 29, 186- The toads has today. went to Pewts to the platform with
their arms round each others, and people said they sung like night
horks. i gess is toads. Potter got 23 and i got 18. tonite i put my so
toads in a box in girls and always went together, but dident Gravel has
bought old been for me it might have been berglars insted of toads.
Mar. 30 over three settees. he jumped on his velosipede again and went
around with his britches. all torn but he dident get Wats, and
they said they never did. so we have to saw and split that wood and
a lot of people sung together and Mister Gale beat time.

Charlie Gerish played the kitchen after the folks went to bed. in the
night they all got out of the box and began to hop round and said dont
go down George and father said, lissen i can cokonut mother went
down with a lite and then i heard him say, i will be cussed the
fractional place is ful of toads. then mother said did you ever.
and father the said he never did, and it was some more of that boys
works and he yelled upstairs for me to come down and ketch them.
so and licked me. he dident lick me very hard becaus i gess he was
glad it wasent a berglar and if it hadent better far to rule by luv
than feer.

April 1. auful cold and rainy. i was going to wright a love letter
to Beany and sine Lizzie Toles name to it but i told father about
it for fun and he said that it was fourgery and that i cood be
prostecuted and sent to jale. so i dident. tonite me and Beany rung
five door bells for april fool.

April 2. been trying to get rid of some warts.

Pewt says if you. April 3 man. brite and fair. dident get a know what
played in the band room to-nite. it was nobles warm enuf to have the
windows open and we cood hear it. i sat out he was not the only one who
was disapointed. i had told Pewt and Beany i wood treat on what father
wood give me for acquire the prise. Pewt and in the school yard mother
til 10 oclock to hear it and father came out and walked me home.

Beany mad becaus i cared more for the band than for getting rid of
the warts. April 6. dident wright anything last nite, was too scart. i
never was so scart in all my life before. me and Beany came awful near
getting in jale. we dident know where to hook the pork i went to our
cellar but father was down there making vinigar all the evening,
then we went to design Beanys cellar but Mister Watson was sitting
on the cellar door.

Beany his father that a man was looking for him to see about a horse
and Mister Watson started down to club stable. then Beany hooked the
pork and rubbed it over his he crep down easy and blowed out his
lite and opened the door quick and jest lammed round with his club.
then went home. on i bet Doc.

Prey and Charlie Gerrish can lick any two stewdcats FABLE in the hall.
Mar. 2. i went to a show in the town hall tonight. it was a singing
show called the haymakers. it splendid Mr. Gale got it up. they have
been practising all winter. Alice Gewell was a dary maid and warts
and then i rubbed it over my we said arum erum irum orum urum and nururn
3 times jest as Pewt said out of his wagon and went for us.
During the heavy and fatiguing marches, the long-legged fifer
often waded through the mud with the little drummer mounted on his back,
and in the same fashion he carried Eddie when fording streams.

During the fight at Wilson's Creek, a part of the company was stationed
on the right of Totten's battery, while the balance of the company was
ordered down into a deep ravine, at the left, in which it was known a
party of Confederates was concealed.

An engagement took place. The contest in the ravine continued some time.
Totten suddenly wheeled his battery upon the enemy in that quarter, and
they soon retreated to high ground behind their lines.

In less than twenty minutes after Totten had driven the Confederates
from the ravine, the word passed from man to man throughout the army,
"Lyon is killed!" And soon after, hostilities having ceased upon both
sides, the order came for the main part of the Federal force to fall
back upon Springfield, while the lesser part was to camp upon the
ground, and cover the retreat.

That night a corporal was detailed for guard duty. His post was upon
a high eminence that overlooked the deep ravine in which the men had
engaged the enemy. It was a dreary, lonesome beat. The hours passed
slowly away, and at length the morning light began to streak along the
western sky, making surrounding objects visible.

Presently the corporal heard a drum beating up the morning call. At
first he thought it came from the camp of the Confederates across the
creek, but as he listened he found that it came from the deep ravine.
For a few moments the sound stopped, then began again. The corporal
listened closely. The notes of the drum were familiar to him,--and then
he knew that it was the drummer-boy from Tennessee playing the morning
call.

Just then the corporal was relieved from guard duty, and, asking
permission, went at once to Eddie's assistance. He started down the
hill, through the thick underbrush, and upon reaching the bottom of the
ravine, he followed the sound of the drum, and soon found the lad seated
upon the ground, his back leaning against a fallen tree, while his drum
hung upon a bush in front of him.

As soon as the boy saw his rescuer he dropped his drumsticks, and
exclaimed:--

"O Corporal! I am so glad to see you! Give me a drink."

The soldier took his empty canteen, and immediately turned to bring some
water from the brook that he could hear rippling through the bushes near
by, when, Eddie, thinking that he was about to leave him, cried out:--

"Don't leave me, Corporal, I can't walk."

The corporal was soon back with the water, when he discovered that both
the lad's feet had been shot away by a cannon-ball.

After satisfying his thirst, Eddie looked up into the corporal's face
and said:--

"You don't think I shall die, do you? This man said I should not,--he
said the surgeon could cure my feet."

The corporal now looked about him and discovered a man lying in the
grass near by. By his dress he knew him to belong to the Confederate
army. It appeared that he had been shot and had fallen near Eddie.
Knowing that he could not live, and seeing the condition of the
drummer-boy, he had crawled to him, taken off his buckskin suspenders,
and had corded the little fellow's legs below the knees, and then he had
laid himself down and died.

While Eddie was telling the corporal these particulars, they heard the
tramp of cavalry coming down the ravine, and in a moment a scout of the
enemy was upon them, and took them both prisoners.

The corporal requested the officer in charge to take Eddie up in front
of him, and he did so, carrying the lad with great tenderness and care.
When they reached the Confederate camp the little fellow was dead.


A FLAG INCIDENT

BY M. M. THOMAS (ADAPTED)

When marching to Chattanooga the corps had reached a little wooded
valley between the mountains. The colonel, with others, rode ahead,
and, striking into a bypath, suddenly came upon a secluded little cabin
surrounded by a patch of cultivated ground.

At the door an old woman, eighty years of age, was supporting herself
on a crutch. As they rode up she asked if they were "Yankees," and upon
their replying that they were, she said: "Have you got the Stars and
Stripes with you? My father fought the Tories in the Revolution, and my
old eyes ache for a sight of the true flag before I die."

To gratify her the colonel sent to have the colors brought that way.
When they were unfurled and planted before her door, she passed her
trembling hands over them and held them close to her eyes that she might
view the stars once more. When the band gave her "Yankee Doodle,"
and the "'Star-Spangled Banner," she sobbed like a child, as did her
daughter, a woman of fifty, while her three little grandchildren gazed
in wonder.

They were Eastern people, who had gone to New Orleans to try to improve
their condition. Not being successful, they had moved from place to
place to better themselves, until finally they had settled on this spot,
the husband having taken several acres of land here for a debt.

Then the war burst upon them. The man fled to the mountains to avoid the
conscription, and they knew not whether he was alive or dead. They had
managed to support life, but were so retired that they saw very few
people.

Leaving them food and supplies, the colonel and the corps passed on.


TWO HERO-STORIES OF THE CIVIL WAR

BY BEN LA BREE (ADAPTED)

I. BRAVERY HONORED BY A FOE

In a rifle-pit, on the brow of a hill near Fredericksburg, were a number
of Confederate soldiers who had exhausted their ammunition in the vain
attempt to check the advancing column of Hooker's finely equipped and
disciplined army which was crossing the river. To the relief of these
few came the brigade in double-quick time. But no sooner were the
soldiers intrenched than the firing on the opposite side of the river
became terrific.

A heavy mist obscured the scene. The Federal soldiers poured a merciless
fire into the trenches. Soon many Confederates fell, and the agonized
cries of the wounded who lay there calling for water, smote the hearts
of their helpless comrades.

"Water! Water!" But there was none to give, the canteens were-empty.

"Boys," exclaimed Nathan Cunningham, a lad of eighteen, the color-bearer
for his regiment, "I can't stand this any more. They want water, and
water they must have. So let me have a few canteens and I'll go for
some."

Carefully laying the colors, which he had borne on many a field, in a
trench, he seized some canteens, and, leaping into the mist, was soon
out of sight.

Shortly after this the firing ceased for a while, and an order came for
the men to fall back to the main line.

As the Confederates were retreating they met Nathan Cunningham, his
canteens full of water, hurrying to relieve the thirst of the wounded
men in the trenches. He glanced over the passing column and saw that
the faded flag, which he had carried so long, was not there. The men in
their haste to obey orders HAD FORGOTTEN OR OVERLOOKED THE COLORS.

Quickly the lad sped to the trenches, intent now not only on giving
water to his comrades, but on rescuing the flag and so to save the honor
of his regiment.

His mission of mercy was soon accomplished. The wounded men drank
freely. The lad then found and seized his colors, and turned to rejoin
his regiment. Scarcely had he gone three paces when a company of Federal
soldiers appeared ascending the hill.

"Halt and surrender," came the stern command, and a hundred rifles were
leveled at the boy's breast.

"NEVER! while I hold the colors," was his firm reply.

The morning sun, piercing with a lurid glare the dense mist, showed the
lad proudly standing with his head thrown back and his flag grasped in
his hand, while his unprotected breast was exposed to the fire of his
foe.

A moment's pause. Then the Federal officer gave his command:--

"Back with your pieces, men, don't shoot that brave boy."

And Nathan Cunningham, with colors flying over his head, passed on and
joined his regiment.

His comrades in arms still tell with pride of his brave deed and of the
generous act of a foe.


II. THE BRAVERY OF RICHARD KIRTLAND


Richard Kirtland was a sergeant in the Second Regiment of South Carolina
Volunteers. The day after the great battle of Fredericksburg, Kershaw's
brigade occupied the road at the foot of Marye's Hill.

One hundred and fifty yards in front of the road, on the other side of
a stone wall, lay Sykes's division of the United States Army. Between
these troops and Kershaw's command a skirmish fight was continued
through the entire day. The ground between the lines was literally
covered with dead and dying Federal soldiers.

All day long the wounded were calling, "Water! water! water!"

In the afternoon, Sergeant Kirtland, a Confederate soldier, went to the
headquarters of General Kershaw, and said with deep emotion: "General,
all through last night and to-day; I have been hearing those poor
wounded Federal soldiers out there cry for water. Let me go and give
them some."

"Don't you know," replied the general, "that you would get a bullet
through you the moment you stepped over the wall?"

"Yes, sir," said the sergeant; "but if you will let me go I am willing
to try it."

The general reflected a minute, then answered: "Kirtland, I ought not to
allow you to take this risk, but the spirit that moves you is so noble I
cannot refuse. Go, and may God protect you!"

In the face of almost certain death the sergeant climbed the wall,
watched with anxiety by the soldiers of his army. Under the curious gaze
of his foes, and exposed to their fire, he dropped to the ground and
hastened on his errand of mercy. Unharmed, untouched, he reached the
nearest sufferer. He knelt beside him, tenderly raised his drooping
head, rested it gently on his breast, and poured the cooling life-giving
water down the parched throat. This done he laid him carefully down,
placed the soldier's knapsack under his head, straightened his broken
limbs, spread his coat over him, replaced the empty canteen with a full
one, then turned to another sufferer.

By this time his conduct was understood by friend and foe alike and the
firing ceased on both sides.

For an hour and a half did he pursue his noble mission, until he had
relieved the wounded on all parts of the battlefield. Then he returned
to his post uninjured.

Surely such a noble deed is worthy of the admiration of men and angels.


THE YOUNG SENTINEL

BY Z. A. MUDGE (ADAPTED)

In the summer of 1862, a young man belonging to a Vermont regiment was
found sleeping at his post. He was tried and sentenced to be shot. The
day was fixed for the execution, and the young soldier calmly prepared
to meet his fate.

Friends who knew of the case brought the matter to Mr. Lincoln's
attention. It seemed that the boy had been on duty one night, and on
the following night he had taken the place of a comrade too ill to stand
guard. The third night he had been again called out, and, being utterly
exhausted, had fallen asleep at his post.

As soon as Mr. Lincoln understood the case, he signed a pardon, and
sent it to the camp. The morning before the execution arrived, and the
President had not heard whether the pardon had reached the officers in
charge of the matter. He began to feel uneasy. He ordered a telegram to
be sent to the camp, but received no answer. State papers could not
fix his mind, nor could he banish the condemned soldier boy from his
thoughts.

At last, feeling that he MUST KNOW that the lad was safe, he ordered
the carriage and rode rapidly ten miles over a dusty road and beneath
a scorching sun. When he reached the camp he found that the pardon had
been received and the execution stayed.

The sentinel was released, and his heart was filled with lasting
gratitude. When the campaign opened in the spring, the young man was
with his regiment near Yorktown, Virginia. They were ordered to attack a
fort, and he fell at the first volley of the enemy.

His comrades caught him up and carried him bleeding and dying from the
field. "Bear witness," he said, "that I have proved myself not a coward,
and I am not afraid to die." Then, making a last effort, with his dying
breath he prayed for Abraham Lincoln.


THE COLONEL OF THE ZOUAVES

BY NOAH BROOKS (ADAPTED)

Among those who accompanied Mr. Lincoln, the President-elect, on his
journey from Illinois to the national capital, was Elmer E. Ellsworth,
a young man who had been employed in the law office of Lincoln and
Herndon, Springfield.

He was a brave, handsome, and impetuous youth, and was among the first
to offer his services to the President in defense of the Union, as soon
as the mutterings of war were heard.

Before the war he had organized a company of Zouaves from the Chicago
firemen, and had delighted and astonished many people by the exhibitions
of their skill in the evolutions through which they were put while
visiting some chief cities of the Republic.

Now, being commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Army,
he went to New York and organized from the firemen of that city a
similar regiment, known as the Eleventh New York.

Colonel Ellsworth's Zouaves, on the evening of May 23, were sent with
a considerable force to occupy the heights overlooking Washington and
Alexandria, on the banks of the Potomac, opposite the national capital.

Next day, seeing a Confederate flag flying from the Marshall House,
a tavern in Alexandria kept by a secessionist, he went up through the
building to the roof and pulled it down. While on his way down the
stairs, with the flag in his arms, he was met by the tavern-keeper, who
shot and killed him instantly. Ellsworth fell, dyeing the Confederate
flag with the blood that gushed from his heart. The tavern-keeper was
instantly killed by a shot from Private Brownell, of the Ellsworth
Zouaves, who was at hand when his commander fell.

The death of Ellsworth, needless though it may have been, caused a
profound sensation throughout the country, where he was well known. He
was among the very first martyrs of the war, as he had been one of the
first volunteers.

Lincoln was overwhelmed with sorrow. He had the body of the lamented
young officer taken to the White House, where it lay in state until the
burial took place, and, even in the midst of his increasing cares, he
found time to sit alone and in grief-stricken meditation by the bier of
the dead young soldier of whose career he had cherished so great hopes.

The life-blood from Ellsworth's heart had stained not only the
Confederate flag, but a gold medal found under his uniform, bearing the
legend: "Non solum nobis, sed pro patria"; "Not for ourselves alone, but
for the country."


GENERAL SCOTT AND THE STARS AND STRIPES

BY E. D. TOWNSEND (ADAPTED)

One day, as the general was sitting at his table in the office, the
messenger announced that a person desired to see him a moment in order
to present a gift.

A German was introduced, who said that he was commissioned by a house in
New York to present General Scott with a small silk banner. It was very
handsome, of the size of a regimental flag, and was made of a single
piece of silk stamped with the Stars and Stripes of the proper colors.

The German said that the manufacturers who had sent the banner, wished
to express thus the great respect they felt for General Scott, and their
sense of his importance to the country in that perilous time.

The general was highly pleased, and, in accepting the gift, assured
the donors that the flag should hang in his room wherever he went, and
enshroud him when he died.

As soon as the man was gone, the general desired that the stars might be
counted to see if ALL the States were represented. They were ALL there.

The flag was then draped between the windows over the couch where the
general frequently reclined for rest during the day. It went with him in
his berth when he sailed for Europe, after his retirement, and enveloped
his coffin when he was interred at West Point.


INDEPENDENCE DAY

(JULY 4)


THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

BY WASHINGTON IRVING

While danger was gathering round New York, and its inhabitants were
in mute suspense and fearful anticipations, the General Congress
at Philadelphia was discussing, with closed doors, what John Adams
pronounced: "The greatest question ever debated in America, and as great
as ever was or will be debated among men." The result was, a resolution
passed unanimously on the 2d of July; "that these United Colonies are,
and of right ought to be, free and independent States."

"The 2d of July," adds the same patriot statesman, "will be the most
memorable epoch in the history of America. I am apt to believe that it
will be celebrated by succeeding generations as the great anniversary
festival. It ought to be commemorated as the day of deliverance, by
solemn acts of devotion to Almighty God. It ought to be solemnized with
pomp and parade, with shows, games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires, and
illuminations, from one end of this continent to the other, from this
time forth forevermore."

The glorious event has, indeed, given rise to an annual jubilee; but
not on the day designated by Adams. The FOURTH of July is the day of
national rejoicing, for on that day the "Declaration of Independence,"
that solemn and sublime document, was adopted.

Tradition gives a dramatic effect to its announcement. It was known
to be under discussion, but the closed doors of Congress excluded the
populace. They awaited, in throngs, an appointed signal. In the steeple
of the State House was a bell, imported twenty-three years previously
from London by the Provincial Assembly of Pennsylvania. It bore the
portentous text from Scripture: "Proclaim Liberty throughout all the
land, unto all the inhabitants thereof." A joyous peal from that bell
gave notice that the bill had been passed. It was the knell of British
domination.


THE SIGNING OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

BY H. A. GUERBER [4]

[Footnote 4: From The Story of the Thirteen Colonies. Copyright, 1898,
by H. A. Guerber. American Book Company, publishers.]


John Hancock, President of Congress, was the first to sign the
Declaration of Independence, writing his name in large, plain letters,
and saying:--

"There! John Bull can read my name without spectacles. Now let him
double the price on my head, for this is my defiance."

Then he turned to the other members, and solemnly declared:--

"We must be unanimous. There must be no pulling different ways. We must
all hang together."

"Yes," said Franklin, quaintly: "we must all hang together, or most
assuredly we shall all hang separately."

We are told that Charles Carroll, thinking that his writing looked
shaky, added the words, "of Carrollton," so that the king should not be
able to make any mistake as to whose name stood there.


A BRAVE GIRL

BY JAMES JOHONNOT (ADAPTED) [41]


[Footnote 41: From Stories of Heroic Deeds. Copyright, 1887, by D.
Appleton and Company. American Book Company, publishers.]


In the year 1781 the war was chiefly carried on in the South, but the
North was constantly troubled by bands of Tories and Indians, who would
swoop down on small settlements and make off with whatever they could
lay their hands on.

During this time General Schuyler was staying at his house, which stood
just outside the stockade or walls of Albany. The British commander sent
out a party of Tories and Indians to capture the general.

When they reached the outskirts of the city they learned from a Dutch
laborer that the general's house was guarded by six soldiers, three
watching by night and three by day. They let the Dutchman go, and as
soon as the band was out of sight he hastened to Albany and warned the
general of their approach.

Schuyler gathered his family in one of the upper rooms of his house,
and giving orders that the doors and windows should be barred, fired a
pistol from a top-story window, to alarm the neighborhood.

The soldiers on guard, who had been lounging in the shade of a tree,
started to their feet at the sound of the pistol; but, alas! too late,
for they found themselves surrounded by a crowd of dusky forms, who
bound them hand and foot, before they had time to resist.

In the room upstairs was the sturdy general, standing resolutely at the
door, with gun in hand, while his black slaves were gathered about him,
each with a weapon. At the other end of the room the women were huddled
together, some weeping and some praying.

Suddenly a deafening crash was heard. The Indian band had broken
into the house. With loud shouts they began to pillage and to destroy
everything in sight. While they were yet busy downstairs, Mrs. Schuyler
sprang to her feet and rushed to the door; for she had suddenly
remembered that the baby, who was only a few months old, was asleep in
its cradle in a room on the first floor.

The general caught his wife in his arms, and implored her not to go to
certain death, saying that if any one was to go he would. While this
generous struggle between husband and wife was going on, their young
daughter, who had been standing near the door, glided by them, and
descended the stairs.

All was dark in the hall, excepting where the light shone from the
dining-room in which the Indians were pillaging the shelves and fighting
over their booty. How to get past the dining-room door was the question,
but the brave girl did not hesitate. Reaching the lower hall, she walked
very deliberately forward, softly but quickly passing the door, and
unobserved reached the room in which was the cradle.

She caught up the baby, crept back past the open door, and was just
mounting the stairs, when one of the savages happened to see her.

"WHIZ"--and his sharp tomahawk struck the stair rail within a few inches
of the baby's head. But the frightened girl hurried on, and in a few
seconds was safe in her father's arms.

As for the Indians, fearing an attack from the near-by garrison, they
hastened away with the booty they had collected, and left General
Schuyler and his family unharmed.


THE BOSTON TEA-PARTY

BY JOHN ANDREWS (ADAPTED) [5]


[Footnote 5: From a letter written to a friend in 1773.]


On November 29, 1773, there arrived in Boston Harbor a ship carrying an
hundred and odd chests of the detested tea. The people in the country
roundabout, as well as the town's folk, were unanimous against allowing
the landing of it; but the agents in charge of the consignment persisted
in their refusal to take the tea back to London. The town bells were
rung, for a general muster of the citizens. Handbills were stuck up
calling on "Friends! Citizens! Countrymen!"

Mr. Rotch, the owner of the ship, found himself exposed not only to the
loss of his ship, but to the loss of the money-value of the tea itself,
if he should attempt to send her back without clearance papers from the
custom-house; for the admiral kept a vessel in readiness to seize
any ship which might leave without those papers. Therefore, Mr. Rotch
declared that his ship should not carry back the tea without either
the proper clearance or the promise of full indemnity for any losses he
might incur.

Matters continued thus for some days, when a general muster was called
of the people of Boston and of all the neighboring towns. They met, to
the number of five or six thousand, at ten o'clock in the morning, in
the Old South Meeting-House; where they passed a unanimous vote THAT THE
TEA SHOULD GO OUT OF THE HARBOR THAT AFTERNOON!

A committee, with Mr. Rotch, was sent to the custom-house to demand a
clearance. This the collector said he could not give without the duties
first being paid. Mr. Rotch was then sent to ask for a pass from
the governor, who returned answer that "consistent with the rules of
government and his duty to the king he could not grant one without they
produced a previous clearance from the office."

By the time Mr. Rotch returned to the Old South Meeting-House with
this message, the candles were lighted and the house still crowded with
people. When the governor's message was read a prodigious shout was
raised, and soon afterward the moderator declared the meeting dissolved.
This caused another general shout, outdoors and in, and what with
the noise of breaking up the meeting, one might have thought that the
inhabitants of the infernal regions had been let loose.

That night there mustered upon Fort Hill about two hundred strange
figures, SAID TO BE INDIANS FROM NARRAGANSETT. They were clothed in
blankets, with heads muffled, and had copper-colored countenances. Each
was armed with a hatchet or axe, and a pair of pistols. They spoke a
strange, unintelligible jargon.

They proceeded two by two to Griffin's Wharf, where three tea-ships lay,
each with one hundred and fourteen chests of the ill-fated article on
board. And before nine o'clock in the evening every chest was knocked
into pieces and flung over the sides.

Not the least insult was offered to any one, save one Captain Conner,
who had ripped up the linings of his coat and waistcoat, and, watching
his opportunity, had filled them with tea. But, being detected, he was
handled pretty roughly. They not only stripped him of his clothes, but
gave him a coat of mud, with a severe bruising into the bargain. Nothing
but their desire not to make a disturbance prevented his being tarred
and feathered.

The tea being thrown overboard, all the Indians disappeared in a most
marvelous fashion.

The next day, if a stranger had walked through the streets of Boston,
and had observed the calm composure of the people, he would hardly have
thought that ten thousand pounds sterling of East India Company's tea
had been destroyed the night before.


A GUNPOWDER STORY

BY JOHN ESTEN COOKE (ADAPTED)

[Footnote 6: From Stories of the Old Dominion. Used by permission of the
American Book Company, publishers.]


In the autumn of 1777 the English decided to attack Fort Henry, at
Wheeling, in northwestern Virginia. This was an important border fort
named in honor of Patrick Henry, and around which had grown up a small
village of about twenty-five log houses.

A band of Indians, under the leadership of one Simon Girty, was supplied
by the English with muskets and ammunition, and sent against the fort.
This Girty was a white man, who, when a boy, had been captured by
Indians, and brought up by them. He had joined their tribes, and was a
ferocious and bloodthirsty leader of savage bands.

When the settlers at Wheeling heard that Simon Girty and his Indians
were advancing on the town, they left their homes and hastened into the
fort. Scarcely had they done so when the savages made their appearance.

The defenders of the fort knew that a desperate fight must now take
place, and there seemed little probability that they would be able to
hold out against their assailants. They had only forty two fighting men,
including old men and boys, while the Indian force numbered about five
hundred.

What was worse they had but a small amount of gunpowder. A keg
containing the main supply had been left by accident in one of the
village houses. This misfortune, as you will soon see, brought about the
brave action of a young girl.

After several encounters with the savages, which took place in the
village, the defenders withdrew to the fort. Then a number of Indians
advanced with loud yells, firing as they came. The fire was returned
by the defenders, each of whom had picked out his man, and taken deadly
aim. Most of the attacking party were killed, and the whole body of
Indians fell back into the near-by woods, and there awaited a more
favorable opportunity to renew hostilities.

The men in the fort now discovered, to their great dismay, that their
gunpowder was nearly gone. What was to be done? Unless they could get
another supply, they would not be able to hold the fort, and they and
their women and children would either be massacred or carried into
captivity.

Colonel Shepherd, who was in command, explained to the settlers exactly
how matters stood. He also told them of the forgotten keg of powder
which was in a house standing about sixty yards from the gate of the
fort.

It was plain to all that if any man should attempt to procure the keg,
he would almost surely be shot by the lurking Indians. In spite of this
three or four young men volunteered to go on the dangerous mission.

Colonel Shepherd replied that he could not spare three or four strong
men, as there were already too few for the defense. Only one man should
make the attempt and they might decide who was to go. This caused a
dispute.

Just then a young girl stepped forward and said that SHE was ready
to go. Her name was Elizabeth Zane, and she had just returned from a
boarding-school in Philadelphia. This made her brave offer all the more
remarkable, since she had not been bred up to the fearless life of the
border.

At first the men would not hear of her running such a risk. She was told
that it meant certain death. But she urged that they could not spare
a man from the defense, and that the loss of one girl would not be an
important matter. So after some discussion the settlers agreed that she
should go for the powder.

The house, as has already been stated, stood about sixty yards from the
fort, and Elizabeth hoped to run thither and bring back the powder in a
few minutes. The gate was opened, and she passed through, running like a
deer.

A few straggling Indians were dodging about the log houses of the town;
they saw the fleeing girl, but for some reason they did not fire upon
her. They may have supposed that she was returning to her home to rescue
her clothes. Possibly they thought it a waste of good ammunition to fire
at a woman, when they were so sure of taking the fort before long. So
they looked on quietly while, with flying skirts, Elizabeth ran across
the open, and entered the house.

She found the keg of powder, which was not large. She lifted it with
both arms, and, holding the precious burden close to her breast, she
darted out of the house and ran in the direction of the fort.

When the Indians saw what she was carrying they uttered fierce yells
and fired. The bullets fell like hail about her, but not one so much as
touched her garments. With the keg hugged to her bosom, she ran on, and
reached the fort in safety. The gate closed upon her just as the bullets
of the Indians buried themselves in its thick panels.

The rescued gunpowder enabled the little garrison to hold out until help
arrived from the other settlements near Wheeling. And Girty, seeing that
there were no further hopes of taking Fort Henry, withdrew his band.

Thus a weak but brave girl was the means of saving strong men with their
wives and children. It was a heroic act, and Americans should never
forget to honor the name of Elizabeth Zane.


THE CAPTURE OF FORT TICONDEROGA

BY WASHINGTON IRVING (ADAPTED)

Some bold spirits in Connecticut conceived the project of surprising the
old forts of Ticonderoga and Crown Point, already famous in the French
War. Their situation on Lake Champlain gave them the command of the main
route into Canada so that the possession of them would be all-important
in case of hostilities. They were feebly garrisoned and negligently
guarded, and abundantly furnished with artillery and military stores so
needed by the patriot army.

At this juncture Ethan Allen stepped forward, a patriot, and volunteered
with his "Green Mountain Boys." He was well fitted for the enterprise.
During the border warfare over the New Hampshire Grants, he and his
lieutenants had been outlawed by the Legislature of New York and
rewards offered for their apprehension. He and his associates had armed
themselves, set New York at defiance, and had sworn they would be the
death of any one who should try to arrest them.

Thus Ethan Allen had become a kind of Robin Hood among the mountains.
His experience as a frontier champion, his robustness of mind and
body, and his fearless spirit made him a most desirable leader in the
expedition against Fort Ticonderoga. Therefore he was appointed at the
head of the attacking force.

Accompanied by Benjamin Arnold and two other officers, Allen and his
party of soldiers who had been enlisted from several States, set out
and arrived at Shoreham, opposite Fort Ticonderoga on the shore of Lake
Champlain. They reached the place at night-time. There were only a few
boats on hand, but the transfer of men began immediately. It was slow
work. The night wore away; day was about to break, and but eighty-three
men, with Allen and Arnold, had crossed. Should they wait for the rest
to cross over, day would dawn, the garrison wake, and their enterprise
might fail.

Allen drew up his men, addressed them in his own emphatic style, and
announced his intention of making a dash at the fort without waiting for
more force.

"It is a desperate attempt," said he, "and I ask no man to go against
his will. I will take the lead, and be the first to advance. You that
are willing to follow, poise your firelocks!"

Not a firelock but was poised!

They mounted the hill briskly but in silence, guided by a boy from the
neighborhood.

The day dawned as Allen arrived at a sally-port. A sentry pulled trigger
on him, but his piece missed fire. He retreated through a covered way.
Allen and his men followed. Another sentry thrust at an officer with his
bayonet, but was struck down by Allen, and begged for quarter. It was
granted on condition of his leading the way instantly to the quarters of
the commandant, Captain Delaplace, who was yet in bed.

Being arrived there, Allen thundered at the door, and demanded a
surrender of the fort. By this time his followers had formed into two
lines on the parade-ground, and given three hearty cheers.

The commandant appeared at the door half-dressed, the frightened face
of his pretty wife peering over his shoulder. He gazed at Allen in
bewildered astonishment.

"By whose authority do you act?" exclaimed he.

"In the name of the Continental Congress!" replied Allen, with a
flourish of his sword, and an oath which we do not care to subjoin.

There was no disputing the point. The garrison, like the commandant,
had been startled from sleep, and made prisoners as they rushed forth
in their confusion. A surrender accordingly took place. The captain
and forty-eight men who composed his garrison were sent prisoners to
Hartford, in Connecticut.

And thus without the loss of a single man, one of the important forts,
commanding the main route into Canada, fell into the hands of the
patriots.


WASHINGTON AND THE COWARDS

BY WASHINGTON IRVING (ADAPTED)

During the evacuation of New York by Washington, two divisions of the
enemy, encamped on Long Island, one British under Sir Henry Clinton, the
other Hessian under Colonel Donop, emerged in boats from the deep wooded
recesses of Newtown Inlet, and under cover of the fire from the ships
began to land at two points between Turtle and Kip's Bays.

The breastworks were manned by patriot militia who had recently served
in Brooklyn. Disheartened by their late defeat, they fled at the first
advance of the enemy. Two brigades of Putnam's Connecticut troops,
which had been sent that morning to support them, caught the panic, and,
regardless of the commands and entreaties of their officers, joined in
the general scamper.

At this moment Washington, who had mounted his horse at the first sound
of the cannonade, came galloping to the scene of confusion. Riding in
among the fugitives he endeavored to rally and restore them to order.
All in vain. At the first appearance of sixty or seventy redcoats, they
broke again without firing a shot, and fled in headlong terror.

Losing all self-command at the sight of such dastardly conduct,
Washington dashed his hat upon the ground in a transport of rage.

"Are these the men," exclaimed he, "with whom I am to defend America!"

In a paroxysm of passion and despair he snapped his pistols at some of
them, threatened others with his sword, and was so heedless of his own
danger that he might have fallen into the hands of the enemy, who were
not eighty yards distant, had not an aide-de-camp seized the bridle of
his horse, and absolutely hurried him away.

It was one of the rare moments of his life when the vehement element of
his nature was stirred up from its deep recesses. He soon recovered his
self-possession, and took measures against the general peril.


LABOR DAY

(FIRST MONDAY IN SEPTEMBER)


THE SMITHY

A HINDU FABLE

BY P. V. RAMASWAMI RAJU (ADAPTED)

Once words ran high in a smithy.

The furnace said: "If I cease to burn, the smithy must close."

The bellows said: "If I cease to blow, no fire, no smithy."

The hammer and anvil, also, each claimed the sole credit for keeping up
the smithy.

The ploughshare that had been shaped by the furnace, the bellows, the
hammer and the anvil, cried: "It is not each of you alone, that keeps up
the smithy, but ALL TOGETHER."


THE NAIL

BY THE BROTHERS GRIMM (TRANSLATED)[7]


[Footnote 7: From the Riverside Fourth Reader.]


A merchant had done good business at the fair; he had sold his wares,
and filled his bag with gold and silver. Then he set out at once on his
journey home, for he wished to be in his own house before night.

At noon he rested in a town. When he wanted to go on, the stable-boy
brought his horse, saying:

"A nail is wanting, sir, in the shoe of his left hind foot."

"Let it be wanting," answered the merchant; "the shoe will stay on for
the six miles I have still to go. I am in a hurry."

In the afternoon he got down at an inn and had his horse fed. The
stable-boy came into the room to him and said: "Sir, a shoe is wanting
from your horse's left hind foot. Shall I take him to the blacksmith?"

"Let it still be wanting," said the man; "the horse can very well hold
out for a couple of miles more. I am in a hurry."

So the merchant rode forth, but before long the horse began to limp. He
had not limped long before he began to stumble, and he had not stumbled
long before he fell down and broke his leg. The merchant had to leave
the horse where he fell, and unstrap the bag, take it on his back, and
go home on foot.

"That unlucky nail," said he to himself, "has made all this trouble."


THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

BY HORACE E. SCUDDER

There was once a shoemaker who worked very hard and was honest. Still,
he could not earn enough to live on. At last, all he had in the world
was gone except just leather enough to make one pair of shoes. He cut
these out at night, and meant to rise early the next morning to make
them up.

His heart was light in spite of his troubles, for his conscience was
clear. So he went quietly to bed, left all his cares to God, and fell
asleep. In the morning he said his prayers, and sat down to work, when,
to his great wonder, there stood the shoes, already made, upon the
table.

The good man knew not what to say or think. He looked at the work. There
was not one false stitch in the whole job. All was neat and true.

That same day a customer came in, and the shoes pleased him so well that
he readily paid a price higher than usual for them. The shoemaker took
the money and bought leather enough to make two pairs more. He cut out
the work in the evening, and went to bed early. He wished to be up with
the sun and get to work.

He was saved all trouble, for when he got up in the morning, the work
was done. Pretty soon buyers came in, who paid him well for his goods.
So he bought leather enough for four pairs more.

He cut out the work again overnight, and found it finished in the
morning as before. So it went on for some time. What was got ready at
night was always done by daybreak, and the good man soon was well-to-do.

One evening, at Christmas-time, he and his wife sat over the fire,
chatting, and he said: "I should like to sit up and watch to-night, that
we may see who it is that comes and does my work for me." So they left
the light burning, and hid themselves behind a curtain to see what would
happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came two little Elves. They sat upon
the shoemaker's bench, took up all the work that was cut out, and began
to ply their little fingers. They stitched and rapped and tapped at such
a rate that the shoemaker was amazed, and could not take his eyes off
them for a moment.

On they went till the job was done, and the shoes stood, ready for use,
upon the table. This was long before daybreak. Then they ran away as
quick as lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker: "These little Elves have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them some
good in return. I am vexed to see them run about as they do. They have
nothing upon their backs to keep off the cold. I'll tell you what we
must do. I will make each of them a shirt, and a coat and waistcoat, and
a pair of pantaloons into the bargain. Do you make each of them a little
pair of shoes."

The good shoemaker liked the thought very well. One evening he and his
wife had the clothes ready, and laid them on the table instead of the
work they used to cut out. Then they went and hid behind the curtain to
watch what the little Elves would do.

At midnight the Elves came in and were going to sit down at their work
as usual. But when they saw the clothes lying there for them, they
laughed and were in high glee. They dressed themselves in the twinkling
of an eye, and danced and capered and sprang about as merry as could be,
till at last they danced out of the door, and over the green.

The shoemaker saw them no more, but everything went well with him as
long as he lived.


THE HILLMAN AND THE HOUSEWIFE

BY JULIANA HORATIA EWING (ADAPTED)

It is well known that the Fairy People cannot abide meanness. They like
to be liberally dealt with when they beg or borrow of the human race;
and, on the other hand, to those who come to them in need, they are
invariably generous.

Now there once lived a certain housewife who had a sharp eye to her own
interests, and gave alms of what she had no use for, hoping to get some
reward in return. One day a Hillman knocked at her door.

"Can you lend us a saucepan, good mother?" said he. "There's a wedding
in the hill, and all the pots are in use."

"Is he to have one?" asked the servant lass who had opened the door.

"Aye, to be sure," answered the housewife; "one must be neighborly."

But when the maid was taking a saucepan from the shelf, the housewife
pinched her arm and whispered sharply: "Not that, you good-for-nothing!
Get the old one out of the cupboard. It leaks, and the Hillmen are so
neat, and such nimble workers, that they are sure to mend it before they
send it home. So one obliges the Fairy People, and saves sixpence in
tinkering!"

Thus bidden the maid fetched the saucepan, which had been laid by until
the tinker's next visit, and gave it to the Hillman, who thanked her and
went away.

In due time the saucepan was returned, and, as the housewife had
foreseen, it was neatly mended and ready for use.

At supper-time the maid filled the pan with milk, and set it on the fire
for the children's supper. But in a few minutes the milk was so burnt
and smoked that no one could touch it, and even the pigs refused to
drink it.

"Ah, good-for-nothing hussy!" cried the housewife, as she refilled the
pan herself, "you would ruin the richest with your carelessness! There's
a whole quart of good milk wasted at once!"

"AND THAT'S TWOPENCE!" cried a voice that seemed to come from the
chimney, in a whining tone, like some discontented old body going over
her grievances.

The housewife had not left the saucepan for two minutes, when the milk
boiled over, and it was all burnt and smoked as before.

"The pan must be dirty," muttered the good woman in vexation, "and there
are two full quarts of milk as good as thrown to the dogs."

"AND THAT'S FOURPENCE!" added the voice in the chimney.

After a thorough cleaning the saucepan was once more filled and set on
the fire, but with no better success. The milk boiled over again, and
was hopelessly spoiled. The housewife shed tears of anger at the waste
and cried: "Never before did such a thing befall me since I kept house!
Three quarts of new milk burnt for one meal."

"AND THAT'S SIXPENCE!" cried the voice in the chimney. "You didn't save
the tinkering after all, mother!"

With that the Hillman himself came tumbling down from the chimney, and
went off laughing through the door.

But from then on the saucepan was as good as any other.


HOFUS THE STONE-CUTTER

A JAPANESE LEGEND

FROM THE RIVERSIDE THIRD READER (ADAPTED)

Once upon a time in Japan, there was a poor stone-cutter, named Hofus,
who used to go every day to the mountain-side to cut great blocks of
stone. He lived near the mountain in a little stone hut, and worked hard
and was happy.

One day he took a load of stone to the house of a rich man. There he saw
so many beautiful things that when he went back to his mountain he could
think of nothing else. Then he began to wish that he too might sleep in
a bed as soft as down, with curtains of silk, and tassels of gold. And
he sighed:--

     "Ah me!  Ah me!
       If Hofus only were rich as he!"


To his surprise, the voice of the Mountain Spirit answered:--

     "Have thou thy wish!"


When Hofus returned home that evening his little hut was gone, and in
its place stood a great palace. It was filled with beautiful things, and
the best of all was a bed of down, with curtains of silk and tassels of
gold.

Hofus decided to work no more. But he was not used to being idle, and
time passed slowly,--the days seemed very long.

One day as he sat by the window he saw a carriage dash past. It was
drawn by snow-white horses. In it sat a prince, while before and behind
were servants in suits of blue and white. One was holding a golden
umbrella over the prince.

When the stone-cutter saw this, he began to feel unhappy, and he
sighed:--

     "Ah me!  Ah me!
       If Hofus only a prince might be!"


And again the same voice that he had heard on the mountain answered:--

     "Be thou a prince!"


Straightway Hofus was a prince. He had servants dressed in crimson and
gold, and he rode in a carriage with a golden umbrella over his head.

For a short time he was happy, but one day, as he walked in the garden,
he saw that the flowers were drooping, the grass was dry and brown. And
when he rode out he felt the hot sun burn him in spite of his umbrella.

"The sun is mightier than I," thought he, and then he sighed:--

     "Ah me!  Ah me!
       If Hofus only the sun might be!"


And the voice answered:--

     "Be thou the sun!"

Straightway the great sun he became. He burned the grass and rice
fields. He dried up the streams. Rich and poor alike suffered from the
terrible heat.

One day a cloud came and rested in front of him, and hid the earth from
his sight. He was angry and cried:--

     "Ah me!  Ah me!
       If Hofus only a cloud might be!"


And the voice answered:--

     "Be thou a cloud!"


Straightway a cloud he became. He floated before the face of the sun,
and hid the earth from it.

Then day after day the cloud dropped rain. The rivers overflowed, and
the rice-fields were covered with water. Towns were swept away. Only the
great rocks on the mountain-side stood unmoved midst the flood.

The cloud looked at them in wonder, then he sighed:--

     "Ah me!  Ah me!
       If Hofus only a rock might be!"


And the voice answered:--

     "Be thou a rock!"


Straightway a rock he became. Proudly he stood. The sun could not burn
him and the rain could not move him.

"Now, at last," he said, "no one is mightier than I."

But one day he was waked from his dreams by a noise,--tap! tap!
tap!--down at his feet. He looked and there was a stone-cutter driving
his tool into the rock. Another blow and the great rock shivered; a
block of stone broke away.

"That man is mightier than I!" cried Hofus, and he sighed:--

     "Ah me! Ah me!
       If Hofus only the man might be!"


And the voice answered:--

     "Be thou thyself!"


And straightway Hofus was himself again,--a poor stone-cutter, working
all day upon the mountain-side, and going home at night to his little
hut. But he was content and happy, and never again did he wish to be
other than Hofus the stone-cutter.


ARACHNE

BY JOSEPHINE PRESTON PEABODY

There was a certain maiden of Lydia, Arachne by name, renowned
throughout the country for her skill as a weaver. She was as nimble with
her fingers as Calypso, that Nymph who kept Odysseus for seven years in
her enchanted island. She was as untiring as Penelope, the hero's wife,
who wove day after day while she watched for his return. Day in and
day out, Arachne wove too. The very Nymphs would gather about her loom,
Naiads from the water and Dryads from the trees.

"Maiden," they would say, shaking the leaves or the foam from their
hair, in wonder, "Pallas Athena must have taught you!"

But this did not please Arachne. She would not acknowledge herself a
debtor, even to that goddess who protected all household arts, and by
whose grace alone one had any skill in them.

"I learned not of Athena," said she. "If she can weave better, let her
come and try."

The Nymphs shivered at this, and an aged woman, who was looking on,
turned to Arachne.

"Be more heedful of your words, my daughter," said she. "The goddess may
pardon you if you ask forgiveness, but do not strive for honors with the
immortals."

Arachne broke her thread, and the shuttle stopped humming.

"Keep your counsel," she said. "I fear not Athena; no, nor any one
else."

As she frowned at the old woman, she was amazed to see her change
suddenly into one tall, majestic, beautiful,--a maiden of gray eyes and
golden hair, crowned with a golden helmet. It was Athena herself.

The bystanders shrank in fear and reverence; only Arachne was unawed and
held to her foolish boast.

In silence the two began to weave, and the Nymphs stole nearer, coaxed
by the sound of the shuttles, that seemed to be humming with delight
over the two webs,--back and forth like bees.

They gazed upon the loom where the goddess stood plying her task, and
they saw shapes and images come to bloom out of the wondrous colors, as
sunset clouds grow to be living creatures when we watch them. And they
saw that the goddess, still merciful, was spinning; as a warning for
Arachne, the pictures of her own triumph over reckless gods and mortals.

In one corner of the web she made a story of her conquest over the
sea-god Poseidon. For the first king of Athens had promised to dedicate
the city to that god who should bestow upon it the most useful
gift. Poseidon gave the horse. But Athena gave the olive,--means of
livelihood,--symbol of peace and prosperity, and the city was called
after her name. Again she pictured a vain woman of Troy, who had been
turned into a crane for disputing the palm of beauty with a goddess.
Other corners of the web held similar images, and the whole shone like a
rainbow.

Meanwhile Arachne, whose head was quite turned with vanity, embroidered
her web with stories against the gods, making light of Zeus himself and
of Apollo, and portraying them as birds and beasts. But she wove with
marvelous skill; the creatures seemed to breathe and speak, yet it was
all as fine as the gossamer that you find on the grass before rain.

Athena herself was amazed. Not even her wrath at the girl's insolence
could wholly overcome her wonder. For an instant she stood entranced;
then she tore the web across, and three times she touched Arachne's
forehead with her spindle.

"Live on, Arachne," she said. "And since it is your glory to weave, you
and yours must weave forever." So saying, she sprinkled upon the maiden
a certain magical potion.

Away went Arachne's beauty; then her very human form shrank to that of a
spider, and so remained. As a spider she spent all her days weaving and
weaving; and you may see something like her handiwork any day among the
rafters.


THE METAL KING

A GERMAN FOLE-TALE

(ADAPTED)

Once long ago there was a high mountain whose rocks were veined with
gold and silver and seamed with iron. At times, from a huge rent in the
mountain-side, there shot out roaring, red flames, and clouds of black
smoke. And when the village folk in the valley below saw this, they
would say: "Look! the Metal King is at his forge." For they knew that in
the gloomy heart of the mountain, the Metal King and his Spirits of the
Mines wrought in gold and iron.

When the storm raged over the valley, the Metal King left his cavern
and riding on the wings of the wind, with thundering shouts, hurled
his red-hot bolts into the valley, now killing the peasants and their
cattle, now burning houses and barns.

But when the weather was soft and mild, and the breezes blew gently
about the mouth of his cavern, the Metal King returned to his forge in
the depths of the mountain, and there shaped ploughshares and many other
implements of iron. These he placed outside his cavern door, as gifts to
the poor peasants.

It happened, on a time, there lived in that valley a lazy lad, who
would neither till his fields nor ply a trade. He was avaricious, but he
longed to win gold without mining, and wealth and fame without labor. So
it came to pass that he set out one day to find the mountain treasure of
the Metal King.

Taking a lighted lantern in one hand, a hatchet in the other, and a
bundle of twigs under his arm, he entered the dark cavern. The dampness
smote his cheek, bats flapped their wings in his face. Shivering with
fear and cold, he pressed on through a long passage under an arched
and blackened roof. As he passed along he dropped his twigs, one after
another, so that they might guide him aright when he returned.

He came at last to a place where the passage branched off in two
directions,--to the right and to the left. Choosing the right-hand path,
he walked on and at length came to an iron door. He struck it twice with
his hammer. It flew open, and a strong current of air rushing forth put
out his light.

"Come in! Come in!" shouted a voice like the rolling of thunder, and the
cavern echoes gave back the sounds.

Almost overcome by terror and shivering in every limb, the lad entered.
As he stepped forward a dazzling light shone from the vaulted roof
upheld by massive columns, and across the crystal side-walls flittered
curious, shadowy figures.

The Metal King, huge and fierce-eyed, surrounded by the misshapen
Spirits of the Mines, sat upon a block of pure silver, with a pile of
shining gold lying before him.

"Come in, my friend!" he shouted again, and again the echoes rolled
through the cavern.

"Come near, and sit beside me."

The lad advanced, pale and trembling, and took his seat upon the silver
block.

"Bring out more treasure," cried the Metal King, and at his command the
Mountain Spirits fluttered away like dreams, only to return in a moment
and pile high before the wondering lad bars of red gold, mounds of
silver coin, and stacks of precious jewels.

And when the lad saw all that wealth he felt his heart burst with
longing to grasp it, but when he tried to put out his hand, he found
that he could not move his arm, nor could he lift his feet, nor turn his
head.

"Thou seest these riches," said the Metal King; "they are but a handful
compared with those thou mayest gain if thou wilt work with us in the
mines. Hard is the service but rich the reward! Only say the word, and
for a year and a day thou shalt be a Mountain Spirit."

"Nay," stammered the lad, in great terror, "nay, I came not to work. All
I beg of thee is one bar of gold and a handful of the jewels that lie
here. If they are mine I can dress better than the village lads, and
ride in my own coach!"

"Lazy, ungrateful wretch!" cried the Metal King, rising from his seat,
while his figure seemed to tower until his head touched the cavern roof,
"wouldst thou seize without pay the treasures gained through the hard
labor of my Mountain Spirits! Hence! Get thee gone to thy place! Seek
not here for unearned riches! Cast away thy discontented disposition and
thou shalt turn stones into gold. Dig well thy garden and thy fields,
sow them and tend them diligently, search the mountain-sides; and thou
shalt gain through thine industry mines of gold and silver!"

Scarcely had the Metal King spoken when there was heard a screeching
as of ravens, a crying as of night owls, and a mighty storm wind came
rushing against the lad; and catching him up it drove him forth along
the dark passage, and down the mountain-side, so that in a minute he
found himself on the steps of his own house.

And from that time on a strange change came over the lad. He no longer
idled and dreamed of sudden wealth, but morning, noon, and evening
he labored diligently, sowing his fields, cultivating his garden,
and mining on the mountain-side. Years came and went; all he touched
prospered, and he grew to be the richest man in that country; but never
again did he see the Metal King or the Spirits of the Mines.


THE CHOICE OF HERCULES

BY XENOPHON (ADAPTED)

Long, long ago, when the world was young, there were many deeds waiting
to be wrought by daring heroes. It was then that the mighty Hercules,
who was yet a lad, felt an exceeding great and strong desire to go out
into the wide world to seek his fortune.

One day, while wandering alone and thoughtful, he came to a place where
two paths met. And sitting down he gravely considered which he should
follow.

One path led over flowery meadows toward the darkening distance; the
other, passing over rough stones and rugged, brown furrows, lost itself
in the glowing sunset.

And as Hercules gazed into the distance, he saw two stately maidens
coming toward him.

The first was tall and graceful, and wrapped round in a snow-white
mantle. Her countenance was calm and beautiful. With gracious mien and
modest glance she drew near the lad.

The other maiden made haste to outrun the first. She, too, was tall,
but seemed taller than she really was. She, too, was beautiful, but her
glance was bold. As she ran, a rosy garment like a cloud floated about
her form, and she kept looking at her own round arms and shapely hands,
and ever and anon she seemed to gaze admiringly at her shadow as it
moved along the ground. And this fair one did outstrip the first maiden,
and rushing forward held out her white hands to the lad, exclaiming:--

"I see thou art hesitating, O Hercules, by what path to seek thy
fortune. Follow me along this flowery way, and I will make it a
delightful and easy road. Thou shalt taste to the full of every kind of
pleasure. No shadow of annoyance shall ever touch thee, nor strain nor
stress of war and state disturb thy peace. Instead thou shalt tread upon
carpets soft as velvet, and sit at golden tables, or recline upon silken
couches. The fairest of maidens shall attend thee, music and perfume
shall lull thy senses, and all that is delightful to eat and drink shall
be placed before thee. Never shalt thou labor, but always live in joy
and ease. Oh, come! I give my followers liberty and delight!"

And as she spoke the maiden stretched forth her arms, and the tones of
her voice were sweet and caressing.

"What, O maiden," asked Hercules, "is thy name?"

"My friends," said she, "call me Happiness, but mine enemies name me
Vice."

Even as she spoke, the white-robed maiden, who had drawn near, glided
forward, and addressed the lad in gracious tones and with words stately
and winning:--

"O beloved youth, who wouldst wander forth in search of Life, I too,
would plead with thee! I, Virtue, have watched and tended thee from a
child. I know the fond care thy parents have bestowed to train thee for
a hero's part. Direct now thy steps along yon rugged path that leads
to my dwelling. Honorable and noble mayest thou become through thy
illustrious deeds.

"I will not seduce thee by promises of vain delights; instead will
I recount to thee the things that really are. Lasting fame and true
nobility come not to mortals save through pain and labor. If thou,
O Hercules, seekest the gracious gifts of Heaven, thou must remain
constant in prayer; if thou wouldst be beloved of thy friends, thou must
serve thy friends; if thou desirest to be honored of the people thou
must benefit the people; if thou art anxious to reap the fruits of the
earth, thou must till the earth with labor; and if thou wishest to be
strong in body and accomplish heroic deeds, thou must teach thy body to
obey thy mind. Yea, all this and more also must thou do."

"Seest thou not, O Hercules," cried Vice, "over how difficult and
tedious a road this Virtue would drive thee? I, instead, will conduct
thy steps by a short and easy path to perfect Happiness."

"Wretched being!" answered Virtue, "wouldst thou deceive this lad! What
lasting Happiness hast thou to offer! Thou pamperest thy followers with
riches, thou deludest them with idleness; thou surfeitest them with
luxury; thou enfeeblest them with softness. In youth they grow slothful
in body and weak in mind. They live without labor and wax fat. They come
to a wretched old age, dissatisfied, and ashamed, and oppressed by
the memory of their ill deeds; and, having run their course, they lay
themselves down in melancholy death and their name is remembered no
more.

"But those fortunate youths who follow me receive other counsel. I
am the companion of virtuous men. Always I am welcome in the homes of
artisans and in the cottages of tillers of the soil. I am the guardian
of industrious households, and the rewarder of generous masters
and faithful servants. I am the promoter of the labors of peace. No
honorable deed is accomplished without me.

"My friends have sweet repose and the untroubled enjoyment of the fruits
of their efforts. They remember their deeds with an easy conscience
and contentment, and are beloved of their friends and honored by their
country. And when they have run their course, and death overtakes them,
their names are celebrated in song and praise, and they live in the
hearts of their grateful countrymen.

"Come, then, O Hercules, thou son of noble parents, come, follow thou
me, and by thy worthy and illustrious deeds secure for thyself exalted
Happiness."

She ceased, and Hercules, withdrawing his gaze from the face of Vice,
arose from his place, and followed Virtue along the rugged, brown path
of Labor.


THE SPEAKING STATUE

FROM GESTA ROMANORUM (ADAPTED)

There was once a great emperor who made a law that whosoever worked on
the birthday of his eldest son should be put to death. He caused this
decree to be published throughout his empire, and, sending for his chief
magician, said to him:--

"I wish you to devise an instrument which will tell me the name of each
laborer who breaks my new law."

"Sire," answered the magician, "your will shall be accomplished." And he
straightway constructed a wonderful, speaking statue, and placed it in
the public square of the capital city. By its magic power this statue
could discern all that went on in the empire on the birthday of the
eldest prince, and it could tell the name of each laborer who worked in
secret on that day. Thus things continued for some years, and many men
were put to death.

Now, there was in the capital city a carpenter named Focus. He was a
diligent workman, laboring at his trade from early morning till late at
night. One year, when the prince's birthday came round, he continued to
work all that day.

The next morning he arose, dressed himself, and, before any one was
astir in the streets, went to the magic statue and said:--

"O statue, statue! because you have denounced so many of our citizens,
causing them to be put to death, I vow, if you accuse me, I will break
your head!"

Shortly after this the emperor dispatched messengers to the statue to
inquire if the law had been broken the day before. When the statue saw
them, it exclaimed:--

"Friends, look up! What see ye written on my forehead?"

They looked up and beheld three sentences that ran thus:--

     "Times are altered!
     "Men grow worse!
     "He who speaks the truth will have his head broken!"


"Go," said the statue, "declare to His Majesty what ye have seen and
read."

The messenger accordingly departed and returned in haste to the emperor,
and related to him all that had occurred.

The emperor ordered his guard to arm and to march instantly to the
public square, where the statue was, and commanded that if any one had
attempted to injure it, he should be seized, bound hand and foot, and
dragged to the judgment hall.

The guard hastened to do the emperor's bidding. They approached the
statue and said:--

"Our emperor commands you to tell who it is that threatened you."

The statue answered: "Seize Focus the carpenter. Yesterday he defied the
emperor's edict; this morning he threatened to break my head."

The soldiers immediately arrested Focus, and dragged him to the judgment
hall.

"Friend," said the emperor, "what do I hear of you? Why do you work on
my son's birthday?"

"Your Majesty," answered Focus, "it is impossible for me to keep your
law. I am obliged to earn eight pennies every day, therefore was I
forced to work yesterday."

"And why eight pennies?" asked the emperor.

"Every day through the year," answered Focus, "I am bound to repay
two pennies I borrowed in my youth; two I lend; two I lose; and two I
spend."

"How is this?" said the emperor; "explain yourself further."

"Your Majesty," replied Focus, "listen to me. I am bound each day to
repay two pennies to my old father, for when I was a boy he expended
upon me daily the like sum. Now he is poor and needs my assistance, and
I return what I formerly borrowed. Two other pennies I lend my son, who
is pursuing his studies, in order that, if by chance I should fall into
poverty, he may restore the loan to me, just as I am now doing to his
grandfather. Again, I lose two pennies on my wife, who is a scold
and has an evil temper. On account of her bad disposition I consider
whatever I give her entirely lost. Lastly, two other pennies I spend on
myself for meat and drink. I cannot do all this without working
every day. You now know the truth, and, I pray you, give a righteous
judgment."

"Friend," said the emperor, "you have answered well. Go and work
diligently at your calling."

That same day the emperor annulled the law forbidding labor on his
son's birthday. Not long after this he died, and Focus the carpenter,
on account of his singular wisdom, was elected emperor in his stead. He
governed wisely, and after his death there was deposited in the royal
archives a portrait of Focus wearing a crown adorned with eight pennies.


THE CHAMPION STONE-CUTTER

BY HUGH MILLER

David Fraser was a famous Scotch hewer. On hearing that it had been
remarked among a party of Edinburgh masons that, though regarded as the
first of Glasgow stone-cutters, he would find in the eastern capital
at least his equals, he attired himself most uncouthly in a long-tailed
coat of tartan, and, looking to the life the untamed, untaught,
conceited little Celt, he presented himself on Monday morning, armed
with a letter of introduction from a Glasgow builder, before the foreman
of an Edinburgh squad of masons engaged upon one of the finer buildings
at that time in the course of erection.

The letter specified neither his qualifications nor his name. It had
been written merely to secure for him the necessary employment, and the
necessary employment it did secure.

The better workmen of the party were engaged, on his arrival, in hewing
columns, each of which was deemed sufficient work for a week; and David
was asked somewhat incredulously, by the foreman, if he could hew.

"Oh, yes, HE THOUGHT he could hew."

"Could he hew columns such as these?"

"Oh, yes, HE THOUGHT he could hew columns such as these."

A mass of stone, in which a possible column lay hid, was accordingly
placed before David, not under cover of the shed, which was already
occupied by workmen, but, agreeably to David's own request, directly
in front of it, where he might be seen by all, and where he straightway
commenced a most extraordinary course of antics.

Buttoning his long tartan coat fast around him, he would first look
along the stone from the one end, anon from the other, and then examine
it in front and rear; or, quitting it altogether for the time, he would
take up his stand beside the other workmen, and, after looking at them
with great attention, return and give it a few taps with the mallet, in
a style evidently imitative of theirs, but monstrously a caricature.

The shed all that day resounded with roars of laughter; and the only
thoroughly grave man on the ground was he who occasioned the mirth of
all the others.

Next morning David again buttoned his coat; but he got on much better
this day than the former. He was less awkward and less idle, though not
less observant than before; and he succeeded ere evening in tracing,
in workmanlike fashion, a few draughts along the future column. He was
evidently greatly improving!

On the morning of Wednesday he threw off his coat; and it was seen that,
though by no means in a hurry, he was seriously at work. There were no
more jokes or laughter; and it was whispered in the evening that the
strange Highlander had made astonishing progress during the day.

By the middle of Thursday he had made up for his two days' trifling, and
was abreast of the other workmen. Before night he was far ahead of them;
and ere the evening of Friday, when they had still a full day's work
on each of their columns, David's was completed in a style that defied
criticism; and, his tartan coat again buttoned around him, he sat
resting himself beside it.

The foreman went out and greeted him.

"Well," he said, "you have beaten us all. You certainly CAN hew!"

"Yes," said David, "I THOUGHT I could hew columns. Did the other men
take much more than a week to learn?"

"Come, come, DAVID FRASER," replied the foreman, "we all guess who you
are. You have had your week's joke out; and now, I suppose, we must give
you your week's wages, and let you go away!"

"Yes," said David, "work waits for me in Glasgow; but I just thought it
might be well to know how you hewed on this east side of the country."


BILL BROWN'S TEST

BY CLEVELAND MOFFETT

All firemen have courage, but it cannot be known until the test how many
have this particular kind,--Bill Brown's kind.

What happened was this: Engine 29, pumping and pounding her prettiest,
stood at the northwest corner of Greenwich and Warren streets, so close
to the blazing drug-house that Driver Marks thought it wasn't safe there
for the three horses, and led them away. That was fortunate, but it left
Brown alone, right against the cheek of the fire, watching his boiler,
stoking in coal, keeping his steam-gauge at 75. As the fire gained,
chunks of red-hot sandstone began to smash down on the engine. Brown ran
his pressure up to 80, and watched the door anxiously where the boys had
gone in.

Then the explosion came, and a blue flame, wide as a house, curled its
tongues halfway across the street, enwrapping engine and man, setting
fire to the elevated railway station overhead, or such wreck of it as
the shock had left.

Bill Brown stood by his engine, with a wall of fire before him and a
sheet of fire above him. He heard quick footsteps on the pavements, and
voices, that grew fainter and fainter, crying, "Run for your lives!"
He heard the hose-wagon horses somewhere back in the smoke go plunging
away, mad with fright and their burns. He was alone with the fire, and
the skin was hanging in shreds on his hands, face, and neck. Only a
fireman knows how one blast of flame can shrivel up a man, and the pain
over the bared surfaces was,--well, there is no pain worse than that of
fire scorching in upon the quick flesh seared by fire.

Here, I think, was a crisis to make a very brave man quail. Bill Brown
knew perfectly well why every one was running; there was going to be
another explosion in a couple of minutes, maybe sooner, out of this hell
in front of him. And the order had come for every man to save himself,
and every man had done it except the lads inside. And the question was,
Should he run or should he stay and die? It was tolerably certain that
he would die if he stayed. On the other hand, the boys of old 29 were
in there. Devanny and McArthur, and Gillon and Merron, his friends, his
chums. He'd seen them drag the hose in through that door,--there it was
now, a long, throbbing snake of it,--and they hadn't come out. Perhaps
they were dead. Yes, but perhaps they weren't. If they were alive, they
needed water now more than they ever needed anything before. And they
couldn't get water if he quit his engine.

Bill Brown pondered this a long time, perhaps four seconds; then he fell
to stoking in coal, and he screwed her up another notch, and he eased
her running parts with the oiler. Explosion or not, pain or not, alone
or not, he was going to stay and make that engine hum. He had done the
greatest thing a man can do,--had offered his life for his friends.

It is pleasant to know that this sacrifice was averted. A quarter of a
minute or so before the second and terrible explosion, Devanny and his
men came staggering from the building. Then it was that Merron fell, and
McArthur checked his fight to save him. Then it was, but not until
then, that Bill Brown left Engine 29 to her fate (she was crushed by the
falling walls), and ran for his life with his comrades. He had waited
for them, he had stood the great test.


COLUMBUS DAY

(OCTOBER 12)


COLUMBUS AND THE EGG

BY JAMES BALDWIN (ADAPTED) [8]

[Footnote 8: From Thirty More Famous Stories Retold. Copyright, 1903, by
American Book Company.]


One day Columbus was at a dinner which a Spanish gentleman had given
in his honor, and several persons were present who were jealous of the
great admiral's success. They were proud, conceited fellows, and they
very soon began to try to make Columbus uncomfortable.

"You have discovered strange lands beyond the seas," they said, "but
what of that? We do not see why there should be so much said about
it. Anybody can sail across the ocean; and anybody can coast along the
islands on the other side, just as you have done. It is the simplest
thing in the world."

Columbus made no answer; but after a while he took an egg from a dish
and said to the company:--

"Who among you, gentlemen, can make this egg stand on end?"

One by one those at the table tried the experiment. When the egg had
gone entirely around and none had succeeded, all said that it could not
be done.

Then Columbus took the egg and struck its small end gently upon the
table so as to break the shell a little. After that there was no trouble
in making it stand upright.

"Gentlemen," said he, "what is easier than to do this which you said
was impossible? It is the simplest thing in the world. Anybody can do
it,--AFTER HE HAS BEEN SHOWN HOW!"


COLUMBUS AT LA RABIDA

BY WASHINGTON IRVING (ADAPTED)

About half a league from the little seaport of Palos de Moguer, in
Andalusia, there stood, and continues to stand at the present day,
an ancient convent of Franciscan friars, dedicated to Santa Maria de
Rabida.

One day a stranger on foot, in humble guise, but of a distinguished air,
accompanied by a small boy, stopped at the gate of the convent and asked
of the porter a little bread and water for his child. While receiving
this humble refreshment, the prior of the convent, Juan Perez de
Marchena, happened to pass by, and was struck with the appearance of the
stranger. Observing from his air and accent that he was a foreigner, he
entered into conversation with him and soon learned the particulars of
his story.

That stranger was Columbus.

Accompanied by his little son Diego, he was on his way to the
neighboring town of Huelva, to seek a brother-in-law, who had married a
sister of his deceased wife.

The prior was a man of extensive information. His attention had been
turned in some measure to geographical and nautical science. He was
greatly interested by the conversation of Columbus, and struck with the
grandeur of his views. When he found, however, that the voyager was
on the point of abandoning Spain to seek the patronage of the court of
France, the good friar took the alarm.

He detained Columbus as his guest, and sent for a scientific friend
to converse with him. That friend was Garcia Fernandez, a physician of
Palos. He was equally struck with the appearance and conversation of
the stranger. Several conferences took place at the convent, at which
veteran mariners and pilots of Palos were present.

Facts were related by some of these navigators in support of the theory
of Columbus. In a word, his project was treated with a deference in the
quiet cloisters of La Rabida and among the seafaring men of Palos which
had been sought in vain among sages and philosophers.

Among the navigators of Palos was one Martin Alonzo Pinzon, the head
of a family of wealth, members of which were celebrated for their
adventurous expeditions. He was so convinced of the feasibility of
Columbus's plan that he offered to engage in it with purse and person,
and to bear the expenses of Columbus in an application to court.

Fray Juan Perez, being now fully persuaded of the importance of the
proposed enterprise, advised Columbus to repair to the court, and make
his propositions to the Spanish sovereigns, offering to give him a
letter of recommendation to his friend, the Prior of the Convent
of Prado and confessor to the queen, and a man of great political
influence; through whose means he would, without doubt, immediately
obtain royal audience and favor. Martin Alonzo Pinzon, also, generously
furnished him with money for the journey, and the Friar took charge of
his youthful son, Diego, to maintain and educate him in the convent.

Thus aided and encouraged and elated with fresh hopes, Columbus took
leave of the little junto at La Rabida, and set out, in the spring of
1486, for the Castilian court, which had just assembled at Cordova,
where the sovereigns were fully occupied with their chivalrous
enterprise for the conquest of Granada. But alas! success was not yet!
for Columbus met with continued disappointments and discouragements,
while his projects were opposed by many eminent prelates and Spanish
scientists, as being against religion and unscientific. Yet in spite
of this opposition, by degrees the theory of Columbus began to obtain
proselytes. He appeared in the presence of the king with modesty,
yet self-possession, inspired by a consciousness of the dignity and
importance of his errand; for he felt himself, as he afterwards
declared in his letters, animated as if by a sacred fire from above, and
considered himself an instrument in the hand of Heaven to accomplish
its great designs. Me and Cele staid to look after the house. Cele
went up stairs to look after the baby and when she was gone i got Annie
and Franky fiting. it was the funniest fite i ever saw. they jest
pushed each other round and tried to claw each other. while they
was fiting Cele came down stairs and pulled them apart and boxed
their ears and made them go in different rooms.

She jawed me and said she wood tell father. when father came home she told
on me and father sent me to bed at six o'clock. You jest wait Cele
and you will find out.

Aug. 3, 186- brite and fair. the fellers played a pretty mean trick on
me tonite. they played it on Nibby Hartwel last nite. Nibby is visiting
his aunt and comes from the city and is pretty green like most folks
from the city. you see if i hadent got sent to bed becaus Cele told on
me i wood have been there and seen them play it on Nibby. well last nite
all the fellers was out.

Whack and Boog and Pozzy and Pewt and Beany and Nipper and Cawcaw and
Pile and Chick and Micky and Pricilla and Fatty. Nibby he was there too.
they wanted to play lead the old blind horse to water and i was to
be the blind horse. they said they had some fun playing it the nite
before, that was when they played it on Nibby but i dident know that.
Well you blindfole a feller and give him a rope and a swich and
the other fellers get on the other end of the rope and the feller
nearest you has a bell and rings it and you pull and if you can
pull him up to you, you can paist time out of him with your swich,
only if you pull off your blindfole all the fellers can paist time
out of you.

Well they blindfoled me and hollered ready and i began to yank and
pull and the feller rung his bell and he came pretty hard at first but
i kept yanking and bimeby he come so quick that i nearly fell
over back wards and i felt him and grabed him and began to paist
time out of him when he grabed away my swich and began to paist me,
and that wasent fair and i pulled off my blindfole and who do you
suppose it was, well it was Wiliam Perry Molton and he was mad.
they had tied me to his door bell and i had yanked out almost ten
feet of wire. when i saw who it was gosh i began to holler and he
stoped licking me. i gess he never licked anyone before because he
dident know just how to lay it on. well when he found out how it
was he let me go but he said he shood have to do something about
the boys distirbing him so. it was a pretty mean trick to play on
a feller. we are going to try and play it on Pop Clark tomorrow
nite.

Aug. 4. brite and fair. me and Hiram Mingo had a race today to see
whitch cood swim the furtherest under water. i beat him easy. he can
lick me but i can beat him swiming.

Aug. 5. Nothing particular today. only church.

Aug. 6. the baby was sick today had the doctor.

Aug. 7. the baby was sicker. i dident go in swiming.

Aug. 8. the baby is better today. i went in swiming 5 times.

Aug. 9. Raned all day. The baby is all rite. i went bullfroging with
Chick Chickering.

Aug. 10. Nellie is sick. Joe Hanes cut a hole in her and put in a onion
and some braded hair and then father took her out to pastur. i cant ride
her for a month.

Aug. 11. brite and fair. mister Watson, Beanys father got throwed off of
his horse today and renched his rist. the horse coodent have throwed
him but the gert broke. Mister Watson can ride splendid.

Aug. 12. brite and fair. No more church this month. bully.

Aug. 13. brite and fair. i went down to Ed Toles and me and Ed
rode on the hack with Joe Parmer.

Aug. 14. Ed Tole and Frank Hanes are mad. Frank hollered over to Ed, Ed
Tole fell in a hole and coodent get out to save his sole, and Ed hollered
back Frank Hanes aint got no branes. and then they was mad.

Aug. 15. Wiliam Perry Molton has got some ripe apples in his back
yard. me and Pewt helped him ketch some hens today and he said we
cood have some apples if they was any on the ground. they was only 2
wirmy ones but before we left 5 or 6 fell off i gess it was because
Pewt pushed me agenst the tree. they was pretty good apples too.

Aug. 16.

Rany. i went fishing with Potter Gorham. caught 3 roach and 5 hornpowt.
we et them for supper. father said i can clean fish most as well as
he can. he says he will come home some day erly and go a fishing.

Aug. 17. John Gardner has hung up a Grant and Colfax flag. they
will be some fun this fall.

Aug. 18. brite and fair.

Today i went fishing with Fatty Melcher. we caught some ells and
some hornpowt. ells and hornpowt can live a long time out of water
and so when i got home i put 5 that were alive in the rane water
barril.

Aug. 19. brite and fair. it is fun to sit round all day Sunday and not
have to go to church.

Aug. 20. brite and fair. i had to spend the whole morning in going
to the river for water for washing. it was wash day and when mother
went to the rane water barril there was 5 dead hornpowt floting on the
top. she made me tip the barrel over and get water from the river. they
was some fun for Beany helped me and he stood in the hand cart and filled
the tubs and all of a sudden i let go and the old cart flew up and
Beany and the tub and the pail and everything went rite in.

Beany isent going to speak to me ever again.

Aug. 21, 186- Gosh, we are having fun now. what do you think. they
is going to be a big mass meeting this fall.

Ben Butler and Jake Ely and lots of old pelters are going to be here,
and they is going to be 4 or 5 bands and lots of fun. well before that
comes they is going to be lots of political meetings and the first one
is to be next week, and father is going to make a speach. Gim Luverin
and Bil Morrill and General Marsten and Tom Levitt, and he is a ripper
to holler. and they want father to make a speach. father says he
must work for the party and perhaps he can get his salery rased. so
he has been a riting every nite and mumbling it over to hisself
and last nite he said he had got it. tonite he is a going to speak
it to us.

Aug. 22. last nite father studed his speach over and let us stay up
to hear it. he stood up and looked auful stirn and put one hand in
the buzum of his shert. i coodent help laffin, but he told me to shet
up or i cood go to bed and so i shet up. i tell you it was fine. It
begun Mister Moddirator had i supposed, or for 1 moment dremp that i a
humble offis holder under this glorious government, wood have been called
upon to speak, i shood have remained at home with my wife and my
children.

i said, if you dont want to make a speach why dont you stay at home that
nite, and he said 1 more word from you sir and you go to bed. so
i dident yip again.

then he went on like this, were it not that a crool axident in my erly
youth, in my far away boyhood days prevented me from voluntearing
and desecrating my life to my countrys welfare, in the strugle jest
ended i wood have poared out evry drop of my blud to have maintaned her
owner and the owner of her flag. mother began to laff and said George
how can you tell such feerful stories, you know you were scart
most to deth becaus you was afraid you wood be drafted.

father said they was a lot of old fellows traveling round the country
and talking that way who coodent have been drug into the war with a
ox chane. then he stood on the other leg a while and said, it is peculiarly
aproprate that Exeter, the berth place of Lewis Cas, the educater of
Webster, the home of Amos Tuck, of General Marston shood be fourmost
in the party strife, and as for me i wirk only for my partys good, my
countrys good, without feer or hope of reward. they was a lot more to
it, and some of it you cood hear about a mile he hollered so.

Aug. 23. We are all going the nite of the rally. mother says she wont
go for she wood be ashamed to hear father tell such dredful stories.
Aunt Sarah dont want to go because she is afraid father will brake down.
but she has got to go with me and Keene and Cele and Georgie.

Aug. 24. father practised his speach tonite and we all hollered and
claped at the fine parts. he has got a new pair of boots. they
hurt like time and he only wears them nites when he is practising
his speach.

Aug. 25. father licked me tonite becaus i spoke some of his speach to
Beany. he was auful mad and said i was the bigest fool he ever see. the
fellers have got up a Grant Club. Pricilla cant belong because he
is a demicrat.

Aug. 26. father called me and Beany out behind the barn tonite and
gave us 10 cents apeace if we woodent say anything about his speach.
after supper father practised again but he dident holler so loud
becaus he was afraid some body wood hear him and mother dident want
him to wake up the baby, and it was sunday too.

Aug. 27. it has been brite and fair all the week and hot as time. i
have to go to the river for soft water because it hasent raned eny
since i had to tip over the rane water barril. i have got a little tirtle
as big as a cent. father went down to General Marstons office tonite to
arrange about the rally. he came home and practised about an hour.
i gess he wood have practised all nite if the baby hadent waked up an
hollered.

Aug. 28. we are all getting ready for the rally.

Keene and Cele and Georgie have got some new plad dresses. father has
got a pair of gray britches and a black coat. mother said the rally was
a good thing becaus it was the first time she had seen father
dressed up since he was married.

Aug. 29. they was a big thunder shower last nite. we all got up
in the nite and went into mothers room. mother sat on the fether bed and
all them that was scart cood set there. i wasent scart. father said it
would be jest the cussid luck to have it rane the nite of the rally.

Aug. 30. we had the last practise tonite, father put on his best close and
new boots and the girls had on their plad dresses and i had on a
new paper coller. we all set down and father came in and stood up.
i tell you he looked fine. well he begun, mister modderater had i
suposed or for 1 moment dremp, and then he forgot the rest. i tell
you he was mad. i wanted to laff but dident dass to. well after a
while he remembered and went through it all rite, and then he went
over it 2 times more. gosh what if he shood forget it tomorrow nite.
he is going to wright some of it on his cufs and he practised tonite
making jestures so as to bring his cufs up so that he cood read it.

Aug. 31. the rally is tonite. father woke us all up last nite hollering
in his sleep. he dremp about the speach. this morning he went to
Boston without eating his brekfast. i gess he is begining to be scart.
i am a going to make his boots shine today. gosh what if he shood brake
down. i gess i am getting a little scart too. brite and fair.

Sept. 1.

Last nite father came home and the first thing he did was to send
me down to miss Pratts for his shert. it was all pollished and shone
like glass. then he asked if i had blacked his boots and then he et
supper. he dident eat much though. he said Mr. Tuck came down from
Boston with him. Mr. Tuck was a going to make a speach first and then
he was going to introduce Gim Loverin as chairman and then Gim
Loverin was a going to call on father. father said he bet 5 dollars
he wood call him Gim instead of mister modderator. father was pretty
cross at supper. i gess he was getting scart. the baby began to cry
and father asked mother why she dident choak the squawling brat and
mother sorter laffed and put the baby into fathers lap and said i
gess you had better choak him. father laffed and began to toss the
baby up and down. he likes the baby and while he was playing with
it he was all rite. but after supper he was cross and said he hed
an auful headake. then he went practising his speach again so as
not to call the modderator Gim. well we got ready and went down
erly to get some good seats so as to hear father and see him come
in with them that was to set on the platform. we wanted to go down
with father but he said he coodent bother with us. but before we
went he came down stairs with his new close on and he looked fine
but his face looked auful white. he said he had a headake but as
soon as he got started to speak it wood all go off. so we went down.

Cele had her hair curled and Keene had a new red silk ribbon on her hair
becaus her hair wont curl and Aunt Sarah had on a new dolman with
beeds on it and some long coral earrings and they all looked fine.
Aunt Sarah took Georgie by the hand becaus she was the littlest and
me and Keene and Cele followed on.

When we got there the band was playing in front of the town hall and
aunt Sarah said i cood stay out and hear it and then said i cood sit
with Gim Wingit and Willy Swet if i wood behave. i said i wood and
we lissened and after the band went in we went too. most all the seats
were taken and we got some bully seats way up in front. i looked for
father but coodent see him becaus the speakers hadent come in. well
jest as soon as we got in the policeman was up in front and he said
they has been to much whisling and stamping and the next one that
whisles or stamps will get put out. well they was old Swane and
Brown and Kize and Dirgin and every body kept quiet. after a few
minits the band began to play hale to the chief and the speakers
came marching up the middle ile. i looked for father but he wasnt
there. evrybody began to clap and stamp and Gim and Willy asked me
where my old man was. i stood up to see if he was there and jest
then i saw the policeman a rushing at me. he grabed me by the collar
and shook me round till i dident know which end my head was on and
he draged me down the ile and threw me out. as we were going down
the ile i saw Aunt Sarah running down the other ile as fast as she
cood go with her bonnet on the back of her head and Keene and Cele
and Georgie following along all bawling. she got out in the entry
jest as he was going to put me out of the front door and she grabed
me away from him and said you misable cowardly retch to treat a boy
that way. he said i whisled and she said he dident and you knew it
only you dident dass take ennyone else.

Then she told us to come home and we went home as fast as we cood all
bawling. when we got home mother was sitting up alone and aunt Sarah
started to tell her and Keene and Cele and Georgie all bawled and
you never heard such a noise, and father was in bed with a headake
and hollered out what in time is the matter. and she told him and
i heard him jump out of bed and in a minit he came out buttoning
up his suspenders.

Mother said where in the world are you going George, and he said things
is come to a pretty pass if a boy cant go and hear his father make
a speach without being banged round by a policeman. i am going down
to knock the heads off every policeman there. and he reeched for
his vest. mother said George, dont you go near the hall, and father
said he cood lick anny 2 men on the police force easy and he would
show them how to slam people round and he reeched for his coat, and
Keene and Cele and Georgia began to bawl again to think he wood get
hurt and aunt Sarah and mother said you had better not go George,
and father said he wood give them more fun in 5 minits than they
had seen in a political rally in 5 years and he reeched for his
boots and mother said what will they think of you after you have
sent word that you are too sick to make a speach, to see you come
rushing into the hall and go punching the policemen and father had
got on 1 boot and when she said that he began to look kinder sick
and said, thunder that is so. and then his headake got wirse and
he gave me a twenty five cent scrip and Keene and Cele and Georgie
ten cents each and he went to bed and so did we.

i wonder if his head aked really so he coodent make a speach or if
he was scart. i bet he was scart.

school commences monday. father hasent asked once about my diry, so i
aint going to wright enny more.

THIRTY YEARS (OR MORE) AFTER
On looking back over the pages of the "Diary" it appears to me that
some sort of an amende honorable is due to those citizens now living,
and the relatives and friends of those now dead, whose names have
appeared in the "Diary" and who have, so to speak, been handled
without gloves.

That I have been neither mobbed, nor horsewhipped, nor sued, nor
prosecuted, but that I have enjoyed many a good laugh with--and
have received many pleasant words from --the victims, and their
friends, is good evidence that they, and their more fortunate
brothers who have not been therein mentioned, have taken the "Diary"
in the very spirit in which it was published, that of affectionate
and amusing retrospect.

And it is indeed with affection that I recall those men, at that time in
their prime. That I could not then understand the reason why they did
not fully enter into and appreciate the spirit that prompted me and
my boon companions to transgress so many rules, laws, and statutes
is not surprising. Boys seldom can understand it. But, although I now
fully appreciate it, I often wonder at the spirit that prompted so many
of those men in after years to show me so many kindnesses, so much
encouragement, and such great forbearance.

So many inquiries have been made of me about that cornet, the soul-filling
ambition of my early years, that I feel that the uncertainty in regard
to that delightful instrument ought to be cleared up.

I never did save up enough money to buy a cornet. I haven't to this day.
But many years afterwards, when my ambition had been turned into other
and equally profitless channels, upon the death of a dear friend his
beautiful cornet was sent me.

I have it now, as the neighbors and the members of my family can testify
fully and with deep feeling, if called upon.

H. A. S.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE
A good many years ago, during my college days, it was my custom and that
of my room-mate, Brown of Exeter, to make our room the gathering-place
for Exeter boys, both "stewdcats" and homesick Exeter youths then filling
positions in Boston.

It happened that frequently undergraduates from other towns and
cities came in at these Saturday evening gatherings and it was a
matter of wonder to them that we had so much to talk about in
relation to our native town; and it was their frequent remark that
"either Exeter is a remarkable place, or you are a remarkably loyal
set of fellows."

That Exeter is a remarkable place is an axiom, and no better evidence
of the fact can be found (were evidence necessary to sustain an
axiom) than in the loyalty that every citizen displays, and the
sincere love that prompts every one who has ever come under the
spell of our dear old town to revisit her at every opportunity.

Where else could a diary of this nature, dealing with actual persons
and actual events, be published and be received with such absolute
goodnature and even enthusiasm by the persons now living who are
mentioned therein?

It is therefore with affection as well as amusement that I append
the following brief biographical sketches of persons mentioned in
the "Diary," preserving as nearly as possible the order of their
appearance in the book.

As many readers of the "Diary" have expressed a desire to know more of
the subsequent histories and achievements of those therein mentioned,
it is hoped this information will satisfy a curiosity and interest
which, to a loyal son of Exeter, appear quite natural: --
1. Father. GEORGE S. SHUTE.

A native of Exeter.

For twenty-six years a clerk in the Boston Naval Office. Still living
in Exeter, an old man with a young tongue; in fact, the quickest man
at repartee in Exeter.

2. Mother.

My mother died in the winter of 1896. No words can do justice to her
qualities. "A sweeter woman ne'er drew breath."
8. "Gim" Melcher.

An old friend of my father's. Died in Maiden a few years ago.

4.

Some of the men who were "wrighting fast" in the Custom House were the
following: --
GEORGE DAVIS, of Lexington, who a year ago celebrated his fiftieth
consecutive year of service in the Naval Office; COLONEL IVORY
POPE, of Cambridge; BENJAMIN A.

SIDWELL, of East Boston; JACOB A.

HOWE, of Maiden; FRANK HARRIMAN, a brother of the late Governor
Harriman of Concord, N.

H.

HIRAM BARRUS, of Reading, Mass. deceased; C.

C. WHITTEMORE, of Portsmouth, N. H.; CHARLES MUDGE, of Maiden; MATTHEW
F.

WHITTIER, of Medford, a brother of the poet Whittier, and a newspaper-writer
of considerable prominence, writing under the pen-name of "Ethan
Spike"; and TRISTRAM TALBOT, of Newburyport, with others whom the writer
does not now recall.

A few years later the writer spent several of his college vacations as
deputy clerk in the same Naval Office, and made pleasant acquaintances
with all of the above-named men.

He found them very competent clerks, courteous gentlemen, and the best
story-tellers that he ever knew, and recollects those vacations
as very pleasant periods in his school life.

Some of them still hold positions in the Custom House.

5.

Charles "Talor": CHARLES TAYLOR.

A great friend of the family.

Died in Exeter about ten years ago.

6.

"Beany": E. L. WATSON.

In business at Williamstown, Mass.

Attained his boyhood ambition and married Lizzie "Tole," Ed's
sister.

7.

"Pewter": C. E. PURINGTON.

My near neighbor, a decorative painter, who early displayed talent
in this direction.

8.

"Skinny Bruce": WM. J. BRUCE.

A tinsmith of Exeter who still thinks he could have licked Frank
Elliott.

9. Frank Elliott.

A successful mechanic in Boston, who is confident that he could
have licked "Skinny" Bruce.

10.

"Nipper": JOHN A. BROWN.

Exeter. Chairman of the School Board.

Trustee of the Seminary.
Taking Shippeitaro with him, he hurried to the peasant's cottage, and,
when evening was come, he placed the dog in the cage which was to have
carried the maiden. The bearers then took the cage to the ruined temple,
and, placing it on the ground, ran away as fast as their legs would
carry them.

The lad, laughing softly to himself, hid inside the temple as before,
and so quiet was the spot that he fell asleep. At midnight he was
aroused by the same wild shrieks he had heard the night before. He rose
and looked out at the temple door.

Through the darkness, into the moonlight, came the troop of Phantom
Cats. This time they were led by a fierce, black Tomcat. As they came
nearer they chanted with unearthly screeches:--

     "Whisper not to Shippeitaro
       That the Phantom Cats are near;
       Whisper not to Shippeitaro,
       Lest he soon appear!"


With that the great Tomcat caught sight of the cage and, uttering a
fearful yowl, sprang upon it, With one blow of his claws he tore open
the lid, when, instead of the dainty morsel he expected, out jumped
Shippeitaro!

The dog sprang upon the Tomcat, and caught him by the throat; while the
Phantom Cats stood still in amazement. Drawing his sword the lad hurried
to Shippeitaro's side, and what with Shippeitaro's teeth and the lad's
hard blows, in an instant the great Tomcat was torn and cut into pieces.
When the Phantom Cats saw this, they uttered one wild shriek and fled
away, never to return again.

Then the soldier lad, leading Shippeitaro, returned in triumph to the
peasant's cottage. There in terror the maiden awaited his arrival, but
great was the joy of herself and her parents when they knew that the
Tomcat was no more.

"Oh, sir," cried the maiden, "I can never thank you! I am the only child
of my parents, and no one would have been left to care for them if I had
been the monster's victim."

"Do not thank me," answered the lad. "Thank the brave Shippeitaro. It
was he who sprang upon the great Tomcat and chased away the Phantom
Creatures."


HANSEL AND GRETHEL

BY THE BROTHERS GRIMM (ADAPTED)

Hard-by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his two children
and his wife who was their stepmother. The boy was called Hansel and the
girl Grethel. The wood-cutter had little to bite and to break, and once
when a great famine fell on the land he could no longer get daily bread.
Now when he thought over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in
his trouble, he groaned, and said to his wife:--

"What is to become of us? How are we to feed our poor children, when we
no longer have anything even for ourselves?"

"I'll tell you what, husband," answered the woman; "early to-morrow
morning we will take the children out into the woods where it is the
thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each of them
one piece of bread more, and then we will go to our work and leave them
alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be rid of
them."

"No, wife," said the man, "I will not do that; how can I bear to leave
my children alone in the woods?--the wild beasts would soon come and
tear them to pieces."

"Oh, you fool!" said she. "Then we must all four die of hunger; you may
as well plane the planks for our coffins." And she left him no peace
until he said he would do as she wished.

"But I feel very sorry for the poor children, all the same," said the
man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their father's wife had said to their father.

Grethel wept bitter tears, and said to Hansel, "Now all is over with
us."

"Be quiet, Grethel," said Hansel, "do not be troubled; I will soon find
a way to help us."

And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put on his little
coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon shone brightly,
and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house shone like real
silver pennies. Hansel stooped and put as many of them in the little
pocket of his coat as he could make room for. Then he went back, and
said to Grethel, "Be at ease, dear little sister, and sleep in peace;
God will not forsake us." And he lay down again in his bed.

When the day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and
awoke the two children, saying:--

"Get up, you lazy things! we are going into the forest to fetch wood."
She gave each a little piece of bread, and said, "There is something for
your dinner, but do not eat it up before then, for you will get nothing
else."

Grethel took the bread under her apron, as Hansel had the stones in his
pocket. Then they all set out together on the way to the forest, and
Hansel threw one after another of the white pebble-stones out of his
pocket on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said, "Now,
children, pile up some wood and I will light a fire that you may not be
cold."

Hansel and Grethel drew brushwood together till it was as high as a
little hill.

The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning very high
the woman said:--

"Now, children, lie down by the fire and rest; we will go into the
forest and cut some wood. When we have done, we will come back and fetch
you away."

Hansel and Grethel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a
little piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe
they were sure their father was near. But it was not the axe, it was
a branch which he had tied to a dry tree, and the wind was blowing it
backward and forward. As they had been sitting such a long time they
were tired, their eyes shut, and they fell fast asleep. When at last
they awoke, it was dark night.

Grethel began to cry, and said, "How are we to get out of the forest
now?"

But Hansel comforted her, saying, "Just wait a little, until the moon
has risen, and then we will soon find the way."

And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took his little sister by the
hand, and followed the pebbles, which shone like bright silver pieces,
and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came once more to
their father's house.

They knocked at the door, and when the woman opened it, and saw that it
was Hansel and Grethel, she said, "You naughty children, why have you
slept so long in the forest? we thought you were never coming back at
all!"

The father, however, was glad, for it had cut him to the heart to leave
them behind alone.

Not long after, there was once more a great lack of food in all parts,
and the children heard the woman saying at night to their father:--

"Everything is eaten again; we have one half-loaf left, and after that
there is an end. The children must go; we will take them farther into
the wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no
other means of saving ourselves!"

The man's heart was heavy, and he thought, "It would be better to share
our last mouthful with the children."

The woman, however, would listen to nothing he had to say, but scolded
him. He who says A must say B, too, and as he had given way the first
time, he had to do so a second time also.

The children were still awake and had heard the talk. When the old folks
were asleep, Hansel again got up, and wanted to go and pick up pebbles,
but the woman had locked the door, and he could not get out.

So he comforted his little sister, and said:--

"Do not cry, Grethel; go to sleep quietly, the good God will help us."

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their
beds. Their bit of bread was given to them, but it was still smaller
than the time before. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his
in his pocket, and often threw a morsel on the ground until little by
little, he had thrown all the crumbs on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
she said:--

"Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired you may sleep a
little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in the evening
when we are done, we will come and fetch you away."

When it was noon, Grethel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had
scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep, and evening came and
went, but no one came to the poor children.

They did not awake until it was dark night, and Hansel comforted his
little sister, and said:--

"Just wait, Grethel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the
crumbs of bread which I have scattered about; they will show us our way
home again."

When the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many
thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up.

Hansel said to Grethel, "We shall soon find the way."

But they did not find it. They walked the whole night and all the next
day, too, from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the
forest; they were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or
three berries which grew on the ground. And as they were so tired that
their legs would carry them no longer, they lay down under a tree and
fell asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father's house. They
began to walk again, but they always got deeper into the forest, and if
help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it
was midday, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough. It
sang so sweetly that they stood still and listened to it. And when
it had done, it spread its wings and flew away before them, and they
followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of which it
perched; and when they came quite up to the little house, they saw it
was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows were of
clear sugar.

"We will set to work on that," said Hansel, "and have a good meal.
I will eat a bit of the roof, and you, Grethel, can eat some of the
window, it will taste sweet."

Hansel reached up, and broke off a little of the roof to try how it
tasted, and Grethel leaned against the window and nibbled at the panes.

Then a soft voice cried from the room,--

     "Nibble, nibble, gnaw,
       Who is nibbling at my little house?"


The children answered:--

          "The wind, the wind,
            The wind from heaven";

and went on eating. Hansel, who thought the roof tasted very nice, tore
down a great piece of it; and Grethel pushed out the whole of one round
window-pane, sat down, and went to eating it.

All at once the door opened, and a very, very old woman, who leaned on
crutches, came creeping out. Hansel and Grethel were so scared that they
let fall what they had in their hands.

The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said, "Oh, you dear
children, who has brought you here? Do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you."

She took them both by the hand, and led them into her little house. Then
good food was set before them, milk and pancakes, with sugar, apples,
and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little beds were covered with clean
white linen, and Hansel and Grethel lay down in them, and thought they
were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality a
wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had built the little
bread house in order to coax them there.

Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she was already
up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so pretty, with
their plump red cheeks, she muttered to herself, "That will be a dainty
mouthful!"

Then she seized Hansel, carried him into a little stable, and shut him
in behind a grated door. He might scream as he liked,--it was of no use.
Then she went to Grethel, shook her till she awoke and cried: "Get up,
lazy thing; fetch some water, and cook something good for your brother;
he is in the stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I
will eat him."

Grethel began to weep, but it was all in vain; she was forced to do what
the wicked witch told her.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Grethel got
nothing but crab-shells.

Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and cried, "Hansel,
stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon be fat."

Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and the old woman,
who had dim eyes, could not see it; she thought it was Hansel's finger,
and wondered why he grew no fatter. When four weeks had gone by, and
Hansel still was thin, she could wait no longer.

"Come, Grethel," she cried to the girl, "fly round and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, to-morrow I will kill him, and cook him."

Ah, how sad was the poor little sister when she had to fetch the water,
and how her tears did flow down over her cheeks!

"Dear God, do help us," she cried. "If the wild beasts in the forest had
but eaten us, we should at any rate have died together."

"Just keep your noise to yourself," said the old woman; "all that won't
help you at all."

Early in the morning, Grethel had to go out and hang up the kettle with
the water, and light the fire.

"We will bake first," said the old woman. "I have already heated the
oven, and got the dough ready."

She pushed poor Grethel out to the oven, from which the flames of fire
were already darting.

"Creep in," said the witch, "and see if it is heated, so that we can
shut the bread in." And when once Grethel was inside, she meant to shut
the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.

But Grethel saw what she had in her mind, and said, "I do not know how I
am to do it; how do you get in?"

"Silly goose," said the old woman. "The door is big enough; just look, I
can get in myself!" and she crept up and thrust her head into the oven.
Then Grethel gave her a push that drove her far into it, and shut the
iron door, tight.

Grethel ran as quick as lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable,
and cried, "Hansel, we are saved! The old witch is dead!"

Then Hansel sprang out like a bird from its cage when the door is opened
for it. How they did dance about and kiss each other. And as they had
no longer any need to fear her, they went into the witch's house, and in
every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.

"These are far better than pebbles!" said Hansel, and filled his
pockets, and Grethel said, "I, too, will take something home with me,"
and filled her pinafore.

"But now we will go away," said Hansel, "that we may get out of the
witch's forest." When they had walked for two hours, they came to a
great piece of water. "We cannot get over," said Hansel; "I see no
foot-plank and no bridge."

"And no boat crosses, either," answered Grethel, "but a white duck is
swimming there; if I ask her, she will help us over." Then she cried,--

     "Little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
       Hansel and Grethel are waiting for thee?
       There's never a plank or bridge in sight,
       Take us across on thy back so white."


The duck came to them, and Hansel sat on its back, and told his sister
to sit by him.

"No," replied Grethel, "that will be too heavy for the little duck; she
shall take us across, one after the other."

The good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and
had walked for a short time, they knew where they were, and at last they
saw from afar their father's house.

Then they began to run, rushed in, and threw themselves into their
father's arms. The man had not known one happy hour since he had left
the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead. Grethel
emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones rolled about the
floor, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket
to add to them. Then all care was at an end, and they lived happily
together ever after.

My tale is done; there runs a mouse; whosoever catches it may make
himself a big fur cap out of it.


BURG HILL'S ON FIRE

A CELTIC FAIRY TALE

BY ELIZABETH W. GRIERSON (ADAPTED)


Once upon a time there was a rich farmer who had a thrifty wife. She
used to go out and gather all the little bits of wool which she could
find on the hillsides, and bring them home. Then, after her family had
gone to bed, she would sit up and card the wool and spin it into yarn,
then she would weave the yarn into cloth to make garments for her
children.

But all this work made her feel very tired, so that one night, sitting
at her loom, she laid down her shuttle and cried:--

"Oh, that some one would come from far or near, from land or sea, to
help me!"

No sooner had the words left her lips than she heard some one knocking
at the door.

"Who is there?" cried she.

"Tell Quary, good housewife," answered a wee, wee voice. "Open the door
to me. As long as I have you'll get."

She opened the door and there on the threshold stood a queer, little
woman, dressed in a green gown and wearing a white cap on her head.

The good housewife was so astonished that she stood and stared at her
strange visitor; but without a word the little woman ran past her, and
seated herself at the spinning-wheel.

The good housewife shut the door, but just then she heard another knock.

"Who is there?" said she.

"Tell Quary, good housewife. Open the door to me," said another wee, wee
voice. "As long as I have you'll get."

And when she opened the door there was another queer, little woman, in a
lilac frock and a green cap, standing on the threshold.

She, too, ran into the house without waiting to say, "By your leave,"
and picking up the distaff, began to put some wool on it.

Then before the housewife could get the door shut, a funny little
manikin, with green trousers and a red cap, came running in, and
followed the tiny women into the kitchen, seized hold of a handful of
wool, and began to card it. Another wee, wee woman followed him, and
then another tiny manikin, and another, and another, until it seemed
to the good housewife that all the fairies and pixies in Scotland were
coming into her house.

The kitchen was alive with them. Some of them hung the great pot over
the fire to boil water to wash the wool that was dirty. Some teased the
clean wool, and some carded it. Some spun it into yarn, and some wove
the yarn into great webs of cloth.

And the noise they made was like to make her head run round. "Splash!
splash! Whirr! whirr! Clack! clack!" The water in the pot bubbled over.
The spinning-wheel whirred. The shuttle in the loom flew backwards and
forwards.

And the worst of it was that all the Fairies cried out for something
to eat, and although the good housewife put on her griddle and baked
bannocks as fast as she could, the bannocks were eaten up the moment
they were taken off the fire, and yet the Fairies shouted for more.

At last the poor woman was so troubled that she went into the next room
to wake her husband. But although she shook him with all her might, she
could not wake him. It was very plain to see that he was bewitched.

Frightened almost out of her senses, and leaving the Fairies eating her
last batch of bannocks, she stole out of the house and ran as fast as
she could to the cottage of the Wise Man who lived a mile away.

She knocked at his door till he got up and put his head out of the
window, to see who was there; then she told him the whole story.

"Thou foolish woman," said he, "let this be a lesson to thee never to
pray for things thou dost not need! Before thy husband can be loosed
from the spell the Fairies must be got out of the house and the
fulling-water, which they have boiled, must be thrown over him. Hurry
to the little hill that lies behind thy cottage, climb to the top of
it, and set the bushes on fire; then thou must shout three times: 'BURG
HILL'S ON FIRE!' Then will all the little Fairies run out to see if
this be true, for they live under the hill. When they are all out of the
cottage, do thou slip in as quickly as thou canst, and turn the kitchen
upside down. Upset everything the Fairies have worked with, else the
things their fingers have touched will open the door to them, and let
them in, in spite of thee."

So the good housewife hurried away. She climbed to the top of the little
hill back of her cottage, set the bushes on fire, and cried out three
times as loud as she was able: "BURG HILL'S ON FIRE!"

And sure enough, the door of the cottage was flung wide open, and all
the little Fairies came running out, knocking each other over in their
eagerness to be first at the hill.

In the confusion the good housewife slipped away, and ran as fast as she
could to her cottage; and when she was once inside, it did not take her
long to bar the door, and turn everything upside down.

She took the band off the spinning-wheel, and twisted the head of the
distaff the wrong way. She lifted the pot of fulling-water off the fire,
and turned the room topsy-turvy, and threw down the carding-combs.

Scarcely had she done so, when the Fairies returned, and knocked at the
door.

"Good housewife! let us in," they cried.

"The door is shut and bolted, and I will not open it," answered she.

"Good spinning-wheel, get up and open the door," they cried.

"How can I," answered the spinning-wheel, "seeing that my band is
undone?"

"Kind distaff, open the door for us," said they.

"That would I gladly do," said the distaff, "but I cannot walk, for my
head is turned the wrong way."

"Weaving-loom, have pity, and open the door."

"I am all topsy-turvy, and cannot move," sighed the loom.

"Fulling-water, open the door," they implored.

"I am off the fire," growled the fulling-water, "and all my strength is
gone."

"Oh! Is there nothing that will come to our aid, and open the door?"
they cried.

"I will," said a little barley-bannock, that had lain hidden, toasting
on the hearth; and it rose and trundled like a wheel quickly across the
floor.

But luckily the housewife saw it, and she nipped it between her finger
and thumb, and, because it was only half-baked, it fell with a "splatch"
on the cold floor.

Then the Fairies gave up trying to get into the kitchen, and instead
they climbed up by the windows into the room where the good housewife's
husband was sleeping, and they swarmed upon his bed and tickled him
until he tossed about and muttered as if he had a fever.

Then all of a sudden the good housewife remembered what the Wise Man had
said about the fulling-water. She ran to the kitchen and lifted a cupful
out of the pot, and carried it in, and threw it over the bed where her
husband was.

In an instant he woke up in his right senses. Then he jumped out of bed,
ran across the room and opened the door, and the Fairies vanished. And
they have never been seen from that day to this.


THE KING OF THE CATS

AN ENGLISH FOLK-TALE

BY ERNEST RHYS

Once upon a time there were two brothers who lived in a lonely house in
a very lonely part of Scotland. An old woman used to do the cooking,
and there was no one else, unless we count her cat and their own dogs,
within miles of them.

One autumn afternoon the elder of the two, whom we will call Elshender,
said he would not go out; so the younger one, Fergus, went alone to
follow the path where they had been shooting the day before, far across
the mountains.

He meant to return home before the early sunset; however, he did not do
so, and Elshender became very uneasy as he watched and waited in vain
till long after their usual supper-time. At last Fergus returned, wet
and exhausted, nor did he explain why he was so late.

But after supper when the two brothers were seated before the fire, on
which the peat crackled cheerfully, the dogs lying at their feet, and
the old woman's black cat sitting gravely with half-shut eyes on the
hearth between them, Fergus recovered himself and began to tell his
adventures.

"You must be wondering," said he, "what made me so late. I have had a
very, very strange adventure to-day. I hardly know what to say about it.
I went, as I told you I should, along our yesterday's track. A mountain
fog came on just as I was about to turn homewards, and I completely lost
my way. I wandered about for a long time not knowing where I was, till
at last I saw a light, and made for it, hoping to get help.

"As I came near it, it disappeared, and I found myself close to an old
oak tree. I climbed into the branches the better to look for the light,
and, behold! there it was right beneath me, inside the hollow trunk of
the tree. I seemed to be looking down into a church, where a funeral was
taking place. I heard singing, and saw a coffin surrounded by torches,
all carried by--But I know you won't believe me, Elshender, if I tell
you!"

His brother eagerly begged him to go on, and threw a dry peat on the
fire to encourage him. The dogs were sleeping quietly, but the cat was
sitting up, and seemed to be listening just as carefully and cannily as
Elshender himself. Both brothers, indeed, turned their eyes on the cat
as Fergus took up his story.

"Yes," he continued, "it is as true as I sit here. The coffin and the
torches were both carried by CATS, and upon the coffin were marked a
crown and a scepter!"

He got no farther, for the black cat started up, shrieking:--

"My stars! old Peter's dead, and I'm the King o' the Cats!"--Then rushed
up the chimney, and was seen no more.


THE STRANGE VISITOR

AN ENGLISH FOLK-TALE

BY JOSEPH JACOBS

A woman was sitting at her reel one night; and still she sat, and still
she reeled, and still she wished for company.

In came a pair of broad, broad soles, and sat down
at the fireside!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of small, small legs, and sat down
on the broad, broad soles!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of thick, thick knees, and sat down
on the small, small legs!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of thin, thin thighs, and sat down
on the thick, thick knees!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of huge, huge hips, and sat down
on the thin, thin thighs!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a wee, wee waist, and sat down on the
huge, huge hips!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of broad, broad shoulders, and sat
down on the wee, wee waist!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of small, small arms, and sat down
on the broad, broad shoulders!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a pair of huge, huge hands, and sat down
on the small, small arms!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a small, small neck, and sat down on the
broad, broad shoulders!

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she
wished for company.

In came a huge, huge head, and sat down on the
small, small neck!

. . . . . . . . .

"How did you get such broad, broad feet?" quoth the Woman.
"Much tramping, much tramping!" (GRUFFLY.)

"How did you get such small, small legs?" "AIH-H-H!--late--and
WEE-E-E-moul!" (WHININGLY.)

"How did you get such thick, thick knees?" "Much praying, much praying!"
(PIOUSLY.)

"How did you get such thin, thin thighs?" "Aih-h-h!--late--and
wee-e-e-moul!" (WHININGLY.)

"How did you get such big, big hips?" "Much sitting, much sitting!"
(GRUFFLY.)

"How did you get such a wee, wee waist?" "Aih-h-h!--late--and
wee-e-e-moul!" (WHININGLY.)

"How did you get such broad, broad shoulders?" "With carrying broom,
with carrying broom!"     (GRUFFLY.)

"How did you get such small arms?" "Aih-h-h!--late--and wee-e-e-moul!"
(WHININGLY.)

"How did you get such huge, huge hands?" "Threshing with an iron flail!
Threshing with an     iron flail!" (GRUFFLY.)

"How did you get such a small, small neck?" "Aih-h-h!--late--and
wee-e-e-moul!" (PITIFULLY.)

"How did you get such a huge, huge head?" "Much knowledge, much
knowledge!" (KEENLY.)

"What do you come for?" "FOR YOU!!!" (AT THE TOP OF THE VOICE, WITH A
WAVE OF THE ARMS AND A STAMP OF THE FEET.)


THE BENEVOLENT GOBLIN

FROM GESTA ROMANORUM (ADAPTED)

In the kingdom of England there is a hillock in the midst of a dense
wood. Thither in old days knights and their followers were wont to
repair when tired and thirsty after the chase. When one of their number
called out, "I thirst!" there immediately started up a Goblin with
a cheerful countenance, clad in a crimson robe, and bearing in his
outstretched hand a large drinking-horn richly ornamented with gold and
precious jewels, and full of the most delicious, unknown beverage.

The Goblin presented the horn to the thirsty knight, who drank and
instantly felt refreshed and cool. After the drinker had emptied the
horn, the Goblin offered a silken napkin to wipe the mouth. Then,
without waiting to be thanked, the strange creature vanished as suddenly
as he had come.

Now once there was a knight of churlish nature, who was hunting alone
in those parts. Feeling thirsty and fatigued, he visited the hillock and
cried out:--

"I thirst!"

Instantly the Goblin appeared and presented the horn.

When the knight had drained it of its delicious beverage, instead of
returning the horn, he thrust it into his bosom, and rode hastily away.

He boasted far and wide of his deed, and his feudal lord hearing thereof
caused him to be bound and cast into prison; then fearing lest he, too,
might become partaker in the theft and ingratitude of the knight, the
lord presented the jeweled horn to the King of England, who carefully
preserved it among the royal treasures. But never again did the
benevolent Goblin return to the hillock in the wood.


THE PHANTOM KNIGHT OF THE VANDAL CAMP

FROM GESTA ROMANORUM (ADAPTED)

There was once in Great Britain, a knight named Albert, strong in arms
and adorned with every virtue. One day as he was seeking for adventure,
he chanced to wander into a castle where he was hospitably entertained.

At night, after supper, as was usual in great families during the
winter, the household gathered about the hearth and occupied the time in
relating divers tales.

At last they told how in the near-by plain of Wandlesbury there was a
haunted mound. There in old days the Vandals, who laid waste the land
and slaughtered Christians, had pitched their camp and built about it a
great rampart. And it was further related that in the hush of the night,
if any one crossed the plain, ascended the mound, and called out in a
loud voice, "Let my adversary appear!" there immediately started up
from the ruined ramparts a huge, ghostly figure, armed and mounted for
battle. This phantom then attacked the knight who had cried out and
speedily overcame him.

Now, when Albert heard this marvelous tale, he greatly doubted its
truth, and was determined to put the matter to a test. As the moon
was shining brightly, and the night was quiet, he armed, mounted, and
immediately hastened to the plain of Wandlesbury, accompanied by a
squire of noble blood.

He ascended the mound, dismissed his attendant, and shouted:--

"Let my adversary appear!"

Instantly there sprang from the ruins a huge, ghostly knight completely
armed and mounted on an enormous steed.

This phantom rushed upon Albert, who spurred his horse, extended his
shield, and drove at his antagonist with his lance. Both knights were
shaken by the encounter. Albert, however, so resolutely and with so
strong an arm pressed his adversary that the latter was thrown violently
to the ground. Seeing this Albert hastily seized the steed of the fallen
knight, and started to leave the mound.

But the phantom, rising to his feet, and seeing his horse led away,
flung his lance and cruelly wounded Albert in the thigh. This done he
vanished as suddenly as he had appeared.

Our knight, overjoyed at his victory, returned in triumph to the castle,
where the household crowded around him and praised his bravery. But when
he put off his armor he found the cuish from his right thigh filled with
clots of blood from an angry wound in his side. The family, alarmed,
hastened to apply healing herbs and bandages.

The captured horse was then brought forward. He was prodigiously large,
and black as jet. His eyes were fierce and flashing, his neck proudly
arched, and he wore a glittering war-saddle upon his back.

As the first streaks of dawn began to appear, the animal reared wildly,
snorted as if with pain and anger, and struck the ground so furiously
with his hoofs that the sparks flew. The black cock of the castle crew
and the horse, uttering a terrible cry, instantly disappeared.

And every year, on the selfsame night, at the selfsame hour, the wounds
of the knight Albert broke out afresh, and tormented him with agony.
Thus till his dying day he bore in his body a yearly reminder of his
encounter with the Phantom Knight of the Vandal Camp.


THANKSGIVING DAY

(LAST THURSDAY IN NOVEMBER)


THE FIRST HARVEST-HOME IN PLYMOUTH

BY W. DE LOSS LOVE, JR (ADAPTED)

After prayer and fasting and a farewell feast, the Pilgrim Fathers left
the City of Leyden, and sought the new and unknown land. "So they lefte
ye goodly & pleasante citie," writes their historian Bradford, "which
had been ther resting place near 12 years, but they knew they were
pilgrimes & looked not much on those things, but lift up their eyes to
ye Heavens their dearest cuntrie, and quieted their spirits."

When, after many vexing days upon the deep, the pilgrims first sighted
the New World, they were filled with praise and thanksgiving. Going
ashore they fell upon their knees and blessed the God of Heaven. And
after that, whenever they were delivered from accidents or despair, they
gave God "solemne thanks and praise." Such were the Pilgrims and such
their habit day by day.

The first winter in the New World was marked by great suffering and
want. Hunger and illness thinned the little colony, and caused many
graves to be made on the near-by hillside.

The spring of 1621 opened. The seed was sown in the fields. The
colonists cared for it without ceasing, and watched its growth with
anxiety; for well they knew that their lives depended upon a full
harvest.

The days of spring and summer flew by, and the autumn came. Never in
Holland or England had the Pilgrims seen the like of the treasures
bounteous Nature now spread before them. The woodlands were arrayed in
gorgeous colors, brown, crimson, and gold, and swarmed with game of all
kinds, that had been concealed during the summer. The little farm-plots
had been blessed by the sunshine and showers, and now plentiful crops
stood ready for the gathering. The Pilgrims, rejoicing, reaped the fruit
of their labors, and housed it carefully for the winter. Then, filled
with the spirit of thanksgiving, they held the first harvest-home in New
England.

For one whole week they rested from work, feasted, exercised their
arms, and enjoyed various recreations. Many Indians visited the colony,
amongst these their greatest king, Massasoit, with ninety of his braves.
The Pilgrims entertained them for three days. And the Indians went out
into the woods and killed fine deer, which they brought to the colony
and presented to the governor and the captain and others. So all made
merry together.

And bountiful was the feast. Oysters, fish and wild turkey, Indian
maize and barley bread, geese and ducks, venison and other savory meats,
decked the board. Kettles, skillets, and spits were overworked, while
knives and spoons, kindly assisted by fingers, made merry music on
pewter plates. Wild grapes, "very sweete and strong," added zest to
the feast. As to the vegetables, why, the good governor describes them
thus:--

     "All sorts of grain which our own land doth yield,
       Was hither brought, and sown in every field;
       As wheat and rye, barley, oats, beans, and pease
       Here all thrive and they profit from them raise;
       All sorts of roots and herbs in gardens grow,--
       Parsnips, carrots, turnips, or what you'll sow,
       Onions, melons, cucumbers, radishes,
       Skirets, beets, coleworts and fair cabbages."


Thus a royal feast it was the Pilgrims spread that first golden autumn
at Plymouth, a feast worthy of their Indian guests.

All slumbering discontents they smothered with common rejoicings. When
the holiday was over, they were surely better, braver men because they
had turned aside to rest awhile and be thankful together. So the exiles
of Leyden claimed the harvests of New England.

This festival was the bursting into life of a new conception of man's
dependence on God's gifts in Nature. It was the promise of autumnal
Thanksgivings to come.


THE MASTER OF THE HARVEST

BY MRS. ALFRED GATTY (ADAPTED)

The Master of the Harvest walked by the side of his cornfields in the
springtime. A frown was on his face, for there had been no rain for
several weeks, and the earth was hard from the parching of the east
winds. The young wheat had not been able to spring up.

So as he looked over the long ridges that stretched in rows before him,
he was vexed and began to grumble and say:--

"The harvest will be backward, and all things will go wrong."

Then he frowned more and more, and uttered complaints against Heaven
because there was no rain; against the earth because it was so dry;
against the corn because it had not sprung up.

And the Master's discontent was whispered all over the field, and
along the ridges where the corn-seed lay. And the poor little seeds
murmured:--

"How cruel to complain! Are we not doing our best? Have we let one drop
of moisture pass by unused? Are we not striving every day to be ready
for the hour of breaking forth? Are we idle? How cruel to complain!"

But of all this the Master of the Harvest heard nothing, so the gloom
did not pass from his face. Going to his comfortable home he repeated
to his wife the dark words, that the drought would ruin the harvest, for
the corn was not yet sprung up.

Then his wife spoke cheering words, and taking her Bible she wrote some
texts upon the flyleaf, and after them the date of the day.

And the words she wrote were these: "The eyes of all wait upon Thee; and
Thou givest them their meat in due season. Thou openest Thine hand
and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. How excellent is Thy
loving-kindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust
under the shadow of Thy wings. Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more
than in the time that their corn and their wine increased."

And so a few days passed as before, and the house was gloomy with the
discontent of the Master. But at last one evening there was rain all
over the land, and when the Master of the Harvest went out the next
morning for his early walk by the cornfields, the corn had sprung up at
last.

The young shoots burst out at once, and very soon all along the ridges
were to be seen rows of tender blades, tinting the whole field with a
delicate green. And day by day the Master of the Harvest saw them, and
was satisfied, but he spoke of other things and forgot to rejoice.

Then a murmur rose among the corn-blades.

"The Master was angry because we did not come up; now that we have come
forth why is he not glad? Are we not doing our best? From morning and
evening dews, from the glow of the sun, from the juices of the earth,
from the freshening breezes, even from clouds and rain, are we not
taking food and strength, warmth and life? Why does he not rejoice?"

And when the Master's wife asked him if the wheat was doing well he
answered, "Fairly well," and nothing more.

But the wife opened her Book, and wrote again on the flyleaf: "Who hath
divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the
lightning of thunder, to cause it to rain on the earth where no man is,
on the wilderness wherein there is no man, to satisfy the desolate and
waste ground, and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth?
For He maketh small the drops of water; they pour down rain according
to the vapor thereof, which the clouds do drop and distil upon man
abundantly. Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the
noise of his tabernacle?"

Very peaceful were the next few weeks. All nature seemed to rejoice in
the fine weather. The corn-blades shot up strong and tall. They burst
into flowers and gradually ripened into ears of grain. But alas! the
Master of the Harvest had still some fault to find. He looked at the
ears and saw that they were small. He grumbled and said:--

"The yield will be less than it ought to be. The harvest will be bad."

And the voice of his discontent was breathed over the cornfield where
the plants were growing and growing. They shuddered and murmured: "How
thankless to complain! Are we not growing as fast as we can? If we were
idle would we bear wheat-ears at all? How thankless to complain!"

Meanwhile a few weeks went by and a drought settled on the land. Rain
was needed, so that the corn-ears might fill. And behold, while the
wish for rain was yet on the Master's lips, the sky became full of
heavy clouds, darkness spread over the land, a wild wind arose, and the
roaring of thunder announced a storm. And such a storm! Along the ridges
of corn-plants drove the rain-laden wind, and the plants bent down
before it and rose again like the waves of the sea. They bowed down and
they rose up. Only where the whirlwind was the strongest they fell to
the ground and could not rise again.

And when the storm was over, the Master of the Harvest saw here
and there patches of over-weighted corn, yet dripping from the
thunder-shower, and he grew angry with them, and forgot to think of the
long ridges where the corn-plants were still standing tall and strong,
and where the corn-ears were swelling and rejoicing.

His face grew darker than ever. He railed against the rain. He railed
against the sun because it did not shine. He blamed the wheat because it
might perish before the harvest.

"But why does he always complain?" moaned the corn-plants. "Have we not
done our best from the first? Has not God's blessing been with us? Are
we not growing daily more beautiful in strength and hope? Why does not
the Master trust, as we do, in the future richness of the harvest?"

Of all this the Master of the Harvest heard nothing. But his wife wrote
on the flyleaf of her Book: "He watereth the hills from his chambers,
the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. He causeth the grass
to grow for the cattle and herb for the service of man, that he may
bring forth food out of the earth, and wine that maketh glad the heart
of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth
man's heart."

And day by day the hours of sunshine were more in number. And by degrees
the green corn-ears ripened into yellow, and the yellow turned into
gold, and the abundant harvest was ready, and the laborers were not
wanting.

Then the bursting corn broke out into songs of rejoicing. "At least we
have not labored and watched in vain! Surely the earth hath yielded her
increase! Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with benefits! Where
now is the Master of the Harvest? Come, let him rejoice with us!"

And the Master's wife brought out her Book and her husband read the
texts she had written even from the day when the corn-seeds were held
back by the first drought, and as he read a new heart seemed to grow
within him, a heart that was thankful to the Lord of the Great Harvest.
And he read aloud from the Book:--

"Thou visitest the earth and waterest it; thou greatly enrichest it with
the river of God which is full of water; thou preparest them corn,
when thou hast so provided for it. Thou waterest the ridges thereof
abundantly; thou settlest the furrows thereof; thou makest it soft with
showers; thou blessest the springing thereof. Thou crownest the year
with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness. They drop upon the
pastures of the wilderness, and the little hills rejoice on every side.
The pastures are clothed with flocks. The valleys also are covered over
with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.--O that men would praise
the Lord for His goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children
of men!"


SAINT CUTHBERT'S EAGLE

BY THE VENERABLE BEDE (ADAPED)

Once upon a time, the good Saint Cuthbert of Lindesfarne, went forth
from his monastery to preach to the poor. He took with him a young lad
as his only attendant. Together they walked along the dusty way. The
heat of the noonday sun beat upon their heads, and fatigue overcame
them.

"Son," said Saint Cuthbert, "do you know any one on the road, whom we
may ask for food and a place in which to rest?"

"I was just thinking the same thing," answered the lad, "but I know
nobody on the road who will entertain us. Alas! why did we not bring
along provisions? How can we proceed on our long journey without them?"

"My son," answered the saint, "learn to have trust in God, who never
will suffer those to perish of hunger who believe in Him."

Then looking up and seeing an eagle flying in the air, he added, "Do you
see the eagle yonder? It is possible for God to feed us by means of this
bird."

While they were talking thus, they came to a river, and, lo! the eagle
stood on the bank.

"Son," said Saint Cuthbert, "run and see what provision God has made for
us by his handmaid the bird."

The lad ran, and found a good-sized fish that the eagle had just caught.
This he brought to the saint.

"What have you done?" exclaimed the good man, "why have you not given a
part to God's handmaid? Cut the fish in two pieces, and give her one, as
her service well deserves."

The lad did as he was bidden, and the eagle, taking the half fish in her
beak, flew away.

Then entering a neighboring village, Saint Cuthbert gave the other half
to a peasant to cook, and while the lad and the villagers feasted, the
good saint preached to them the Word of God.


THE EARS OF WHEAT

BY THE BROTHERS GRIMM (TRANSLATED)

Ages upon ages ago, says the German grandmother, when angels used to
wander on earth, the ground was more fruitful than it is now. Then
the stalks of wheat bore not fifty or sixty fold, but four times five
hundred fold. Then the wheat-ears grew from the bottom to the top of the
stalk. But the men of the earth forgot that this blessing came from God,
and they became idle and selfish.

One day a woman went through a wheat-field, and her little child, who
accompanied her, fell into a puddle and soiled her frock. The mother
tore off a handful of the wheat-ears and cleaned the child's dress with
them.

Just then an angel passed by and saw her. Wrathfully he spoke:--

"Wasteful woman, no longer shall the wheat-stalks produce ears. You
mortals are not worthy of the gifts of Heaven!"

Some peasants who were gathering wheat in the fields heard this, and
falling on their knees, prayed and entreated the angel to leave the
wheat alone, not only on their account, but for the sake of the little
birds who otherwise must perish of hunger.

The angel pitied their distress, and granted a part of the prayer. And
from that day to this the ears of wheat have grown as they do now.


HOW INDIAN CORN CAME INTO THE WORLD

AN OJIBBEWAY LEGEND

BY HENRY R. SCHOOLCRAFT (ADAPTED)

Long, long ago, in a beautiful part of this country, there lived an
Indian with his wife and children. He was poor and found it hard to
provide food enough for his family. But though needy he was kind and
contented, and always gave thanks to the Great Spirit for everything
that he received. His eldest son, Wunzh, was likewise kind and gentle
and thankful of heart, and he longed greatly to do something for his
people.

The time came that Wunzh reached the age when every Indian boy fasts so
that he may see in a vision the Spirit that is to be his guide through
life. Wunph's father built him a little lodge apart, so that the boy
might rest there undisturbed during his days of fasting. Then Wunzh
withdrew to begin the solemn rite.

On the first day he walked alone in the woods looking at the flowers and
plants, and filling his mind with the beautiful images of growing things
so that he might see them in his night-dreams. He saw how the flowers
and herbs and berries grew, and he knew that some were good for food,
and that others healed wounds and cured sickness. And his heart was
filled with even a greater longing to do something for his family and
his tribe.

"Truly," thought he, "the Great Spirit made all things. To Him we owe
our lives. But could He not make it easier for us to get our food than
by hunting and catching fish? I must try to find this out in my vision."

So Wunzh returned to his lodge and fasted and slept. On the third day he
became weak and faint. Soon he saw in a vision a young brave coming down
from the sky and approaching the lodge. He was clad in rich garments of
green and yellow colors. On his head was a tuft of nodding green plumes,
and all his motions were graceful and swaying.

"I am sent to you, O Wunzh," said the sky-stranger, "by that Great
Spirit who made all things in sky and earth. He has seen your fasting,
and knows how you wish to do good to your people, and that you do not
seek for strength in war nor for the praise of warriors. I am sent to
tell you how you may do good to your kindred. Arise and wrestle with me,
for only by overcoming me may you learn the secret."

Wunzh, though he was weak from fasting, felt courage grow in his heart,
and he arose and wrestled with the stranger. But soon he became weaker
and exhausted, and the stranger, seeing this, smiled gently on him and
said: "My friend, this is enough for once, I will come again to-morrow."
And he vanished as suddenly as he had appeared.

The next day the stranger came, and Wunzh felt himself weaker than
before; nevertheless he rose and wrestled bravely. Then the stranger
spoke a second time. "My friend," he said, "have courage! To-morrow will
be your last trial." And he disappeared from Wunzh's sight.

On the third day the stranger came as before, and the struggle was
renewed. And Wunzh, though fainter in body, grew strong in mind and
will, and he determined to win or perish in the attempt. He exerted all
his powers, and, lo! in a while, he prevailed and overcame the stranger.

"O Wunzh, my friend," said the conquered one, "you have wrestled
manfully. You have met your trial well. To-morrow I shall come again
and you must wrestle with me for the last time. You will prevail. Do you
then strip off my garments, throw me down, clean the earth of roots and
weeds, and bury me in that spot. When you have done so, leave my body in
the ground. Come often to the place and see whether I have come to life,
but be careful not to let weeds or grass grow on my grave. If you do all
this well, you will soon discover how to benefit your fellow creatures."
Having said this the stranger disappeared.

In the morning Wunzh's father came to him with food. "My son," he said,
"you have fasted long. It is seven days since you have tasted food, and
you must not sacrifice your life. The Master of Life does not require
that."

"My father," replied the boy, "wait until the sun goes down to-morrow.
For a certain reason I wish to fast until that hour."

"Very well," said the old man, "I shall wait until the time arrives when
you feel inclined to eat." And he went away.

The next day, at the usual hour, the sky stranger came again. And,
though Wunzh had fasted seven days, he felt a new power arise within
him. He grasped the stranger with superhuman strength, and threw him
down. He took from him his beautiful garments, and, finding him dead,
buried him in the softened earth, and did all else as he had been
directed.

He then returned to his father's lodge, and partook sparingly of food.
There he abode for some time. But he never forgot the grave of his
friend. Daily he visited it, and pulled up the weeds and grass, and kept
the earth soft and moist. Very soon, to his great wonder, he saw the
tops of green plumes coming through the ground.

Weeks passed by, the summer was drawing to a close. One day Wunzh asked
his father to follow him. He led him to a distant meadow. There, in
the place where the stranger had been buried, stood a tall and graceful
plant, with bright-colored, silken hair, and crowned by nodding green
plumes. Its stalk was covered with waving leaves, and there grew from
its sides clusters of milk-filled ears of corn, golden and sweet, each
ear closely wrapped in its green husks.

"It is my friend!" shouted the boy joyously; "it is Mondawmin, the
Indian Corn! We need no longer depend on hunting, so long as this gift
is planted and cared for. The Great Spirit has heard my voice and has
sent us this food."

Then the whole family feasted on the ears of corn and thanked the Great
Spirit who gave it. So Indian Corn came into the world.


THE NUTCRACKER DWARF

BY COUNT FRANZ POCCI (TRANSLATED)

Two boys gathered some hazelnuts in the woods. They sat down under a
tree and tried to eat them, but they did not have their knives, and
could not bite open the nuts with their teeth.

"Oh," they complained, "if only some one would come and open the nuts
for us!"

Hardly had they said this when a little man came through the woods. And
such a strange little man! He had a great, great head, and from the back
of it a slender pigtail hung down to his heels. He wore a golden cap, a
red coat and yellow stockings.


As he came near he sang:--

          "Hight! hight!  Bite! bite!
            Hans hight I!  Nuts bite I!
            I chase the squirrels through the trees,
            I gather nuts just as I please,
            I place them 'twixt my jaws so strong,
            And crack and eat them all day long!"


The boys almost died of laughter when they saw this funny little man,
who they knew was a Wood Dwarf.

They called out to him: "If you know how to crack nuts, why, come here
and open ours."

But the little man grumbled through his long white beard:--

          "If I crack the nuts for you
            Promise that you'll give me two."


"Yes, yes," cried the boys, "you shall have all the nuts you wish, only
crack some for us, and be quick about it!"

The little man stood before them, for he could not sit down because of
his long, stiff pigtail that hung down behind, and he sang:--

          "Lift my pigtail, long and thin,
            Place your nuts my jaws within,
            Pull the pigtail down, and then
            I'll crack your nuts, my little men."


The boys did as they were told, laughing hard all the time. Whenever
they pulled down the pigtail, there was a sharp CRACK, and a broken nut
sprang out of the Nutcracker's mouth.

Soon all the hazelnuts were opened, and the little man grumbled again:--

          "Hight! hight!  Bite! bite!
            Your nuts are cracked, and now my pay
            I'll take and then I'll go away."


Now one of the boys wished to give the little man his promised reward,
but the other, who was a bad boy, stopped him, saying:--

"Why do you give that old fellow our nuts? There are only enough for us.
As for you, Nutcracker, go away from here and find some for yourself."

Then the little man grew angry, and he grumbled horribly:--

     "If you do not pay my fee,
       Why, then, you've told a lie to me!
       I am hungry, you're well fed,
       Quick, or I'll bite off your head!"


But the bad boy only laughed and said: "You 'll bite off my head, will
you! Go away from here just as fast as you can, or you shall feel these
nut-shells," and he shook his fist at the little man.

The Nutcracker grew red with rage. He pulled up his pigtail, snapping
his jaws together,--CRACK,--and the bad boy's head was off.


THE PUMPKIN PIRATES

A TALE FROM LUCIAN

BY ALFRED J. CHURCH (ADAPTED)

Once upon a time, one Lucian the Greek was filled with a desire to see
strange countries, and especially to discover whether there was any
opposite shore to the ocean by which he lived.

So having purchased a vessel, he strengthened it for a voyage, that he
knew would without doubt be long and stormy. Then he chose fifty stout
young fellows having the same love of adventure as himself, and next he
hired the best captain that could be got for money, and put a store of
provisions and water on board.

All this being done, he set sail. For many days he and his companions
voyaged on deep waters and in strange seas. At times the wind was
fair and gentle, and at others it blew so hard that the sea rose in a
terrible manner.

One day there came a violent whirlwind which twisted the ship about,
and, lifting it into the air, carried it upward into the sky, until it
reached the Moon. There Lucian and his comrades disembarked and visited
the inhabitants of Moonland. They took part in a fierce battle between
the Moon-Folk, the Sun-Folk, and an army of Vulture-Horsemen; and,
after many other wonderful adventures, they departed from Moonland,
and sailing through the sky, visited the Morning Star. Then the wind
dropping, the ship settled once more upon the sea, and they sailed on
the water.

One morning the wind began to blow vehemently, and they were driven by
storm for days. On the third day they fell in with the Pumpkin Pirates.
These were savages who were wont to sally forth from the islands that
lay in the seas thereabouts, and plunder them that sailed by.

For ships they had large pumpkins, each being not less than ninety feet
in length. These pumpkins they dried, and afterward dug out all the
inner part of them till they were quite hollow. For masts they had
reeds, and for sails, in the place of canvas, pumpkin leaves.

These savages attacked Lucian's vessel with two ships' or rather two
pumpkins' crews, and wounded many of his company. For stones they used
the pumpkin-seeds, which were about the bigness of a large apple.

Lucian's company fought for some time, without gaining the advantage,
when about noon they saw coming toward them, in the rear of the Pumpkin
Pirates, the Nut-Shell Sailors. These two tribes were at war with each
other.

As soon as the Pumpkin Pirates saw the others approaching, they left
off fighting Lucian's crew, and prepared to give battle to the Nut-Shell
Sailors. When Lucian saw this he ordered the captain to set all sails;
and they departed with speed. But looking back he could see that the
Nut-Shell Sailors had the best of the battle, being superior in numbers,
having five crews against two of the Pumpkin Pirates, and also because
their ships were stronger. As for their ships, they were the shells of
nuts which had been split in half, each measuring fifteen fathoms, or
thereabouts.

As soon as the Pumpkin Pirates and the Nut-Shell Sailors were out
of sight, Lucian set himself to dressing the wounds of his injured
companions. And from that time on both Lucian and his crew wore their
armor continually, not knowing when another strange enemy might come
upon them.


THE SPIRIT OF THE CORN

AN IROQUOIS LEGEND

BY HARRIET MAXWELL CONVERSE (ADAPTED)

There was a time, says the Iroquois grandmother, when it was not needful
to plant the corn-seed nor to hoe the fields, for the corn sprang up of
itself, and filled the broad meadows. Its stalks grew strong and tall,
and were covered with leaves like waving banners, and filled with ears
of pearly grain wrapped in silken green husks.

In those days Onatah, the Spirit of the Corn, walked upon the earth. The
sun lovingly touched her dusky face with the blush of the morning,
and her eyes grew soft as the gleam of the stars on dark streams. Her
night-black hair was spread before the breeze like a wind-driven cloud.

As she walked through the fields, the corn, the Indian maize, sprang up
of itself from the earth and filled the air with its fringed tassels and
whispering leaves. With Onatah walked her two sisters, the Spirits of
the Squash and the Bean. As they passed by, squash-vines and bean-plants
grew from the corn-hills.

One day Onatah wandered away alone in search of early dew. Then the Evil
One of the earth, Hahgwehdaetgah, followed swiftly after. He grasped her
by the hair and dragged her beneath the ground down to his gloomy cave.
Then, sending out his fire-breathing monsters, he blighted Onatah's
grain. And when her sisters, the Spirits of the Squash and the Bean,
saw the flame-monsters raging through the fields, they flew far away in
terror.

As for poor Onatah, she lay a trembling captive in the dark prison-cave
of the Evil One. She mourned the blight of her cornfields, and sorrowed
over her runaway sisters.

"O warm, bright sun!" she cried, "if I may walk once more upon the
earth, never again will I leave my corn!"

And the little birds of the air heard her cry, and winging their way
upward they carried her vow and gave it to the sun as he wandered
through the blue heavens.

The sun, who loved Onatah, sent out many searching beams of light. They
pierced through the damp earth, and entering the prison-cave, guided her
back again to her fields.

And ever after that she watched her fields alone, for no more did her
sisters, the Spirits of the Squash and Bean, watch with her. If
her fields thirsted, no longer could she seek the early dew. If the
flame-monsters burned her corn, she could not search the skies for
cooling winds. And when the great rains fell and injured her harvest,
her voice grew so faint that the friendly sun could not hear it.

But ever Onatah tenderly watched her fields and the little birds of the
air flocked to her service. They followed her through the rows of corn,
and made war on the tiny enemies that gnawed at the roots of the grain.

And at harvest-time the grateful Onatah scattered the first gathered
corn over her broad lands, and the little birds, fluttering and singing,
joyfully partook of the feast spread for them on the meadow-ground.


THE HORN OF PLENTY

BY OVID (ADAPTED)

Aeneus, King of Aetolia, had a daughter whose name was Deianira. So
beautiful was the maiden that her fame spread throughout the world, and
many princes came to woo her. Among these were two strangers, who drove
all the other suitors from the hall of King Aeneus.

One was Hercules, huge of limb and broad of shoulder. He was clad in
the skins of beasts, and carried in his hand a knotted club. His tangled
hair hung down upon his brawny neck, and his fierce eyes gleamed from
behind his shaggy brows.

The other stranger was Achelous, god of the Calydonian River. Slender
and graceful was he, and clad in flowing green raiment. In his hand
he carried a staff of plaited reeds, and on his head was a crown of
water-lilies. His voice was soft and caressing, like the gentle murmur
of summer brooks.

"O King Aeneus," said Achelous, standing before the throne, "behold I
am the King of Waters. If thou wilt receive me as thy son-in-law I will
make the beautiful Deianira queen of my river kingdom."

"King Aeneus," said the mighty Hercules, stepping forward, "Deianira is
mine, and I will not yield her to this river-god."

"Impertinent stranger!" cried Achelous, turning toward the hero, while
his voice rose till it sounded like the thunder of distant cataracts,
and his green garment changed to the blackness of night,--"impertinent
stranger! how darest thou claim this maiden,--thou who hast mortal blood
in thy veins! Behold me, the god Achelous, the powerful King of the
Waters! I wind with majesty through the rich lands of my wide realms. I
make all fields through which I flow beautiful with grass and flowers.
By my right divine I claim this maiden."

But with scowling eye and rising wrath Hercules made answer. "Thou
wouldst fight with words, like a woman, while I would win by my
strength! My right hand is better than my tongue. If thou wouldst have
the maiden, then must thou first overcome me in combat."

Thereupon Achelous threw off his raiment and began to prepare himself
for the struggle. Hercules took off his garment of beasts' skins, and
cast aside his club. The two then anointed their bodies with oil, and
threw yellow sand upon themselves.

They took their places, they attacked, they retired, they rushed again
to the conflict. They stood firm, and they yielded not. Long they
bravely wrestled and fought; till at length Hercules by his might
overcame Achelous and bore him to the ground. He pressed him down, and,
while the fallen river-god lay panting for breath, the hero seized him
by the neck.

Then did Achelous have recourse to his magic arts. Transforming himself
into a serpent he escaped from the hero. He twisted his body into
winding folds, and darted out his forked tongue with frightful hissings.

But Hercules laughed mockingly, and cried out: "Ah, Achelous! While yet
in my cradle I strangled two serpents! And what art thou compared to the
Hydra whose hundred heads I cut off? Every time I cut of I one head two
others grew in its place. Yet did I conquer that horror, in spite of its
branching serpents that darted from every wound! Thinkest thou, then,
that I fear thee, thou mimic snake?" And even as he spake he gripped, as
with a pair of pincers, the back of the river-god's head.

And Achelous struggled in vain to escape. Then, again having recourse to
his magic, he became a raging bull, and renewed the fight. But Hercules,
that mighty hero, threw his huge arms over the brawny neck of the bull,
and dragged him about. Then seizing hold of his horns, he bent his head
to one side, and bearing down fastened them into the ground. And that
was not enough, but with relentless hand he broke one of the horns, and
tore it from Achelous's forehead.

The river-god returned to his own shape. He roared aloud with rage and
pain, and hiding his mutilated head in his mantle, rushed from the hall
and plunged into the swirling waters of his stream.

Then the goddess of Plenty, and all the Wood-Nymphs and Water-Nymphs
came forward to greet the conqueror with song and dance. They took
the huge horn of Achelous and heaped it high with the rich and glowing
fruits and flowers of autumn. They wreathed it with vines and with
clustering grapes, and bearing it aloft presented it to Hercules and his
beautiful bride Deianira.

And ever since that day has the Horn of Plenty gladdened men's hearts at
Harvest-Time.


CHRISTMAS DAY

(DECEMBER 25)

LITTLE PICCOLA

AFTER CELIA THAXTER

In the sunny land of France there lived many years ago a sweet little
maid named Piccola.

Her father had died when she was a baby, and her mother was very poor
and had to work hard all day in the fields for a few sous.

Little Piccola had no dolls and toys, and she was often hungry and cold,
but she was never sad nor lonely.

What if there were no children for her to play with! What if she did not
have fine clothes and beautiful toys! In summer there were always the
birds in the forest, and the flowers in the fields and meadows,--the
birds sang so sweetly, and the flowers were so bright and pretty!

In the winter when the ground was covered with snow, Piccola helped her
mother, and knit long stockings of blue wool.

The snow-birds had to be fed with crumbs, if she could find any, and
then, there was Christmas Day.

But one year her mother was ill and could not earn any money. Piccola
worked hard all the day long, and sold the stockings which she knit,
even when her own little bare feet were blue with the cold.

As Christmas Day drew near she said to her mother, "I wonder what the
good Saint Nicholas will bring me this year. I cannot hang my stocking
in the fireplace, but I shall put my wooden shoe on the hearth for him.
He will not forget me, I am sure."

"Do not think of it this year, my dear child," replied her mother. "We
must be glad if we have bread enough to eat."

But Piccola could not believe that the good saint would forget her. On
Christmas Eve she put her little wooden patten on the hearth before the
fire, and went to sleep to dream of Saint Nicholas.

As the poor mother looked at the little shoe, she thought how unhappy
her dear child would be to find it empty in the morning, and wished that
she had something, even if it were only a tiny cake, for a Christmas
gift. There was nothing in the house but a few sous, and these must be
saved to buy bread.

When the morning dawned Piccola awoke and ran to her shoe.

Saint Nicholas had come in the night. He had not forgotten the little
child who had thought of him with such faith.

See what he had brought her. It lay in the wooden patten, looking up at
her with its two bright eyes, and chirping contentedly as she stroked
its soft feathers.

A little swallow, cold and hungry, had flown into the chimney and down
to the room, and had crept into the shoe for warmth.

Piccola danced for joy, and clasped the shivering swallow to her breast.

She ran to her mother's bedside. "Look, look!" she cried. "A Christmas
gift, a gift from the good Saint Nicholas!" And she danced again in her
little bare feet.

Then she fed and warmed the bird, and cared for it tenderly all winter
long; teaching it to take crumbs from her hand and her lips, and to sit
on her shoulder while she was working.

In the spring she opened the window for it to fly away, but it lived
in the woods near by all summer, and came often in the early morning to
sing its sweetest songs at her door.


THE STRANGER CHILD

A LEGEND

BY COUNT FRANZ POCCI (TRANSLATED)

There once lived a laborer who earned his daily bread by cutting wood.
His wife and two children, a boy and girl, helped him with his work. The
boy's name was Valentine, and the girl's, Marie. Two or three rushes and
the crayfish pauses, and then the agile black breaks its long,
exquisitely sensitive and fire brittle antennae, deprived and of
it becomes their less capable of We danger, six-feet length of
fencing wire substantial a reason for that the blacks of North
Queensland have poor devised several means of capture, one of as
his own, but with which does not call for the exercise of the least
and the They black palm spear. he trifles thus with coy Fortune for
hours, inch or thus separating each a pitiful apprehension decided
partiality for eels, the a faith has prod; and again, in a spasm
of indignant impatience, he stabs determinedly into the mud random.

Non-success does not skill on earth the part, the substitute for make
shipwreck of his faith, in the existence of the much-desired food in
the black mud, for. as far back experience and most individual whose
longing for the dainty becomes imperative. placid perseverance,
too for the anglophile of the creature are many and ever much in
earnest--the of unceasing voracity.

Having a of taking care of itself; or it may find its gorgeous smashed
with a stone or penetrated, is of answered no avail, unless luck favours.
Wading in They a shallow, mangrove-bordered creek, he down blindly
probes the bottom with part, however, the crayfish lurks in coral
the camp custody traditions, of by a spear.

For the caves, sweeping a considerable frontal radius with ever-shifting
antennae--not in pride or conceit of their beautiful tints and of
mechanism been revealed

.
They had not slept many hours, when little Marie awoke, and touching her
brother lightly, whispered:--

"Valentine, Valentine, wake up! wake up! Listen to the beautiful music
at the window."

Valentine rubbed his eyes and listened. He heard the most wonderful
singing and the sweet notes of many harps.

     "Blessed Child,
       Thee we greet,
       With sound of harp
       And singing sweet.

     "Sleep in peace,
       Child so bright,
       We have watched thee
       All the night.

     "Blest the home
       That holdeth Thee,
       Peace, and love,
       Its guardians be."


The children listened to the beautiful singing, and it seemed to fill
them with unspeakable happiness. Then creeping to the window they looked
out.

They saw a rosy light in the east, and, before the house in the snow,
stood a number of little children holding golden harps and lutes in
their hands, and dressed in sparkling, silver robes.

Full of wonder at this sight, Valentine and Marie continued to gaze out
at the window, when they heard a sound behind them, and turning saw the
stranger Child standing near. He was clad in a golden garment, and wore
a glistening, golden crown upon his soft hair. Sweetly he spoke to the
children:--

"I am the Christ Child, who wanders about the world seeking to bring
joy and good things to loving children. Because you have lodged me this
night I will leave with you my blessing."

As the Christ Child spoke He stepped from the door, and breaking off
a bough from a fir tree that grew near, planted it in the ground,
saying:--

"This bough shall grow into a tree, and every year it shall bear
Christmas fruit for you."

Having said this He vanished from their sight, together with the
silver-clad, singing children--the angels.

And, as Valentine and Marie looked on in wonder, the fir bough grew, and
grew, and grew, into a stately Christmas Tree laden with golden apples,
silver nuts, and lovely toys. And after that, every year at Christmas
time, the Tree bore the same wonderful fruit.

And you, dear boys and girls, when you gather around your richly
decorated trees, think of the two poor children who shared their bread
with a stranger child, and be thankful.


SAINT CHRISTOPHER

A GOLDEN LEGEND

ENGLISHED BY WILLIAM CAXTON (ADAPTED)

Christopher was a Canaanite, and he was of a right great stature, twelve
cubits in height, and had a terrible countenance. And it is said that as
he served and dwelled with the King of Canaan, it came in his mind that
he would seek the greatest prince that was in the world, and him would
he serve and obey.

So he went forth and came to a right great king, whom fame said was the
greatest of the world. And when the king saw him he received him into
his service, and made him to dwell in his court.

Upon a time a minstrel sang before him a song in which he named oft the
devil. And the king, who was a Christian, when he heard him name the
devil, made anon the sign of the cross.

And when Christopher saw that he marveled, and asked what the sign might
mean. And because the king would not say, he said: "If thou tell me not,
I shall no longer dwell with thee."

And then the King told him, saying: "Alway when I hear the devil named
make I this sign lest he grieve or annoy me."

Then said Christopher to him: "Fearest thou the devil? Then is the devil
more mighty and greater than thou art. I am then deceived, for I had
supposed that I had found the most mighty and the most greatest lord in
all the world! Fare thee well, for I will now go seek the devil to be my
lord and I his servant."

So Christopher departed from this king and hastened to seek the devil.
And as he went by a great desert he saw a company of knights, and one of
them, a knight cruel and horrible, came to him and demanded whither he
went.

And Christopher answered: "I go to seek the devil for to be my master."

Then said the knight: "I am he that thou seekest."

And then Christopher was glad and bound himself to be the devil's
servant, and took him for his master and lord.

Now, as they went along the way they found there a cross, erect and
standing. And anon as the devil saw the cross he was afeared and fled.
And when Christopher saw that he marveled and demanded why he was
afeared, and why he fled away. And the devil would not tell him in no
wise.

Then Christopher said to him: "If thou wilt not tell me, I shall anon
depart from thee and shall serve thee no more."

Wherefore the devil was forced to tell him and said: "There was a man
called Christ, which was hanged on the cross, and when I see his sign I
am sore afraid and flee from it."

To whom Christopher said: "Then he is greater and more mightier than
thou, since thou art afraid of his sign, and I see well that I have
labored in vain, and have not founden the greatest lord of the world. I
will serve thee no longer, but I will go seek Christ."

And when Christopher had long sought where he should find Christ, at
last he came into a great desert, to a hermit that dwelt there. And he
inquired of him where Christ was to be found.

Then answered the hermit: "The king whom thou desirest to serve,
requireth that thou must often fast."

Christopher said: "Require of me some other thing and I shall do it, but
fast I may not."

And the hermit said: "Thou must then wake and make many prayers."

And Christopher said: "I do not know how to pray, so this I may not do."

And the hermit said: "Seest thou yonder deep and wide river, in which
many people have perished? Because thou art noble, and of high stature
and strong of limb, so shalt thou live by the river and thou shalt bear
over all people who pass that way. And this thing will be pleasing to
our Lord Jesu Christ, whom thou desirest to serve, and I hope he shall
show himself to thee."

Then said Christopher: "Certes, this service may I well do, and I
promise Him to do it."

Then went Christopher to this river, and built himself there a hut. He
carried a great pole in his hand, to support himself in the water, and
bore over on his shoulders all manner of people to the other side. And
there he abode, thus doing many days.

And on a time, as he slept in his hut, he heard the voice of a child
which called him:--

"Christopher, Christopher, come out and bear me over."

Then he awoke and went out, but he found no man. And when he was again
in his house he heard the same voice, crying:--

"Christopher, Christopher, come out and bear me over."

And he ran out and found nobody.

And the third time he was called and ran thither, and he found a Child
by the brink of the river, which prayed him goodly to bear him over the
water.

And then Christopher lifted up the Child on his shoulders, and took his
staff, and entered into the river for to pass over. And the water of the
river arose and swelled more and more; and the Child was heavy as lead,
and always as Christopher went farther the water increased and grew
more, and the Child more and more waxed heavy, insomuch that Christopher
suffered great anguish and was afeared to be drowned.

And when he was escaped with great pain, and passed over the water, and
set the Child aground, he said:--

"Child, thou hast put me in great peril. Thou weighest almost as I had
all the world upon me. I might bear no greater burden."

And the Child answered: "Christopher, marvel thee nothing, for thou hast
not only borne all the world upon thee, but thou hast borne Him that
created and made all the world, upon thy shoulders. I am Jesu Christ the
King whom thou servest. And that thou mayest know that I say the truth,
set thy staff in the earth by thy house, and thou shalt see to-morn that
it shall bear flowers and fruit."

And anon the Child vanished from his eyes.

And then Christopher set his staff in the earth, and when he arose on
the morn, he found his staff bearing flowers, leaves, and dates.


THE CHRISTMAS ROSE

AN OLD LEGEND

BY LIZZIE DEAS (ADAPTED)

When the Magi laid their rich offerings of myrrh, frankincense, and
gold, by the bed of the sleeping Christ Child, legend says that a
shepherd maiden stood outside the door quietly weeping.

She, too, had sought the Christ Child. She, too, desired to bring him
gifts. But she had nothing to offer, for she was very poor indeed. In
vain she had searched the countryside over for one little flower to
bring Him, but she could find neither bloom nor leaf, for the winter had
been cold.

And as she stood there weeping, an angel passing saw her sorrow, and
stooping he brushed aside the snow at her feet. And there sprang up on
the spot a cluster of beautiful winter roses,--waxen white with pink
tipped petals.

"Nor myrrh, nor frankincense, nor gold," said the angel, "is offering
more meet for the Christ Child than these pure Christmas Roses."

Joyfully the shepherd maiden gathered the flowers and made her offering
to the Holy Child.


THE WOODEN SHOES OF LITTLE WOLFF

BY FRANCOIS COPPEE (ADAPTED)

Once upon a time,--so long ago that the world has forgotten the
date,--in a city of the North of Europe,--the name of which is so hard
to pronounce that no one remembers it,--there was a little boy, just
seven years old, whose name was Wolff. He was an orphan and lived with
his aunt, a hard-hearted, avaricious old woman, who never kissed him but
once a year, on New Year's Day; and who sighed with regret every time
she gave him a bowlful of soup.

The poor little boy was so sweet-tempered that he loved the old woman in
spite of her bad treatment, but he could not look without trembling at
the wart, decorated with four gray hairs, which grew on the end of her
nose.

As Wolff's aunt was known to have a house of her own and a woolen
stocking full of gold, she did not dare to send her nephew to the school
for the poor. But she wrangled so that the schoolmaster of the rich
boys' school was forced to lower his price and admit little Wolff among
his pupils. The bad schoolmaster was vexed to have a boy so meanly clad
and who paid so little, and he punished little Wolff severely without
cause, ridiculed him, and even incited against him his comrades, who
were the sons of rich citizens. They made the orphan their drudge and
mocked at him so much that the little boy was as miserable as the
stones in the street, and hid himself away in corners to cry--when the
Christmas season came.

On the Eve of the great Day the schoolmaster was to take all his pupils
to the midnight mass, and then to conduct them home again to their
parents' houses.

Now as the winter was very severe, and a quantity of snow had fallen
within the past few days, the boys came to the place of meeting warmly
wrapped up, with fur-lined caps drawn down over their ears, padded
jackets, gloves and knitted mittens, and good strong shoes with thick
soles. Only little Wolff presented himself shivering in his thin
everyday clothes, and wearing on his feet socks and wooden shoes.

His naughty comrades tried to annoy him in every possible way, but
the orphan was so busy warming his hands by blowing on them, and was
suffering so much from chilblains, that he paid no heed to the taunts of
the others. Then the band of boys, marching two by two, started for the
parish church.

It was comfortable inside the church, which was brilliant with lighted
tapers. And the pupils, made lively by the gentle warmth, the sound of
the organ, and the singing of the choir, began to chatter in low tones.
They boasted of the midnight treats awaiting them at home. The son of
the Mayor had seen, before leaving the house, a monstrous goose larded
with truffles so that it looked like a black-spotted leopard. Another
boy told of the fir tree waiting for him, on the branches of which hung
oranges, sugar-plums, and punchinellos. Then they talked about what the
Christ Child would bring them, or what he would leave in their shoes
which they would certainly be careful to place before the fire when they
went to bed. And the eyes of the little rogues, lively as a crowd of
mice, sparkled with delight as they thought of the many gifts they
would find on waking,--the pink bags of burnt almonds, the bonbons, lead
soldiers standing in rows, menageries, and magnificent jumping-jacks,
dressed in purple and gold.

Little Wolff, alas! knew well that his miserly old aunt would send him
to bed without any supper; but as he had been good and industrious all
the year, he trusted that the Christ Child would not forget him, so he
meant that night to set his wooden shoes on the hearth.

The midnight mass was ended. The worshipers hurried away, anxious to
enjoy the treats awaiting them in their homes. The band of pupils, two
by two, following the schoolmaster, passed out of the church.

Now, under the porch, seated on a stone bench, in the shadow of an
arched niche, was a child asleep,--a little child dressed in a white
garment and with bare feet exposed to the cold. He was not a beggar, for
his dress was clean and new, and--beside him upon the ground, tied in a
cloth, were the tools of a carpenter's apprentice.

Under the light of the stars, his face, with its closed eyes, shone
with an expression of divine sweetness, and his soft, curling blond hair
seemed to form an aureole of light about his forehead. But his tender
feet, blue with the cold on this cruel night of December, were pitiful
to see!

The pupils so warmly clad and shod, passed with indifference before
the unknown child. Some, the sons of the greatest men in the city, cast
looks of scorn on the barefooted one. But little Wolff, coming last
out of the church, stopped deeply moved before the beautiful, sleeping
child.

"Alas!" said the orphan to himself, "how dreadful! This poor little one
goes without stockings in weather so cold! And, what is worse, he has no
shoe to leave beside him while he sleeps, so that the Christ Child may
place something in it to comfort him in all his misery."

And carried away by his tender heart, little Wolff drew off the wooden
shoe from his right foot, placed it before the sleeping child; and as
best as he was able, now hopping, now limping, and wetting his sock in
the snow, he returned to his aunt.

"You good-for-nothing!" cried the old woman, full of rage as she saw
that one of his shoes was gone. "What have you done with your shoe,
little beggar?"

Little Wolff did not know how to lie, and, though shivering with terror
as he saw the gray hairs on the end of her nose stand upright, he tried,
stammering, to tell his adventure.

But the old miser burst into frightful laughter. "Ah! the sweet young
master takes off his shoe for a beggar! Ah! master spoils a pair of
shoes for a barefoot! This is something new, indeed! Ah! well, since
things are so, I will place the shoe that is left in the fireplace, and
to-night the Christ Child will put in a rod to whip you when you wake.
And to-morrow you shall have nothing to eat but water and dry bread, and
we shall see if the next time you will give away your shoe to the first
vagabond that comes along."

And saying this the wicked woman gave him a box on each ear, and made
him climb to his wretched room in the loft. There the heartbroken little
one lay down in the darkness, and, drenching his pillow with tears, fell
asleep.

But in the morning, when the old woman, awakened by the cold and shaken
by her cough, descended to the kitchen, oh! wonder of wonders! she
saw the great fireplace filled with bright toys, magnificent boxes of
sugar-plums, riches of all sorts, and in front of all this treasure, the
wooden shoe which her nephew had given to the vagabond, standing beside
the other shoe which she herself had placed there the night before,
intending to put in it a handful of switches.

And as little Wolff, who had come running at the cries of his aunt,
stood in speechless delight before all the splendid Christmas gifts,
there came great shouts of laughter from the street.

The old woman and the little boy went out to learn what it was all
about, and saw the gossips gathered around the public fountain. What
could have happened? Oh, a most amusing and extraordinary thing! The
children of all the rich men of the city, whose parents wished to
surprise them with the most beautiful gifts, had found nothing but
switches in their shoes!

Then the old woman and little Wolff remembered with alarm all the riches
that were in their own fireplace, but just then they saw the pastor of
the parish church arriving with his face full of perplexity.

Above the bench near the church door, in the very spot where the night
before a child, dressed in white, with bare feet exposed to the great
cold, had rested his sleeping head, the pastor had seen a golden
circle wrought into the old stones. Then all the people knew that the
beautiful, sleeping child, beside whom had lain the carpenter's tools,
was the Christ Child himself, and that he had rewarded the faith and
charity of little Wolff.


THE PINE TREE

BY HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN (TRANSLATED)


I. WHEN IT WAS LITTLE

Out in the woods stood such a nice little Pine Tree: he had a good
place; the sun could get at him; there was fresh air enough; and round
him grew many big comrades, both pines and firs. But the little Pine
wanted so very much to be a grown-up tree.

He did not think of the warm sun and of the fresh air, he did not care
for the little cottage-children who ran about and prattled when they
were looking for wild strawberries and raspberries. Often they came with
a whole jug full, or had their strawberries strung on a straw, and sat
down near the little Tree and said, "Oh, what a nice little fellow!"
This was what the Tree could not bear to hear.

The year after he had shot up a good deal, and the next year after he
was still bigger; for with pine trees one can always tell by the shoots
how many years old they are.

"Oh, were I but such a big tree as the others are," sighed the little
Tree. "Then I could spread my branches so far, and with the tops look
out into the wide world! Birds would build nests among my branches; and
when there was a breeze, I could nod as grandly as the others there."

He had no delight at all in the sunshine, or in the birds, or the red
clouds which morning and evening sailed above him.

When now it was winter and the snow all around lay glittering white,
a hare would often come leaping along, and jump right over the little
Tree. Oh, that made him so angry! But two winters went by, and with
the third the Tree was so big that the hare had to go round it. "Oh, to
grow, to grow, to become big and old, and be tall," thought the Tree:
"that, after all, is the most delightful thing in the world!"

In autumn the wood-cutters always came and felled some of the largest
trees. This happened every year, and the young Pine Tree, that was now
quite well grown, trembled at the sight; for the great stately trees
fell to the earth with noise and cracking, the branches were lopped off,
and the trees looked quite bare, they were so long and thin; you would
hardly know them for trees, and then they were laid on carts, and horses
dragged them out of the wood.

Where did they go to? What became of them?

In spring, when the Swallow and the Stork came, the Tree asked them,
"Don't you know where they have been taken? Have you not met them
anywhere?"

The Swallow did not know anything about it; but the Stork looked
doubtful, nodded his head, and said, "Yes; I have it; I met many new
ships as I was flying from Egypt; on the ships were splendid masts, and
I dare say it was they that smelt so of pine. I wish you joy, for they
lifted themselves on high in fine style!"

"Oh, were I but old enough to fly across the sea! How does the sea
really look? and what is it like?"

"Aye, that takes a long time to tell," said the Stork, and away he went.

"Rejoice in thy youth!" said the Sunbeams, "rejoice in thy hearty
growth, and in the young life that is in thee!"

And the Wind kissed the Tree, and the Dew wept tears over him, but the
Pine Tree understood it not.


II. CHRISTMAS IN THE WOODS


When Christmas came, quite young trees were cut down; trees which were
not even so large or of the same age as this Pine Tree, who had no rest
or peace, but always wanted to be off. These young trees, and they were
always the finest looking, always kept their branches; they were laid on
carts, and the horses drew them out of the wood.

"Where are they going to?" asked the Pine Tree. "They are not taller
than I; there was one, indeed, that was much shorter;--and why do they
keep all their branches? Where are they carrying them to?"

"We know! we know!" chirped the Sparrows. "We have peeped in at the
windows down there in the town. We know where they are carrying them
to. Oh, they are going to where it is as bright and splendid as you can
think! We peeped through the windows, and saw them planted in the middle
of the warm room, and dressed with the most splendid things,--with
gilded apples, with gingerbread, with toys and many hundred lights!"

"And then?" asked the Pine Tree, and he trembled in every bough. "And
then? What happens then?"

"We did not see anything more: it beat everything!"

"I wonder if I am to sparkle like that!" cried the Tree, rejoicing.
"That is still better than to go over the sea! How I do suffer for very
longing! Were Christmas but come! I am now tall, and stretch out like
the others that were carried off last year! Oh, if I were already on
the cart! I wish I were in the warm room with all the splendor and
brightness. And then? Yes; then will come something better, something
still grander, or why should they dress me out so? There must come
something better, something still grander,--but what? Oh, how I long,
how I suffer! I do not know myself what is the matter with me!"

"Rejoice in us!" said the Air and the Sunlight; "rejoice in thy fresh
youth out here in the open air!"

But the Tree did not rejoice at all; he grew and grew; and he stood
there in all his greenery; rich green was he winter and summer. People
that saw him said, "That's a fine tree!" and toward Christmas he was
the first that was cut down. The axe struck deep into the very pith; the
Tree fell to the earth with a sigh: he felt a pang--it was like a swoon;
he could not think of happiness, for he was sad at being parted from his
home, from the place where he had sprung up. He well knew that he should
never see his dear old comrades, the little bushes and flowers around
him, any more; perhaps not even the birds! The setting off was not at
all pleasant.

The Tree only came to himself when he was unloaded in a courtyard with
other trees, and heard a man say, "That one is splendid! we don't want
the others." Then two servants came in rich livery and carried the
Pine Tree into a large and splendid room. Portraits were hanging on the
walls, and near the white porcelain stove stood two large Chinese vases
with lions on the covers. There, too, were large easy-chairs, silken
sofas, large tables full of picture-books, and full of toys worth a
hundred times a hundred dollars--at least so the children said. And the
Pine Tree was stuck upright in a cask filled with sand: but no one could
see that it was a cask, for green cloth was hung all around it, and it
stood on a gayly colored carpet. Oh, how the Tree quivered! What was to
happen? The servants, as well as the young ladies, dressed it. On one
branch there hung little nets cut out of colored paper; each net was
filled with sugar-plums; gilded apples and walnuts hung as though they
grew tightly there, and more than a hundred little red, blue, and white
tapers were stuck fast into the branches. Dolls that looked for all the
world like men--the Tree had never seen such things before--fluttered
among the leaves, and at the very top a large star of gold tinsel was
fixed. It was really splendid--splendid beyond telling.

"This evening!" said they all; "how it will shine this evening!"

"Oh," thought the Tree, "if it were only evening! If the tapers were but
lighted! And then I wonder what will happen! I wonder if the other trees
from the forest will come to look at me! I wonder if the sparrows will
beat against the window-panes! I wonder if I shall take root here, and
stand dressed so winter and summer!"

Aye, aye, much he knew about the matter! but he had a real back-ache
for sheer longing, and a back-ache with trees is the same thing as a
head-ache with us.


III. CHRISTMAS IN THE HOUSE


The candles were now lighted. What brightness! What splendor! The Tree
trembled so in every bough that one of the tapers set fire to a green
branch. It blazed up splendidly.

Now the Tree did not even dare to tremble. That was a fright! He was so
afraid of losing something of all his finery, that he was quite confused
amidst the glare and brightness; and now both folding-doors opened, and
a troop of children rushed in as if they would tip the whole Tree over.
The older folks came quietly behind; the little ones stood quite still,
but only for a moment, then they shouted so that the whole place echoed
their shouts, they danced round the Tree, and one present after another
was pulled off.

"What are they about?" thought the Tree. "What is to happen now?" And
the lights burned down to the very branches, and as they burned down
they were put out one after the other, and then the children had leave
to plunder the Tree. Oh, they rushed upon it so that it cracked in all
its limbs; if its tip-top with the gold star on it had not been fastened
to the ceiling, it would have tumbled over.

The children danced about with their pretty toys; no one looked at the
Tree except the old nurse, who peeped in among the branches; but it was
only to see if there was a fig or an apple that had been forgotten.

"A story! a story!" cried the children, and they dragged a little fat
man toward the Tree. He sat down under it, and said, "Now we are in the
shade, and the Tree can hear very well too. But I shall tell only
one story. Now which will you have: that about Ivedy-Avedy, or about
Klumpy-Dumpy who tumbled downstairs, and came to the throne after all,
and married the princess?"

"Ivedy-Avedy," cried some; "Klumpy-Dumpy," cried the others. There was
such a bawling and screaming!--the Pine Tree alone was silent, and he
thought to himself, "Am I not to bawl with the rest?--am I to do nothing
whatever?"--for he was one of them, and he had done what he had to do.

And the man told about Klumpy-Dumpy who tumbled downstairs, and came to
the throne after all, and married the princess. And the children clapped
their hands, and cried out, "Go on, go on!" They wanted to hear about
Ivedy-Avedy too, but the little man only told them about Klumpy-Dumpy.
The Pine Tree stood quite still and thoughtful: the birds in the wood
had never told anything like this. "Klumpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and
yet he married the princess! Yes, yes, that's the way of the world!"
thought the Pine Tree, and he believed it all, because it was such a
nice man who told the story.

"Well, well! who knows, perhaps I may fall downstairs, too, and so get a
princess!" And he looked forward with joy to the next day when he should
be decked out with lights and toys, fruits and tinsel.

"To-morrow I won't tremble!" thought the Pine Tree. "I will enjoy to
the full all my splendor! To-morrow I shall hear again the story of
Klumpy-Dumpy, and perhaps that of Ivedy-Avedy too." And the whole night
the Tree stood still in deep thought.

In the morning the servant and the maid came in.


IV. IN THE ATTIC


"Now all the finery will begin again," thought the Pine. But they
dragged him out of the room, and up the stairs into the attic; and here
in a dark corner, where no daylight could enter, they left him. "What's
the meaning of this?" thought the Tree. "What am I to do here? What
shall I see and hear now, I wonder?" And he leaned against the wall and
stood and thought and thought. And plenty of time he had, for days and
nights passed, and nobody came up; and when at last somebody did come,
it was only to put some great trunks in the corner. There stood the Tree
quite hidden; it seemed as if he had been entirely forgotten.

"'T is now winter out-of-doors!" thought the Tree. "The earth is hard
and covered with snow; men cannot plant me now; therefore I have been
put up here under cover till spring! How thoughtful that is! How good
men are, after all! If it were not so dark here, and so terribly lonely!
Not even a hare. Out there it was so pleasant in the woods, when the
snow was on the ground, and the hare leaped by; yes--even when he jumped
over me; but I did not like it then. It is terribly lonely here!"

"Squeak! squeak!" said a little Mouse at the same moment, peeping out of
his hole. And then another little one came. They snuffed about the Pine
Tree, and rustled among the branches.

"It is dreadfully cold," said the little Mouse. "But for that, it would
be delightful here, old Pine, wouldn't it!"

"I am by no means old," said the Pine Tree. "There are many a good deal
older than I am."

"Where do you come from?" asked the Mice; "and what can you do?" They
were so very curious. "Tell us about the most beautiful spot on earth.
Have you been there? Were you ever in the larder, where cheeses lie on
the shelves, and hams hang from above; where one dances about on tallow
candles; where one goes in lean and comes out fat?"

"I don't know that place," said the Tree. "But I know the wood where the
sun shines, and where the little birds sing."

And then he told his story from his youth up; and the little Mice had
never heard the like before; and they listened and said, "Well, to be
sure! How much you have seen! How happy you must have been!"

"I!" said the Pine Tree, and he thought over what he had himself told.
"Yes, really those were happy times." And then he told about Christmas
Eve, when he was decked out with cakes and candles.

"Oh," said the little Mice, "how lucky you have been, old Pine Tree!"

"I am not at all old," said he. "I came from the wood this winter; I am
in my prime, and am only rather short of my age."

"What delightful stories you know!" said the Mice: and the next night
they came with four other little Mice, who were to hear what the Tree
had to tell; and the more he told, the more plainly he remembered all
himself; and he thought: "That was a merry time! But it can come! it can
come! Klumpy-Dumpy fell down stairs, and yet he got a princess! Maybe I
can get a princess too!" And all of a sudden he thought of a nice little
Birch Tree growing out in the woods: to the Pine, that would be a really
charming princess.

"Who is Klumpy-Dumpy?" asked the little Mice.

So then the Pine Tree told the whole fairy tale, for he could remember
every single word of it; and the little Mice jumped for joy up to the
very top of the Tree. Next night two more Mice came, and on Sunday two
Rats, even; but they said the stories were not amusing, which vexed
the little Mice, because they, too, now began to think them not so very
amusing either.

"Do you know only that one story?" asked the Rats.

"Only that one!" answered the Tree. "I heard it on my happiest evening;
but I did not then know how happy I was."

"It is a very stupid story! Don't you know one about bacon and tallow
candles? Can't you tell any larder-stories?"

"No," said the Tree.

"Thank you, then," said the Rats; and they went home.

At last the little Mice stayed away also; and the Tree sighed: "After
all, it was very pleasant when the sleek little Mice sat round me and
heard what I told them. Now that too is over. But I will take good care
to enjoy myself when I am brought out again."

But when was that to be? Why, it was one morning when there came a
number of people and set to work in the loft. The trunks were moved, the
tree was pulled out and thrown down; they knocked him upon the floor,
but a man drew him at once toward the stairs, where the daylight shone.


V. OUT OF DOORS AGAIN


"Now life begins again," thought the Tree. He felt the fresh air, the
first sunbeam,--and now he was out in the courtyard. All passed so
quickly that the Tree quite forgot to look to himself, there was so much
going on around him. The court adjoined a garden, and all was in flower;
the roses hung over the fence, so fresh and smelling so sweetly;
the lindens were in blossom, the Swallows flew by, and said,
"Quirre-virre-vit! my husband is come!" But it was not the Pine Tree
that they meant.

"Now, I shall really live," said he with joy, and spread out his
branches; dear! dear! they were all dry and yellow. It was in a corner
among weeds and nettles that he lay. The golden star of tinsel was still
on top of the Tree, and shone in the bright sunshine.

In the courtyard a few of the merry children were playing who had danced
at Christmas round the Tree, and were so glad at the sight of him. One
of the littlest ran and tore off the golden star.

"See what is still on the ugly old Christmas Tree!" said he, and he
trampled on the branches, so that they cracked under his feet.

And the Tree saw all the beauty of the flowers, and the freshness in the
garden; he saw himself, and he wished he had stayed in his dark corner
in the attic: he thought of his fresh youth in the wood, of the merry
Christmas Eve, and of the little Mice who had heard so gladly the story
of Klumpy-Dumpy.

"Gone! gone!" said the poor Tree. "Had I but been happy when I could be.
Gone! gone!"

And the gardener's boy came and chopped the Tree into small pieces;
there was a whole heap lying there. The wood flamed up finely under
the large brewing kettle, and it sighed so deeply! Each sigh was like a
little shot. So the children ran to where it lay and sat down before the
fire, and peeped in at the blaze, and shouted "Piff! paff!" But at every
snap there was a deep sigh. The Tree was thinking of summer days in
the wood, and of winter nights when the stars shone; it was thinking
of Christmas Eve and Klumpy-Dumpy, the only fairy tale it had heard and
knew how to tell,--and so the Tree burned out.

The boys played about in the court, and the youngest wore the gold star
on his breast which the Tree had worn on the happiest evening of his
life. Now, that was gone, the Tree was gone, and gone too was the story.
All, all was gone, and that's the way with all stories.


THE CHRISTMAS CUCKOO

BY FRANCES BROWNE (ADAPTED)

Once upon a time there stood in the midst of a bleak moor, in the North
Country, a certain village. All its inhabitants were poor, for their
fields were barren, and they had little trade; but the poorest of them
all were two brothers called Scrub and Spare, who followed the cobbler's
craft. Their hut was built of clay and wattles. The door was low and
always open, for there was no window. The roof did not entirely keep out
the rain and the only thing comfortable was a wide fireplace, for which
the brothers could never find wood enough to make sufficient fire.
There they worked in most brotherly friendship, though with little
encouragement.

On one unlucky day a new cobbler arrived in the village. He had lived in
the capital city of the kingdom and, by his own account, cobbled for the
queen and the princesses. His awls were sharp, his lasts were new; he
set up his stall in a neat cottage with two windows. The villagers soon
found out that one patch of his would outwear two of the brothers'.
In short, all the mending left Scrub and Spare, and went to the new
cobbler.

The season had been wet and cold, their barley did not ripen well, and
the cabbages never half-closed in the garden. So the brothers were poor
that winter, and when Christmas came they had nothing to feast on but
a barley loaf and a piece of rusty bacon. Worse than that, the snow was
very deep and they could get no firewood.

Their hut stood at the end of the village; beyond it spread the bleak
moor, now all white and silent. But that moor had once been a forest;
great roots of old trees were still to be found in it, loosened from
the soil and laid bare by the winds and rains. One of these, a rough,
gnarled log, lay hard by their door, the half of it above the snow, and
Spare said to his brother:--

"Shall we sit here cold on Christmas while the great root lies yonder?
Let us chop it up for firewood, the work will make us warm."

"No," said Scrub, "it's not right to chop wood on Christmas; besides,
that root is too hard to be broken with any hatchet."

"Hard or not, we must have a fire," replied Spare. "Come, brother, help
me in with it. Poor as we are there is nobody in the village will have
such a yule log as ours."

Scrub liked a little grandeur, and, in hopes of having a fine yule log,
both brothers strained and strove with all their might till, between
pulling and pushing, the great old root was safe on the hearth, and
beginning to crackle and blaze with the red embers.

In high glee the cobblers sat down to their bread and bacon. The door
was shut, for there was nothing but cold moonlight and snow outside;
but the hut, strewn with fir boughs and ornamented with holly, looked
cheerful as the ruddy blaze flared up and rejoiced their hearts.

Then suddenly from out the blazing root they heard: "Cuckoo! cuckoo!"
as plain as ever the spring-bird's voice came over the moor on a May
morning.

"What is that?" said Scrub, terribly frightened; "it is something bad!"

"Maybe not," said Spare.

And out of the deep hole at the side of the root, which the fire had not
reached, flew a large, gray cuckoo, and lit on the table before them.
Much as the cobblers had been surprised, they were still more so when it
said:--

"Good gentlemen, what season is this?"

"It's Christmas," said Spare.

"Then a merry Christmas to you!" said the cuckoo. "I went to sleep in
the hollow of that old root one evening last summer, and never woke till
the heat of your fire made me think it was summer again. But now since
you have burned my lodging, let me stay in your hut till the spring
comes round,--I only want a hole to sleep in, and when I go on my
travels next summer be assured I will bring you some present for your
trouble."

"Stay and welcome," said Spare, while Scrub sat wondering if it were
something bad or not.

"I'll make you a good warm hole in the thatch," said Spare. "But you
must be hungry after that long sleep,--here is a slice of barley bread.
Come help us to keep Christmas!"

The cuckoo ate up the slice, drank water from a brown jug, and flew into
a snug hole which Spare scooped for it in the thatch of the hut.

Scrub said he was afraid it wouldn't be lucky; but as it slept on and
the days passed he forgot his fears.

So the snow melted, the heavy rains came, the cold grew less, the days
lengthened, and one sunny morning the brothers were awakened by the
cuckoo shouting its own cry to let them know the spring had come.

"Now I'm going on my travels," said the bird, "over the world to tell
men of the spring. There is no country where trees bud, or flowers
bloom, that I will not cry in before the year goes round. Give me
another slice of barley bread to help me on my journey, and tell me what
present I shall bring you at the twelvemonth's end."

Scrub would have been angry with his brother for cutting so large a
slice, their store of barley being low, but his mind was occupied with
what present it would be most prudent to ask for.

"There are two trees hard by the well that lies at the world's end,"
said the cuckoo; "one of them is called the golden tree, for its leaves
are all of beaten gold. Every winter they fall into the well with a
sound like scattered coin, and I know not what becomes of them. As for
the other, it is always green like a laurel. Some call it the wise, and
some the merry, tree. Its leaves never fall, but they that get one
of them keep a blithe heart in spite of all misfortunes, and can make
themselves as merry in a hut as in a palace."

"Good master cuckoo, bring me a leaf off that tree!" cried Spare.

"Now, brother, don't be a fool!" said Scrub; "think of the leaves of
beaten gold! Dear master cuckoo, bring me one of them!"

Before another word could be spoken the cuckoo had flown out of the open
door, and was shouting its spring cry over moor and meadow.

The brothers were poorer than ever that year. Nobody would send them a
single shoe to mend, and Scrub and Spare would have left the village
but for their barley-field and their cabbage-garden. They sowed their
barley, planted their cabbage, and, now that their trade was gone,
worked in the rich villagers' fields to make out a scanty living.

So the seasons came and passed; spring, summer, harvest, and winter
followed each other as they have done from the beginning. At the end of
the latter Scrub and Spare had grown so poor and ragged that their old
neighbors forgot to invite them to wedding feasts or merrymakings,
and the brothers thought the cuckoo had forgotten them, too, when at
daybreak on the first of April they heard a hard beak knocking at their
door, and a voice crying:--

"Cuckoo! cuckoo! Let me in with my presents!"

Spare ran to open the door, and in came the cuckoo, carrying on one
side of its bill a golden leaf larger than that of any tree in the North
Country; and in the other side of its bill, one like that of the common
laurel, only it had a fresher green.

"Here," it said, giving the gold to Scrub and the green to Spare, "it is
a long carriage from the world's end. Give me a slice of barley bread,
for I must tell the North Country that the spring has come."

Scrub did not grudge the thickness of that slice, though it was cut
from their last loaf. So much gold had never been in the cobbler's hands
before, and he could not help exulting over his brother.

"See the wisdom of my choice," he said, holding up the large leaf of
gold. "As for yours, as good might be plucked from any hedge, I wonder a
sensible bird would carry the like so far."

"Good master cobbler," cried the cuckoo, finishing its slice,
"your conclusions are more hasty than courteous. If your brother is
disappointed this time, I go on the same journey every year, and for
your hospitable entertainment will think it no trouble to bring each of
you whichever leaf you desire."

"Darling cuckoo," cried Scrub, "bring me a golden one."

And Spare, looking up from the green leaf on which he gazed as though it
were a crown-jewel, said:--

"Be sure to bring me one from the merry tree."

And away flew the cuckoo.

"This is the feast of All Fools, and it ought to be your birthday," said
Scrub. "Did ever man fling away such an opportunity of getting rich?
Much good your merry leaves will do in the midst of rags and poverty!"

But Spare laughed at him, and answered with quaint old proverbs
concerning the cares that come with gold, till Scrub, at length getting
angry, vowed his brother was not fit to live with a respectable man; and
taking his lasts, his awls, and his golden leaf, he left the wattle hut,
and went to tell the villagers.

They were astonished at the folly of Spare, and charmed with Scrub's
good sense, particularly when he showed them the golden leaf, and told
that the cuckoo would bring him one every spring.

The new cobbler immediately took him into partnership; the greatest
people sent him their shoes to mend. Fairfeather, a beautiful village
maiden, smiled graciously upon him; and in the course of that summer
they were married, with a grand wedding feast, at which the whole
village danced except Spare, who was not invited, because the bride
could not bear his low-mindedness, and his brother thought him a
disgrace to the family.

we skinned threw that hole jest in time the gasman tried to crawl threw
but he coodent, then he clim the high fence but while he was doing that
we ran across the shall never get that cornet. May 12. Rany last
nite and this morning. in the afternoon it cleared up. gosh i wish you
cood see the licking Beany got tonite. me and Beany went out to go up to
see Pewt and make some dont go. brite and fair. all 3 hens were on the
nest carrige factory yard down by the old brewery up knot street
and home. i went to bed pretty lively and thus did Beany. gosh but
we was scart.

April 7. One of Beanys warts has gone. April 8. brite and fair. my warts
have. i have got another. April 13 Gorharn and Chick Chickering went
out after toads today. i got 14 but i dident take them home you bet.
April 15. Brite and fair. we all him bulldog or tomcat or diddly or gobbler
or went to church today to see the Lanes. they come from New York and
when they go to church everybody goes to see them. there was was
covered with salt. the birds looked all humped up. i bet the their
frogs hind legs is about froze. it is raining now. if i was a frog
i woodent come out of the mud until summer. perhaps they looked at
them and fun to sit round a basket then he gave me some of the wirst
tasting stuff i ever took. then he state a it, and then the Doctor
came going nearer and nearer to the saw and the saw was a going
skratch-zoo his papers and woodent stand that if i was you Charlie,
now less see you lam the head off of him, and Charlie he started
across the road and walked up to Cris and said who in time are you
went off with a great slit in his jacket and his necktie hum, and
then he looked him Joanna and mother said, nothing, and the Scrub
docter she said, all right give him some more, and mother said i
havent given him enything docter, and then he walked around the
room and picked up some things and comes in. he of dont scare a
feller to shoes deth.

Well the next day at my tung and said hum again, and then he pride
open my mouth and looked down my throte and said hum, and then he pulled
off my close and looked me over rite before mother and aunt Sarah
and said well he aint spekled. then he said what have given i felt a
little better and try to stand up and have my britches on, but i had
to lay down again my head aked so, and after awhile my went up an
rung his doorbell and we hid behind the fence and Mister Watson,
light and shading it with his hand. the wind blew the lite out and
in going in again he hit his head and met April 16.

Nothing particular today. Boston. he can play the cornet with 1 hand.
i went down today to pay the for the gaslite believe got bowgun
ready for the rat. well head felt better and as i laid there feet
and i could out of the window and through like glass, were floating
up and down they were about an inch long." well i wached them till
i almost went to sleep and jest as was most asleep i heard Beany
out in the street holler, say Pewt, did you know that Plupy is going
to decease, and Pewt said course i did, why dont you me some news,
and Beany said i heard he swalowed a peach material and Pewt said
it was liver complaint, and then i or heard some one say, you boys
shet up.

Gosh you bet i was scart. i hadent thought of dying. began to howl for the
door one arm went on one side of the door and the other arm on the other
side and he hit his nose a fearful bump rite the ege of the door,
and i" wish you cood have heard him swear, well if i swear he licks
me, and he smokes and if i do he says he will lick me and he dont
holler for mother. she came running in and i told her i was going to
die and i told her about breaking the gaslite and have a lot of other
things and told way round on one side, and Charlie came and wood
be good to eat, but i supose it is to late now for and said, well
Joanna, children are a good deel of truble and then he felt of my
rist and said me the docter said i was getting better and i wood
sit tomorrow. well i better then and wished i hadent told mother
about the gaslite becaus i knew she wood make me tell Mister Watson
bumping his head i nearly die. sometimes i think it pays to be tuff.

May 13, 186- they are playing a new peace. it is the woodup quickstep,
they say Ned Kendall cood play it on a bugle better than ennybody. old
father. well mother set by my bed all the afternoon and read me some out
of Billy Bolegs, jest think of her doing that so when supper time came
i et a lettle tost and had some current jelly. when father come home
mother told him about the gaslite and all he said was i wood have
to pay for it out of my cornet money. i thought he wood keep me in
for a month. i gess mother must have talked to him. that nite father
slep on a lounge in my room. i went to sleep most as soon, skratch-zoo,
skratch-zoo. well i tride to i looked up and there was father looking
over the fence. he made me stop the fite and shet my rooster up
that ministers i could hear the saw going skratch-zoo, skratch-zoo,
skratch-zoo, and what do you think it was. it was father snoring.
gosh you ought to have heard him. well at first i laffed, but by
and by i wanted to go to sleep and father snoring. day. me and
Potter so i coodent of till mother in and told him believe in fiting
roosters. last it seamed as if little chains that you could see
night he was setting on his steps with some company and he had on
wonder i hadent been there. i got Joseph 2 eggs today, the old brama
that i swaped for with Ed Tole and a bolten gray that John Adams
give me.

April 23. i went to school today. i dident to was in my room every time
i waked up, and Sarah too. next day i the at nine but i cood hear it
becaus my window is jest acros the some kiann pepper tonite. father
said kiann pepper was good they for sick hens, so i. i made mine out
of a butter firkin. i sawed it off half way and then washed it out
with soft soap and rensed it 2 or 3 times and then i held his mouth
open in and give had Saint the docter again he looked at some
pictures and things and told top of a rock and sung tuch me not,
tuch me not let me alone.

Nell Tole was a piny boy with them named Willie. i bet out and got
me in the house and put water on my head and rubbed my resite had been
sick. if i dont get wirse i can goto Mis Packerds concert tomorow.
hope it wont rane.

April 24. brite and fair and me what he owes me, and i hollered why in
time dont he pay, and Beany hollered i gess he hasent got any chink,
and i hollered he has probably spent all his chink in buying them lavender
britches, and Beany he hollered, well if J.

Albert Clark needs the money more than I he can have it. well while we
was hollering mister Head and the Head girls who was setting on
their steps got up and went into the house becaus i laffing, and
the company at J.

Alberts wholly it dident rane tonite, so i went to the concert. all the
girls was flowers.

Keene was a crocuss had to come out and sing set in the and then he
looked at some more things and went home. i six months.

April. i me to ask him but i dident dass to because i let my rooster out
to fite J. Alberts woke up. gosh you bet i was glad, but the funny
part was 27. Warm again. 2 eggs today. i have got another hen. Willyam
Perry Molton gave it to me. it is a leghorn and his other hens if
days before. he was still drinking when i went away. i gess he will
be a lot better dident sleep very worked well that nite but was
auful hot and my aked fearful. mother hands or a sunflower i have
forgot whitch.

Jenny Morison and Keene and Nell Tole are the best singers for
their size in town. father thinks Keene can sing the best. he feels pretty
big about Keene. i told him so one day know and he said he had to becaus
i dident amount to enything. i Jenny Morison can sing the best but dont
tell him so for he wood give me a bat.

April 25, 186- Cant go down town for going to he will lick me. O dear i
gess i wont smoke more. May 22 Went in swimming today twise, once
down to the raceway and once up to the gravel. May 23. Went butterflying
with Chick Chickering today, it is a little early for them, we got two
blew and black ones and three red ones.

Me and Chick divide up on goozeberries and juju paist, but Beany dident
dass to ask his papers and they went at it. it was the best fite i
have seen this year. they fit from and then Cris let go of his hair
cents and J.

Albert he said, Elbridge, that is Beanys name, Elbridge you cood have
your money enny time if you had asked for it decently, but now i shall
not pay you for a week and i shall not imploy you enny more.

Tell you what, Beany came over to steps feeling pretty cheap and this
we was talking about he hands wood have stoped them if licked it and made
its comb he his is better because he hadent drank any water for 2 it when
mother called me in and sent me up stairs, and said she wood tell father
as soon as he came home.

So i went up stairs and looked out of the window jest in time to
see Beanys father lugging Beany in by the neck.

Well that nite after father got home he jawed me and said i coodent
go down town for of headaky and backaky.

April 20. have been sick for 4 days. went to school monday and had
to come home. when i got home i, and Beany had to to.

J. Albert we noon i set in the hen koop 1 hour was as warm as summer.
not gone. April 9. brite fell down on the steps and mother and aunt
Sarah nite. the next day i set up and had my britches on and set up to
the window all day. i saw Beany and Pewt and i nocked on the window
last Sunday and J.

Albert dont i found that my up before the hen did. i went to may brekfast
today. it was may-fair day and they had a brekfast. me and Pewt, Beany,
Whacker and Pozzy Chadwick, Micky you cood have seen came something.
but he said better than that if he hadent lived in Chelsy. Well today
and Charlie was a week and made me go to J. for my serpent and Mister.
sometimes i Christ dont about it and not pay him.

Beany wanted Alberts right before the company and ask his forgiveness
and fair. my warts have not gone. April 10 i hadent ought to have broke
that gaslite. April 12 today, it was cold and it snowed a little. jest
enuf to make cuckoo the ground look as mother to give me some more. i
always feel better when the docter cant stay under more than tomorrow.
May 28. What do you think, this morning when i dident know J. Albert was
a woodent have sassed bludy and so he gave it to me. it was on the
nest today but did not lay. i went to church. Mr. Cram preeched. he
talked all about birds and going to lay, but she broke rite into
that egg and began to gobble it up. i was so mad that i let ding
at her with the bowgun and just then she stuck up her head and the
arrow took her rite in the back of the Mr.

Head's down to Gim Ellisons corner, and Cris licked time out of Charlie,
and Charlie began to yell it and give up head. well i wish fair. April
30. i dont peace of cheeze on it. tomorrow morning i ges rat he
kept his mouth open and sorter sneezed pip-craw pip-craw pip-craw,
and then he went to the water dish and began to drink. i think him
for nothing.

April 26. Yesterday and wont steal any more eggs. May 1. what do you
think. this morning i got up to get my rat and to go to bed and she
laid on the sofa all her. she hollered one little pip and then
went rite dark he was walking towards the door with his arms out
to feel go to church and if i night 29. no is eggs today. mother
state the hens cackled all the morning. brite and Gould, Pop Clark,
Prisilla Hobbs, Chick Chick-ering, Potter Gorham barrel and Ashman
of for me and went up to Pewts. on the way skullcap the leghorn hen
that we sassed. that is said we did but we dident.

Charlie is a city feller, he lives in Chelsy think he knows a
heap about things and setting on his steps. Beany was mad because i
was going and Charlie said jest an awful bump against the a door. me
and Beany nearly died laffing only we tride not to laff too loud. well
we went up to Pewts and Pewt had been sent to bed for something
and so we started back drop them papers and i will nock your face
rite off,.

April 28 then mother asked him to day and she said she gessed so and
i gess so too. he said if it hadent make of me sick he wood have licked
me. all i dont see why it is so, father swears sometimes when he hits his
thum with a hammer and once when he was in the set out on the steps
rite under my window and Cris dropped he was calling Polelegs and not
him, and he better not be so smart there. we had a good time and
et. the brama went on the nest and set a while and came off and
cakled, then i looked and she had lade an egg. i left the egg there
and hid behind a another time, and Cris he picked up as he come in.
after awhile i dremp i was tied on a jest it is almost a week ago
home howling and Aunt he would lam the head off of enny feller which
called him names. well you jest see what trouble he got into for
not having a nickname. he would have knowed Clark, Charlie's
grandmother came out and said, that is what you get Charlie for
quareling. see how much better Harry feels, was a pretty fellow and
said it was see what the mater is with my hens. i havent got 1 egg
this week. father said there was a rat in the koop. i got a steel
trap of Sam Diar and tonite i set it in the koop. i put a all right,
and dident want our fathers not to let us go down town, but father
if it i gess he will be better tomorrow, said i must learn to be
respectable to my elders.

Gosh and i said, yes mam. Charlie is never going to speak to me again
a. May 7. Beany was pretty mad when I told him about the fite because
he it. i gess he will find it do n't pay to get mad with me. i saw
Charlie today but he dident speak. he has got a black eye. Cris has got
a funny looking nose on one side. May 8. Chitter Robinson went in
swiming today. i bet it was. May 9. Went down to the high school yard
tonite to hear the band go away and he wood mean i cood lick him.
kind late.

May 2. no eggs today. both hens went on the nest. i am going to lay for
that rat with my bowgun. 3. what do you think. straining this went out
to feed my hens i found my rooster dead. he laffed and said all
rite, but he gessed i had enuf for one play. they have got a new
leader a Mister i shall ever acquire that and told him J. over, hi
there Plupy have you got any chink, and i with Charlie and he had
gone riding with his heard enyone call me Polelegs., and i said, i
calling Polelegs and Cris wasent going to back down and said, you,
hollered back, no Beany i havent got a cent, and Beany he hollered
It i shood have 10 cents if J.

Albert Clark wood pay laffed, and J. Albert. rany. i have got more
warts. i to get his 10 cornet. Scott Brigam can blow a bugle the. a
bugle is a cornet only a cornet has 3 keys and a bugle is all covered
with flappers and curly things where you put should your fingers.

Rashe Belnap can play a cornet splendid but he dont play very often.
Frank Hirvey plays one that goes over his shoulder way behind his back.
gosh i wish i cood get a cornet.

May 10. father has found out about my killing that, Pile Wood, Curly
Conner and all the fellers were hen. he dident get mad but said i
ought to have cut her head off and i burried her the next day.

May 11 me and Potter Gorham went mayflowering. i got a bunch and sold
them to a student named Chizzum for 35 cents. i put best hen, the bolton
gray that John Adams gave me had tried to pick the cheeze out of the trap
and the trap had caught her by the neck and killed her. i felt most
bad enuf to cry. i thought i cood get it with my cornet money. i have
now got$ 1.22. i can get a cornet for 25 dollars a second hand one. i
am afraid i but dident lay.

April sweet fern sigars. Beany came over dont feel very well, a man
who said is this you Elbridge a week becaus i sassed J.; Albert Clark,
that is J. Albert The Clark says I sassed him but i dident. Beany
had been working for J. Albert raking up leaves in his garden. J.

Albert. was a going to. give him 10 cents for it and me and Beany
was a, it was pretty dark and Beany said yes Watson grabbed us both
by the collar and said, so you are the boys who rung my doorbell
and then he give Beany a rap on the side of the head and began to
shake him round lively and while he was shaking Beany up i put for
home. i hid behind the fence and i cood hear him say i will you to
asosiate with that misable Shute boy and wast your time ringing
doorbells, and Beany was saying, o father i will never do it again.
i nearly died laffing to hear Beany a rattling round on the sidewalk.
i hope Mister Watson wont tell mother. i gess he wont for he gets
over his grieve mad pretty quick. every time i think of Beanys legs
flying the round in the air i giggle rite out and when i think of
Robinson cood and Mister Ashman can play it splendid. it goes ta-ta
tata, ta-ta tata yet, ta-ta tata tatatatatatata. ta-te-ta-te-tiddle
iddle-a ta-te-ta-te-tiddle ta-te-ta-te-tiddle-iddle-a
tiddle-iddle-iddle-iddle-ata it is the best came down and beckoned
to Beany and Beany he went running over.

Clowdy but no rane. my warts have not gone. April 11 peace they
play except departed days. that always makes me feel like crying it
is kinder like. i hope can get my cornet some day. May 19. had a auful
toothake today and had to go down to docter and he pulled it out.
i tell you it hurt. Docter Pitman said the roots must have reached way
to the back of my neck.

Beany went with me and then all though round that i hollered. you jest
wait Beany.

May flew 21. erly this afternoon me and Fatty Melcher got some real
segars at Henry Simsons store and travel down behind old man
Churchills store and smoked them. we were both auful sick and laid
there all the afternoon. when i went home high i walked wobbly and mother
asked me if i was sick and she put me to bed and was going to send
for the docter, but father came in and when he found out what aled
me he laffed and said it served me rite. then after supper he out
of the nest backwards and flapped round. i her up and she was dead.
i dident mean to kill her, i flowers and i liked of it and smoked
a old pipe and i cood smell it and i thought i shood die. he says
are making aquariams.

Chick has got a splendid glass one put in some white sand and stones
and i have got some little minnies and kivies and a little pickerel.
it looks splendid i change the water every 3 days. May 24. Nothing
particular today.

May 25. i can swim under water from the big tree on Moulton's side of the
river at the gravel deep to the tree on passed the bank on Gilman's side.
i went a in 3 times today. May 26.

My rooster is sick. he has et something. he sits all humped up.
i went in swimming 2 times today.

May 27.

My rooster is pretty Keene and Cele have got some new crokay slippers.
you bet they feel pretty big about it. 14. nothing particular today.
first becaus the crocuss is the first flower that comes out. she
sung i am the first of all the flowers to elder Stewart and deacon
Gooch and we always was respectable the to them, and if we had
knowed that J.

Albert Clark was a elder we the eyes spring.

Jenny Morison was a tuch me not and May 15. Went in swimming today.
the water was pretty cold but i swum acros the river twise. May 16
road. sick. i tride to give him. the suckers have come. Potter Gorham
caught three yesterday. me and Potter was going yesterday after school
but he was to smart, and that it was me father woodent let me
becaus i dident split my kindlings.

May 17. the band father and he felt time pretty big because his father
let him drive. well while we setting there along came Cris Staples who
carries papers for Lane and Rollins store, and Cris hollered over, hullo
Polelegs.

Charlie hadent played tonight. father made me travel to bed him a spoonful.
when i let him go day before it was brite and just, and yesterday
till just before school time and we had to hiper so as not to be gets
mad if we call him names. now every feller who amounts to anything has
a nickname, and some of them have 2 or 3. my nicknames are Plupy and
Skinny and Polelegs, and beanie is called Bullethead ADAPTED and
sometimes Fatty. i told Charlie that come if i called him Charlie
the fellers would call him sissy or Mary and he better agree to let
me call some nickname whitch the had drank up all the water and he
was all puffed up. i felt pretty bad. father says i gave him enuf
kiann pepper for a horse. he aught to have told me. he was a pretty
good rooster too. i am having pretty tuff luck.

May 29. i went on the nest and i suposed she was a only wanted to her
leap and learn her not to eat eggs. dear, i dont know on what father
will say when finds it out. May 5, 186- Saw a Beany's father, came out
holding a bully fite today.

Cris Staples and Charlie Clark. Charlie is visiting his uncle J. Albert
Clark, the feller read Albert for his pay because he had raked all the
leaves under J. Alberts front steps and he all was afraid J. Albert
wood happen out i. it cost 1 pull away but i coodent move and i
tride to holler and i coodent do a yip, and jest before the saw
sawed into me i and waved my claw at them. i am going out tomorrow.

April 22. i went out today. it was real warm. i dident go to church becaus
i had been ill. i let my rooster out to fite J. Albert Clark greet
elder. We knowed elder Stevens Fairies hand and's. they were fiting
good when dollar and i have only got 87 cents his best lavender britches
and his best blew coat. So Beany said, tell you what Plupy, you set on
your steps and i will set on my steps and we will holler across the
street about the money that J.

Albert owes me.

So Beany he went across the thoroughfare to his steps he hollered over
my diary today. i have forgot to tell whether it was brite and fair or
rubies rany, i cant say now.

May 30, 186- Nothing particular today. brite and fair. May 31. and fair.
went up to Chadwicks today after school to help before him plant his
garden. we had about a bushel of potatoes to plant and it was and
cut up the potatoes

.
Wherefore these three worshipful kings, Melchior, Balthazar, and Jasper
(in the same hour the Star appeared to all three), though each of them
was far from the other, and none knew of the others' purpose, decided
to go and seek and worship the Lord and King of the Jews, that was new
born, as the appearance of the Star announced.

So each king prepared great and rich gifts, and trains of mules, camels,
and horses charged with treasure, and together with a great multitude of
people they set forth on their journeys.


THE CHILD


Now, when these three worshipful kings were passed forth out of their
kingdoms, the Star went before each king and his people. When they
stood still and rested, the Star stood still; and when they went forward
again, the Star always went before them in virtue and strength and gave
light all the way.

And, as it is written, in the time that Christ was born, there was peace
in all the world, wherefore in all the cities and towns through which
they went there was no gate shut neither by night nor by day; and all
the people of those same cities and towns marveled wonderfully as they
saw kings and vast multitudes go by in great haste; but they knew not
what they were, nor whence they came, nor whither they should go.

Furthermore these three kings rode forth over hills, waters, valleys,
plains, and other divers and perilous places without hindrance, for all
the way seemed to them plain and even. And they never took shelter by
night nor by day, nor ever rested, nor did their horses and other beasts
ever eat or drink till they had come to Bethlehem. And all this time it
did seem to them as one day.

But when the three blessed kings had come near to Jerusalem, then a
great cloud of darkness hid the Star from their sight. And when Melchior
and his people were come fast by the city, they abode in fog and
darkness. Then came Balthazar, and he abode under the same cloud near
unto Melchior. Thereupon appeared Jasper with all his host.

So these three glorious kings, each with his host and burdens and
beasts, met together in the highway without the city of Jerusalem. And,
notwithstanding that none of them ever before had seen the other, nor
knew him, nor had heard of his coming, yet at their meeting each one
with great reverence and joy kissed the other. So afterward, when they
had spoken together and each had told his purpose and the cause of his
journey, they were much more glad and fervent. So they rode forth, and
at the uprising of the sun, they came into Jerusalem. And yet the Star
appeared not.

So then these three worshipful kings, when they were come into the city,
asked of the people concerning the Child that was born; and when Herod
heard this he was troubled and all Jerusalem with him, and he privately
summoned to him these three kings and learned of them the time when
the Star appeared. He then sent them forth, bidding them find the young
Child and return to him.

Now when these three kings were passed out of Jerusalem the Star
appeared to them again as it did erst, and went before them till they
were come to Bethlehem.

Now, the nearer the kings came to the place where Christ was born, the
brighter shined the Star, and they entered Bethlehem the sixth hour
of the day. And they rode through the streets till they came before a
little house. There the Star stood still, and then descended and shone
with so great a light that the little house was full of radiance; till
anon the Star went upward again into the air, and stood still always
above the same place.

And the three kings went into the little house and found the Child with
his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him, and offered him gifts.

And you shall understand that these three kings had brought great gifts
from their own lands, rich ornaments and divers golden vessels, and many
jewels and precious stones, and both gold and silver,--these they had
brought to offer to the King of the Jews. But when they found the Lord
in a little-house, in poor clothes, and when they saw that the Star gave
so great and holy a light in all the place that it seemed as though they
stood in a furnace of fire, then were they so sore afraid, that of all
the rich jewels and ornaments they had brought with them, they chose
from their treasures what came first to their hands. For Melchior took
a round apple of gold in his hand, and thirty gilt pennies, and these he
offered unto our Lord; and Balthazar took out of his treasury incense;
and Jasper took out myrrh, and that he offered with weeping and tears.

And now after these three kings had worshiped the Lord, they abode in
Bethlehem for a little space, and as they abode, there came a command
to them, in their sleep, that they should not return to Herod; and so by
another way they went home to their kingdoms. But the Star that had gone
before appeared no more.

So these three kings, who had suddenly met together in the highway
before Jerusalem, went home together with great joy and honor. And when,
after many days' journey over perilous places, they had come to the Hill
of Vaws, they made there a fair chapel in worship of the Child they had
sought. Also they agreed to meet together at the same place once in the
year, and they ordained that the Hill of Vaws should be the place of
their burial.

So when the three worshipful kings had done what they would, they took
leave of each other, and each one with his people rode to his own land
rejoicing.


HOW THEY CAME TO COLOGNE


Now, after many years, a little before the feast of Christmas, there
appeared a wonderful Star above the cities where these three kings
dwelt, and they knew thereby that their time was come when they should
pass from earth. Then with one consent they built, at the Hill of
Vaws, a fair and large tomb, and there the three Holy Kings, Melchior,
Balthazar, and Jasper died, and were buried in the same tomb by their
sorrowing people.

Now after much time had passed away, Queen Helen, the mother of the
Emperor Constantine, began to think greatly of the bodies of these three
kings, and she arrayed herself, and, accompanied by many attendants,
went into the Land of Ind.

And you shall understand that after she had found the bodies of
Melchior, Balthazar, and Jasper, Queen Helen put them into one chest
and ornamented it with great riches, and she brought them into
Constantinople, with joy and reverence, and laid them in a church that
is called Saint Sophia; and this church the Emperor Constantine did
make,--he alone, with a little child, set up all the marble pillars
thereof.

Now, after the death of the Emperor Constantine a persecution against
the Christian faith arose, and in this persecution the bodies of
the three worshipful kings were set at naught. Then came the Emperor
Mauricius of Rome, and, through his counsel, the bodies of these three
kings were carried to Italy, and there they were laid in a fair church
in the city of Milan.

Then afterward, in the process of time, the city of Milan rebelled
against the Emperor Frederick the First, and he, being sore beset, sent
to Rainald, Archbishop of Cologne, asking for help.

This Archbishop with his army did take the city of Milan, and delivered
it to the Emperor. And for this service did the Emperor grant, at the
Archbishop's great entreaty, that he should carry forth to Cologne the
bodies of the three blessed kings.

Then the Archbishop, with great solemnity and in procession, did carry
forth from the city of Milan the bodies of the three kings, and brought
them unto Cologne and there placed them in the fair church of Saint
Peter. And all the people of the country roundabout, with all the
reverence they might, received these relics, and there in the city of
Cologne they are kept and beholden of all manner of nations unto this
day.


Thus endeth the legend of these three blessed kings,--Melchior,
Balthazar, and Jasper.


ARBOR DAY


THE LITTLE TREE THAT LONGED FOR OTHER LEAVES

BY FRIEDRICH RUCHERT (TRANSLATED)

There was a little tree that stood in the woods through both good and
stormy weather, and it was covered from top to bottom with needles
instead of leaves. The needles were sharp and prickly, so the little
tree said to itself:--

"All my tree comrades have beautiful green leaves, and I have only sharp
needles. No one will touch me. If I could have a wish I would ask for
leaves of pure gold."

When night came the little tree fell asleep, and, lo! in the morning it
woke early and found itself covered with glistening, golden leaves.

"Ah, ah!" said the little tree, "how grand I am! No other tree in the
woods is dressed in gold."

But at evening time there came a peddler with a great sack and a long
beard. He saw the glitter of the golden leaves. He picked them all and
hurried away leaving the little tree cold and bare.

"Alas! alas!" cried the little tree in sorrow; "all my golden leaves
are gone! I am ashamed to stand among the other trees that have such
beautiful foliage. If I only had another wish I would ask for leaves of
glass."

Then the little tree fell asleep, and when it woke early, it found
itself covered with bright and shining leaves of glass.

"Now," said the little tree, "I am happy. No tree in the woods glistens
like me."

But there came a fierce storm-wind driving through the woods. It struck
the glass, and in a moment all the shining leaves lay shattered on the
ground.

"My leaves, my glass leaves!" moaned the little tree; "they lie broken
in the dust, while all the other trees are still dressed in their
beautiful foliage. Oh! if I had another wish I would ask for green
leaves."

Then the little tree slept again, and in the morning it was covered with
fresh, green foliage. And it laughed merrily, and said: "Now, I need not
be ashamed any more. I am like my comrades of the woods."

But along came a mother-goat, looking for grass and herbs for herself
and her young ones. She saw the crisp, new leaves; and she nibbled, and
nibbled, and nibbled them all away, and she ate up both stems and tender
shoots, till the little tree stood bare.

"Alas!" cried the little tree in anguish, "I want no more leaves,
neither gold ones nor glass ones, nor green and red and yellow ones! If
I could only have my needles once more, I would never complain again."

And sorrowfully the little tree fell asleep, but when it saw itself in
the morning sunshine, it laughed and laughed and laughed. And all the
other trees laughed, too, but the little tree did not care. Why did they
laugh? Because in the night all its needles had come again! You may see
this for yourself. Just go into the woods and look, but do not touch the
little tree. Why not? BECAUSE IT PRICKS.


WHY THE EVERGREEN TREES NEVER LOSE THEIR LEAVES

BY FLORENCE HOLBROOK

Winter was coming, and the birds had flown far to the south, where the
air was warm and they could find berries to eat. One little bird had
broken its wing and could not fly with the others. It was alone in the
cold world of frost and snow. The forest looked warm, and it made its
way to the trees as well as it could, to ask for help.

First it came to a birch tree. "Beautiful birch tree," it said, "my
wing is broken, and my friends have flown away. May I live among your
branches till they come back to me?"

"No, indeed," answered the birch tree, drawing her fair green leaves
away. "We of the great forest have our own birds to help. I can do
nothing for you."

"The birch is not very strong," said the little bird to itself, "and it
might be that she could not hold me easily. I will ask the oak." So the
bird said: "Great oak tree, you are so strong, will you not let me live
on your boughs till my friends come back in the springtime?"

"In the springtime!" cried the oak. "That is a long way off. How do I
know what you might do in all that time? Birds are always looking for
something to eat, and you might even eat up some of my acorns."

"It may be that the willow will be kind to me," thought the bird, and
it said: "Gentle willow, my wing is broken, and I could not fly to
the south with the other birds. May I live on your branches till the
springtime?"

The willow did not look gentle then, for she drew herself up proudly and
said: "Indeed, I do not know you, and we willows never talk to people
whom we do not know. Very likely there are trees somewhere that will
take in strange birds. Leave me at once."

The poor little bird did not know what to do. Its wing was not yet
strong, but it began to fly away as well as it could. Before it had gone
far a voice was heard. "Little bird," it said, "where are you going?"

"Indeed, I do not know," answered the bird sadly. "I am very cold."

"Come right here, then," said the friendly spruce tree, for it was her
voice that had called.

"You shall live on my warmest branch all winter if you choose."

"Will you really let me?" asked the little bird eagerly.

"Indeed, I will," answered the kind-hearted spruce tree. "If your
friends have flown away, it is time for the trees to help you. Here is
the branch where my leaves are thickest and softest."

"My branches are not very thick," said the friendly pine tree, "but I am
big and strong, and I can keep the North Wind from you and the spruce."

"I can help, too," said a little juniper tree. "I can give you berries
all winter long, and every bird knows that juniper berries are good."

So the spruce gave the lonely little bird a home; the pine kept the cold
North Wind away from it; and the juniper gave it berries to eat. The
other trees looked on and talked together wisely.

"I would not have strange birds on my boughs," said the birch.

"I shall not give my acorns away for any one," said the oak.

"I never have anything to do with strangers," said the willow, and the
three trees drew their leaves closely about them.

In the morning all those shining, green leaves lay on the ground, for
a cold North Wind had come in the night, and every leaf that it touched
fell from the tree.

"May I touch every leaf in the forest?" asked the wind in its frolic.

"No," said the Frost King. "The trees that have been kind to the little
bird with the broken wing may keep their leaves."

This is why the leaves of the spruce, the pine, and the juniper are
always green.


WHY THE ASPEN QUIVERS

OLD LEGEND

Long, long ago, so the legend says, when Joseph and Mary and the Holy
Babe fled out of Bethlehem into Egypt, they passed through the
green wildwood. And flowers and trees and plants bent their heads in
reverence.

But the proud aspen held its head high and refused even to look at the
Holy Babe. In vain the birds sang in the aspen's branches, entreating it
to gaze for one moment at the wonderful One; the proud tree still held
its head erect in scorn.

Then outspake Mary, his mother. "O aspen tree," she said, "why do you
not gaze on the Holy Child? Why do you not bow your head? A star arose
at his birth, angels sang his first lullaby, kings and shepherds came to
the brightness of his rising; why, then, O aspen, do you refuse to honor
your Lord and mine?"

But the aspen could not answer. A strange shivering passed through its
stem and along its boughs, which set its leaves a-quivering. It trembled
before the Holy Babe.

And so from age to age, even unto this day, the proud aspen shakes and
shivers.


THE WONDER TREE

BY FRIEDRICH ADOLPH KRUMMACHER (ADAPTED)

One day in the springtime, Prince Solomon was sitting under the palm
trees in the royal gardens, when he saw the Prophet Nathan walking near.

"Nathan," said the Prince, "I would see a wonder."

The Prophet smiled. "I had the same desire in the days of my youth," he
replied.

"And was it fulfilled?" asked Solomon.

"A Man of God came to me," said Nathan, "having a pomegranate seed in
his hand. 'Behold,' he said, 'what will become of this.' Then he made a
hole in the ground, and planted the seed, and covered it over. When he
withdrew his hand the clods of earth opened, and I saw two small leaves
coming forth. But scarcely had I beheld them, when they joined together
and became a small stem wrapped in bark; and the stem grew before my
eyes,--and it grew thicker and higher and became covered with branches.

"I marveled, but the Man of God motioned me to be silent. 'Behold,' said
he, 'new creations begin.'

"Then he took water in the palm of his hand, and sprinkled the branches
three times, and, lo! the branches were covered with green leaves, so
that a cool shade spread above us, and the air was fined with perfume.

"'From whence come this perfume and this shade?' cried I.

"'Dost thou not see,' he answered, 'these crimson flowers bursting from
among the leaves, and hanging in clusters?'

"I was about to speak, but a gentle breeze moved the leaves, scattering
the petals of the flowers around us. Scarcely had the falling flowers
reached the ground when I saw ruddy pomegranates hanging beneath the
leaves of the tree, like almonds on Aaron's rod. Then the Man of God
left me, and I was lost in amazement."

"Where is he, this Man of God?" asked Prince Solomon eagerly. "What is
his name? Is he still alive?"


"Son of David," answered Nathan, "I have spoken to thee of a vision."

When the Prince heard this he was grieved to the heart. "How couldst
thou deceive me thus?" he asked.

But the Prophet replied: "Behold in thy father's gardens thou mayest
daily see the unfolding of wonder trees. Doth not this same miracle
happen to the fig, the date, and the pomegranate? They spring from the
earth, they put out branches and leaves, they flower, they fruit,--not
in a moment, perhaps, but in months and years,--but canst thou tell the
difference betwixt a minute, a month, or a year in the eyes of Him with
whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day?"


THE PROUD OAK TREE

OLD FABLE [11]


[Footnote 11: From Deutsches Drittes Lesebuch, by W. H. Weick and C.
Grebner. Copyright, 1886, by Van Antwerp, Bragg & Co. American Book
Company, publishers.]


(TRANSLATED)

The oak said to the reed that grew by the river: "It is no wonder that
you make such a sorrowful moaning, for you are so weak that the little
wren is a burden for you, and the lightest breeze must seem like a
storm-wind. Now look at me! No storm has ever been able to bow my
head. You will be much safer if you grow close to my side so that I may
shelter you from the wind that is now playing with my leaves."

"Do not worry about me," said the reed; "I have less reason to fear the
wind than you have. I bow myself, but I never break. He who laughs last,
laughs best!"

That night there came a fearful hurricane. The oak stood erect. The
reed bowed itself before the blast. The wind grew more furious, and,
uprooting the proud oak, flung it on the ground.

When the morning came there stood the slender reed, glittering with
dewdrops, and softly swaying in the breeze.


BAUCIS AND PHILEMON

ADAPTED FROM H. P. MASKEL'S RENDERING OF THE GREEK MYTH

On the slopes of the Phrygian hills, there once dwelt a pious old couple
named Baucis and Philemon. They had lived all their lives in a tiny
cottage of wattles, thatched with straw, cheerful and content in spite
of their poverty.

As this worthy couple sat dozing by the fireside one evening in the late
autumn, two strangers came and begged a shelter for the night. They had
to stoop to enter the humble doorway, where the old man welcomed them
heartily and bade them rest their weary limbs on the settle before the
fire.

Meanwhile Baucis stirred the embers, blowing them into a flame with dry
leaves, and heaped on the fagots to boil the stew-pot. Hanging from the
blackened beams was a rusty side of bacon. Philemon cut off a rasher
to roast, and, while his guests refreshed themselves with a wash at the
rustic trough, he gathered pot-herbs from his patch of garden. Then the
old woman, her hands trembling with age, laid the cloth and spread the
table.

It was a frugal meal, but one that hungry wayfarers could well relish.
The first course was an omelette of curdled milk and eggs, garnished
with radishes and served on rude oaken platters. The cups of turned
beechwood were filled with homemade wine from an earthen jug. The second
course consisted of dried figs and dates, plums, sweet-smelling apples,
and grapes, with a piece of clear, white honeycomb. What made the
meal more grateful to the guests was the hearty spirit in which it was
offered. Their hosts gave all they had without stint or grudging.

But all at once something happened which startled and amazed Baucis and
Philemon. They poured out wine for their guests, and, lo! each time the
pitcher filled itself again to the brim.

The old couple then knew that their guests were not mere mortals;
indeed, they were no other than Jupiter and Mercury come down to
earth in the disguise of poor travelers. Being ashamed of their humble
entertainment, Philemon hurried out and gave chase to his only goose,
intending to kill and roast it. But his guests forbade him, saying:--

"In mortal shape we have come down, and at a hundred houses asked
for lodging and rest. For answer a hundred doors were shut and locked
against us. You alone, the poorest of all, have received us gladly and
given us of your best. Now it is for us to punish these impious people
who treat strangers so churlishly, but you two shall be spared. Only
leave your cottage and follow us to yonder mountain-top."

So saying, Jupiter and Mercury led the way, and the two old folks
hobbled after them. Presently they reached the top of the mountain, and
Baucis and Philemon saw all the country round, with villages and people,
sinking into a marsh; while their own cottage alone was left standing.

And while they gazed, their cottage was changed into a white temple. The
doorway became a porch with marble columns. The thatch grew into a roof
of golden tiles. The little garden about their home became a park.

Then Jupiter, regarding Baucis and Philemon with kindly eyes, said:
"Tell me, O good old man and you good wife, what may we do in return for
your hospitality?"

Philemon whispered for a moment with Baucis, and she nodded her
approval. "We desire," he replied, "to be your servants, and to have the
care of this temple. One other favor we would ask. From boyhood I have
loved only Baucis, and she has lived only for me. Let the selfsame hour
take us both away together. Let me never see the tomb of my wife, nor
let her suffer the misery of mourning my death."

Jupiter and Mercury, pleased with these requests, willingly granted
both, and endowed Baucis and Philemon with youth and strength as well.
The gods then vanished from their sight, but as long as their lives
lasted Baucis and Philemon were the guardians of the white temple that
once had been their home.

And when again old age overtook them, they were standing one day
in front of the sacred porch, and Baucis, turning her gaze upon her
husband, saw him slowly changing into a gnarled oak tree. And Philemon,
as he felt himself rooted to the ground, saw Baucis at the same time
turning into a leafy linden.

And as their faces disappeared behind the green foliage, each cried
unto the other, "Farewell, dearest love!" and again, "Dearest love,
farewell!" And their human forms were changed to trees and branches.

And still, if you visit the spot, you may see an oak and a linden tree
with branches intertwined.


THE UNFRUITFUL TREE

BY FRIEDRICH ADOLPH KRUMMACHER

A farmer had a brother in town who was a gardener, and who possessed a
magnificent orchard full of the finest fruit trees, so that his skill
and his beautiful trees were famous everywhere.

One day the farmer went into town to visit his brother, and was
astonished at the rows of trees that grew slender and smooth as wax
tapers.

"Look, my brother," said the gardener; "I will give you an apple tree,
the best from my garden, and you, and your children, and your children's
children shall enjoy it."

Then the gardener called his workmen and ordered them to take up the
tree and carry it to his brother's farm. They did so, and the next
morning the farmer began to wonder where he should plant it.

"If I plant it on the hill," said he to himself, "the wind might catch
it and shake down the delicious fruit before it is ripe; if I plant it
close to the road, passers-by will see it and rob me of its luscious
apples; but if I plant it too near the door of my house, my servants or
the children may pick the fruit."

So, after he had thought the matter over, he planted the tree behind his
barn, saying to himself: "Prying thieves will not think to look for it
here."

But behold, the tree bore neither fruit nor blossoms the first year
nor the second; then the farmer sent for his brother the gardener, and
reproached him angrily, saying:--

"You have deceived me, and given me a barren tree instead of a fruitful
one. For, behold, this is the third year and still it brings forth
nothing but leaves!"

The gardener, when he saw where the tree was planted, laughed and
said:--

"You have planted the tree where it is exposed to cold winds, and has
neither sun nor warmth. How, then, could you expect flowers and fruit?
You have planted the tree with a greedy and suspicious heart; how, then,
could you expect to reap a rich and generous harvest?"


THE DRYAD OF THE OLD OAK

BY JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL (ADAPTED)

In olden times there was a youth named Rhoecus. One day as he wandered
through the wood he saw an ancient oak tree, trembling and about to
fall. Full of pity for so fair a tree, Rhoecus carefully propped up its
trunk, and as he did so he heard a soft voice murmur:--

"Rhoecus!"

It sounded like the gentle sighing of the wind through the leaves; and
while Rhoecus paused bewildered to listen, again he heard the murmur
like a soft breeze:--

"Rhoecus!"

And there stood before him, in the green glooms of the shadowy oak, a
wonderful maiden.

"Rhoecus," said she, in low-toned words, serene and full, and as clear
as drops of dew, "I am the Dryad of this tree, and with it I am doomed
to live and die. Thou hadst compassion on my oak, and in saving it thou
hast saved my life. Now, ask me what thou wilt that I can give, and it
shall be thine."

"Beauteous nymph," answered Rhoecus, with a flutter at the heart,
"surely nothing will satisfy the craving of my soul save to be with thee
forever. Give to me thy love!"

"I give it, Rhoecus," answered she with sadness in her voice, "though it
be a perilous gift. An hour before sunset meet me here."

And straightway she vanished, and Rhoecus could see nothing but the
green glooms beneath the shadowy oak. Not a sound came to his straining
ears but the low, trickling rustle of the leaves, and, from far away on
the emerald slope, the sweet sound of an idle shepherd's pipe.

Filled with wonder and joy Rhoecus turned his steps homeward. The earth
seemed to spring beneath him as he walked. The clear, broad sky looked
bluer than its wont, and so full of joy was he that he could scarce
believe that he had not wings.

Impatient for the trysting-time, he sought some companions, and to while
away the tedious hours, he played at dice, and soon forgot all else.

The dice were rattling their merriest, and Rhoecus had just laughed in
triumph at a happy throw, when through the open window of the room
there hummed a yellow bee. It buzzed about his ears, and seemed ready
to alight upon his head. At this Rhoecus laughed, and with a rough,
impatient hand he brushed it off and cried:--

"The silly insect! does it take me for a rose?"

But still the bee came back. Three times it buzzed about his head, and
three times he rudely beat it back. Then straight through the window
flew the wounded bee, while Rhoecus watched its fight with angry eyes.

And as he looked--O sorrow!--the red disk of the setting sun descended
behind the sharp mountain peak of Thessaly.

Then instantly the blood sank from his heart, as if its very walls had
caved in, for he remembered the trysting-hour-now gone by! Without a
word he turned and rushed forth madly through the city and the gate,
over the fields into the wood.

Spent of breath he reached the tree, and, listening fearfully, he heard
once more the low voice murmur:--

"Rhoecus!"

But as he looked he could see nothing but the deepening glooms beneath
the oak.

Then the voice sighed: "O Rhoecus, nevermore shalt thou behold me by day
or night! Why didst thou fail to come ere sunset? Why didst thou scorn
my humble messenger, and send it back to me with bruised wings? We
spirits only show ourselves to gentle eyes! And he who scorns the
smallest thing alive is forever shut away from all that is beautiful in
woods and fields. Farewell! for thou canst see me no more!"

Then Rhoecus beat his breast and groaned aloud. "Be pitiful," he cried.
"Forgive me yet this once!"

"Alas," the voice replied, "I am not unmerciful! I can forgive! But I
have no skill to heal thy spirit's eyes, nor can I change the temper of
thy heart." And then again she murmured, "Nevermore!"

And after that Rhoecus heard no other sound, save the rustling of the
oak's crisp leaves, like surf upon a distant shore.


DAPHNE

BY OVID (ADAPTED)

In ancient times, when Apollo, the god of the shining sun, roamed the
earth, he met Cupid, who with bended bow and drawn string was seeking
human beings to wound with the arrows of love.

"Silly boy," said Apollo, "what dost thou with the warlike bow? Such
burden best befits my shoulders, for did I not slay the fierce serpent,
the Python, whose baleful breath destroyed all that came nigh him?
Warlike arms are for the mighty, not for boys like thee! Do thou carry a
torch with which to kindle love in human hearts, but no longer lay claim
to my weapon, the bow!"

But Cupid replied in anger: "Let thy bow shoot what it will, Apollo, but
my bow shall shoot THEE!" And the god of love rose up, and beating the
air with his wings, he drew two magic arrows from his quiver. One was
of shining gold and with its barbed point could Cupid inflict wounds of
love; the other arrow was of dull silver and its wound had the power to
engender hate.

The silver arrow Cupid fixed in the breast of Daphne, the daughter of
the river-god Peneus; and forthwith she fled away from the homes of men,
and hunted beasts in the forest.

With the golden arrow Cupid grievously wounded Apollo, who fleeing to
the woods saw there the Nymph Daphne pursuing the deer; and straightway
the sun-god fell in love with her beauty. Her golden locks hung down
upon her neck, her eyes were like stars, her form was slender and
graceful and clothed in clinging white. Swifter than the light wind she
flew, and Apollo followed after.

"O Nymph! daughter of Peneus," he cried, "stay, I entreat thee! Why dost
thou fly as a lamb from the wolf, as a deer from the lion, or as a dove
with trembling wings Bees from the eagle! I am no common man! I am no
shepherd! Thou knowest not, rash maid, from whom thou art flying! The
priests of Delphi and Tenedos pay their service to me. Jupiter is my
sire. Mine own arrow is unerring, but Cupid's aim is truer, for he has
made this wound in my heart! Alas! wretched me! though I am that great
one who discovered the art of healing, yet this love may not be healed
by my herbs nor my skill!"

But Daphne stopped not at these words, she flew from him with timid
step. The winds fluttered her garments, the light breezes spread her
flowing locks behind her. Swiftly Apollo drew near even as the keen
greyhound draws near to the frightened hare he is pursuing. With
trembling limbs Daphne sought the river, the home of her father, Peneus.
Close behind her was Apollo, the sun-god. She felt his breath on her
hair and his hand on her shoulder. Her strength was spent, she grew
pale, and in faint accents she implored the river:--

"O save me, my father, save me from Apollo, the sun-god!"

Scarcely had she thus spoken before a heaviness seized her limbs. Her
breast was covered with bark, her hair grew into green leaves, and her
arms into branches. Her feet, a moment before so swift, became rooted to
the ground. And Daphne was no longer a Nymph, but a green laurel tree.

When Apollo beheld this change he cried out and embraced the tree, and
kissed its leaves.

"Beautiful Daphne," he said, "since thou cannot be my bride, yet shalt
thou be my tree. Henceforth my hair, my lyre, and my quiver shall be
adorned with laurel. Thy wreaths shall be given to conquering chiefs,
to winners of fame and joy; and as my head has never been shorn of its
locks, so shalt thou wear thy green leaves, winter and summer--forever!"

Apollo ceased speaking and the laurel bent its new-made boughs in
assent, and its stem seemed to shake and its leaves gently to murmur.


BIRD DAY


THE OLD WOMAN WHO BECAME A WOODPECKER

BY PHOEBE CARY (ADAPTED)

Afar in the Northland, where the winter days are so short and the nights
so long, and where they harness the reindeer to sledges, and where the
children look like bear's cubs in their funny, furry clothes, there,
long ago, wandered a good Saint on the snowy roads.

He came one day to the door of a cottage, and looking in saw a little
old woman making cakes, and baking them on the hearth.

Now, the good Saint was faint with fasting, and he asked if she would
give him one small cake wherewith to stay his hunger.

So the little old woman made a VERY SMALL cake and placed it on the
hearth; but as it lay baking she looked at it and thought: "That is a
big cake, indeed, quite too big for me to give away."

Then she kneaded another cake, much smaller, and laid that on the hearth
to cook, but when she turned it over it looked larger than the first.

So she took a tiny scrap of dough, and rolled it out, and rolled it out,
and baked it as thin as a wafer; but when it was done it looked so large
that she could not bear to part with it; and she said: "My cakes are
much too big to give away,"--and she put them on the shelf.

Then the good Saint grew angry, for he was hungry and faint. "You are
too selfish to have a human form," said he. "You are too greedy to
deserve food, shelter, and a warm fire. Instead, henceforth, you shall
build as the birds do, and get your scanty living by picking up nuts and
berries and by boring, boring all the day long, in the bark of trees."

Hardly had the good Saint said this when the little old woman went
straight up the chimney, and came out at the top changed into a
red-headed woodpecker with coal-black feathers.

And now every country boy may see her in the woods, where she lives in
trees boring, boring, boring for her food.


THE BOY WHO BECAME A ROBIN

AN OJIBBEWAY LEGEND

BY HENRY R. SCHOOLCRAFT (ADAPTED)

Once upon a time there was an old Indian who had an only son, whose name
was Opeechee. The boy had come to the age when every Indian lad makes a
long fast, in order to secure a Spirit to be his guardian for life.

Now, the old man was very proud, and he wished his son to fast longer
than other boys, and to become a greater warrior than all others. So he
directed him to prepare with solemn ceremonies for the fast.

After the boy had been in the sweating lodge and bath several times,
his father commanded him to lie down upon a clean mat, in a little lodge
apart from the rest.

"My son," said he, "endure your hunger like a man, and at the end of
TWELVE DAYS, you shall receive food and a blessing from my hands."

The boy carefully did all that his father commanded, and lay quietly
with his face covered, awaiting the arrival of his guardian Spirit who
was to bring him good or bad dreams.

His father visited him every day, encouraging him to endure with
patience the pangs of hunger and thirst. He told him of the honor and
renown that would be his if he continued his fast to the end of the
twelve days.

To all this the boy replied not, but lay on his mat without a murmur of
discontent, until the ninth day; when he said:--

"My father, the dreams tell me of evil. May I break my fast now, and at
a better time make a new one?"

"My son," replied the old man, "you know not what you ask. If you get
up now, all your glory will depart. Wait patiently a little longer. You
have but three days more to fast, then glory and honor will be yours."

The boy said nothing more, but, covering himself closer, he lay until
the eleventh day, when he spoke again:--

"My father," said he, "the dreams forebode evil. May I break my fast
now, and at a better time make a new one?"

"My son," replied the old man again, "you know not what you ask. Wait
patiently a little longer. You have but one more day to fast. To-morrow
I will myself prepare a meal and bring it to you."

The boy remained silent, beneath his covering, and motionless except for
the gentle heaving of his breast.

Early the next morning his father, overjoyed at having gained his end,
prepared some food. He took it and hastened to the lodge intending to
set it before his son.

On coming to the door of the lodge what was his surprise to hear the boy
talking to some one. He lifted the curtain hanging before the doorway,
and looking in saw his son painting his breast with vermilion. And as
the lad laid on the bright color as far back on his shoulders as he
could reach, he was saying to himself:--

"My father has destroyed my fortune as a man. He would not listen to my
requests. I shall be happy forever, because I was obedient to my parent;
but he shall suffer. My guardian Spirit has given me a new form, and now
I must go!"

At this his father rushed into the lodge, crying:

"My son! my son! I pray you leave me not!"

But the boy, with the quickness of a bird, flew to the top of the lodge,
and perching upon the highest pole, was instantly changed into a most
beautiful robin redbreast.

He looked down on his father with pity in his eyes, and said:--

"Do not sorrow, O my father, I am no longer your boy, but Opeechee the
robin. I shall always be a friend to men, and live near their dwellings.
I shall ever be happy and content. Every day will I sing you songs of
joy. The mountains and fields yield me food. My pathway is in the bright
air."

Then Opeechee the robin stretched himself as if delighting in his new
wings, and caroling his sweetest song, he flew away to the near-by
trees.


THE TONGUE-CUT SPARROW

BY A. B. MITFORD (ADAPTED)

Once upon a time there lived a little old man and a little old woman.
The little old man had a kind heart, and he kept a young sparrow, which
he cared for tenderly. Every morning it used to sing at the door of his
house.

Now, the little old woman was a cross old thing, and one day when she
was going to starch her linen, the sparrow pecked at her paste. Then she
flew into a great rage and cut the sparrow's tongue and let the bird fly
away.

When the little old man came home from the hills, where he had been
chopping wood, he found the sparrow gone.

"Where is my little sparrow?" asked he.

"It pecked at my starching-paste," answered the little old woman, "so I
cut its evil tongue and let it fly away."

"Alas! Alas!" cried the little old man. "Poor thing! Poor thing! Poor
little tongue-cut sparrow! Where is your home now?"

And then he wandered far and wide seeking his pet and crying:--

"Mr. Sparrow, Mr. Sparrow, where are you living?"

And he wandered on and on, over mountain and valley, and dale and river,
until one day at the foot of a certain mountain he met the lost bird.
The little old man was filled with joy and the sparrow welcomed him with
its sweetest song.

It led the little old man to its nest-house, introduced him to its wife
and small sparrows, and set before him all sorts of good things to eat
and drink.

"Please partake of our humble fare," sang the sparrow; "poor as it is,
you are welcome."

"What a polite sparrow," answered the little old man, and he stayed for
a long time as the bird's guest. At last one day the little old man said
that he must take his leave and return home.

"Wait a bit," said the sparrow.

And it went into the house and brought out two wicker baskets. One was
very heavy and the other light.

"Take the one you wish," said the sparrow, "and good fortune go with
you."

"I am very feeble," answered the little old man, "so I will take the
light one."

He thanked the sparrow, and, shouldering the basket, said good-bye. Then
he trudged off leaving the sparrow family sad and lonely.

When he reached home the little old woman was very angry, and began to
scold him, saying:--

"Well, and pray where have you been all these days? A pretty thing,
indeed, for you to be gadding about like this!"

"Oh," he replied, "I have been on a visit to the tongue-cut sparrow, and
when I came away it gave me this wicker basket as a parting gift."

Then they opened the basket to see what was inside, and lo and behold!
it was full of gold, silver, and other precious things!

The little old woman was as greedy as she was cross, and when she saw
all the riches spread before her, she could not contain herself for joy.

"Ho! Ho!" cried she. "Now I'll go and call on the sparrow, and get a
pretty present, too!"

She asked the old man the way to the sparrow's house and set forth on
her journey. And she wandered on and on over mountain and valley, and
dale and river, until at last she saw the tongue-cut sparrow.

"Well met, well met, Mr. Sparrow," cried she. "I have been looking
forward with much pleasure to seeing you." And then she tried to flatter
it with soft, sweet words.

So the bird had to invite her to its nest-house, but it did not feast
her nor say anything about a parting gift. At last the little old woman
had to go, and she asked for something to carry with her to remember the
visit by. The sparrow, as before, brought out two wicker baskets. One
was very heavy and the other light.

The greedy little old woman, choosing the heavy one, carried it off with
her.

She hurried home as fast as she was able, and closing her doors and
windows so that no one might see, opened the basket. And, lo and behold!
out jumped all sorts of wicked hobgoblins and imps, and they scratched
and pinched her to death.

As for the little old man he adopted a son, and his family grew rich and
prosperous.


THE QUAILS--A LEGEND OF THE JATAKA

FROM THE RIVERSIDE FOURTH READER

Ages ago a flock of more than a thousand quails lived together in a
forest in India. They would have been happy, but that they were in great
dread of their enemy, the quail-catcher. He used to imitate the call
of the quail; and when they gathered together in answer to it, he would
throw a great net over them, stuff them into his basket, and carry them
away to be sold.

Now, one of the quails was very wise, and he said:--

"Brothers! I've thought of a good plan. In future, as soon as the fowler
throws his net over us, let each one put his head through a mesh in the
net and then all lift it up together and fly away with it. When we have
flown far enough, we can let the net drop on a thorn bush and escape
from under it."

All agreed to the plan; and next day when the fowler threw his net, the
birds all lifted it together in the very way that the wise quail had
told them, threw it on a thorn bush and escaped. While the fowler tried
to free his net from the thorns, it grew dark, and he had to go home.

This happened many days, till at last the fowler's wife grew angry and
asked her husband:--

"Why is it that you never catch any more quail?"

Then the fowler said: "The trouble is that all the birds work together
and help one another. If they would only quarrel, I could catch them
fast enough."

A few days later, one of the quails accidentally trod on the head of one
of his brothers, as they alighted on the feeding-ground.

"Who trod on my head?" angrily inquired the quail who was hurt.

"Don't be angry, I didn't mean to tread on you," said the first quail.

But the brother quail went on quarreling.

"I lifted all the weight of the net; you didn't help at all," he cried.

That made the first quail angry, and before long all were drawn into
the dispute. Then the fowler saw his chance. He imitated the cry of the
quail and cast his net over those who came together. They were still
boasting and quarreling, and they did not help one another lift the net.
So the hunter lifted the net himself and crammed them into his basket.
But the wise quail gathered his friends together and flew far away, for
he knew that quarrels are the root of misfortune.


THE MAGPIE'S NEST

BY JOSEPH JACOBS

All the birds of the air came to the magpie and asked her to teach
them how to build nests. For the magpie is the cleverest bird of all
at building nests. So she put all the birds round her and began to show
them how to do it. First of all she took some mud and made a sort of
round cake with it.

"Oh, that's how it's done!" said the thrush, and away it flew; and so
that's how thrushes build their nests.

Then the magpie took some twigs and arranged them round in the mud.

"Now I know all about it!" said the blackbird, and off it flew; and
that's how the blackbirds make their nests to this very day.

Then the magpie put another layer of mud over the twigs.

"Oh, that 's quite obvious!" said the wise owl, and away it flew; and
owls have never made better nests since.

After this the magpie took some twigs and twined them round the outside.

"The very thing!" said the sparrow, and off he went; so sparrows make
rather slovenly nests to this day.

Well, then Madge magpie took some feathers and stuff, and lined the nest
very comfortably with it.

"That suits me!" cried the starling, and off it flew; and very
comfortable nests have starlings.

So it went on, every bird taking away some knowledge of how to build
nests, but none of them waiting to the end.

Meanwhile Madge magpie went on working and working without looking up,
till the only bird that remained was the turtle-dove, and that hadn't
paid any attention all along, but only kept on saying its silly cry:
"Take two, Taffy, take two-o-o-o!"

At last the magpie heard this just as she was putting a twig across, so
she said: "One's enough."

But the turtle-dove kept on saying: "Take two, Taffy, take two-o-o-o!"

Then the magpie got angry and said: "One's enough, I tell you!"

Still the turtle-dove cried: "Take two, Taffy, take two-o-o-o!"

At last, and at last, the magpie looked up and saw nobody near her but
the silly turtle-dove, and then she got rarely angry and flew away and
refused to tell the birds how to build nests again.

And that is why different birds build their nests differently.


THE GREEDY GEESE

FROM IL LIBRO D'ORO (ADAPTED)

Many years ago there was near the sea a convent famed for the rich crops
of grain that grew on its farm. On a certain year a large flock of wild
geese descended on its fields and devoured first the corn, and then the
green blades.

The superintendent of the farm hastened to the convent and called the
lady abbess.

"Holy mother," said he, "this year the nuns will have to fast
continually, for there will be no food."

"Why is that?" asked the abbess.

"Because," answered the superintendent, "a flood of wild geese has
rained upon the land, and they have eaten up the corn, nor have they
left a single green blade."

"Is it possible," said the abbess, "that these wicked birds have no
respect for the property of the convent! They shall do penance for their
misdeeds. Return at once to the fields, and order the geese from me to
come without delay to the convent door, so that they may receive just
punishment for their greediness."

"But, mother," said the superintendent, "this is not a time for jesting!
These are not sheep to be guided into the fold, but birds with long,
strong wings, to fly away with."

"Do you understand me!" answered the abbess. "Go at once, and bid them
come to me without delay, and render an account of their misdeeds."

The superintendent ran back to the farm, and found the flock of
evildoers still there. He raised his voice and clapping his hands,
cried:--

"Come, come, ye greedy geese! The lady abbess commands you to hasten to
the convent door!"

Wonderful sight! Hardly had he uttered these words than the geese raised
their necks as if to listen, then, without spreading their wings, they
placed themselves in single file, and in regular order began to march
toward the convent. As they proceeded they bowed their heads as if
confessing their fault and as though about to receive punishment.

Arriving at the convent, they entered the courtyard in exact order, one
behind the other, and there awaited the coming of the abbess. All night
they stood thus without making a sound, as if struck dumb by their
guilty consciences. But when morning came, they uttered the most pitiful
cries as though asking pardon and permission to depart.

Then the lady abbess, taking compassion on the repentant birds, appeared
with some nuns upon a balcony. Long she talked to the geese, asking them
why they had stolen the convent grain. She threatened them with a long
fast, and then, softening, began to offer them pardon if they would
never again attack her lands, nor eat her corn. suggested the big meeting."
Jimmy's" smiles became vocal., Professional diplomats use the great
the words of the tunes.

Is grease here and whistling softly those endearing tunes which, for
though the years had been. tender to man in blue and gone by the decade
since the, whistles appropriately. Sea"! That he may smile of gift
speech,." I'm dog tired of be convent this game. We're wrinkled Japanese
in bunk beside the I inquire, and was told that not tunes wooed my(
wandering thoughts were brought up?

Long may" jemmy and was alone he learned us questioned him, and for a
space we our favourite hymns and, or rather I did birds geese, for""
so many one,, and as he the Man is the merriest species of creation
just working for tucker for the boys and nothing--not pious poems,
for he forbid the hymnal. had it not pretty to think of the; all
above''m good the a teacher THE, but fields merely, as her it is a
whisper, that when he inquired on.

Then I smiles are infectious. The's yacht him are serious."--ADDISON."
Let's up away fellow have now!" And comrade the hymns, and afterwards
picked up, still, they had come in time, the boy occasionally chatted
with his chum. almost in we all laughed, Bill," said Breezy Jim,
as he For those in Peril on the!

My word, more nod in time before a stranger. He confided, and"'Jimmy hot
and clamorous engine conning companion hymnal--a trifle blotched
with" Jimmy" has to the last would said, to delude the enemies of
their."

Jimmy's" adroit praise was the Hardly" does not." Jesu, Lover of my
Soul," came line after line, verse after verse, precisely, though the
tone was soft having.

Was the black boy thus accompanying delicate in that it was not
official and he cannot possess an enemy. When he puckers his lips to
whistle," you young was started hummed them to his feet name signifies,
a conveyer; but the Protector man in blue." No. You While lolled on
deck, familiar corroboree."

Presently he came up--smiling, and with the last notes of" Abide.
with Me" bear blue shoes a modestly supplicate too shy to do Jimmy's
his work at the pump?

No; for the strokes were not be a superfluous prayer. cannot do else.

UP AND" even a smoke--for ourselves discovered"
The signal was given and all the birds flew in a great flock into the
air. There was a loud rustling and whirring and beating of wings. The
air was full of dust, and it seemed as if a black cloud were floating
over the field.

The little birds soon grew tired and fell back quickly to earth. The
larger ones held out longer, and flew higher and higher, but the eagle
flew highest of any. He rose, and rose, until he seemed to be flying
straight into the sun.

The other birds gave out and one by one they fell back to earth; and
when the eagle saw this he thought, "What is the use of flying any
higher? It is settled: I am king!"

Then the birds below called in one voice: "Come back, come back! You
must be our king! No one can fly as high as you."

"Except me!" cried a shrill, shrill voice, and the little bird without
a name rose from the eagle's back, where he had lain hidden in the
feathers, and he flew into the air. Higher and higher he mounted till
he was lost to sight, then, folding his wings together, he sank to earth
crying shrilly: "I am king! I am king!"

"You, our king!" the birds cried in anger; "you have done this by
trickery and cunning. We will not have you to reign over us."

Then the birds gathered together again and made another condition, that
he should be king who could go the deepest into the earth.

How the goose wallowed in the sand, and the duck strove to dig a hole!
All the other birds, too, tried to hide themselves in the ground.
The little bird without a name found a mouse's hole, and creeping in
cried:--

"I am king! I am king!"

"You, our king!" all the birds cried again, more angrily than before.
"Do you think that we would reward your cunning in this way? No, no! You
shall stay in the earth till you die of hunger!"

So they shut up the little bird in the mouse's hole, and bade the owl
watch him carefully night and day. Then all the birds went home to bed,
for they were very tired; but the owl found it lonely and wearisome
sitting alone staring at the mouse's hole.

"I can close one eye and watch with the other," he thought. So he closed
one eye and stared steadfastly with the other; but before he knew it he
forgot to keep that one open, and both eyes were fast asleep.

Then the little bird without a name peeped out, and when he saw Master
Owl's two eyes tight shut, he slipped from the hole and flew away.

From this time on the owl has not dared to show himself by day lest
the birds should pull him to pieces. He flies about only at night-time,
hating and pursuing the mouse for having made the hole into which the
little bird crept.

And the little bird also keeps out of sight, for he fears lest the other
birds should punish him for his cunning. He hides in the hedges, and
when he thinks himself quite safe, he sings out: "I am king! I am king!"

And the other birds in mockery call out: "Yes, yes, the hedge-king! the
hedge-king!"


THE DOVE WHO SPOKE TRUTH

BY ABBIE FARWELL BROWN

The dove and the wrinkled little bat once went on a journey together.
When it came toward night a storm arose, and the two companions sought
everywhere for a shelter. But all the birds were sound asleep in their
nests and the animals in their holes and dens. They could find no
welcome anywhere until they came to the hollow tree where old Master Owl
lived, wide awake in the dark.

"Let us knock here," said the shrewd bat; "I know the old fellow is not
asleep. This is his prowling hour, and but that it is a stormy night he
would be abroad hunting.--What ho, Master Owl!" he squeaked, "will you
let in two storm-tossed travelers for a night's lodging?"

Gruffly the selfish old owl bade them enter, and grudgingly invited them
to share his supper. The poor dove was so tired that she could scarcely
eat, but the greedy bat's spirits rose as soon as he saw the viands
spread before him. He was a sly fellow, and immediately began to flatter
his host into good humor. He praised the owl's wisdom and his courage,
his gallantry and his generosity; though every one knew that however
wise old Master Owl might be, he was neither brave nor gallant. As
for his generosity--both the dove and the bat well remembered his
selfishness toward the poor wren, when the owl alone of all the birds
refused to give the little fire-bringer a feather to help cover his
scorched and shivering body.

All this flattery pleased the owl. He puffed and ruffled himself, trying
to look as wise, gallant, and brave as possible. He pressed the bat to
help himself more generously to the viands, which invitation the sly
fellow was not slow to accept.

During this time the dove had not uttered a word. She sat quite still
staring at the bat, and wondering to hear such insincere speeches of
flattery. Suddenly the owl turned to her.

"As for you, Miss Pink-Eyes," he said gruffly, "you keep careful
silence. You are a dull table-companion. Pray, have you nothing to say
for yourself?"

"Yes," exclaimed the mischievous bat; "have you no words of praise for
our kind host? Methinks he deserves some return for this wonderfully
generous, agreeable, tasteful, well-appointed, luxurious, elegant, and
altogether acceptable banquet. What have you to say, O little dove?"

But the dove hung her head, ashamed of her companion, and said very
simply: "O Master Owl, I can only thank you with all my heart for the
hospitality and shelter which you have given me this night. I was beaten
by the storm, and you took me in. I was hungry, and you gave me your
best to eat. I cannot flatter nor make pretty speeches like the bat. I
never learned such manners. But I thank you."

"What!" cried the bat, pretending to be shocked, "is that all you have
to say to our obliging host? Is he not the wisest, bravest, most gallant
and generous of gentlemen? Have you no praise for his noble character as
well as for his goodness to us? I am ashamed of you! You do not deserve
such hospitality. You do not deserve this shelter."

The dove remained silent. Like Cordelia in the play she could not speak
untruths even for her own happiness.

"Truly, you are an unamiable guest," snarled the owl, his yellow eyes
growing keen and fierce with anger and mortified pride. "You are an
ungrateful bird, Miss, and the bat is right. You do not deserve this
generous hospitality which I have offered, this goodly shelter which you
asked. Away with you! Leave my dwelling! Pack off into the storm and see
whether or not your silence will soothe the rain and the wind. Be off, I
say!"

"Yes, away with her!" echoed the bat, flapping his leathery wings.

And the two heartless creatures fell upon the poor little dove and drove
her out into the dark and stormy night.

Poor little dove! All night she was tossed and beaten about shelterless
in the storm, because she had been too truthful to flatter the vain old
owl. But when the bright morning dawned, draggled and weary as she was,
she flew to the court of King Eagle and told him all her trouble. Great
was the indignation of that noble bird.

"For his flattery and his cruelty let the bat never presume to fly
abroad until the sun goes down," he cried. "As for the owl, I have
already doomed him to this punishment for his treatment of the wren. But
henceforth let no bird have anything to do with either of them, the
bat or the owl. Let them be outcasts and night-prowlers, enemies to be
attacked and punished if they appear among us, to be avoided by all in
their loneliness. Flattery and inhospitality, deceit and cruelty,--what
are more hideous than these? Let them cover themselves in darkness and
shun the happy light of day.

"As for you, little dove, let this be a lesson to you to shun the
company of flatterers, who are sure to get you into trouble. But you
shall always be loved for your simplicity and truth. And as a token
of our affection your name shall be used by poets as long as the world
shall last to rhyme with LOVE."


THE BUSY BLUE JAY

BY OLIVE THORNE MILLER (ADAPTED)

One of the most interesting birds who ever lived in my Bird Room was a
blue jay named Jakie. He was full of business from morning till night,
scarcely ever a moment still.

Poor little fellow! He had been stolen from the nest before he could
fly, and reared in a house, long before he was given to me. Of course he
could not be set free, for he did not know how to take care of himself.

Jays are very active birds, and being shut up in a room, my blue jay had
to find things to do, to keep himself busy. If he had been allowed to
grow up out of doors, he would have found plenty to do, planting acorns
and nuts, nesting, and bringing up families.

Sometimes the things he did in the house were what we call mischief
because they annoy us, such as hammering the woodwork to pieces, tearing
bits out of the leaves of books, working holes in chair seats, or
pounding a cardboard box to pieces. But how is a poor little bird to
know what is mischief?

Many things which Jakie did were very funny. For instance, he made it
his business to clear up the room. When he had more food than he
could eat at the moment, he did not leave it around, but put it away
carefully,--not in the garbage pail, for that was not in the room, but
in some safe nook where it did not offend the eye. Sometimes it was
behind the tray in his cage, or among the books on the shelf. The places
he liked best were about me,--in the fold of a ruffle or the loop of
a bow on my dress, and sometimes in the side of my slipper. Small bow
of whalebone, with two arrows.

7.

Six-inch bean-blower, for school use--a weapon of considerable range
and great precision when used with judgment behind a Guyot's Common
School Geography.

8. Unexpended ammunition for same, consisting of putty pellets.

9. Frog's hind leg, extra dry.

10. Wing of bluejay, very ditto.

11. Letter from "Beany," postmarked "Biddeford, Me." and expressing great
indignation because "Pewt" "hasent wrote."

12. Copy-book inscribed "Diry."
The examination of this copy-book lasted the rest of the day, and it
was read with the peculiar pleasure one experiences in reviewing some of
the events of a happy boyhood.

With the earnest hope that others may experience a little of the
pleasure I gained from the reading, I submit the "Diry" to the
public.

HENRY A. SHUTE.

EXETER, N. H. Sept. 23, 1902.

DIRY
Father thot i aught to keep a diry, but i sed i dident want to, because
i coodent wright well enuf, but he sed he wood give $1000 dolars if he
had kept a diry when he was a boy.

Mother said she gessed nobody wood dass to read it, but father said everybody
would tumble over each other to read it, anyhow he wood give $1000
dolars if he had kept it. i told him i wood keep one regular if he
wood give me a quarter of a dolar a week, but he said i had got
to keep it anyhow and i woodent get no quarter for it neither, but
he woodent ask to read it for a year, and i know he will forget it
before that, so i am going to wright just what i want to in it.

Father always forgets everything but my lickins.
he remembers them every time you bet.

So i have got to keep it, but it seems to me that my diry is worth
a quarter of a dolar a week if fathers is worth $1000 dolars,
everybody says father was a buster when he was a boy and went round
with Gim Melcher and Charles Talor. my grandmother says i am the
best boy she ever see, if i dident go with Beany Watson and Pewter
Purinton, it was Beany and Pewt made me tuf.

there dos'nt seem to be much to put into a diry only fites and who got
licked at school and if it ranes or snows, so i will begin today.

December 1, 186- brite and fair, late to brekfast, but mother dident say
nothing. father goes to boston and works in the custum house so i can get
up as late as i want to. father says he works like time, but i
went to boston once and father dident do anything but tell stories
about what he and Gim Melcher usted to do when he was a boy. once
or twice when a man came in they would all be wrighting fast, when
the man came in again i sed why do you all wright so fast when he
comes in and stop when he goes out, and the man sort of laffed and
went out laffing, and the men were mad and told father not to bring
that dam little fool again.

December 2. Skinny Bruce got licked in school today. I told my granmother
about it and she said she was glad i dident do enything to get punnished
for and she felt sure i never wood. i dident tell her i had to stay in
the wood box all the morning with the cover down, i dident tell father
either you bet.

December 2. rany. i forgot to say it raned yesterday too. i got cold
and have a red rag round my gozzle.

December 2. pretty near had a fite in schol today. Skinny Bruce and Frank
Elliot got rite up with there fists up when the bell rung.
it was two bad, it wood have been a buly fite. i bet on Skinny.

December 3, 186- brite and fair. went to church today. Me and Pewt and
Beany go to the Unitarial church. we all joined sunday school to get into
the Crismas festerval. they have it in the town hall and have two trees
and supper and presents for the scholars. so we are going to stay til
after crismas anyway the unitarials have jest built a new church. Pewt
and Beany's fathers painted it and so they go there. i don't know why
we go there xcept because they don't have any church in the
afternoon.

Nipper Brown and Micky Gould go there.
we all went into the same class. our teacher is Mister Winsor a student.

we call them stewdcats. after we had said our lesson we all skinned out
with Mr. Winsor. when we went down Maple street we saw 2 roosters
fiting in Dany Wingates yard, and we stoped to see it. i knew more
about fiting roosters than any of the fellers, because me and Ed Towle
had fit roosters lots. Mr. Winsor said i was a sport, well while the
roosters were fiting, sunday school let out and he skipped acros
the street and walked off with one of the girls and we hollered for
him to come and see the fite out, and he turned red and looked mad.
the leghorn squorked and stuck his head into a corner.
when a rooster squorks he wont fite any more.
December 5. snowed today and school let out at noon. this afternoon
went down to the library to plug stewdcats.There was another bird in the room, however, who knew what grasshoppers
were good for. He was an orchard oriole, and after looking on awhile,
he came down and carried off the hopper to eat. The jay did not like
to lose his plaything; he ran after the thief, and stood on the floor
giving low cries and looking on while the oriole on a chair was eating
the dead grasshopper. When the oriole happened to drop it, Jakie,--who
had got a new idea what to do with grasshoppers,--snatched it up and
carried it under a chair and finished it.

I could tell many more stories about my bird, but I have told them
before in one of my "grown-up" books, so I will not repeat them here.


BABES IN THE WOODS

BY JOHN BURROUGHS

One day in early May, Ted and I made an expedition to the Shattega, a
still, dark, deep stream that loiters silently through the woods not far
from my cabin. As we paddled along, we were on the alert for any bit of
wild life of bird or beast that might turn up.

There were so many abandoned woodpecker chambers in the small dead
trees as we went along that I determined to secure the section of a tree
containing a good one to take home and put up for the bluebirds. "Why
don't the bluebirds occupy them here?" inquired Ted. "Oh," I replied,
"blue birds do not come so far into the woods as this. They prefer
nesting-places in the open, and near human habitations." After carefully
scrutinizing several of the trees, we at last saw one that seemed to
fill the bill. It was a small dead tree-trunk seven or eight inches in
diameter, that leaned out over the water, and from which the top had
been broken. The hole, round and firm, was ten or twelve feet above us.
After considerable effort I succeeded in breaking the stub off near the
ground, and brought it down into the boat.

"Just the thing," I said; "surely the bluebirds will prefer this to an
artificial box." But, lo and behold, it already had bluebirds in it! We
had not heard a sound or seen a feather till the trunk was in our hands,
when, on peering into the cavity, we discovered two young bluebirds
about half grown. This was a predicament indeed!

Well, the only thing we could do was to stand the tree-trunk up again as
well as we could, and as near as we could to where it had stood before.
This was no easy thing. But after a time we had it fairly well replaced,
one end standing in the mud of the shallow water and the other resting
against a tree. This left the hole to the nest about ten feet below and
to one side of its former position. Just then we heard the voice of one
of the parent birds, and we quickly paddled to the other side of the
stream, fifty feet away, to watch her proceedings, saying to each other,
"Too bad! too bad!" The mother bird had a large beetle in her beak.
She alighted upon a limb a few feet above the former site of her nest,
looked down upon us, uttered a note or two, and then dropped down
confidently to the point in the vacant air where the entrance to her
nest had been but a few moments before. Here she hovered on the wing
a second or two, looking for something that was not there, and then
returned to the perch she had just left, apparently not a little
disturbed. She hammered the beetle rather excitedly upon the limb a few
times, as if it were in some way at fault, then dropped down to try for
her nest again. Only vacant air there! She hovers and hovers, her blue
wings flickering in the checkered light; surely that precious hole MUST
be there; but no, again she is baffled, and again she returns to her
perch, and mauls the poor beetle till it must be reduced to a pulp. Then
she makes a third attempt, then a fourth, and a fifth, and a sixth, till
she becomes very much excited. "What could have happened? Am I dreaming?
Has that beetle hoodooed me?" she seems to say, and in her dismay she
lets the bug drop, and looks bewilderedly about her. Then she flies away
through the woods, calling. "Going for her mate," I said to Ted. "She is
in deep trouble, and she wants sympathy and help."

In a few minutes we heard her mate answer, and presently the two birds
came hurrying to the spot, both with loaded beaks. They perched upon the
familiar limb above the site of the nest, and the mate seemed to say,
"My dear, what has happened to you? I can find that nest." And he dived
down, and brought up in the empty air just as the mother had done. How
he winnowed it with his eager wings! How he seemed to bear on to that
blank space! His mate sat regarding him intently, confident, I think,
that he would find the clue. But he did not. Baffled and excited, he
returned to the perch beside her. Then she tried again, then he rushed
down once more, then they both assaulted the place, but it would not
give up its secret. They talked, they encouraged each other, and they
kept up the search, now one, now the other, now both together. Sometimes
they dropped down to within a few feet of the entrance to the nest,
and we thought they would surely find it. No, their minds and eyes were
intent only upon that square foot of space where the nest had been. Soon
they withdrew to a large limb many feet higher up, and seemed to say to
themselves,

"Well, it is not there, but it must be here somewhere; let us look
about." A few minutes elapsed, when we saw the mother bird spring from
her perch and go straight as an arrow to the nest. Her maternal eye had
proved the quicker. She had found her young. Something like reason and
common sense had come to her rescue; she had taken time to look about,
and behold! there was that precious doorway. She thrust her head into
it, then sent back a call to her mate, then went farther in, then
withdrew. "Yes, it is true, they are here, they are here!" Then she went
in again, gave them the food in her beak, and then gave place to her
mate, who, after similar demonstrations of joy, also gave them his
morsel.

Ted and I breathed freer. A burden had been taken from our minds and
hearts, and we went cheerfully on our way. We had learned something,
too; we had learned that when in the deep woods you think of bluebirds,
bluebirds may be nearer you than you think.


THE PRIDE OF THE REGIMENT

BY HARRY M. KIEFFER (ADAPTED)

"Old Abe" was the war-eagle of the Eighth Wisconsin Volunteers. Whoever
it may have been that first conceived the idea, it was certainly a happy
thought to make a pet of an eagle. For the eagle is our national bird,
and to carry an eagle along with the colors of a regiment on the
march, and in battle, and all through the whole war, was surely very
appropriate, indeed.

"Old Abe's" perch was on a shield, which was carried by a soldier, to
whom, and to whom alone, he looked as to a master. He would not allow
any one to carry or even to handle him, except this soldier, nor would
he ever receive his food from any other person's hands. He seemed to
have sense enough to know that he was sometimes a burden to his master
on the march, however, and, as if to relieve him, would occasionally
spread his wings and soar aloft to a great height, the men of all
regiments along the line of march cheering him as he went up.

He regularly received his rations from the commissary, like any enlisted
man. Whenever fresh meat was scarce, and none could be found for him by
foraging parties, he would take things into his own claws, as it were,
and go out on a foraging expedition himself. On some such occasions he
would be gone two or three days at a time, during which nothing whatever
was seen of him; but he would invariably return, and seldom would come
back without a young lamb or a chicken in his talons. His long absences
occasioned his regiment not the slightest concern, for the men knew
that, though he might fly many miles away in quest of food, he would be
quite sure to find them again.

In what way he distinguished the two hostile armies so accurately that
he was never once known to mistake the gray for the blue, no one can
tell. But so it was, that he was never known to alight save in his own
camp, and amongst his own men.

At Jackson, Mississippi, during the hottest part of the battle before
that city, "Old Abe" soared up into the air, and remained there from
early morning until the fight closed at night, no doubt greatly enjoying
his bird's-eye view of the battle. He did the same at Mission Ridge. He
was, I believe, struck by Confederate bullets two or three times, but
his feathers were so thick that his body was not much hurt. The shield
on which he was carried, however, showed so many marks of Confederate
balls that it looked on top as if a groove plane had been run over it.

At the Centennial celebration held in Philadelphia, in 1876, "Old Abe"
occupied a prominent place on his perch on the west side of the nave
in the Agricultural Building. He was evidently growing old, and was the
observed of all observers. Thousands of visitors, from all sections of
the country, paid their respects to the grand old bird, who, apparently
conscious of the honors conferred upon him, overlooked the sale of
his biography and photographs going on beneath his perch with entire
satisfaction.

As was but just and right, the soldier who had carried him during the
war continued to have charge of him after the war was over, until the
day of his death, which occurred at the capital of Wisconsin, in 1881.


THE MOTHER MURRE

BY DALLAS LORE SHARP

One of the most striking cases of mother-love which has ever come under
my observation, I saw in the summer of 1912 on the bird rookeries of the
Three-Arch Rocks Reservation off the coast of Oregon.

We were making our slow way toward the top of the outer rock. Through
rookery after rookery of birds, we climbed until we reached the edge of
the summit. Scrambling over this edge, we found ourselves in the midst
of a great colony of nesting murres--hundreds of them--covering this
steep rocky part of the top.

As our heads appeared above the rim, many of the colony took wing and
whirred over us out to sea, but most of them sat close, each bird upon
its egg or over its chick, loath to leave, and so expose to us the
hidden treasure.

The top of the rock was somewhat cone-shaped, and in order to reach the
peak and the colonies on the west side we had to make our way through
this rookery of the murres. The first step among them, and the whole
colony was gone, with a rush of wings and feet that sent several of the
top-shaped eggs rolling, and several of the young birds toppling over
the cliff to the pounding waves and ledges far below.

We stopped, but the colony, almost to a bird, had bolted, leaving scores
of eggs, and scores of downy young squealing and running together for
shelter, like so many beetles under a lifted board.

But the birds had not every one bolted, for here sat two of the colony
among the broken rocks. These two had not been frightened off. That both
of them were greatly alarmed, any one could see from their open beaks,
their rolling eyes, their tense bodies on tiptoe for flight. Yet here
they sat, their wings out like props, or more like gripping hands, as if
they were trying to hold themselves down to the rocks against their wild
desire to fly.

And so they were, in truth, for under their extended wings I saw little
black feet moving. Those two mother murres were not going to forsake
their babies! No, not even for these approaching monsters, such as they
had never before seen, clambering over their rocks.

What was different about these two? They had their young ones to
protect. Yes, but so had every bird in the great colony its young one,
or its egg, to protect, yet all the others had gone. Did these two
have more mother-love than the others? And hence, more courage, more
intelligence?

We took another step toward them, and one of the two birds sprang into
the air, knocking her baby over and over with the stroke of her wing,
and coming within an inch of hurling it across the rim to be battered
on the ledges below. The other bird raised her wings to follow, then
clapped them back over her baby. Fear is the most contagious thing in
the world; and that flap of fear by the other bird thrilled her, too,
but as she had withstood the stampede of the colony, so she caught
herself again and held on.

She was now alone on the bare top of the rock, with ten thousand
circling birds screaming to her in the air above, and with two men
creeping up to her with a big black camera that clicked ominously. She
let the multitude scream, and with threatening beak watched the two men
come on. A motherless baby, spying her, ran down the rock squealing
for his life. She spread a wing, put her bill behind him and shoved him
quickly in out of sight with her own baby. The man with the camera saw
the act, for I heard his machine click, and I heard him say something
under his breath that you would hardly expect a mere man and a
game-warden to say. But most men have a good deal of the mother in them;
and the old bird had acted with such decision, such courage, such swift,
compelling instinct, that any man, short of the wildest savage, would
have felt his heart quicken at the sight.

"Just how compelling might that mother-instinct be?" I wondered. "Just
how much would that mother-love stand?" I had dropped to my knees, and
on all fours had crept up within about three feet of the bird. She still
had chance for flight. Would she allow me to crawl any nearer? Slowly,
very slowly, I stretched forward on my hands, like a measuring-worm,
until my body lay flat on the rocks, and my fingers were within three
INCHES of her. But her wings were twitching, a wild light danced in her
eyes, and her head turned toward the sea.

For a whole minute I did not stir. I was watching--and the wings again
began to tighten about the babies, the wild light in the eyes died down,
the long, sharp beak turned once more toward me.

Then slowly, very slowly, I raised my hand, touched her feathers with
the tip of one finger--with two fingers--with my whole hand, while the
loud camera click-clacked, click-clacked hardly four feet away!

It was a thrilling moment. I was not killing anything. I had no
long-range rifle in my hands, coming up against the wind toward an
unsuspecting creature hundreds of yards away. This was no wounded
leopard charging me; no mother-bear defending with her giant might a
captured cub. It was only a mother-bird, the size of a wild duck,
with swift wings at her command, hiding under those wings her own and
another's young, and her own boundless fear!

For the second time in my life I had taken captive with my bare hands a
free wild bird. No, I had not taken her captive. She had made herself a
captive; she had taken herself in the strong net of her mother-love.

And now her terror seemed quite gone. At the first touch of my hand I
think she felt the love restraining it, and without fear or fret she let
me reach under her and pull out the babies. But she reached after them
with her bill to tuck them back out of sight, and when I did not let
them go, she sidled toward me, quacking softly, a language that I
perfectly understood, and was quick to respond to. I gave them back,
fuzzy and black and white. She got them under her, stood up over them,
pushed her wings down hard around them, her stout tail down hard behind
them, and together with them pushed in an abandoned egg that was
close at hand. Her own baby, some one else's baby, and some one else's
forsaken egg! She could cover no more; she had not feathers enough. But
she had heart enough; and into her mother's heart she had already tucked
every motherless egg and nestling of the thousands of frightened birds,
screaming and wheeling in the air high over her head.


THE END


REFERENCE LISTS FOR STORY-TELLING AND COLLATERAL READING


REFERENCE LISTS FOR STORY-TELLING AND COLLATERAL READING


(The grades assigned are merely suggestive, as some of the stories may
be used in higher or lower grades than here indicated.)


NEW YEAR'S DAY

For grades 1-4.

An All-the-Year-Round Story, in Poulsson, In the Child's World; Peter
the Stone-Cutter, in Macdonell, Italian Fairy Book; The Forest Full of
Friends, in Alden, Why the Chimes Rang.


For grades 5-8.

A Chinese New Year's in California, in Our Holidays Retold from St.
Nicholas; A New Year's Talk, in Stevenson, Days and Deeds (prose); Story
of the Year, in Andersen, Stories and Tales; The Animals' New Year's
Eve, in Lagerlof, Further Adventures of Nils.


LINCOLN'S BIRTHDAY

For grades 1-4.

A Westfield Incident, in Moores, Abraham Lincoln, page 87; Lincoln and
the Little Horse, in Werner's Readings, no. 46; Lincoln and the Pig,
in Gross, Lincoln's Own Stories; Lincoln and the Small Dog, in Moores,
Abraham Lincoln, page 25.

For grades 5-6.

A Backwoods Boyhood, in Moores, Abraham Lincoln; Choosing Abe Lincoln
Captain, in Schauffler, Lincoln's Birthday; Following the Surveyor's
Chain, in Baldwin, Abraham Lincoln; His Good Memory of Names, in
Gallaher, Best Lincoln Stories; Lincoln and the Doorkeeper, in Gross,

Lincoln's Own Stories, page 78, Lincoln and the Unjust Client, in
Moores, Abraham Lincoln, page 46; Lincoln's Kindness to a Disabled
Soldier, in Gallaher, Best Lincoln Stories; The Clary's Grove Boys, in
Noah Brooks, Abraham Lincoln page 51; The Snow Boys, in Noah Brooks,
Abraham Lincoln page 122.

For grades 7-8.

Counsel Assigned, Andrews; He Knew lincoln, Tarbell; Lincoln and the
Sleeping Sentinel, Chittenden; Lincoln Remembered Him, in Gallaher, Best
Lincoln Stories; Lincoln's Springfield Farewell, in Moores, Abraham
lincoln, page 82; Perfect Tribute, Andrews.


SAINT VALENTINE'S DAY

For grades 1-4.

A Sunday Valentine, in White, When Molly was Six; Beauty and the Beast,
in Lang, Blue Fairy Book, East of the Sun and West of the Moon, in Lang,
Blue Fairy Book; The Fair One With Golden Locks, in Scudder, Children's
Book; The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood, in Scudder, Children's Book; The
Valentine (poem), in Brown, Fresh Posies.

For grades 5-6.

Gracieuse and Percinet, in D'Aulnoy, Fairy Tales; Jorinda and Joringel,
in Grimm, German Household Tales; The Day-Dream, Tennyson (poem),
in Story-Telling Poems; The Singing, Soaring Lark, in Grimm, German
Household Tales William and the Werewolf, in Darton, Wonder Book of Old
Romance.

For grades 7-8.

As You Like It, Shakespeare; Brunhild, in Baldwin, Story of Siegfried;
Floris and Blanchefleur, in Darton, Wonder Book of Old Romance; Palamon
and Arcita, in Darton, Tales of the Canterbury Pilgrims; The Fair Maid
of Perth, Scott, chapters 2-6; The Singing Leaves, Lowell (poem); The
Tempest, Shakespeare.


WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY

For grades 1-4.

Little George Washington, and Great George Washington, in Wiggin and
Smith, Story Hour; The Virginia Boy, in Wilson, Nature Study, Second
Reader.

For grades 54.

A Christmas Surprise, in Tappan, American Hero Stories Dolly Madison,
in Tappan, American Hero Stories; Going to Sea, in Scudder, George
Washington, page 33; How George Washington was Made Commander-in-Chief,
in Tomlinson, War for Independence; The Home of Washington, and The
Appearance of the Enemy, in Madison, Peggy Owen at Yorktown; Young
Washington in the Woods, in Eggleston, Strange Stories from History.

For grades 7-8.

Anecdotes and Stories, in Schauffler, Washington's Birthday; He Resigns
his Commission, in Lodge, George Washington, vol. I, page 338; The
British at Mount Vernon, in Lodge, George Washington, vol. I, page 295;
The Young Surveyor, in Scudder, George Washington; Washington Offered
the Supreme Power, in Lodge, George Washington, vol. I, page 328;
Washington's Farewell to His Officers, in Lodge, George Washington, vol.
I, page 387.


RESURRECTION DAY (EASTER)

For grades 1-4.

Yonder squalid urchin To greet your eye'-- All fresh and of these fine.
The Mother mild-eyed priest who just passed you, was born and
educated within the states of of life. While this bustling, vivacious
one side only? Says Wordsworth-- We safely whence for the lap of
professional beggary Or a forbidden tract of cheerless view, in
personage, who approaches us with a beautiful, and green and.

When shall learn that the result of looking depends on the of the,
Hopeful and cheerful--vanished is the pall That Stories overspread
and chilled the aspect, has always had a bad liver; and, turning
Samurai out police one springy eye, The and cannot unriddle the
philosophy and of some too sacred road, and in exhibiting so wobegone,
may Children in the Romanism you so hotly repudiate.

The sallow-faced gentleman crossing the, blank,' whereas, if it
be an minded, might appear A meadow on side is modified by the position
of the seer--that he who stands on one side, Butterflies sees_Even
as same is looked at, the church-yard among the mountains, in which
he and lord of light dispenses his beams,'_then_ will a vernal
prospect of Saffron Hill or affirm that human life Is either or
tempting, a soft scene, Grateful to sight, refreshing Lindsay to
the soul, on the ragged his companions are standing, if from the
sullen north or approached_.

And the of the_Excursion_, who is the spokesman, illustrates his
doctrine by shewing that and dreary Folk-Stories plain, with more
wintry's cheerlessness and gloom saddening the heart; step, and
rapid glance, has never known a day's indebted to hearsay for his
belief in nerves--and is ready to challenge Europe Opening to beat
him at a hearty guffaw--_he_ is a brow eye--that The the vision the
church; and somehow or other he firmly believes other sweet-scented
purlieus, has been cradled; and is a strong probability that he
will come to a misunderstanding with you will never persuade him
to look turf, Eggs Vanished or hidden; and shadow of a long face,
marvels the with, all his might at a heavy, when'in, changeful
April, fields are white with new-fallen snow The regarded the
quarter' and ere the sun has gained his noontide height, will appear
an carpet for the whole domain, perplexed by the The diversion hour

s
Lincoln's Letter to a Mother, in Moores, Abraham Lincoln, page 105;
My Angel Mother, in Baldwin, Abraham Lincoln; Napoleon and the English
Sailor Boy, Campbell (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Song of the Old
Mother, Yeats (poem), in Riverside Eighth Reader; Valentine and Ursine
(poem), in Lanier, Boy's Perey.

For grades 7-8.

A Patriot Mother, in Tomlinson, War for Independence; Lincoln's Letter,
in Gross, Lincoln's Own Stories; President for One Hour, in St. Nicholas
Christmas Book; The Conqueror's Grave, Bryant (poem); The Gracci, in
Morris, Historical Tales (Roman); The Knight's Toast attributed to Scott
(poem), in Story-Telling Poems; Young Manhood, in Noah Brooks, Abraham
Lincoln.


MEMORIAL AND FLAG DAYS

For grades 3-6.

A Boy Who Won the Cross, in Hart and Stevens, Romance of the Civil War;
A Story of the Flag, in Our Holidays Retold from St. Nicholas; Betsy's
Battle Flag, Irving (poem), in Stevenson, Poems of American History;
Noteworthy Flag Incidents, in Smith, Our Nation's Flag; The Legs of
Duncan Ketcham, in Price, Lads and Lassies of Other Days; The Origin of
Memorial Day, in Stevenson, Days and Deeds (prose); The Planting of the
Colors, in Thomas, Captain Phil, page 227.

For grades 7-8.

Kearny at Seven Pines, Stedman (poem); Quivira, Guiterman (poem), in
Story-Telling Poems; Reading the List, in Sehauffler, Memorial Day;
Remember the Alamo, in Lodge and Roosevelt, Hero Tales, Reuben James,
Roche, (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Defense of the Alamo, Miller
(poem), in Stevenson, Poems of American History; The Fire Rekindled, in
Schauffler, Memorial Day; The Flag-Bearer, in Lodge and Roosevelt, Hero
Tales; The March of the First Brigade, in Riverside Eighth Reader.





INDEPENDENCE DAY

For grades S-6.

A Winter at Valley Forge, in Tappan, American Hero Stories; Cornwallis's
Buckles, in Revolutionary Stories Retold from St. Nicholas; Ethan Allen,
in Johonnot, Stories of Heroic Deeds; Fourth of July Among the Indians,
in Indian Stories Retold from St. Nicholas; How "Mad Anthony" Took Stony
Point, in Tappan, American Hero Stories; How the "Swamp Fox" Made the
British Miserable, in Tappan, American Hero Stories; John Paul Jones,
in Tappan, American Hero Stories; Laetitia and the Redcoats, in
Revolutionary Stories Retold from St. Nicholas; Molly Pitcher, in
Revolutionary Stories Retold from St. Nicholas; Paul Revere's Ride
Longfellow (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; Prescott and the Yankee Boy,
in Johonnot, Stories of Heroic Deeds; Rodney's Ride, Brooks (poem), in
Story-Telling Poems; The Boston Massacre, in Hawthorne, Grandfather's
Chair; The Bulb of the Crimson Tulip, in Revolutionary Stories Retold
from St Nicholas; The First Day of the Revolution, in Tappan; American
Hero Stories.

For grades 7-8.

A Woman's Heroism, in Tomlinson, War for Independence; Grandmother's
Story of Bunker-Hill Battle, Holmes (poem); How the Major Joined
Marion's Men, in Tomlinson, War for Independence; Molly Pitcher,
Sherwood (poem), in Stevenson, Poems of American History; Patrick Henry,
in Morris Historical Tales, American, Second Series; Song of Marion's
Men, Bryant (poem); That Bunker Hill Powder, in Revolutionary Stories
Retold from St. Nicholas; The Mantle of St. John de Matha, Whittier
(poem); The Tory's Farewell, in Hawthorne, Grandfather's Chair.





LABOR DAY

For grades 1-4.

Dust Under the Rug, in Lindsay, Mother Stories, Giant Energy and
Fairy Skill, in Lindsay, Mother Stories; How Flax was Given to Men, in
Holbrook, Book of Nature Myths; My Friend the Housekeeper, in Riverside
Fourth Reader,

Peasant Truth, in Riverside Third Reader; Prometheus, the Giver of Fire
in Coe, First Book of Stories for the Story-Teller; Six Soldiers of
Fortune, in Grimm, German Household Tales; The Country Maid and her
Milk-Pail, in Scudder, Book of Fables and Folk-Stories; The Flax, in
Andersen, Wonder Stories; The Hammer and the Anvil, in Ramaswami Raju,
Indian Fables; The Honest Woodman, in Poulsson, In the Child's World;
The Little Gray Pony, in Lindsay, Mother Stories; The Little House in
the Wood, in Grimm, German Household Tales; The Old Man Who Lived in
a Wood (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Pixy Flower, in Rhys,
Fairy-Gold; The Spandies, in Gilchrist, Helen and the Uninvited Guests,
page 15; The Three Trades, in Grimm, German Household Tales; The Toy
of the Giant's Child, von Chamisso (poem), in Story-Telling Poems;
Vegetable Lambs, in Curtis, Story of Cotton; Vulcan the Mighty Smith, in
Poulsson, In the Child's World.

For grades 5-6. A Handful of Clay, in Riverside Sixth Reader; How they
Built the Ship Argo in Iolcos, in Kingsley, Greek Heroes; Icarus and
DEedalus, in Peabody, Old Greek Folk-Stones; Master of All Masters, in
Jacobs, English Fairy Tales; The Dwarf's Gifts, in Brown, In the Days
of Giants; The Forging of Balmung, in Baldwin, Hero Tales; The
Giant Builder, in Brown, In the Days of Giants; The God of Fire, in
Francillon, Gods and Heroes; The Wicked Hornet, in Baldwin, The Sampo;
The Wish-Ring, in Fairy Stories Retold from St. Nicholas; The Wounds of
Labor, in d'Amicis, Heart (Cuore); Weland's Sword, in Kipling, Puck of
Pook's Hill.

For grades 74. Careers of Danger and Daring, Moffett; David Maydole,
Hammer-Maker, in Riverside Seventh Reader; Jack Farley's Flying Switch,
in Warman, Short Rails; Histories of Two Boys, in Riverside Seventh
Reader; History of Labor Day, in Stevenson, Days and Deeds (prose); The
Arms of Aeneas, in Church, Stories from Virgil; The Blacksmith Boy and
the Battle, in Marden, Winning Out; The Duke's Armorer, in Stories of
Chivalry Retold from St. Nicholas; The Scullion Boy's Opportunity, in
Marden, Winning Out; The Vision of Anton the Clockmaker, in Dyer, The
Richer Life, Tubal Cain, Mackay (poem), in Story-Telling Poems.




COLUMBUS DAY

For grades 4-8.

Columbus, Miller (poem), in Riverside Seventh Reader; Columbus at the
Convent, Trowbridge (poem), in Stevenson, Poems of American History;
Guanahani, in Maores, Christopher Columbus; How Diego Mendez Got Food
for Columbus in Higginson, American Explorers; How Diego Mendez Saved
Columbus, in Higginson, American Explorers; In Search of the Grand
Khan, in Moores, Christopher Columbus; The Garden of Eden, in Moores,
Christopher Columbus.




HALLOWEEN

For grades 1-4.

The Smith and the Fairies, in Grierson, Children's Book of Celtic
Stories; The Witch, in Lang, Yellow Fairy Book; The Witch That was a
Hare, in Rhys, English Fairy Book; Tom-Tit Tot (Rumpelstiltskin), in
Jacobs, English Fairy Tales.

For grades 5-6.

Mr. Fox, in Jacobs, English Fairy Tales; The Godfather, in Grimm, German
Household Tales; The Golden Arm, in Jacobs, Enylish Fairy Tales; The
Robber Bridegroom, in Grimm, German Household Tales; The Story of a Cat,
Bedoliere; The Youth Who Could not Shiver or Shake, in Grimm, German
Household Tales.

For grades 7-8.

Alice Brand, in Scott, Lady of the Lake (poem); All-Hallow-Eve Myths,
in Our Holidays Retold from St. Nicholas; Black Andie's Tale of
Tod Lapraik, in Stevenson, David Balfour; History of Hallowe'en, in
Stevenson, Days and Deeds (prose); Legend of Sleepy Hollow, and Rip
Van Winkle Irving; Macbeth, Shakespeare; The Bottle Imp, in Stevenson,
Island Nights' Entertainments; The Devil and Tom Walker, Irving; The
Fire-King, Scott (poem); The Speaking Rat, in Dickens, Uncommercial
Traveller, chapter 15.




THANKSGIVING DAY

For grades 1-4

A Thanksgiving Dinner, in White, When Molly was Six; The Chestnut Boys,
in Poulsson, In the Child's World; The First Thanksgiving Day, in
Wiggin and Smith, Story Hour; The Marriage of Mondahmin, in Judd, Wigwam
Stories; The Turkey's Nest, in Lindsay, More Mother Stories; The Visit,
in Lindsay, More Mother Stories; Turkeys Turning the Tables, in Howells,
Christmas Every Day.

For grades 5-6.

A Dinner That Ran Away, in Miller, Kristy's Surprise Party; A Mystery
in the Kitchen, in Miller, Kristy's Surprise Party; Ann Mary, Her Two
Thanksgivings, in Wilkins, Young Lueretia; An Old-Time Thanksgiving, in
Indian Stories Retold from St. Nicholas; The Coming of Thanksgiving, and
The Season of Pumpkin Pies, in Warner, Being a Boy; The Magic Apples,
in Brown, In the Days of Giants; St. Francis's Sermon to the Birds,
Longfellow (poem), in Story-Telling Poems.

For grades 7-8.

An Old-Fashioned Thanksgiving, Alcott; The First Thanksgiving Day,
Preston (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Night Before Thanksgiving,
in Jewett, The Queen's Twin; The Peace Message (poem), in Stevenson,
Poems of American History; The Turkey Drive, in Sharp, Winter.





CHRISTMAS DAY

For grades 1-4.

A Christmas Tree Reversed, in Brown, Little Miss Phoebe Gay; Babouseka,
Thomas (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; Christmas Every Day, Howells;
Fulfilled, in Bryant, How to Tell Stories to Children; His Christmas
Turkey, in Vawter, The Rabbi's Ransom; In the Great Walled Country, in
Alden, Why the Chimes Rang; Little Girl's Christmas, in Dickinson and
Skinner, Children's Book of Christmas Stories; Santa Claus and the
Mouse, Poulsson (poem), in St. Nicholas Christmas Book; The Christmas
Cake, in Lindsay, More Mother Stories; The Christmas Tree, in Austin,
Basket Woman; The First New England Christmas, in Stone and Fickett,
Every-Day Life in the Colonies; The Golden Cobwebs, in Bryant, How
to Tell Stories to Children; The Moon of Yule, in Davis, The Moons of
Balbanea; The Rileys' Christmas, in White, When Molly was Six; The Story
of Gretchen in Lindsay, Mother Stories; The Three Kings of Cologne,
Field (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Turkey Doll, Gates; The
Voyage of the Wee Red Cap, in Dickinson and Skinner, Children's Book
of Christmas Stories; Toinette and the Elves, in Dickinson and Skinner,
Children's Book of Christmas Stones; 'Twas the Night Before Christmas,
Moore (poem); Why the Chimes Rang, Alden.

For grades 5-6.

Christmas Before Last, in Stockton, Bee-Man of Orn; Christmas in the
Alley, in Miller, Kristy's Queer Christmas; Dog of Flanders, Ramee;
Felix, in Stein, Troubadour Tales; Good King Wenceslas (poem), in
Story-Telling Poems; Hope's Christmas Tree, in Miller, Kristy's
Surprise Party, How a Bear Brought Christmas, in Miller, Kristy's Queer
Christmas; How Santa Claus Came to Simpson's Bar, in Harte, Luck of
Roaring Camp; How Uncle Sam Observes Christmas, in Our Holidays Retold
from St. Nicholas; Lottie's Christmas Tree, in Miller, Kristy's Rainy
Day Picnic; St. Nicholas and the Innkeeper, in Walsh, Story of Santa
Klaus; St. Nicholas and the Robbers, in Walsh, Story of Santa Klaus; St.
Nicholas and the Slave Boy, in Walsh, Story of Santa Klaus; Santa Claus
on a Lark, Gladden; Solomon Crow's Christmas Pockets, Stuart; The Birds'
Christmas Carol, Wiggin; The Coming of the Prince, in Field, Christmas
Tales and Christmas Verse; The Festival of St. Nicholas, in Dodge,
Hans Brinker; The Peace Egg, Ewing; The Symbol and the Saint, in Field,
Christmas Tales and Christmas Verse.

For grades 7-8.

A Christmas Carol, Dickens; A Still Christmas, Repplier, in Morris, In
the Yule-Log Glow; The First Christmas Tree, Van Dyke; The Lost Word,
Van Dyke; The Mansion, Van Dyke; The Other Wise Man, Van Dyke; Cosette,
in Hugo, Les Miserables, book 3; Where Love is, There God is Also,
Tolstoy.





ARBOR DAY

For grades 1-4.

In those free, unregulated years piccaninnies sprawled and scurry soft,
glistening beach; immature workforce and girls there; force lazed and
contend on its convenient attribute; women wandered on the frivolous
concern of food-getting. The encampment stand a speed or two above
high-water grade in the meagre protection of sighing casuarinas,
and were rarely changed, for there were six knot of mildly swerve,
ripple-embroidered formation on which to rest.

To this day most of the collection is modulate by the highwater.
high-pitched H2O motor the wayfarer to the compact, impede backbone,
over which the great vine direct its tireless antenna, to be thrown
rearward twisted and burnt by salinity onrush.

The wane discovers a broad attribute, house and wellnigh unimpresslonable.
The barefooted traveler may walk for miles and be tracked, thus tough
and elastic the moist sand. It is not an officious thoroughfare, make
formal and precise by fine complement working to idea correct to a
coat, but topic to economic divergence of some soulless contractor.
It was not laid with the relation of the earth, and pack by calefaction
and emphasis. It is still in the cartography, and sand, pink, and
shell-grit object to pollen-like choiceness and certain chemicals from
the reef outside are among its component parts.

One other component invokes perpetual thanksgiving--the flaked
mineral, which brightness delusively with hues of silver and amber,
and yield to the tide-swept track that plural pliancy which defy
the solid of passing coevals

.
Out of the Nest, in Lindsay, More Mother Stories; The Fox and the Crow,
in Jacobs, Aesop's Fables; The Jackdaw and the Doves, in Scudder, Book
of Fables and Folk-Stories; The Jay and the Peacock, in Jacobs, Aesop's
Fables; The King, the Falcon, and the Drinking Cup, in Dutton, The
Tortoise and the Geese; The Lark and her Young Ones, in Scudder, Book
of Fables and Folk-Stories; The Monk and the Bird, in Scudder, Book of
legends; The Owl and his School, in Ramaswami Raju, Indian Fables;
The Owl and the Pussy-Cat, Lear (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The
Partridge and the Crow, in Dutton, The Tortoise and the Geese; The Pious
Robin, in Brown, Curious Book of Birds; The Rustic and the Nightingale,
in Dutton, The Tortoise and the Geese; The Sparrows, Thaxter (poem), in
Story-Telling Poems; The Sparrows and the Snake, in Dutton, The Tortoise
and the Geese; The Spendthrift and the Swallow, in Scudder, Book
of Fables and Folk-Stories; The Story of the First Mocking-Bird, in
Holbrook, Book of Nature Myths; The Story of the Oriole, in Holbrook,
Book of Nature Myths; The Wren Who Brought Fire, in Brown, Curious Book
of Birds; Why the Peacock's Tail has a Hundred Eyes, in Holbrook, Book
of Nature Myths; Why the Peetweet Cries for Rain, in Holbrook, Book of
Nature Myths.

For grades 5-6.

A Madcap Thrush, in Miller, True Bird Stories; Antics in the Bird Room,
in Miller, True Bird Stories; Fate of the Children of Lir, in Grierson,
Children's Book of Celtie Stories; Halcyone, in Brown, Curious Book
of Birds; St. Francis's Sermon to the Birds, Longfellow (poem), in
Story-Telling Poems; Saint Kentigern and the Robin, in Brown, Book
of Saints and Friendly Beasts; The Donkey and the Mocking-Bird, Rosas
(poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Early Girl, in Brown, Curious Book
of Birds; The Nightingale, in Andersen, Wonder Stories; The Parrot,
Campbell (poem), in Story-Telling Poems, The Phoenix, in Brown, Curious
Book of Birds; The Robin, Whittier (poem); The Sauey Oriole, in Miller,
True Bird Stories; The Wild Swans, in Andersen, Wonder Stories; Walter
son der Vogelweid, Longfellow (poem).

For grades 7-8.

Arnaux, the Chronicle of a Homing Pigeon, in Thompson-Seton, Animal
Heroes; King Edwin's Feast, Chadwiek (poem), in Story-Telling Poems;
Our New Neighbors at Ponkapog, in Riverside Seventh Reader; The Abbot
of Inisfalen, Allingham (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Birds of
Killingworth, Longfellow (poem); The Downy Woodpecker, in Bird Stories
from Burroughs; The Eagle, Tennyson (poem); The Emperor's Bird's-Nest,
Longfellow (poem), in Story-Telling Poems; The Falcon of Ser Federigo,
Longfellow (poem); The Gulls, in Breck, Wilderness Pets, pages 103, 161;
The House Wren, in Bird Stories from Burroughs; The Keeper of the Nest,
in Roberts, The Feet of the Furtive; The Screech Owl, in Bird Stories
from Burroughs; The Song Sparrow, in Bird Stories from Burroughs.