Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.


THE MONK

A ROMANCE


by

MATTHEW LEWIS


  Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
  Nocturnos lemures, portentaque.
                             Horat.

  Dreams, magic terrors, spells of mighty power,
  Witches, and ghosts who rove at midnight hour.


PREFACE

IMITATION OF HORACE Ep. 20.--B. 1.

    Methinks, Oh! vain ill-judging Book,
  I see thee cast a wishful look,
  Where reputations won and lost are
  In famous row called Paternoster.
  Incensed to find your precious olio
  Buried in unexplored port-folio,
  You scorn the prudent lock and key,
  And pant well bound and gilt to see
  Your Volume in the window set
  Of Stockdale, Hookham, or Debrett.

    Go then, and pass that dangerous bourn
  Whence never Book can back return:
  And when you find, condemned, despised,
  Neglected, blamed, and criticised,
  Abuse from All who read you fall,
  (If haply you be read at all
  Sorely will you your folly sigh at,
  And wish for me, and home, and quiet.

    Assuming now a conjuror's office, I
  Thus on your future Fortune prophesy:--
  Soon as your novelty is o'er,
  And you are young and new no more,
  In some dark dirty corner thrown,
  Mouldy with damps, with cobwebs strown,
  Your leaves shall be the Book-worm's prey;
  Or sent to Chandler-Shop away,
  And doomed to suffer public scandal,
  Shall line the trunk, or wrap the candle!

    But should you meet with approbation,
  And some one find an inclination
  To ask, by natural transition
  Respecting me and my condition;
  That I am one, the enquirer teach,
  Nor very poor, nor very rich;
  Of passions strong, of hasty nature,
  Of graceless form and dwarfish stature;
  By few approved, and few approving;
  Extreme in hating and in loving;

    Abhorring all whom I dislike,
  Adoring who my fancy strike;
  In forming judgements never long,
  And for the most part judging wrong;
  In friendship firm, but still believing
  Others are treacherous and deceiving,
  And thinking in the present aera
  That Friendship is a pure chimaera:
  More passionate no creature living,
  Proud, obstinate, and unforgiving,
  But yet for those who kindness show,
  Ready through fire and smoke to go.

    Again, should it be asked your page,
  'Pray, what may be the author's age?'
  Your faults, no doubt, will make it clear,
  I scarce have seen my twentieth year,
  Which passed, kind Reader, on my word,
  While England's Throne held George the Third.

    Now then your venturous course pursue:
  Go, my delight! Dear Book, adieu!

  Hague,
  Oct. 28, 1794.                     M. G. L.


ADVERTISEMENT

The first idea of this Romance was suggested by the story of the Santon
Barsisa, related in The Guardian.--The Bleeding Nun is a tradition
still credited in many parts of Germany; and I have been told that the
ruins of the Castle of Lauenstein, which She is supposed to haunt, may
yet be seen upon the borders of Thuringia.--The Water-King, from the
third to the twelfth stanza, is the fragment of an original Danish
Ballad--And Belerma and Durandarte is translated from some stanzas to
be found in a collection of old Spanish poetry, which contains also the
popular song of Gayferos and Melesindra, mentioned in Don Quixote.--I
have now made a full avowal of all the plagiarisms of which I am aware
myself; but I doubt not, many more may be found, of which I am at
present totally unconscious.


VOLUME I

CHAPTER I

  ----Lord Angelo is precise;
  Stands at a guard with envy; Scarce confesses
  That his blood flows, or that his appetite
  Is more to bread than stone.
                               Measure for Measure.


Scarcely had the Abbey Bell tolled for five minutes, and already was
the Church of the Capuchins thronged with Auditors.  Do not encourage
the idea that the Crowd was assembled either from motives of piety or
thirst of information.  But very few were influenced by those reasons;
and in a city where superstition reigns with such despotic sway as in
Madrid, to seek for true devotion would be a fruitless attempt.  The
Audience now assembled in the Capuchin Church was collected by various
causes, but all of them were foreign to the ostensible motive.  The
Women came to show themselves, the Men to see the Women:  Some were
attracted by curiosity to hear an Orator so celebrated; Some came
because they had no better means of employing their time till the play
began; Some, from being assured that it would be impossible to find
places in the Church; and one half of Madrid was brought thither by
expecting to meet the other half.  The only persons truly anxious to
hear the Preacher were a few antiquated devotees, and half a dozen
rival Orators, determined to find fault with and ridicule the
discourse.  As to the remainder of the Audience, the Sermon might have
been omitted altogether, certainly without their being disappointed,
and very probably without their perceiving the omission.

Whatever was the occasion, it is at least certain that the Capuchin
Church had never witnessed a more numerous assembly. Every corner was
filled, every seat was occupied.  The very Statues which ornamented the
long aisles were pressed into the service.  Boys suspended themselves
upon the wings of Cherubims; St. Francis and St. Mark bore each a
spectator on his shoulders; and St. Agatha found herself under the
necessity of carrying double.  The consequence was, that in spite of
all their hurry and expedition, our two newcomers, on entering the
Church, looked round in vain for places.

However, the old Woman continued to move forwards.  In vain were
exclamations of displeasure vented against her from all sides: In vain
was She addressed with--'I assure you, Segnora, there are no places
here.'--'I beg, Segnora, that you will not crowd me so
intolerably!'--'Segnora, you cannot pass this way.  Bless me! How can
people be so troublesome!'--The old Woman was obstinate, and on She
went.  By dint of perseverance and two brawny arms She made a passage
through the Crowd, and managed to bustle herself into the very body of
the Church, at no great distance from the Pulpit.  Her companion had
followed her with timidity and in silence, profiting by the exertions
of her conductress.

'Holy Virgin!' exclaimed the old Woman in a tone of disappointment,
while She threw a glance of enquiry round her; 'Holy Virgin!  What
heat!  What a Crowd! I wonder what can be the meaning of all this.  I
believe we must return:  There is no such thing as a seat to be had,
and nobody seems kind enough to accommodate us with theirs.'

This broad hint attracted the notice of two Cavaliers, who occupied
stools on the right hand, and were leaning their backs against the
seventh column from the Pulpit.  Both were young, and richly habited.
Hearing this appeal to their politeness pronounced in a female voice,
they interrupted their conversation to look at the speaker.  She had
thrown up her veil in order to take a clearer look round the Cathedral.
Her hair was red, and She squinted.  The Cavaliers turned round, and
renewed their conversation.

'By all means,' replied the old Woman's companion; 'By all means,
Leonella, let us return home immediately; The heat is excessive, and I
am terrified at such a crowd.'

These words were pronounced in a tone of unexampled sweetness. The
Cavaliers again broke off their discourse, but for this time they were
not contented with looking up:  Both started involuntarily from their
seats, and turned themselves towards the Speaker.

The voice came from a female, the delicacy and elegance of whose figure
inspired the Youths with the most lively curiosity to view the face to
which it belonged.  This satisfaction was denied them.  Her features
were hidden by a thick veil; But struggling through the crowd had
deranged it sufficiently to discover a neck which for symmetry and
beauty might have vied with the Medicean Venus.  It was of the most
dazzling whiteness, and received additional charms from being shaded by
the tresses of her long fair hair, which descended in ringlets to her
waist.  Her figure was rather below than above the middle size:  It was
light and airy as that of an Hamadryad.  Her bosom was carefully
veiled. Her dress was white; it was fastened by a blue sash, and just
permitted to peep out from under it a little foot of the most delicate
proportions.  A chaplet of large grains hung upon her arm, and her face
was covered with a veil of thick black gauze. Such was the female, to
whom the youngest of the Cavaliers now offered his seat, while the
other thought it necessary to pay the same attention to her companion.

The old Lady with many expressions of gratitude, but without much
difficulty, accepted the offer, and seated herself:  The young one
followed her example, but made no other compliment than a simple and
graceful reverence.  Don Lorenzo (such was the Cavalier's name, whose
seat She had accepted) placed himself near her; But first He whispered
a few words in his Friend's ear, who immediately took the hint, and
endeavoured to draw off the old Woman's attention from her lovely
charge.

'You are doubtless lately arrived at Madrid,' said Lorenzo to his fair
Neighbour; 'It is impossible that such charms should have long remained
unobserved; and had not this been your first public appearance, the
envy of the Women and adoration of the Men would have rendered you
already sufficiently remarkable.'

He paused, in expectation of an answer.  As his speech did not
absolutely require one, the Lady did not open her lips:  After a few
moments He resumed his discourse:

'Am I wrong in supposing you to be a Stranger to Madrid?'

The Lady hesitated; and at last, in so low a voice as to be scarcely
intelligible, She made shift to answer,--'No, Segnor.'

'Do you intend making a stay of any length?'

'Yes, Segnor.'

'I should esteem myself fortunate, were it in my power to contribute to
making your abode agreeable. I am well known at Madrid, and my Family
has some interest at Court.  If I can be of any service, you cannot
honour or oblige me more than by permitting me to be of use to
you.'--'Surely,' said He to himself, 'She cannot answer that by a
monosyllable; now She must say something to me.'

Lorenzo was deceived, for the Lady answered only by a bow.

By this time He had discovered that his Neighbour was not very
conversible; But whether her silence proceeded from pride, discretion,
timidity, or idiotism, He was still unable to decide.

After a pause of some minutes--'It is certainly from your being a
Stranger,' said He, 'and as yet unacquainted with our customs, that you
continue to wear your veil. Permit me to remove it.'

At the same time He advanced his hand towards the Gauze:  The Lady
raised hers to prevent him.

'I never unveil in public, Segnor.'

'And where is the harm, I pray you?' interrupted her Companion somewhat
sharply; 'Do not you see that the other Ladies have all laid their
veils aside, to do honour no doubt to the holy place in which we are?
I have taken off mine already; and surely if I expose my features to
general observation, you have no cause to put yourself in such a
wonderful alarm!  Blessed Maria! Here is a fuss and a bustle about a
chit's face!  Come, come, Child! Uncover it; I warrant you that nobody
will run away with it from you--'

'Dear aunt, it is not the custom in Murcia.'

'Murcia, indeed!  Holy St. Barbara, what does that signify?  You are
always putting me in mind of that villainous Province.  If it is the
custom in Madrid, that is all that we ought to mind, and therefore I
desire you to take off your veil immediately.  Obey me this moment
Antonia, for you know that I cannot bear contradiction--'

Her niece was silent, but made no further opposition to Don Lorenzo's
efforts, who, armed with the Aunt's sanction hastened to remove the
Gauze.  What a Seraph's head presented itself to his admiration!  Yet
it was rather bewitching than beautiful; It was not so lovely from
regularity of features as from sweetness and sensibility of
Countenance.  The several parts of her face considered separately, many
of them were far from handsome; but when examined together, the whole
was adorable.  Her skin though fair was not entirely without freckles;
Her eyes were not very large, nor their lashes particularly long.  But
then her lips were of the most rosy freshness; Her fair and undulating
hair, confined by a simple ribband, poured itself below her waist in a
profusion of ringlets; Her throat was full and beautiful in the
extreme; Her hand and arm were formed with the most perfect symmetry;
Her mild blue eyes seemed an heaven of sweetness, and the crystal in
which they moved sparkled with all the brilliance of Diamonds:  She
appeared to be scarcely fifteen; An arch smile, playing round her
mouth, declared her to be possessed of liveliness, which excess of
timidity at present represt; She looked round her with a bashful
glance; and whenever her eyes accidentally met Lorenzo's, She dropt
them hastily upon her Rosary; Her cheek was immediately suffused with
blushes, and She began to tell her beads; though her manner evidently
showed that She knew not what She was about.

Lorenzo gazed upon her with mingled surprise and admiration; but the
Aunt thought it necessary to apologize for Antonia's mauvaise honte.

''Tis a young Creature,' said She, 'who is totally ignorant of the
world.  She has been brought up in an old Castle in Murcia; with no
other Society than her Mother's, who, God help her! has no more sense,
good Soul, than is necessary to carry her Soup to her mouth. Yet She is
my own Sister, both by Father and Mother.'

'And has so little sense?' said Don Christoval with feigned
astonishment; 'How very Extraordinary!'

'Very true, Segnor; Is it not strange?  However, such is the fact; and
yet only to see the luck of some people!  A young Nobleman, of the very
first quality, took it into his head that Elvira had some pretensions
to Beauty--As to pretensions, in truth, She had always enough of THEM;
But as to Beauty....! If I had only taken half the pains to set
myself off which She did....!  But this is neither here nor there.
As I was saying, Segnor, a young Nobleman fell in love with her, and
married her unknown to his Father.  Their union remained a secret near
three years, But at last it came to the ears of the old Marquis, who,
as you may well suppose, was not much pleased with the intelligence.
Away He posted in all haste to Cordova, determined to seize Elvira, and
send her away to some place or other, where She would never be heard of
more.  Holy St. Paul! How He stormed on finding that She had escaped
him, had joined her Husband, and that they had embarked together for
the Indies. He swore at us all, as if the Evil Spirit had possessed
him; He threw my Father into prison, as honest a painstaking Shoe-maker
as any in Cordova; and when He went away, He had the cruelty to take
from us my Sister's little Boy, then scarcely two years old, and whom
in the abruptness of her flight, She had been obliged to leave behind
her.  I suppose, that the poor little Wretch met with bitter bad
treatment from him, for in a few months after, we received intelligence
of his death.'

'Why, this was a most terrible old Fellow, Segnora!'

'Oh! shocking! and a Man so totally devoid of taste! Why, would you
believe it, Segnor?  When I attempted to pacify him, He cursed me for a
Witch, and wished that to punish the Count, my Sister might become as
ugly as myself!  Ugly indeed!  I like him for that.'

'Ridiculous', cried Don Christoval; 'Doubtless the Count would have
thought himself fortunate, had he been permitted to exchange the one
Sister for the other.'

'Oh!  Christ!  Segnor, you are really too polite.  However, I am
heartily glad that the Conde was of a different way of thinking. A
mighty pretty piece of business, to be sure, Elvira has made of it!
After broiling and stewing in the Indies for thirteen long years, her
Husband dies, and She returns to Spain, without an House to hide her
head, or money to procure her one!  This Antonia was then but an
Infant, and her only remaining Child. She found that her Father-in-Law
had married again, that he was irreconcileable to the Conde, and that
his second Wife had produced him a Son, who is reported to be a very
fine young Man. The old Marquis refused to see my Sister or her Child;
But sent her word that on condition of never hearing any more of her,
He would assign her a small pension, and She might live in an old
Castle which He possessed in Murcia; This had been the favourite
habitation of his eldest Son; But since his flight from Spain, the old
Marquis could not bear the place, but let it fall to ruin and
confusion--My Sister accepted the proposal; She retired to Murcia, and
has remained there till within the last Month.'

'And what brings her now to Madrid?' enquired Don Lorenzo, whom
admiration of the young Antonia compelled to take a lively interest in
the talkative old Woman's narration.

'Alas! Segnor, her Father-in-Law being lately dead, the Steward of his
Murcian Estates has refused to pay her pension any longer.

With the design of supplicating his Son to renew it, She is now come to
Madrid; But I doubt, that She might have saved herself the trouble! You
young Noblemen have always enough to do with your money, and are not
very often disposed to throw it away upon old Women.  I advised my
Sister to send Antonia with her petition; But She would not hear of
such a thing.  She is so obstinate!  Well!  She will find herself the
worse for not following my counsels: the Girl has a good pretty face,
and possibly might have done much.'

'Ah! Segnora,' interrupted Don Christoval, counterfeiting a passionate
air; 'If a pretty face will do the business, why has not your Sister
recourse to you?'

'Oh! Jesus! my Lord, I swear you quite overpower me with your
gallantry!  But I promise you that I am too well aware of the danger of
such Expeditions to trust myself in a young Nobleman's power!  No, no;
I have as yet preserved my reputation without blemish or reproach, and
I always knew how to keep the Men at a proper distance.'

'Of that, Segnora, I have not the least doubt.  But permit me to ask
you; Have you then any aversion to Matrimony?'

'That is an home question.  I cannot but confess, that if an amiable
Cavalier was to present himself....'

Here She intended to throw a tender and significant look upon Don
Christoval; But, as She unluckily happened to squint most abominably,
the glance fell directly upon his Companion:  Lorenzo took the
compliment to himself, and answered it by a profound bow.

'May I enquire,' said He, 'the name of the Marquis?'

'The Marquis de las Cisternas.'

'I know him intimately well.  He is not at present in Madrid, but is
expected here daily.  He is one of the best of Men; and if the lovely
Antonia will permit me to be her Advocate with him, I doubt not my
being able to make a favourable report of her cause.'

Antonia raised her blue eyes, and silently thanked him for the offer by
a smile of inexpressible sweetness.  Leonella's satisfaction was much
more loud and audible: Indeed, as her Niece was generally silent in her
company, She thought it incumbent upon her to talk enough for both:
This She managed without difficulty, for She very seldom found herself
deficient in words.

'Oh! Segnor!' She cried; 'You will lay our whole family under the most
signal obligations!  I accept your offer with all possible gratitude,
and return you a thousand thanks for the generosity of your proposal.
Antonia, why do not you speak, Child?  While the Cavalier says all
sorts of civil things to you, you sit like a Statue, and never utter a
syllable of thanks, either bad, good, or indifferent!'

'My dear Aunt, I am very sensible that....'

'Fye, Niece!  How often have I told you, that you never should
interrupt a Person who is speaking!?  When did you ever know me do such
a thing?  Are these your Murcian manners?  Mercy on me! I shall never
be able to make this Girl any thing like a Person of good breeding.
But pray, Segnor,' She continued, addressing herself to Don Christoval,
'inform me, why such a Crowd is assembled today in this Cathedral?'

'Can you possibly be ignorant, that Ambrosio, Abbot of this Monastery,
pronounces a Sermon in this Church every Thursday? All Madrid rings
with his praises.  As yet He has preached but thrice; But all who have
heard him are so delighted with his eloquence, that it is as difficult
to obtain a place at Church, as at the first representation of a new
Comedy.  His fame certainly must have reached your ears--'

'Alas! Segnor, till yesterday I never had the good fortune to see
Madrid; and at Cordova we are so little informed of what is passing in
the rest of the world, that the name of Ambrosio has never been
mentioned in its precincts.'

'You will find it in every one's mouth at Madrid.  He seems to have
fascinated the Inhabitants; and not having attended his Sermons myself,
I am astonished at the Enthusiasm which He has excited.  The adoration
paid him both by Young and Old, by Man and Woman is unexampled.  The
Grandees load him with presents; Their Wives refuse to have any other
Confessor, and he is known through all the city by the name of the
"Man of Holiness".'

'Undoubtedly, Segnor, He is of noble origin--'

'That point still remains undecided.  The late Superior of the
Capuchins found him while yet an Infant at the Abbey door.  All
attempts to discover who had left him there were vain, and the Child
himself could give no account of his Parents.  He was educated in the
Monastery, where He has remained ever since.  He early showed a strong
inclination for study and retirement, and as soon as He was of a proper
age, He pronounced his vows.  No one has ever appeared to claim him, or
clear up the mystery which conceals his birth; and the Monks, who find
their account in the favour which is shewn to their establishment from
respect to him, have not hesitated to publish that He is a present to
them from the Virgin.  In truth the singular austerity of his life
gives some countenance to the report.  He is now thirty years old,
every hour of which period has been passed in study, total seclusion
from the world, and mortification of the flesh.  Till these last three
weeks, when He was chosen superior of the Society to which He belongs,
He had never been on the outside of the Abbey walls:  Even now He never
quits them except on Thursdays, when He delivers a discourse in this
Cathedral which all Madrid assembles to hear.  His knowledge is said to
be the most profound, his eloquence the most persuasive.  In the whole
course of his life He has never been known to transgress a single rule
of his order; The smallest stain is not to be discovered upon his
character; and He is reported to be so strict an observer of Chastity,
that He knows not in what consists the difference of Man and Woman.
The common People therefore esteem him to be a Saint.'

'Does that make a Saint?' enquired Antonia; 'Bless me!  Then am I one?'

'Holy St. Barbara!' exclaimed Leonella; 'What a question!  Fye, Child,
Fye!  These are not fit subjects for young Women to handle.  You should
not seem to remember that there is such a thing as a Man in the world,
and you ought to imagine every body to be of the same sex with
yourself.  I should like to see you give people to understand, that you
know that a Man has no breasts, and no hips, and no ...'.

Luckily for Antonia's ignorance which her Aunt's lecture would soon
have dispelled, an universal murmur through the Church announced the
Preacher's arrival. Donna Leonella rose from her seat to take a better
view of him, and Antonia followed her example.

He was a Man of noble port and commanding presence.  His stature was
lofty, and his features uncommonly handsome.  His Nose was aquiline,
his eyes large black and sparkling, and his dark brows almost joined
together.  His complexion was of a deep but clear Brown; Study and
watching had entirely deprived his cheek of colour.  Tranquillity
reigned upon his smooth unwrinkled forehead; and Content, expressed
upon every feature, seemed to announce the Man equally unacquainted
with cares and crimes.  He bowed himself with humility to the audience:
Still there was a certain severity in his look and manner that inspired
universal awe, and few could sustain the glance of his eye at once
fiery and penetrating.  Such was Ambrosio, Abbot of the Capuchins, and
surnamed, 'The Man of Holiness'.

Antonia, while She gazed upon him eagerly, felt a pleasure fluttering
in her bosom which till then had been unknown to her, and for which She
in vain endeavoured to account.  She waited with impatience till the
Sermon should begin; and when at length the Friar spoke, the sound of
his voice seemed to penetrate into her very soul. Though no other of
the Spectators felt such violent sensations as did the young Antonia,
yet every one listened with interest and emotion.  They who were
insensible to Religion's merits, were still enchanted with Ambrosio's
oratory. All found their attention irresistibly attracted while He
spoke, and the most profound silence reigned through the crowded Aisles.

Even Lorenzo could not resist the charm:  He forgot that Antonia was
seated near him, and listened to the Preacher with undivided attention.

In language nervous, clear, and simple, the Monk expatiated on the
beauties of Religion.  He explained some abstruse parts of the sacred
writings in a style that carried with it universal conviction.  His
voice at once distinct and deep was fraught with all the terrors of the
Tempest, while He inveighed against the vices of humanity, and
described the punishments reserved for them in a future state.  Every
Hearer looked back upon his past offences, and trembled:  The Thunder
seemed to roll, whose bolt was destined to crush him, and the abyss of
eternal destruction to open before his feet.  But when Ambrosio,
changing his theme, spoke of the excellence of an unsullied conscience,
of the glorious prospect which Eternity presented to the Soul untainted
with reproach, and of the recompense which awaited it in the regions of
everlasting glory, His Auditors felt their scattered spirits insensibly
return.  They threw themselves with confidence upon the mercy of their
Judge; They hung with delight upon the consoling words of the Preacher;
and while his full voice swelled into melody, They were transported to
those happy regions which He painted to their imaginations in colours
so brilliant and glowing.

The discourse was of considerable length; Yet when it concluded, the
Audience grieved that it had not lasted longer.  Though the Monk had
ceased to speak, enthusiastic silence still prevailed through the
Church:  At length the charm gradually dissolving, the general
admiration was expressed in audible terms.  As Ambrosio descended from
the Pulpit, His Auditors crowded round him, loaded him with blessings,
threw themselves at his feet, and kissed the hem of his Garment.  He
passed on slowly with his hands crossed devoutly upon his bosom, to the
door opening into the Abbey Chapel, at which his Monks waited to
receive him.  He ascended the Steps, and then turning towards his
Followers, addressed to them a few words of gratitude, and exhortation.
While He spoke, his Rosary, composed of large grains of amber, fell
from his hand, and dropped among the surrounding multitude. It was
seized eagerly, and immediately divided amidst the Spectators.  Whoever
became possessor of a Bead, preserved it as a sacred relique; and had
it been the Chaplet of thrice-blessed St. Francis himself, it could not
have been disputed with greater vivacity.  The Abbot, smiling at their
eagerness, pronounced his benediction, and quitted the Church, while
humility dwelt upon every feature.  Dwelt She also in his heart?

Antonia's eyes followed him with anxiety.  As the Door closed after
him, it seemed to her as had she lost some one essential to her
happiness.  A tear stole in silence down her cheek.

'He is separated from the world!' said She to herself; 'Perhaps, I
shall never see him more!'

As she wiped away the tear, Lorenzo observed her action.

'Are you satisfied with our Orator?' said He; 'Or do you think that
Madrid overrates his talents?'

Antonia's heart was so filled with admiration for the Monk, that She
eagerly seized the opportunity of speaking of him:  Besides, as She now
no longer considered Lorenzo as an absolute Stranger, She was less
embarrassed by her excessive timidity.

'Oh!  He far exceeds all my expectations,' answered She; 'Till this
moment I had no idea of the powers of eloquence.  But when He spoke,
his voice inspired me with such interest, such esteem, I might almost
say such affection for him, that I am myself astonished at the
acuteness of my feelings.'

Lorenzo smiled at the strength of her expressions.

'You are young and just entering into life,' said He; 'Your heart, new
to the world and full of warmth and sensibility, receives its first
impressions with eagerness.  Artless yourself, you suspect not others
of deceit; and viewing the world through the medium of your own truth
and innocence, you fancy all who surround you to deserve your
confidence and esteem.  What pity, that these gay visions must soon be
dissipated!  What pity, that you must soon discover the baseness of
mankind, and guard against your fellow-creatures as against your Foes!'

'Alas! Segnor,' replied Antonia; 'The misfortunes of my Parents have
already placed before me but too many sad examples of the perfidy of
the world!  Yet surely in the present instance the warmth of sympathy
cannot have deceived me.'

'In the present instance, I allow that it has not.  Ambrosio's
character is perfectly without reproach; and a Man who has passed the
whole of his life within the walls of a Convent cannot have found the
opportunity to be guilty, even were He possessed of the inclination.
But now, when, obliged by the duties of his situation, He must enter
occasionally into the world, and be thrown into the way of temptation,
it is now that it behoves him to show the brilliance of his virtue.
The trial is dangerous; He is just at that period of life when the
passions are most vigorous, unbridled, and despotic; His established
reputation will mark him out to Seduction as an illustrious Victim;
Novelty will give additional charms to the allurements of pleasure; and
even the Talents with which Nature has endowed him will contribute to
his ruin, by facilitating the means of obtaining his object.  Very few
would return victorious from a contest so severe.'

'Ah! surely Ambrosio will be one of those few.'

'Of that I have myself no doubt:  By all accounts He is an exception to
mankind in general, and Envy would seek in vain for a blot upon his
character.'

'Segnor, you delight me by this assurance!  It encourages me to indulge
my prepossession in his favour; and you know not with what pain I
should have repressed the sentiment!  Ah! dearest Aunt, entreat my
Mother to choose him for our Confessor.'

'I entreat her?' replied Leonella; 'I promise you that I shall do no
such thing.  I do not like this same Ambrosio in the least; He has a
look of severity about him that made me tremble from head to foot:
Were He my Confessor, I should never have the courage to avow one half
of my peccadilloes, and then I should be in a rare condition!  I never
saw such a stern-looking Mortal, and hope that I never shall see such
another.  His description of the Devil, God bless us! almost terrified
me out of my wits, and when He spoke about Sinners He seemed as if He
was ready to eat them.'

'You are right, Segnora,' answered Don Christoval; 'Too great severity
is said to be Ambrosio's only fault. Exempted himself from human
failings, He is not sufficiently indulgent to those of others; and
though strictly just and disinterested in his decisions, his government
of the Monks has already shown some proofs of his inflexibility. But
the crowd is nearly dissipated: Will you permit us to attend you home?'

'Oh! Christ! Segnor,' exclaimed Leonella affecting to blush; 'I would
not suffer such a thing for the Universe!  If I came home attended by
so gallant a Cavalier, My Sister is so scrupulous that She would read
me an hour's lecture, and I should never hear the last of it.  Besides,
I rather wish you not to make your proposals just at present.'

'My proposals?  I assure you, Segnora....'

'Oh! Segnor, I believe that your assurances of impatience are all very
true; But really I must desire a little respite.  It would not be quite
so delicate in me to accept your hand at first sight.'

'Accept my hand?  As I hope to live and breathe....'

'Oh! dear Segnor, press me no further, if you love me! I shall consider
your obedience as a proof of your affection; You shall hear from me
tomorrow, and so farewell.  But pray, Cavaliers, may I not enquire your
names?'

'My Friend's,' replied Lorenzo, 'is the Conde d'Ossorio, and mine
Lorenzo de Medina.'

''Tis sufficient.  Well, Don Lorenzo, I shall acquaint my Sister with
your obliging offer, and let you know the result with all expedition.
Where may I send to you?'

'I am always to be found at the Medina Palace.'

'You may depend upon hearing from me.  Farewell, Cavaliers. Segnor
Conde, let me entreat you to moderate the excessive ardour of your
passion:  However, to prove to you that I am not displeased with you,
and prevent your abandoning yourself to despair, receive this mark of
my affection, and sometimes bestow a thought upon the absent Leonella.'

As She said this, She extended a lean and wrinkled hand; which her
supposed Admirer kissed with such sorry grace and constraint so
evident, that Lorenzo with difficulty repressed his inclination to
laugh.  Leonella then hastened to quit the Church; The lovely Antonia
followed her in silence; but when She reached the Porch, She turned
involuntarily, and cast back her eyes towards Lorenzo.  He bowed to
her, as bidding her farewell; She returned the compliment, and hastily
withdrew.

'So, Lorenzo!' said Don Christoval as soon as they were alone, 'You
have procured me an agreeable Intrigue!  To favour your designs upon
Antonia, I obligingly make a few civil speeches which mean nothing to
the Aunt, and at the end of an hour I find myself upon the brink of
Matrimony!  How will you reward me for having suffered so grievously
for your sake?  What can repay me for having kissed the leathern paw of
that confounded old Witch? Diavolo!  She has left such a scent upon my
lips that I shall smell of garlick for this month to come!  As I pass
along the Prado, I shall be taken for a walking Omelet, or some large
Onion running to seed!'

'I confess, my poor Count,' replied Lorenzo, 'that your service has
been attended with danger; Yet am I so far from supposing it be past
all endurance that I shall probably solicit you to carry on your amours
still further.'

'From that petition I conclude that the little Antonia has made some
impression upon you.'

'I cannot express to you how much I am charmed with her.  Since my
Father's death, My Uncle the Duke de Medina, has signified to me his
wishes to see me married; I have till now eluded his hints, and refused
to understand them; But what I have seen this Evening....'

'Well?  What have you seen this Evening?  Why surely, Don Lorenzo, You
cannot be mad enough to think of making a Wife out of this
Grand-daughter of "as honest a painstaking Shoe-maker as any in
Cordova"?'

'You forget, that She is also the Grand-daughter of the late Marquis de
las Cisternas; But without disputing about birth and titles, I must
assure you, that I never beheld a Woman so interesting as Antonia.'

'Very possibly; But you cannot mean to marry her?'

'Why not, my dear Conde?  I shall have wealth enough for both of us,
and you know that my Uncle thinks liberally upon the subject.

From what I have seen of Raymond de las Cisternas, I am certain that he
will readily acknowledge Antonia for his Niece.  Her birth therefore
will be no objection to my offering her my hand. I should be a Villain
could I think of her on any other terms than marriage; and in truth She
seems possessed of every quality requisite to make me happy in a Wife.
Young, lovely, gentle, sensible....'

'Sensible?  Why, She said nothing but "Yes," and "No".'

'She did not say much more, I must confess--But then She always said
"Yes," or "No," in the right place.'

'Did She so?  Oh! your most obedient!  That is using a right Lover's
argument, and I dare dispute no longer with so profound a Casuist.
Suppose we adjourn to the Comedy?'

'It is out of my power.  I only arrived last night at Madrid, and have
not yet had an opportunity of seeing my Sister; You know that her
Convent is in this Street, and I was going thither when the Crowd which
I saw thronging into this Church excited my curiosity to know what was
the matter.  I shall now pursue my first intention, and probably pass
the Evening with my Sister at the Parlour grate.'

'Your Sister in a Convent, say you?  Oh! very true, I had forgotten.
And how does Donna Agnes?  I am amazed, Don Lorenzo, how you could
possibly think of immuring so charming a Girl within the walls of a
Cloister!'

'I think of it, Don Christoval?  How can you suspect me of such
barbarity?  You are conscious that She took the veil by her own desire,
and that particular circumstances made her wish for a seclusion from
the World.  I used every means in my power to induce her to change her
resolution; The endeavour was fruitless, and I lost a Sister!'

'The luckier fellow you; I think, Lorenzo, you were a considerable
gainer by that loss:  If I remember right, Donna Agnes had a portion of
ten thousand pistoles, half of which reverted to your Lordship.  By St.
Jago! I wish that I had fifty Sisters in the same predicament. I should
consent to losing them every soul without much heart-burning--'

'How, Conde?' said Lorenzo in an angry voice; 'Do you suppose me base
enough to have influenced my Sister's retirement?  Do you suppose that
the despicable wish to make myself Master of her fortune could....'

'Admirable!  Courage, Don Lorenzo!  Now the Man is all in a blaze.  God
grant that Antonia may soften that fiery temper, or we shall certainly
cut each other's throat before the Month is over!  However, to prevent
such a tragical Catastrophe for the present, I shall make a retreat,
and leave you Master of the field.  Farewell, my Knight of Mount Aetna!
Moderate that inflammable disposition, and remember that whenever it is
necessary to make love to yonder Harridan, you may reckon upon my
services.'

He said, and darted out of the Cathedral.

'How wild-brained!' said Lorenzo; 'With so excellent an heart, what
pity that He possesses so little solidity of judgment!'

The night was now fast advancing.  The Lamps were not yet lighted.  The
faint beams of the rising Moon scarcely could pierce through the gothic
obscurity of the Church.  Lorenzo found himself unable to quit the
Spot.  The void left in his bosom by Antonia's absence, and his
Sister's sacrifice which Don Christoval had just recalled to his
imagination, created that melancholy of mind which accorded but too
well with the religious gloom surrounding him.  He was still leaning
against the seventh column from the Pulpit.  A soft and cooling air
breathed along the solitary Aisles:  The Moonbeams darting into the
Church through painted windows tinged the fretted roofs and massy
pillars with a thousand various tints of light and colours:

Universal silence prevailed around, only interrupted by the occasional
closing of Doors in the adjoining Abbey.

The calm of the hour and solitude of the place contributed to nourish
Lorenzo's disposition to melancholy. He threw himself upon a seat which
stood near him, and abandoned himself to the delusions of his fancy.
He thought of his union with Antonia; He thought of the obstacles which
might oppose his wishes; and a thousand changing visions floated before
his fancy, sad 'tis true, but not unpleasing.  Sleep insensibly stole
over him, and the tranquil solemnity of his mind when awake for a while
continued to influence his slumbers.

He still fancied himself to be in the Church of the Capuchins; but it
was no longer dark and solitary.  Multitudes of silver Lamps shed
splendour from the vaulted Roof; Accompanied by the captivating chaunt
of distant choristers, the Organ's melody swelled through the Church;
The Altar seemed decorated as for some distinguished feast; It was
surrounded by a brilliant Company; and near it stood Antonia arrayed in
bridal white, and blushing with all the charms of Virgin Modesty.

Half hoping, half fearing, Lorenzo gazed upon the scene before him.
Sudden the door leading to the Abbey unclosed, and He saw, attended by
a long train of Monks, the Preacher advance to whom He had just
listened with so much admiration.  He drew near Antonia.

'And where is the Bridegroom?' said the imaginary Friar.

Antonia seemed to look round the Church with anxiety. Involuntarily the
Youth advanced a few steps from his concealment.  She saw him; The
blush of pleasure glowed upon her cheek; With a graceful motion of her
hand She beckoned to him to advance.  He disobeyed not the command; He
flew towards her, and threw himself at her feet.

She retreated for a moment; Then gazing upon him with unutterable
delight;--'Yes!' She exclaimed, 'My Bridegroom!  My destined
Bridegroom!' She said, and hastened to throw herself into his arms; But
before He had time to receive her, an Unknown rushed between them.  His
form was gigantic; His complexion was swarthy, His eyes fierce and
terrible; his Mouth breathed out volumes of fire; and on his forehead
was written in legible characters--'Pride! Lust! Inhumanity!'

Antonia shrieked.  The Monster clasped her in his arms, and springing
with her upon the Altar, tortured her with his odious caresses.  She
endeavoured in vain to escape from his embrace. Lorenzo flew to her
succour, but ere He had time to reach her, a loud burst of thunder was
heard.  Instantly the Cathedral seemed crumbling into pieces; The Monks
betook themselves to flight, shrieking fearfully; The Lamps were
extinguished, the Altar sank down, and in its place appeared an abyss
vomiting forth clouds of flame.  Uttering a loud and terrible cry the
Monster plunged into the Gulph, and in his fall attempted to drag
Antonia with him. He strove in vain.  Animated by supernatural powers
She disengaged herself from his embrace; But her white Robe was left in
his possession.  Instantly a wing of brilliant splendour spread itself
from either of Antonia's arms.  She darted upwards, and while ascending
cried to Lorenzo,

'Friend! we shall meet above!'

At the same moment the Roof of the Cathedral opened; Harmonious voices
pealed along the Vaults; and the glory into which Antonia was received
was composed of rays of such dazzling brightness, that Lorenzo was
unable to sustain the gaze.  His sight failed, and He sank upon the
ground.

When He woke, He found himself extended upon the pavement of the
Church:  It was Illuminated, and the chaunt of Hymns sounded from a
distance.  For a while Lorenzo could not persuade himself that what He
had just witnessed had been a dream, so strong an impression had it
made upon his fancy.  A little recollection convinced him of its
fallacy:  The Lamps had been lighted during his sleep, and the music
which he heard was occasioned by the Monks, who were celebrating their
Vespers in the Abbey Chapel.

Lorenzo rose, and prepared to bend his steps towards his Sister's
Convent.  His mind fully occupied by the singularity of his dream, He
already drew near the Porch, when his attention was attracted by
perceiving a Shadow moving upon the opposite wall. He looked curiously
round, and soon descried a Man wrapped up in his Cloak, who seemed
carefully examining whether his actions were observed.  Very few people
are exempt from the influence of curiosity.  The Unknown seemed anxious
to conceal his business in the Cathedral, and it was this very
circumstance, which made Lorenzo wish to discover what He was about.

Our Hero was conscious that He had no right to pry into the secrets of
this unknown Cavalier.

'I will go,' said Lorenzo.  And Lorenzo stayed, where He was.

The shadow thrown by the Column, effectually concealed him from the
Stranger, who continued to advance with caution.  At length He drew a
letter from beneath his cloak, and hastily placed it beneath a Colossal
Statue of St. Francis.  Then retiring with precipitation, He concealed
himself in a part of the Church at a considerable distance from that in
which the Image stood.

'So!' said Lorenzo to himself; 'This is only some foolish love affair.
I believe, I may as well be gone, for I can do no good in it.'

In truth till that moment it never came into his head that He could do
any good in it; But He thought it necessary to make some little excuse
to himself for having indulged his curiosity.  He now made a second
attempt to retire from the Church:  For this time He gained the Porch
without meeting with any impediment; But it was destined that He should
pay it another visit that night. As He descended the steps leading into
the Street, a Cavalier rushed against him with such violence, that Both
were nearly overturned by the concussion.  Lorenzo put his hand to his
sword.

'How now, Segnor?' said He; 'What mean you by this rudeness?'

'Ha!  Is it you, Medina?' replied the Newcomer, whom Lorenzo by his
voice now recognized for Don Christoval; 'You are the luckiest Fellow
in the Universe, not to have left the Church before my return.  In, in!
my dear Lad!  They will be here immediately!'

'Who will be here?'

'The old Hen and all her pretty little Chickens!  In, I say, and then
you shall know the whole History.'

Lorenzo followed him into the Cathedral, and they concealed themselves
behind the Statue of St. Francis.

'And now,' said our Hero, 'may I take the liberty of asking, what is
the meaning of all this haste and rapture?'

'Oh! Lorenzo, we shall see such a glorious sight!  The Prioress of St.
Clare and her whole train of Nuns are coming hither.  You are to know,
that the pious Father Ambrosio (The Lord reward him for it!) will upon
no account move out of his own precincts:  It being absolutely
necessary for every fashionable Convent to have him for its Confessor,
the Nuns are in consequence obliged to visit him at the Abbey; since
when the Mountain will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet must needs go to
the Mountain.  Now the Prioress of St. Clare, the better to escape the
gaze of such impure eyes as belong to yourself and your humble Servant,
thinks proper to bring her holy flock to confession in the Dusk: She is
to be admitted into the Abbey Chapel by yon private door.  The
Porteress of St. Clare, who is a worthy old Soul and a particular
Friend of mine, has just assured me of their being here in a few
moments.  There is news for you, you Rogue!  We shall see some of the
prettiest faces in Madrid!'

'In truth, Christoval, we shall do no such thing.  The Nuns are always
veiled.'

'No!  No!  I know better.  On entering a place of worship, they ever
take off their veils from respect to the Saint to whom 'tis dedicated.
But Hark!  They are coming!  Silence, silence! Observe, and be
convinced.'

'Good!' said Lorenzo to himself; 'I may possibly discover to whom the
vows are addressed of this mysterious Stranger.'

Scarcely had Don Christoval ceased to speak, when the Domina of St.
Clare appeared, followed by a long procession of Nuns.  Each upon
entering the Church took off her veil.  The Prioress crossed her hands
upon her bosom, and made a profound reverence as She passed the Statue
of St. Francis, the Patron of this Cathedral. The Nuns followed her
example, and several moved onwards without having satisfied Lorenzo's
curiosity.  He almost began to despair of seeing the mystery cleared
up, when in paying her respects to St. Francis, one of the Nuns
happened to drop her Rosary.  As She stooped to pick it up, the light
flashed full upon her face.  At the same moment She dexterously removed
the letter from beneath the Image, placed it in her bosom, and hastened
to resume her rank in the procession.

'Ha!' said Christoval in a low voice; 'Here we have some little
Intrigue, no doubt.'

'Agnes, by heaven!' cried Lorenzo.

'What, your Sister?  Diavolo!  Then somebody, I suppose, will have to
pay for our peeping.'

'And shall pay for it without delay,' replied the incensed Brother.

The pious procession had now entered the Abbey; The Door was already
closed upon it.  The Unknown immediately quitted his concealment and
hastened to leave the Church:  Ere He could effect his intention, He
descried Medina stationed in his passage.  The Stranger hastily
retreated, and drew his Hat over his eyes.

'Attempt not to fly me!' exclaimed Lorenzo; 'I will know who you are,
and what were the contents of that Letter.'

'Of that Letter?' repeated the Unknown.  'And by what title do you ask
the question?'

'By a title of which I am now ashamed; But it becomes not you to
question me.  Either reply circumstantially to my demands, or answer me
with your Sword.'

'The latter method will be the shortest,' rejoined the Other, drawing
his Rapier; 'Come on, Segnor Bravo! I am ready!'

Burning with rage, Lorenzo hastened to the attack: The Antagonists had
already exchanged several passes before Christoval, who at that moment
had more sense than either of them, could throw himself between their
weapons.

'Hold!  Hold!  Medina!' He exclaimed; 'Remember the consequences of
shedding blood on consecrated ground!'

The Stranger immediately dropped his Sword.

'Medina?' He cried; 'Great God, is it possible! Lorenzo, have you quite
forgotten Raymond de las Cisternas?'

Lorenzo's astonishment increased with every succeeding moment. Raymond
advanced towards him, but with a look of suspicion He drew back his
hand, which the Other was preparing to take.

'You here, Marquis?  What is the meaning of all this?  You engaged in a
clandestine correspondence with my Sister, whose affections....'

'Have ever been, and still are mine.  But this is no fit place for an
explanation.  Accompany me to my Hotel, and you shall know every thing.
Who is that with you?'

'One whom I believe you to have seen before,' replied Don Christoval,
'though probably not at Church.'

'The Conde d'Ossorio?'

'Exactly so, Marquis.'

'I have no objection to entrusting you with my secret, for I am sure
that I may depend upon your silence.'

'Then your opinion of me is better than my own, and therefore I must
beg leave to decline your confidence. Do you go your own way, and I
shall go mine.  Marquis, where are you to be found?'

'As usual, at the Hotel de las Cisternas; But remember, that I am
incognito, and that if you wish to see me, you must ask for Alphonso
d'Alvarada.'

'Good!  Good!  Farewell, Cavaliers!' said Don Christoval, and instantly
departed.

'You, Marquis,' said Lorenzo in the accent of surprise; 'You, Alphonso
d'Alvarada?'

'Even so, Lorenzo:  But unless you have already heard my story from
your Sister, I have much to relate that will astonish you. Follow me,
therefore, to my Hotel without delay.'

At this moment the Porter of the Capuchins entered the Cathedral to
lock up the doors for the night.  The two Noblemen instantly withdrew,
and hastened with all speed to the Palace de las Cisternas.

'Well, Antonia!' said the Aunt, as soon as She had quitted the Church;
'What think you of our Gallants?  Don Lorenzo really seems a very
obliging good sort of young Man:  He paid you some attention, and
nobody knows what may come of it.  But as to Don Christoval, I protest
to you, He is the very Phoenix of politeness.  So gallant! so
well-bred!  So sensible, and so pathetic!  Well!  If ever Man can
prevail upon me to break my vow never to marry, it will be that Don
Christoval.  You see, Niece, that every thing turns out exactly as I
told you:  The very moment that I produced myself in Madrid, I knew
that I should be surrounded by Admirers.  When I took off my veil, did
you see, Antonia, what an effect the action had upon the Conde?  And
when I presented him my hand, did you observe the air of passion with
which He kissed it?  If ever I witnessed real love, I then saw it
impressed upon Don Christoval's countenance!'

Now Antonia had observed the air, with which Don Christoval had kissed
this same hand; But as She drew conclusions from it somewhat different
from her Aunt's, She was wise enough to hold her tongue.  As this is
the only instance known of a Woman's ever having done so, it was judged
worthy to be recorded here.

The old Lady continued her discourse to Antonia in the same strain,
till they gained the Street in which was their Lodging. Here a Crowd
collected before their door permitted them not to approach it; and
placing themselves on the opposite side of the Street, they endeavoured
to make out what had drawn all these people together.  After some
minutes the Crowd formed itself into a Circle; And now Antonia
perceived in the midst of it a Woman of extraordinary height, who
whirled herself repeatedly round and round, using all sorts of
extravagant gestures.  Her dress was composed of shreds of
various-coloured silks and Linens fantastically arranged, yet not
entirely without taste.  Her head was covered with a kind of Turban,
ornamented with vine leaves and wild flowers.  She seemed much
sun-burnt, and her complexion was of a deep olive:  Her eyes looked
fiery and strange; and in her hand She bore a long black Rod, with
which She at intervals traced a variety of singular figures upon the
ground, round about which She danced in all the eccentric attitudes of
folly and delirium.  Suddenly She broke off her dance, whirled herself
round thrice with rapidity, and after a moment's pause She sang the
following Ballad.

                THE GYPSY'S SONG

  Come, cross my hand!  My art surpasses
    All that did ever Mortal know;
  Come, Maidens, come! My magic glasses
    Your future Husband's form can show:

  For 'tis to me the power is given
    Unclosed the book of Fate to see;
  To read the fixed resolves of heaven,
    And dive into futurity.

  I guide the pale Moon's silver waggon;
    The winds in magic bonds I hold;
  I charm to sleep the crimson Dragon,
    Who loves to watch o'er buried gold:

  Fenced round with spells, unhurt I venture
    Their sabbath strange where Witches keep;
  Fearless the Sorcerer's circle enter,
    And woundless tread on snakes asleep.

  Lo! Here are charms of mighty power!
    This makes secure an Husband's truth
  And this composed at midnight hour
    Will force to love the coldest Youth:

  If any Maid too much has granted,
    Her loss this Philtre will repair;
  This blooms a cheek where red is wanted,
    And this will make a brown girl fair!

  Then silent hear, while I discover
    What I in Fortune's mirror view;
  And each, when many a year is over,
    Shall own the Gypsy's sayings true.


'Dear Aunt!' said Antonia when the Stranger had finished, 'Is She not
mad?'

'Mad?  Not She, Child; She is only wicked.  She is a Gypsy, a sort of
Vagabond, whose sole occupation is to run about the country telling
lyes, and pilfering from those who come by their money honestly.  Out
upon such Vermin!  If I were King of Spain, every one of them should be
burnt alive who was found in my dominions after the next three weeks.'

These words were pronounced so audibly that they reached the Gypsy's
ears.  She immediately pierced through the Crowd and made towards the
Ladies.  She saluted them thrice in the Eastern fashion, and then
addressed herself to Antonia.

THE GYPSY

 'Lady! gentle Lady!  Know,
  I your future fate can show;
  Give your hand, and do not fear;
  Lady! gentle Lady! hear!'

'Dearest Aunt!' said Antonia, 'Indulge me this once! Let me have my
fortune told me!'

'Nonsense, Child!  She will tell you nothing but falsehoods.'

'No matter; Let me at least hear what She has to say. Do, my dear Aunt!
Oblige me, I beseech you!'

'Well, well! Antonia, since you are so bent upon the thing, ... Here,
good Woman, you shall see the hands of both of us.  There is money for
you, and now let me hear my fortune.'

As She said this, She drew off her glove, and presented her hand; The
Gypsy looked at it for a moment, and then made this reply.


THE GYPSY

  'Your fortune?  You are now so old,
  Good Dame, that 'tis already told:
  Yet for your money, in a trice
  I will repay you in advice.
  Astonished at your childish vanity,
  Your Friends all tax you with insanity,
  And grieve to see you use your art
  To catch some youthful Lover's heart.
  Believe me, Dame, when all is done,
  Your age will still be fifty one;
  And Men will rarely take an hint
  Of love, from two grey eyes that squint.
  Take then my counsels; Lay aside
  Your paint and patches, lust and pride,
  And on the Poor those sums bestow,
  Which now are spent on useless show.
  Think on your Maker, not a Suitor;
  Think on your past faults, not on future;
  And think Time's Scythe will quickly mow
  The few red hairs, which deck your brow.

The audience rang with laughter during the Gypsy's address; and--'fifty
one,'--'squinting eyes,' 'red hair,'--'paint and patches,' &c. were
bandied from mouth to mouth.  Leonella was almost choaked with passion,
and loaded her malicious Adviser with the bitterest reproaches.  The
swarthy Prophetess for some time listened to her with a contemptuous
smile: at length She made her a short answer, and then turned to
Antonia.

THE GYPSY

 'Peace, Lady!  What I said was true;
  And now, my lovely Maid, to you;
  Give me your hand, and let me see
  Your future doom, and heaven's decree.'

In imitation of Leonella, Antonia drew off her glove, and presented her
white hand to the Gypsy, who having gazed upon it for some time with a
mingled expression of pity and astonishment, pronounced her Oracle in
the following words.

THE GYPSY

 'Jesus! what a palm is there!
  Chaste, and gentle, young and fair,
  Perfect mind and form possessing,
  You would be some good Man's blessing:
  But Alas! This line discovers,
  That destruction o'er you hovers;
  Lustful Man and crafty Devil
  Will combine to work your evil;
  And from earth by sorrows driven,
  Soon your Soul must speed to heaven.
  Yet your sufferings to delay,
  Well remember what I say.
  When you One more virtuous see
  Than belongs to Man to be,
  One, whose self no crimes assailing,
  Pities not his Neighbour's Failing,
  Call the Gypsy's words to mind:
  Though He seem so good and kind,
  Fair Exteriors oft will hide
  Hearts, that swell with lust and pride!
  Lovely Maid, with tears I leave you!
  Let not my prediction grieve you;
  Rather with submission bending
  Calmly wait distress impending,
  And expect eternal bliss
  In a better world than this.

Having said this, the Gypsy again whirled herself round thrice, and
then hastened out of the Street with frantic gesture.  The Crowd
followed her; and Elvira's door being now unembarrassed Leonella
entered the House out of honour with the Gypsy, with her Niece, and
with the People; In short with every body, but herself and her charming
Cavalier.  The Gypsy's predictions had also considerably affected
Antonia; But the impression soon wore off, and in a few hours She had
forgotten the adventure as totally as had it never taken place.


CHAPTER II

  Forse se tu gustassi una sol volta
  La millesima parte delle gioje,
  Che gusta un cor amato riamando,
  Diresti ripentita sospirando,
  Perduto e tutto il tempo
  Che in amar non si sponde.
                       Tasso.

  Hadst Thou but tasted once the thousandth part
  Of joys, which bless the loved and loving heart,
  Your words repentant and your sighs would prove,
  Lost is the time which is not past in love.

The monks having attended their Abbot to the door of his Cell, He
dismissed them with an air of conscious superiority in which Humility's
semblance combated with the reality of pride.

He was no sooner alone, than He gave free loose to the indulgence of
his vanity.  When He remembered the Enthusiasm which his discourse had
excited, his heart swelled with rapture, and his imagination presented
him with splendid visions of aggrandizement.  He looked round him with
exultation, and Pride told him loudly that He was superior to the rest
of his fellow-Creatures.

'Who,' thought He; 'Who but myself has passed the ordeal of Youth, yet
sees no single stain upon his conscience?  Who else has subdued the
violence of strong passions and an impetuous temperament, and submitted
even from the dawn of life to voluntary retirement?  I seek for such a
Man in vain.  I see no one but myself possessed of such resolution.
Religion cannot boast Ambrosio's equal!  How powerful an effect did my
discourse produce upon its Auditors!  How they crowded round me!  How
they loaded me with benedictions, and pronounced me the sole
uncorrupted Pillar of the Church!  What then now is left for me to do?
Nothing, but to watch as carefully over the conduct of my Brothers as I
have hitherto watched over my own.  Yet hold!  May I not be tempted
from those paths which till now I have pursued without one moment's
wandering?  Am I not a Man, whose nature is frail, and prone to error?
I must now abandon the solitude of my retreat; The fairest and noblest
Dames of Madrid continually present themselves at the Abbey, and will
use no other Confessor.

I must accustom my eyes to Objects of temptation, and expose myself to
the seduction of luxury and desire.  Should I meet in that world which
I am constrained to enter some lovely Female, lovely ...  as you,
Madona....!'

As He said this, He fixed his eyes upon a picture of the Virgin, which
was suspended opposite to him:  This for two years had been the Object
of his increasing wonder and adoration.  He paused, and gazed upon it
with delight.

'What Beauty in that countenance!'  He continued after a silence of
some minutes; 'How graceful is the turn of that head!  What sweetness,
yet what majesty in her divine eyes!  How softly her cheek reclines
upon her hand!  Can the Rose vie with the blush of that cheek?  Can the
Lily rival the whiteness of that hand? Oh! if such a Creature existed,
and existed but for me! Were I permitted to twine round my fingers
those golden ringlets, and press with my lips the treasures of that
snowy bosom!  Gracious God, should I then resist the temptation?
Should I not barter for a single embrace the reward of my sufferings
for thirty years?  Should I not abandon....  Fool that I am!
Whither do I suffer my admiration of this picture to hurry me?  Away,
impure ideas!  Let me remember that Woman is for ever lost to me. Never
was Mortal formed so perfect as this picture. But even did such exist,
the trial might be too mighty for a common virtue, but Ambrosio's is
proof against temptation.  Temptation, did I say?  To me it would be
none.  What charms me, when ideal and considered as a superior Being,
would disgust me, become Woman and tainted with all the failings of
Mortality.  It is not the Woman's beauty that fills me with such
enthusiasm; It is the Painter's skill that I admire, it is the Divinity
that I adore! Are not the passions dead in my bosom?  Have I not freed
myself from the frailty of Mankind?  Fear not, Ambrosio!  Take
confidence in the strength of your virtue.  Enter boldly into a world
to whose failings you are superior; Reflect that you are now exempted
from Humanity's defects, and defy all the arts of the Spirits of
Darkness.  They shall know you for what you are!'

Here his Reverie was interrupted by three soft knocks at the door of
his Cell.  With difficulty did the Abbot awake from his delirium.  The
knocking was repeated.

'Who is there?' said Ambrosio at length.

'It is only Rosario,' replied a gentle voice.

'Enter!  Enter, my Son!'

The Door was immediately opened, and Rosario appeared with a small
basket in his hand.

Rosario was a young Novice belonging to the Monastery, who in three
Months intended to make his profession.  A sort of mystery enveloped
this Youth which rendered him at once an object of interest and
curiosity.  His hatred of society, his profound melancholy, his rigid
observation of the duties of his order, and his voluntary seclusion
from the world at his age so unusual, attracted the notice of the whole
fraternity.  He seemed fearful of being recognised, and no one had ever
seen his face. His head was continually muffled up in his Cowl; Yet
such of his features as accident discovered, appeared the most
beautiful and noble. Rosario was the only name by which He was known in
the Monastery.

No one knew from whence He came, and when questioned in the subject He
preserved a profound silence.  A Stranger, whose rich habit and
magnificent equipage declared him to be of distinguished rank, had
engaged the Monks to receive a Novice, and had deposited the necessary
sums.  The next day He returned with Rosario, and from that time no
more had been heard of him.

The Youth had carefully avoided the company of the Monks:  He answered
their civilities with sweetness, but reserve, and evidently showed that
his inclination led him to solitude.  To this general rule the Superior
was the only exception.  To him He looked up with a respect approaching
idolatry:  He sought his company with the most attentive assiduity, and
eagerly seized every means to ingratiate himself in his favour.  In the
Abbot's society his Heart seemed to be at ease, and an air of gaiety
pervaded his whole manners and discourse.  Ambrosio on his side did not
feel less attracted towards the Youth; With him alone did He lay aside
his habitual severity.  When He spoke to him, He insensibly assumed a
tone milder than was usual to him; and no voice sounded so sweet to him
as did Rosario's.  He repayed the Youth's attentions by instructing him
in various sciences; The Novice received his lessons with docility;
Ambrosio was every day more charmed with the vivacity of his Genius,
the simplicity of his manners, and the rectitude of his heart:  In
short He loved him with all the affection of a Father.  He could not
help sometimes indulging a desire secretly to see the face of his
Pupil; But his rule of self-denial extended even to curiosity, and
prevented him from communicating his wishes to the Youth.

'Pardon my intrusion, Father,' said Rosario, while He placed his basket
upon the Table; 'I come to you a Suppliant.  Hearing that a dear Friend
is dangerously ill, I entreat your prayers for his recovery.  If
supplications can prevail upon heaven to spare him, surely yours must
be efficacious.'

'Whatever depends upon me, my Son, you know that you may command.

What is your Friend's name?'

'Vincentio della Ronda.'

''Tis sufficient.  I will not forget him in my prayers, and may our
thrice-blessed St. Francis deign to listen to my intercession!--What
have you in your basket, Rosario?'

'A few of those flowers, reverend Father, which I have observed to be
most acceptable to you.  Will you permit my arranging them in your
chamber?'

'Your attentions charm me, my Son.'

While Rosario dispersed the contents of his Basket in small Vases
placed for that purpose in various parts of the room, the Abbot thus
continued the conversation.

'I saw you not in the Church this evening, Rosario.'

'Yet I was present, Father.  I am too grateful for your protection to
lose an opportunity of witnessing your Triumph.'

'Alas! Rosario, I have but little cause to triumph:  The Saint spoke by
my mouth; To him belongs all the merit. It seems then you were
contented with my discourse?'

'Contented, say you?  Oh! you surpassed yourself!  Never did I hear
such eloquence ...  save once!'

Here the Novice heaved an involuntary sigh.

'When was that once?' demanded the Abbot.

'When you preached upon the sudden indisposition of our late Superior.'

'I remember it:  That is more than two years ago.  And were you
present?  I knew you not at that time, Rosario.'

''Tis true, Father; and would to God! I had expired, ere I beheld that
day!  What sufferings, what sorrows should I have escaped!'

'Sufferings at your age, Rosario?'

'Aye, Father; Sufferings, which if known to you, would equally raise
your anger and compassion!  Sufferings, which form at once the torment
and pleasure of my existence!  Yet in this retreat my bosom would feel
tranquil, were it not for the tortures of apprehension.  Oh God!  Oh
God! how cruel is a life of fear!--Father! I have given up all; I have
abandoned the world and its delights for ever:  Nothing now remains,
Nothing now has charms for me, but your friendship, but your affection.
If I lose that, Father!  Oh! if I lose that, tremble at the effects of
my despair!'

'You apprehend the loss of my friendship?  How has my conduct justified
this fear?  Know me better, Rosario, and think me worthy of your
confidence.  What are your sufferings?  Reveal them to me, and believe
that if 'tis in my power to relieve them....'

'Ah! 'tis in no one's power but yours.  Yet I must not let you know
them.  You would hate me for my avowal!  You would drive me from your
presence with scorn and ignominy!'

'My Son, I conjure you!  I entreat you!'

'For pity's sake, enquire no further!  I must not ... I dare not...
Hark!  The Bell rings for Vespers!  Father, your benediction, and I
leave you!'

As He said this, He threw himself upon his knees and received the
blessing which He demanded.  Then pressing the Abbot's hand to his
lips, He started from the ground and hastily quitted the apartment.
Soon after Ambrosio descended to Vespers (which were celebrated in a
small chapel belonging to the Abbey), filled with surprise at the
singularity of the Youth's behaviour.

Vespers being over, the Monks retired to their respective Cells. The
Abbot alone remained in the Chapel to receive the Nuns of St. Clare.
He had not been long seated in the confessional chair before the
Prioress made her appearance.  Each of the Nuns was heard in her turn,
while the Others waited with the Domina in the adjoining Vestry.
Ambrosio listened to the confessions with attention, made many
exhortations, enjoined penance proportioned to each offence, and for
some time every thing went on as usual: till at last one of the Nuns,
conspicuous from the nobleness of her air and elegance of her figure,
carelessly permitted a letter to fall from her bosom.  She was
retiring, unconscious of her loss.  Ambrosio supposed it to have been
written by some one of her Relations, and picked it up intending to
restore it to her.

'Stay, Daughter,' said He; 'You have let fall....'

At this moment, the paper being already open, his eye involuntarily
read the first words.  He started back with surprise!  The Nun had
turned round on hearing his voice:  She perceived her letter in his
hand, and uttering a shriek of terror, flew hastily to regain it.

'Hold!' said the Friar in a tone of severity; 'Daughter, I must read
this letter.'

'Then I am lost!'  She exclaimed clasping her hands together wildly.

All colour instantly faded from her face; she trembled with agitation,
and was obliged to fold her arms round a Pillar of the Chapel to save
herself from sinking upon the floor.  In the meanwhile the Abbot read
the following lines.

'All is ready for your escape, my dearest Agnes.  At twelve tomorrow
night I shall expect to find you at the Garden door:  I have obtained
the Key, and a few hours will suffice to place you in a secure asylum.
Let no mistaken scruples induce you to reject the certain means of
preserving yourself and the innocent Creature whom you nourish in your
bosom.  Remember that you had promised to be mine, long ere you engaged
yourself to the church; that your situation will soon be evident to the
prying eyes of your Companions; and that flight is the only means of
avoiding the effects of their malevolent resentment.  Farewell, my
Agnes! my dear and destined Wife!  Fail not to be at the Garden door at
twelve!'

As soon as He had finished, Ambrosio bent an eye stern and angry upon
the imprudent Nun.

'This letter must to the Prioress!' said He, and passed her.

His words sounded like thunder to her ears:  She awoke from her
torpidity only to be sensible of the dangers of her situation. She
followed him hastily, and detained him by his garment.

'Stay!  Oh! stay!' She cried in the accents of despair, while She threw
herself at the Friar's feet, and bathed them with her tears.  'Father,
compassionate my youth!  Look with indulgence on a Woman's weakness,
and deign to conceal my frailty!  The remainder of my life shall be
employed in expiating this single fault, and your lenity will bring
back a soul to heaven!'

'Amazing confidence!  What!  Shall St. Clare's Convent become the
retreat of Prostitutes?  Shall I suffer the Church of Christ to cherish
in its bosom debauchery and shame?  Unworthy Wretch! such lenity would
make me your accomplice.  Mercy would here be criminal.  You have
abandoned yourself to a Seducer's lust; You have defiled the sacred
habit by your impurity; and still dare you think yourself deserving my
compassion?  Hence, nor detain me longer!  Where is the Lady Prioress?'
He added, raising his voice.

'Hold! Father, Hold!  Hear me but for one moment! Tax me not with
impurity, nor think that I have erred from the warmth of temperament.
Long before I took the veil, Raymond was Master of my heart:  He
inspired me with the purest, the most irreproachable passion, and was
on the point of becoming my lawful husband.  An horrible adventure, and
the treachery of a Relation, separated us from each other:  I believed
him for ever lost to me, and threw myself into a Convent from motives
of despair.  Accident again united us; I could not refuse myself the
melancholy pleasure of mingling my tears with his:  We met nightly in
the Gardens of St. Clare, and in an unguarded moment I violated my vows
of Chastity.  I shall soon become a Mother: Reverend Ambrosio, take
compassion on me; take compassion on the innocent Being whose existence
is attached to mine. If you discover my imprudence to the Domina, both
of us are lost:  The punishment which the laws of St. Clare assign to
Unfortunates like myself is most severe and cruel.  Worthy, worthy
Father! Let not your own untainted conscience render you unfeeling
towards those less able to withstand temptation!  Let not mercy be the
only virtue of which your heart is unsusceptible!  Pity me, most
reverend!  Restore my letter, nor doom me to inevitable destruction!'

'Your boldness confounds me!  Shall I conceal your crime, I whom you
have deceived by your feigned confession?  No, Daughter, no! I will
render you a more essential service.  I will rescue you from perdition
in spite of yourself; Penance and mortification shall expiate your
offence, and Severity force you back to the paths of holiness.  What;
Ho!  Mother St. Agatha!'

'Father!  By all that is sacred, by all that is most dear to you, I
supplicate, I entreat....'

'Release me!  I will not hear you.  Where is the Domina?  Mother St.
Agatha, where are you?'

The door of the Vestry opened, and the Prioress entered the Chapel,
followed by her Nuns.

'Cruel!  Cruel!' exclaimed Agnes, relinquishing her hold.

Wild and desperate, She threw herself upon the ground, beating her
bosom and rending her veil in all the delirium of despair. The Nuns
gazed with astonishment upon the scene before them.  The Friar now
presented the fatal paper to the Prioress, informed her of the manner
in which he had found it, and added, that it was her business to
decide, what penance the delinquent merited.

While She perused the letter, the Domina's countenance grew inflamed
with passion.  What!  Such a crime committed in her Convent, and made
known to Ambrosio, to the Idol of Madrid, to the Man whom She was most
anxious to impress with the opinion of the strictness and regularity of
her House!  Words were inadequate to express her fury.  She was silent,
and darted upon the prostrate Nun looks of menace and malignity.

'Away with her to the Convent!' said She at length to some of her
Attendants.

Two of the oldest Nuns now approaching Agnes, raised her forcibly from
the ground, and prepared to conduct her from the Chapel.

'What!' She exclaimed suddenly shaking off their hold with distracted
gestures; 'Is all hope then lost?  Already do you drag me to
punishment?  Where are you, Raymond?  Oh! save me! save me!'

Then casting upon the Abbot a frantic look, 'Hear me!' She continued;
'Man of an hard heart!  Hear me, Proud, Stern, and Cruel!  You could
have saved me; you could have restored me to happiness and virtue, but
would not!  You are the destroyer of my Soul; You are my Murderer, and
on you fall the curse of my death and my unborn Infant's!  Insolent in
your yet-unshaken virtue, you disdained the prayers of a Penitent; But
God will show mercy, though you show none.  And where is the merit of
your boasted virtue?  What temptations have you vanquished?  Coward!
you have fled from it, not opposed seduction.  But the day of Trial
will arrive!  Oh! then when you yield to impetuous passions! when you
feel that Man is weak, and born to err; When shuddering you look back
upon your crimes, and solicit with terror the mercy of your God, Oh! in
that fearful moment think upon me!  Think upon your Cruelty!  Think
upon Agnes, and despair of pardon!'

As She uttered these last words, her strength was exhausted, and She
sank inanimate upon the bosom of a Nun who stood near her. She was
immediately conveyed from the Chapel, and her Companions followed her.

Ambrosio had not listened to her reproaches without emotion.  A secret
pang at his heart made him feel, that He had treated this Unfortunate
with too great severity. He therefore detained the Prioress and
ventured to pronounce some words in favour of the Delinquent.

'The violence of her despair,' said He, 'proves, that at least Vice is
not become familiar to her.  Perhaps by treating her with somewhat less
rigour than is generally practised, and mitigating in some degree the
accustomed penance....'

'Mitigate it, Father?' interrupted the Lady Prioress; 'Not I, believe
me.  The laws of our order are strict and severe; they have fallen into
disuse of late, But the crime of Agnes shows me the necessity of their
revival.  I go to signify my intention to the Convent, and Agnes shall
be the first to feel the rigour of those laws, which shall be obeyed to
the very letter.  Father, Farewell.'

Thus saying, She hastened out of the Chapel.

'I have done my duty,' said Ambrosio to himself.

Still did He not feel perfectly satisfied by this reflection.  To
dissipate the unpleasant ideas which this scene had excited in him,
upon quitting the Chapel He descended into the Abbey Garden.

In all Madrid there was no spot more beautiful or better regulated.  It
was laid out with the most exquisite taste; The choicest flowers
adorned it in the height of luxuriance, and though artfully arranged,
seemed only planted by the hand of Nature: Fountains, springing from
basons of white Marble, cooled the air with perpetual showers; and the
Walls were entirely covered by Jessamine, vines, and Honeysuckles.  The
hour now added to the beauty of the scene.  The full Moon, ranging
through a blue and cloudless sky, shed upon the trees a trembling
lustre, and the waters of the fountains sparkled in the silver beam:  A
gentle breeze breathed the fragrance of Orange-blossoms along the
Alleys; and the Nightingale poured forth her melodious murmur from the
shelter of an artificial wilderness.  Thither the Abbot bent his steps.

In the bosom of this little Grove stood a rustic Grotto, formed in
imitation of an Hermitage.  The walls were constructed of roots of
trees, and the interstices filled up with Moss and Ivy. Seats of Turf
were placed on either side, and a natural Cascade fell from the Rock
above.  Buried in himself the Monk approached the spot.  The universal
calm had communicated itself to his bosom, and a voluptuous
tranquillity spread languor through his soul.

He reached the Hermitage, and was entering to repose himself, when He
stopped on perceiving it to be already occupied. Extended upon one of
the Banks lay a man in a melancholy posture.

His head was supported upon his arm, and He seemed lost in mediation.
The Monk drew nearer, and recognised Rosario:  He watched him in
silence, and entered not the Hermitage.  After some minutes the Youth
raised his eyes, and fixed them mournfully upon the opposite Wall.

'Yes!' said He with a deep and plaintive sigh; 'I feel all the
happiness of thy situation, all the misery of my own!  Happy were I,
could I think like Thee!  Could I look like Thee with disgust upon
Mankind, could bury myself for ever in some impenetrable solitude, and
forget that the world holds Beings deserving to be loved!  Oh God!
What a blessing would Misanthropy be to me!'

'That is a singular thought, Rosario,' said the Abbot, entering the
Grotto.

'You here, reverend Father?' cried the Novice.

At the same time starting from his place in confusion, He drew his Cowl
hastily over his face.  Ambrosio seated himself upon the Bank, and
obliged the Youth to place himself by him.

'You must not indulge this disposition to melancholy,' said He; 'What
can possibly have made you view in so desirable a light, Misanthropy,
of all sentiments the most hateful?'

'The perusal of these Verses, Father, which till now had escaped my
observation.  The Brightness of the Moonbeams permitted my reading
them; and Oh! how I envy the feelings of the Writer!'

As He said this, He pointed to a marble Tablet fixed against the
opposite Wall:  On it were engraved the following lines.

         INSCRIPTION IN AN HERMITAGE

  Who-e'er Thou art these lines now reading,
  Think not, though from the world receding
  I joy my lonely days to lead in
      This Desart drear,
  That with remorse a conscience bleeding
      Hath led me here.

  No thought of guilt my bosom sowrs:
  Free-willed I fled from courtly bowers;
  For well I saw in Halls and Towers
     That Lust and Pride,
  The Arch-Fiend's dearest darkest Powers,
     In state preside.

  I saw Mankind with vice incrusted;
  I saw that Honour's sword was rusted;
  That few for aught but folly lusted;
  That He was still deceiv'd, who trusted
     In Love or Friend;
  And hither came with Men disgusted
     My life to end.

  In this lone Cave, in garments lowly,
  Alike a Foe to noisy folly,
  And brow-bent gloomy melancholy
     I wear away
  My life, and in my office holy
    Consume the day.

  Content and comfort bless me more in
  This Grot, than e'er I felt before in
  A Palace, and with thoughts still soaring
     To God on high,
  Each night and morn with voice imploring
     This wish I sigh.

  'Let me, Oh! Lord! from life retire,
  Unknown each guilty worldly fire,
  Remorseful throb, or loose desire;
     And when I die,
  Let me in this belief expire,
     "To God I fly"!'

  Stranger, if full of youth and riot
  As yet no grief has marred thy quiet,
  Thou haply throw'st a scornful eye at
     The Hermit's prayer:
  But if Thou hast a cause to sigh at
     Thy fault, or care;

  If Thou hast known false Love's vexation,
  Or hast been exil'd from thy Nation,
  Or guilt affrights thy contemplation,
         And makes thee pine,
  Oh! how must Thou lament thy station,
       And envy mine!

'Were it possible' said the Friar, 'for Man to be so totally wrapped up
in himself as to live in absolute seclusion from human nature, and
could yet feel the contented tranquillity which these lines express, I
allow that the situation would be more desirable, than to live in a
world so pregnant with every vice and every folly.  But this never can
be the case.  This inscription was merely placed here for the ornament
of the Grotto, and the sentiments and the Hermit are equally imaginary.
Man was born for society.  However little He may be attached to the
World, He never can wholly forget it, or bear to be wholly forgotten by
it.  Disgusted at the guilt or absurdity of Mankind, the Misanthrope
flies from it: He resolves to become an Hermit, and buries himself in
the Cavern of some gloomy Rock.  While Hate inflames his bosom,
possibly He may feel contented with his situation:  But when his
passions begin to cool; when Time has mellowed his sorrows, and healed
those wounds which He bore with him to his solitude, think you that
Content becomes his Companion?  Ah! no, Rosario.  No longer sustained
by the violence of his passions, He feels all the monotony of his way
of living, and his heart becomes the prey of Ennui and weariness.  He
looks round, and finds himself alone in the Universe:  The love of
society revives in his bosom, and He pants to return to that world
which He has abandoned.  Nature loses all her charms in his eyes:  No
one is near him to point out her beauties, or share in his admiration
of her excellence and variety.  Propped upon the fragment of some Rock,
He gazes upon the tumbling waterfall with a vacant eye, He views
without emotion the glory of the setting Sun.  Slowly He returns to his
Cell at Evening, for no one there is anxious for his arrival; He has no
comfort in his solitary unsavoury meal:  He throws himself upon his
couch of Moss despondent and dissatisfied, and wakes only to pass a day
as joyless, as monotonous as the former.'

'You amaze me, Father!  Suppose that circumstances condemned you to
solitude; Would not the duties of Religion and the consciousness of a
life well spent communicate to your heart that calm which....'

'I should deceive myself, did I fancy that they could.  I am convinced
of the contrary, and that all my fortitude would not prevent me from
yielding to melancholy and disgust.  After consuming the day in study,
if you knew my pleasure at meeting my Brethren in the Evening!  After
passing many a long hour in solitude, if I could express to you the joy
which I feel at once more beholding a fellow-Creature!  'Tis in this
particular that I place the principal merit of a Monastic Institution.
It secludes Man from the temptations of Vice; It procures that leisure
necessary for the proper service of the Supreme; It spares him the
mortification of witnessing the crimes of the worldly, and yet permits
him to enjoy the blessings of society.  And do you, Rosario, do YOU
envy an Hermit's life?  Can you be thus blind to the happiness of your
situation?  Reflect upon it for a moment. This Abbey is become your
Asylum:  Your regularity, your gentleness, your talents have rendered
you the object of universal esteem:  You are secluded from the world
which you profess to hate; yet you remain in possession of the benefits
of society, and that a society composed of the most estimable of
Mankind.'

'Father!  Father! 'tis that which causes my Torment!  Happy had it been
for me, had my life been passed among the vicious and abandoned!  Had I
never heard pronounced the name of Virtue! 'Tis my unbounded adoration
of religion; 'Tis my soul's exquisite sensibility of the beauty of fair
and good, that loads me with shame! that hurries me to perdition!  Oh!
that I had never seen these Abbey walls!'

'How, Rosario?  When we last conversed, you spoke in a different tone.
Is my friendship then become of such little consequence? Had you never
seen these Abbey walls, you never had seen me: Can that really be your
wish?'

'Had never seen you?' repeated the Novice, starting from the Bank, and
grasping the Friar's hand with a frantic air; 'You? You?  Would to God,
that lightning had blasted them, before you ever met my eyes!  Would to
God! that I were never to see you more, and could forget that I had
ever seen you!'

With these words He flew hastily from the Grotto.  Ambrosio remained in
his former attitude, reflecting on the Youth's unaccountable behaviour.
He was inclined to suspect the derangement of his senses: yet the
general tenor of his conduct, the connexion of his ideas, and calmness
of his demeanour till the moment of his quitting the Grotto, seemed to
discountenance this conjecture.  After a few minutes Rosario returned.
He again seated himself upon the Bank:  He reclined his cheek upon one
hand, and with the other wiped away the tears which trickled from his
eyes at intervals.

The Monk looked upon him with compassion, and forbore to interrupt his
meditations.  Both observed for some time a profound silence.  The
Nightingale had now taken her station upon an Orange Tree fronting the
Hermitage, and poured forth a strain the most melancholy and melodious.
Rosario raised his head, and listened to her with attention.

'It was thus,' said He, with a deep-drawn sigh; 'It was thus, that
during the last month of her unhappy life, my Sister used to sit
listening to the Nightingale.  Poor Matilda!  She sleeps in the Grave,
and her broken heart throbs no more with passion.'

'You had a Sister?'

'You say right, that I HAD; Alas!  I have one no longer.  She sunk
beneath the weight of her sorrows in the very spring of life.'

'What were those sorrows?'

'They will not excite YOUR pity:  YOU know not the power of those
irresistible, those fatal sentiments, to which her Heart was a prey.
Father, She loved unfortunately.  A passion for One endowed with every
virtue, for a Man, Oh! rather let me say, for a divinity, proved the
bane of her existence.  His noble form, his spotless character, his
various talents, his wisdom solid, wonderful, and glorious, might have
warmed the bosom of the most insensible.  My Sister saw him, and dared
to love though She never dared to hope.'

'If her love was so well bestowed, what forbad her to hope the
obtaining of its object?'

'Father, before He knew her, Julian had already plighted his vows to a
Bride most fair, most heavenly!  Yet still my Sister loved, and for the
Husband's sake She doted upon the Wife.  One morning She found means to
escape from our Father's House:  Arrayed in humble weeds She offered
herself as a Domestic to the Consort of her Beloved, and was accepted.
She was now continually in his presence:  She strove to ingratiate
herself into his favour:  She succeeded.  Her attentions attracted
Julian's notice;  The virtuous are ever grateful, and He distinguished
Matilda above the rest of her Companions.'

'And did not your Parents seek for her?  Did they submit tamely to
their loss, nor attempt to recover their wandering Daughter?'

'Ere they could find her, She discovered herself.  Her love grew too
violent for concealment; Yet She wished not for Julian's person, She
ambitioned but a share of his heart.  In an unguarded moment She
confessed her affection.  What was the return? Doating upon his Wife,
and believing that a look of pity bestowed upon another was a theft
from what He owed to her, He drove Matilda from his presence.  He
forbad her ever again appearing before him.  His severity broke her
heart:  She returned to her Father's, and in a few Months after was
carried to her Grave.'

'Unhappy Girl!  Surely her fate was too severe, and Julian was too
cruel.'

'Do you think so, Father?' cried the Novice with vivacity; 'Do you
think that He was cruel?'

'Doubtless I do, and pity her most sincerely.'

'You pity her?  You pity her?  Oh!  Father!  Father! Then pity me!'

The Friar started; when after a moment's pause Rosario added with a
faltering voice,--'for my sufferings are still greater.  My Sister had
a Friend, a real Friend, who pitied the acuteness of her feelings, nor
reproached her with her inability to repress them.  I ...!  I have no
Friend!  The whole wide world cannot furnish an heart that is willing
to participate in the sorrows of mine!'

As He uttered these words, He sobbed audibly.  The Friar was affected.
He took Rosario's hand, and pressed it with tenderness.

'You have no Friend, say you?  What then am I?  Why will you not
confide in me, and what can you fear?  My severity?  Have I ever used
it with you?  The dignity of my habit?  Rosario, I lay aside the Monk,
and bid you consider me as no other than your Friend, your Father.
Well may I assume that title, for never did Parent watch over a Child
more fondly than I have watched over you. From the moment in which I
first beheld you, I perceived sensations in my bosom till then unknown
to me; I found a delight in your society which no one's else could
afford; and when I witnessed the extent of your genius and information,
I rejoiced as does a Father in the perfections of his Son.  Then lay
aside your fears; Speak to me with openness:  Speak to me, Rosario, and
say that you will confide in me.  If my aid or my pity can alleviate
your distress....'

'Yours can!  Yours only can!  Ah!  Father, how willingly would I unveil
to you my heart!  How willingly would I declare the secret which bows
me down with its weight! But Oh!  I fear!  I fear!'

'What, my Son?'

'That you should abhor me for my weakness; That the reward of my
confidence should be the loss of your esteem.'

'How shall I reassure you?  Reflect upon the whole of my past conduct,
upon the paternal tenderness which I have ever shown you.  Abhor you,
Rosario?  It is no longer in my power.  To give up your society would
be to deprive myself of the greatest pleasure of my life.  Then reveal
to me what afflicts you, and believe me while I solemnly swear....'

'Hold!' interrupted the Novice; 'Swear, that whatever be my secret, you
will not oblige me to quit the Monastery till my Noviciate shall
expire.'

'I promise it faithfully, and as I keep my vows to you, may Christ keep
his to Mankind.  Now then explain this mystery, and rely upon my
indulgence.'

'I obey you.  Know then....  Oh! how I tremble to name the word!
Listen to me with pity, revered Ambrosio!  Call up every latent spark
of human weakness that may teach you compassion for mine!  Father!'
continued He throwing himself at the Friar's feet, and pressing his
hand to his lips with eagerness, while agitation for a moment choaked
his voice; 'Father!' continued He in faltering accents, 'I am a Woman!'

The Abbot started at this unexpected avowal. Prostrate on the ground
lay the feigned Rosario, as if waiting in silence the decision of his
Judge.  Astonishment on the one part, apprehension on the other, for
some minutes chained them in the same attitudes, as had they been
touched by the Rod of some Magician.  At length recovering from his
confusion, the Monk quitted the Grotto, and sped with precipitation
towards the Abbey.  His action did not escape the Suppliant.  She
sprang from the ground; She hastened to follow him, overtook him, threw
herself in his passage, and embraced his knees.  Ambrosio strove in
vain to disengage himself from her grasp.

'Do not fly me!' She cried; 'Leave me not abandoned to the impulse of
despair!  Listen, while I excuse my imprudence; while I acknowledge my
Sister's story to be my own!  I am Matilda; You are her Beloved.'

If Ambrosio's surprise was great at her first avowal, upon hearing her
second it exceeded all bounds.  Amazed, embarrassed, and irresolute He
found himself incapable of pronouncing a syllable, and remained in
silence gazing upon Matilda:  This gave her opportunity to continue her
explanation as follows.

'Think not, Ambrosio, that I come to rob your Bride of your affections.
No, believe me:  Religion alone deserves you; and far is it from
Matilda's wish to draw you from the paths of virtue.  What I feel for
you is love, not licentiousness; I sigh to be possessor of your heart,
not lust for the enjoyment of your person.  Deign to listen to my
vindication:  A few moments will convince you that this holy retreat is
not polluted by my presence, and that you may grant me your compassion
without trespassing against your vows.'--She seated herself:  Ambrosio,
scarcely conscious of what He did, followed her example, and She
proceeded in her discourse.

'I spring from a distinguished family:  My Father was Chief of the
noble House of Villanegas.  He died while I was still an Infant, and
left me sole Heiress of his immense possessions. Young and wealthy, I
was sought in marriage by the noblest Youths of Madrid; But no one
succeeded in gaining my affections.  I had been brought up under the
care of an Uncle possessed of the most solid judgment and extensive
erudition.  He took pleasure in communicating to me some portion of his
knowledge.  Under his instructions my understanding acquired more
strength and justness than generally falls to the lot of my sex:  The
ability of my Preceptor being aided by natural curiosity, I not only
made a considerable progress in sciences universally studied, but in
others, revealed but to few, and lying under censure from the blindness
of superstition.  But while my Guardian laboured to enlarge the sphere
of my knowledge, He carefully inculcated every moral precept:  He
relieved me from the shackles of vulgar prejudice; He pointed out the
beauty of Religion; He taught me to look with adoration upon the pure
and virtuous, and, woe is me! I have obeyed him but too well!

'With such dispositions, Judge whether I could observe with any other
sentiment than disgust the vice, dissipation, and ignorance, which
disgrace our Spanish Youth.  I rejected every offer with disdain.  My
heart remained without a Master till chance conducted me to the
Cathedral of the Capuchins.  Oh! surely on that day my Guardian Angel
slumbered neglectful of his charge!  Then was it that I first beheld
you:  You supplied the Superior's place, absent from illness.  You
cannot but remember the lively enthusiasm which your discourse created.
Oh! how I drank your words!  How your eloquence seemed to steal me from
myself!  I scarcely dared to breathe, fearing to lose a syllable; and
while you spoke, Methought a radiant glory beamed round your head, and
your countenance shone with the majesty of a God.  I retired from the
Church, glowing with admiration.  From that moment you became the idol
of my heart, the never-changing object of my Meditations.  I enquired
respecting you.  The reports which were made me of your mode of life,
of your knowledge, piety, and self-denial riveted the chains imposed on
me by your eloquence. I was conscious that there was no longer a void
in my heart; That I had found the Man whom I had sought till then in
vain.  In expectation of hearing you again, every day I visited your
Cathedral:  You remained secluded within the Abbey walls, and I always
withdrew, wretched and disappointed.  The Night was more propitious to
me, for then you stood before me in my dreams; You vowed to me eternal
friendship; You led me through the paths of virtue, and assisted me to
support the vexations of life.  The Morning dispelled these pleasing
visions; I woke, and found myself separated from you by Barriers which
appeared insurmountable.  Time seemed only to increase the strength of
my passion:  I grew melancholy and despondent; I fled from society, and
my health declined daily.  At length no longer able to exist in this
state of torture, I resolved to assume the disguise in which you see
me.  My artifice was fortunate:  I was received into the Monastery, and
succeeded in gaining your esteem.

'Now then I should have felt compleatly happy, had not my quiet been
disturbed by the fear of detection.  The pleasure which I received from
your society, was embittered by the idea that perhaps I should soon be
deprived of it: and my heart throbbed so rapturously at obtaining the
marks of your friendship, as to convince me that I never should survive
its loss.  I resolved, therefore, not to leave the discovery of my sex
to chance, to confess the whole to you, and throw myself entirely on
your mercy and indulgence.  Ah! Ambrosio, can I have been deceived?
Can you be less generous than I thought you?  I will not suspect it.
You will not drive a Wretch to despair; I shall still be permitted to
see you, to converse with you, to adore you!  Your virtues shall be my
example through life; and when we expire, our bodies shall rest in the
same Grave.'

She ceased.  While She spoke, a thousand opposing sentiments combated
in Ambrosio's bosom.  Surprise at the singularity of this adventure,
Confusion at her abrupt declaration, Resentment at her boldness in
entering the Monastery, and Consciousness of the austerity with which
it behoved him to reply, such were the sentiments of which He was
aware; But there were others also which did not obtain his notice.  He
perceived not, that his vanity was flattered by the praises bestowed
upon his eloquence and virtue; that He felt a secret pleasure in
reflecting that a young and seemingly lovely Woman had for his sake
abandoned the world, and sacrificed every other passion to that which
He had inspired:  Still less did He perceive that his heart throbbed
with desire, while his hand was pressed gently by Matilda's ivory
fingers.

By degrees He recovered from his confusion.  His ideas became less
bewildered:  He was immediately sensible of the extreme impropriety,
should Matilda be permitted to remain in the Abbey after this avowal of
her sex.  He assumed an air of severity, and drew away his hand.

'How, Lady!' said He; 'Can you really hope for my permission to remain
amongst us?  Even were I to grant your request, what good could you
derive from it?  Think you that I ever can reply to an affection,
which...'

'No, Father, No!  I expect not to inspire you with a love like mine.  I
only wish for the liberty to be near you, to pass some hours of the day
in your society; to obtain your compassion, your friendship and esteem.
Surely my request is not unreasonable.'

'But reflect, Lady!  Reflect only for a moment on the impropriety of my
harbouring a Woman in the Abbey; and that too a Woman, who confesses
that She loves me.  It must not be.  The risque of your being
discovered is too great, and I will not expose myself to so dangerous a
temptation.'

'Temptation, say you?  Forget that I am a Woman, and it no longer
exists:  Consider me only as a Friend, as an Unfortunate, whose
happiness, whose life depends upon your protection.  Fear not lest I
should ever call to your remembrance that love the most impetuous, the
most unbounded, has induced me to disguise my sex; or that instigated
by desires, offensive to YOUR vows and my own honour, I should
endeavour to seduce you from the path of rectitude.  No, Ambrosio,
learn to know me better.  I love you for your virtues:  Lose them, and
with them you lose my affections.  I look upon you as a Saint; Prove to
me that you are no more than Man, and I quit you with disgust.  Is it
then from me that you fear temptation?  From me, in whom the world's
dazzling pleasures created no other sentiment than contempt? From me,
whose attachment is grounded on your exemption from human frailty?  Oh!
dismiss such injurious apprehensions!  Think nobler of me, think nobler
of yourself.  I am incapable of seducing you to error; and surely your
Virtue is established on a basis too firm to be shaken by unwarranted
desires.  Ambrosio, dearest Ambrosio! drive me not from your presence;
Remember your promise, and authorize my stay!'

'Impossible, Matilda; YOUR interest commands me to refuse your prayer,
since I tremble for you, not for myself.  After vanquishing the
impetuous ebullitions of Youth; After passing thirty years in
mortification and penance, I might safely permit your stay, nor fear
your inspiring me with warmer sentiments than pity.  But to yourself,
remaining in the Abbey can produce none but fatal consequences.  You
will misconstrue my every word and action; You will seize every
circumstance with avidity, which encourages you to hope the return of
your affection; Insensibly your passions will gain a superiority over
your reason; and far from these being repressed by my presence, every
moment which we pass together, will only serve to irritate and excite
them. Believe me, unhappy Woman! you possess my sincere compassion.  I
am convinced that you have hitherto acted upon the purest motives; But
though you are blind to the imprudence of your conduct, in me it would
be culpable not to open your eyes.  I feel that Duty obliges my
treating you with harshness:  I must reject your prayer, and remove
every shadow of hope which may aid to nourish sentiments so pernicious
to your repose.  Matilda, you must from hence tomorrow.'

'Tomorrow, Ambrosio?  Tomorrow?  Oh! surely you cannot mean it!

You cannot resolve on driving me to despair!  You cannot have the
cruelty....'

'You have heard my decision, and it must be obeyed. The Laws of our
Order forbid your stay:  It would be perjury to conceal that a Woman is
within these Walls, and my vows will oblige me to declare your story to
the Community.  You must from hence!--I pity you, but can do no more!'

He pronounced these words in a faint and trembling voice:  Then rising
from his seat, He would have hastened towards the Monastery.  Uttering
a loud shriek, Matilda followed, and detained him.

'Stay yet one moment, Ambrosio!  Hear me yet speak one word!'

'I dare not listen!  Release me!  You know my resolution!'

'But one word!  But one last word, and I have done!'

'Leave me!  Your entreaties are in vain!  You must from hence tomorrow!'

'Go then, Barbarian!  But this resource is still left me.'

As She said this, She suddenly drew a poignard:  She rent open her
garment, and placed the weapon's point against her bosom.

'Father, I will never quit these Walls alive!'

'Hold!  Hold, Matilda!  What would you do?'

'You are determined, so am I:  The Moment that you leave me, I plunge
this Steel in my heart.'

'Holy St. Francis!  Matilda, have you your senses?  Do you know the
consequences of your action?  That Suicide is the greatest of crimes?
That you destroy your Soul?  That you lose your claim to salvation?
That you prepare for yourself everlasting torments?'

'I care not! I care not!' She replied passionately; 'Either your hand
guides me to Paradise, or my own dooms me to perdition! Speak to me,
Ambrosio!  Tell me that you will conceal my story, that I shall remain
your Friend and your Companion, or this poignard drinks my blood!'

As She uttered these last words, She lifted her arm, and made a motion
as if to stab herself.  The Friar's eyes followed with dread the course
of the dagger.  She had torn open her habit, and her bosom was half
exposed. The weapon's point rested upon her left breast:  And Oh! that
was such a breast!  The Moonbeams darting full upon it enabled the Monk
to observe its dazzling whiteness.  His eye dwelt with insatiable
avidity upon the beauteous Orb.  A sensation till then unknown filled
his heart with a mixture of anxiety and delight:  A raging fire shot
through every limb; The blood boiled in his veins, and a thousand wild
wishes bewildered his imagination.

'Hold!' He cried in an hurried faultering voice; 'I can resist no
longer!  Stay, then, Enchantress; Stay for my destruction!'

He said, and rushing from the place, hastened towards the Monastery:
He regained his Cell and threw himself upon his Couch, distracted
irresolute and confused.

He found it impossible for some time to arrange his ideas.  The scene
in which He had been engaged had excited such a variety of sentiments
in his bosom, that He was incapable of deciding which was predominant.
He was irresolute what conduct He ought to hold with the disturber of
his repose.  He was conscious that prudence, religion, and propriety
necessitated his obliging her to quit the Abbey:  But on the other hand
such powerful reasons authorized her stay that He was but too much
inclined to consent to her remaining.  He could not avoid being
flattered by Matilda's declaration, and at reflecting that He had
unconsciously vanquished an heart which had resisted the attacks of
Spain's noblest Cavaliers:  The manner in which He had gained her
affections was also the most satisfactory to his vanity: He remembered
the many happy hours which He had passed in Rosario's society, and
dreaded that void in his heart which parting with him would occasion.
Besides all this, He considered, that as Matilda was wealthy, her
favour might be of essential benefit to the Abbey.

'And what do I risque,' said He to himself, 'by authorizing her stay?
May I not safely credit her assertions?  Will it not be easy for me to
forget her sex, and still consider her as my Friend and my disciple?
Surely her love is as pure as She describes.  Had it been the offspring
of mere licentiousness, would She so long have concealed it in her own
bosom?  Would She not have employed some means to procure its
gratification?  She has done quite the contrary:  She strove to keep me
in ignorance of her sex; and nothing but the fear of detection, and my
instances, would have compelled her to reveal the secret.  She has
observed the duties of religion not less strictly than myself.  She has
made no attempts to rouze my slumbering passions, nor has She ever
conversed with me till this night on the subject of Love.  Had She been
desirous to gain my affections, not my esteem, She would not have
concealed from me her charms so carefully:  At this very moment I have
never seen her face:  Yet certainly that face must be lovely, and her
person beautiful, to judge by her ... by what I have seen.'

As this last idea passed through his imagination, a blush spread itself
over his cheek.  Alarmed at the sentiments which He was indulging, He
betook himself to prayer; He started from his Couch, knelt before the
beautiful Madona, and entreated her assistance in stifling such
culpable emotions.  He then returned to his Bed, and resigned himself
to slumber.

He awoke, heated and unrefreshed.  During his sleep his inflamed
imagination had presented him with none but the most voluptuous
objects.  Matilda stood before him in his dreams, and his eyes again
dwelt upon her naked breast.  She repeated her protestations of eternal
love, threw her arms round his neck, and loaded him with kisses:  He
returned them; He clasped her passionately to his bosom, and ... the
vision was dissolved. Sometimes his dreams presented the image of his
favourite Madona, and He fancied that He was kneeling before her:  As
He offered up his vows to her, the eyes of the Figure seemed to beam on
him with inexpressible sweetness.  He pressed his lips to hers, and
found them warm:  The animated form started from the Canvas, embraced
him affectionately, and his senses were unable to support delight so
exquisite.  Such were the scenes, on which his thoughts were employed
while sleeping:  His unsatisfied Desires placed before him the most
lustful and provoking Images, and he rioted in joys till then unknown
to him.

He started from his Couch, filled with confusion at the remembrance of
his dreams.  Scarcely was He less ashamed, when He reflected on his
reasons of the former night which induced him to authorize Matilda's
stay. The cloud was now dissipated which had obscured his judgment:  He
shuddered when He beheld his arguments blazoned in their proper
colours, and found that He had been a slave to flattery, to avarice,
and self-love.  If in one hour's conversation Matilda had produced a
change so remarkable in his sentiments, what had He not to dread from
her remaining in the Abbey?  Become sensible of his danger, awakened
from his dream of confidence, He resolved to insist on her departing
without delay.  He began to feel that He was not proof against
temptation; and that however Matilda might restrain herself within the
bounds of modesty, He was unable to contend with those passions, from
which He falsely thought himself exempted.

'Agnes!  Agnes!' He exclaimed, while reflecting on his embarrassments,
'I already feel thy curse!'

He quitted his Cell, determined upon dismissing the feigned Rosario.
He appeared at Matins; But his thoughts were absent, and He paid them
but little attention.  His heart and brain were both of them filled
with worldly objects, and He prayed without devotion. The service over,
He descended into the Garden.  He bent his steps towards the same spot
where, on the preceding night, He had made this embarrassing discovery.
He doubted not but that Matilda would seek him there:  He was not
deceived.  She soon entered the Hermitage, and approached the Monk with
a timid air.  After a few minutes during which both were silent, She
appeared as if on the point of speaking; But the Abbot, who during this
time had been summoning up all his resolution, hastily interrupted her.
Though still unconscious how extensive was its influence, He dreaded
the melodious seduction of her voice.

'Seat yourself by my side, Matilda,' said He, assuming a look of
firmness, though carefully avoiding the least mixture of severity;
'Listen to me patiently, and believe, that in what I shall say, I am
not more influenced by my own interest than by yours:  Believe, that I
feel for you the warmest friendship, the truest compassion, and that
you cannot feel more grieved than I do, when I declare to you that we
must never meet again.'

'Ambrosio!' She cried, in a voice at once expressive of surprise and
sorrow.

'Be calm, my Friend!  My Rosario!  Still let me call you by that name
so dear to me!  Our separation is unavoidable; I blush to own, how
sensibly it affects me.-- But yet it must be so.  I feel myself
incapable of treating you with indifference, and that very conviction
obliges me to insist upon your departure.  Matilda, you must stay here
no longer.'

'Oh! where shall I now seek for probity?  Disgusted with a perfidious
world, in what happy region does Truth conceal herself?  Father, I
hoped that She resided here; I thought that your bosom had been her
favourite shrine.  And you too prove false?  Oh God!  And you too can
betray me?'

'Matilda!'

'Yes, Father, Yes! 'Tis with justice that I reproach you.  Oh! where
are your promises?  My Noviciate is not expired, and yet will you
compell me to quit the Monastery?  Can you have the heart to drive me
from you?  And have I not received your solemn oath to the contrary?'

'I will not compell you to quit the Monastery:  You have received my
solemn oath to the contrary.  But yet when I throw myself upon your
generosity, when I declare to you the embarrassments in which your
presence involves me, will you not release me from that oath?  Reflect
upon the danger of a discovery, upon the opprobrium in which such an
event would plunge me: Reflect that my honour and reputation are at
stake, and that my peace of mind depends on your compliance.  As yet my
heart is free; I shall separate from you with regret, but not with
despair.  Stay here, and a few weeks will sacrifice my happiness on the
altar of your charms.  You are but too interesting, too amiable!  I
should love you, I should doat on you!  My bosom would become the prey
of desires which Honour and my profession forbid me to gratify.  If I
resisted them, the impetuosity of my wishes unsatisfied would drive me
to madness:  If I yielded to the temptation, I should sacrifice to one
moment of guilty pleasure my reputation in this world, my salvation in
the next.  To you then I fly for defence against myself.  Preserve me
from losing the reward of thirty years of sufferings!  Preserve me from
becoming the Victim of Remorse!  YOUR heart has already felt the
anguish of hopeless love; Oh! then if you really value me, spare mine
that anguish! Give me back my promise; Fly from these walls.  Go, and
you bear with you my warmest prayers for your happiness, my friendship,
my esteem and admiration:  Stay, and you become to me the source of
danger, of sufferings, of despair!  Answer me, Matilda; What is your
resolve?'--She was silent--'Will you not speak, Matilda? Will you not
name your choice?'

'Cruel! Cruel!' She exclaimed, wringing her hands in agony; 'You know
too well that you offer me no choice! You know too well that I can have
no will but yours!'

'I was not then deceived!  Matilda's generosity equals my expectations.'

'Yes; I will prove the truth of my affection by submitting to a decree
which cuts me to the very heart.  Take back your promise. I will quit
the Monastery this very day.  I have a Relation, Abbess of a Covent in
Estramadura:  To her will I bend my steps, and shut myself from the
world for ever.  Yet tell me, Father; Shall I bear your good wishes
with me to my solitude?  Will you sometimes abstract your attention
from heavenly objects to bestow a thought upon me?'

'Ah! Matilda, I fear that I shall think on you but too often for my
repose!'

'Then I have nothing more to wish for, save that we may meet in heaven.
Farewell, my Friend! my Ambrosio!-- And yet methinks, I would fain bear
with me some token of your regard!'

'What shall I give you?'

'Something.--Any thing.--One of those flowers will be sufficient.'
(Here She pointed to a bush of Roses, planted at the door of the
Grotto.)  'I will hide it in my bosom, and when I am dead, the Nuns
shall find it withered upon my heart.'

The Friar was unable to reply:  With slow steps, and a soul heavy with
affliction, He quitted the Hermitage.  He approached the Bush, and
stooped to pluck one of the Roses.  Suddenly He uttered a piercing cry,
started back hastily, and let the flower, which He already held, fall
from his hand.  Matilda heard the shriek, and flew anxiously towards
him.

'What is the matter?' She cried; 'Answer me, for God's sake! What has
happened?'

'I have received my death!' He replied in a faint voice; 'Concealed
among the Roses ...  A Serpent....'

Here the pain of his wound became so exquisite, that Nature was unable
to bear it:  His senses abandoned him, and He sank inanimate into
Matilda's arms.

Her distress was beyond the power of description.  She rent her hair,
beat her bosom, and not daring to quit Ambrosio, endeavoured by loud
cries to summon the Monks to her assistance. She at length succeeded.
Alarmed by her shrieks, Several of the Brothers hastened to the spot,
and the Superior was conveyed back to the Abbey.  But even such an
indignity as this does not touch bottom. Boys have before now made
me a "Harbour of Refuge," with the poetry left out, and bricks
and various missiles substituted. They have dodged behind me
to escape the consequences of "cheekiness" to bigger boys, and have
used my canvas as a screen to shield off stones.

And what are you to do?

Just at that moment, in all likelihood, you are putting in a crisp,
telling touch that will "do the trick," and if the news were brought
to you that your favourite aunt had fallen downstairs, it would
not be sufficient to make you rise from off your camp-stool.

[Illustration: "Hi-spi-Hoy"]

I was sketching once near a row of those cheap one-storied cottages,
generally called Villa This and Villa That, inhabited by a tribe
the mothers of which seem always to have a baby on hand, and several
others in various stages of development.

These children spend most of their time, so far as I can judge, in
hanging about, just outside the front garden, waiting for something
to turn up to amuse them, and I had been much bothered by their
creeping round behind me, or edging closer and closer to my side,
and occasionally shoving each other so as to shake me or my sketch.

I tried to forget them, and maintained a chilling silence.

The numbers, however, kept on increasing, and presently games were
projected in my immediate vicinity, as though I were the centre of
gravity, or the hub of the universe.

The climax was reached when a young nurse, aged seven or thereabouts,
with a child just on the brink of independence in her arms, came
up and said--
"D'yer mind me leaving my baby here, while I have a game with the
Tubbses?

She'll be all right if I sit her on your jacket."
Nice thing when seeking material for a masterpiece for next year's
Academy to be asked to look after baby!

The remarks made by street loafers and errand-boys, too, who stand
at your elbow for half-an-hour at a stretch, are not encouraging,
as a rule.

One boy, in what he considers a tone of confidence, will say to another--

"S'elp me, Bob, aint 'e a doin' it a fair treat."
"Carry me out" (it is impossible to write "out" as _they_ pronounce it),
"'Arree, ain't it fine" (rising intonation on the "I")--"I wish I wos
a bloomin' hartist."
"Don't 'e fancy 'isself, just."
It is difficult to keep quietly on at work with every appearance of
indifference under such circumstances. It is also exasperating to
be called "Matey," as though you were a pal of theirs, and lived on the
same landing. Yet these are only a few of the indignities with which
a poor artist has to put up.

[Illustration: "D'YER MIND ME LEAVING MY BABY HERE."]
Who has not, when on a sketching tour, felt the contempt that the
bucolic mind has for a man who, day after day, and week after week,
sits out of doors on his camp-stool, doing his best to catch some
of Nature's mystery and fleeting beauty, and give it an abiding
place on his canvas.

[Illustration: "AINT 'E A DOIN' IT A FAIR TREAT."]
My friend S---- is a big, healthy, bearded fellow, who looks as though
he could pick half-hundred weights up in each hand with the ease
that I pick up my palette. The following dialogue took place on one
occasion between him and an elderly rustic who had been standing
watching him for some time, as he sat by the roadside, painting.

"No offence, sir," said the agriculturist, "but is anything the matter
wi' yer?"

"No," answered S---- "What makes you ask?"
"Yer hain't lame, are yer?"
"Lame! Good gracious, no!"
"You hain't 'ad a misfortune in any way? The sciatics or lumbager,
that's kind o' laid yer by?"
"No, I'm as well as I have always been."
"An' yer call yerself a man and can sit theer a doin' o' that. Well,
I'm d----d!"

I never go out sketching without feeling this silent contempt, for it is
only rarely that it finds expression. The remarks made by villagers
show how utterly unable they are to grasp the idea of anyone valuing
an artist's efforts.

The old story of the painter who was asked by the farmer whose cow he
had been drawing, what the said picture might be worth when finished,
is typical.

[Illustration: "YER HAIN'T LAME, ARE YER?"]
"Oh, I hope to get thirty pounds for it if it is well hung," explained
the artist.

"Thutty pound for the mere picture!"

cried the old fellow in astonishment. "Why, I'd sell you the old cow
itself for ten."

[Illustration: WHOSE COW HE HAD BEEN DRAWING.]
A spirit of commiseration underlies a good many of the remarks made
by the bucolic.

I went down on one occasion to see a couple of painters who had
taken a small cottage at one and sixpence a week in order to paint
some orchard pictures.

When their neighbours, who were farm hands, got to know them a bit, they
were very friendly disposed, and made them presents of vegetables,
and one old fellow who was reputed to have "saved a smart bit o'
money," said to one of the "painter chaps," as they were called--
"There don't seem much of a living in your business, sir.

I s'pose trade's a bit dull with ye, now folks is a spring cleaning.

What do yer say now to paintin' my cart in yer dinner hour?

I shall want it done afore long, and I'd like to gie ye the job,
for a shilling or two down't come amiss to any of us.

Do it now?"
[Illustration: "WHAT DO YOU SAY TO PAINTIN' MY CART?"]

Another job refused by these same artists was to clean and touch
up an old picture that had been bought for a few shillings at a sale.

The old chap who had purchased it went so far as to offer them a
shilling to do the work, and that offer being declined, he threw in
a pint of stout as an additional inducement.

A friend who had painted a 50 x 40 canvas outside during one summer,
spending some five or six weeks upon it, told me that one
old chap, who looked like a jobbing gardener, used to pass by every
day, and invariably stayed to stare at the work, but always at a
respectful distance, and it was not until the picture was nearly
completed that he broke the silence.

"D'yer moind me 'aving a look at it, sir?"

[Illustration: STAYED TO STARE AT THE WORK.]
"Oh, certainly not," and my friend got off his camp-stool to let
the critic have an uninterrupted view.

The subject was a careful study of wild flowers and herbage, growing in
the corner of an orchard. The old fellow seemed to take the
picture in very carefully, and at length said:

"Is it a view in Ireland, sir?"
"View in Ireland! What made you think of that? Don't you see it's the
corner of the orchard there, with all the thistles and docks and
wild flowers?"

  "Well, to be sure!

  Fancy anyone a paintin' them
  weeds and trumpery!" and
  with that cheerless remark the
  old fellow sheered off.

  
  [Illustration: MODELLING A
  MILKMAID.]
  Sculptors, unlike painters, rarely venture out of their studios,
but it happened that a sculptor came down to spend a few days with
us when in a Norfolk village, and so liked the place that he hired
a barn, had a lot of clay and a turntable sent down, and started
modelling a milkmaid.

  As the work progressed, it became
  the talk of the place, and, in
  due course, numbers came to see the clay
  image that my friend was setting up in the barn.

  This work _did_ appeal to them.
  They could see at a glance what
  it was meant to represent,
  and the chorus of approval was loud and general, except on the
part of the village constable.

  He was a taciturn man, and used to come
  and smoke his pipe and preserve
  a contemptuous silence. One day he
  said--

  "Are you making that image
  for a church?"
  "No. Why did you think I was?"
  "Oh, nothing.

  Only when I was in London, and that's
  a smart while ago, I
  worked on a church as was a buildin',
  and we had to fix some figures; only they were made in what we
calls Portland cement."

  [Illustration: NUMBERS CAME
  TO SEE THE CLAY IMAGE.]
  "Oh, then, you have seen sculpture
  before?"

  "Yes, sir, 'tain't the first time
  as I've seed a graven image,
  as the Bible calls 'em. D'yer
  ever make them figures they puts over doors and winders of houses?"

  "No; I can't say I do."
  "Did you ever see them two figures
  in the Lord Mayor's palace in
  the City? You _ought_ to see them, sir.

  I reckon they're the best things in
  that line you can see anywhere?"
  
  "I'm afraid I don't remember which figures you refer to."

  "Oh, they ain't like your work, not
  a little bit. They're
  picked out in all kinds of colours,
  and are ever so big.

  I was thinking they must represent
  two of them heathen gods what
  the Children of Israel fell down
  and worshipped.

  You know the figures I mean?"
  
  "I'm afraid I don't. Can't you
  remember their names?"

  "Why, Gog and Magog, aren't
  they, sir?"
  [Illustration: THE VILLAGE
  CONSTABLE.]

  
  _The Brothers' Agency._
  BY DO BAHIN.
  

  ILLUSTRATIONS BY THE MISSES
  HAMMOND.
  
  -----

  "She won't see you, my boy," said
  Grigsby, as I stood on the steps
  of the Scandalmongers' Club waiting
  for the next West Kensington 'bus; "she's doing a roaring trade,
and don't want any more advertisements; and if she does she'll put
up her own notices, and not use you for billsticker."

  "Grigsby may not be right this
  time," I reflected, as I scaled
  the 'bus.
  "He seldom is!

And haven't I triumphantly interviewed all the most unmanageable
celebrities of the last ten years, from Lord Tennyson to the Royal
baby? I suppose it's my bland appearance. It lulls suspicion and
excites curiosity. People want to see whether it is possible for any
man to _be_ such a fool as I _look_. Anyhow, I must go through with
it now, as I've let it out to Grigsby."
[Illustration: "SHE WON'T SEE YOU."]
The fact is, I was about to try to interview Miss Jenny T. Buller, the
inventress and manager of the "Brothers' Agency," perhaps the most
important social factor of the present century. In due course I found
myself opposite a smart-looking house, on whose door-plate was engraved
"The Brothers' Agency."
Being taken no doubt for a postulant Brother, I was shown upstairs
into a severe but elegant room, in the middle of which, at a huge
desk loaded with papers, sat a fashionable young lady of the frailest
type of Transatlantic beauty.

"Miss Buller, I believe."
"You will not suit," she said, after one short but decisive stare.
"You are not up to our mark."
"I don't wish to be a Brother," I replied.

"Then what do you want?" she answered.

"Miss Buller," I inquired, as if my life depended on the response, "how
did you ever think of this wonderful scheme?"
She laid down her pen, and turned in her chair; and I saw that I
had won.

"I'm tired of writing just now," she began, "and I don't mind if I tell
you.

[Illustration: "'I DON'T MIND IF I TELL YOU.'"]
"I found myself obliged to increase my income by some means. I first
thought of starting a servants' agency; but the inconvenience I
experienced from having no brothers to take me about suggested a
novel idea to me.

I was wondering if other girls felt as I did, when it flashed upon
me that young men who, from any reasons, are in want of money, might
let themselves out as brothers to well-to-do damsels possessing no
fraternal relations.

I immediately settled to start an agency for this object--somewhat
on the principle of 'Lady Guides'--the full title being 'The
agency for supplying Brothers to brotherless girls, or those with
unobliging brothers.' I resolved to call it shortly 'The Brothers'
Agency.' It is a good name, and gives to the undertaking a kind of
monastic flavour that I find is very taking.

"Of course I only began in a small way amongst the men and girls I knew
personally; but my business spread so rapidly that I soon started a
regular office, and issued printed rules.

"I decided that the Brothers should go to their work during the day
(as such relations do), and only be engaged for the evening to
escort my clients, as their sisters, to balls, theatres, etc.

I knew that young men in London society were supposed to let
themselves out for dances; so why not as Brothers?"

"Why not, indeed?" I murmured sympathetically.

"We do not find," she continued vivaciously, "that it leads to matrimonial
complications, as the men who seek employment as Brothers are usually
so very impecunious that they understand that marriage is out of
the question for them.

I was told by my friends, by which I mean all those who felt themselves
privileged to say nasty things to me, that we should degenerate
into a matrimonial agency, but I have not found it so.

On the contrary, every man entering his name on our books, and every
girl engaging a Brother, signs a paper agreeing to pay a large
prohibitive fine should they get engaged to each other during the
period of fraternity. Any man known to be engaged is obliged to take
his name off the books _at once_, as we find _fiancées_ very
prejudiced, and several unpleasant visits were paid to me at the
office.

Any man becoming engaged while fulfilling a contract is liable to instant
dismissal at the employer's pleasure, it having been found that he
almost invariably becomes remiss and inattentive in his discharge of
duties.

[Illustration: "ONE SISTER WAS SEEN AT THE THEATRE BY AN OLD MAIDEN
AUNT."]
"Of course, till the significance of the title of 'Brother' became generally
known in London society, there arose a good deal of scandal and
confusion.

"One sister was seen at the theatre by an old maiden aunt, who had never
heard of the Agency. The young lady offered as an explanation that
the man with her was 'only engaged for the time,' which so shocked the
poor old lady that she made a codicil next day to her will reciting
her niece's misbehaviour and disinheriting her."
"That kind of misunderstanding," I said, "can hardly occur any longer."

"I should think not," she retorted. "And meantime, thank goodness, the
term 'Brother' has put an end to that hackneyed form of refusal, 'I
love you as a brother.' The sisters are only allowed to require
the attention of the Brothers for a stated number of nights a week,
and the work is well paid.

On the other hand, the sisters escape all the duties they generally have
to perform for their real brothers, such as practising accompaniments,
mending, shopping, or running messages.

[Illustration: "MENDING."]

"Brothers are engaged by the week; but I always recommend that
the same Brother should not be retained for more than a month, as too
long a service makes them--like old family servants--presume, and
fancy themselves invaluable."
"And how do you manage about characters?" I here enquired.

"I never," she said, "consent to act as agent for any man I have not
seen, or to procure a Brother for any girl I have not talked to; and
I study their characters so as to know how any arrangement is
likely to answer.

We often have photographs of Brothers ready for engagement--in fact,
those who keep their names permanently on the books usually supply
us with cabinet pictures for reference, and I arrange for interviews
as between mistresses and servants."
"And what terms are generally asked by the Brothers?" I said.

"These, of course," she replied, "depend largely on the nature of the
situation, and the qualifications of the Brother. Vulgar or
disagreeable girls have to pay very heavily. Families with several
girls are charged more in proportion, as many men object to go where
other Brothers are kept. Some men are willing to go as joint Brother
to a family of girls, but this rarely works well.

"They are paid so much a week, and their theatre money if they have to
escort the lady to the play (like beer money, you know). One man required
his buttonhole bouquets, but I said he was clearly above his place.
We do not arrange any engagements for the summer vacation, as we have
found it too dangerous. I really think," she added thoughtfully, "that
the best way of explaining our methods to you would be to show some
entries in our books."
"I should be deeply interested," I answered, stifling my eagerness, "and
it would be very kind of you."
She drew a great ledger towards her, and showed me one or two
entries.
The first ran as follows:

"'A Brother, six feet high; dresses well; aristocratic manners; a good
dancer, and knows all the newest steps, including the Pas de Quatre;
obliging, and good-tempered; a teetotaller, and only smokes the best
tobacco. Has the highest credentials from his last place. Available
for "Church Parade" on Sunday, but prefers not to attend church previously,
as he cannot get up so early.'"
[Illustration: "KNOWS ALL THE NEWEST STEPS."]
"What a paragon!" I exclaimed.

"Ah! but he asks a very large salary," she rejoined; "he is so much
sought after. This is a less expensive one--
"'A Brother, aged 27, something in the City; bad figure, but pleasant
smile, and amusing to talk to; slightly provincial, but very highly
educated; _most_ respectable and steady; musical, and a good tennis
player.

Very few private engagements, and therefore available most days of the
week. Charges strictly moderate.'"
"We have one man on the books who owns a dogcart," resumed Miss
Buller.

"He is in the Guards, and preferred to earn a little money to being
obliged to leave his regiment. I need hardly say that his charges
are very high."

"Naturally," I murmured.

"Here is an advertisement addressed to young ladies of a religious turn
of mind:

"'A young curate, who has a conscientious objection to bazaars, would
be glad to augment his income (the money to be devoted to charitable
objects) by obtaining employment as a Brother. He does not dance
himself, but would give the sanction of his presence to such entertainments
any day except Friday. He is fond of tennis and a good oar. He will
give assistance to any lady district-visiting, or taking a
Sunday-school class in his own parish.

He prefers, as the object is a charitable one, leaving the question
of salary to the sister's own good feeling.'

[Illustration: "A YOUNG CURATE."]
"You wouldn't believe," said Miss Buller, "what a run there is on
him; but I find I can easily supply every kind of variety now.

A barrister, on this next page, suggests that, as he has influential
legal connections, he can generally procure for his sister an excellent
place at the sensational trials that have become so fashionable
for ladies to attend!

He commands a huge salary, especially being a gifted conversationalist,
and taking the charge of a dinner table brilliantly; he has credentials
from his last place for being 'witty without vulgarity.'"
"And now," I said, "I should like to see the sort of advertisement used
by ladies needing Brothers, if you would be kind enough to show
me one."
"They are not so interesting," she replied, "but here is one I received
to-day:

"'A Brother is required during the hunting season by two sisters. He
must be a good rider, capable of giving a lead, but very obliging, as
two Brothers have been parted with lately, owing to over-excitement
in the field causing them to neglect their sisters. The Brother
will be mounted by the ladies' parents.'"
"Don't you find that disputes arise," I asked, "between Brothers
and their employers?

I should have thought the position might become irksome to a young
man, if the sister was unpleasant."
"Of course," she answered pensively, "an ill-tempered girl can make
matters very unpleasant; but such people pay very highly, as I
pointed out only yesterday to one of our most promising Brothers.

'She is rather a common girl,' I said, 'but you know you were very unlucky
at Newmarket lately; and you sit up incessantly playing poker; and
if you take my advice you will make your losses good by sticking
to your place.

I dare say the theatres are rather trying, but, on the other hand,
as you don't go into at all the same society that she does, you are not
likely to meet anyone you know at the parties she takes you to; and,
of course, as her Brother, you need not dance incessantly with her!' He
finally took my advice."
"Now that," I said, in my very stupidest manner, "is one of the
difficulties which has occurred to me. A man who has been engaged as
a Brother finds himself saddled with an undesirable acquaintance after
the engagement is over."
[Illustration: "AN ILL-TEMPERED GIRL CAN MAKE MATTERS VERY
UNPLEASANT."]
"I should have thought," she replied, indignantly, "that you would have
understood that neither the lady nor the Brother are expected to
recognise each other when they meet after the termination of the
engagement."

"It must be anxious work sometimes," I remarked, "settling the disputes
that arise."
"It is, indeed," said Miss Buller. "One contract on the part of a rising
young artist was actually broken off in the middle because the sister
who had engaged him, an inordinately vain girl, insisted on being
introduced as a central figure into his Academy picture for the year.
He refused, and appealed to me; I supported him; on which the
young lady came to the office and abused us both.

My fear now is," she continued, "that Mr. Whiteley will step in and
'provide' Brothers, but I feel sure that this business could only
be managed successfully by a lady. A dispute arose last week over the
question of a Brother being required to introduce any friends he
might meet at a party to his sister.

I vetoed this at once, as real brothers often decline to do this,
unless they consider their sister does them credit. On another
occasion a Brother insisted on smoking a strong cigar in
a cab, coming back from the theatre, saying that he was not
accustomed to treat his sisters with ceremony."
"That was rude," I remarked; "but still I pity the men if they are
engaged by very exacting sisters, because, after all, they are not
real brothers."

[Illustration: "ABUSED US BOTH."]
"Oh," said Miss Buller, "I admit that sometimes sisters do get
troublesome. One situation I find very hard to fill: the Brothers
complain of its being such a hard place, as the young lady is so
unpopular that no men ever come to speak to her, and her idea of
a Brother is a person who never quits your side in the Row, or
elsewhere.
The consequence is, that the wretched Brother never has a moment's
relaxation. She pays very highly, however. You know, many men
stipulate that, even if fulfilling engagements, they shall be free
to attend race meetings. We are obliged to consider the Brothers,
as I assure you the competition for our best ones is tremendous.
They are engaged--like seats at the theatre--for weeks beforehand.
I forgot to mention that they are paid less highly in the winter
than in the Season."
"You are certainly doing an excellent work," I exclaimed, growing
bolder as I felt my copy was made; "and, if I could hire myself out
as _your_ Brother,"--I paused expressively.
"I guess I don't need to hire," she replied gaily, "I find all the
Brothers are willing to take me out for nothing."He accompanied her to
the door of her cell; and when arrived there, He stopped her to declare
his consent to her continuing the Partner of his solitude so long as
should be agreeable to herself.

She discovered no marks of pleasure at receiving this intelligence,
though on the preceding day She had been so anxious to obtain the
permission.

'Alas! Father,' She said, waving her head mournfully; 'Your kindness
comes too late!  My doom is fixed.  We must separate for ever.  Yet
believe, that I am grateful for your generosity, for your compassion of
an Unfortunate who is but too little deserving of it!'

She put her handkerchief to her eyes.  Her Cowl was only half drawn
over her face.  Ambrosio observed that She was pale, and her eyes sunk
and heavy.

'Good God!' He cried; 'You are very ill, Matilda! I shall send Father
Pablos to you instantly.'

'No; Do not.  I am ill, 'tis true; But He cannot cure my malady.
Farewell, Father!  Remember me in your prayers tomorrow, while I shall
remember you in heaven!'

She entered her cell, and closed the door.

The Abbot dispatched to her the Physician without losing a moment, and
waited his report impatiently.  But Father Pablos soon returned, and
declared that his errand had been fruitless. Rosario refused to admit
him, and had positively rejected his offers of assistance.  The
uneasiness which this account gave Ambrosio was not trifling:  Yet He
determined that Matilda should have her own way for that night:  But
that if her situation did not mend by the morning, he would insist upon
her taking the advice of Father Pablos.

He did not find himself inclined to sleep.  He opened his casement, and
gazed upon the moonbeams as they played upon the small stream whose
waters bathed the walls of the Monastery.  The coolness of the night
breeze and tranquillity of the hour inspired the Friar's mind with
sadness.  He thought upon Matilda's beauty and affection; Upon the
pleasures which He might have shared with her, had He not been
restrained by monastic fetters.  He reflected, that unsustained by hope
her love for him could not long exist; That doubtless She would succeed
in extinguishing her passion, and seek for happiness in the arms of One
more fortunate.  He shuddered at the void which her absence would leave
in his bosom.  He looked with disgust on the monotony of a Convent, and
breathed a sigh towards that world from which He was for ever
separated.  Such were the reflections which a loud knocking at his door
interrupted.  The Bell of the Church had already struck Two.  The Abbot
hastened to enquire the cause of this disturbance.  He opened the door
of his Cell, and a Lay-Brother entered, whose looks declared his hurry
and confusion.

'Hasten, reverend Father!' said He; 'Hasten to the young Rosario.

He earnestly requests to see you; He lies at the point of death.'

'Gracious God!  Where is Father Pablos?  Why is He not with him? Oh! I
fear! I fear!'

'Father Pablos has seen him, but his art can do nothing.  He says that
He suspects the Youth to be poisoned.'

'Poisoned?  Oh!  The Unfortunate!  It is then as I suspected! But let
me not lose a moment; Perhaps it may yet be time to save her!'

He said, and flew towards the Cell of the Novice.  Several Monks were
already in the chamber.  Father Pablos was one of them, and held a
medicine in his hand which He was endeavouring to persuade Rosario to
swallow.  The Others were employed in admiring the Patient's divine
countenance, which They now saw for the first time.  She looked
lovelier than ever.  She was no longer pale or languid; A bright glow
had spread itself over her cheeks; her eyes sparkled with a serene
delight, and her countenance was expressive of confidence and
resignation.

'Oh! torment me no more!' was She saying to Pablos, when the terrified
Abbot rushed hastily into the Cell; 'My disease is far beyond the reach
of your skill, and I wish not to be cured of it'--Then perceiving
Ambrosio,-- 'Ah! 'tis He!' She cried; 'I see him once again, before we
part for ever!  Leave me, my Brethren; Much have I to tell this holy
Man in private.'

The Monks retired immediately, and Matilda and the Abbot remained
together.

'What have you done, imprudent Woman!' exclaimed the Latter, as soon as
they were left alone; 'Tell me; Are my suspicions just? Am I indeed to
lose you?  Has your own hand been the instrument of your destruction?'

She smiled, and grasped his hand.

'In what have I been imprudent, Father?  I have sacrificed a pebble,
and saved a diamond:  My death preserves a life valuable to the world,
and more dear to me than my own.  Yes, Father; I am poisoned; But know
that the poison once circulated in your veins.'

'Matilda!'

'What I tell you I resolved never to discover to you but on the bed of
death:  That moment is now arrived. You cannot have forgotten the day
already, when your life was endangered by the bite of a Cientipedoro.
The Physician gave you over, declaring himself ignorant how to extract
the venom:  I knew but of one means, and hesitated not a moment to
employ it.  I was left alone with you:  You slept; I loosened the
bandage from your hand; I kissed the wound, and drew out the poison
with my lips.  The effect has been more sudden than I expected.  I feel
death at my heart; Yet an hour, and I shall be in a better world.'

'Almighty God!' exclaimed the Abbot, and sank almost lifeless upon the
Bed.

After a few minutes He again raised himself up suddenly, and gazed upon
Matilda with all the wildness of despair.

'And you have sacrificed yourself for me!  You die, and die to preserve
Ambrosio!  And is there indeed no remedy, Matilda?  And is there indeed
no hope?  Speak to me, Oh!  speak to me!  Tell me, that you have still
the means of life!'

'Be comforted, my only Friend!  Yes, I have still the means of life in
my power:  But 'tis a means which I dare not employ.  It is dangerous!
It is dreadful!  Life would be purchased at too dear a rate, ...
unless it were permitted me to live for you.'

'Then live for me, Matilda, for me and gratitude!'-- (He caught her
hand, and pressed it rapturously to his lips.)--'Remember our late
conversations; I now consent to every thing:  Remember in what lively
colours you described the union of souls; Be it ours to realize those
ideas.  Let us forget the distinctions of sex, despise the world's
prejudices, and only consider each other as Brother and Friend.  Live
then, Matilda!  Oh! live for me!'

'Ambrosio, it must not be.  When I thought thus, I deceived both you
and myself.  Either I must die at present, or expire by the lingering
torments of unsatisfied desire.  Oh! since we last conversed together,
a dreadful veil has been rent from before my eyes.  I love you no
longer with the devotion which is paid to a Saint:  I prize you no more
for the virtues of your soul; I lust for the enjoyment of your person.
The Woman reigns in my bosom, and I am become a prey to the wildest of
passions.  Away with friendship! 'tis a cold unfeeling word.  My bosom
burns with love, with unutterable love, and love must be its return.
Tremble then, Ambrosio, tremble to succeed in your prayers.  If I live,
your truth, your reputation, your reward of a life past in sufferings,
all that you value is irretrievably lost.  I shall no longer be able to
combat my passions, shall seize every opportunity to excite your
desires, and labour to effect your dishonour and my own.  No, no,
Ambrosio; I must not live!  I am convinced with every moment, that I
have but one alternative; I feel with every heart-throb, that I must
enjoy you, or die.'

'Amazement!--Matilda! Can it be you who speak to me?'

He made a movement as if to quit his seat.  She uttered a loud shriek,
and raising herself half out of the Bed, threw her arms round the Friar
to detain him.

'Oh! do not leave me!  Listen to my errors with compassion!  In a few
hours I shall be no more; Yet a little, and I am free from this
disgraceful passion.'

'Wretched Woman, what can I say to you!  I cannot ... I must not ...
But live, Matilda!  Oh! live!'

'You do not reflect on what you ask.  What?  Live to plunge myself in
infamy?  To become the Agent of Hell?  To work the destruction both of
you and of Myself? Feel this heart, Father!'

She took his hand:  Confused, embarrassed, and fascinated, He withdrew
it not, and felt her heart throb under it.

'Feel this heart, Father!  It is yet the seat of honour, truth, and
chastity:  If it beats tomorrow, it must fall a prey to the blackest
crimes.  Oh! let me then die today!  Let me die, while I yet deserve
the tears of the virtuous!  Thus will expire!'--(She reclined her head
upon his shoulder; Her golden Hair poured itself over his Chest.)--
'Folded in your arms, I shall sink to sleep; Your hand shall close my
eyes for ever, and your lips receive my dying breath.  And will you not
sometimes think of me?  Will you not sometimes shed a tear upon my
Tomb? Oh!  Yes!  Yes!  Yes!  That kiss is my assurance!'

The hour was night.  All was silence around.  The faint beams of a
solitary Lamp darted upon Matilda's figure, and shed through the
chamber a dim mysterious light.  No prying eye, or curious ear was near
the Lovers: Nothing was heard but Matilda's melodious accents.
Ambrosio was in the full vigour of Manhood. He saw before him a young
and beautiful Woman, the preserver of his life, the Adorer of his
person, and whom affection for him had reduced to the brink of the
Grave.  He sat upon her Bed; His hand rested upon her bosom; Her head
reclined voluptuously upon his breast.  Who then can wonder, if He
yielded to the temptation?  Drunk with desire, He pressed his lips to
those which sought them:  His kisses vied with Matilda's in warmth and
passion.  He clasped her rapturously in his arms; He forgot his vows,
his sanctity, and his fame:  He remembered nothing but the pleasure and
opportunity.

'Ambrosio! Oh! my Ambrosio!' sighed Matilda.

'Thine, ever thine!' murmured the Friar, and sank upon her bosom.


CHAPTER III

  ----These are the Villains
  Whom all the Travellers do fear so much.
  --------Some of them are Gentlemen
  Such as the fury of ungoverned Youth
  Thrust from the company of awful Men.
         Two Gentlemen of Verona.

The Marquis and Lorenzo proceeded to the Hotel in silence.  The Former
employed himself in calling every circumstance to his mind, which
related might give Lorenzo's the most favourable idea of his connexion
with Agnes.  The Latter, justly alarmed for the honour of his family,
felt embarrassed by the presence of the Marquis: The adventure which He
had just witnessed forbad his treating him as a Friend; and Antonia's
interests being entrusted to his mediation, He saw the impolicy of
treating him as a Foe. He concluded from these reflections, that
profound silence would be the wisest plan, and waited with impatience
for Don Raymond's explanation.

They arrived at the Hotel de las Cisternas.  The Marquis immediately
conducted him to his apartment, and began to express his satisfaction
at finding him at Madrid.  Lorenzo interrupted him.

'Excuse me, my Lord,' said He with a distant air, 'if I reply somewhat
coldly to your expressions of regard.  A Sister's honour is involved in
this affair:  Till that is established, and the purport of your
correspondence with Agnes cleared up, I cannot consider you as my
Friend.  I am anxious to hear the meaning of your conduct, and hope
that you will not delay the promised explanation.'

'First give me your word, that you will listen with patience and
indulgence.'

'I love my Sister too well to judge her harshly; and till this moment I
possessed no Friend so dear to me as yourself.  I will also confess,
that your having it in your power to oblige me in a business which I
have much at heart, makes me very anxious to find you still deserving
my esteem.'

'Lorenzo, you transport me!  No greater pleasure can be given me, than
an opportunity of serving the Brother of Agnes.'

'Convince me that I can accept your favours without dishonour, and
there is no Man in the world to whom I am more willing to be obliged.'

'Probably, you have already heard your Sister mention the name of
Alphonso d'Alvarada?'

'Never.  Though I feel for Agnes an affection truly fraternal,
circumstances have prevented us from being much together.  While yet a
Child She was consigned to the care of her Aunt, who had married a
German Nobleman.  At his Castle She remained till two years since, when
She returned to Spain, determined upon secluding herself from the
world.'

'Good God!  Lorenzo, you knew of her intention, and yet strove not to
make her change it?'

'Marquis, you wrong me.  The intelligence, which I received at Naples,
shocked me extremely, and I hastened my return to Madrid for the
express purpose of preventing the sacrifice.  The moment that I
arrived, I flew to the Convent of St. Clare, in which Agnes had chosen
to perform her Noviciate.  I requested to see my Sister.  Conceive my
surprise when She sent me a refusal; She declared positively, that
apprehending my influence over her mind, She would not trust herself in
my society till the day before that on which She was to receive the
Veil.  I supplicated the Nuns; I insisted upon seeing Agnes, and
hesitated not to avow my suspicions that her being kept from me was
against her own inclinations. To free herself from the imputation of
violence, the Prioress brought me a few lines written in my Sister's
well-known hand, repeating the message already delivered.  All future
attempts to obtain a moment's conversation with her were as fruitless
as the first.  She was inflexible, and I was not permitted to see her
till the day preceding that on which She entered the Cloister never to
quit it more.  This interview took place in the presence of our
principal Relations.  It was for the first time since her childhood
that I saw her, and the scene was most affecting.  She threw herself
upon my bosom, kissed me, and wept bitterly.  By every possible
argument, by tears, by prayers, by kneeling, I strove to make her
abandon her intention.  I represented to her all the hardships of a
religious life; I painted to her imagination all the pleasures which
She was going to quit, and besought her to disclose to me, what
occasioned her disgust to the world.  At this last question She turned
pale, and her tears flowed yet faster.  She entreated me not to press
her on that subject; That it sufficed me to know that her resolution
was taken, and that a Convent was the only place where She could now
hope for tranquillity.  She persevered in her design, and made her
profession.  I visited her frequently at the Grate, and every moment
that I passed with her, made me feel more affliction at her loss.  I
was shortly after obliged to quit Madrid; I returned but yesterday
evening, and since then have not had time to call at St. Clare's
Convent.'

'Then till I mentioned it, you never heard the name of Alphonso
d'Alvarada?'

'Pardon me: my Aunt wrote me word that an Adventurer so called had
found means to get introduced into the Castle of Lindenberg; That He
had insinuated himself into my Sister's good graces, and that She had
even consented to elope with him.  However, before the plan could be
executed, the Cavalier discovered that the estates which He believed
Agnes to possess in Hispaniola, in reality belonged to me.  This
intelligence made him change his intention; He disappeared on the day
that the elopement was to have taken place, and Agnes, in despair at
his perfidy and meanness, had resolved upon seclusion in a Convent.
She added, that as this adventurer had given himself out to be a Friend
of mine, She wished to know whether I had any knowledge of him.  I
replied in the negative.  I had then very little idea, that Alphonso
d'Alvarada and the Marquis de las Cisternas were one and the same
person:  The description given me of the first by no means tallied with
what I knew of the latter.'

'In this I easily recognize Donna Rodolpha's perfidious character.
Every word of this account is stamped with marks of her malice, of her
falsehood, of her talents for misrepresenting those whom She wishes to
injure.  Forgive me, Medina, for speaking so freely of your Relation.
The mischief which She has done me authorises my resentment, and when
you have heard my story, you will be convinced that my expressions have
not been too severe.'

He then began his narrative in the following manner.

HISTORY OF DON RAYMOND, MARQUIS DE LAS CISTERNAS

Long experience, my dear Lorenzo, has convinced me how generous is your
nature:  I waited not for your declaration of ignorance respecting your
Sister's adventures to suppose that they had been purposely concealed
from you.  Had they reached your knowledge, from what misfortunes
should both Agnes and myself have escaped!  Fate had ordained it
otherwise!  You were on your Travels when I first became acquainted
with your Sister; and as our Enemies took care to conceal from her your
direction, it was impossible for her to implore by letter your
protection and advice.

On leaving Salamanca, at which University as I have since heard, you
remained a year after I quitted it, I immediately set out upon my
Travels.  My Father supplied me liberally with money; But He insisted
upon my concealing my rank, and presenting myself as no more than a
private Gentleman.  This command was issued by the counsels of his
Friend, the Duke of Villa Hermosa, a Nobleman for whose abilities and
knowledge of the world I have ever entertained the most profound
veneration.

'Believe me,' said He, 'my dear Raymond, you will hereafter feel the
benefits of this temporary degradation.  'Tis true, that as the Conde
de las Cisternas you would have been received with open arms; and your
youthful vanity might have felt gratified by the attentions showered
upon you from all sides.  At present, much will depend upon yourself:
You have excellent recommendations, but it must be your own business to
make them of use to you.  You must lay yourself out to please; You must
labour to gain the approbation of those, to whom you are presented:
They who would have courted the friendship of the Conde de las
Cisternas will have no interest in finding out the merits, or bearing
patiently with the faults, of Alphonso d'Alvarada.  Consequently, when
you find yourself really liked, you may safely ascribe it to your good
qualities, not your rank, and the distinction shown you will be
infinitely more flattering.  Besides, your exalted birth would not
permit your mixing with the lower classes of society, which will now be
in your power, and from which, in my opinion, you will derive
considerable benefit.  Do not confine yourself to the Illustrious of
those Countries through which you pass.  Examine the manners and
customs of the multitude: Enter into the Cottages; and by observing how
the Vassals of Foreigners are treated, learn to diminish the burthens
and augment the comforts of your own.  According to my ideas, of those
advantages which a Youth destined to the possession of power and wealth
may reap from travel, He should not consider as the least essential,
the opportunity of mixing with the classes below him, and becoming an
eyewitness of the sufferings of the People.'

Forgive me, Lorenzo, if I seem tedious in my narration. The close
connexion which now exists between us, makes me anxious that you should
know every particular respecting me; and in my fear of omitting the
least circumstance which may induce you to think favourably of your
Sister and myself, I may possibly relate many which you may think
uninteresting.

I followed the Duke's advice; I was soon convinced of its wisdom.

I quitted Spain, calling myself by the assumed title of Don Alphonso
d'Alvarada, and attended by a single Domestic of approved fidelity.
Paris was my first station.  For some time I was enchanted with it, as
indeed must be every Man who is young, rich, and fond of pleasure.  Yet
among all its gaieties, I felt that something was wanting to my heart.
I grew sick of dissipation: I discovered, that the People among whom I
lived, and whose exterior was so polished and seducing, were at bottom
frivolous, unfeeling and insincere.  I turned from the Inhabitants of
Paris with disgust, and quitted that Theatre of Luxury without heaving
one sigh of regret.

I now bent my course towards Germany, intending to visit most of the
principal courts:  Prior to this expedition, I meant to make some
little stay at Strasbourg.  On quitting my Chaise at Luneville to take
some refreshment, I observed a splendid Equipage, attended by four
Domestics in rich liveries, waiting at the door of the Silver Lion.
Soon after as I looked out of the window, I saw a Lady of noble
presence, followed by two female Attendants, step into the Carriage,
which drove off immediately.

I enquired of the Host, who the Lady was, that had just departed.

'A German Baroness, Monsieur, of great rank and fortune.  She has been
upon a visit to the Duchess of Longueville, as her Servants informed
me; She is going to Strasbourg, where She will find her Husband, and
then both return to their Castle in Germany.'

I resumed my journey, intending to reach Strasbourg that night. My
hopes, however were frustrated by the breaking down of my Chaise.  The
accident happened in the middle of a thick Forest, and I was not a
little embarrassed as to the means of proceeding.

It was the depth of winter:  The night was already closing round us;
and Strasbourg, which was the nearest Town, was still distant from us
several leagues.  It seemed to me that my only alternative to passing
the night in the Forest, was to take my Servant's Horse and ride on to
Strasbourg, an undertaking at that season very far from agreeable.
However, seeing no other resource, I was obliged to make up my mind to
it.  Accordingly I communicated my design to the Postillion, telling
him that I would send People to assist him as soon as I reached
Strasbourg. I had not much confidence in his honesty; But Stephano
being well-armed, and the Driver to all appearance considerably
advanced in years, I believed I ran no danger of losing my Baggage.

Luckily, as I then thought, an opportunity presented itself of passing
the night more agreeably than I expected.  On mentioning my design of
proceeding by myself to Strasbourg, the Postillion shook his head in
disapprobation.

'It is a long way,' said He; 'You will find it a difficult matter to
arrive there without a Guide.  Besides, Monsieur seems unaccustomed to
the season's severity, and 'tis possible that unable to sustain the
excessive cold....'

'What use is there to present me with all these objections?' said I,
impatiently interrupting him; 'I have no other resource:  I run still
greater risque of perishing with cold by passing the night in the
Forest.'

'Passing the night in the Forest?' He replied; 'Oh! by St. Denis! We
are not in quite so bad a plight as that comes to yet.  If I am not
mistaken, we are scarcely five minutes walk from the Cottage of my old
Friend, Baptiste.  He is a Wood-cutter, and a very honest Fellow. I
doubt not but He will shelter you for the night with pleasure.  In the
meantime I can take the saddle-Horse, ride to Strasbourg, and be back
with proper people to mend your Carriage by break of day.'

'And in the name of God,' said I, 'How could you leave me so long in
suspense?  Why did you not tell me of this Cottage sooner? What
excessive stupidity!'

'I thought that perhaps Monsieur would not deign to accept....'

'Absurd! Come, come!  Say no more, but conduct us without delay to the
Wood-man's Cottage.'

He obeyed, and we moved onwards:  The Horses contrived with some
difficulty to drag the shattered vehicle after us.  My Servant was
become almost speechless, and I began to feel the effects of the cold
myself, before we reached the wished-for Cottage.  It was a small but
neat Building:  As we drew near it, I rejoiced at observing through the
window the blaze of a comfortable fire. Our Conductor knocked at the
door:  It was some time before any one answered; The People within
seemed in doubt whether we should be admitted.

'Come!  Come, Friend Baptiste!' cried the Driver with impatience; 'What
are you about?  Are you asleep?  Or will you refuse a night's lodging
to a Gentleman, whose Chaise has just broken down in the Forest?'

'Ah! is it you, honest Claude?' replied a Man's voice from within;
'Wait a moment, and the door shall be opened.'

Soon after the bolts were drawn back.  The door was unclosed, and a Man
presented himself to us with a Lamp in his hand.  He gave the Guide an
hearty reception, and then addressed himself to me.

'Walk in, Monsieur; Walk in, and welcome!  Excuse me for not admitting
you at first:  But there are so many Rogues about this place, that
saving your presence, I suspected you to be one.'

Thus saying, He ushered me into the room, where I had observed the
fire:  I was immediately placed in an Easy Chair, which stood close to
the Hearth.  A Female, whom I supposed to be the Wife of my Host, rose
from her seat upon my entrance, and received me with a slight and
distant reverence.  She made no answer to my compliment, but
immediately re-seating herself, continued the work on which She had
been employed.  Her Husband's manners were as friendly as hers were
harsh and repulsive.

'I wish, I could lodge you more conveniently, Monsieur,' said He; 'But
we cannot boast of much spare room in this hovel.  However, a chamber
for yourself, and another for your Servant, I think, we can make shift
to supply.  You must content yourself with sorry fare; But to what we
have, believe me, you are heartily welcome.' ----Then turning to his
wife--'Why, how you sit there, Marguerite, with as much tranquillity as
if you had nothing better to do!  Stir about, Dame!  Stir about! Get
some supper; Look out some sheets; Here, here; throw some logs upon the
fire, for the Gentleman seems perished with cold.'

The Wife threw her work hastily upon the Table, and proceeded to
execute his commands with every mark of unwillingness.  Her countenance
had displeased me on the first moment of my examining it.  Yet upon the
whole her features were handsome unquestionably; But her skin was
sallow, and her person thin and meagre; A louring gloom over-spread her
countenance; and it bore such visible marks of rancour and ill-will, as
could not escape being noticed by the most inattentive Observer.  Her
every look and action expressed discontent and impatience, and the
answers which She gave Baptiste, when He reproached her good-humouredly
for her dissatisfied air, were tart, short, and cutting.  In fine, I
conceived at first sight equal disgust for her, and prepossession in
favour of her Husband, whose appearance was calculated to inspire
esteem and confidence.  His countenance was open, sincere, and
friendly; his manners had all the Peasant's honesty unaccompanied by
his rudeness; His cheeks were broad, full, and ruddy; and in the
solidity of his person He seemed to offer an ample apology for the
leanness of his Wife's.  From the wrinkles on his brow I judged him to
be turned of sixty; But He bore his years well, and seemed still hearty
and strong: The Wife could not be more than thirty, but in spirits and
vivacity She was infinitely older than the Husband.

However, in spite of her unwillingness, Marguerite began to prepare the
supper, while the Wood-man conversed gaily on different subjects.  The
Postillion, who had been furnished with a bottle of spirits, was now
ready to set out for Strasbourg, and enquired, whether I had any
further commands.

'For Strasbourg?' interrupted Baptiste; 'You are not going thither
tonight?'

'I beg your pardon:  If I do not fetch Workmen to mend the Chaise, How
is Monsieur to proceed tomorrow?'

'That is true, as you say; I had forgotten the Chaise.  Well, but
Claude; You may at least eat your supper here?  That can make you lose
very little time, and Monsieur looks too kind-hearted to send you out
with an empty stomach on such a bitter cold night as this is.'

To this I readily assented, telling the Postillion that my reaching
Strasbourg the next day an hour or two later would be perfectly
immaterial.  He thanked me, and then leaving the Cottage with Stephano,
put up his Horses in the Wood-man's Stable.  Baptiste followed them to
the door, and looked out with anxiety.

''Tis a sharp biting wind!' said He; 'I wonder, what detains my Boys so
long!  Monsieur, I shall show you two of the finest Lads, that ever
stept in shoe of leather. The eldest is three and twenty, the second a
year younger:  Their Equals for sense, courage, and activity, are not
to be found within fifty miles of Strasbourg.  Would They were back
again!  I begin to feel uneasy about them.'

Marguerite was at this time employed in laying the cloth.

'And are you equally anxious for the return of your Sons?' said I to
her.

'Not I!' She replied peevishly; 'They are no children of mine.'

'Come!  Come, Marguerite!' said the Husband; 'Do not be out of humour
with the Gentleman for asking a simple question.  Had you not looked so
cross, He would never have thought you old enough to have a Son of
three and twenty:  But you see how many years ill-temper adds to
you!--Excuse my Wife's rudeness, Monsieur.  A little thing puts her
out, and She is somewhat displeased at your not thinking her to be
under thirty.  That is the truth, is it not, Marguerite?  You know,
Monsieur, that Age is always a ticklish subject with a Woman.  Come!
come!  Marguerite, clear up a little.  If you have not Sons as old, you
will some twenty years hence, and I hope, that we shall live to see
them just such Lads as Jacques and Robert.'

Marguerite clasped her hands together passionately.

'God forbid!' said She; 'God forbid! If I thought it, I would strangle
them with my own hands!'

She quitted the room hastily, and went up stairs.

I could not help expressing to the Wood-man how much I pitied him for
being chained for life to a Partner of such ill-humour.

'Ah!  Lord!  Monsieur, Every one has his share of grievances, and
Marguerite has fallen to mine.  Besides, after all She is only cross,
and not malicious.  The worst is, that her affection for two children
by a former Husband makes her play the Step-mother with my two Sons.
She cannot bear the sight of them, and by her good-will they would
never set a foot within my door.  But on this point I always stand
firm, and never will consent to abandon the poor Lads to the world's
mercy, as She has often solicited me to do.  In every thing else I let
her have her own way; and truly She manages a family rarely, that I
must say for her.'

We were conversing in this manner, when our discourse was interrupted
by a loud halloo, which rang through the Forest.

'My Sons, I hope!' exclaimed the Wood-man, and ran to open the door.

The halloo was repeated:  We now distinguished the trampling of Horses,
and soon after a Carriage, attended by several Cavaliers stopped at the
Cottage door.  One of the Horsemen enquired how far they were still
from Strasbourg.  As He addressed himself to me, I answered in the
number of miles which Claude had told me; Upon which a volley of curses
was vented against the Drivers for having lost their way.  The Persons
in the Coach were now informed of the distance of Strasbourg, and also
that the Horses were so fatigued as to be incapable of proceeding
further.  A Lady, who appeared to be the principal, expressed much
chagrin at this intelligence; But as there was no remedy, one of the
Attendants asked the Wood-man, whether He could furnish them with
lodging for the night.

He seemed much embarrassed, and replied in the negative; Adding that a
Spanish Gentleman and his Servant were already in possession of the
only spare apartments in his House.  On hearing this, the gallantry of
my nation would not permit me to retain those accommodations, of which
a Female was in want.  I instantly signified to the Wood-man, that I
transferred my right to the Lady; He made some objections; But I
overruled them, and hastening to the Carriage, opened the door, and
assisted the Lady to descend.  I immediately recognized her for the
same person whom I had seen at the Inn at Luneville.  I took an
opportunity of asking one of her Attendants, what was her name?

'The Baroness Lindenberg,' was the answer.

I could not but remark how different a reception our Host had given
these newcomers and myself.  His reluctance to admit them was visibly
expressed on his countenance, and He prevailed on himself with
difficulty to tell the Lady that She was welcome. I conducted her into
the House, and placed her in the armed-chair, which I had just quitted.
She thanked me very graciously; and made a thousand apologies for
putting me to an inconvenience.  Suddenly the Wood-man's countenance
cleared up.

'At last I have arranged it!' said He, interrupting her excuses; 'I can
lodge you and your suite, Madam, and you will not be under the
necessity of making this Gentleman suffer for his politeness.

We have two spare chambers, one for the Lady, the other, Monsieur, for
you:  My Wife shall give up hers to the two Waiting-women; As for the
Men-servants, they must content themselves with passing the night in a
large Barn, which stands at a few yards distance from the House.  There
they shall have a blazing fire, and as good a supper as we can make
shift to give them.'

After several expressions of gratitude on the Lady's part, and
opposition on mine to Marguerite's giving up her bed, this arrangement
was agreed to.  As the Room was small, the Baroness immediately
dismissed her Male Domestics:  Baptiste was on the point of conducting
them to the Barn which He had mentioned when two young Men appeared at
the door of the Cottage.

'Hell and Furies!' exclaimed the first starting back; 'Robert, the
House is filled with Strangers!'

'Ha!  There are my Sons!' cried our Host.  'Why, Jacques! Robert!
whither are you running, Boys?  There is room enough still for you.'

Upon this assurance the Youths returned.  The Father presented them to
the Baroness and myself:  After which He withdrew with our Domestics,
while at the request of the two Waiting-women, Marguerite conducted
them to the room designed for their Mistress.

The two new-comers were tall, stout, well-made young Men,
hard-featured, and very much sun-burnt.  They paid their compliments to
us in few words, and acknowledged Claude, who now entered the room, as
an old acquaintance.  They then threw aside their cloaks in which they
were wrapped up, took off a leathern belt to which a large Cutlass was
suspended, and each drawing a brace of pistols from his girdle laid
them upon a shelf.

'You travel well-armed,' said I.

'True, Monsieur;' replied Robert.  'We left Strasbourg late this
Evening, and 'tis necessary to take precautions at passing through this
Forest after dark.  It does not bear a good repute, I promise you.'

'How?' said the Baroness; 'Are there Robbers hereabout?'

'So it is said, Madame; For my own part, I have travelled through the
wood at all hours, and never met with one of them.'

Here Marguerite returned.  Her Stepsons drew her to the other end of
the room, and whispered her for some minutes.  By the looks which they
cast towards us at intervals, I conjectured them to be enquiring our
business in the Cottage.

In the meanwhile the Baroness expressed her apprehensions, that her
Husband would be suffering much anxiety upon her account. She had
intended to send on one of her Servants to inform the Baron of her
delay; But the account which the young Men gave of the Forest rendered
this plan impracticable.  Claude relieved her from her embarrassment.
He informed her that He was under the necessity of reaching Strasbourg
that night, and that would She trust him with a letter, She might
depend upon its being safely delivered.

'And how comes it,' said I, 'that you are under no apprehension of
meeting these Robbers?'

'Alas! Monsieur, a poor Man with a large family must not lose certain
profit because 'tis attended with a little danger, and perhaps my Lord
the Baron may give me a trifle for my pains. Besides, I have nothing to
lose except my life, and that will not be worth the Robbers taking.'

I thought his arguments bad, and advised his waiting till the Morning;
But as the Baroness did not second me, I was obliged to give up the
point.  The Baroness Lindenberg, as I found afterwards, had long been
accustomed to sacrifice the interests of others to her own, and her
wish to send Claude to Strasbourg blinded her to the danger of the
undertaking.  Accordingly, it was resolved that He should set out
without delay.  The Baroness wrote her letter to her Husband, and I
sent a few lines to my Banker, apprising him that I should not be at
Strasbourg till the next day.  Claude took our letters, and left the
Cottage.

The Lady declared herself much fatigued by her journey:  Besides having
come from some distance, the Drivers had contrived to lose their way in
the Forest.  She now addressed herself to Marguerite, desiring to be
shown to her chamber, and permitted to take half an hour's repose.  One
of the Waiting-women was immediately summoned; She appeared with a
light, and the Baroness followed her up stairs.  The cloth was
spreading in the chamber where I was, and Marguerite soon gave me to
understand that I was in her way.  Her hints were too broad to be
easily mistaken; I therefore desired one of the young Men to conduct me
to the chamber where I was to sleep, and where I could remain till
supper was ready.

'Which chamber is it, Mother?' said Robert.

'The One with green hangings,' She replied; 'I have just been at the
trouble of getting it ready, and have put fresh sheets upon the Bed; If
the Gentleman chooses to lollop and lounge upon it, He may make it
again himself for me.'

'You are out of humour, Mother, but that is no novelty.  Have the
goodness to follow me, Monsieur.'

He opened the door, and advanced towards a narrow staircase.

'You have got no light!' said Marguerite; 'Is it your own neck or the
Gentleman's that you have a mind to break?'

She crossed by me, and put a candle into Robert's hand, having received
which, He began to ascend the staircase.  Jacques was employed in
laying the cloth, and his back was turned towards me.

Marguerite seized the moment, when we were unobserved.  She caught my
hand, and pressed it strongly.

'Look at the Sheets!' said She as She passed me, and immediately
resumed her former occupation.

Startled by the abruptness of her action, I remained as if petrified.
Robert's voice, desiring me to follow him, recalled me to myself.  I
ascended the staircase.  My conductor ushered me into a chamber, where
an excellent wood-fire was blazing upon the hearth.  He placed the
light upon the Table, enquired whether I had any further commands, and
on my replying in the negative, He left me to myself.  You may be
certain that the moment when I found myself alone was that on which I
complied with Marguerite's injunction.  I took the candle, hastily
approached the Bed, and turned down the Coverture.  What was my
astonishment, my horror, at finding the sheets crimsoned with blood!

At that moment a thousand confused ideas passed before my imagination.
The Robbers who infested the Wood, Marguerite's exclamation respecting
her Children, the arms and appearance of the two young Men, and the
various Anecdotes which I had heard related, respecting the secret
correspondence which frequently exists between Banditti and
Postillions, all these circumstances flashed upon my mind, and inspired
me with doubt and apprehension.  I ruminated on the most probable means
of ascertaining the truth of my conjectures.  Suddenly I was aware of
Someone below pacing hastily backwards and forwards.  Every thing now
appeared to me an object of suspicion.  With precaution I drew near the
window, which, as the room had been long shut up, was left open in
spite of the cold.  I ventured to look out.  The beams of the Moon
permitted me to distinguish a Man, whom I had no difficulty to
recognize for my Host.  I watched his movements.

He walked swiftly, then stopped, and seemed to listen:  He stamped upon
the ground, and beat his stomach with his arms as if to guard himself
from the inclemency of the season.  At the least noise, if a voice was
heard in the lower part of the House, if a Bat flitted past him, or the
wind rattled amidst the leafless boughs, He started, and looked round
with anxiety.

'Plague take him!' said He at length with impatience; 'What can He be
about!'

He spoke in a low voice; but as He was just below my window, I had no
difficulty to distinguish his words.

I now heard the steps of one approaching.  Baptiste went towards the
sound; He joined a man, whom his low stature and the Horn suspended
from his neck, declared to be no other than my faithful Claude, whom I
had supposed to be already on his way to Strasbourg.  Expecting their
discourse to throw some light upon my situation, I hastened to put
myself in a condition to hear it with safety.  For this purpose I
extinguished the candle, which stood upon a table near the Bed:  The
flame of the fire was not strong enough to betray me, and I immediately
resumed my place at the window.

The objects of my curiosity had stationed themselves directly under it.
I suppose that during my momentary absence the Wood-man had been
blaming Claude for tardiness, since when I returned to the window, the
latter was endeavouring to excuse his fault.

'However,' added He, 'my diligence at present shall make up for my past
delay.'

'On that condition,' answered Baptiste, 'I shall readily forgive you.
But in truth as you share equally with us in our prizes, your own
interest will make you use all possible diligence. 'Twould be a shame
to let such a noble booty escape us!  You say, that this Spaniard is
rich?'

'His Servant boasted at the Inn, that the effects in his Chaise were
worth above two thousand Pistoles.'

Oh! how I cursed Stephano's imprudent vanity!

'And I have been told,' continued the Postillion, 'that this Baroness
carries about her a casket of jewels of immense value.'

'May be so, but I had rather She had stayed away.  The Spaniard was a
secure prey.  The Boys and myself could easily have mastered him and
his Servant, and then the two thousand Pistoles would have been shared
between us four.  Now we must let in the Band for a share, and perhaps
the whole Covey may escape us. Should our Friends have betaken
themselves to their different posts before you reach the Cavern, all
will be lost.  The Lady's Attendants are too numerous for us to
overpower them:  Unless our Associates arrive in time, we must needs
let these Travellers set out tomorrow without damage or hurt.'

''Tis plaguy unlucky that my Comrades who drove the Coach should be
those unacquainted with our Confederacy!  But never fear, Friend
Baptiste.  An hour will bring me to the Cavern; It is now but ten
o'clock, and by twelve you may expect the arrival of the Band.  By the
bye, take care of your Wife:  You know how strong is her repugnance to
our mode of life, and She may find means to give information to the
Lady's Servants of our design.'

'Oh! I am secure of her silence; She is too much afraid of me, and fond
of her children, to dare to betray my secret.  Besides, Jacques and
Robert keep a strict eye over her, and She is not permitted to set a
foot out of the Cottage.  The Servants are safely lodged in the Barn; I
shall endeavour to keep all quiet till the arrival of our Friends.
Were I assured of your finding them, the Strangers should be dispatched
this instant; But as it is possible for you to miss the Banditti, I am
fearful of being summoned to produce them by their Domestics in the
Morning.'

'And suppose either of the Travellers should discover your design?'

'Then we must poignard those in our power, and take our chance about
mastering the rest.  However, to avoid running such a risque, hasten to
the Cavern:  The Banditti never leave it before eleven, and if you use
diligence, you may reach it in time to stop them.'

'Tell Robert that I have taken his Horse:  My own has broken his
bridle, and escaped into the Wood.  What is the watch-word?'

'The reward of Courage.'

''Tis sufficient.  I hasten to the Cavern.'

'And I to rejoin my Guests, lest my absence should create suspicion.
Farewell, and be diligent.'

These worthy Associates now separated:  The One bent his course towards
the Stable, while the Other returned to the House.

You may judge, what must have been my feelings during this
conversation, of which I lost not a single syllable.  I dared not trust
myself to my reflections, nor did any means present itself to escape
the dangers which threatened me.  Resistance, I knew to be vain; I was
unarmed, and a single Man against Three:  However, I resolved at least
to sell my life as dearly as I could. Dreading lest Baptiste should
perceive my absence, and suspect me to have overheard the message with
which Claude was dispatched, I hastily relighted my candle and quitted
the chamber.  On descending, I found the Table spread for six Persons.
The Baroness sat by the fireside: Marguerite was employed in dressing a
sallad, and her Step-sons were whispering together at the further end
of the room.  Baptiste having the round of the Garden to make, ere He
could reach the Cottage door, was not yet arrived.  I seated myself
quietly opposite to the Baroness.

A glance upon Marguerite told her that her hint had not been thrown
away upon me.  How different did She now appear to me! What before
seemed gloom and sullenness, I now found to be disgust at her
Associates, and compassion for my danger.  I looked up to her as to my
only resource; Yet knowing her to be watched by her Husband with a
suspicious eye, I could place but little reliance on the exertions of
her good-will.

In spite of all my endeavours to conceal it, my agitation was but too
visibly expressed upon my countenance. I was pale, and both my words
and actions were disordered and embarrassed.  The young Men observed
this, and enquired the cause.  I attributed it to excess of fatigue,
and the violent effect produced on me by the severity of the season.
Whether they believed me or not, I will not pretend to say:  They at
least ceased to embarrass me with their questions.  I strove to divert
my attention from the perils which surrounded me, by conversing on
different subjects with the Baroness.  I talked of Germany, declaring
my intention of visiting it immediately:  God knows, that I little
thought at that moment of ever seeing it!  She replied to me with great
ease and politeness, professed that the pleasure of making my
acquaintance amply compensated for the delay in her journey, and gave
me a pressing invitation to make some stay at the Castle of Lindenberg.
As She spoke thus, the Youths exchanged a malicious smile, which
declared that She would be fortunate if She ever reached that Castle
herself.  This action did not escape me; But I concealed the emotion
which it excited in my breast.  I continued to converse with the Lady;
But my discourse was so frequently incoherent, that as She has since
informed me, She began to doubt whether I was in my right senses.  The
fact was, that while my conversation turned upon one subject, my
thoughts were entirely occupied by another.  I meditated upon the means
of quitting the Cottage, finding my way to the Barn, and giving the
Domestics information of our Host's designs.  I was soon convinced, how
impracticable was the attempt.  Jacques and Robert watched my every
movement with an attentive eye, and I was obliged to abandon the idea.
All my hopes now rested upon Claude's not finding the Banditti:  In
that case, according to what I had overheard, we should be permitted to
depart unhurt.

I shuddered involuntarily as Baptiste entered the room.  He made many
apologies for his long absence, but 'He had been detained by affairs
impossible to be delayed.'  He then entreated permission for his family
to sup at the same table with us, without which, respect would not
authorize his taking such a liberty.  Oh! how in my heart I cursed the
Hypocrite!  How I loathed his presence, who was on the point of
depriving me of an existence, at that time infinitely dear!  I had
every reason to be satisfied with life; I had youth, wealth, rank, and
education; and the fairest prospects presented themselves before me.  I
saw those prospects on the point of closing in the most horrible
manner:  Yet was I obliged to dissimulate, and to receive with a
semblance of gratitude the false civilities of him who held the dagger
to my bosom.

The permission which our Host demanded, was easily obtained.  We seated
ourselves at the Table.  The Baroness and myself occupied one side:
The Sons were opposite to us with their backs to the door.  Baptiste
took his seat by the Baroness at the upper end, and the place next to
him was left for his Wife.  She soon entered the room, and placed
before us a plain but comfortable Peasant's repast.  Our Host thought
it necessary to apologize for the poorness of the supper:  'He had not
been apprized of our coming; He could only offer us such fare as had
been intended for his own family:'

'But,' added He, 'should any accident detain my noble Guests longer
than they at present intend, I hope to give them a better treatment.'

The Villain! I well knew the accident to which He alluded; I shuddered
at the treatment which He taught us to expect!

My Companion in danger seemed entirely to have got rid of her chagrin
at being delayed.  She laughed, and conversed with the family with
infinite gaiety.  I strove but in vain to follow her example.  My
spirits were evidently forced, and the constraint which I put upon
myself escaped not Baptiste's observation.

'Come, come, Monsieur, cheer up!' said He; 'You seem not quite
recovered from your fatigue.  To raise your spirits, what say you to a
glass of excellent old wine which was left me by my Father? God rest
his soul, He is in a better world!  I seldom produce this wine; But as
I am not honoured with such Guests every day, this is an occasion which
deserves a Bottle.'

He then gave his Wife a Key, and instructed her where to find the wine
of which He spoke.  She seemed by no means pleased with the commission;
She took the Key with an embarrassed air, and hesitated to quit the
Table.

'Did you hear me?' said Baptiste in an angry tone.

Marguerite darted upon him a look of mingled anger and fear, and left
the chamber.  His eyes followed her suspiciously, till She had closed
the door.

She soon returned with a bottle sealed with yellow wax.  She placed it
upon the table, and gave the Key back to her Husband. I suspected that
this liquor was not presented to us without design, and I watched
Marguerite's movements with inquietude. She was employed in rinsing
some small horn Goblets.  As She placed them before Baptiste, She saw
that my eye was fixed upon her; and at the moment when She thought
herself unobserved by the Banditti, She motioned to me with her head
not to taste the liquor, She then resumed her place.

In the mean while our Host had drawn the Cork, and filling two of the
Goblets, offered them to the Lady and myself.  She at first made some
objections, but the instances of Baptiste were so urgent, that She was
obliged to comply.  Fearing to excite suspicion, I hesitated not to
take the Goblet presented to me. By its smell and colour I guessed it
to be Champagne; But some grains of powder floating upon the top
convinced me that it was not unadulterated.  However, I dared not to
express my repugnance to drinking it; I lifted it to my lips, and
seemed to be swallowing it:  Suddenly starting from my chair, I made
the best of my way towards a Vase of water at some distance, in which
Marguerite had been rinsing the Goblets.  I pretended to spit out the
wine with disgust, and took an opportunity unperceived of emptying the
liquor into the Vase.

The Banditti seemed alarmed at my action.  Jacques half rose from his
chair, put his hand into his bosom, and I discovered the haft of a
dagger.  I returned to my seat with tranquillity, and affected not to
have observed their confusion.

'You have not suited my taste, honest Friend,' said I, addressing
myself to Baptiste.  'I never can drink Champagne without its producing
a violent illness.  I swallowed a few mouthfuls ere I was aware of its
quality, and fear that I shall suffer for my imprudence.'

Baptiste and Jacques exchanged looks of distrust.

'Perhaps,' said Robert, 'the smell may be disagreeable to you.'

He quitted his chair, and removed the Goblet.  I observed, that He
examined, whether it was nearly empty.

'He must have drank sufficient,' said He to his Brother in a low voice,
while He reseated himself.

Marguerite looked apprehensive, that I had tasted the liquor:  A glance
from my eye reassured her.

I waited with anxiety for the effects which the Beverage would produce
upon the Lady.  I doubted not but the grains which I had observed were
poisonous, and lamented that it had been impossible for me to warn her
of the danger.  But a few minutes had elapsed before I perceived her
eyes grow heavy; Her head sank upon her shoulder, and She fell into a
deep sleep.  I affected not to attend to this circumstance, and
continued my conversation with Baptiste, with all the outward gaiety in
my power to assume.  But He no longer answered me without constraint.
He eyed me with distrust and astonishment, and I saw that the Banditti
were frequently whispering among themselves. My situation became every
moment more painful; I sustained the character of confidence with a
worse grace than ever.  Equally afraid of the arrival of their
Accomplices and of their suspecting my knowledge of their designs, I
knew not how to dissipate the distrust which the Banditti evidently
entertained for me.  In this new dilemma the friendly Marguerite again
assisted me.  She passed behind the Chairs of her Stepsons, stopped for
a moment opposite to me, closed her eyes, and reclined her head upon
her shoulder.  This hint immediately dispelled my incertitude.  It told
me, that I ought to imitate the Baroness, and pretend that the liquor
had taken its full effect upon me.  I did so, and in a few minutes
seemed perfectly overcome with slumber.

'So!' cried Baptiste, as I fell back in my chair; 'At last He sleeps!
I began to think that He had scented our design, and that we should
have been forced to dispatch him at all events.'

'And why not dispatch him at all events?' enquired the ferocious
Jacques.  'Why leave him the possibility of betraying our secret?
Marguerite, give me one of my Pistols:  A single touch of the trigger
will finish him at once.'

'And supposing,' rejoined the Father, 'Supposing that our Friends
should not arrive tonight, a pretty figure we should make when the
Servants enquire for him in the Morning!  No, no, Jacques; We must wait
for our Associates.  If they join us, we are strong enough to dispatch
the Domestics as well as their Masters, and the booty is our own; If
Claude does not find the Troop, we must take patience, and suffer the
prey to slip through our fingers. Ah! Boys, Boys, had you arrived but
five minutes sooner, the Spaniard would have been done for, and two
thousand Pistoles our own.  But you are always out of the way when you
are most wanted.

You are the most unlucky Rogues!'

'Well, well, Father!' answered Jacques; 'Had you been of my mind, all
would have been over by this time. You, Robert, Claude, and myself, why
the Strangers were but double the number, and I warrant you we might
have mastered them.  However, Claude is gone; 'Tis too late to think of
it now.  We must wait patiently for the arrival of the Gang; and if the
Travellers escape us tonight, we must take care to waylay them
tomorrow.'

'True!  True!' said Baptiste; 'Marguerite, have you given the
sleeping-draught to the Waiting-women?'

She replied in the affirmative.

'All then is safe.  Come, come, Boys; Whatever falls out, we have no
reason to complain of this adventure. We run no danger, may gain much,
and can lose nothing.'

At this moment I heard a trampling of Horses.  Oh! how dreadful was the
sound to my ears.  A cold sweat flowed down my forehead, and I felt all
the terrors of impending death.  I was by no means reassured by hearing
the compassionate Marguerite exclaim in the accents of despair,

'Almighty God! They are lost!'

Luckily the Wood-man and his Sons were too much occupied by the arrival
of their Associates to attend to me, or the violence of my agitation
would have convinced them that my sleep was feigned.

'Open!  Open!' exclaimed several voices on the outside of the Cottage.

'Yes!  Yes!' cried Baptiste joyfully; 'They are our Friends sure
enough!  Now then our booty is certain.  Away! Lads, Away!  Lead them
to the Barn; You know what is to be done there.'

Robert hastened to open the door of the Cottage.

'But first,' said Jacques, taking up his arms; 'first let me dispatch
these Sleepers.'

'No, no, no!' replied his Father; 'Go you to the Barn, where your
presence is wanted.  Leave me to take care of these and the Women
above.'

Jacques obeyed, and followed his Brother.  They seemed to converse with
the New-Comers for a few minutes:  After which I heard the Robbers
dismount, and as I conjectured, bend their course towards the Barn.

'So! That is wisely done!' muttered Baptiste; 'They have quitted their
Horses, that They may fall upon the Strangers by surprise. Good! Good!
and now to business.'

I heard him approach a small Cupboard which was fixed up in a distant
part of the room, and unlock it.  At this moment I felt myself shaken
gently.

'Now! Now!' whispered Marguerite.

I opened my eyes.  Baptiste stood with his back towards me.  No one
else was in the room save Marguerite and the sleeping Lady. The Villain
had taken a dagger from the Cupboard and seemed examining whether it
was sufficiently sharp.  I had neglected to furnish myself with arms;
But I perceived this to be my only chance of escaping, and resolved not
to lose the opportunity.  I sprang from my seat, darted suddenly upon
Baptiste, and clasping my hands round his throat, pressed it so
forcibly as to prevent his uttering a single cry.  You may remember
that I was remarkable at Salamanca for the power of my arm:  It now
rendered me an essential service.  Surprised, terrified, and
breathless, the Villain was by no means an equal Antagonist.  I threw
him upon the ground; I grasped him still tighter; and while I fixed him
without motion upon the floor, Marguerite, wresting the dagger from his
hand, plunged it repeatedly in his heart till He expired.

No sooner was this horrible but necessary act perpetrated than
Marguerite called on me to follow her.

'Flight is our only refuge!' said She; 'Quick! Quick! Away!'

I hesitated not to obey her: but unwilling to leave the Baroness a
victim to the vengeance of the Robbers, I raised her in my arms still
sleeping, and hastened after Marguerite.  The Horses of the Banditti
were fastened near the door:  My Conductress sprang upon one of them.
I followed her example, placed the Baroness before me, and spurred on
my Horse.  Our only hope was to reach Strasbourg, which was much nearer
than the perfidious Claude had assured me.  Marguerite was well
acquainted with the road, and galloped on before me.  We were obliged
to pass by the Barn, where the Robbers were slaughtering our Domestics.
The door was open:  We distinguished the shrieks of the dying and
imprecations of the Murderers!  What I felt at that moment language is
unable to describe!

Jacques heard the trampling of our Horses as we rushed by the Barn.  He
flew to the Door with a burning Torch in his hand, and easily
recognised the Fugitives.

'Betrayed! Betrayed!' He shouted to his Companions.

Instantly they left their bloody work, and hastened to regain their
Horses.  We heard no more.  I buried my spurs in the sides of my
Courser, and Marguerite goaded on hers with the poignard, which had
already rendered us such good service.  We flew like lightning, and
gained the open plains.  Already was Strasbourg's Steeple in sight,
when we heard the Robbers pursuing us. Marguerite looked back, and
distinguished our followers descending a small Hill at no great
distance.  It was in vain that we urged on our Horses; The noise
approached nearer with every moment.

'We are lost!' She exclaimed; 'The Villains gain upon us!'

'On! On!' replied I; 'I hear the trampling of Horses coming from the
Town.'

We redoubled our exertions, and were soon aware of a numerous band of
Cavaliers, who came towards us at full speed.  They were on the point
of passing us.

'Stay!  Stay!' shrieked Marguerite; 'Save us!  For God's sake, save us!'

The Foremost, who seemed to act as Guide, immediately reined in his
Steed.

''Tis She! 'Tis She!' exclaimed He, springing upon the ground; 'Stop,
my Lord, stop! They are safe! 'Tis my Mother!'

At the same moment Marguerite threw herself from her Horse, clasped him
in her arms, and covered him with Kisses.  The other Cavaliers stopped
at the exclamation.

'The Baroness Lindenberg?' cried another of the Strangers eagerly;
'Where is She?  Is She not with you?'

He stopped on beholding her lying senseless in my arms.  Hastily He
caught her from me.  The profound sleep in which She was plunged made
him at first tremble for her life; but the beating of her heart soon
reassured him.

'God be thanked!' said He; 'She has escaped unhurt.'

I interrupted his joy by pointing out the Brigands, who continued to
approach.  No sooner had I mentioned them than the greatest part of the
Company, which appeared to be chiefly composed of soldiers, hastened
forward to meet them.  The Villains stayed not to receive their attack:
Perceiving their danger they turned the heads of their Horses, and fled
into the wood, whither they were followed by our Preservers.  In the
mean while the Stranger, whom I guessed to be the Baron Lindenberg,
after thanking me for my care of his Lady, proposed our returning with
all speed to the Town.  The Baroness, on whom the effects of the opiate
had not ceased to operate, was placed before him; Marguerite and her
Son remounted their Horses; the Baron's Domestics followed, and we soon
arrived at the Inn, where He had taken his apartments.

This was at the Austrian Eagle, where my Banker, whom before my
quitting Paris I had apprised of my intention to visit Strasbourg, had
prepared Lodgings for me.  I rejoiced at this circumstance.  It gave me
an opportunity of cultivating the Baron's acquaintance, which I foresaw
would be of use to me in Germany.  Immediately upon our arrival the
Lady was conveyed to bed; A Physician was sent for, who prescribed a
medicine likely to counteract the effects of the sleepy potion, and
after it had been poured down her throat, She was committed to the care
of the Hostess.  The Baron then addressed himself to me, and entreated
me to recount the particulars of this adventure.  I complied with his
request instantaneously; for in pain respecting Stephano's fate, whom I
had been compelled to abandon to the cruelty of the Banditti, I found
it impossible for me to repose, till I had some news of him.  I
received but too soon the intelligence, that my trusty Servant had
perished.  The Soldiers who had pursued the Brigands returned while I
was employed in relating my adventure to the Baron. By their account I
found that the Robbers had been overtaken:  Guilt and true courage are
incompatible; They had thrown themselves at the feet of their Pursuers,
had surrendered themselves without striking a blow, had discovered
their secret retreat, made known their signals by which the rest of the
Gang might be seized, and in short had betrayed ever mark of cowardice
and baseness.  By this means the whole of the Band, consisting of near
sixty persons, had been made Prisoners, bound, and conducted to
Strasbourg.  Some of the Soldiers hastened to the Cottage, One of the
Banditti serving them as Guide.  Their first visit was to the fatal
Barn, where they were fortunate enough to find two of the Baron's
Servants still alive, though desperately wounded. The rest had expired
beneath the swords of the Robbers, and of these my unhappy Stephano was
one.

Alarmed at our escape, the Robbers in their haste to overtake us, had
neglected to visit the Cottage.  In consequence, the Soldiers found the
two Waiting-women unhurt, and buried in the same death-like slumber
which had overpowered their Mistress. There was nobody else found in
the Cottage, except a child not above four years old, which the
Soldiers brought away with them. We were busying ourselves with
conjectures respecting the birth of this little unfortunate, when
Marguerite rushed into the room with the Baby in her arms.  She fell at
the feet of the Officer who was making us this report, and blessed him
a thousand times for the preservation of her Child.

When the first burst of maternal tenderness was over, I besought her to
declare, by what means She had been united to a Man whose principles
seemed so totally discordant with her own.  She bent her eyes
downwards, and wiped a few tears from her cheek.

'Gentlemen,' said She after a silence of some minutes, 'I would request
a favour of you:  You have a right to know on whom you confer an
obligation.  I will not therefore stifle a confession which covers me
with shame; But permit me to comprise it in as few words as possible.

'I was born in Strasbourg of respectable Parents; Their names I must at
present conceal:  My Father still lives, and deserves not to be
involved in my infamy; If you grant my request, you shall be informed
of my family name.  A Villain made himself Master of my affections, and
to follow him I quitted my Father's House. Yet though my passions
overpowered my virtue, I sank not into that degeneracy of vice, but too
commonly the lot of Women who make the first false step.  I loved my
Seducer; dearly loved him! I was true to his Bed; this Baby, and the
Youth who warned you, my Lord Baron, of your Lady's danger, are the
pledges of our affection.  Even at this moment I lament his loss,
though 'tis to him that I owe all the miseries of my existence.

'He was of noble birth, but He had squandered away his paternal
inheritance.  His Relations considered him as a disgrace to their name,
and utterly discarded him.  His excesses drew upon him the indignation
of the Police.  He was obliged to fly from Strasbourg, and saw no other
resource from beggary than an union with the Banditti who infested the
neighbouring Forest, and whose Troop was chiefly composed of Young Men
of family in the same predicament with himself.  I was determined not
to forsake him.  I followed him to the Cavern of the Brigands, and
shared with him the misery inseparable from a life of pillage.  But
though I was aware that our existence was supported by plunder, I knew
not all the horrible circumstances attached to my Lover's profession.
These He concealed from me with the utmost care; He was conscious that
my sentiments were not sufficiently depraved to look without horror
upon assassination:  He supposed, and with justice, that I should fly
with detestation from the embraces of a Murderer.  Eight years of
possession had not abated his love for me; and He cautiously removed
from my knowledge every circumstance, which might lead me to suspect
the crimes in which He but too often participated. He succeeded
perfectly:  It was not till after my Seducer's death, that I discovered
his hands to have been stained with the blood of innocence.

'One fatal night He was brought back to the Cavern covered with wounds:
He received them in attacking an English Traveller, whom his Companions
immediately sacrificed to their resentment.  He had only time to
entreat my pardon for all the sorrows which He had caused me:  He
pressed my hand to his lips, and expired.  My grief was inexpressible.
As soon as its violence abated, I resolved to return to Strasbourg, to
throw myself with my two Children at my Father's feet, and implore his
forgiveness, though I little hoped to obtain it.  What was my
consternation when informed that no one entrusted with the secret of
their retreat was ever permitted to quit the troop of the Banditti;
That I must give up all hopes of ever rejoining society, and consent
instantly to accepting one of their Band for my Husband!  My prayers
and remonstrances were vain.  They cast lots to decide to whose
possession I should fall; I became the property of the infamous
Baptiste.  A Robber, who had once been a Monk, pronounced over us a
burlesque rather than a religious Ceremony: I and my Children were
delivered into the hands of my new Husband, and He conveyed us
immediately to his home.

'He assured me that He had long entertained for me the most ardent
regard; But that Friendship for my deceased Lover had obliged him to
stifle his desires.  He endeavoured to reconcile me to my fate, and for
some time treated me with respect and gentleness:  At length finding
that my aversion rather increased than diminished, He obtained those
favours by violence, which I persisted to refuse him.  No resource
remained for me but to bear my sorrows with patience; I was conscious
that I deserved them but too well.  Flight was forbidden: My Children
were in the power of Baptiste, and He had sworn that if I attempted to
escape, their lives should pay for it.  I had had too many
opportunities of witnessing the barbarity of his nature to doubt his
fulfilling his oath to the very letter.  Sad experience had convinced
me of the horrors of my situation:  My first Lover had carefully
concealed them from me; Baptiste rather rejoiced in opening my eyes to
the cruelties of his profession, and strove to familiarise me with
blood and slaughter.

'My nature was licentious and warm, but not cruel: My conduct had been
imprudent, but my heart was not unprincipled.  Judge then what I must
have felt at being a continual witness of crimes the most horrible and
revolting!  Judge how I must have grieved at being united to a Man who
received the unsuspecting Guest with an air of openness and
hospitality, at the very moment that He meditated his destruction.
Chagrin and discontent preyed upon my constitution:  The few charms
bestowed on me by nature withered away, and the dejection of my
countenance denoted the sufferings of my heart.  I was tempted a
thousand times to put an end to my existence; But the remembrance of my
Children held my hand.  I trembled to leave my dear Boys in my Tyrant's
power, and trembled yet more for their virtue than their lives.  The
Second was still too young to benefit by my instructions; But in the
heart of my Eldest I laboured unceasingly to plant those principles,
which might enable him to avoid the crimes of his Parents.  He listened
to me with docility, or rather with eagerness.  Even at his early age,
He showed that He was not calculated for the society of Villains; and
the only comfort which I enjoyed among my sorrows, was to witness the
dawning virtues of my Theodore.

'Such was my situation, when the perfidy of Don Alphonso's postillion
conducted him to the Cottage.  His youth, air, and manners interested
me most forcibly in his behalf.  The absence of my Husband's Sons gave
me an opportunity which I had long wished to find, and I resolved to
risque every thing to preserve the Stranger.  The vigilance of Baptiste
prevented me from warning Don Alphonso of his danger:  I knew that my
betraying the secret would be immediately punished with death; and
however embittered was my life by calamities, I wanted courage to
sacrifice it for the sake of preserving that of another Person. My only
hope rested upon procuring succour from Strasbourg:  At this I resolved
to try; and should an opportunity offer of warning Don Alphonso of his
danger unobserved, I was determined to seize it with avidity.  By
Baptiste's orders I went upstairs to make the Stranger's Bed:  I spread
upon it Sheets in which a Traveller had been murdered but a few nights
before, and which still were stained with blood.  I hoped that these
marks would not escape the vigilance of our Guest, and that He would
collect from them the designs of my perfidious Husband.  Neither was
this the only step which I took to preserve the Stranger.  Theodore was
confined to his bed by illness.  I stole into his room unobserved by my
Tyrant, communicated to him my project, and He entered into it with
eagerness.  He rose in spite of his malady, and dressed himself with
all speed.  I fastened one of the Sheets round his arms, and lowered
him from the Window.  He flew to the Stable, took Claude's Horse, and
hastened to Strasbourg.  Had He been accosted by the Banditti, He was
to have declared himself sent upon a message by Baptiste, but
fortunately He reached the Town without meeting any obstacle.
Immediately upon his arrival at Strasbourg, He entreated assistance
from the Magistrature: His Story passed from mouth to mouth, and at
length came to the knowledge of my Lord the Baron.  Anxious for the
safety of his Lady, whom He knew would be upon the road that Evening,
it struck him that She might have fallen into the power of the Robbers.
He accompanied Theodore who guided the Soldiers towards the Cottage,
and arrived just in time to save us from falling once more into the
hands of our Enemies.'

Here I interrupted Marguerite to enquire why the sleepy potion had been
presented to me.  She said that Baptiste supposed me to have arms about
me, and wished to incapacitate me from making resistance:  It was a
precaution which He always took, since as the Travellers had no hopes
of escaping, Despair would have incited them to sell their lives dearly.

The Baron then desired Marguerite to inform him, what were her present
plans.  I joined him in declaring my readiness to show my gratitude to
her for the preservation of my life.

'Disgusted with a world,' She replied, 'in which I have met with
nothing but misfortunes, my only wish is to retire into a Convent.  But
first I must provide for my Children.  I find that my Mother is no
more, probably driven to an untimely grave by my desertion!  My Father
is still living; He is not an hard Man; Perhaps, Gentlemen, in spite of
my ingratitude and imprudence, your intercessions may induce him to
forgive me, and to take charge of his unfortunate Grand-sons.  If you
obtain this boon for me, you will repay my services a thousand-fold!'

Both the Baron and myself assured Marguerite, that we would spare no
pains to obtain her pardon: and that even should her Father be
inflexible, She need be under no apprehensions respecting the fate of
her Children.  I engaged myself to provide for Theodore, and the Baron
promised to take the youngest under his protection.

The grateful Mother thanked us with tears for what She called
generosity, but which in fact was no more than a proper sense of our
obligations to her.  She then left the room to put her little Boy to
bed, whom fatigue and sleep had compleatly overpowered.

The Baroness, on recovering and being informed from what dangers I had
rescued her, set no bounds to the expressions of her gratitude.  She
was joined so warmly by her Husband in pressing me to accompany them to
their Castle in Bavaria, that I found it impossible to resist their
entreaties.  During a week which we passed at Strasbourg, the interests
of Marguerite were not forgotten: In our application to her Father we
succeeded as amply as we could wish.  The good old Man had lost his
Wife:  He had no Children but this unfortunate Daughter, of whom He had
received no news for almost fourteen years.  He was surrounded by
distant Relations, who waited with impatience for his decease in order
to get possession of his money.  When therefore Marguerite appeared
again so unexpectedly, He considered her as a gift from heaven: He
received her and her Children with open arms, and insisted upon their
establishing themselves in his House without delay. The disappointed
Cousins were obliged to give place.  The old Man would not hear of his
Daughter's retiring into a Convent: He said that She was too necessary
to his happiness, and She was easily persuaded to relinquish her
design.  But no persuasions could induce Theodore to give up the plan
which I had at first marked out for him.  He had attached himself to me
most sincerely during my stay at Strasbourg; and when I was on the
point of leaving it, He besought me with tears to take him into my
service: He set forth all his little talents in the most favourable
colours, and tried to convince me that I should find him of infinite
use to me upon the road.  I was unwilling to charge myself with a Lad
but scarcely turned of thirteen, whom I knew could only be a burthen to
me:  However, I could not resist the entreaties of this affectionate
Youth, who in fact possessed a thousand estimable qualities.  With some
difficulty He persuaded his relations to let him follow me, and that
permission once obtained, He was dubbed with the title of my Page.
Having passed a week at Strasbourg, Theodore and myself set out for
Bavaria in company with the Baron and his Lady.  These Latter as well
as myself had forced Marguerite to accept several presents of value,
both for herself, and her youngest Son:  On leaving her, I promised his
Mother faithfully that I would restore Theodore to her within the year.

I have related this adventure at length, Lorenzo, that you might
understand the means by which 'The Adventurer, Alphonso d'Alvarada got
introduced into the Castle of Lindenberg.'  Judge from this specimen
how much faith should be given to your Aunt's assertions!


VOLUME II


CHAPTER I

  Avaunt! and quit my sight!  Let the Earth hide thee!
  Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold!
  Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
  Which Thou dost glare with! Hence, horrible shadow!
  Unreal mockery hence!
                        Macbeth.

Continuation of the History of Don Raymond.

My journey was uncommonly agreeable:  I found the Baron a Man of some
sense, but little knowledge of the world.  He had past a great part of
his life without stirring beyond the precincts of his own domains, and
consequently his manners were far from being the most polished:  But He
was hearty, good-humoured, and friendly.  His attention to me was all
that I could wish, and I had every reason to be satisfied with his
behaviour. His ruling passion was Hunting, which He had brought himself
to consider as a serious occupation; and when talking over some
remarkable chace, He treated the subject with as much gravity as it had
been a Battle on which the fate of two kingdoms was depending.  I
happened to be a tolerable Sportsman:  Soon after my arrival at
Lindenberg I gave some proofs of my dexterity.  The Baron immediately
marked me down for a Man of Genius, and vowed to me an eternal
friendship.

That friendship was become to me by no means indifferent.  At the
Castle of Lindenberg I beheld for the first time your Sister, the
lovely Agnes.  For me whose heart was unoccupied, and who grieved at
the void, to see her and to love her were the same.  I found in Agnes
all that was requisite to secure my affection.  She was then scarcely
sixteen; Her person light and elegant was already formed; She possessed
several talents in perfection, particularly those of Music and drawing:
Her character was gay, open, and good-humoured; and the graceful
simplicity of her dress and manners formed an advantageous contrast to
the art and studied Coquetry of the Parisian Dames, whom I had just
quitted.  From the moment that I beheld her, I felt the most lively
interest in her fate.  I made many enquiries respecting her of the
Baroness.

'She is my Niece,' replied that Lady; 'You are still ignorant, Don
Alphonso, that I am your Countrywoman.  I am Sister to the Duke of
Medina Celi:  Agnes is the Daughter of my second Brother, Don Gaston:
She has been destined to the Convent from her cradle, and will soon
make her profession at Madrid.'

(Here Lorenzo interrupted the Marquis by an exclamation of surprise.

'Intended for the Convent from her cradle?' said He; 'By heaven, this
is the first word that I ever heard of such a design!'

'I believe it, my dear Lorenzo,' answered Don Raymond; 'But you must
listen to me with patience.  You will not be less surprised, when I
relate some particulars of your family still unknown to you, and which
I have learnt from the mouth of Agnes herself.'

He then resumed his narrative as follows.)

You cannot but be aware that your Parents were unfortunately Slaves to
the grossest superstition:  When this foible was called into play,
their every other sentiment, their every other passion yielded to its
irresistible strength.  Then the music ceased; and a few seconds later
a throng of heated dancers swarmed through the open doorway to the
surrounding veranda, and simultaneously a chatter broke forth. Fans,
like gigantic butterfly wings, vibrated to and fro. Skilful
waiters, in black and white, glanced in and out.
Laughter, thoughtless and care-free, mingled in the general scene.

The music still, Ben Blair was about to move on, when suddenly a man
and a girl in the shadow of a window on the second floor caught and held
his attention. As far as he could see, they were alone. Evidently one
or the other of them knew the house intimately, and had deliberately
sought the place. From the veranda beneath, the flow of talk continued
uninterruptedly; but they gave it no attention. The spectator could
distinctly see the man as he leaned back in the light and spoke
earnestly. At times he gesticulated with rapid passionate motions, such
as one unconsciously uses when deeply absorbed. Now and again, with the
bodily motions that we have learned to connect with the French, his
shoulders were shrugged expressively. He was obviously talking against
time; for his every motion showed intense concentration. No spectator
could have mistaken the nature of his speech. Passion supreme, abandon
absolute, were here personified. As he spoke, he gradually leaned farther
forward toward the woman who listened. His face was no longer in the
light. Suddenly, at first low, as though coming from a distance,
increasing gradually until it throbbed into the steady beat of a
waltz, the music recommenced. It was the signal for action and for
throwing off restraint. The man leaned forward; his arm stretched out
and closed about the figure of the woman.

His face pressed forward to meet hers, again and again.

Not Ben alone, but a half-dozen other spectators had watched the scene.

An overdressed girl among the number tittered at the sight.

But Ben scarcely noticed. With the strength of insulted womanhood,
the girl had broken free, and now stood up full in the light. One look
she gave to the man, a look which should have withered him with its
scorn; then, gathering her skirts, she almost ran from the
room.

Only a few seconds had the girl's face been clear of the shadow;
yet it had been long enough to permit recognition, and instantly
liquid fire flowed in the veins of Benjamin Blair.

His breath came quick and short as that of a runner passing under the
wire, and his great jaw set. The woman he had seen was Florence
Baker.

With one motion he was upon the terrace leading toward the house.
Another second, and he would have been well upon his way, when a hand
grasped him from behind and drew him back. With a half-articulated
imprecation Ben turned--and stood fronting Scotty Baker. The
Englishman's face was very white. Behind the compound lenses his eyes
glowed in a way Ben had not thought possible; but his voice was
steady when he spoke.

"I saw too, Ben," he said, "and I understand. I know what you want to
do, and God knows I want to do the same thing myself; but it would do
no good; it would only make the matter worse." He looked at the younger
man fixedly, almost imploringly. His voice sank. "As you care for Florence,
Ben, go away. Don't make a scene that will do only harm. Leave her with
me. I came to take her home, and I'll do so at once." The speaker
paused, and his hand reached out and grasped the other's with a grip
unmistakable. "I appreciate your motive, my boy, and I honor it. I
know how you feel; and whatever I may have been in the past,
from this time on I am your friend. I am your friend now, when I
ask you to go," and he fairly forced his companion away.

Once outside the crowd, Ben halted. He gave the Englishman one long
look; his lips opened as if to speak; then, without a word, he moved
away.

There was no listlessness about him now. He was throbbing with
repressed energy, like a great engine with steam up. His feet tapped
with the regularity of clock-ticks over mile after mile of the city
walks. He longed for physical weariness, for sleep; but the day, with
its manifold mental exaltations and depressions, prevented. It
seemed to him that he could never sleep again, could never again
be weary. He could only walk on and on.

Down town again, he found the crowds smaller and the border of chairs
in front of his hotel largely empty. A few cigars still burned
in the half-light, but they were the last flicker of a conflagration
now all but extinguished. The restless throb of the human dynamo was
lower and more subdued. The street cars were practically empty. Instead
of a constant stream of vehicles, an occasional cab clattered past.

The city was preparing for its brief hours of fitful rest.

Straight on Ben walked, between the towering office buildings,
beside the now darkened department-store hives, past the giant wholesale
establishments and warehouses; until, quite unintentionally
on his part, and almost before he realized it, he found himself in
another world, another city, as distinct as though it were no part
of the cosmopolitan whole. Again he came upon throbbing life; but
of quite another type.
Once more he met people in abundance, noisy, chattering human
beings; but more frequently than his own he now heard foreign tongues
that he did not understand, and did not even recognize. No longer were
the pedestrians well dressed or apparently prosperous. Instead,
poverty and squalor and filth were rampant. More loth even than the
well-to-do of the suburbs to go within doors, the swarming mass of
humanity covered the steps of the houses, and overflowed upon the
sidewalk, even upon the street itself.

There were men, women, children; the lame, the halt, the blind. The
elders stared at the visitor, while the youngsters, secure in numbers,
guyed him to their hearts' content.

It was all as foreign to any previous experience of this countryman as
though he had come from a different planet. He had read of the city
slums as of Stanley's Central African negro tribes with unpronounceable
names; and he had thought of them in much the same way.

To him they had been something known to exist, but with which it was
but remotely probable he would ever come in contact. Now, without
preparation or premeditation, thrown face to face with the reality,
it brought upon him a sickening feeling, a sort of mental nausea.

Ben was not a philanthropist or a social reformer; the inspiring
thought of the inexhaustible field for usefulness therein presented
had never occurred to him.

He wished chiefly to get away from the stench and ugliness; and,
turning down a cross street, he started to return.

The locality he now entered was more modern and better lighted than the
one he left behind.

The decorated building fronts, with their dazzling electric signs, partook
of the characteristics of the inhabitants, who seemed overdressed and
vulgarly ostentatious. The gaudily trapped saloons, _cafés_, and
music halls, spoke a similar message.

This was the recreation spot of the people of the quarter; their land
of lethe.

So near were the saloons and drinking gardens that from their open
doorways there came a pungent odor of beer. Every place had
instrumental music of some kind.

Mandolins and guitars, in the hands of gentlemen of color, were the
favorites. Pianos of execrable tone, played by youths with defective
complexions, or by machinery, were a close second. Before one
place, a crowd blocked the sidewalk; and there Ben stopped. A vaudeville
performance was going on within--an invisible dialect comedian
doing a German stunt to the accompaniment of wooden clogs and disarranged
verbs.

A barker in front, coatless, his collar loosened, a black string tie
dangling over an unclean shirt front, was temporarily taking a much-needed
rest. An electric sign overhead dyed his cheeks with shifting colors--first
red, then green, then white. Despite its veneer of brazen effrontery,
the face, with its great mouth and two days' growth of beard, was haggard
and weary looking. Ben mentally pictured, with a feeling of compassion,
other human beings doing their idiotic "stunts" inside, sweltering
in the foul air; and he wondered how, if an atom of self-respect
remained in their make-up, they could fail to despise themselves.

But the comedian had subsided in a roar of applause, and again the
barker's hands were gesticulating wildly.

"Now's your time, ladies and gentlemen," he harangued.

"It's continuous, you know, and Madame--"
But Ben did not wait for more.

Elbow first, he pushed into the crowd, and as it instantly closed about
him the odor of unclean bodies made him fairly hold his breath.

Straight ahead, looking neither to right nor to left, went the
countryman; he turned the corner of the block, a corner without a
light.
Suddenly, with an instinctive tightening of his breath, he drew back. He
had nearly stepped upon a man, dead drunk, stretched half in a
darkened doorway, half on the walk. The wretch's head was bent back
over one of the iron steps until it seemed as if he must choke,
and he was snoring heavily.

Not a policeman was in sight, and Ben, in great physical disgust, carried
the helpless hulk to one side, out of the way of pedestrians, took off
the tattered coat and rolled it into a pillow for the head, and
then moved on with the sound of the stertorous drunken breathing still
in his ears.

Still other experiences were in store for him. He made a half block
without further interruption; then he suddenly heard at his back a
frightened scream, and a young woman came running toward him,
followed at a distance by a roughly dressed man, the latter apparently
the worse for liquor.

Blair stopped, and the girl coming up, caught him by the arm
imploringly.

"Help me, Mister, please!" she pleaded breathlessly. "He--Tom,
back there--insulted me. I--" A burst of hysterical tears interrupted
the confession.

Meanwhile, seeing the turn events had taken, the pursuer had likewise
stopped, and now he hesitated.

"All right," replied Ben. "Go ahead! I'll see that the fellow doesn't
trouble you again." And he started back.

But the girl's hand was again upon his arm.

"No," she protested, "not that way, please. He's my steady, Tom is,
only to-night he's drank too much, and--and--he doesn't realize
what he's doing."

The grip on his arm tightened as she looked imploringly into his face.
"Take me home, please!" A catch was in her voice. "I'm afraid."
Ben hesitated. Even in the half-light the petitioner's face hinted
brazenly of cosmetics.

"Where do you live?" he asked shortly.

"Only a little way, less than a block, and it's the direction you're
going. Please take me!"

"Very well," said Blair, and they moved on, the girl still clinging to
him and sobbing at intervals. Before a dark three-story and basement
building, with a decidedly sinister aspect, she stopped and indicated
a stairway.

"This is the place."

"All right," responded Ben. "I guess you're safe now. Good-night!"

But she clung to him the tighter. "Come up with me," she insisted.
"We're only on the second floor, and I haven't thanked you yet. Really,
I'm so grateful! You don't know what it means to be a girl,
and--and--" Her feelings got the better of her again, and she paused
to wipe her eyes on her sleeve. "My mother will be so thankful too.
She'd never forgive me if I didn't bring you up. Please come!"

and she led the way up the darkened stair.

Again Ben hesitated. He did not in the least like the situation in
which circumstances had placed him. The prospect of the girl's
mother, like herself, scattering grateful tears upon him was not
alluring; but it seemed the part of a cad to refuse, and at last
he followed.

His guide led him up a short flight of stairs and turned to the right,
down a dimly lighted hall. The ground-floor of the building was used
for store purposes.

This second floor was evidently a series of apartments.
Lights from within the rooms crept over the curtained transoms. Voices
sounded; glasses clinked. A piano banged out ragtime like mad.

At the fourth door the girl stopped. "Thank you so much for coming,"
she said. "Walk right in," and throwing open the door she fairly
shoved the visitor inside.

From out the semi-darkness, Ben now found himself in a well-lighted
room, and the change made him blink about him. Instead of the motherly
old lady in a frilled cap, whom he had expected to see, he found himself
in the company of a half-dozen coatless young men and under-dressed
women, lounging in questionable attitudes on chairs and sofas.
At his advent they all looked up. A sallow youth who had been
operating the piano turned in his seat and the music stopped. Not
yet realizing the trick that had been played upon him, Ben turned to
look for his guide; but she was nowhere in sight, and the door
was closed. His eyes shifted back and met a circle of amused faces,
while a burst of mocking laughter broke upon his ears.

Then for the first time he understood, and his face went white with
anger.

Without a word he started to leave the room.

But one of the women was already at his side, her detaining hand upon
his sleeve. "No, no, honey!" she said, insinuatingly. "We're all good
fellows! Stay awhile!"

Ben shook her off roughly. Her very touch was contaminating. But one
of the men had had time to get between him and the door; a sarcastic
smile was upon his face as he blocked the way.

"I guess it's on you, old man!" he bantered. "About a half-dozen quarts
will do for a starter!" He nodded to a pudgy old woman who was
watching interestedly from the background. "You heard the gent's order,
mother!
Beer, and in a hurry! He looks dry and hot."
Again a gale of laughter broke forth; but Ben took no notice. He made
one step forward, until he was within arm's reach of the humorist.

"Step out of my way, please," he said evenly.

Had the man been alone he would have complied, and quickly.

No human being with eyes and intelligence could have misread the
warning on Ben Blair's countenance. He started to move, when the girl
who had first come forward turned the tide.

"Aw, Charley!" she goaded. "Is that all the nerve you've got!" and she
laughed ironically.

Instantly the man's face reddened, and he fell back into his first
position.

"Sorry I can't oblige you, pal," he said, "but you see it's agin
de house. Us blokes has got--"
The sentence was never completed. Ben's fist shot out and caught the
speaker fair on the point of his jaw, and he collapsed in his tracks.

For a second no one in the room stirred; then before Ben could open the
door, the other men were upon him. The women fled screaming to the
farthest corner of the room, where they huddled together like
sheep.
Returning with the tray, the old woman realized an only too familiar
condition.

"Gentlemen!" she pleaded. "Gentlemen!"

But no one paid the slightest attention to her.

Forced by sheer odds of mass toward a corner, Ben's long arms were working
like flails. Another man fell, and was up again. The first one also was
upon his feet now, his face white, and a tiny stream of blood
trickling from his bruised jaw. A heavy beer-bottle flung by one of the
women crashed on the wall over the countryman's head, the contents
spattering over him like rain.
One of the men had seized a chair and swung it high, to strike, with
murder in his eye. Attracted by the confusion, the other occupants of
the floor had rushed into the hall. The door was flung open and
instantly blocked with a mass of sinister menacing faces.

Until then, Ben had been silent as death, silent as one who realizes
that he is fighting for life against overwhelming odds. Now of a sudden
he leaped backward like a great cat, clear of all the others. From
his throat there issued a sound, the like of which not one of those who
listened had ever heard before, and which fairly lifted their hair--the
Indian war-whoop that the man had learned as a boy. With the old
instinctive motion, comparable in swiftness to nothing save the passage
of light, the cowboy's hands went to his hips, and as swiftly returned
with the muzzles of two great revolvers protruding like
elongated index fingers. With equal swiftness, his face had
undergone a transformation.
His jaw was set and his blue eyes flashed like live coals.

"Stand back, little folks!" he ordered, while the twin weapons revolved
in circles of reflected flame about his trigger fingers. "You seem to
want a show, and you shall have it!" The whirling circles vanished. A
deep report fell upon the silence, and a gaudy vase on the mantle
flew into a thousand pieces. "Stand back, people, or you might get
hurt!"
Awed into dumb helplessness, the spectators stared with widening eyes;
but the spectacle had only begun. Like the reports of giant
fire-crackers, only seconds apart, the great revolvers spoke.

A nudely suggestive cast in the corner followed the vase.

A quaintly carved clock paused in its measure of time, its hands chronicling
the minute of interruption. A decanter of whiskey burst spattering
over a table. Two bacchanalian pictures on the wall suddenly had
yawning wounds in their centre.

The portrait of a queen of the footlights leaped into the air.

One of the beer-bottles, which the madame had placed on a convenient
table, popped as though it were champagne. Fragments of glass and
porcelain fell about like hail. The place was lighted by a tuft of three
big incandescent globes; and, last of all, one by one, they crashed
into atoms, and the room was in total darkness. Then silence fell,
startling in contrast to the late confusion, while the pungent odor of
burnt gunpowder intruded upon the nostrils.

For a moment there was inaction; then the assembly broke into motion.
No thought was there now of retaliation or revenge; only, as at a
sudden conflagration or a wreck, of individual safety and escape.
The hallway was cleared as if by magic.

Within the room the men and women jostled each other in the darkness,
or jammed imprecating in the narrow doorway.

In a few seconds Ben was alone. Calmly he thrust the empty revolvers back
into his pockets and followed leisurely into the hall. There the dim
light revealed an empty space; but here and there a lock turned
gratingly, and from more than one room as he passed came the sound of
furniture being hastily drawn forward as a barricade.

No human being ever knew what occurred behind the locked door of Ben
Blair's room at the hotel that night.

Those hours were buried as deep as what took place in his mind during
the months intervening between the coming of Florence Baker to the
city and his own decision to follow her.

By nature a solitary, he fought his battles alone and in silence.
That he never once touched his bed, the hotel maids could have
testified the next morning. As to the decision that followed those
sleepless hours, his own action gave a clue. He had left a call for
an early train West, and at daylight a tap sounded on his door,
while a voice announced the time.
"Yes," answered the guest; but he did not stir.
In a few minutes the tap was repeated more insistently. "You've
only time to make your train if you hurry," warned the voice.
For a moment Blair did not answer. Then he said: "I have decided
not to go." 

CHAPTER XXV 
OF WHAT AVAIL?
It was late next morning, almost noon in fact, when Florence Baker
awoke; and even then she did not at once rise. A physical listlessness,
very unusual to her, lay upon her like a weight. A year ago, by
this time of day, she would have been ravenously hungry; but now
she had a feeling that she could not have taken a mouthful of food
had her life depended on it. The room, although it faced the west
and was well ventilated, seemed hot and depressing. A breeze stirred
the lace curtains at the window, but it was heated by the blocks
of city pavements over which it had come. The girl involuntarily
compared this awakening with that of a former life in what now
seemed to her the very long ago. She remembered the light morning
wind of the prairies, which, always fresh with the coolness of dew
and of growing things, had drifted in at the tiny windows of the
Baker ranch-house. She recalled the sweet scent of the buffalo grass
with a vague sense of depression and irrevocable loss.
She turned restlessly beneath the covers, and in doing so her face
came in contact with the moistened surface of her pillow. Propping
herself up on her elbow, she looked curiously at the tell-tale bit
of linen.
Obviously, she had been crying in her sleep; and for this there
must have been a reason. Until that moment she had not thought of
the previous night; but now the sudden recollection overwhelmed
her. She was only a girl-woman--a child of nature, incapable of
repression. Two great tears gathered in her soft brown eyes; with
instinctive desire of concealment the fluffy head dropped to the
pillow, and the sobs broke out afresh.
Minutes passed; then her mother's hesitating steps approached the
door.

"Florence," called a voice. "Florence, are you well?"
The dishevelled brown head lifted, but the girl made no motion to
let her mother in.

"Yes--I am well," she echoed.
For a moment Mrs. Baker hesitated, but she was too much in awe of
her daughter to enter uninvited.Unlocking a
drawer, She took out a small case, which She opened, and presented to
me.

'Do you know the resemblance?' said She smiling.

It was her own.

Transported at the gift, I pressed the portrait to my lips with
passion:  I threw myself at her feet, and declared my gratitude in the
warmest and most affectionate terms.  She listened to me with
complaisance, and assured me that She shared my sentiments: When
suddenly She uttered a loud shriek, disengaged the hand which I held,
and flew from the room by a door which opened to the Garden.  Amazed at
this abrupt departure, I rose hastily from my knees.  I beheld with
confusion the Baroness standing near me glowing with jealousy, and
almost choaked with rage.  On recovering from her swoon, She had
tortured her imagination to discover her concealed Rival.  No one
appeared to deserve her suspicions more than Agnes.  She immediately
hastened to find her Niece, tax her with encouraging my addresses, and
assure herself whether her conjectures were well-grounded.
Unfortunately She had already seen enough to need no other
confirmation.  She arrived at the door of the room at the precise
moment, when Agnes gave me her Portrait.  She heard me profess an
everlasting attachment to her Rival, and saw me kneeling at her feet.
She advanced to separate us; We were too much occupied by each other to
perceive her approach, and were not aware of it, till Agnes beheld her
standing by my side.

Rage on the part of Donna Rodolpha, embarrassment on mine, for some
time kept us both silent.  The Lady recovered herself first.

'My suspicions then were just,' said She; 'The Coquetry of my Niece has
triumphed, and 'tis to her that I am sacrificed.  In one respect
however I am fortunate:  I shall not be the only one who laments a
disappointed passion.  You too shall know, what it is to love without
hope!  I daily expect orders for restoring Agnes to her Parents.
Immediately upon her arrival in Spain, She will take the veil, and
place an insuperable barrier to your union.  You may spare your
supplications.' She continued, perceiving me on the point of speaking;
'My resolution is fixed and immoveable.  Your Mistress shall remain a
close Prisoner in her chamber till She exchanges this Castle for the
Cloister. Solitude will perhaps recall her to a sense of her duty:  But
to prevent your opposing that wished event, I must inform you, Don
Alphonso, that your presence here is no longer agreeable either to the
Baron or Myself.  It was not to talk nonsense to my Niece that your
Relations sent you to Germany:  Your business was to travel, and I
should be sorry to impede any longer so excellent a design.  Farewell,
Segnor; Remember, that tomorrow morning we meet for the last time.'

Having said this, She darted upon me a look of pride, contempt, and
malice, and quitted the apartment.  I also retired to mine, and
consumed the night in planning the means of rescuing Agnes from the
power of her tyrannical Aunt.

After the positive declaration of its Mistress, it was impossible for
me to make a longer stay at the Castle of Lindenberg. Accordingly I the
next day announced my immediate departure.  The Baron declared that it
gave him sincere pain; and He expressed himself in my favour so warmly,
that I endeavoured to win him over to my interest.  Scarcely had I
mentioned the name of Agnes when He stopped me short, and said, that it
was totally out of his power to interfere in the business.  I saw that
it was in vain to argue; The Baroness governed her Husband with
despotic sway, and I easily perceived that She had prejudiced him
against the match.  Agnes did not appear:  I entreated permission to
take leave of her, but my prayer was rejected.  I was obliged to depart
without seeing her.

At quitting him the Baron shook my hand affectionately, and assured me
that as soon as his Niece was gone, I might consider his House as my
own.

'Farewell, Don Alphonso!' said the Baroness, and stretched out her hand
to me.

I took it, and offered to carry it to my lips.  She prevented me.

Her Husband was at the other end of the room, and out of hearing.

'Take care of yourself,' She continued; 'My love is become hatred, and
my wounded pride shall not be unatoned.  Go where you will, my
vengeance shall follow you!'

She accompanied these words with a look sufficient to make me tremble.
I answered not, but hastened to quit the Castle.

As my Chaise drove out of the Court, I looked up to the windows of your
Sister's chamber.  Nobody was to be seen there:  I threw myself back
despondent in my Carriage.  I was attended by no other servants than a
Frenchman whom I had hired at Strasbourg in Stephano's room, and my
little Page whom I before mentioned to you.  The fidelity,
intelligence, and good temper of Theodore had already made him dear to
me; But He now prepared to lay an obligation on me, which made me look
upon him as a Guardian Genius.  Scarcely had we proceeded half a mile
from the Castle, when He rode up to the Chaise-door.

'Take courage, Segnor!' said He in Spanish, which He had already learnt
to speak with fluency and correctness. 'While you were with the Baron,
I watched the moment when Dame Cunegonda was below stairs, and mounted
into the chamber over that of Donna Agnes.  I sang as loud as I could a
little German air well-known to her, hoping that She would recollect my
voice.  I was not disappointed, for I soon heard her window open.  I
hastened to let down a string with which I had provided myself:  Upon
hearing the casement closed again, I drew up the string, and fastened
to it I found this scrap of paper.'

He then presented me with a small note addressed to me.  I opened it
with impatience:  It contained the following words written in pencil:

Conceal yourself for the next fortnight in some neighbouring Village.
My Aunt will believe you to have quitted Lindenberg, and I shall be
restored to liberty.  I will be in the West Pavilion at twelve on the
night of the thirtieth.  Fail not to be there, and we shall have an
opportunity of concerting our future plans.  Adieu.
Agnes.

At perusing these lines my transports exceeded all bounds; Neither did
I set any to the expressions of gratitude which I heaped upon Theodore.
In fact his address and attention merited my warmest praise.  You will
readily believe that I had not entrusted him with my passion for Agnes;
But the arch Youth had too much discernment not to discover my secret,
and too much discretion not to conceal his knowledge of it.  He
observed in silence what was going on, nor strove to make himself an
Agent in the business till my interests required his interference.  I
equally admired his judgment, his penetration, his address, and his
fidelity.  This was not the first occasion in which I had found him of
infinite use, and I was every day more convinced of his quickness and
capacity.  During my short stay at Strasbourg, He had applied himself
diligently to learning the rudiments of Spanish:  He continued to study
it, and with so much success that He spoke it with the same facility as
his native language.  He past the greatest part of his time in reading;
He had acquired much information for his Age; and united the advantages
of a lively countenance and prepossessing figure to an excellent
understanding and the very best of hearts.  He is now fifteen; He is
still in my service, and when you see him, I am sure that He will
please you.  But excuse this digression:  I return to the subject which
I quitted.

I obeyed the instructions of Agnes.  I proceeded to Munich. There I
left my Chaise under the care of Lucas, my French Servant, and then
returned on Horseback to a small Village about four miles distant from
the Castle of Lindenberg.  Upon arriving there a story was related to
the Host at whose Inn I descended, which prevented his wondering at my
making so long a stay in his House. The old Man fortunately was
credulous and incurious: He believed all I said, and sought to know no
more than what I thought proper to tell him.  Nobody was with me but
Theodore; Both were disguised, and as we kept ourselves close, we were
not suspected to be other than what we seemed.  In this manner the
fortnight passed away.  During that time I had the pleasing conviction
that Agnes was once more at liberty.  She past through the Village with
Dame Cunegonda:  She seemed in health and spirits, and talked to her
Companion without any appearance of constraint.

'Who are those Ladies?' said I to my Host, as the Carriage past.

'Baron Lindenberg's Niece with her Governess,' He replied; 'She goes
regularly every Friday to the Convent of St. Catharine, in which She
was brought up, and which is situated about a mile from hence.'

You may be certain that I waited with impatience for the ensuing
Friday.  I again beheld my lovely Mistress.  She cast her eyes upon me,
as She passed the Inn-door.  A blush which overspread her cheek told me
that in spite of my disguise I had been recognised.  I bowed
profoundly.  She returned the compliment by a slight inclination of the
head as if made to one inferior, and looked another way till the
Carriage was out of sight.

The long-expected, long-wished for night arrived.  It was calm, and the
Moon was at the full.  As soon as the Clock struck eleven I hastened to
my appointment, determined not to be too late. Theodore had provided a
Ladder; I ascended the Garden wall without difficulty; The Page
followed me, and drew the Ladder after us. I posted myself in the West
Pavilion, and waited impatiently for the approach of Agnes.  Every
breeze that whispered, every leaf that fell, I believed to be her
footstep, and hastened to meet her.  Thus was I obliged to pass a full
hour, every minute of which appeared to me an age.  The Castle Bell at
length tolled twelve, and scarcely could I believe the night to be no
further advanced.  Another quarter of an hour elapsed, and I heard the
light foot of my Mistress approaching the Pavilion with precaution.  I
flew to receive her, and conducted her to a seat.  I threw myself at
her feet, and was expressing my joy at seeing her, when She thus
interrupted me.

'We have no time to lose, Alphonso:  The moments are precious, for
though no more a Prisoner, Cunegonda watches my every step. An express
is arrived from my Father; I must depart immediately for Madrid, and
'tis with difficulty that I have obtained a week's delay.  The
superstition of my Parents, supported by the representations of my
cruel Aunt, leaves me no hope of softening them to compassion.  In this
dilemma I have resolved to commit myself to your honour:  God grant
that you may never give me cause to repent my resolution!  Flight is my
only resource from the horrors of a Convent, and my imprudence must be
excused by the urgency of the danger.  Now listen to the plan by which
I hope to effect my escape.

'We are now at the thirtieth of April.  On the fifth day from this the
Visionary Nun is expected to appear.  In my last visit to the Convent I
provided myself with a dress proper for the character:  A Friend, whom
I have left there and to whom I made no scruple to confide my secret,
readily consented to supply me with a religious habit.  Provide a
carriage, and be with it at a little distance from the great Gate of
the Castle.  As soon as the Clock strikes 'one,' I shall quit my
chamber, drest in the same apparel as the Ghost is supposed to wear.
Whoever meets me will be too much terrified to oppose my escape.  I
shall easily reach the door, and throw myself under your protection.
Thus far success is certain:  But Oh!  Alphonso, should you deceive me!
Should you despise my imprudence and reward it with ingratitude, the
World will not hold a Being more wretched than myself!  I feel all the
dangers to which I shall be exposed.  I feel that I am giving you a
right to treat me with levity:  But I rely upon your love, upon your
honour!  The step which I am on the point of taking, will incense my
Relations against me:  Should you desert me, should you betray the
trust reposed in you, I shall have no friend to punish your insult, or
support my cause.  On yourself alone rests all my hope, and if your own
heart does not plead in my behalf, I am undone for ever!'

The tone in which She pronounced these words was so touching, that in
spite of my joy at receiving her promise to follow me, I could not help
being affected.  I also repined in secret at not having taken the
precaution to provide a Carriage at the Village, in which case I might
have carried off Agnes that very night. Such an attempt was now
impracticable:  Neither Carriage or Horses were to be procured nearer
than Munich, which was distant from Lindenberg two good days journey.
I was therefore obliged to chime in with her plan, which in truth
seemed well arranged: Her disguise would secure her from being stopped
in quitting the Castle, and would enable her to step into the Carriage
at the very Gate without difficulty or losing time.

Agnes reclined her head mournfully upon my shoulder, and by the light
of the Moon I saw tears flowing down her cheek.  I strove to dissipate
her melancholy, and encouraged her to look forward to the prospect of
happiness.  I protested in the most solemn terms that her virtue and
innocence would be safe in my keeping, and that till the church had
made her my lawful Wife, her honour should be held by me as sacred as a
Sister's.  I told her that my first care should be to find you out,
Lorenzo, and reconcile you to our union; and I was continuing to speak
in the same strain, when a noise without alarmed me.  Suddenly the door
of the Pavilion was thrown open, and Cunegonda stood before us.  She
had heard Agnes steal out of her chamber, followed her into the Garden,
and perceived her entering the Pavilion.  Favoured by the Trees which
shaded it, and unperceived by Theodore who waited at a little distance,
She had approached in silence, and overheard our whole conversation.

'Admirable!' cried Cunegonda in a voice shrill with passion, while
Agnes uttered a loud shriek; 'By St. Barbara, young Lady, you have an
excellent invention!  You must personate the Bleeding Nun, truly?  What
impiety!  What incredulity!  Marry, I have a good mind to let you
pursue your plan:  When the real Ghost met you, I warrant, you would be
in a pretty condition!  Don Alphonso, you ought to be ashamed of
yourself for seducing a young ignorant Creature to leave her family and
Friends: However, for this time at least I shall mar your wicked
designs. The noble Lady shall be informed of the whole affair, and
Agnes must defer playing the Spectre till a better opportunity.
Farewell, Segnor-- Donna Agnes, let me have the honour of conducting
your Ghost-ship back to your apartment.'

She approached the Sopha on which her trembling Pupil was seated, took
her by the hand, and prepared to lead her from the Pavilion.

I detained her, and strove by entreaties, soothing, promises, and
flattery to win her to my party:  But finding all that I could say of
no avail, I abandoned the vain attempt.

'Your obstinacy must be its own punishment,' said I; 'But one resource
remains to save Agnes and myself, and I shall not hesitate to employ
it.'

Terrified at this menace, She again endeavoured to quit the Pavilion;
But I seized her by the wrist, and detained her forcibly.  At the same
moment Theodore, who had followed her into the room, closed the door,
and prevented her escape.  I took the veil of Agnes:  I threw it round
the Duenna's head, who uttered such piercing shrieks that in spite of
our distance from the Castle, I dreaded their being heard.  At length I
succeeded in gagging her so compleatly that She could not produce a
single sound.  Theodore and myself with some difficulty next contrived
to bind her hands and feet with our handkerchiefs; And I advised Agnes
to regain her chamber with all diligence.  I promised that no harm
should happen to Cunegonda, bad her remember that on the fifth of May I
should be in waiting at the Great Gate of the Castle, and took of her
an affectionate farewell.  Trembling and uneasy She had scarce power
enough to signify her consent to my plans, and fled back to her
apartment in disorder and confusion.

In the meanwhile Theodore assisted me in carrying off my antiquated
Prize.  She was hoisted over the wall, placed before me upon my Horse
like a Portmanteau, and I galloped away with her from the Castle of
Lindenberg.  The unlucky Duenna never had made a more disagreeable
journey in her life:  She was jolted and shaken till She was become
little more than an animated Mummy; not to mention her fright when we
waded through a small River through which it was necessary to pass in
order to regain the Village.  Before we reached the Inn, I had already
determined how to dispose of the troublesome Cunegonda.  We entered the
Street in which the Inn stood, and while the page knocked, I waited at
a little distance.  The Landlord opened the door with a Lamp in his
hand.

'Give me the light!' said Theodore; 'My Master is coming.'

He snatched the Lamp hastily, and purposely let it fall upon the
ground:  The Landlord returned to the Kitchen to re-light the Lamp,
leaving the door open.  I profited by the obscurity, sprang from my
Horse with Cunegonda in my arms, darted up stairs, reached my chamber
unperceived, and unlocking the door of a spacious Closet, stowed her
within it, and then turned the Key. The Landlord and Theodore soon
after appeared with lights:  The Former expressed himself a little
surprised at my returning so late, but asked no impertinent questions.
He soon quitted the room, and left me to exult in the success of my
undertaking.

I immediately paid a visit to my Prisoner.  I strove to persuade her
submitting with patience to her temporary confinement.  My attempt was
unsuccessful.  Unable to speak or move, She expressed her fury by her
looks, and except at meals I never dared to unbind her, or release her
from the Gag.  At such times I stood over her with a drawn sword, and
protested, that if She uttered a single cry, I would plunge it in her
bosom.  As soon as She had done eating, the Gag was replaced.  I was
conscious that this proceeding was cruel, and could only be justified
by the urgency of circumstances:  As to Theodore, He had no scruples
upon the subject.  Cunegonda's captivity entertained him beyond
measure. During his abode in the Castle, a continual warfare had been
carried on between him and the Duenna; and now that He found his Enemy
so absolutely in his power, He triumphed without mercy.  He seemed to
think of nothing but how to find out new means of plaguing her:
Sometimes He affected to pity her misfortune, then laughed at, abused,
and mimicked her; He played her a thousand tricks, each more provoking
than the other, and amused himself by telling her that her elopement
must have occasioned much surprise at the Baron's.  This was in fact
the case.  No one except Agnes could imagine what was become of Dame
Cunegonda: Every hole and corner was searched for her; The Ponds were
dragged, and the Woods underwent a thorough examination.  Still no Dame
Cunegonda made her appearance.  Agnes kept the secret, and I kept the
Duenna:  The Baroness, therefore, remained in total ignorance
respecting the old Woman's fate, but suspected her to have perished by
suicide.  Thus past away five days, during which I had prepared every
thing necessary for my enterprise.  On quitting Agnes, I had made it my
first business to dispatch a Peasant with a letter to Lucas at Munich,
ordering him to take care that a Coach and four should arrive about ten
o'clock on the fifth of May at the Village of Rosenwald.  He obeyed my
instructions punctually: The Equipage arrived at the time appointed.
As the period of her Lady's elopement drew nearer, Cunegonda's rage
increased.  I verily believe that spight and passion would have killed
her, had I not luckily discovered her prepossession in favour of Cherry
Brandy. With this favourite liquor She was plentifully supplied, and
Theodore always remaining to guard her, the Gag was occasionally
removed.  The liquor seemed to have a wonderful effect in softening the
acrimony of her nature; and her confinement not admitting of any other
amusement, She got drunk regularly once a day just by way of passing
the time.

The fifth of May arrived, a period by me never to be forgotten! Before
the Clock struck twelve, I betook myself to the scene of action.
Theodore followed me on horseback.  I concealed the Carriage in a
spacious Cavern of the Hill, on whose brow the Castle was situated:
This Cavern was of considerable depth, and among the peasants was known
by the name of Lindenberg Hole.  The night was calm and beautiful:  The
Moonbeams fell upon the antient Towers of the Castle, and shed upon
their summits a silver light.  All was still around me:  Nothing was to
be heard except the night breeze sighing among the leaves, the distant
barking of Village Dogs, or the Owl who had established herself in a
nook of the deserted Eastern Turret.  I heard her melancholy shriek,
and looked upwards.  She sat upon the ride of a window, which I
recognized to be that of the haunted Room.  This brought to my
remembrance the story of the Bleeding Nun, and I sighed while I
reflected on the influence of superstition and weakness of human
reason.  Suddenly I heard a faint chorus steal upon the silence of the
night.

'What can occasion that noise, Theodore?'

'A Stranger of distinction,' replied He, 'passed through the Village
today in his way to the Castle:  He is reported to be the Father of
Donna Agnes.  Doubtless, the Baron has given an entertainment to
celebrate his arrival.'

The Castle Bell announced the hour of midnight: This was the usual
signal for the family to retire to Bed.  Soon after I perceived lights
in the Castle moving backwards and forwards in different directions.  I
conjectured the company to be separating.  I could hear the heavy doors
grate as they opened with difficulty, and as they closed again the
rotten Casements rattled in their frames.  The chamber of Agnes was on
the other side of the Castle.  I trembled lest She should have failed
in obtaining the Key of the haunted Room:  Through this it was
necessary for her to pass in order to reach the narrow Staircase by
which the Ghost was supposed to descend into the great Hall.  Agitated
by this apprehension, I kept my eyes constantly fixed upon the window,
where I hoped to perceive the friendly glare of a Lamp borne by Agnes.
I now heard the massy Gates unbarred.  By the candle in his hand I
distinguished old Conrad, the Porter.  He set the Portal doors wide
open, and retired.  The lights in the Castle gradually disappeared, and
at length the whole Building was wrapt in darkness.

While I sat upon a broken ridge of the Hill, the stillness of the scene
inspired me with melancholy ideas not altogether unpleasing.  The
Castle which stood full in my sight, formed an object equally awful and
picturesque. Its ponderous Walls tinged by the moon with solemn
brightness, its old and partly-ruined Towers lifting themselves into
the clouds and seeming to frown on the plains around them, its lofty
battlements oergrown with ivy, and folding Gates expanding in honour of
the Visionary Inhabitant, made me sensible of a sad and reverential
horror. Yet did not these sensations occupy me so fully, as to prevent
me from witnessing with impatience the slow progress of time.  I
approached the Castle, and ventured to walk round it.  A few rays of
light still glimmered in the chamber of Agnes.  I observed them with
joy.  I was still gazing upon them, when I perceived a figure draw near
the window, and the Curtain was carefully closed to conceal the Lamp
which burned there.  Convinced by this observation that Agnes had not
abandoned our plan, I returned with a light heart to my former station.

The half-hour struck!  The three-quarters struck!  My bosom beat high
with hope and expectation.  At length the wished-for sound was heard.
The Bell tolled 'One,' and the Mansion echoed with the noise loud and
solemn.  I looked up to the Casement of the haunted Chamber.  Scarcely
had five minutes elapsed, when the expected light appeared.  I was now
close to the Tower.  The window was not so far from the Ground but that
I fancied I perceived a female figure with a Lamp in her hand moving
slowly along the Apartment.  The light soon faded away, and all was
again dark and gloomy.

Occasional gleams of brightness darted from the Staircase windows as
the lovely Ghost past by them.  I traced the light through the Hall:
It reached the Portal, and at length I beheld Agnes pass through the
folding gates.  She was habited exactly as She had described the
Spectre.  A chaplet of Beads hung upon her arm; her head was enveloped
in a long white veil; Her Nun's dress was stained with blood, and She
had taken care to provide herself with a Lamp and dagger.  She advanced
towards the spot where I stood.  I flew to meet her, and clasped her in
my arms.

  'Agnes!' said I while I pressed her to my bosom,
  Agnes!  Agnes!  Thou art mine!
  Agnes! Agnes! I am thine!
  In my veins while blood shall roll,
  Thou art mine!
  I am thine!
  Thine my body! Thine my soul!

Terrified and breathless She was unable to speak: She dropt her Lamp
and dagger, and sank upon my bosom in silence.  I raised her in my
arms, and conveyed her to the Carriage.  Theodore remained behind in
order to release Dame Cunegonda.  I also charged him with a letter to
the Baroness explaining the whole affair, and entreating her good
offices in reconciling Don Gaston to my union with his Daughter.  I
discovered to her my real name:  I proved to her that my birth and
expectations justified my pretending to her Niece, and assured her,
though it was out of my power to return her love, that I would strive
unceasingly to obtain her esteem and friendship.

I stepped into the Carriage, where Agnes was already seated. Theodore
closed the door, and the Postillions drove away.  At first I was
delighted with the rapidity of our progress; But as soon as we were in
no danger of pursuit, I called to the Drivers, and bad them moderate
their pace.  They strove in vain to obey me.  The Horses refused to
answer the rein, and continued to rush on with astonishing swiftness.
The Postillions redoubled their efforts to stop them, but by kicking
and plunging the Beasts soon released themselves from this restraint.
Uttering a loud shriek, the Drivers were hurled upon the ground.
Immediately thick clouds obscured the sky:  The winds howled around us,
the lightning flashed, and the Thunder roared tremendously.  Never did
I behold so frightful a Tempest!  Terrified by the jar of contending
elements, the Horses seemed every moment to increase their speed.
Nothing could interrupt their career; They dragged the Carriage through
Hedges and Ditches, dashed down the most dangerous precipices, and
seemed to vye in swiftness with the rapidity of the winds.

All this while my Companion lay motionless in my arms.  Truly alarmed
by the magnitude of the danger, I was in vain attempting to recall her
to her senses; when a loud crash announced, that a stop was put to our
progress in the most disagreeable manner. The Carriage was shattered to
pieces.  In falling I struck my temple against a flint.  The pain of
the wound, the violence of the shock, and apprehension for the safety
of Agnes combined to overpower me so compleatly, that my senses forsook
me, and I lay without animation on the ground.

I probably remained for some time in this situation, since when I
opened my eyes, it was broad daylight.  Several Peasants were standing
round me, and seemed disputing whether my recovery was possible.  I
spoke German tolerably well.  As soon as I could utter an articulate
sound, I enquired after Agnes.  What was my surprise and distress, when
assured by the Peasants, that nobody had been seen answering the
description which I gave of her! They told me that in going to their
daily labour they had been alarmed by observing the fragments of my
Carriage, and by hearing the groans of an Horse, the only one of the
four which remained alive: The other Three lay dead by my side.  Nobody
was near me when they came up, and much time had been lost, before they
succeeded in recovering me.  Uneasy beyond expression respecting the
fate of my Companion, I besought the Peasants to disperse themselves in
search of her:  I described her dress, and promised immense rewards to
whoever brought me any intelligence.  As for myself, it was impossible
for me to join in the pursuit: I had broken two of my ribs in the fall:
My arm being dislocated hung useless by my side; and my left leg was
shattered so terribly, that I never expected to recover its use.

The Peasants complied with my request:  All left me except Four, who
made a litter of boughs and prepared to convey me to the neighbouring
Town.  I enquired its name.  It proved to be Ratisbon, and I could
scarcely persuade myself that I had travelled to such a distance in a
single night.  I told the Countrymen that at one o'clock that morning I
had past through the Village of Rosenwald.  They shook their heads
wistfully, and made signs to each other that I must certainly be
delirious.  I was conveyed to a decent Inn and immediately put to bed.
A Physician was sent for, who set my arm with success.  He then
examined my other hurts, and told me that I need be under no
apprehension of the consequences of any of them; But ordered me to keep
myself quiet, and be prepared for a tedious and painful cure.  I
answered him that if He hoped to keep me quiet, He must first endeavour
to procure me some news of a Lady who had quitted Rosenwald in my
company the night before, and had been with me at the moment when the
Coach broke down.  He smiled, and only replied by advising me to make
myself easy, for that all proper care should be taken of me.  As He
quitted me, the Hostess met him at the door of the room.

'The Gentleman is not quite in his right senses;' I heard him say to
her in a low voice; ''Tis the natural consequence of his fall, but that
will soon be over.'

One after another the Peasants returned to the Inn, and informed me
that no traces had been discovered of my unfortunate Mistress.

Uneasiness now became despair. I entreated them to renew their search
in the most urgent terms, doubling the promises which I had already
made them.  My wild and frantic manner confirmed the bye-standers in
the idea of my being delirious.  No signs of the Lady having appeared,
they believed her to be a creature fabricated by my over-heated brain,
and paid no attention to my entreaties.  However, the Hostess assured
me that a fresh enquiry should be made, but I found afterwards that her
promise was only given to quiet me.  No further steps were taken in the
business.

Though my Baggage was left at Munich under the care of my French
Servant, having prepared myself for a long journey, my purse was amply
furnished:  Besides my equipage proved me to be of distinction, and in
consequence all possible attention was paid me at the Inn.  The day
passed away:  Still no news arrived of Agnes.  The anxiety of fear now
gave place to despondency.  I ceased to rave about her and was plunged
in the depth of melancholy reflections.  Perceiving me to be silent and
tranquil, my Attendants believed my delirium to have abated, and that
my malady had taken a favourable turn.  According to the Physician's
order I swallowed a composing medicine; and as soon as the night shut
in, my attendants withdrew and left me to repose.

That repose I wooed in vain.  The agitation of my bosom chased away
sleep.  Restless in my mind, in spite of the fatigue of my body, I
continued to toss about from side to side, till the Clock in a
neighbouring Steeple struck 'One.'  As I listened to the mournful
hollow sound, and heard it die away in the wind, I felt a sudden
chillness spread itself over my body.  I shuddered without knowing
wherefore; Cold dews poured down my forehead, and my hair stood
bristling with alarm.  Suddenly I heard slow and heavy steps ascending
the staircase. By an involuntary movement I started up in my bed, and
drew back the curtain.  A single rush-light which glimmered upon the
hearth shed a faint gleam through the apartment, which was hung with
tapestry.  The door was thrown open with violence.  A figure entered,
and drew near my Bed with solemn measured steps.  With trembling
apprehension I examined this midnight Visitor.  God Almighty!  It was
the Bleeding Nun!  It was my lost Companion!  Her face was still
veiled, but She no longer held her Lamp and dagger.  She lifted up her
veil slowly.  What a sight presented itself to my startled eyes!  I
beheld before me an animated Corse.  Her countenance was long and
haggard; Her cheeks and lips were bloodless; The paleness of death was
spread over her features, and her eyeballs fixed stedfastly upon me
were lustreless and hollow.

I gazed upon the Spectre with horror too great to be described. My
blood was frozen in my veins.  I would have called for aid, but the
sound expired ere it could pass my lips.  My nerves were bound up in
impotence, and I remained in the same attitude inanimate as a Statue.

The visionary Nun looked upon me for some minutes in silence: There was
something petrifying in her regard. At length in a low sepulchral voice
She pronounced the following words.

      "Raymond!  Raymond!  Thou art mine!
       Raymond! Raymond!  I am thine!
       In thy veins while blood shall roll,
       I am thine!
       Thou art mine!
       Mine thy body! Mine thy soul!----"

Breathless with fear, I listened while She repeated my own expressions.
The Apparition seated herself opposite to me at the foot of the Bed,
and was silent.  Her eyes were fixed earnestly upon mine:  They seemed
endowed with the property of the Rattlesnake's, for I strove in vain to
look off her.  My eyes were fascinated, and I had not the power of
withdrawing them from the Spectre's.

In this attitude She remained for a whole long hour without speaking or
moving; nor was I able to do either.  At length the Clock struck two.
The Apparition rose from her seat, and approached the side of the bed.
She grasped with her icy fingers my hand which hung lifeless upon the
Coverture, and pressing her cold lips to mine, again repeated,

      "Raymond! Raymond! Thou art mine!
       Raymond! Raymond!
       I am thine! &c.----"

She then dropped my hand, quitted the chamber with slow steps, and the
Door closed after her.  Till that moment the faculties of my body had
been all suspended; Those of my mind had alone been waking.  The charm
now ceased to operate:  The blood which had been frozen in my veins
rushed back to my heart with violence: I uttered a deep groan, and sank
lifeless upon my pillow.

The adjoining room was only separated from mine by a thin partition:
It was occupied by the Host and his Wife:  The Former was rouzed by my
groan, and immediately hastened to my chamber: The Hostess soon
followed him.  With some difficulty they succeeded in restoring me to
my senses, and immediately sent for the Physician, who arrived in all
diligence.  He declared my fever to be very much increased, and that if
I continued to suffer such violent agitation, He would not take upon
him to ensure my life.  Some medicines which He gave me in some degree
tranquillized my spirits.  I fell into a sort of slumber towards
daybreak; But fearful dreams prevented me from deriving any benefit
from my repose.  Agnes and the Bleeding Nun presented themselves by
turns to my fancy, and combined to harass and torment me.  I awoke
fatigued and unrefreshed.  My fever seemed rather augmented than
diminished; The agitation of my mind impeded my fractured bones from
knitting:  I had frequent fainting fits, and during the whole day the
Physician judged it expedient not to quit me for two hours together.

The singularity of my adventure made me determine to conceal it from
every one, since I could not expect that a circumstance so strange
should gain credit.  I was very uneasy about Agnes.  I knew not what
She would think at not finding me at the rendezvous, and dreaded her
entertaining suspicions of my fidelity.  However, I depended upon
Theodore's discretion, and trusted that my letter to the Baroness would
convince her of the rectitude of my intentions.  These considerations
somewhat lightened my inquietude upon her account:  But the impression
left upon my mind by my nocturnal Visitor grew stronger with every
succeeding moment.  The night drew near; I dreaded its arrival.  Yet I
strove to persuade myself that the Ghost would appear no more, and at
all events I desired that a Servant might sit up in my chamber.

The fatigue of my body from not having slept on the former night,
co-operating with the strong opiates administered to me in profusion,
at length procured me that repose of which I was so much in need.  I
sank into a profound and tranquil slumber, and had already slept for
some hours, when the neighbouring Clock rouzed me by striking 'One'.
Its sound brought with it to my memory all the horrors of the night
before.  The same cold shivering seized me.  I started up in my bed,
and perceived the Servant fast asleep in an armed-Chair near me.  I
called him by his name:  He made no answer.  I shook him forcibly by
the arm, and strove in vain to wake him.  He was perfectly insensible
to my efforts.  I now heard the heavy steps ascending the staircase;
The Door was thrown open, and again the Bleeding Nun stood before me.
Once more my limbs were chained in second infancy.  Once more I heard
those fatal words repeated,

      "Raymond! Raymond!  Thou art mine!
       Raymond! Raymond!  I am thine! &c.----"

The scene which had shocked me so sensibly on the former night, was
again presented.  The Spectre again pressed her lips to mine, again
touched me with her rotting fingers, and as on her first appearance,
quitted the chamber as soon as the Clock told 'Two.'

Even night was this repeated.  Far from growing accustomed to the
Ghost, every succeeding visit inspired me with greater horror. Her idea
pursued me continually, and I became the prey of habitual melancholy.
The constant agitation of my mind naturally retarded the
re-establishment of my health.  Several months elapsed before I was
able to quit my bed; and when at length I was moved to a Sopha, I was
so faint, spiritless, and emaciated, that I could not cross the room
without assistance.  The looks of my Attendants sufficiently denoted
the little hope, which they entertained of my recovery.  The profound
sadness, which oppressed me without remission made the Physician
consider me to be an Hypochondriac.  The cause of my distress I
carefully concealed in my own bosom, for I knew that no one could give
me relief:  The Ghost was not even visible to any eye but mine.  I had
frequently caused Attendants to sit up in my room:  But the moment that
the Clock struck 'One,' irresistible slumber seized them, nor left them
till the departure of the Ghost.

You may be surprized that during this time I made no enquiries after
your Sister.  Theodore, who with difficulty had discovered my abode,
had quieted my apprehensions for her safety:  At the same time He
convinced me that all attempts to release her from captivity must be
fruitless till I should be in a condition to return to Spain.  The
particulars of her adventure which I shall now relate to you, were
partly communicated to me by Theodore, and partly by Agnes herself.

On the fatal night when her elopement was to have taken place, accident
had not permitted her to quit her chamber at the appointed time.  At
length She ventured into the haunted room, descended the staircase
leading into the Hall, found the Gates open as She expected, and left
the Castle unobserved.  What was her surprize at not finding me ready
to receive her!  She examined the Cavern, ranged through every Alley of
the neighbouring wood, and passed two full hours in this fruitless
enquiry. She could discover no traces either of me or of the Carriage.
Alarmed and disappointed, her only resource was to return to the Castle
before the Baroness missed her:  But here She found herself in a fresh
embarrassment. The Bell had already tolled 'Two:' The Ghostly hour was
past, and the careful Porter had locked the folding gates.  After much
irresolution She ventured to knock softly.  Luckily for her, Conrad was
still awake:  He heard the noise and rose, murmuring at being called up
a second time.  No sooner had He opened one of the Doors, and beheld
the supposed Apparition waiting there for admittance, than He uttered a
loud cry, and sank upon his knees.  Agnes profited by his terror.  She
glided by him, flew to her own apartment, and having thrown off her
Spectre's trappings, retired to bed endeavouring in vain to account for
my disappearing.

In the mean while Theodore having seen my Carriage drive off with the
false Agnes, returned joyfully to the Village.  The next morning He
released Cunegonda from her confinement, and accompanied her to the
Castle.  There He found the Baron, his Lady, and Don Gaston, disputing
together upon the Porter's relation.  All of them agreed in believing
the existence of Spectres:  But the Latter contended, that for a Ghost
to knock for admittance was a proceeding till then unwitnessed, and
totally incompatible with the immaterial nature of a Spirit. They were
still discussing this subject when the Page appeared with Cunegonda and
cleared up the mystery.  On hearing his deposition, it was agreed
unanimously that the Agnes whom Theodore had seen step into my Carriage
must have been the Bleeding Nun, and that the Ghost who had terrified
Conrad was no other than Don Gaston's Daughter.

The first surprize which this discovery occasioned being over, the
Baroness resolved to make it of use in persuading her Niece to take the
veil.  Fearing lest so advantageous an establishment for his Daughter
should induce Don Gaston to renounce his resolution, She suppressed my
letter, and continued to represent me as a needy unknown Adventurer.  A
childish vanity had led me to conceal my real name even from my
Mistress; I wished to be loved for myself, not for being the Son and
Heir of the Marquis de las Cisternas.  The consequence was that my rank
was known to no one in the Castle except the Baroness, and She took
good care to confine the knowledge to her own breast.  Don Gaston
having approved his Sister's design, Agnes was summoned to appear
before them.  She was taxed with having meditated an elopement, obliged
to make a full confession, and was amazed at the gentleness with which
it was received:  But what was her affliction, when informed that the
failure of her project must be attributed to me!  Cunegonda, tutored by
the Baroness, told her that when I released her, I had desired her to
inform her Lady that our connexion was at an end, that the whole affair
was occasioned by a false report, and that it by no means suited my
circumstances to marry a Woman without fortune or expectations.

To this account my sudden disappearing gave but too great an air of
probability.  Theodore, who could have contradicted the story, by Donna
Rodolpha's order was kept out of her sight:  What proved a still
greater confirmation of my being an Impostor, was the arrival of a
letter from yourself declaring that you had no sort of acquaintance
with Alphonso d'Alvarada.  These seeming proofs of my perfidy, aided by
the artful insinuations of her Aunt, by Cunegonda's flattery, and her
Father's threats and anger, entirely conquered your Sister's repugnance
to a Convent. Incensed at my behaviour, and disgusted with the world in
general, She consented to receive the veil.  She past another Month at
the Castle of Lindenberg, during which my non-appearance confirmed her
in her resolution, and then accompanied Don Gaston into Spain.
Theodore was now set at liberty.  He hastened to Munich, where I had
promised to let him hear from me; But finding from Lucas that I had
never arrived there, He pursued his search with indefatigable
perseverance, and at length succeeded in rejoining me at Ratisbon.

So much was I altered, that scarcely could He recollect my features:
The distress visible upon his sufficiently testified how lively was the
interest which He felt for me.  The society of this amiable Boy, whom I
had always considered rather as a Companion than a Servant, was now my
only comfort.  His conversation was gay yet sensible, and his
observations shrewd and entertaining: He had picked up much more
knowledge than is usual at his Age:  But what rendered him most
agreeable to me, was his having a delightful voice, and some skill in
Music.  He had also acquired some taste in poetry, and even ventured
sometimes to write verses himself.  He occasionally composed little
Ballads in Spanish, his compositions were but indifferent, I must
confess; yet they were pleasing to me from their novelty, and hearing
him sing them to his guitar was the only amusement, which I was capable
of receiving.  Theodore perceived well enough that something preyed
upon my mind; But as I concealed the cause of my grief even from him,
Respect would not permit him to pry into my secrets.

One Evening I was lying upon my Sopha, plunged in reflections very far
from agreeable:  Theodore amused himself by observing from the window a
Battle between two Postillions, who were quarrelling in the Inn-yard.

'Ha! Ha!' cried He suddenly; 'Yonder is the Great Mogul.'

'Who?' said I.

'Only a Man who made me a strange speech at Munich.'

'What was the purport of it?'

'Now you put me in mind of it, Segnor, it was a kind of message to you;
but truly it was not worth delivering.  I believe the Fellow to be mad,
for my part.  When I came to Munich in search of you, I found him
living at 'The King of the Romans,' and the Host gave me an odd account
of him.  By his accent He is supposed to be a Foreigner, but of what
Country nobody can tell.  He seemed to have no acquaintance in the
Town, spoke very seldom, and never was seen to smile.  He had neither
Servants or Baggage; But his Purse seemed well-furnished, and He did
much good in the Town.  Some supposed him to be an Arabian Astrologer,
Others to be a Travelling Mountebank, and many declared that He was
Doctor Faustus, whom the Devil had sent back to Germany.  The Landlord,
however told me, that He had the best reasons to believe him to be the
Great Mogul incognito.'

'But the strange speech, Theodore.'

'True, I had almost forgotten the speech:  Indeed for that matter, it
would not have been a great loss if I had forgotten it altogether.  You
are to know, Segnor, that while I was enquiring about you of the
Landlord, this Stranger passed by.  He stopped, and looked at me
earnestly. 'Youth!' said He in a solemn voice, 'He whom you seek, has
found that which He would fain lose.  My hand alone can dry up the
blood:  Bid your Master wish for me when the Clock strikes, 'One.'

'How?' cried I, starting from my Sopha.  (The words which Theodore had
repeated, seemed to imply the Stranger's knowledge of my secret) 'Fly
to him, my Boy!  Entreat him to grant me one moment's conversation!'

Theodore was surprised at the vivacity of my manner: However, He asked
no questions, but hastened to obey me.  I waited his return
impatiently.  But a short space of time had elapsed when He again
appeared and ushered the expected Guest into my chamber.  He was a Man
of majestic presence:  His countenance was strongly marked, and his
eyes were large, black, and sparkling:  Yet there was a something in
his look which, the moment that I saw him, inspired me with a secret
awe, not to say horror.  He was drest plainly, his hair was unpowdered,
and a band of black velvet which encircled his forehead spread over his
features an additional gloom.  His countenance wore the marks of
profound melancholy; his step was slow, and his manner grave, stately,
and solemn.

He saluted me with politeness; and having replied to the usual
compliments of introduction, He motioned to Theodore to quit the
chamber.  The Page instantly withdrew.

'I know your business,' said He, without giving me time to speak.

'I have the power of releasing you from your nightly Visitor; But this
cannot be done before Sunday.  On the hour when the Sabbath Morning
breaks, Spirits of darkness have least influence over Mortals.  After
Saturday the Nun shall visit you no more.'

'May I not enquire,' said I, 'by what means you are in possession of a
secret which I have carefully concealed from the knowledge of everyone?'

'How can I be ignorant of your distress, when their cause at this
moment stands beside you?'

I started.  The Stranger continued.

'Though to you only visible for one hour in the twenty-four, neither
day or night does She ever quit you; Nor will She ever quit you till
you have granted her request.'

'And what is that request?'

'That She must herself explain:  It lies not in my knowledge. Wait with
patience for the night of Saturday: All shall be then cleared up.'

I dared not press him further.  He soon after changed the conversation
and talked of various matters.  He named People who had ceased to exist
for many Centuries, and yet with whom He appeared to have been
personally acquainted.  I could not mention a Country however distant
which He had not visited, nor could I sufficiently admire the extent
and variety of his information. I remarked to him that having
travelled, seen, and known so much, must have given him infinite
pleasure.  He shook his head mournfully.

'No one,' He replied, 'is adequate to comprehending the misery of my
lot!  Fate obliges me to be constantly in movement:  I am not permitted
to pass more than a fortnight in the same place.  I have no Friend in
the world, and from the restlessness of my destiny I never can acquire
one.  Fain would I lay down my miserable life, for I envy those who
enjoy the quiet of the Grave: But Death eludes me, and flies from my
embrace.  In vain do I throw myself in the way of danger.  I plunge
into the Ocean; The Waves throw me back with abhorrence upon the shore:
I rush into fire; The flames recoil at my approach:  I oppose myself to
the fury of Banditti; Their swords become blunted, and break against my
breast:  The hungry Tiger shudders at my approach, and the Alligator
flies from a Monster more horrible than itself. God has set his seal
upon me, and all his Creatures respect this fatal mark!'

He put his hand to the velvet, which was bound round his forehead.
There was in his eyes an expression of fury, despair, and malevolence,
that struck horror to my very soul.  An involuntary convulsion made me
shudder.  The Stranger perceived it.

'Such is the curse imposed on me,' he continued:  'I am doomed to
inspire all who look on me with terror and detestation.  You already
feel the influence of the charm, and with every succeeding moment will
feel it more.  I will not add to your sufferings by my presence.
Farewell till Saturday.  As soon as the Clock strikes twelve, expect me
at your chamber door.'

Having said this He departed, leaving me in astonishment at the
mysterious turn of his manner and conversation.

His assurances that I should soon be relieved from the Apparition's
visits produced a good effect upon my constitution. Theodore, whom I
rather treated as an adopted Child than a Domestic, was surprized at
his return to observe the amendment in my looks.  He congratulated me
on this symptom of returning health, and declared himself delighted at
my having received so much benefit from my conference with the Great
Mogul.  Upon enquiry I found that the Stranger had already past eight
days in Ratisbon:  According to his own account, therefore, He was only
to remain there six days longer.  Saturday was still at the distance of
Three.  Oh! with what impatience did I expect its arrival!  In the
interim, the Bleeding Nun continued her nocturnal visits; But hoping
soon to be released from them altogether, the effects which they
produced on me became less violent than before.

The wished-for night arrived.  To avoid creating suspicion I retired to
bed at my usual hour:  But as soon as my Attendants had left me, I
dressed myself again, and prepared for the Stranger's reception.  He
entered my room upon the turn of midnight.  A small Chest was in his
hand, which He placed near the Stove.  He saluted me without speaking;
I returned the compliment, observing an equal silence.  He then opened
his Chest.  The first thing which He produced was a small wooden
Crucifix: He sank upon his knees, gazed upon it mournfully, and cast
his eyes towards heaven.  He seemed to be praying devoutly. At length
He bowed his head respectfully, kissed the Crucifix thrice, and quitted
his kneeling posture.  He next drew from the Chest a covered Goblet:
With the liquor which it contained, and which appeared to be blood, He
sprinkled the floor, and then dipping in it one end of the Crucifix, He
described a circle in the middle of the room.  Round about this He
placed various reliques, sculls, thigh-bones &c; I observed, that He
disposed them all in the forms of Crosses.  Lastly He took out a large
Bible, and beckoned me to follow him into the Circle.  I obeyed.

'Be cautious not to utter a syllable!' whispered the Stranger; 'Step
not out of the circle, and as you love yourself, dare not to look upon
my face!'

Holding the Crucifix in one hand, the Bible in the other, He seemed to
read with profound attention.  The Clock struck 'One'! As usual I heard
the Spectre's steps upon the Staircase:  But I was not seized with the
accustomed shivering.  I waited her approach with confidence.  She
entered the room, drew near the Circle, and stopped.  The Stranger
muttered some words, to me unintelligible.  Then raising his head from
the Book, and extending the Crucifix towards the Ghost, He pronounced
in a voice distinct and solemn,

'Beatrice!  Beatrice!  Beatrice!'

'What wouldst Thou?' replied the Apparition in a hollow faltering tone.

'What disturbs thy sleep?  Why dost thou afflict and torture this
Youth?  How can rest be restored to thy unquiet Spirit?'

'I dare not tell!--I must not tell!--Fain would I repose in my Grave,
but stern commands force me to prolong my punishment!'

'Knowest Thou this blood?  Knowest Thou in whose veins it flowed?

Beatrice! Beatrice! In his name I charge thee to answer me!'

'I dare not disobey my taskers.'

'Darest Thou disobey Me?'

He spoke in a commanding tone, and drew the sable band from his
forehead.  In spite of his injunctions to the contrary, Curiosity would
not suffer me to keep my eyes off his face:  I raised them, and beheld
a burning Cross impressed upon his brow. For the horror with which this
object inspired me I cannot account, but I never felt its equal!  My
senses left me for some moments; A mysterious dread overcame my
courage, and had not the Exorciser caught my hand, I should have fallen
out of the Circle.

When I recovered myself, I perceived that the burning Cross had
produced an effect no less violent upon the Spectre.  Her countenance
expressed reverence, and horror, and her visionary limbs were shaken by
fear.

'Yes!' She said at length; 'I tremble at that mark!--respect it!--I
obey you!  Know then, that my bones lie still unburied: They rot in the
obscurity of Lindenberg Hole.  None but this Youth has the right of
consigning them to the Grave.  His own lips have made over to me his
body and his soul:  Never will I give back his promise, never shall He
know a night devoid of terror, unless He engages to collect my
mouldering bones, and deposit them in the family vault of his
Andalusian Castle.  Then let thirty Masses be said for the repose of my
Spirit, and I trouble this world no more.  Now let me depart!  Those
flames are scorching!'

He let the hand drop slowly which held the Crucifix, and which till
then He had pointed towards her.  The apparition bowed her head, and
her form melted into air.  The Exorciser led me out of the Circle.  He
replaced the Bible &c.  in the Chest, and then addressed himself to me,
who stood near him speechless from astonishment.

'Don Raymond, you have heard the conditions on which repose is promised
you.  Be it your business to fulfil them to the letter. For me nothing
more remains than to clear up the darkness still spread over the
Spectre's History, and inform you that when living, Beatrice bore the
name of las Cisternas.  She was the great Aunt of your Grandfather:  In
quality of your relation, her ashes demand respect from you, though the
enormity of her crimes must excite your abhorrence.  The nature of
those crimes no one is more capable of explaining to you than myself:
I was personally acquainted with the holy Man who proscribed her
nocturnal riots in the Castle of Lindenberg, and I hold this narrative
from his own lips.

'Beatrice de las Cisternas took the veil at an early age, not by her
own choice, but at the express command of her Parents.  She was then
too young to regret the pleasures of which her profession deprived her:
But no sooner did her warm and voluptuous character begin to be
developed than She abandoned herself freely to the impulse of her
passions, and seized the first opportunity to procure their
gratification.  This opportunity was at length presented, after many
obstacles which only added new force to her desires.  She contrived to
elope from the Convent, and fled to Germany with the Baron Lindenberg.
She lived at his Castle several months as his avowed Concubine:  All
Bavaria was scandalized by her impudent and abandoned conduct. Her
feasts vied in luxury with Cleopatra's, and Lindenberg became the
Theatre of the most unbridled debauchery.  Not satisfied with
displaying the incontinence of a Prostitute, She professed herself an
Atheist:  She took every opportunity  to scoff at her monastic vows,
and loaded with ridicule the most sacred ceremonies of Religion.

'Possessed of a character so depraved, She did not long confine her
affections to one object.  Soon after her arrival at the Castle, the
Baron's younger Brother attracted her notice by his strong-marked
features, gigantic Stature, and Herculean limbs. She was not of an
humour to keep her inclinations long unknown; But She found in Otto von
Lindenberg her equal in depravity.  He returned her passion just
sufficiently to increase it; and when He had worked it up to the
desired pitch, He fixed the price of his love at his Brother's murder.
The Wretch consented to this horrible agreement.  A night was pitched
upon for perpetrating the deed.  Otto, who resided on a small Estate a
few miles distant from the Castle, promised that at One in the morning
He would be waiting for her at Lindenberg Hole; that He would bring
with him a party of chosen Friends, by whose aid He doubted not being
able to make himself Master of the Castle; and that his next step
should be the uniting her hand to his.  It was this last promise, which
overruled every scruple of Beatrice, since in spite of his affection
for her, the Baron had declared positively that He never would make her
his Wife.

'The fatal night arrived.  The Baron slept in the arms of his
perfidious Mistress, when the Castle-Bell struck 'One.' Immediately
Beatrice drew a dagger from underneath the pillow, and plunged it in
her Paramour's heart.  The Baron uttered a single dreadful groan, and
expired.  The Murderess quitted her bed hastily, took a Lamp in one
hand, in the other the bloody dagger, and bent her course towards the
cavern.  The Porter dared not to refuse opening the Gates to one more
dreaded in the Castle than its Master.  Beatrice reached Lindenberg
Hole unopposed, where according to promise She found Otto waiting for
her.  He received and listened to her narrative with transport: But ere
She had time to ask why He came unaccompanied, He convinced her that He
wished for no witnesses to their interview. Anxious to conceal his
share in the murder, and to free himself from a Woman, whose violent
and atrocious character made him tremble with reason for his own
safety, He had resolved on the destruction of his wretched Agent.
Rushing upon her suddenly, He wrested the dagger from her hand:  He
plunged it still reeking with his Brother's blood in her bosom, and put
an end to her existence by repeated blows.

'Otto now succeeded to the Barony of Lindenberg.  The murder was
attributed solely to the fugitive Nun, and no one suspected him to have
persuaded her to the action.  But though his crime was unpunished by
Man, God's justice permitted him not to enjoy in peace his
blood-stained honours.  Her bones lying still unburied in the Cave, the
restless soul of Beatrice continued to inhabit the Castle.  Drest in
her religious habit in memory of her vows broken to heaven, furnished
with the dagger which had drank the blood of her Paramour, and holding
the Lamp which had guided her flying steps, every night did She stand
before the Bed of Otto. The most dreadful confusion reigned through the
Castle; The vaulted chambers resounded with shrieks and groans; And the
Spectre, as She ranged along the antique Galleries, uttered an
incoherent mixture of prayers and blasphemies.  Otto was unable to
withstand the shock which He felt at this fearful Vision: Its horror
increased with every succeeding appearance:  His alarm at length became
so insupportable that his heart burst, and one morning He was found in
his bed totally deprived of warmth and animation.  His death did not
put an end to the nocturnal riots. The bones of Beatrice continued to
lie unburied, and her Ghost continued to haunt the Castle.

'The domains of Lindenberg now fell to a distant Relation.  But
terrified by the accounts given him of the Bleeding Nun (So was the
Spectre called by the multitude), the new Baron called to his
assistance a celebrated Exorciser.  This holy Man succeeded in obliging
her to temporary repose; But though She discovered to him her history,
He was not permitted to reveal it to others, or cause her skeleton to
be removed to hallowed ground.  That Office was reserved for you, and
till your coming, her Ghost was doomed to wander about the Castle and
lament the crime which She had there committed.  However, the Exorciser
obliged her to silence during his lifetime.  So long as He existed, the
haunted chamber was shut up, and the Spectre was invisible.  At his
death which happened in five years after, She again appeared, but only
once on every fifth year, on the same day and at the same hour when She
plunged her Knife in the heart of her sleeping Lover:  She then visited
the Cavern which held her mouldering skeleton, returned to the Castle
as soon as the Clock struck 'Two,' and was seen no more till the next
five years had elapsed.

'She was doomed to suffer during the space of a Century.  That period
is past.  Nothing now remains but to consign to the Grave the ashes of
Beatrice.  I have been the means of releasing you from your visionary
Tormentor; and amidst all the sorrows which oppress me, to think that I
have been of use to you, is some consolation.  Youth, farewell!  May
the Ghost of your Relation enjoy that rest in the Tomb, which the
Almighty's vengeance has denied to me for ever!'

Here the Stranger prepared to quit the apartment.

'Stay yet one moment!' said I; 'You have satisfied my curiosity with
regard to the Spectre, but you leave me in prey to yet greater
respecting yourself.  Deign to inform me, to whom I am under such real
obligations.  You mention circumstances long past, and persons long
dead:  You were personally acquainted with the Exorciser, who by your
own account has been deceased near a Century.  How am I to account for
this?  What means that burning Cross upon your forehead, and why did
the sight of it strike such horror to my soul?'

On these points He for some time refused to satisfy me.  At length
overcome by my entreaties, He consented to clear up the whole, on
condition that I would defer his explanation till the next day.  With
this request I was obliged to comply, and He left me.  In the Morning
my first care was to enquire after the mysterious Stranger.  Conceive
my disappointment when informed that He had already quitted Ratisbon.
I dispatched messengers in pursuit of him but in vain.  No traces of
the Fugitive were discovered.  Since that moment I never have heard any
more of him, and 'tis most probable that I never shall.'

(Lorenzo here interrupted his Friend's narrative.

'How?' said He; 'You have never discovered who He was, or even formed a
guess?'

'Pardon me,' replied the Marquis; 'When I related this adventure to my
Uncle, the Cardinal-Duke, He told me that He had no doubt of this
singular Man's being the celebrated Character known universally by the
name of 'the wandering Jew.'  His not being permitted to pass more than
fourteen days on the same spot, the burning Cross impressed upon his
forehead, the effect which it produced upon the Beholders, and many
other circumstances give this supposition the colour of truth.  The
Cardinal is fully persuaded of it; and for my own part I am inclined to
adopt the only solution which offers itself to this riddle.  I return
to the narrative from which I have digressed.')

From this period I recovered my health so rapidly as to astonish my
Physicians.  The Bleeding Nun appeared no more, and I was soon able to
set out for Lindenberg.  The Baron received me with open arms.  I
confided to him the sequel of my adventure; and He was not a little
pleased to find that his Mansion would be no longer troubled with the
Phantom's quiennial visits.  I was sorry to perceive that absence had
not weakened Donna Rodolpha's imprudent passion.  In a private
conversation which I had with her during my short stay at the Castle,
She renewed her attempts to persuade me to return her affection.
Regarding her as the primary cause of all my sufferings, I entertained
for her no other sentiment than disgust.  The Skeleton of Beatrice was
found in the place which She had mentioned.  This being all that I
sought at Lindenberg, I hastened to quit the Baron's domains, equally
anxious to perform the obsequies of the murdered Nun, and escape the
importunity of a Woman whom I detested.  I departed, followed by Donna
Rodolpha's menaces that my contempt should not be long unpunished.

I now bent my course towards Spain with all diligence.  Lucas with my
Baggage had joined me during my abode at Lindenberg.  I arrived in my
native Country without any accident, and immediately proceeded to my
Father's Castle in Andalusia.  The remains of Beatrice were deposited
in the family vault, all due ceremonies performed, and the number of
Masses said which She had required.  Nothing now hindered me from
employing all my endeavours to discover the retreat of Agnes.  The
Baroness had assured me that her Niece had already taken the veil:
This intelligence I suspected to have been forged by jealousy, and
hoped to find my Mistress still at liberty to accept my hand.  I
enquired after her family; I found that before her Daughter could reach
Madrid, Donna Inesilla was no more:  You, my dear Lorenzo, were said to
be abroad, but where I could not discover:  Your Father was in a
distant Province on a visit to the Duke de Medina, and as to Agnes, no
one could or would inform me what was become of her.  Theodore,
according to promise, had returned to Strasbourg, where He found his
Grandfather dead, and Marguerite in possession of his fortune.  All her
persuations to remain with her were fruitless:  He quitted her a second
time, and followed me to Madrid.  He exerted himself to the utmost in
forwarding my search: But our united endeavours were unattended by
success. The retreat, which concealed Agnes remained an impenetrable
mystery, and I began to abandon all hopes of recovering her.

About eight months ago I was returning to my Hotel in a melancholy
humour, having past the evening at the Play-House. The Night was dark,
and I was unaccompanied.  Plunged in reflections which were far from
being agreeable, I perceived not that three Men had followed me from
the Theatre; till, on turning into an unfrequented Street, they all
attacked me at the same time with the utmost fury.  I sprang back a few
paces, drew my sword, and threw my cloak over my left arm.  The
obscurity of the night was in my favour.  For the most part the blows
of the Assassins, being aimed at random, failed to touch me.  I at
length was fortunate enough to lay one of my Adversaries at my feet;
But before this I had already received so many wounds, and was so
warmly pressed, that my destruction would have been inevitable, had not
the clashing of swords called a Cavalier to my assistance.  He ran
towards me with his sword drawn:  Several Domestics followed him with
torches.  His arrival made the combat equal:  Yet would not the Bravoes
abandon their design till the Servants were on the point of joining us.
They then fled away, and we lost them in the obscurity.

The Stranger now addressed himself to me with politeness, and enquired
whether I was wounded.  Faint with the loss of blood, I could scarcely
thank him for his seasonable aid, and entreat him to let some of his
Servants convey me to the Hotel de las Cisternas.  I no sooner
mentioned the name than He profest himself an acquaintance of my
Father's, and declared that He would not permit my being transported to
such a distance before my wounds had been examined.  He added that his
House was hard by, and begged me to accompany him thither.  His manner
was so earnest, that I could not reject his offer, and leaning upon his
arm, a few minutes brought me to the Porch of a magnificent Hotel.

On entering the House, an old grey-headed Domestic came to welcome my
Conductor:  He enquired when the Duke, his Master, meant to quit the
Country, and was answered that He would remain there yet some months.
My Deliverer then desired the family Surgeon to be summoned without
delay.  His orders were obeyed.  I was seated upon a Sopha in a noble
apartment; and my wounds being examined, they were declared to be very
slight.  The Surgeon, however, advised me not to expose myself to the
night air; and the Stranger pressed me so earnestly to take a bed in
his House, that I consented to remain where I was for the present.

Being now left alone with my Deliverer, I took the opportunity of
thanking him in more express terms, than I had done hitherto: But He
begged me to be silent upon the subject.

'I esteem myself happy,' said He, 'in having had it in my power to
render you this little service; and I shall think myself eternally
obliged to my Daughter for detaining me so late at the Convent of St.
Clare.  The high esteem in which I have ever held the Marquis de las
Cisternas, though accident has not permitted our being so intimate as I
could wish, makes me rejoice in the opportunity of making his Son's
acquaintance.  I am certain that my Brother in whose House you now are,
will lament his not being at Madrid to receive you himself: But in the
Duke's absence I am Master of the family, and may assure you in his
name, that every thing in the Hotel de Medina is perfectly at your
disposal.'

Conceive my surprize, Lorenzo, at discovering in the person of my
Preserver Don Gaston de Medina:  It was only to be equalled by my
secret satisfaction at the assurance that Agnes inhabited the Convent
of St. Clare.  This latter sensation was not a little weakened, when in
answer to my seemingly indifferent questions He told me that his
Daughter had really taken the veil.  I suffered not my grief at this
circumstance to take root in my mind:  I flattered myself with the idea
that my Uncle's credit at the Court of Rome would remove this obstacle,
and that without difficulty I should obtain for my Mistress a
dispensation from her vows.  Buoyed up with this hope I calmed the
uneasiness of my bosom; and I redoubled my endeavours to appear
grateful for the attention and pleased with the society of Don Gaston.

A Domestic now entered the room, and informed me that the Bravo whom I
had wounded discovered some signs of life.  I desired that He might be
carried to my Father's Hotel, and that as soon as He recovered his
voice, I would examine him respecting his reasons for attempting my
life.  I was answered that He was already able to speak, though with
difficulty:  Don Gaston's curiosity made him press me to interrogate
the Assassin in his presence, but this curiosity I was by no means
inclined to gratify.  One reason was, that doubting from whence the
blow came, I was unwilling to place before Don Gaston's eyes the guilt
of a Sister:  Another was, that I feared to be recognized for Alphonso
d'Alvarada, and precautions taken in consequence to keep me from the
sight of Agnes.  To avow my passion for his Daughter, and endeavour to
make him enter into my schemes, what I knew of Don Gaston's character
convinced me would be an imprudent step: and considering it to be
essential that He should know me for no other than the Conde de las
Cisternas, I was determined not to let him hear the Bravo's confession.
I insinuated to him, that as I suspected a Lady to be concerned in the
Business, whose name might accidentally escape from the Assassin, it
was necessary for me to examine the Man in private.  Don Gaston's
delicacy would not permit his urging the point any longer, and in
consequence the Bravo was conveyed to my Hotel.

The next Morning I took leave of my Host, who was to return to the Duke
on the same day.  My wounds had been so trifling that, except being
obliged to wear my arm in a sling for a short time, I felt no
inconvenience from the night's adventure.  The Surgeon who examined the
Bravo's wound declared it to be mortal:  He had just time to confess
that He had been instigated to murder me by the revengeful Donna
Rodolpha, and expired in a few minutes after.

All my thoughts were now bent upon getting to the speech of my lovely
Nun.  Theodore set himself to work, and for this time with better
success.  He attacked the Gardener of St. Clare so forcibly with bribes
and promises that the Old Man was entirely gained over to my interests;
and it was settled that I should be introduced into the Convent in the
character of his Assistant. The plan was put into execution without
delay.  Disguised in a common habit, and a black patch covering one of
my eyes, I was presented to the Lady Prioress, who condescended to
approve of the Gardener's choice.  I immediately entered upon my
employment. Botany having been a favourite study with me, I was by no
means at a loss in my new station.  For some days I continued to work
in the Convent Garden without meeting the Object of my disguise: On the
fourth Morning I was more successful.  I heard the voice of Agnes, and
was speeding towards the sound, when the sight of the Domina stopped
me.  I drew back with caution, and concealed myself behind a thick
clump of Trees.

The Prioress advanced and seated herself with Agnes on a Bench at no
great distance.  I heard her in an angry tone blame her Companion's
continual melancholy: She told her that to weep the loss of any Lover
in her situation was a crime; But that to weep the loss of a faithless
one was folly and absurdity in the extreme.  Agnes replied in so low a
voice that I could not distinguish her words, but I perceived that She
used terms of gentleness and submission.  The conversation was
interrupted by the arrival of a young Pensioner who informed the Domina
that She was waited for in the Parlour.  The old Lady rose, kissed the
cheek of Agnes, and retired.  The newcomer remained.  Agnes spoke much
to her in praise of somebody whom I could not make out, but her Auditor
seemed highly delighted, and interested by the conversation.  The Nun
showed her several letters; the Other perused them with evident
pleasure, obtained permission to copy them, and withdrew for that
purpose to my great satisfaction.

No sooner was She out of sight, than I quitted my concealment. Fearing
to alarm my lovely Mistress, I drew near her gently, intending to
discover myself by degrees.  But who for a moment can deceive the eyes
of love?  She raised her head at my approach, and recognised me in
spite of my disguise at a single glance.  She rose hastily from her
seat with an exclamation of surprize, and attempted to retire; But I
followed her, detained her, and entreated to be heard.  Persuaded of my
falsehood She refused to listen to me, and ordered me positively to
quit the Garden.  It was now my turn to refuse.  I protested that
however dangerous might be the consequences, I would not leave her till
She had heard my justification.  I assured her that She had been
deceived by the artifices of her Relations; that I could convince her
beyond the power of doubt that my passion had been pure and
disinterested; and I asked her what should induce me to seek her in the
Convent, were I influenced by the selfish motives which my Enemies had
ascribed to me.

My prayers, my arguments, and vows not to quit her, till She had
promised to listen to me, united to her fears lest the Nuns should see
me with her, to her natural curiosity, and to the effection which She
still felt for me in spite of my supposed desertion, at length
prevailed. She told me that to grant my request at that moment was
impossible; But She engaged to be in the same spot at eleven that
night, and to converse with me for the last time.  Having obtained this
promise I released her hand, and She fled back with rapidity towards
the Convent.

I communicated my success to my Ally, the old Gardener:  He pointed out
an hiding place where I might shelter myself till night without fear of
a discovery.  Thither I betook myself at the hour when I ought to have
retired with my supposed Master, and waited impatiently for the
appointed time.  The chillness of the night was in my favour, since it
kept the other Nuns confined to their Cells.  Agnes alone was
insensible of the inclemency of the Air, and before eleven joined me at
the spot which had witnessed our former interview.  Secure from
interruption, I related to her the true cause of my disappearing on the
fatal fifth of May.  She was evidently much affected by my narrative:
When it was concluded, She confessed the injustice of her suspicions,
and blamed herself for having taken the veil through despair at my
ingratitude.

'But now it is too late to repine!' She added; 'The die is thrown:  I
have pronounced my vows, and dedicated myself to the service of heaven.
I am sensible, how ill I am calculated for a Convent.  My disgust at a
monastic life increases daily:  Ennui and discontent are my constant
Companions; and I will not conceal from you that the passion which I
formerly felt for one so near being my Husband is not yet extinguished
in my bosom.  But we must part!  Insuperable Barriers divide us from
each other, and on this side the Grave we must never meet again!'

I now exerted myself to prove that our union was not so impossible as
She seemed to think it.  I vaunted to her the Cardinal-Duke of Lerma's
influence at the Court of Rome:  I assured her that I should easily
obtain a dispensation from her vows; and I doubted not but Don Gaston
would coincide with my views, when informed of my real name and long
attachment.  Agnes replied that since I encouraged such an hope, I
could know but little of her Father.  Liberal and kind in every other
respect, Superstition formed the only stain upon his character.  Upon
this head He was inflexible; He sacrificed his dearest interests to his
scruples, and would consider it an insult to suppose him capable of
authorising his daughter to break her vows to heaven.

'But suppose,' said I interrupting her; 'Suppose that He should
disapprove of our union; Let him remain ignorant of my proceedings,
till I have rescued you from the prison in which you are now confined.
Once my Wife, you are free from his authority:  I need from him no
pecuniary assistance; and when He sees his resentment to be unavailing,
He will doubtless restore you to his favour.  But let the worst happen;
Should Don Gaston be irreconcileable, my Relations will vie with each
other in making you forget his loss: and you will find in my Father a
substitute for the Parent of whom I shall deprive you.'

'Don Raymond,' replied Agnes in a firm and resolute voice, 'I love my
Father:  He has treated me harshly in this one instance; but I have
received from him in every other so many proofs of love that his
affection is become necessary to my existence. Were I to quit the
Convent, He never would forgive me; nor can I think that on his
deathbed He would leave me his curse, without shuddering at the very
idea.  Besides, I am conscious myself, that my vows are binding:
Wilfully did I contract my engagement with heaven; I cannot break it
without a crime.  Then banish from your mind the idea of our being ever
united.  I am devoted to religion; and however I may grieve at our
separation, I would oppose obstacles myself, to what I feel would
render me guilty.'

I strove to overrule these ill-grounded scruples:  We were still
disputing upon the subject, when the Convent Bell summoned the Nuns to
Matins.  Agnes was obliged to attend them; But She left me not till I
had compelled her to promise that on the following night She would be
at the same place at the same hour.  These meetings continued for
several Weeks uninterrupted; and 'tis now, Lorenzo, that I must implore
your indulgence.  Reflect upon our situation, our youth, our long
attachment: Weigh all the circumstances which attended our
assignations, and you will confess the temptation to have been
irresistible; you will even pardon me when I acknowledge, that in an
unguarded moment, the honour of Agnes was sacrificed to my passion.'

(Lorenzo's eyes sparkled with fury:  A deep crimson spread itself over
his face.  He started from his seat, and attempted to draw his sword.
The Marquis was aware of his movement, and caught his hand:  He pressed
it affectionately.

'My Friend! My Brother! Hear me to the conclusion!  Till then restrain
your passion, and be at least convinced, that if what I have related is
criminal, the blame must fall upon me, and not upon your Sister.'

Lorenzo suffered himself to be prevailed upon by Don Raymond's
entreaties.  He resumed his place, and listened to the rest of the
narrative with a gloomy and impatient countenance.  The Marquis thus
continued.)

'Scarcely was the first burst of passion past when Agnes, recovering
herself, started from my arms with horror.  She called me infamous
Seducer, loaded me with the bitterest reproaches, and beat her bosom in
all the wildness of delirium.  Ashamed of my imprudence, I with
difficulty found words to excuse myself.  I endeavoured to console her;
I threw myself at her feet, and entreated her forgiveness.  She forced
her hand from me, which I had taken, and would have prest to my lips.

'Touch me not!' She cried with a violence which terrified me; 'Monster
of perfidy and ingratitude, how have I been deceived in you!  I looked
upon you as my Friend, my Protector:  I trusted myself in your hands
with confidence, and relying upon your honour, thought that mine ran no
risque.  And 'tis by you, whom I adored, that I am covered with infamy!
'Tis by you that I have been seduced into breaking my vows to God, that
I am reduced to a level with the basest of my sex!  Shame upon you,
Villain, you shall never see me more!'

She started from the Bank on which She was seated.  I endeavoured to
detain her; But She disengaged herself from me with violence, and took
refuge in the Convent.

I retired, filled with confusion and inquietude.  The next morning I
failed not as usual to appear in the Garden; but Agnes was no where to
be seen.  At night I waited for her at the place where we generally
met; I found no better success.  Several days and nights passed away in
the same manner.  At length I saw my offended Mistress cross the walk
on whose borders I was working: She was accompanied by the same young
Pensioner, on whose arm She seemed from weakness obliged to support
herself.  She looked upon me for a moment, but instantly turned her
head away.  I waited her return; But She passed on to the Convent
without paying any attention to me, or the penitent looks with which I
implored her forgiveness.

As soon as the Nuns were retired, the old Gardener joined me with a
sorrowful air.

'Segnor,' said He, 'it grieves me to say, that I can be no longer of
use to you.  The Lady whom you used to meet has just assured me that if
I admitted you again into the Garden, She would discover the whole
business to the Lady Prioress.  She bade me tell you also, that your
presence was an insult, and that if you still possess the least respect
for her, you will never attempt to see her more.  Excuse me then for
informing you that I can favour your disguise no longer.  Should the
Prioress be acquainted with my conduct, She might not be contented with
dismissing me her service:  Out of revenge She might accuse me of
having profaned the Convent, and cause me to be thrown into the Prisons
of the Inquisition.'

Fruitless were my attempts to conquer his resolution.  He denied me all
future entrance into the Garden, and Agnes persevered in neither
letting me see or hear from her.  In about a fortnight after, a violent
illness which had seized my Father obliged me to set out for Andalusia.
I hastened thither, and as I imagined, found the Marquis at the point
of death.  Though on its first appearance his complaint was declared
mortal, He lingered out several Months; during which my attendance upon
him during his malady, and the occupation of settling his affairs after
his decease, permitted not my quitting Andalusia.  Within these four
days I returned to Madrid, and on arriving at my Hotel, I there found
this letter waiting for me.

(Here the Marquis unlocked the drawer of a Cabinet: He took out a
folded paper, which He presented to his Auditor.  Lorenzo opened it,
and recognised his Sister's hand.  The Contents were as follows.

Into what an abyss of misery have you plunged me!  Raymond, you force
me to become as criminal as yourself.  I had resolved never to see you
more; if possible, to forget you; If not, only to remember you with
hate.  A Being for whom I already feel a Mother's tenderness, solicits
me to pardon my Seducer, and apply to his love for the means of
preservation.  Raymond, your child lives in my bosom.  I tremble at the
vengeance of the Prioress; I tremble much for myself, yet more for the
innocent Creature whose existence depends upon mine.  Both of us are
lost, should my situation be discovered.  Advise me then what steps to
take, but seek not to see me.  The Gardener, who undertakes to deliver
this, is dismissed, and we have nothing to hope from that quarter:  The
Man engaged in his place is of incorruptible fidelity.  The best means
of conveying to me your answer, is by concealing it under the great
Statue of St. Francis, which stands in the Capuchin Cathedral.  Thither
I go every Thursday to confession, and shall easily have an opportunity
of securing your letter.  I hear that you are now absent from Madrid;
Need I entreat you to write the very moment of your return?  I will not
think it.  Ah! Raymond!  Mine is a cruel situation!  Deceived by my
nearest Relations, compelled to embrace a profession the duties of
which I am ill-calculated to perform, conscious of the sanctity of
those duties, and seduced into violating them by One whom I least
suspected of perfidy, I am now obliged by circumstances to chuse
between death and perjury.  Woman's timidity, and maternal affection,
permit me not to balance in the choice.  I feel all the guilt into
which I plunge myself, when I yield to the plan which you before
proposed to me.  My poor Father's death which has taken place since we
met, has removed one obstacle.  He sleeps in his grave, and I no longer
dread his anger.  But from the anger of God, Oh! Raymond! who shall
shield me?  Who can protect me against my conscience, against myself?
I dare not dwell upon these thoughts; They will drive me mad.  I have
taken my resolution:  Procure a dispensation from my vows; I am ready
to fly with you.  Write to me, my Husband!  Tell me, that absence has
not abated your love, tell me that you will rescue from death your
unborn Child, and its unhappy Mother.  I live in all the agonies of
terror:  Every eye which is fixed upon me seems to read my secret and
my shame.  And you are the cause of those agonies!  Oh! When my heart
first loved you, how little did it suspect you of making it feel such
pangs!

                                      Agnes.

Having perused the letter, Lorenzo restored it in silence.  The Marquis
replaced it in the Cabinet, and then proceeded.)

'Excessive was my joy at reading this intelligence so
earnestly-desired, so little expected.  My plan was soon arranged.
When Don Gaston discovered to me his Daughter's retreat, I entertained
no doubt of her readiness to quit the Convent:  I had, therefore,
entrusted the Cardinal-Duke of Lerma with the whole affair, who
immediately busied himself in obtaining the necessary Bull.
Fortunately I had afterwards neglected to stop his proceedings.  Not
long since I received a letter from him, stating that He expected daily
to receive the order from the Court of Rome.  Upon this I would
willingly have relyed:  But the Cardinal wrote me word, that I must
find some means of conveying Agnes out of the Convent, unknown to the
Prioress.  He doubted not but this Latter would be much incensed by
losing a Person of such high rank from her society, and consider the
renunciation of Agnes as an insult to her House.  He represented her as
a Woman of a violent and revengeful character, capable of proceeding to
the greatest extremities.  It was therefore to be feared, lest by
confining Agnes in the Convent She should frustrate my hopes, and
render the Pope's mandate unavailing.  Influenced by this
consideration, I resolved to carry off my Mistress, and conceal her
till the arrival of the expected Bull in the Cardinal-Duke's Estate.
He approved of my design, and profest himself ready to give a shelter
to the Fugitive.  I next caused the new Gardener of St. Clare to be
seized privately, and confined in my Hotel.  By this means I became
Master of the Key to the Garden door, and I had now nothing more to do
than prepare Agnes for the elopement.  This was done by the letter,
which you saw me deliver this Evening.  I told her in it, that I should
be ready to receive her at twelve tomorrow night, that I had secured
the Key of the Garden, and that She might depend upon a speedy release.

You have now, Lorenzo, heard the whole of my long narrative.  I have
nothing to say in my excuse, save that my intentions towards your
Sister have been ever the most honourable:  That it has always been,
and still is my design to make her my Wife:  And that I trust, when you
consider these circumstances, our youth, and our attachment, you will
not only forgive our momentary lapse from virtue, but will aid me in
repairing my faults to Agnes, and securing a lawful title to her person
and her heart.


CHAPTER II

  O You! whom Vanity's light bark conveys
  On Fame's mad voyage by the wind of praise,
  With what a shifting gale your course you ply,
  For ever sunk too low, or borne too high!
  Who pants for glory finds but short repose,
  A breath revives him, and a breath o'er-throws.
                                Pope.

Here the Marquis concluded his adventures.  Lorenzo, before He could
determine on his reply, past some moments in reflection. At length He
broke silence.

'Raymond,' said He taking his hand, 'strict honour would oblige me to
wash off in your blood the stain thrown upon my family; But the
circumstances of your case forbid me to consider you as an Enemy.  The
temptation was too great to be resisted.  'Tis the superstition of my
Relations which has occasioned these misfortunes, and they are more the
Offenders than yourself and Agnes.  What has past between you cannot be
recalled, but may yet be repaired by uniting you to my Sister.  You
have ever been, you still continue to be, my dearest and indeed my only
Friend.  I feel for Agnes the truest affection, and there is no one on
whom I would bestow her more willingly than on yourself.  Pursue then
your design.  I will accompany you tomorrow night, and conduct her
myself to the House of the Cardinal.  My presence will be a sanction
for her conduct, and prevent her incurring blame by her flight from the
Convent.'

The Marquis thanked him in terms by no means deficient in gratitude.
Lorenzo then informed him that He had nothing more to apprehend from
Donna Rodolpha's enmity.  Five Months had already elapsed since, in an
excess of passion, She broke a blood-vessel and expired in the course
of a few hours.  He then proceeded to mention the interests of Antonia.
The Marquis was much surprized at hearing of this new Relation: His
Father had carried his hatred of Elvira to the Grave, and had never
given the least hint that He knew what was become of his eldest Son's
Widow.  Don Raymond assured his friend that He was not mistaken in
supposing him ready to acknowledge his Sister-in-law and her amiable
Daughter.  The preparations for the elopement would not permit his
visiting them the next day; But in the meanwhile He desired Lorenzo to
assure them of his friendship, and to supply Elvira upon his account
with any sums which She might want.  This the Youth promised to do, as
soon as her abode should be known to him:  He then took leave of his
future Brother, and returned to the Palace de Medina.

The day was already on the point of breaking when the Marquis retired
to his chamber.  Conscious that his narrative would take up some hours,
and wishing to secure himself from interruption on returning to the
Hotel, He ordered his Attendants not to sit up for him.  Consequently,
He was somewhat surprised on entering his Antiroom, to find Theodore
established there.  The Page sat near a Table with a pen in his hand,
and was so totally occupied by his employment that He perceived not his
Lord's approach.  The Marquis stopped to observe him.  Theodore wrote a
few lines, then paused, and scratched out a part of the writing:  Then
wrote again, smiled, and seemed highly pleased with what He had been
about.  At last He threw down his pen, sprang from his chair, and
clapped his hands together joyfully.

'There it is!' cried He aloud:  'Now they are charming!'

His transports were interrupted by a laugh from the Marquis, who
suspected the nature of his employment.

'What is so charming, Theodore?'

The Youth started, and looked round.  He blushed, ran to the Table,
seized the paper on which He had been writing, and concealed it in
confusion.

'Oh! my Lord, I knew not that you were so near me.  Can I be of use to
you?  Lucas is already gone to bed.'

'I shall follow his example when I have given my opinion of your
verses.'

'My verses, my Lord?'

'Nay, I am sure that you have been writing some, for nothing else could
have kept you awake till this time of the morning.  Where are they,
Theodore?  I shall like to see your composition.'

Theodore's cheeks glowed with still deeper crimson: He longed to show
his poetry, but first chose to be pressed for it.

'Indeed, my Lord, they are not worthy your attention.'

'Not these verses, which you just now declared to be so charming?

Come, come, let me see whether our opinions are the same.  I promise
that you shall find in me an indulgent Critic.'

The Boy produced his paper with seeming reluctance; but the
satisfaction which sparkled in his dark expressive eyes betrayed the
vanity of his little bosom.  The Marquis smiled while He observed the
emotions of an heart as yet but little skilled in veiling its
sentiments.  He seated himself upon a Sopha: Theodore, while Hope and
fear contended on his anxious countenance, waited with inquietude for
his Master's decision, while the Marquis read the following lines.

  LOVE AND AGE

    The night was dark; The wind blew cold;
  Anacreon, grown morose and old,
  Sat by his fire, and fed the chearful flame:
  Sudden the Cottage-door expands,
  And lo! before him Cupid stands,
  Casts round a friendly glance, and greets him by his name.

    'What is it Thou?' the startled Sire
  In sullen tone exclaimed, while ire
  With crimson flushed his pale and wrinkled cheek:
  'Wouldst Thou again with amorous rage
  Inflame my bosom?  Steeled by age,
  Vain Boy, to pierce my breast thine arrows are too weak.

    'What seek You in this desart drear?
  No smiles or sports inhabit here;
  Ne'er did these vallies witness dalliance sweet:
  Eternal winter binds the plains;
  Age in my house despotic reigns,
  My Garden boasts no flower, my bosom boasts no heat.

    'Begone, and seek the blooming bower,
  Where some ripe Virgin courts thy power,
  Or bid provoking dreams flit round her bed;
  On Damon's amorous breast repose;
  Wanton--on Chloe's lip of rose,
  Or make her blushing cheek a pillow for thy head.

    'Be such thy haunts; These regions cold
  Avoid!  Nor think grown wise and old
  This hoary head again thy yoke shall bear:
  Remembering that my fairest years
  By Thee were marked with sighs and tears,
  I think thy friendship false, and shun the guileful snare.

    'I have not yet forgot the pains
  I felt, while bound in Julia's chains;
  The ardent flames with which my bosom burned;
  The nights I passed deprived of rest;
  The jealous pangs which racked my breast;
  My disappointed hopes, and passion unreturned.

    'Then fly, and curse mine eyes no more!
  Fly from my peaceful Cottage-door!
  No day, no hour, no moment shalt Thou stay.
  I know thy falsehood, scorn thy arts,
  Distrust thy smiles, and fear thy darts;
  Traitor, begone, and seek some other to betray!'

    'Does Age, old Man, your wits confound?'
  Replied the offended God, and frowned;
  (His frown was sweet as is the Virgin's smile!)
  'Do You to Me these words address?
  To Me, who do not love you less,
  Though You my friendship scorn, and pleasures past revile!

    'If one proud Fair you chanced to find,
  An hundred other Nymphs were kind,
  Whose smiles might well for Julia's frowns atone:
  But such is Man!  His partial hand
  Unnumbered favours writes on sand,
  But stamps one little fault on solid lasting stone.

    'Ingrate! Who led Thee to the wave,
  At noon where Lesbia loved to lave?
  Who named the bower alone where Daphne lay?
  And who, when Caelia shrieked for aid,
  Bad you with kisses hush the Maid?
  What other was't than Love, Oh! false Anacreon, say!

    'Then You could call me--"Gentle Boy!
  "My only bliss! my source of joy!"--
  Then You could prize me dearer than your soul!
  Could kiss, and dance me on your knees;
  And swear, not wine itself would please,
  Had not the lip of Love first touched the flowing bowl!

    'Must those sweet days return no more?
  Must I for aye your loss deplore,
  Banished your heart, and from your favour driven?
  Ah! no; My fears that smile denies;
  That heaving breast, those sparkling eyes
  Declare me ever dear and all my faults forgiven.

   'Again beloved, esteemed, carest,
  Cupid shall in thine arms be prest,
  Sport on thy knees, or on thy bosom sleep:
  My Torch thine age-struck heart shall warm;
  My Hand pale Winter's rage disarm,
  And Youth and Spring shall here once more their revels keep.'--

    A feather now of golden hue
  He smiling from his pinion drew;
  This to the Poet's hand the Boy commits;
  And straight before Anacreon's eyes
  The fairest dreams of fancy rise,
  And round his favoured head wild inspiration flits.

    His bosom glows with amorous fire
  Eager He grasps the magic lyre;
  Swift o'er the tuneful chords his fingers move:
  The Feather plucked from Cupid's wing
  Sweeps the too-long-neglected string,
  While soft Anacreon sings the power and praise of Love.

    Soon as that name was heard, the Woods
  Shook off their snows; The melting floods
  Broke their cold chains, and Winter fled away.
  Once more the earth was deckt with flowers;
  Mild Zephyrs breathed through blooming bowers;
  High towered the glorious Sun, and poured the blaze of day.

    Attracted by the harmonious sound,
  Sylvans and Fauns the Cot surround,
  And curious crowd the Minstrel to behold:
  The Wood-nymphs haste the spell to prove;
  Eager They run; They list, they love,
  And while They hear the strain, forget the Man is old.

    Cupid, to nothing constant long,
  Perched on the Harp attends the song,
  Or stifles with a kiss the dulcet notes:
  Now on the Poet's breast reposes,
  Now twines his hoary locks with roses,
  Or borne on wings of gold in wanton circle floats.

    Then thus Anacreon--'I no more
  At other shrine my vows will pour,
  Since Cupid deigns my numbers to inspire:
  From Phoebus or the blue-eyed Maid
  Now shall my verse request no aid,
  For Love alone shall be the Patron of my Lyre.

    'In lofty strain, of earlier days,
  I spread the King's or Hero's praise,
  And struck the martial Chords with epic fire:
  But farewell, Hero! farewell, King!
  Your deeds my lips no more shall sing,
  For Love alone shall be the subject of my Lyre.


The Marquis returned the paper with a smile of encouragement.

'Your little poem pleases me much,' said He; 'However, you must not
count my opinion for anything.  I am no judge of verses, and for my own
part, never composed more than six lines in my life: Those six produced
so unlucky an effect that I am fully resolved never to compose another.
But I wander from my subject.  I was going to say that you cannot
employ your time worse than in making verses.  An Author, whether good
or bad, or between both, is an Animal whom everybody is privileged to
attack; For though All are not able to write books, all conceive
themselves able to judge them.  A bad composition carries with it its
own punishment, contempt and ridicule.  A good one excites envy, and
entails upon its Author a thousand mortifications.  He finds himself
assailed by partial and ill-humoured Criticism: One Man finds fault
with the plan, Another with the style, a Third with the precept, which
it strives to inculcate; and they who cannot succeed in finding fault
with the Book, employ themselves in stigmatizing its Author.  They
maliciously rake out from obscurity every little circumstance which may
throw ridicule upon his private character or conduct, and aim at
wounding the Man, since They cannot hurt the Writer.  In short, to
enter the lists of literature is wilfully to expose yourself to the
arrows of neglect, ridicule, envy, and disappointment.  Whether you
write well or ill, be assured that you will not escape from blame;
Indeed this circumstance contains a young Author's chief consolation:
He remembers that Lope de Vega and Calderona had unjust and envious
Critics, and He modestly conceives himself to be exactly in their
predicament.  But I am conscious that all these sage observations are
thrown away upon you.  Authorship is a mania to conquer which no
reasons are sufficiently strong; and you might as easily persuade me
not to love, as I persuade you not to write.  However, if you cannot
help being occasionally seized with a poetical paroxysm, take at least
the precaution of communicating your verses to none but those whose
partiality for you secures their approbation.'

'Then, my Lord, you do not think these lines tolerable?' said Theodore
with an humble and dejected air.

'You mistake my meaning.  As I said before, they have pleased me much;
But my regard for you makes me partial, and Others might judge them
less favourably.  I must still remark that even my prejudice in your
favour does not blind me so much as to prevent my observing several
faults.  For instance, you make a terrible confusion of metaphors; You
are too apt to make the strength of your lines consist more in the
words than sense; Some of the verses only seem introduced in order to
rhyme with others; and most of the best ideas are borrowed from other
Poets, though possibly you are unconscious of the theft yourself.
These faults may occasionally be excused in a work of length; But a
short Poem must be correct and perfect.'

'All this is true, Segnor; But you should consider that I only write
for pleasure.'

'Your defects are the less excusable.  Their incorrectness may be
forgiven in those who work for money, who are obliged to compleat a
given task in a given time, and are paid according to the bulk, not
value of their productions.  But in those whom no necessity forces to
turn Author, who merely write for fame, and have full leisure to polish
their compositions, faults are impardonable, and merit the sharpest
arrows of criticism.'

The Marquis rose from the Sopha; the Page looked discouraged and
melancholy, and this did not escape his Master's observation.

'However' added He smiling, 'I think that these lines do you no
discredit.  Your versification is tolerably easy, and your ear seems to
be just.  The perusal of your little poem upon the whole gave me much
pleasure; and if it is not asking too great a favour, I shall be highly
obliged to you for a Copy.'

The Youth's countenance immediately cleared up.  He perceived not the
smile, half approving, half ironical, which accompanied the request,
and He promised the Copy with great readiness.  The Marquis withdrew to
his chamber, much amused by the instantaneous effect produced upon
Theodore's vanity by the conclusion of his Criticism.  He threw himself
upon his Couch; Sleep soon stole over him, and his dreams presented him
with the most flattering pictures of happiness with Agnes.

On reaching the Hotel de Medina, Lorenzo's first care was to enquire
for Letters.  He found several waiting for him; but that which He
sought was not amongst them.  Leonella had found it impossible to write
that evening.  However, her impatience to secure Don Christoval's
heart, on which She flattered herself with having made no slight
impression, permitted her not to pass another day without informing him
where She was to be found.  On her return from the Capuchin Church, She
had related to her Sister with exultation how attentive an handsome
Cavalier had been to her; as also how his Companion had undertaken to
plead Antonia's cause with the Marquis de las Cisternas.  Elvira
received this intelligence with sensations very different from those
with which it was communicated.  She blamed her Sister's imprudence in
confiding her history to an absolute Stranger, and expressed her fears
lest this inconsiderate step should prejudice the Marquis against her.
The greatest of her apprehensions She concealed in her own breast.  She
had observed with inquietude that at the mention of Lorenzo, a deep
blush spread itself over her Daughter's cheek.  The timid Antonia dared
not to pronounce his name:  Without knowing wherefore, She felt
embarrassed when He was made the subject of discourse, and endeavoured
to change the conversation to Ambrosio.  Elvira perceived the emotions
of this young bosom:  In consequence, She insisted upon Leonella's
breaking her promise to the Cavaliers. A sigh, which on hearing this
order escaped from Antonia, confirmed the wary Mother in her resolution.

Through this resolution Leonella was determined to break:  She
conceived it to be inspired by envy, and that her Sister dreaded her
being elevated above her.  Without imparting her design to anyone, She
took an opportunity of dispatching the following note to Lorenzo; It
was delivered to him as soon as He woke.

'Doubtless, Segnor Don Lorenzo, you have frequently accused me of
ingratitude and forgetfulness:  But on the word of a Virgin, it was out
of my power to perform my promise yesterday.  I know not in what words
to inform you how strange a reception my Sister gave your kind wish to
visit her.  She is an odd Woman, with many good points about her; But
her jealousy of me frequently makes her conceive notions quite
unaccountable.  On hearing that your Friend had paid some little
attention to me, She immediately took the alarm:  She blamed my
conduct, and has absolutely forbidden me to let you know our abode.  My
strong sense of gratitude for your kind offers of service, and ...
Shall I confess it? my desire to behold once more the too amiable Don
Christoval, will not permit my obeying her injunctions.  I have
therefore stolen a moment to inform you, that we lodge in the Strada di
San Iago, four doors from the Palace d'Albornos, and nearly opposite to
the Barber's Miguel Coello.  Enquire for Donna Elvira Dalfa, since in
compliance with her Father-in-law's order, my Sister continues to be
called by her maiden name.  At eight this evening you will be sure of
finding us:  But let not a word drop which may raise a suspicion of my
having written this letter.  Should you see the Conde d'Ossorio, tell
him ...  I blush while I declare it ...

Tell him that his presence will be but too acceptable to the
sympathetic                                         Leonella.

The latter sentences were written in red ink, to express the blushes of
her cheek, while She committed an outrage upon her virgin modesty.

Lorenzo had no sooner perused this note than He set out in search of
Don Christoval.  Not being able to find him in the course of the day,
He proceeded to Donna Elvira's alone, to Leonella's infinite
disappointment.  The Domestic by whom He sent up his name, having
already declared his Lady to be at home, She had no excuse for refusing
his visit:  Yet She consented to receive it with much reluctance.  That
reluctance was increased by the changes which his approach produced in
Antonia's countenance; nor was it by any means abated when the Youth
himself appeared.  The symmetry of his person, animation of his
features, and natural elegance of his manners and address, convinced
Elvira that such a Guest must be dangerous for her Daughter.  She
resolved to treat him with distant politeness, to decline his services
with gratitude for the tender of them, and to make him feel, without
offence, that his future visits would be far from acceptable.

On his entrance He found Elvira, who was indisposed, reclining upon a
Sopha:  Antonia sat by her embroidery frame, and Leonella, in a
pastoral dress, held 'Montemayor's Diana.'  In spite of her being the
Mother of Antonia, Lorenzo could not help expecting to find in Elvira
Leonella's true Sister, and the Daughter of 'as honest a painstaking
Shoe-maker, as any in Cordova.'  A single glance was sufficient to
undeceive him.  He beheld a Woman whose features, though impaired by
time and sorrow, still bore the marks of distinguished beauty:  A
serious dignity reigned upon her countenance, but was tempered by a
grace and sweetness which rendered her truly enchanting.  Lorenzo
fancied that She must have resembled her Daughter in her youth, and
readily excused the imprudence of the late Conde de las Cisternas.  She
desired him to be seated, and immediately resumed her place upon the
Sopha.

Antonia received him with a simple reverence, and continued her work:
Her cheeks were suffused with crimson, and She strove to conceal her
emotion by leaning over her embroidery frame.  Her Aunt also chose to
play off her airs of modesty; She affected to blush and tremble, and
waited with her eyes cast down to receive, as She expected, the
compliments of Don Christoval.  Finding after some time that no sign of
his approach was given, She ventured to look round the room, and
perceived with vexation that Medina was unaccompanied.  Impatience
would not permit her waiting for an explanation: Interrupting Lorenzo,
who was delivering Raymond's message, She desired to know what was
become of his Friend.

He, who thought it necessary to maintain himself in her good graces,
strove to console her under her disappointment by committing a little
violence upon truth.

'Ah! Segnora,' He replied in a melancholy voice 'How grieved will He be
at losing this opportunity of paying you his respects!  A Relation's
illness has obliged him to quit Madrid in haste:  But on his return, He
will doubtless seize the first moment with transport to throw himself
at your feet!'

As He said this, his eyes met those of Elvira:  She punished his
falsehood sufficiently by darting at him a look expressive of
displeasure and reproach.  Neither did the deceit answer his intention.
Vexed and disappointed Leonella rose from her seat, and retired in
dudgeon to her own apartment.

Lorenzo hastened to repair the fault, which had injured him in Elvira's
opinion.  He related his conversation with the Marquis respecting her:
He assured her that Raymond was prepared to acknowledge her for his
Brother's Widow; and that till it was in his power to pay his
compliments to her in person, Lorenzo was commissioned to supply his
place.  This intelligence relieved Elvira from an heavy weight of
uneasiness:  She had now found a Protector for the fatherless Antonia,
for whose future fortunes She had suffered the greatest apprehensions.
She was not sparing of her thanks to him who had interfered so
generously in her behalf; But still She gave him no invitation to
repeat his visit.

However, when upon rising to depart He requested permission to enquire
after her health occasionally, the polite earnestness of his manner,
gratitude for his services, and respect for his Friend the Marquis,
would not admit of a refusal.  She consented reluctantly to receive
him:  He promised not to abuse her goodness, and quitted the House.

Antonia was now left alone with her Mother:  A temporary silence
ensued.  Both wished to speak upon the same subject, but Neither knew
how to introduce it.  The one felt a bashfulness which sealed up her
lips, and for which She could not account:  The other feared to find
her apprehensions true, or to inspire her Daughter with notions to
which She might be still a Stranger.  At length Elvira began the
conversation.

'That is a charming young Man, Antonia; I am much pleased with him.
Was He long near you yesterday in the Cathedral?'

'He quitted me not for a moment while I staid in the Church:  He gave
me his seat, and was very obliging and attentive.'

'Indeed?  Why then have you never mentioned his name to me?  Your Aunt
lanched out in praise of his Friend, and you vaunted Ambrosio's
eloquence:  But Neither said a word of Don Lorenzo's person and
accomplishments.  Had not Leonella spoken of his readiness to undertake
our cause, I should not have known him to be in existence.'

She paused.  Antonia coloured, but was silent.

'Perhaps you judge him less favourably than I do.  In my opinion his
figure is pleasing, his conversation sensible, and manners engaging.
Still He may have struck you differently:  You may think him
disagreeable, and ...'.

'Disagreeable? Oh! dear Mother, how should I possibly think him so?  I
should be very ungrateful were I not sensible of his kindness
yesterday, and very blind if his merits had escaped me. His figure is
so graceful, so noble!  His manners so gentle, yet so manly!  I never
yet saw so many accomplishments united in one person, and I doubt
whether Madrid can produce his equal.'

'Why then were you so silent in praise of this Phoenix of Madrid?

Why was it concealed from me that his society had afforded you
pleasure?'

'In truth, I know not:  You ask me a question which I cannot resolve
myself.  I was on the point of mentioning him a thousand times:  His
name was constantly upon my lips, but when I would have pronounced it,
I wanted courage to execute my design. However, if I did not speak of
him, it was not that I thought of him the less.'

'That I believe; But shall I tell you why you wanted courage?  It was
because, accustomed to confide to me your most secret thoughts, you
knew not how to conceal, yet feared to acknowledge, that your heart
nourished a sentiment which you were conscious I should disapprove.
Come hither to me, my Child.'

Antonia quitted her embroidery frame, threw herself upon her knees by
the Sopha, and hid her face in her Mother's lap.

'Fear not, my sweet Girl!  Consider me equally as your Friend and
Parent, and apprehend no reproof from me.  I have read the emotions of
your bosom; you are yet ill-skilled in concealing them, and they could
not escape my attentive eye.  This Lorenzo is dangerous to your repose;
He has already made an impression upon your heart.  'Tis true that I
perceive easily that your affection is returned; But what can be the
consequences of this attachment?  You are poor and friendless, my
Antonia; Lorenzo is the Heir of the Duke of Medina Celi.  Even should
Himself mean honourably, his Uncle never will consent to your union;
Nor without that Uncle's consent, will I.  By sad experience I know
what sorrows She must endure, who marries into a family unwilling to
receive her.  Then struggle with your affection:  Whatever pains it may
cost you, strive to conquer it.  Your heart is tender and susceptible:
It has already received a strong impression; But when once convinced
that you should not encourage such sentiments, I trust, that you have
sufficient fortitude to drive them from your bosom.'

Antonia kissed her hand, and promised implicit obedience.  Elvira then
continued.

'To prevent your passion from growing stronger, it will be needful to
prohibit Lorenzo's visits.  The service which He has rendered me
permits not my forbidding them positively; But unless I judge too
favourably of his character, He will discontinue them without taking
offence, if I confess to him my reasons, and throw myself entirely on
his generosity.  The next time that I see him, I will honestly avow to
him the embarrassment which his presence occasions.  How say you, my
Child?  Is not this measure necessary?'

Antonia subscribed to every thing without hesitation, though not
without regret.  Her Mother kissed her affectionately, and retired to
bed.  Antonia followed her example, and vowed so frequently never more
to think of Lorenzo, that till Sleep closed her eyes She thought of
nothing else.

While this was passing at Elvira's, Lorenzo hastened to rejoin the
Marquis.  Every thing was ready for the second elopement of Agnes; and
at twelve the two Friends with a Coach and four were at the Garden wall
of the Convent.  Don Raymond drew out his Key, and unlocked the door.
They entered, and waited for some time in expectation of being joined
by Agnes.  At length the Marquis grew impatient:  Beginning to fear
that his second attempt would succeed no better than the first, He
proposed to reconnoitre the Convent.  The Friends advanced towards it.
Every thing was still and dark.  The Prioress was anxious to keep the
story a secret, fearing lest the crime of one of its members should
bring disgrace upon the whole community, or that the interposition of
powerful Relations should deprive her vengeance of its intended victim.
She took care therefore to give the Lover of Agnes no cause to suppose
that his design was discovered, and his Mistress on the point of
suffering the punishment of her fault. The same reason made her reject
the idea of arresting the unknown Seducer in the Garden; Such a
proceeding would have created much disturbance, and the disgrace of her
Convent would have been noised about Madrid.  She contented herself
with confining Agnes closely; As to the Lover, She left him at liberty
to pursue his designs.  What She had expected was the result.  The
Marquis and Lorenzo waited in vain till the break of day:  They then
retired without noise, alarmed at the failure of their plan, and
ignorant of the cause of its ill-success.

The next morning Lorenzo went to the Convent, and requested to see his
Sister.  The Prioress appeared at the Grate with a melancholy
countenance:  She informed him that for several days Agnes had appeared
much agitated; That She had been prest by the Nuns in vain to reveal
the cause, and apply to their tenderness for advice and consolation;
That She had obstinately persisted in concealing the cause of her
distress; But that on Thursday Evening it had produced so violent an
effect upon her constitution, that She had fallen ill, and was actually
confined to her bed.  Lorenzo did not credit a syllable of this
account: He insisted upon seeing his Sister; If She was unable to come
to the Grate, He desired to be admitted to her Cell.  The Prioress
crossed herself!  She was shocked at the very idea of a Man's profane
eye pervading the interior of her holy Mansion, and professed herself
astonished that Lorenzo could think of such a thing.  She told him that
his request could not be granted; But that if He returned the next day,
She hoped that her beloved Daughter would then be sufficiently
recovered to join him at the Parlour grate.

With this answer Lorenzo was obliged to retire, unsatisfied and
trembling for his Sister's safety.

He returned the next morning at an early hour.  'Agnes was worse; The
Physician had pronounced her to be in imminent danger; She was ordered
to remain quiet, and it was utterly impossible for her to receive her
Brother's visit.'  Lorenzo stormed at this answer, but there was no
resource.  He raved, He entreated, He threatened:  No means were left
untried to obtain a sight of Agnes.  His endeavours were as fruitless
as those of the day before, and He returned in despair to the Marquis.
On his side, the Latter had spared no pains to discover what had
occasioned his plot to fail:  Don Christoval, to whom the affair was
now entrusted, endeavoured to worm out the secret from the Old
Porteress of St. Clare, with whom He had formed an acquaintance; But
She was too much upon her guard, and He gained from her no
intelligence. The Marquis was almost distracted, and Lorenzo felt
scarcely less inquietude.  Both were convinced that the purposed
elopement must have been discovered:  They doubted not but the malady
of Agnes was a pretence, But they knew not by what means to rescue her
from the hands of the Prioress.

Regularly every day did Lorenzo visit the Convent: As regularly was He
informed that his Sister rather grew worse than better. Certain that
her indisposition was feigned, these accounts did not alarm him:  But
his ignorance of her fate, and of the motives which induced the
Prioress to keep her from him, excited the most serious uneasiness.  He
was still uncertain what steps He ought to take, when the Marquis
received a letter from the Cardinal-Duke of Lerma.  It inclosed the
Pope's expected Bull, ordering that Agnes should be released from her
vows, and restored to her Relations.  This essential paper decided at
once the proceedings of her Friends:  They resolved that Lorenzo should
carry it to the Domina without delay, and demand that his Sister should
be instantly given up to him.  Against this mandate illness could not
be pleaded:  It gave her Brother the power of removing her instantly to
the Palace de Medina, and He determined to use that power on the
following day.

His mind relieved from inquietude respecting his Sister, and his
Spirits raised by the hope of soon restoring her to freedom, He now had
time to give a few moments to love and to Antonia.  At the same hour as
on his former visit He repaired to Donna Elvira's:  She had given
orders for his admission.  As soon as He was announced, her Daughter
retired with Leonella, and when He entered the chamber, He found the
Lady of the House alone.  She received him with less distance than
before, and desired him to place himself near her upon the Sopha.  She
then without losing time opened her business, as had been agreed
between herself and Antonia.

'You must not think me ungrateful, Don Lorenzo, or forgetful how
essential are the services which you have rendered me with the Marquis.
I feel the weight of my obligations; Nothing under the Sun should
induce my taking the step to which I am now compelled but the interest
of my Child, of my beloved Antonia.  My health is declining; God only
knows how soon I may be summoned before his Throne.  My Daughter will
be left without Parents, and should She lose the protection of the
Cisternas family, without Friends.

She is young and artless, uninstructed in the world's perfidy, and with
charms sufficient to render her an object of seduction. Judge then, how
I must tremble at the prospect before her! Judge how anxious I must be
to keep her from their society who may excite the yet dormant passions
of her bosom.  You are amiable, Don Lorenzo:  Antonia has a
susceptible, a loving heart, and is grateful for the favours conferred
upon us by your interference with the Marquis.  Your presence makes me
tremble: I fear lest it should inspire her with sentiments which may
embitter the remainder of her life, or encourage her to cherish hopes
in her situation unjustifiable and futile.  Pardon me when I avow my
terrors, and let my frankness plead in my excuse.  I cannot forbid you
my House, for gratitude restrains me; I can only throw myself upon your
generosity, and entreat you to spare the feelings of an anxious, of a
doting Mother.  Believe me when I assure you that I lament the
necessity of rejecting your acquaintance; But there is no remedy, and
Antonia's interest obliges me to beg you to forbear your visits.  By
complying with my request, you will increase the esteem which I already
feel for you, and of which everything convinces me that you are truly
deserving.'

'Your frankness charms me,' replied Lorenzo; 'You shall find that in
your favourable opinion of me you were not deceived.  Yet I hope that
the reasons, now in my power to allege, will persuade you to withdraw a
request which I cannot obey without infinite reluctance.  I love your
Daughter, love her most sincerely:  I wish for no greater happiness
than to inspire her with the same sentiments, and receive her hand at
the Altar as her Husband. 'Tis true, I am not rich myself; My Father's
death has left me but little in my own possession; But my expectations
justify my pretending to the Conde de las Cisternas' Daughter.'

He was proceeding, but Elvira interrupted him.

'Ah! Don Lorenzo, you forget in that pompous title the meanness of my
origin.  You forget that I have now past fourteen years in Spain,
disavowed by my Husband's family, and existing upon a stipend barely
sufficient for the support and education of my Daughter.  Nay, I have
even been neglected by most of my own Relations, who out of envy affect
to doubt the reality of my marriage.  My allowance being discontinued
at my Father-in-law's death, I was reduced to the very brink of want.
In this situation I was found by my Sister, who amongst all her foibles
possesses a warm, generous, and affectionate heart.  She aided me with
the little fortune which my Father left her, persuaded me to visit
Madrid, and has supported my Child and myself since our quitting
Murcia.  Then consider not Antonia as descended from the Conde de la
Cisternas:  Consider her as a poor and unprotected Orphan, as the
Grand-child of the Tradesman Torribio Dalfa, as the needy Pensioner of
that Tradesman's Daughter.  Reflect upon the difference between such a
situation, and that of the Nephew and Heir of the potent Duke of
Medina.  I believe your intentions to be honourable; But as there are
no hopes that your Uncle will approve of the union, I foresee that the
consequences of your attachment must be fatal to my Child's repose.'

'Pardon me, Segnora; You are misinformed if you suppose the Duke of
Medina to resemble the generality of Men.  His sentiments are liberal
and disinterested:  He loves me well; and I have no reason to dread his
forbidding the marriage when He perceives that my happiness depends
upon Antonia.  But supposing him to refuse his sanction, what have I
still to fear?  My Parents are no more; My little fortune is in my own
possession: It will be sufficient to support Antonia, and I shall
exchange for her hand Medina's Dukedom without one sigh of regret.'

'You are young and eager; It is natural for you to entertain such
ideas.  But Experience has taught me to my cost that curses accompany
an unequal alliance.  I married the Conde de las Cisternas in
opposition to the will of his Relations; Many an heart-pang has
punished me for the imprudent step.  Whereever we bent our course, a
Father's execration pursued Gonzalvo.  Poverty overtook us, and no
Friend was near to relieve our wants.  Still our mutual affection
existed, but alas! not without interruption.

Accustomed to wealth and ease, ill could my Husband support the
transition to distress and indigence.  He looked back with repining to
the comforts which He once enjoyed.  He regretted the situation which
for my sake He had quitted; and in moments when Despair possessed his
mind, has reproached me with having made him the Companion of want and
wretchedness!  He has called me his bane!  The source of his sorrows,
the cause of his destruction! Ah God! He little knew how much keener
were my own heart's reproaches!  He was ignorant that I suffered
trebly, for myself, for my Children, and for him!  'Tis true that his
anger seldom lasted long:  His sincere affection for me soon revived in
his heart; and then his repentance for the tears which He had made me
shed tortured me even more than his reproaches.  He would throw himself
on the ground, implore my forgiveness in the most frantic terms, and
load himself with curses for being the Murderer of my repose.  Taught
by experience that an union contracted against the inclinations of
families on either side must be unfortunate, I will save my Daughter
from those miseries which I have suffered. Without your Uncle's
consent, while I live, She never shall be yours.  Undoubtedly He will
disapprove of the union; His power is immense, and Antonia shall not be
exposed to his anger and persecution.'

'His persecution?  How easily may that be avoided! Let the worst
happen, it is but quitting Spain.  My wealth may easily be realised;
The Indian Islands will offer us a secure retreat; I have an estate,
though not of value, in Hispaniola:  Thither will we fly, and I shall
consider it to be my native Country, if it gives me Antonia's
undisturbed possession.'

'Ah! Youth, this is a fond romantic vision.  Gonzalvo thought the same.
He fancied that He could leave Spain without regret; But the moment of
parting undeceived him.  You know not yet what it is to quit your
native land; to quit it, never to behold it more!

You know not, what it is to exchange the scenes where you have passed
your infancy, for unknown realms and barbarous climates! To be
forgotten, utterly eternally forgotten, by the Companions of your
Youth!  To see your dearest Friends, the fondest objects of your
affection, perishing with diseases incidental to Indian atmospheres,
and find yourself unable to procure for them necessary assistance!  I
have felt all this!  My Husband and two sweet Babes found their Graves
in Cuba:  Nothing would have saved my young Antonia but my sudden
return to Spain.  Ah! Don Lorenzo, could you conceive what I suffered
during my absence!  Could you know how sorely I regretted all that I
left behind, and how dear to me was the very name of Spain!  I envied
the winds which blew towards it:  And when the Spanish Sailor chaunted
some well-known air as He past my window, tears filled my eyes while I
thought upon my native land.  Gonzalvo too ...  My Husband ...'.

Elvira paused.  Her voice faltered, and She concealed her face with her
handkerchief.  After a short silence She rose from the Sopha, and
proceeded.

'Excuse my quitting you for a few moments:  The remembrance of what I
have suffered has much agitated me, and I need to be alone.  Till I
return peruse these lines.  After my Husband's death I found them among
his papers; Had I known sooner that He entertained such sentiments,
Grief would have killed me.  He wrote these verses on his voyage to
Cuba, when his mind was clouded by sorrow, and He forgot that He had a
Wife and Children.

What we are losing, ever seems to us the most precious:  Gonzalvo was
quitting Spain for ever, and therefore was Spain dearer to his eyes
than all else which the World contained.  Read them, Don Lorenzo; They
will give you some idea of the feelings of a banished Man!'

Elvira put a paper into Lorenzo's hand, and retired from the chamber.
The Youth examined the contents, and found them to be as follows.

  THE EXILE

  Farewell, Oh! native Spain! Farewell for ever!
  These banished eyes shall view thy coasts no more;
  A mournful presage tells my heart, that never
  Gonzalvo's steps again shall press thy shore.

  Hushed are the winds; While soft the Vessel sailing
  With gentle motion plows the unruffled Main,
  I feel my bosom's boasted courage failing,
  And curse the waves which bear me far from Spain.

  I see it yet! Beneath yon blue clear Heaven
  Still do the Spires, so well beloved, appear;
  From yonder craggy point the gale of Even
  Still wafts my native accents to mine ear:

  Propped on some moss-crowned Rock, and gaily singing,
  There in the Sun his nets the Fisher dries;
  Oft have I heard the plaintive Ballad, bringing
  Scenes of past joys before my sorrowing eyes.

  Ah! Happy Swain!  He waits the accustomed hour,
  When twilight-gloom obscures the closing sky;
  Then gladly seeks his loved paternal bower,
  And shares the feast his native fields supply:

  Friendship and Love, his Cottage Guests, receive him
  With honest welcome and with smile sincere;
  No threatening woes of present joys bereave him,
  No sigh his bosom owns, his cheek no tear.

  Ah! Happy Swain!  Such bliss to me denying,
  Fortune thy lot with envy bids me view;
  Me, who from home and Spain an Exile flying,
  Bid all I value, all I love, adieu.

  No more mine ear shall list the well-known ditty
  Sung by some Mountain-Girl, who tends her Goats,
  Some Village-Swain imploring amorous pity,
  Or Shepherd chaunting wild his rustic notes:

  No more my arms a Parent's fond embraces,
  No more my heart domestic calm, must know;
  Far from these joys, with sighs which Memory traces,
  To sultry skies, and distant climes I go.

  Where Indian Suns engender new diseases,
  Where snakes and tigers breed, I bend my way
  To brave the feverish thirst no art appeases,
  The yellow plague, and madding blaze of day:

  But not to feel slow pangs consume my liver,
  To die by piece-meal in the bloom of age,
  My boiling blood drank by insatiate fever,
  And brain delirious with the day-star's rage,

  Can make me know such grief, as thus to sever
  With many a bitter sigh, Dear Land, from Thee;
  To feel this heart must doat on thee for ever,
  And feel, that all thy joys are torn from me!

  Ah me!  How oft will Fancy's spells in slumber
  Recall my native Country to my mind!
  How oft regret will bid me sadly number
  Each lost delight and dear Friend left behind!

  Wild Murcia's Vales, and loved romantic bowers,
  The River on whose banks a Child I played,
  My Castle's antient Halls, its frowning Towers,
  Each much-regretted wood, and well-known Glade,

  Dreams of the land where all my wishes centre,
  Thy scenes, which I am doomed no more to know,
  Full oft shall Memory trace, my soul's Tormentor,
  And turn each pleasure past to present woe.

  But Lo! The Sun beneath the waves retires;
  Night speeds apace her empire to restore:
  Clouds from my sight obscure the village-spires,
  Now seen but faintly, and now seen no more.

  Oh! breathe not, Winds! Still be the Water's motion!
  Sleep, sleep, my Bark, in silence on the Main!
  So when to-morrow's light shall gild the Ocean,
  Once more mine eyes shall see the coast of Spain.

  Vain is the wish!  My last petition scorning,
  Fresh blows the Gale, and high the Billows swell:
  Far shall we be before the break of Morning;
  Oh! then for ever, native Spain, farewell!


Lorenzo had scarcely time to read these lines, when Elvira returned to
him:  The giving a free course to her tears had relieved her, and her
spirits had regained their usual composure.

'I have nothing more to say, my Lord,' said She; 'You have heard my
apprehensions, and my reasons for begging you not to repeat your
visits.  I have thrown myself in full confidence upon your honour:  I
am certain that you will not prove my opinion of you to have been too
favourable.'

'But one question more, Segnora, and I leave you.  Should the Duke of
Medina approve my love, would my addresses be unacceptable to yourself
and the fair Antonia?'

'I will be open with you, Don Lorenzo:  There being little probability
of such an union taking place, I fear that it is desired but too
ardently by my Daughter.  You have made an impression upon her young
heart, which gives me the most serious alarm:  To prevent that
impression from growing stronger, I am obliged to decline your
acquaintance.  For me, you may be sure that I should rejoice at
establishing my Child so advantageously. Conscious that my
constitution, impaired by grief and illness, forbids me to expect a
long continuance in this world, I tremble at the thought of leaving her
under the protection of a perfect Stranger.  The Marquis de las
Cisternas is totally unknown to me:

He will marry; His Lady may look upon Antonia with an eye of
displeasure, and deprive her of her only Friend.  Should the Duke, your
Uncle, give his consent, you need not doubt obtaining mine, and my
Daughter's:  But without his, hope not for ours.  At all events, what
ever steps you may take, what ever may be the Duke's decision, till you
know it let me beg your forbearing to strengthen by your presence
Antonia's prepossession.  If the sanction of your Relations authorises
your addressing her as your Wife, my Doors fly open to you:  If that
sanction is refused, be satisfied to possess my esteem and gratitude,
but remember, that we must meet no more.'

With an impulse she could not have explained to herself, she had drawn
away and swiftly mounted the steps of the house. Not until she reached
the porch did she turn.

"Don't, don't, please!" she urged. "I beg your pardon. I shouldn't have
asked what I did. Forget that I spoke at all." She was struggling for
words, for breath. Her color came and went. "Good-night." And not trusting
herself to look back, oblivious of courtesy, she almost ran into
the house.

Standing as she had left him, his hat in his hand, Clarence Sidwell
watched her pass through the lighted vestibule into the darkness
beyond.

CHAPTER XVIII
PAINTER AND PICTURE

Scotty Baker dropped a lump of sugar into his coffee and stirred
the mixture carefully, glancing the while smilingly at his wife and
daughter.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed; "it seems good to be back here again."
Mrs. Baker was deep in a letter she had just opened, but Florence returned
the smile companionably.

"And it seems mighty good to have you back, daddy," she replied.
"Just think of our being alone, a pair of poor defenceless women, three
whole months without a man about the house! If you ever dare do it
again you're liable to find one in your place when you return. Isn't
he, mamma?"

Her mother looked up reproachfully. "For shame, Florence!" she cried.

But Scotty only observed his daughter quizzically. "I did--almost,
this time, didn't I?" he bantered. "By the way, who is this wonderful
being, this Sidwell, I've heard so much about the last few hours?" He
was as obtuse as a post to his wife's meaning look. "Tell me about
him, won't you?"
Florence laughed a bit unnaturally.

It seemed her words had a way of returning like a boomerang.

"He's a writer," she explained laconically.

"A writer?" Scotty paused, a teaspoonful of coffee between the
cup and his mouth. "A real one?"
The smile left the girl's face. "His family is one of the oldest in the
city," she explained coldly. "His work sells by the thousand. You can
judge for yourself."
Scotty sipped his coffee impassively, but behind the big glasses the
twinkle left his eyes.

"The inference you suggest would have been more obvious if you
hadn't made the first remark," he said a little sharply.

"I've noticed the matter of good family has quite an influence in this
world."
The subject was dropped, but nevertheless it left its aftermath.
Easy-going Scotty did not often say an unpleasant thing, and for
that very reason Florence knew that when he did it had an especial
significance.

"By the way," he observed after a moment, "we ought to celebrate to-day
in some manner. I rather expected to find a band at the station to
welcome me yesterday upon my return, but I didn't, and I fear
there's been no public demonstration arranged.

What do you say to our packing up our dinner, taking the elevated,
and spending the day in the country?

What say you, Mollie?"
His wife looked at her daughter helplessly. "Just as Florence says. I'm
willing," she replied.

"What speaks the oracle?" smiled Scotty. "Shall we or shall we
not?
Personally, I feel a desire for cooling springs, to step on a
good-sized plat of green without having a watchful bluecoat loom
in the distance."

Florence fingered the linen of the tablecloth with genuine
discomfort.
"You two can go.

I'll help you get ready," she ventured at last. "I'm sorry, but I
promised Mr. Sidwell last night I'd visit the art gallery with him
this afternoon. He says they've some new canvases hung lately, one of
them by a particular friend of his.

He's such a student of art, and I know so little about it that I hate
to miss going."
Again the smile left Scotty's eyes. "Can't you write a note explaining,
and postpone the visit until some other time?" It took quite an
effort for this undemonstrative Englishman to make the request.

The girl glanced out the window with a look her father understood very
well. "I hardly think so," she said. "He's going away for the Summer
soon, and his time is limited."
Scotty said no more, and soon after he left the table and went into the
library. Florence sat for a moment abstractedly; then with her
old impulsive manner she followed him.

"Daddy," the girl's arms clasped around his neck, her cheek pressed
against his, "I'm awful sorry I can't go with you to-day. I'd like to,
really."
But for one of the very few times that Florence could remember
her father did not respond. Instead, he removed her arms rather coldly.

"Oh, that's all right," he said; "I hope you'll have a good time." And
picking up the morning paper he lit a cigar and moved toward the shady
veranda.

Watching him, the girl had a desire to follow, to prevent his leaving
her in that way.

But she hesitated and the moment passed.

Yet, although a cloud shadowed Florence Baker's morning, by afternoon
it had departed.

Sidwell's carriage came promptly, creating something of a stir behind
the drawn shades of the adjoining residences--for the Bakers were
not located in a fashionable quarter.

Sidwell himself, immaculate, smiling, greeted her with the deference which
became him well, and in itself conveyed a delicate compliment. Neither
made any reference to the incident of the night before. His manner
gave no hint of the constraint which under the circumstances might have
been expected. A few months before, the girl would have thought he
had taken her request literally, and had forgotten; but now she knew
better.

In this fascinating new life one could pass pleasantries with one's
dearest enemy and still smile. In the old life, under similar
circumstances, there would have been gun-play, and probably later a
funeral; but here--they knew better how to live. Already, in the
few social events she had attended, she had seen them juggle with
emotions as a conjurer with knives--to emerge unhurt, unruffled. To be
sure, she could not herself do it--yet; but she understood, and
admired.

Out of doors the sun was uncomfortably hot, but within the high
walled gallery it was cool and pleasant. Florence had been
there before, but earlier in the season, and many other visitors
were present. To-day she and Sidwell were practically alone, and she
faced him with a little receptive gesture.

"You're always getting me to talk," she said. "To-day I'm going to exchange
places. Don't expect me to do anything but listen."
Sidwell smiled.

"Won't you even condescend to suggest channels in which my discourse
may flow?"

  he bantered.
  
                                            The girl hesitated.

"Perhaps," she ventured, "if I find it necessary."
For an hour they wandered about, moving slowly, and pausing often to
rest. Sidwell talked well, but somewhat impersonally. At last, in an
out-of-the-way corner, they came to the modest canvas of his friend,
and they sat down before it. The picture was unnamed and unsigned.
Without being extraordinary as a work of art, its subject lent its chief
claim to distinction. Interested because her companion seemed interested,
Florence looked at it steadily. At first there appeared to her
nothing but a mountain, steep and rugged, and a weary man who,
climbing it, had lain down to rest.

Far down at the mountain's base she saw where the figure had begun
its ascent.

The way was easy there, and the trail, through the abundant grasses
crushed underfoot, was of one who had moved rapidly.

Gradually, with the upward incline, obstacles had increased, and the
footprints drew nearer together. Still higher, from a straight line the
trail had become tortuous and irregular.

Here the climber had passed around a thicket of trees; there a great
boulder had stood in the path; but, ever indomitable, the way had
been steadily upward toward some point the climber had in view. Steeper
and steeper the way had grown. The prints on the rocky mountain-side,
from being those of feet only, merged into those made by hands.
The man had begun to crawl, making his way inch by inch.

Fragments of his torn clothing hung on the points of rocks. Dim brown
lines showed the path his body had taken, as he sometimes slipped
back. Breaks in the scant vegetation told where his fingers had
clutched desperately to halt his descent. Yet each time the reverse had
been but temporary; he had returned, and mounted higher and higher.
But at last there had come the end. He had reached his present place
in the picture. By gripping tightly he could hold his own, but to advance
was impossible. Straight above him, a sheer wall, many times his own
height, was the blank, unbroken face of the rock. That he had tried
to scale even this was evident, for finger-marks from bleeding hands
were thick thereon; but he had finally abandoned the effort. Physically,
he was conquered. It seemed that one could almost hear the quick
coming and going of his breath.

Yet, prostrate as he lay, his eyes were turned toward the barrier his
body could not scale, to a something which crowned its utmost
height,--something indefinite and unattainable,--the supreme desire
and purpose of his life.

The two spectators sat silent. Other visitors came near, glanced at the
canvas and at the pair of observers, and passed on with muffled
footsteps.

The girl turned, and, as on the night at the roof-garden, found the
man's eyes upon her.

"What name does your friend give to his work?"

she asked.

"He calls it 'The Unattainable.'"
"And what is its meaning?"
"Ambition, perfection, complete happiness--anything striven for with
one's whole soul."
Florence was studying her companion now as steadily as he had been
studying her a moment before. "To your--friend it meant--"
"Happiness."
The girl's hands were clasped in her lap in a way she had when her
thoughts were concentrated.

"And he never found it?" she asked.

Unconsciously one of Sidwell's hands made a downward motion of deprecation.
"He did not. We made the circuit of the earth together in pursuit
of it--but all was useless. It seemed as though the more he searched
the more he was baffled in his quest."
For a moment the girl made no reply, but in her lap her hands clasped
tighter and tighter.

A thought that made her finger-tips tingle was taking form in her
mind.

A dim comprehension of the nature of this man had first suggested it; the
fact that the canvas was unsigned had helped give it form. The
speaker's last words, his even tone of voice, had not passed unnoticed.
She turned to the canvas, searched the skilfully concealed outlines
of the tattered figure with the upturned eyes. The clasped hands
grew white with the tension.

"I didn't know before you were an artist as well as a writer," she
said evenly.

Sidwell turned quickly. The girl could feel his look. "I fear,"
he said, "I fail to grasp your meaning. You think--"
Florence met the speaker's look steadily. "I don't think," she said, "I
know. You painted the picture, Mr. Sidwell. That man there on the
mountain-side is you!"
Her companion hesitated. His face darkened; his lips opened to speak and
closed again.

The girl continued watching him with steady look.

"I can hardly believe it," she said absently. "It seems impossible."

Sidwell forced a smile. "Impossible? What? That I should paint a
daub like that?"
The girl's tense hands relaxed wearily.

"No, not that you paint, but that the man there--the one finding happiness
unattainable--should be you."
The lids dropped just a shade over Sidwell's black eyes. "And
why, if you please, should it be more remarkable that I am unhappy than
another?"
This time Florence took him up quickly. "Because," she answered, "you
seem to have everything one can think of that is needed to make a human
being happy--wealth, position, health, ability--all the prizes other
people work their lives out for or die for." Again the voice dropped.
"I can't understand it." She was silent a moment. "I can't understand
it," she repeated.

From the girl's face the man's eyes passed to the canvas, and rested
there.

"Yes," he said slowly, "I suppose it is difficult, almost impossible,
for you to realize why I am--as I am. You have never had the personal
experience--and we only understand what we have felt. The trouble with
me is that I have experienced too much, felt too much. I've ceased
to take things on trust. Like the youth and the key flower I've forgotten
the best." The voice paused, but the eyes still kept to the canvas.

"That picture," he went on, "typifies it all. I painted it, not because
I'm an artist, but because in a fashion it expresses something I
couldn't put into words, or express in any other way. When I began to
climb, the object above me was not happiness but ambition. Wealth
and social place, as you say, I already had. They meant nothing to
me. What I wanted was to make a name in another way--as a literary man."
The dark eyes shifted back to the listener's face, the voice spoke more
rapidly.

"I went after the thing that I wanted with all the power and tenacity
that was in me. I worked with the one object in view; worked without
resting, feverishly. I had successes and failures, failures and successes--a
long line of both. At last, as the world puts it, I _arrived_. I got to
a position where everything I wrote sold, and sold well; but in the
meantime the thing above me, which had been ambition, gradually took
on another shape. Perfection it was I longed for now, perfection in my
art. It was not enough that the public had accepted me as I was; I
was not satisfied with my work. Try as I might, nothing that I wrote
ever reached my own standard in its execution. I worked harder than ever;
but it was useless. I was confronting the blank wall--the wall of my
natural limitations."
The voice paused, and for a moment lowered. "I won't say what I did
then; I was--mad almost--the finger-marks of it are on the rock."

The girl could not look longer into the speaker's eyes. She felt as
if she were gazing upon a naked human soul, and turned away.

"At last," he went on in his confession, "I came to myself, and was
forced to see things as they were. I saw that as well as I thought I
had understood life I had not even grasped its meaning. I had fancied
the attainment of my object the supreme end, and by every human
standard I had succeeded in my purpose; but the thing I had gained was
trash.
Wealth, power, notoriety--what were they?

Bubbles, nothing more; bubbles that broke in the hand of him who clasped
them. The real meaning and object of existence lay deeper, and had nothing
whatever to do with the estimate of a person by his fellows. It was a
frame of mind of the individual himself."

Florence's face turned farther away, but Sidwell did not notice. "Then,
for the last time," he hurried on, "the unattainable changed form
for me, and became what it seems now--happiness.

For a little time I think I was happy--happy in merely having made
the discovery.

Then came the reaction.

I was as I was, as I am now--a product of my past life, of a civilization
essentially artificial. In striving for a false ideal I had unfitted
myself for the real when at last I discovered it."
Unconsciously the man had come closer, and his eyes glowed. At last his
apathy was shaken off, and his words came in a torrent. "What I was then
I am to-day. Mentally, I am like an inebriate, who no longer finds
satisfaction in plain food and drink, but craves stimulants. I demand
activity, excitement, change. In every hour of my life I realize the
narrowness and artificiality of it all; but without it I am unhappy.
I sometimes think Mother Nature herself has disowned me; when I try
to get near her she draws away--I fancy with a shudder. Solitude of
desert, of forest, or of prairie is no longer solitude to me. It is
filled with voices--accusing voices; and I rush back to the crowd
and the unrest of the city.

Even my former pleasures seem to have deserted me. You have spoke often
of accomplishing big things, doing something better than anyone
else can do it, as an example of pleasure supreme. If you
realized what you were saying you would know its irony. You cannot do
a thing better than anyone else. People, like water, strike a dead
level.
No matter how you strive, dozens of others can do the thing you
are doing. Were you to die, your place would be filled to-morrow,
and the world would wag on just the same. There is always someone
just beneath you watchfully waiting, ready to seize your place if
you relax your effort for a moment.

The term 'big things' is relative. To speak it is merely to refer to
something you do not personally understand.

Nothing seems really big to the one who does it. Nothing is difficult
when you understand it. The growing of potatoes in a backyard is just
as wonderful a performance as the painting of one of these pictures;
it would be more so were it not so common and so necessary. The
construction of a steam-engine or an electric dynamo is incomparably
more remarkable than the merging of separate thousands of capital into
millions of combination, yet multitudes of men everywhere can
do either of the former things and are unnoticed. We worship what we do
not understand, and call it big; but the man in the secret realizes
the mockery and smiles."

Closer came the dark face. The black eyes, intense and flashing,
held the listener in their gaze.

"I said that even my pleasures seem to have deserted me.

It is true. I used to like to wander about the city, to see it at its
busiest, to loiter amid the hum and the roar and the ceaseless activity.
I saw in it then only friendly rivalry, like a hurdle race or a
football game--something pleasing and stimulating. Now it all affects
me in just the reverse way. I look beneath the surface, and my
heart sinks to find not friendly competition, but a battle, where
men and women fight for daily bread, where the weak are crowded and
trampled upon by the strong.
In ordinary battle the maimed and the crippled are spared, but here
they still fight on. Mercy or quarter is unknown. Oh, it is ghastly!
I used to take pleasure in books, in the work of others; but even
this satisfaction has been taken from me--except such grim satisfaction
as a physician may feel at a _post mortem_. The very labor that
made me a success in literature caused me to be a dissector of
things around me.
To learn how others attained their ends I must needs tear their
work apart and study the fragments. This habit has become a part
of me. I overlook the beauty of the product in the working of the
machinery that produced it. I watch the mixing of literary confections,
served to the reader so that upon laying down the book he may have
a good taste in his mouth. People themselves, those I meet from day
to day, inevitably go through the same metamorphosis. I see them
as characters in a book.
Their foibles and peculiarities are grist for my mill. Everything,
everyone, when I appear, slips into the narrow confines of a printed
page. I can't even spare myself. Fragments of me can be had for a
price at any of the book-stalls. I've become public property--and
with no one to blame but myself."
The flow of speech halted. The speaker's face was so near now that
the girl could not avoid looking at it.
"Do you wonder," he concluded, "that I am not happy?"
The girl looked up. The two pairs of brown eyes met. Outwardly, she
who answered was calm; but in her lap the small hands were clasping
each other tightly, so that the blood had left the fingers.
"No, I do not wonder now," she answered simply.
"And you understand?"
"Yes, I--no, there's so much--Oh, take me home, please!" The sentence
ended abruptly in a plea. The slender body was trembling as with
cold.
"Take me home, please. I want to--to think."
"Florence!" The word was a caress. "Florence!"
But the girl was already on her feet. "Don't say any more to-day!
I can't stand it. Take me home!"
Sidwell looked at her closely for a moment; then the mask of
conventionality, which for a time had lifted from his face, dropped
once more, and he also arose. In silence, side by side, the two
made their way down the long hall to the exit. Out of doors, the
afternoon sun, serene and smiling, gave them a friendly greeting.
CHAPTER XIX 
A VISITOR FROM THE PLAINS
"Papa," said Florence, next morning, as they two sat alone at
breakfast, her mother having reported a headache and failed to
appear, "let's go somewhere, away from folks, for a week or so."

"Why this sudden change of front?" her father queried. "Not being
of the enemy I'm entitled to the plan of campaign, you know."

Florence observed him steadily, and the father could not but notice
how much more mature she seemed than the prairie girl of a few
months ago.
"There is no change of front or plan of campaign as far as I know,"
she replied. "I simply want to get away a bit, that's all." She
returned to her neglected breakfast.She seems sensible of
her fault; The excess of her grief proves her penitence, and I am
convinced that her tears flow more from contrition than fear of
punishment.  Reverend Mother, would you be persuaded to mitigate the
severity of your sentence, would you but deign to overlook this first
transgression, I offer myself as the pledge of her future conduct.'

'Overlook it, say you?  Mother Camilla, you amaze me!  What? After
disgracing me in the presence of Madrid's Idol, of the very Man on whom
I most wished to impress an idea of the strictness of my discipline?
How despicable must I have appeared to the reverend Abbot!  No, Mother,
No! I never can forgive the insult. I cannot better convince Ambrosio
that I abhor such crimes, than by punishing that of Agnes with all the
rigour of which our severe laws admit.  Cease then your supplications;
They will all be unavailing.  My resolution is taken:  Tomorrow Agnes
shall be made a terrible example of my justice and resentment.'

The Mother Camilla seemed not to give up the point, but by this time
the Nuns were out of hearing.  The Prioress unlocked the door which
communicated with St. Clare's Chapel, and having entered with her
Companion, closed it again after them.

Matilda now asked, who was this Agnes with whom the Prioress was thus
incensed, and what connexion She could have with Ambrosio. He related
her adventure; and He added, that since that time his ideas having
undergone a thorough revolution, He now felt much compassion for the
unfortunate Nun.

'I design,' said He, 'to request an audience of the Domina tomorrow,
and use every means of obtaining a mitigation of her sentence.'

'Beware of what you do!' interrupted Matilda; 'Your sudden change of
sentiment may naturally create surprize, and may give birth to
suspicions which it is most our interest to avoid.  Rather, redouble
your outward austerity, and thunder out menaces against the errors of
others, the better to conceal your own.  Abandon the Nun to her fate.
Your interfering might be dangerous, and her imprudence merits to be
punished:  She is unworthy to enjoy Love's pleasures, who has not wit
enough to conceal them.  But in discussing this trifling subject I
waste moments which are precious.  The night flies apace, and much must
be done before morning.  The Nuns are retired; All is safe.  Give me
the Lamp, Ambrosio. I must descend alone into these Caverns:  Wait
here, and if any one approaches, warn me by your voice; But as you
value your existence, presume not to follow me.  Your life would fall a
victim to your imprudent curiosity.'

Thus saying She advanced towards the Sepulchre, still holding her Lamp
in one hand, and her little Basket in the other.  She touched the door:
It turned slowly upon its grating hinges, and a narrow winding
staircase of black marble presented itself to her eyes.  She descended
it.  Ambrosio remained above, watching the faint beams of the Lamp as
they still proceeded up the stairs.  They disappeared, and He found
himself in total darkness.

Left to himself He could not reflect without surprize on the sudden
change in Matilda's character and sentiments.  But a few days had past
since She appeared the mildest and softest of her sex, devoted to his
will, and looking up to him as to a superior Being.  Now She assumed a
sort of courage and manliness in her manners and discourse but
ill-calculated to please him.  She spoke no longer to insinuate, but
command:  He found himself unable to cope with her in argument, and was
unwillingly obliged to confess the superiority of her judgment.  Every
moment convinced him of the astonishing powers of her mind:  But what
She gained in the opinion of the Man, She lost with interest in the
affection of the Lover.  He regretted Rosario, the fond, the gentle,
and submissive:  He grieved that Matilda preferred the virtues of his
sex to those of her own; and when He thought of her expressions
respecting the devoted Nun, He could not help blaming them as cruel and
unfeminine.  Pity is a sentiment so natural, so appropriate to the
female character, that it is scarcely a merit for a Woman to possess
it, but to be without it is a grievous crime.  Ambrosio could not
easily forgive his Mistress for being deficient in this amiable
quality.  However, though he blamed her insensibility, He felt the
truth of her observations; and though He pitied sincerely the
unfortunate Agnes, He resolved to drop the idea of interposing in her
behalf.

Near an hour had elapsed, since Matilda descended into the Caverns;
Still She returned not.  Ambrosio's curiosity was excited.  He drew
near the Staircase.  He listened.  All was silent, except that at
intervals He caught the sound of Matilda's voice, as it wound along the
subterraneous passages, and was re-echoed by the Sepulchre's vaulted
roofs.  She was at too great a distance for him to distinguish her
words, and ere they reached him they were deadened into a low murmur.
He longed to penetrate into this mystery.  He resolved to disobey her
injunctions and follow her into the Cavern.  He advanced to the
Staircase; He had already descended some steps when his courage failed
him. He remembered Matilda's menaces if He infringed her orders, and
his bosom was filled with a secret unaccountable awe.  He returned up
the stairs, resumed his former station, and waited impatiently for the
conclusion of this adventure.

Suddenly He was sensible of a violent shock:  An earthquake rocked the
ground.  The Columns which supported the roof under which He stood were
so strongly shaken, that every moment menaced him with its fall, and at
the same moment He heard a loud and tremendous burst of thunder.  It
ceased, and his eyes being fixed upon the Staircase, He saw a bright
column of light flash along the Caverns beneath.  It was seen but for
an instant.  No sooner did it disappear, than all was once more quiet
and obscure.  Profound Darkness again surrounded him, and the silence
of night was only broken by the whirring Bat, as She flitted slowly by
him.

With every instant Ambrosio's amazement increased.  Another hour
elapsed, after which the same light again appeared and was lost again
as suddenly.  It was accompanied by a strain of sweet but solemn Music,
which as it stole through the Vaults below, inspired the Monk with
mingled delight and terror.  It had not long been hushed, when He heard
Matilda's steps upon the Staircase.  She ascended from the Cavern; The
most lively joy animated her beautiful features.

'Did you see any thing?' She asked.

'Twice I saw a column of light flash up the Staircase.'

'Nothing else?'

'Nothing.'

'The Morning is on the point of breaking.  Let us retire to the Abbey,
lest daylight should betray us.'

With a light step She hastened from the burying-ground.  She regained
her Cell, and the curious Abbot still accompanied her. She closed the
door, and disembarrassed herself of her Lamp and Basket.

'I have succeeded!' She cried, throwing herself upon his bosom:
'Succeeded beyond my fondest hopes!  I shall live, Ambrosio, shall live
for you!  The step which I shuddered at taking proves to me a source of
joys inexpressible!  Oh! that I dared communicate those joys to you!
Oh! that I were permitted to share with you my power, and raise you as
high above the level of your sex, as one bold deed has exalted me above
mine!'

'And what prevents you, Matilda?' interrupted the Friar; 'Why is your
business in the Cavern made a secret?  Do you think me undeserving of
your confidence?  Matilda, I must doubt the truth of your affection,
while you have joys in which I am forbidden to share.'

'You reproach me with injustice.  I grieve sincerely that I am obliged
to conceal from you my happiness.  But I am not to blame: The fault
lies not in me, but in yourself, my Ambrosio!  You are still too much
the Monk.  Your mind is enslaved by the prejudices of Education; And
Superstition might make you shudder at the idea of that which
experience has taught me to prize and value.  At present you are unfit
to be trusted with a secret of such importance:  But the strength of
your judgment; and the curiosity which I rejoice to see sparkling in
your eyes, makes me hope that you will one day deserve my confidence.
Till that period arrives, restrain your impatience.  Remember that you
have given me your solemn oath never to enquire into this night's
adventures.  I insist upon your keeping this oath: For though' She
added smiling, while She sealed his lips with a wanton kiss; 'Though I
forgive your breaking your vows to heaven, I expect you to keep your
vows to me.'

The Friar returned the embrace which had set his blood on fire. The
luxurious and unbounded excesses of the former night were renewed, and
they separated not till the Bell rang for Matins.

The same pleasures were frequently repeated.  The Monks rejoiced in the
feigned Rosario's unexpected recovery, and none of them suspected his
real sex.  The Abbot possessed his Mistress in tranquillity, and
perceiving his frailty unsuspected, abandoned himself to his passions
in full security.  Shame and remorse no longer tormented him.  Frequent
repetitions made him familiar with sin, and his bosom became proof
against the stings of Conscience.  In these sentiments He was
encouraged by Matilda; But She soon was aware that She had satiated her
Lover by the unbounded freedom of her caresses.  Her charms becoming
accustomed to him, they ceased to excite the same desires which at
first they had inspired.  The delirium of passion being past, He had
leisure to observe every trifling defect:  Where none were to be found,
Satiety made him fancy them.  The Monk was glutted with the fullness of
pleasure:  A Week had scarcely elapsed before He was wearied of his
Paramour: His warm constitution still made him seek in her arms the
gratification of his lust: But when the moment of passion was over, He
quitted her with disgust, and his humour, naturally inconstant, made
him sigh impatiently for variety.

Possession, which cloys Man, only increases the affection of Woman.
Matilda with every succeeding day grew more attached to the Friar.
Since He had obtained her favours, He was become dearer to her than
ever, and She felt grateful to him for the pleasures in which they had
equally been Sharers.  Unfortunately as her passion grew ardent,
Ambrosio's grew cold; The very marks of her fondness excited his
disgust, and its excess served to extinguish the flame which already
burned but feebly in his bosom.  Matilda could not but remark that her
society seemed to him daily less agreeable:  He was inattentive while
She spoke: her musical talents, which She possessed in perfection, had
lost the power of amusing him; Or if He deigned to praise them, his
compliments were evidently forced and cold.  He no longer gazed upon
her with affection, or applauded her sentiments with a Lover's
partiality.  This Matilda well perceived, and redoubled her efforts to
revive those sentiments which He once had felt. She could not but fail,
since He considered as importunities the pains which She took to please
him, and was disgusted by the very means which She used to recall the
Wanderer.  Still, however, their illicit Commerce continued:  But it
was clear that He was led to her arms, not by love, but the cravings of
brutal appetite.  His constitution made a Woman necessary to him, and
Matilda was the only one with whom He could indulge his passions
safely:  In spite of her beauty, He gazed upon every other Female with
more desire; But fearing that his Hypocrisy should be made public, He
confined his inclinations to his own breast.

It was by no means his nature to be timid:  But his education had
impressed his mind with fear so strongly, that apprehension was now
become part of his character. Had his Youth been passed in the world,
He would have shown himself possessed of many brilliant and manly
qualities.  He was naturally enterprizing, firm, and fearless:  He had
a Warrior's heart, and He might have shone with splendour at the head
of an Army.  There was no want of generosity in his nature:  The
Wretched never failed to find in him a compassionate Auditor: His
abilities were quick and shining, and his judgment, vast, solid, and
decisive.  With such qualifications He would have been an ornament to
his Country: That He possessed them, He had given proofs in his
earliest infancy, and his Parents had beheld his dawning virtues with
the fondest delight and admiration.  Unfortunately, while yet a Child
He was deprived of those Parents.  He fell into the power of a Relation
whose only wish about him was never to hear of him more; For that
purpose He gave him in charge to his Friend, the former Superior of the
Capuchins.  The Abbot, a very Monk, used all his endeavours to persuade
the Boy that happiness existed not without the walls of a Convent.  He
succeeded fully.  To deserve admittance into the order of St. Francis
was Ambrosio's highest ambition.  His Instructors carefully repressed
those virtues whose grandeur and disinterestedness were ill-suited to
the Cloister.  Instead of universal benevolence, He adopted a selfish
partiality for his own particular establishment:  He was taught to
consider compassion for the errors of Others as a crime of the blackest
dye:  The noble frankness of his temper was exchanged for servile
humility; and in order to break his natural spirit, the Monks terrified
his young mind by placing before him all the horrors with which
Superstition could furnish them:  They painted to him the torments of
the Damned in colours the most dark, terrible, and fantastic, and
threatened him at the slightest fault with eternal perdition.  No
wonder that his imagination constantly dwelling upon these fearful
objects should have rendered his character timid and apprehensive.  Add
to this, that his long absence from the great world, and total
unacquaintance with the common dangers of life, made him form of them
an idea far more dismal than the reality.  While the Monks were busied
in rooting out his virtues and narrowing his sentiments, they allowed
every vice which had fallen to his share to arrive at full perfection.
He was suffered to be proud, vain, ambitious, and disdainful:  He was
jealous of his Equals, and despised all merit but his own:  He was
implacable when offended, and cruel in his revenge. Still in spite of
the pains taken to pervert them, his natural good qualities would
occasionally break through the gloom cast over them so carefully:

At such times the contest for superiority between his real and acquired
character was striking and unaccountable to those unacquainted with his
original disposition.  He pronounced the most severe sentences upon
Offenders, which, the moment after, Compassion induced him to mitigate:
He undertook the most daring enterprizes, which the fear of their
consequences soon obliged him to abandon:  His inborn genius darted a
brilliant light upon subjects the most obscure; and almost
instantaneously his Superstition replunged them in darkness more
profound than that from which they had just been rescued.  His Brother
Monks, regarding him as a Superior Being, remarked not this
contradiction in their Idol's conduct.  They were persuaded that what
He did must be right, and supposed him to have good reasons for
changing his resolutions.  The fact was, that the different sentiments
with which Education and Nature had inspired him were combating in his
bosom:  It remained for his passions, which as yet no opportunity had
called into play, to decide the victory.  Unfortunately his passions
were the very worst Judges, to whom He could possibly have applied.
His monastic seclusion had till now been in his favour, since it gave
him no room for discovering his bad qualities.  The superiority of his
talents raised him too far above his Companions to permit his being
jealous of them:  His exemplary piety, persuasive eloquence, and
pleasing manners had secured him universal Esteem, and consequently He
had no injuries to revenge:  His Ambition was justified by his
acknowledged merit, and his pride considered as no more than proper
confidence.  He never saw, much less conversed with, the other sex:  He
was ignorant of the pleasures in Woman's power to bestow, and if He
read in the course of his studies

   'That Men were fond, He smiled, and wondered how!'

For a time, spare diet, frequent watching, and severe penance cooled
and represt the natural warmth of his constitution:  But no sooner did
opportunity present itself, no sooner did He catch a glimpse of joys to
which He was still a Stranger, than Religion's barriers were too feeble
to resist the overwhelming torrent of his desires.  All impediments
yielded before the force of his temperament, warm, sanguine, and
voluptuous in the excess.

As yet his other passions lay dormant; But they only needed to be once
awakened, to display themselves with violence as great and irresistible.

He continued to be the admiration of Madrid.  The Enthusiasm created by
his eloquence seemed rather to increase than diminish.

Every Thursday, which was the only day when He appeared in public, the
Capuchin Cathedral was crowded with Auditors, and his discourse was
always received with the same approbation.  He was named Confessor to
all the chief families in Madrid; and no one was counted fashionable
who was injoined penance by any other than Ambrosio.  In his resolution
of never stirring out of his Convent, He still persisted. This
circumstance created a still greater opinion of his sanctity and
self-denial.  Above all, the Women sang forth his praises loudly, less
influenced by devotion than by his noble countenance, majestic air, and
well-turned, graceful figure.  The Abbey door was thronged with
Carriages from morning to night; and the noblest and fairest Dames of
Madrid confessed to the Abbot their secret peccadilloes.

The eyes of the luxurious Friar devoured their charms:  Had his
Penitents consulted those Interpreters, He would have needed no other
means of expressing his desires.  For his misfortune, they were so
strongly persuaded of his continence, that the possibility of his
harbouring indecent thoughts never once entered their imaginations.
The climate's heat, 'tis well known, operates with no small influence
upon the constitutions of the Spanish Ladies:  But the most abandoned
would have thought it an easier task to inspire with passion the marble
Statue of St. Francis than the cold and rigid heart of the immaculate
Ambrosio.

On his part, the Friar was little acquainted with the depravity of the
world; He suspected not that but few of his Penitents would have
rejected his addresses.  Yet had He been better instructed on this
head, the danger attending such an attempt would have sealed up his
lips in silence.  He knew that it would be difficult for a Woman to
keep a secret so strange and so important as his frailty; and He even
trembled lest Matilda should betray him.  Anxious to preserve a
reputation which was infinitely dear to him, He saw all the risque of
committing it to the power of some vain giddy Female; and as the
Beauties of Madrid affected only his senses without touching his heart,
He forgot them as soon as they were out of his sight.  The danger of
discovery, the fear of being repulsed, the loss of reputation, all
these considerations counselled him to stifle his desires: And though
He now felt for it the most perfect indifference, He was necessitated
to confine himself to Matilda's person.

One morning, the confluence of Penitents was greater than usual. He was
detained in the Confessional Chair till a late hour.  At length the
crowd was dispatched, and He prepared to quit the Chapel, when two
Females entered and drew near him with humility.  They threw up their
veils, and the youngest entreated him to listen to her for a few
moments.  The melody of her voice, of that voice to which no Man ever
listened without interest, immediately caught Ambrosio's attention.  He
stopped.  The Petitioner seemed bowed down with affliction:  Her cheeks
were pale, her eyes dimmed with tears, and her hair fell in disorder
over her face and bosom.  Still her countenance was so sweet, so
innocent, so heavenly, as might have charmed an heart less susceptible,
than that which panted in the Abbot's breast.  With more than usual
softness of manner He desired her to proceed, and heard her speak as
follows with an emotion which increased every moment.

'Reverend Father, you see an Unfortunate, threatened with the loss of
her dearest, of almost her only Friend!  My Mother, my excellent Mother
lies upon the bed of sickness.  A sudden and dreadful malady seized her
last night; and so rapid has been its progress, that the Physicians
despair of her life.  Human aid fails me; Nothing remains for me but to
implore the mercy of Heaven.  Father, all Madrid rings with the report
of your piety and virtue.  Deign to remember my Mother in your prayers:
Perhaps they may prevail on the Almighty to spare her; and should that
be the case, I engage myself every Thursday in the next three Months to
illuminate the Shrine of St. Francis in his honour.'

'So!' thought the Monk; 'Here we have a second Vincentio della Ronda.
Rosario's adventure began thus,' and He wished secretly that this might
have the same conclusion.

He acceded to the request.  The Petitioner returned him thanks with
every mark of gratitude, and then continued.

'I have yet another favour to ask.  We are Strangers in Madrid; My
Mother needs a Confessor, and knows not to whom She should apply.  We
understand that you never quit the Abbey, and Alas! my poor Mother is
unable to come hither!  If you would have the goodness, reverend
Father, to name a proper person, whose wise and pious consolations may
soften the agonies of my Parent's deathbed, you will confer an
everlasting favour upon hearts not ungrateful.'

With this petition also the Monk complied.  Indeed, what petition would
He have refused, if urged in such enchanting accents?  The suppliant
was so interesting!  Her voice was so sweet, so harmonious!  Her very
tears became her, and her affliction seemed to add new lustre to her
charms.  He promised to send to her a Confessor that same Evening, and
begged her to leave her address. The Companion presented him with a
Card on which it was written, and then withdrew with the fair
Petitioner, who pronounced before her departure a thousand benedictions
on the Abbot's goodness.  His eyes followed her out of the Chapel.  It
was not till She was out of sight that He examined the Card, on which
He read the following words.

'Donna Elvira Dalfa, Strada di San Iago, four doors from the Palace
d'Albornos.'

The Suppliant was no other than Antonia, and Leonella was her
Companion.  The Latter had not consented without difficulty to
accompany her Niece to the Abbey:  Ambrosio had inspired her with such
awe that She trembled at the very sight of him.  Her fears had
conquered even her natural loquacity, and while in his presence She
uttered not a single syllable.

The Monk retired to his Cell, whither He was pursued by Antonia's
image.  He felt a thousand new emotions springing in his bosom, and He
trembled to examine into the cause which gave them birth. They were
totally different from those inspired by Matilda, when She first
declared her sex and her affection.  He felt not the provocation of
lust; No voluptuous desires rioted in his bosom; Nor did a burning
imagination picture to him the charms which Modesty had veiled from his
eyes.  On the contrary, what He now felt was a mingled sentiment of
tenderness, admiration, and respect.  A soft and delicious melancholy
infused itself into his soul, and He would not have exchanged it for
the most lively transports of joy.  Society now disgusted him:  He
delighted in solitude, which permitted his indulging the visions of
Fancy: His thoughts were all gentle, sad, and soothing, and the whole
wide world presented him with no other object than Antonia.

'Happy Man!' He exclaimed in his romantic enthusiasm; 'Happy Man, who
is destined to possess the heart of that lovely Girl!  What delicacy in
her features!  What elegance in her form!  How enchanting was the timid
innocence of her eyes, and how different from the wanton expression,
the wild luxurious fire which sparkles in Matilda's!  Oh! sweeter must
one kiss be snatched from the rosy lips of the First, than all the full
and lustful favours bestowed so freely by the Second.  Matilda gluts me
with enjoyment even to loathing, forces me to her arms, apes the
Harlot, and glories in her prostitution.  Disgusting!  Did She know the
inexpressible charm of Modesty, how irresistibly it enthralls the heart
of Man, how firmly it chains him to the Throne of Beauty, She never
would have thrown it off.  What would be too dear a price for this
lovely Girl's affections?  What would I refuse to sacrifice, could I be
released from my vows, and permitted to declare my love in the sight of
earth and heaven?  While I strove to inspire her with tenderness, with
friendship and esteem, how tranquil and undisturbed would the hours
roll away!  Gracious God!  To see her blue downcast eyes beam upon mine
with timid fondness!  To sit for days, for years listening to that
gentle voice!  To acquire the right of obliging her, and hear the
artless expressions of her gratitude!  To watch the emotions of her
spotless heart!  To encourage each dawning virtue!  To share in her joy
when happy, to kiss away her tears when distrest, and to see her fly to
my arms for comfort and support!  Yes; If there is perfect bliss on
earth, 'tis his lot alone, who becomes that Angel's Husband.'

While his fancy coined these ideas, He paced his Cell with a disordered
air.  His eyes were fixed upon vacancy: His head reclined upon his
shoulder; A tear rolled down his cheek, while He reflected that the
vision of happiness for him could never be realized.

'She is lost to me!' He continued; 'By marriage She cannot be mine:
And to seduce such innocence, to use the confidence reposed in me to
work her ruin....  Oh! it would be a crime, blacker than yet the
world ever witnessed!  Fear not, lovely Girl!  Your virtue runs no
risque from me.  Not for Indies would I make that gentle bosom know the
tortures of remorse.'

Again He paced his chamber hastily.  Then stopping, his eye fell upon
the picture of his once-admired Madona. He tore it with indignation
from the wall:  He threw it on the ground, and spurned it from him with
his foot.

'The Prostitute!'

Unfortunate Matilda! Her Paramour forgot that for his sake alone She
had forfeited her claim to virtue; and his only reason for despising
her was that She had loved him much too well.

He threw himself into a Chair which stood near the Table.  He saw the
card with Elvira's address.  He took it up, and it brought to his
recollection his promise respecting a Confessor. He passed a few
minutes in doubt:  But Antonia's Empire over him was already too much
decided to permit his making a long resistance to the idea which struck
him.  He resolved to be the Confessor himself.  He could leave the
Abbey unobserved without difficulty:  By wrapping up his head in his
Cowl He hoped to pass through the Streets without being recognised: By
taking these precautions, and by recommending secrecy to Elvira's
family, He doubted not to keep Madrid in ignorance that He had broken
his vow never to see the outside of the Abbey walls.  Matilda was the
only person whose vigilance He dreaded:  But by informing her at the
Refectory that during the whole of that day, Business would confine him
to his Cell, He thought himself secure from her wakeful jealousy.
Accordingly, at the hours when the Spaniards are generally taking their
Siesta, He ventured to quit the Abbey by a private door, the Key of
which was in his possession.  The Cowl of his habit was thrown over his
face:  From the heat of the weather the Streets were almost totally
deserted: The Monk met with few people, found the Strada di San Iago,
and arrived without accident at Donna Elvira's door.  He rang, was
admitted, and immediately ushered into an upper apartment.

It was here that He ran the greatest risque of a discovery.  Had
Leonella been at home, She would have recognized him directly: Her
communicative disposition would never have permitted her to rest till
all Madrid was informed that Ambrosio had ventured out of the Abbey,
and visited her Sister.  Fortune here stood the Monk's Friend.  On
Leonella's return home, She found a letter instructing her that a
Cousin was just dead, who had left what little He possessed between
Herself and Elvira.  To secure this bequest She was obliged to set out
for Cordova without losing a moment.  Amidst all her foibles her heart
was truly warm and affectionate, and She was unwilling to quit her
Sister in so dangerous a state.  But Elvira insisted upon her taking
the journey, conscious that in her Daughter's forlorn situation no
increase of fortune, however trifling, ought to be neglected.
Accordingly, Leonella left Madrid, sincerely grieved at her Sister's
illness, and giving some few sighs to the memory of the amiable but
inconstant Don Christoval.  She was fully persuaded that at first She
had made a terrible breach in his heart:  But hearing nothing more of
him, She supposed that He had quitted the pursuit, disgusted by the
lowness of her origin, and knowing upon other terms than marriage He
had nothing to hope from such a Dragon of Virtue as She professed
herself; Or else, that being naturally capricious and changeable, the
remembrance of her charms had been effaced from the Conde's heart by
those of some newer Beauty.  Whatever was the cause of her losing him,
She lamented it sorely.  She strove in vain, as She assured every body
who was kind enough to listen to her, to tear his image from her too
susceptible heart.  She affected the airs of a lovesick Virgin, and
carried them all to the most ridiculous excess.  She heaved lamentable
sighs, walked with her arms folded, uttered long soliloquies, and her
discourse generally turned upon some forsaken Maid who expired of a
broken heart!  Her fiery locks were always ornamented with a garland of
willow; Every evening She was seen straying upon the Banks of a rivulet
by Moonlight; and She declared herself a violent Admirer of murmuring
Streams and Nightingales;

      'Of lonely haunts, and twilight Groves,
      'Places which pale Passion loves!'

Such was the state of Leonella's mind, when obliged to quit Madrid.
Elvira was out of patience at all these follies, and endeavoured at
persuading her to act like a reasonable Woman. Her advice was thrown
away: Leonella assured her at parting that nothing could make her
forget the perfidious Don Christoval.  In this point She was
fortunately mistaken.  An honest Youth of Cordova, Journeyman to an
Apothecary, found that her fortune would be sufficient to set him up in
a genteel Shop of his own: In consequence of this reflection He avowed
himself her Admirer. Leonella was not inflexible. The ardour of his
sighs melted her heart, and She soon consented to make him the happiest
of Mankind.  She wrote to inform her Sister of her marriage; But, for
reasons which will be explained hereafter, Elvira never answered her
letter.

Ambrosio was conducted into the Antichamber to that where Elvira was
reposing.  The Female Domestic who had admitted him left him alone
while She announced his arrival to her Mistress. Antonia, who had been
by her Mother's Bedside, immediately came to him.

'Pardon me, Father,' said She, advancing towards him; when recognizing
his features, She stopped suddenly, and uttered a cry of joy.  'Is it
possible!' She continued;

'Do not my eyes deceive me?  Has the worthy Ambrosio broken through his
resolution, that He may soften the agonies of the best of Women?  What
pleasure will this visit give my Mother! Let me not delay for a moment
the comfort which your piety and wisdom will afford her.'

Thus saying, She opened the chamber door, presented to her Mother her
distinguished Visitor, and having placed an armed-chair by the side of
the Bed, withdrew into another department.

Elvira was highly gratified by this visit:  Her expectations had been
raised high by general report, but She found them far exceeded.
Ambrosio, endowed by nature with powers of pleasing, exerted them to
the utmost while conversing with Antonia's Mother.  With persuasive
eloquence He calmed every fear, and dissipated every scruple:  He bad
her reflect on the infinite mercy of her Judge, despoiled Death of his
darts and terrors, and taught her to view without shrinking the abyss
of eternity, on whose brink She then stood.  Elvira was absorbed in
attention and delight:  While She listened to his exhortations,
confidence and comfort stole insensibly into her mind.  She unbosomed
to him without hesitation her cares and apprehensions.  The latter
respecting a future life He had already quieted:  And He now removed
the former, which She felt for the concerns of this.  She trembled for
Antonia.  She had none to whose care She could recommend her, save to
the Marquis de las Cisternas and her Sister Leonella.  The protection
of the One was very uncertain; and as to the Other, though fond of her
Niece, Leonella was so thoughtless and vain as to make her an improper
person to have the sole direction of a Girl so young and ignorant of
the World. The Friar no sooner learnt the cause of her alarms than He
begged her to make herself easy upon that head.  He doubted not being
able to secure for Antonia a safe refuge in the House of one of his
Penitents, the Marchioness of Villa-Franca:  This was a Lady of
acknowledged virtue, remarkable for strict principles and extensive
charity.  Should accident deprive her of this resource, He engaged to
procure Antonia a reception in some respectable Convent:  That is to
say, in quality of boarder; for Elvira had declared herself no Friend
to a monastic life, and the Monk was either candid or complaisant
enough to allow that her disapprobation was not unfounded.

These proofs of the interest which He felt for her completely won
Elvira's heart.  In thanking him She exhausted every expression which
Gratitude could furnish, and protested that now She should resign
herself with tranquillity to the Grave. Ambrosio rose to take leave:
He promised to return the next day at the same hour, but requested that
his visits might be kept secret.

'I am unwilling' said He, 'that my breaking through a rule imposed by
necessity should be generally known.  Had I not resolved never to quit
my Convent, except upon circumstances as urgent as that which has
conducted me to your door, I should be frequently summoned upon
insignificant occasions:  That time would be engrossed by the Curious,
the Unoccupied, and the fanciful, which I now pass at the Bedside of
the Sick, in comforting the expiring Penitent, and clearing the passage
to Eternity from Thorns.'

Elvira commended equally his prudence and compassion, promising to
conceal carefully the honour of his visits.  The Monk then gave her his
benediction, and retired from the chamber.

In the Antiroom He found Antonia:  He could not refuse himself the
pleasure of passing a few moments in her society.  He bad her take
comfort, for that her Mother seemed composed and tranquil, and He hoped
that She might yet do well.  He enquired who attended her, and engaged
to send the Physician of his Convent to see her, one of the most
skilful in Madrid.  He then launched out in Elvira's commendation,
praised her purity and fortitude of mind, and declared that She had
inspired him with the highest esteem and reverence.  Antonia's innocent
heart swelled with gratitude:  Joy danced in her eyes, where a tear
still sparkled. The hopes which He gave her of her Mother's recovery,
the lively interest which He seemed to feel for her, and the flattering
way in which She was mentioned by him, added to the report of his
judgment and virtue, and to the impression made upon her by his
eloquence, confirmed the favourable opinion with which his first,
appearance had inspired Antonia.  She replied with diffidence, but
without restraint:  She feared not to relate to him all her little
sorrows, all her little fears and anxieties; and She thanked him for
his goodness with all the genuine warmth which favours kindle in a
young and innocent heart.  Such alone know how to estimate benefits at
their full value.  They who are conscious of Mankind's perfidy and
selfishness, ever receive an obligation with apprehension and distrust:
They suspect that some secret motive must lurk behind it:  They express
their thanks with restraint and caution, and fear to praise a kind
action to its full extent, aware that some future day a return may be
required.  Not so Antonia; She thought the world was composed only of
those who resembled her, and that vice existed, was to her still a
secret.  The Monk had been of service to her; He said that He wished
her well; She was grateful for his kindness, and thought that no terms
were strong enough to be the vehicle of her thanks.  With what delight
did Ambrosio listen to the declaration of her artless gratitude!  The
natural grace of her manners, the unequalled sweetness of her voice,
her modest vivacity, her unstudied elegance, her expressive
countenance, and intelligent eyes united to inspire him with pleasure
and admiration, While the solidity and correctness of her remarks
received additional beauty from the unaffected simplicity of the
language in which they were conveyed.

Ambrosio was at length obliged to tear himself from this conversation
which possessed for him but too many charms.  He repeated to Antonia
his wishes that his visits should not be made known, which desire She
promised to observe.  He then quitted the House, while his Enchantress
hastened to her Mother, ignorant of the mischief which her Beauty had
caused.  She was eager to know Elvira's opinion of the Man whom She had
praised in such enthusiastic terms, and was delighted to find it
equally favourable, if not even more so, than her own.

'Even before He spoke,' said Elvira, 'I was prejudiced in his favour:
The fervour of his exhortations, dignity of his manner, and closeness
of his reasoning, were very far from inducing me to alter my opinion.
His fine and full-toned voice struck me particularly; But surely,
Antonia, I have heard it before.  It seemed perfectly familiar to my
ear.  Either I must have known the Abbot in former times, or his voice
bears a wonderful resemblance to that of some other, to whom I have
often listened.

There were certain tones which touched my very heart, and made me feel
sensations so singular, that I strive in vain to account for them.'

'My dearest Mother, it produced the same effect upon me:  Yet certainly
neither of us ever heard his voice till we came to Madrid.  I suspect
that what we attribute to his voice, really proceeds from his pleasant
manners, which forbid our considering him as a Stranger.  I know not
why, but I feel more at my ease while conversing with him than I
usually do with people who are unknown to me.  I feared not to repeat
to him all my childish thoughts; and somehow I felt confident that He
would hear my folly with indulgence.  Oh! I was not deceived in him!
He listened to me with such an air of kindness and attention!  He
answered me with such gentleness, such condescension! He did not call
me an Infant, and treat me with contempt, as our cross old Confessor at
the Castle used to do.  I verily believe that if I had lived in Murcia
a thousand years, I never should have liked that fat old Father
Dominic!'

'I confess that Father Dominic had not the most pleasing manners in the
world; But He was honest, friendly, and well-meaning.'

'Ah!  my dear Mother, those qualities are so common!'

'God grant, my Child, that Experience may not teach you to think them
rare and precious:  I have found them but too much so!  But tell me,
Antonia; Why is it impossible for me to have seen the Abbot before?'

'Because since the moment when He entered the Abbey, He has never been
on the outside of its walls.  He told me just now, that from his
ignorance of the Streets, He had some difficulty to find the Strada di
San Iago, though so near the Abbey.'

'All this is possible, and still I may have seen him BEFORE He entered
the Abbey:  In order to come out, it was rather necessary that He
should first go in.'

'Holy Virgin!  As you say, that is very true.--Oh! But might He not
have been born in the Abbey?'

Elvira smiled.

'Why, not very easily.'

'Stay, Stay!  Now I recollect how it was.  He was put into the Abbey
quite a Child; The common People say that He fell from heaven, and was
sent as a present to the Capuchins by the Virgin.'

'That was very kind of her.  And so He fell from heaven, Antonia?

He must have had a terrible tumble.'

'Many do not credit this, and I fancy, my dear Mother, that I must
number you among the Unbelievers.  Indeed, as our Landlady told my
Aunt, the general idea is that his Parents, being poor and unable to
maintain him, left him just born at the Abbey door. The late Superior
from pure charity had him educated in the Convent, and He proved to be
a model of virtue, and piety, and learning, and I know not what else
besides:  In consequence, He was first received as a Brother of the
order, and not long ago was chosen Abbot.  However, whether this
account or the other is the true one, at least all agree that when the
Monks took him under their care, He could not speak:  Therefore, you
could not have heard his voice before He entered the Monastery, because
at that time He had no voice at all.'

'Upon my word, Antonia, you argue very closely!  Your conclusions are
infallible!  I did not suspect you of being so able a Logician.'

'Ah! You are mocking me!  But so much the better. It delights me to see
you in spirits:  Besides you seem tranquil and easy, and I hope that
you will have no more convulsions.  Oh! I was sure the Abbot's visit
would do you good!'

'It has indeed done me good, my Child.  He has quieted my mind upon
some points which agitated me, and I already feel the effects of his
attention.  My eyes grow heavy, and I think I can sleep a little.  Draw
the curtains, my Antonia:  But if I should not wake before midnight, do
not sit up with me, I charge you.'

Antonia promised to obey her, and having received her blessing drew the
curtains of the Bed.  She then seated herself in silence at her
embroidery frame, and beguiled the hours with building Castles in the
air.  Her spirits were enlivened by the evident change for the better
in Elvira, and her fancy presented her with visions bright and
pleasing.  In these dreams Ambrosio made no despicable figure.  She
thought of him with joy and gratitude; But for every idea which fell to
the Friar's share, at least two were unconsciously bestowed upon
Lorenzo.  Thus passed the time, till the Bell in the neighbouring
Steeple of the Capuchin Cathedral announced the hour of midnight:
Antonia remembered her Mother's injunctions, and obeyed them, though
with reluctance. She undrew the curtains with caution.  Elvira was
enjoying a profound and quiet slumber; Her cheek glowed with health's
returning colours:  A smile declared that her dreams were pleasant, and
as Antonia bent over her, She fancied that She heard her name
pronounced.  She kissed her Mother's forehead softly, and retired to
her chamber.  There She knelt before a Statue of St. Rosolia, her
Patroness; She recommended herself to the protection of heaven, and as
had been her custom from infancy, concluded her devotions by chaunting
the following Stanzas.

  MIDNIGHT HYMN

    Now all is hushed; The solemn chime
  No longer swells the nightly gale:
  Thy awful presence, Hour sublime,
  With spotless heart once more I hail.

    'Tis now the moment still and dread,
  When Sorcerers use their baleful power;
  When Graves give up their buried dead
  To profit by the sanctioned hour:

    From guilt and guilty thoughts secure,
  To duty and devotion true,
  With bosom light and conscience pure,
  Repose, thy gentle aid I woo.

    Good Angels, take my thanks, that still
  The snares of vice I view with scorn;
  Thanks, that to-night as free from ill
  I sleep, as when I woke at morn.

    Yet may not my unconscious breast
  Harbour some guilt to me unknown?
  Some wish impure, which unreprest
  You blush to see, and I to own?

    If such there be, in gentle dream
  Instruct my feet to shun the snare;
  Bid truth upon my errors beam,
  And deign to make me still your care.

    Chase from my peaceful bed away
  The witching Spell, a foe to rest,
  The nightly Goblin, wanton Fay,
  The Ghost in pain, and Fiend unblest:

    Let not the Tempter in mine ear
  Pour lessons of unhallowed joy;
  Let not the Night-mare, wandering near
  My Couch, the calm of sleep destroy;

    Let not some horrid dream affright
  With strange fantastic forms mine eyes;
  But rather bid some vision bright
  Display the bliss of yonder skies.

    Show me the crystal Domes of Heaven,
  The worlds of light where Angels lie;
  Shew me the lot to Mortals given,
  Who guiltless live, who guiltless die.

    Then show me how a seat to gain
  Amidst those blissful realms of
  Air;  Teach me to shun each guilty stain,
  And guide me to the good and fair.

    So every morn and night, my Voice
  To heaven the grateful strain shall raise;
  In You as Guardian Powers rejoice,
  Good Angels, and exalt your praise:

    So will I strive with zealous fire
  Each vice to shun, each fault correct;
  Will love the lessons you inspire,
  And Prize the virtues you protect.

    Then when at length by high command
  My body seeks the Grave's repose,
  When Death draws nigh with friendly hand
  My failing Pilgrim eyes to close;

    Pleased that my soul has 'scaped the wreck,
  Sighless will I my life resign,
  And yield to God my Spirit back,
  As pure as when it first was mine.


Having finished her usual devotions, Antonia retired to bed. Sleep soon
stole over her senses; and for several hours She enjoyed that calm
repose which innocence alone can know, and for which many a Monarch
with pleasure would exchange his Crown.


CHAPTER IV

      ----Ah! how dark
  These long-extended realms and rueful wastes;
  Where nought but silence reigns, and night, dark night,
  Dark as was Chaos ere the Infant Sun
  Was rolled together, or had tried its beams
  Athwart the gloom profound!
  The sickly Taper
  By glimmering through thy low-browed misty vaults,
  Furred round with mouldy damps, and ropy slime,
  Lets fall a supernumerary horror,
  And only serves to make
  Thy night more irksome!
                         Blair.

Returned undiscovered to the Abbey, Ambrosio's mind was filled with the
most pleasing images.  He was wilfully blind to the danger of exposing
himself to Antonia's charms:  He only remembered the pleasure which her
society had afforded him, and rejoiced in the prospect of that pleasure
being repeated.  He failed not to profit by Elvira's indisposition to
obtain a sight of her Daughter every day.  At first He bounded his
wishes to inspire Antonia with friendship:  But no sooner was He
convinced that She felt that sentiment in its fullest extent, than his
aim became more decided, and his attentions assumed a warmer colour.
The innocent familiarity with which She treated him, encouraged his
desires:  Grown used to her modesty, it no longer commanded the same
respect and awe:  He still admired it, but it only made him more
anxious to deprive her of that quality which formed her principal
charm.  Warmth of passion, and natural penetration, of which latter
unfortunately both for himself and Antonia He possessed an ample share,
supplied a knowledge of the arts of seduction.  He easily distinguished
the emotions which were favourable to his designs, and seized every
means with avidity of infusing corruption into Antonia's bosom.  This
He found no easy matter.  Extreme simplicity prevented her from
perceiving the aim to which the Monk's insinuations tended; But the
excellent morals which She owed to Elvira's care, the solidity and
correctness of her understanding, and a strong sense of what was right
implanted in her heart by Nature, made her feel that his precepts must
be faulty. By a few simple words She frequently overthrew the whole
bulk of his sophistical arguments, and made him conscious how weak they
were when opposed to Virtue and Truth.  On such occasion He took refuge
in his eloquence; He overpowered her with a torrent of Philosophical
paradoxes, to which, not understanding them, it was impossible for her
to reply; And thus though He did not convince her that his reasoning
was just, He at least prevented her from discovering it to be false.
He perceived that her respect for his judgment augmented daily, and
doubted not with time to bring her to the point desired.

He was not unconscious that his attempts were highly criminal: He saw
clearly the baseness of seducing the innocent Girl:  But his passion
was too violent to permit his abandoning his design. He resolved to
pursue it, let the consequences be what they might.  He depended upon
finding Antonia in some unguarded moment; And seeing no other Man
admitted into her society, nor hearing any mentioned either by her or
by Elvira, He imagined that her young heart was still unoccupied. While
He waited for the opportunity of satisfying his unwarrantable lust,
every day increased his coldness for Matilda.  Not a little was this
occasioned by the consciousness of his faults to her.  To hide them
from her He was not sufficiently master of himself:  Yet He dreaded
lest, in a transport of jealous rage, She should betray the secret on
which his character and even his life depended. Matilda could not but
remark his indifference:  He was conscious that She remarked it, and
fearing her reproaches, shunned her studiously.  Yet when He could not
avoid her, her mildness might have convinced him that He had nothing to
dread from her resentment.  She had resumed the character of the gentle
interesting Rosario: She taxed him not with ingratitude; But her eyes
filled with involuntary tears, and the soft melancholy of her
countenance and voice uttered complaints far more touching than words
could have conveyed.  Ambrosio was not unmoved by her sorrow; But
unable to remove its cause, He forbore to show that it affected him.
As her conduct convinced him that He needed not fear her vengeance, He
continued to neglect her, and avoided her company with care.  Matilda
saw that She in vain attempted to regain his affections:  Yet She
stifled the impulse of resentment, and continued to treat her
inconstant Lover with her former fondness and attention.

By degrees Elvira's constitution recovered itself.  She was no longer
troubled with convulsions, and Antonia ceased to tremble for her
Mother.  Ambrosio beheld this reestablishment with displeasure.  He saw
that Elvira's knowledge of the world would not be the Dupe of his
sanctified demeanour, and that She would easily perceive his views upon
her Daughter.  He resolved therefore, before She quitted her chamber,
to try the extent of his influence over the innocent Antonia.

One evening, when He had found Elvira almost perfectly restored to
health, He quitted her earlier than was his usual custom.  Not finding
Antonia in the Antichamber, He ventured to follow her to her own.  It
was only separated from her Mother's by a Closet, in which Flora, the
Waiting-Woman, generally slept.  Antonia sat upon a Sopha with her back
towards the door, and read attentively.  She heard not his approach,
till He had seated himself by her.  She started, and welcomed him with
a look of pleasure:  Then rising, She would have conducted him to the
sitting-room; But Ambrosio taking her hand, obliged her by gentle
violence to resume her place.  She complied without difficulty: She
knew not that there was more impropriety in conversing with him in one
room than another.  She thought herself equally secure of his
principles and her own, and having replaced herself upon the Sopha, She
began to prattle to him with her usual ease and vivacity.

He examined the Book which She had been reading, and had now placed
upon the Table.  It was the Bible.

'How!' said the Friar to himself; 'Antonia reads the Bible, and is
still so ignorant?'

But, upon a further inspection, He found that Elvira had made exactly
the same remark.  That prudent Mother, while She admired the beauties
of the sacred writings, was convinced that, unrestricted, no reading
more improper could be permitted a young Woman.  Many of the narratives
can only tend to excite ideas the worst calculated for a female breast:
Every thing is called plainly and roundly by its name; and the annals
of a Brothel would scarcely furnish a greater choice of indecent
expressions. Yet this is the Book which young Women are recommended to
study; which is put into the hands of Children, able to comprehend
little more than those passages of which they had better remain
ignorant; and which but too frequently inculcates the first rudiments
of vice, and gives the first alarm to the still sleeping passions.  Of
this was Elvira so fully convinced, that She would have preferred
putting into her Daughter's hands 'Amadis de Gaul,' or 'The Valiant
Champion, Tirante the White;' and would sooner have authorised her
studying the lewd exploits of 'Don Galaor,' or the lascivious jokes of
the 'Damsel Plazer di mi vida.'  She had in consequence made two
resolutions respecting the Bible.  The first was that Antonia should
not read it till She was of an age to feel its beauties, and profit by
its morality:  The second, that it should be copied out with her own
hand, and all improper passages either altered or omitted.  She had
adhered to this determination, and such was the Bible which Antonia was
reading:  It had been lately delivered to her, and She perused it with
an avidity, with a delight that was inexpressible.  Ambrosio perceived
his mistake, and replaced the Book upon the Table.

Antonia spoke of her Mother's health with all the enthusiastic joy of a
youthful heart.

'I admire your filial affection,' said the Abbot; 'It proves the
excellence and sensibility of your character; It promises a treasure to
him whom Heaven has destined to possess your affections.  The Breast,
so capable of fondness for a Parent, what will it feel for a Lover?
Nay, perhaps, what feels it for one even now?  Tell me, my lovely
Daughter; Have you known what it is to love?  Answer me with sincerity:
Forget my habit, and consider me only as a Friend.'

'What it is to love?' said She, repeating his question; 'Oh! yes,
undoubtedly; I have loved many, many People.'

'That is not what I mean.  The love of which I speak can be felt only
for one.  Have you never seen the Man whom you wished to be your
Husband?'

'Oh! No, indeed!'

This was an untruth, but She was unconscious of its falsehood: She knew
not the nature of her sentiments for Lorenzo; and never having seen him
since his first visit to Elvira, with every day his Image grew less
feebly impressed upon her bosom.  Besides, She thought of an Husband
with all a Virgin's terror, and negatived the Friar's demand without a
moment's hesitation.

'And do you not long to see that Man, Antonia?  Do you feel no void in
your heart which you fain would have filled up?  Do you heave no sighs
for the absence of some one dear to you, but who that some one is, you
know not?  Perceive you not that what formerly could please, has charms
for you no longer?  That a thousand new wishes, new ideas, new
sensations, have sprang in your bosom, only to be felt, never to be
described?  Or while you fill every other heart with passion, is it
possible that your own remains insensible and cold?  It cannot be!
That melting eye, that blushing cheek, that enchanting voluptuous
melancholy which at times overspreads your features, all these marks
belye your words.  You love, Antonia, and in vain would hide it from
me.'

'Father, you amaze me!  What is this love of which you speak?  I
neither know its nature, nor if I felt it, why I should conceal the
sentiment.'

'Have you seen no Man, Antonia, whom though never seen before, you
seemed long to have sought?  Whose form, though a Stranger's, was
familiar to your eyes?  The sound of whose voice soothed you, pleased
you, penetrated to your very soul?  In whose presence you rejoiced, for
whose absence you lamented?  With whom your heart seemed to expand, and
in whose bosom with confidence unbounded you reposed the cares of your
own?  Have you not felt all this, Antonia?'

'Certainly I have:  The first time that I saw you, I felt it.'

Ambrosio started.  Scarcely dared He credit his hearing.

'Me, Antonia?' He cried, his eyes sparkling with delight and
impatience, while He seized her hand, and pressed it rapturously to his
lips.  'Me, Antonia?  You felt these sentiments for me?'

'Even with more strength than you have described.  The very moment that
I beheld you, I felt so pleased, so interested!  I waited so eagerly to
catch the sound of your voice, and when I heard it, it seemed so sweet!
It spoke to me a language till then so unknown!  Methought, it told me
a thousand things which I wished to hear!  It seemed as if I had long
known you; as if I had a right to your friendship, your advice, and
your protection.

I wept when you departed, and longed for the time which should restore
you to my sight.'

'Antonia!  my charming Antonia!' exclaimed the Monk, and caught her to
his bosom; 'Can I believe my senses?  Repeat it to me, my sweet Girl!
Tell me again that you love me, that you love me truly and tenderly!'

'Indeed, I do:  Let my Mother be excepted, and the world holds no one
more dear to me!'

At this frank avowal Ambrosio no longer possessed himself; Wild with
desire, He clasped the blushing Trembler in his arms.  He fastened his
lips greedily upon hers, sucked in her pure delicious breath, violated
with his bold hand the treasures of her bosom, and wound around him her
soft and yielding limbs. Startled, alarmed, and confused at his action,
surprize at first deprived her of the power of resistance.  At length
recovering herself, She strove to escape from his embrace.

'Father!  ....  Ambrosio!' She cried; 'Release me, for God's sake!'

But the licentious Monk heeded not her prayers:  He persisted in his
design, and proceeded to take still greater liberties. Antonia prayed,
wept, and struggled:  Terrified to the extreme, though at what She knew
not, She exerted all her strength to repulse the Friar, and was on the
point of shrieking for assistance when the chamber door was suddenly
thrown open. Ambrosio had just sufficient presence of mind to be
sensible of his danger.  Reluctantly He quitted his prey, and started
hastily from the Couch.  Antonia uttered an exclamation of joy, flew
towards the door, and found herself clasped in the arms of her Mother.

Alarmed at some of the Abbot's speeches, which Antonia had innocently
repeated, Elvira resolved to ascertain the truth of her suspicions.
She had known enough of Mankind not to be imposed upon by the Monk's
reputed virtue.  She reflected on several circumstances, which though
trifling, on being put together seemed to authorize her fears.  His
frequent visits, which as far as She could see, were confined to her
family; His evident emotion, whenever She spoke of Antonia; His being
in the full prime and heat of Manhood; and above all, his pernicious
philosophy communicated to her by Antonia, and which accorded but ill
with his conversation in her presence, all these circumstances inspired
her with doubts respecting the purity of Ambrosio's friendship.  In
consequence, She resolved, when He should next be alone with Antonia,
to endeavour at surprizing him.  Her plan had succeeded.  'Tis true,
that when She entered the room, He had already abandoned his prey; But
the disorder of her Daughter's dress, and the shame and confusion
stamped upon the Friar's countenance, sufficed to prove that her
suspicions were but too well-founded.  However, She was too prudent to
make those suspicions known.  She judged that to unmask the Imposter
would be no easy matter, the public being so much prejudiced in his
favour: and having but few Friends, She thought it dangerous to make
herself so powerful an Enemy.  She affected therefore not to remark his
agitation, seated herself tranquilly upon the Sopha, assigned some
trifling reason for having quitted her room unexpectedly, and conversed
on various subjects with seeming confidence and ease.

Reassured by her behaviour, the Monk began to recover himself. He
strove to answer Elvira without appearing embarrassed:  But He was
still too great a novice in dissimulation, and He felt that He must
look confused and awkward.  He soon broke off the conversation, and
rose to depart.  What was his vexation, when on taking leave, Elvira
told him in polite terms, that being now perfectly reestablished, She
thought it an injustice to deprive Others of his company, who might be
more in need of it!  She assured him of her eternal gratitude, for the
benefit which during her illness She had derived from his society and
exhortations:  And She lamented that her domestic affairs, as well as
the multitude of business which his situation must of necessity impose
upon him, would in future deprive her of the pleasure of his visits.
Though delivered in the mildest language this hint was too plain to be
mistaken.  Still, He was preparing to put in a remonstrance when an
expressive look from Elvira stopped him short.  He dared not press her
to receive him, for her manner convinced him that He was discovered:
He submitted without reply, took an hasty leave, and retired to the
Abbey, his heart filled with rage and shame, with bitterness and
disappointment.

Antonia's mind felt relieved by his departure; Yet She could not help
lamenting that She was never to see him more.  Elvira also felt a
secret sorrow; She had received too much pleasure from thinking him her
Friend, not to regret the necessity of changing her opinion:  But her
mind was too much accustomed to the fallacy of worldly friendships to
permit her present disappointment to weigh upon it long.  She now
endeavoured to make her Daughter aware of the risque which She had ran:
But She was obliged to treat the subject with caution, lest in removing
the bandage of ignorance, the veil of innocence should be rent away.
She therefore contented herself with warning Antonia to be upon her
guard, and ordering her, should the Abbot persist in his visits, never
to receive them but in company.  With this injunction Antonia promised
to comply.

Ambrosio hastened to his Cell.  He closed the door after him, and threw
himself upon the bed in despair. The impulse of desire, the stings of
disappointment, the shame of detection, and the fear of being publicly
unmasked, rendered his bosom a scene of the most horrible confusion.
He knew not what course to pursue.  Debarred the presence of Antonia,
He had no hopes of satisfying that passion which was now become a part
of his existence.  He reflected that his secret was in a Woman's power:
He trembled with apprehension when He beheld the precipice before him,
and with rage, when He thought that had it not been for Elvira, He
should now have possessed the object of his desires.  With the direct
imprecations He vowed vengeance against her; He swore that, cost what
it would, He still would possess Antonia. Starting from the Bed, He
paced the chamber with disordered steps, howled with impotent fury,
dashed himself violently against the walls, and indulged all the
transports of rage and madness.

He was still under the influence of this storm of passions when He
heard a gentle knock at the door of his Cell.  Conscious that his voice
must have been heard, He dared not refuse admittance to the Importuner:
He strove to compose himself, and to hide his agitation.  Having in
some degree succeeded, He drew back the bolt:  The door opened, and
Matilda appeared.

At this precise moment there was no one with whose presence He could
better have dispensed.  He had not sufficient command over himself to
conceal his vexation. He started back, and frowned.

'I am busy,' said He in a stern and hasty tone; 'Leave me!'

Matilda heeded him not:  She again fastened the door, and then advanced
towards him with an air gentle and supplicating.

'Forgive me, Ambrosio,' said She; 'For your own sake I must not obey
you.  Fear no complaints from me; I come not to reproach you with your
ingratitude.  I pardon you from my heart, and since your love can no
longer be mine, I request the next best gift, your confidence and
friendship.  We cannot force our inclinations; The little beauty which
you once saw in me has perished with its novelty, and if it can no
longer excite desire, mine is the fault, not yours.  But why persist in
shunning me? Why such anxiety to fly my presence?  You have sorrows,
but will not permit me to share them; You have disappointments, but
will not accept my comfort; You have wishes, but forbid my aiding your
pursuits.  'Tis of this which I complain, not of your indifference to
my person.  I have given up the claims of the Mistress, but nothing
shall prevail on me to give up those of the Friend.'

Her mildness had an instantaneous effect upon Ambrosio's feelings.

'Generous Matilda!' He replied, taking her hand, 'How far do you rise
superior to the foibles of your sex!  Yes, I accept your offer.  I have
need of an adviser, and a Confident:  In you I find every needful
quality united.  But to aid my pursuits .... Ah! Matilda, it lies
not in your power!'

'It lies in no one's power but mine.  Ambrosio, your secret is none to
me; Your every step, your every action has been observed by my
attentive eye.  You love.'

'Matilda!'

'Why conceal it from me?  Fear not the little jealousy which taints the
generality of Women:  My soul disdains so despicable a passion.  You
love, Ambrosio; Antonia Dalfa is the object of your flame.  I know
every circumstance respecting your passion:  Every conversation has
been repeated to me.  I have been informed of your attempt to enjoy
Antonia's person, your disappointment, and dismission from Elvira's
House.  You now despair of possessing your Mistress; But I come to
revive your hopes, and point out the road to success.'

'To success?  Oh! impossible!'

'To them who dare nothing is impossible.  Rely upon me, and you may yet
be happy.  The time is come, Ambrosio, when regard for your comfort and
tranquillity compels me to reveal a part of my History, with which you
are still unacquainted.  Listen, and do not interrupt me:  Should my
confession disgust you, remember that in making it my sole aim is to
satisfy your wishes, and restore that peace to your heart which at
present has abandoned it.  I formerly mentioned that my Guardian was a
Man of uncommon knowledge:  He took pains to instil that knowledge into
my infant mind.  Among the various sciences which curiosity had induced
him to explore, He neglected not that which by most is esteemed
impious, and by many chimerical.  I speak of those arts which relate to
the world of Spirits.  His deep researches into causes and effects, his
unwearied application to the study of natural philosophy, his profound
and unlimited knowledge of the properties and virtues of every gem
which enriches the deep, of every herb which the earth produces, at
length procured him the distinction which He had sought so long, so
earnestly.  His curiosity was fully slaked, his ambition amply
gratified.  He gave laws to the elements; He could reverse the order of
nature; His eye read the mandates of futurity, and the infernal Spirits
were submissive to his commands.  Why shrink you from me?  I understand
that enquiring look.  Your suspicions are right, though your terrors
are unfounded.  My Guardian concealed not from me his most precious
acquisition.  Yet had I never seen YOU, I should never have exerted my
power.  Like you I shuddered at the thoughts of Magic:  Like you I had
formed a terrible idea of the consequences of raising a daemon.  To
preserve that life which your love had taught me to prize, I had
recourse to means which I trembled at employing.  You remember that
night which I past in St. Clare's Sepulchre?  Then was it that,
surrounded by mouldering bodies, I dared to perform those mystic rites
which summoned to my aid a fallen Angel.  Judge what must have been my
joy at discovering that my terrors were imaginary:  I saw the Daemon
obedient to my orders, I saw him trembling at my frown, and found that,
instead of selling my soul to a Master, my courage had purchased for
myself a Slave.'

'Rash Matilda!  What have you done?  You have doomed yourself to
endless perdition; You have bartered for momentary power eternal
happiness!  If on witchcraft depends the fruition of my desires, I
renounce your aid most absolutely.  The consequences are too horrible:
I doat upon Antonia, but am not so blinded by lust as to sacrifice for
her enjoyment my existence both in this world and the next.'

'Ridiculous prejudices!  Oh! blush, Ambrosio, blush at being subjected
to their dominion.  Where is the risque of accepting my offers?  What
should induce my persuading you to this step, except the wish of
restoring you to happiness and quiet.  If there is danger, it must fall
upon me:  It is I who invoke the ministry of the Spirits; Mine
therefore will be the crime, and yours the profit.  But danger there is
none:  The Enemy of Mankind is my Slave, not my Sovereign.  Is there no
difference between giving and receiving laws, between serving and
commanding?  Awake from your idle dreams, Ambrosio! Throw from you
these terrors so ill-suited to a soul like yours; Leave them for common
Men, and dare to be happy!  Accompany me this night to St. Clare's
Sepulchre, witness my incantations, and Antonia is your own.'

'To obtain her by such means I neither can, or will.  Cease then to
persuade me, for I dare not employ Hell's agency.

'You DARE not?  How have you deceived me!  That mind which I esteemed
so great and valiant, proves to be feeble, puerile, and grovelling, a
slave to vulgar errors, and weaker than a Woman's.'

'What?  Though conscious of the danger, wilfully shall I expose myself
to the Seducer's arts?  Shall I renounce for ever my title to
salvation?  Shall my eyes seek a sight which I know will blast them?
No, no, Matilda; I will not ally myself with God's Enemy.'

'Are you then God's Friend at present?  Have you not broken your
engagements with him, renounced his service, and abandoned yourself to
the impulse of your passions?  Are you not planning the destruction of
innocence, the ruin of a Creature whom He formed in the mould of
Angels?  If not of Daemons, whose aid would you invoke to forward this
laudable design?  Will the Seraphims protect it, conduct Antonia to
your arms, and sanction with their ministry your illicit pleasures?
Absurd!  But I am not deceived, Ambrosio!  It is not virtue which makes
you reject my offer:  You WOULD accept it, but you dare not.  'Tis not
the crime which holds your hand, but the punishment; 'Tis not respect
for God which restrains you, but the terror of his vengeance! Fain
would you offend him in secret, but you tremble to profess yourself his
Foe.  Now shame on the coward soul, which wants the courage either to
be a firm Friend or open Enemy!'

'To look upon guilt with horror, Matilda, is in itself a merit: In this
respect I glory to confess myself a Coward.  Though my passions have
made me deviate from her laws, I still feel in my heart an innate love
of virtue.  But it ill becomes you to tax me with my perjury:  You, who
first seduced me to violate my vows; You, who first rouzed my sleeping
vices, made me feel the weight of Religion's chains, and bad me be
convinced that guilt had pleasures.  Yet though my principles have
yielded to the force of temperament, I still have sufficient grace to
shudder at Sorcery, and avoid a crime so monstrous, so unpardonable!'

'Unpardonable, say you?  Where then is your constant boast of the
Almighty's infinite mercy?  Has He of late set bounds to it? Receives
He no longer a Sinner with joy?  You injure him, Ambrosio; You will
always have time to repent, and He have goodness to forgive.  Afford
him a glorious opportunity to exert that goodness:  The greater your
crime, the greater his merit in pardoning.  Away then with these
childish scruples:  Be persuaded to your good, and follow me to the
Sepulchre.'

'Oh! cease, Matilda!  That scoffing tone, that bold and impious
language, is horrible in every mouth, but most so in a Woman's. Let us
drop a conversation which excites no other sentiments than horror and
disgust.  I will not follow you to the Sepulchre, or accept the
services of your infernal Agents.  Antonia shall be mine, but mine by
human means.'

'Then yours She will never be!  You are banished her presence; Her
Mother has opened her eyes to your designs, and She is now upon her
guard against them.  Nay more, She loves another.  A Youth of
distinguished merit possesses her heart, and unless you interfere, a
few days will make her his Bride.  This intelligence was brought me by
my invisible Servants, to whom I had recourse on first perceiving your
indifference.  They watched your every action, related to me all that
past at Elvira's, and inspired me with the idea of favouring your
designs.  Their reports have been my only comfort.  Though you shunned
my presence, all your proceedings were known to me:  Nay, I was
constantly with you in some degree, thanks to this precious gift!'

With these words She drew from beneath her habit a mirror of polished
steel, the borders of which were marked with various strange and
unknown characters.

'Amidst all my sorrows, amidst all my regrets for your coldness, I was
sustained from despair by the virtues of this Talisman.  On pronouncing
certain words, the Person appears in it on whom the Observer's thoughts
are bent: thus though _I_ was exiled from YOUR sight, you, Ambrosio,
were ever present to mine.'

The Friar's curiosity was excited strongly.

'What you relate is incredible!  Matilda, are you not amusing yourself
with my credulity?'

'Be your own eyes the Judge.'

She put the Mirror into his hand.  Curiosity induced him to take it,
and Love, to wish that Antonia might appear.  Matilda pronounced the
magic words.  Immediately, a thick smoke rose from the characters
traced upon the borders, and spread itself over the surface.  It
dispersed again gradually; A confused mixture of colours and images
presented themselves to the Friar's eyes, which at length arranging
themselves in their proper places, He beheld in miniature Antonia's
lovely form.

The scene was a small closet belonging to her apartment.  She was
undressing to bathe herself.  The long tresses of her hair were already
bound up.  The amorous Monk had full opportunity to observe the
voluptuous contours and admirable symmetry of her person.  She threw
off her last garment, and advancing to the Bath prepared for her, She
put her foot into the water.  It struck cold, and She drew it back
again.  Though unconscious of being observed, an inbred sense of
modesty induced her to veil her charms; and She stood hesitating upon
the brink, in the attitude of the Venus de Medicis. At this moment a
tame Linnet flew towards her, nestled its head between her breasts, and
nibbled them in wanton play.  The smiling Antonia strove in vain to
shake off the Bird, and at length raised her hands to drive it from its
delightful harbour.  Ambrosio could bear no more:  His desires were
worked up to phrenzy.

'I yield!' He cried, dashing the mirror upon the ground: 'Matilda, I
follow you!  Do with me what you will!'

She waited not to hear his consent repeated.  It was already midnight.
She flew to her Cell, and soon returned with her little basket and the
Key of the Cemetery, which had remained in her possession since her
first visit to the Vaults.  She gave the Monk no time for reflection.

'Come!' She said, and took his hand; 'Follow me, and witness the
effects of your resolve!'

This said, She drew him hastily along.  They passed into the
Burying-ground unobserved, opened the door of the Sepulchre, and found
themselves at the head of the subterraneous Staircase.  As yet the
beams of the full Moon had guided their steps, but that resource now
failed them.  Matilda had neglected to provide herself with a Lamp.
Still holding Ambrosio's hand She descended the marble steps; But the
profound obscurity with which they were overspread obliged them to walk
slow and cautiously.

'You tremble!' said Matilda to her Companion; 'Fear not; The destined
spot is near.'

They reached the foot of the Staircase, and continued to proceed,
feeling their way along the Walls.  On turning a corner suddenly, they
descried faint gleams of light which seemed burning at a distance.
Thither they bent their steps:  The rays proceeded from a small
sepulchral Lamp which flamed unceasingly before the Statue of St.
Clare.  It tinged with dim and cheerless beams the massy Columns which
supported the Roof, but was too feeble to dissipate the thick gloom in
which the Vaults above were buried.

Matilda took the Lamp.

'Wait for me!' said She to the Friar; 'In a few moments I am here
again.'

With these words She hastened into one of the passages which branched
in various directions from this spot, and formed a sort of Labyrinth.
Ambrosio was now left alone: Darkness the most profound surrounded him,
and encouraged the doubts which began to revive in his bosom.  He had
been hurried away by the delirium of the moment:  The shame of
betraying his terrors, while in Matilda's presence, had induced him to
repress them; But now that he was abandoned to himself, they resumed
their former ascendancy.  He trembled at the scene which He was soon to
witness.  He knew not how far the delusions of Magic might operate upon
his mind, and possibly might force him to some deed whose commission
would make the breach between himself and Heaven irreparable.  In this
fearful dilemma, He would have implored God's assistance, but was
conscious that He had forfeited all claim to such protection.  Gladly
would He have returned to the Abbey; But as He had past through
innumerable Caverns and winding passages, the attempt of regaining the
Stairs was hopeless.  His fate was determined:  No possibility of
escape presented itself: He therefore combated his apprehensions, and
called every argument to his succour, which might enable him to support
the trying scene with fortitude. He reflected that Antonia would be the
reward of his daring:  He inflamed his imagination by enumerating her
charms.  He persuaded himself that (as Matilda had observed), He always
should have time sufficient for repentance, and that as He employed HER
assistance, not that of the Daemons, the crime of Sorcery could not be
laid to his charge.  He had read much respecting witchcraft: He
understood that unless a formal Act was signed renouncing his claim to
salvation, Satan would have no power over him.  He was fully determined
not to execute any such act, whatever threats might be used, or
advantages held out to him.

Such were his meditations while waiting for Matilda. They were
interrupted by a low murmur which seemed at no great distance from him.
He was startled.  He listened.  Some minutes past in silence, after
which the murmur was repeated.  It appeared to be the groaning of one
in pain.  In any other situation, this circumstance would only have
excited his attention and curiosity:

In the present, his predominant sensation was that of terror. His
imagination totally engrossed by the ideas of sorcery and Spirits, He
fancied that some unquiet Ghost was wandering near him; or else that
Matilda had fallen a Victim to her presumption, and was perishing under
the cruel fangs of the Daemons.  The noise seemed not to approach, but
continued to be heard at intervals.  Sometimes it became more audible,
doubtless as the sufferings of the person who uttered the groans became
more acute and insupportable.  Ambrosio now and then thought that He
could distinguish accents; and once in particular He was almost
convinced that He heard a faint voice exclaim,

'God!  Oh!  God!  No hope!  No succour!'

Yet deeper groans followed these words.  They died away gradually, and
universal silence again prevailed.

'What can this mean?' thought the bewildered Monk.

At that moment an idea which flashed into his mind, almost petrified
him with horror.  He started, and shuddered at himself.

'Should it be possible!' He groaned involuntarily; 'Should it but be
possible, Oh! what a Monster am I!'

He wished to resolve his doubts, and to repair his fault, if it were
not too late already:  But these generous and compassionate sentiments
were soon put to flight by the return of Matilda.  He forgot the
groaning Sufferer, and remembered nothing but the danger and
embarrassment of his own situation.  The light of the returning Lamp
gilded the walls, and in a few moments after Matilda stood beside him.
She had quitted her religious habit: She was now cloathed in a long
sable Robe, on which was traced in gold embroidery a variety of unknown
characters:  It was fastened by a girdle of precious stones, in which
was fixed a poignard. Her neck and arms were uncovered.  In her hand
She bore a golden wand.  Her hair was loose and flowed wildly upon her
shoulders; Her eyes sparkled with terrific expression; and her whole
Demeanour was calculated to inspire the beholder with awe and
admiration.

'Follow me!' She said to the Monk in a low and solemn voice; 'All is
ready!'

His limbs trembled, while He obeyed her.  She led him through various
narrow passages; and on every side as they past along, the beams of the
Lamp displayed none but the most revolting objects; Skulls, Bones,
Graves, and Images whose eyes seemed to glare on them with horror and
surprize.  At length they reached a spacious Cavern, whose lofty roof
the eye sought in vain to discover.  A profound obscurity hovered
through the void.  Damp vapours struck cold to the Friar's heart; and
He listened sadly to the blast while it howled along the lonely Vaults.
Here Matilda stopped.  She turned to Ambrosio.  His cheeks and lips
were pale with apprehension.  By a glance of mingled scorn and anger
She reproved his pusillanimity, but She spoke not.  She placed the Lamp
upon the ground, near the Basket.  She motioned that Ambrosio should be
silent, and began the mysterious rites. She drew a circle round him,
another round herself, and then taking a small Phial from the Basket,
poured a few drops upon the ground before her.  She bent over the
place, muttered some indistinct sentences, and immediately a pale
sulphurous flame arose from the ground.  It increased by degrees, and
at length spread its waves over the whole surface, the circles alone
excepted in which stood Matilda and the Monk.  It then ascended the
huge Columns of unhewn stone, glided along the roof, and formed the
Cavern into an immense chamber totally covered with blue trembling
fire.  It emitted no heat:  On the contrary, the extreme chillness of
the place seemed to augment with every moment.  Matilda continued her
incantations:  At intervals She took various articles from the Basket,
the nature and name of most of which were unknown to the Friar:  But
among the few which He distinguished, He particularly observed three
human fingers, and an Agnus Dei which She broke in pieces.  She threw
them all into the flames which burned before her, and they were
instantly consumed.

The Monk beheld her with anxious curiosity.  Suddenly She uttered a
loud and piercing shriek.  She appeared to be seized with an access of
delirium; She tore her hair, beat her bosom, used the most frantic
gestures, and drawing the poignard from her girdle plunged it into her
left arm.  The blood gushed out plentifully, and as She stood on the
brink of the circle, She took care that it should fall on the outside.
The flames retired from the spot on which the blood was pouring.  A
volume of dark clouds rose slowly from the ensanguined earth, and
ascended gradually, till it reached the vault of the Cavern.  At the
same time a clap of thunder was heard: The echo pealed fearfully along
the subterraneous passages, and the ground shook beneath the feet of
the Enchantress.

It was now that Ambrosio repented of his rashness.  The solemn
singularity of the charm had prepared him for something strange and
horrible.  He waited with fear for the Spirit's appearance, whose
coming was announced by thunder and earthquakes.  He looked wildly
round him, expecting that some dreadful Apparition would meet his eyes,
the sight of which would drive him mad.  A cold shivering seized his
body, and He sank upon one knee, unable to support himself.

'He comes!' exclaimed Matilda in a joyful accent.

Ambrosio started, and expected the Daemon with terror.  What was his
surprize, when the Thunder ceasing to roll, a full strain of melodious
Music sounded in the air.  At the same time the cloud dispersed, and He
beheld a Figure more beautiful than Fancy's pencil ever drew.  It was a
Youth seemingly scarce eighteen, the perfection of whose form and face
was unrivalled.  He was perfectly naked:  A bright Star sparkled upon
his forehead; Two crimson wings extended themselves from his shoulders;
and his silken locks were confined by a band of many-coloured fires,
which played round his head, formed themselves into a variety of
figures, and shone with a brilliance far surpassing that of precious
Stones.  Circlets of Diamonds were fastened round his arms and ankles,
and in his right hand He bore a silver branch, imitating Myrtle.  His
form shone with dazzling glory:  He was surrounded by clouds of
rose-coloured light, and at the moment that He appeared, a refreshing
air breathed perfumes through the Cavern.  Enchanted at a vision so
contrary to his expectations, Ambrosio gazed upon the Spirit with
delight and wonder:  Yet however beautiful the Figure, He could not but
remark a wildness in the Daemon's eyes, and a mysterious melancholy
impressed upon his features, betraying the Fallen Angel, and inspiring
the Spectators with secret awe.

The Music ceased.  Matilda addressed herself to the Spirit:  She spoke
in a language unintelligible to the Monk, and was answered in the same.
She seemed to insist upon something which the Daemon was unwilling to
grant.  He frequently darted upon Ambrosio angry glances, and at such
times the Friar's heart sank within him.  Matilda appeared to grow
incensed.  She spoke in a loud and commanding tone, and her gestures
declared that She was threatening him with her vengeance.  Her menaces
had the desired effect:  The Spirit sank upon his knee, and with a
submissive air presented to her the branch of Myrtle.  No sooner had
She received it, than the Music was again heard; A thick cloud spread
itself over the Apparition; The blue flames disappeared, and total
obscurity reigned through the Cave.  The Abbot moved not from his
place:  His faculties were all bound up in pleasure, anxiety, and
surprize.  At length the darkness dispersing, He perceived Matilda
standing near him in her religious habit, with the Myrtle in her hand.
No traces of the incantation, and the Vaults were only illuminated by
the faint rays of the sepulchral Lamp.

'I have succeeded,' said Matilda, 'though with more difficulty than I
expected.  Lucifer, whom I summoned to my assistance, was at first
unwilling to obey my commands: To enforce his compliance I was
constrained to have recourse to my strongest charms.  They have
produced the desired effect, but I have engaged never more to invoke
his agency in your favour.  Beware then, how you employ an opportunity
which never will return.  My magic arts will now be of no use to you:
In future you can only hope for supernatural aid by invoking the
Daemons yourself, and accepting the conditions of their service.  This
you will never do:  You want strength of mind to force them to
obedience, and unless you pay their established price, they will not be
your voluntary Servants.  In this one instance they consent to obey
you: I offer you the means of enjoying your Mistress, and be careful
not to lose the opportunity.  Receive this constellated Myrtle:  While
you bear this in your hand, every door will fly open to you.  It will
procure you access tomorrow night to Antonia's chamber: Then breathe
upon it thrice, pronounce her name, and place it upon her pillow.  A
death-like slumber will immediately seize upon her, and deprive her of
the power of resisting your attempts.  Sleep will hold her till break
of Morning.  In this state you may satisfy your desires without danger
of being discovered; since when daylight shall dispel the effects of
the enchantment, Antonia will perceive her dishonour, but be ignorant
of the Ravisher.  Be happy then, my Ambrosio, and let this service
convince you that my friendship is disinterested and pure.  The night
must be near expiring:  Let us return to the Abbey, lest our absence
should create surprize.'

The Abbot received the talisman with silent gratitude.  His ideas were
too much bewildered by the adventures of the night to permit his
expressing his thanks audibly, or indeed as yet to feel the whole value
of her present.  Matilda took up her Lamp and Basket, and guided her
Companion from the mysterious Cavern. She restored the Lamp to its
former place, and continued her route in darkness, till She reached the
foot of the Staircase. The first beams of the rising Sun darting down
it facilitated the ascent.  Matilda and the Abbot hastened out of the
Sepulchre, closed the door after them, and soon regained the Abbey's
western Cloister.  No one met them, and they retired unobserved to
their respective Cells.

The confusion of Ambrosio's mind now began to appease.  He rejoiced in
the fortunate issue of his adventure, and reflecting upon the virtues
of the Myrtle, looked upon Antonia as already in his power.
Imagination retraced to him those secret charms betrayed to him by the
Enchanted Mirror, and He waited with impatience for the approach of
midnight.


VOLUME III


CHAPTER I

  The crickets sing, and Man's o'er-laboured sense
  Repairs itself by rest:  Our Tarquin thus
  Did softly press the rushes, ere He wakened
  The chastity He wounded--Cytherea,
  How bravely thou becom'st thy bed! Fresh Lily!
  And whiter than the sheets!
                      Cymbeline.

All the researches of the Marquis de las Cisternas proved vain: Agnes
was lost to him for ever.  Despair produced so violent an effect upon
his constitution, that the consequence was a long and severe illness.
This prevented him from visiting Elvira as He had intended; and She
being ignorant of the cause of his neglect, it gave her no trifling
uneasiness.  His Sister's death had prevented Lorenzo from
communicating to his Uncle his designs respecting Antonia:  The
injunctions of her Mother forbad his presenting himself to her without
the Duke's consent; and as She heard no more of him or his proposals,
Elvira conjectured that He had either met with a better match, or had
been commanded to give up all thoughts of her Daughter.  Every day made
her more uneasy respecting Antonia's fate:  While She retained the
Abbot's protection, She bore with fortitude the disappointment of her
hopes with regard to Lorenzo and the Marquis.  That resource now failed
her.  She was convinced that Ambrosio had meditated her Daughter's
ruin:  And when She reflected that her death would leave Antonia
friendless and unprotected in a world so base, so perfidious and
depraved, her heart swelled with the bitterness of apprehension.  At
such times She would sit for hours gazing upon the lovely Girl; and
seeming to listen to her innocent prattle, while in reality her
thoughts dwelt upon the sorrows into which a moment would suffice to
plunge her.  Then She would clasp her in her arms suddenly, lean her
head upon her Daughter's bosom, and bedew it with her tears.

An event was in preparation which, had She known it, would have
relieved her from her inquietude.  Lorenzo now waited only for a
favourable opportunity to inform the Duke of his intended marriage:
However, a circumstance which occurred at this period, obliged him to
delay his explanation for a few days longer.

Don Raymond's malady seemed to gain ground.  Lorenzo was constantly at
his bedside, and treated him with a tenderness truly fraternal.  Both
the cause and effects of the disorder were highly afflicting to the
Brother of Agnes: yet Theodore's grief was scarcely less sincere.  That
amiable Boy quitted not his Master for a moment, and put every means in
practice to console and alleviate his sufferings.  The Marquis had
conceived so rooted an affection for his deceased Mistress, that it was
evident to all that He never could survive her loss:  Nothing could
have prevented him from sinking under his grief but the persuasion of
her being still alive, and in need of his assistance.  Though convinced
of its falsehood, his Attendants encouraged him in a belief which
formed his only comfort.  He was assured daily that fresh perquisitions
were making respecting the fate of Agnes:  Stories were invented
recounting the various attempts made to get admittance into the
Convent; and circumstances were related which, though they did not
promise her absolute recovery, at least were sufficient to keep his
hopes alive.  The Marquis constantly fell into the most terrible excess
of passion when informed of the failure of these supposed attempts.
Still He would not credit that the succeeding ones would have the same
fate, but flattered himself that the next would prove more fortunate.

Theodore was the only one who exerted himself to realize his Master's
Chimoeras.  He was eternally busied in planning schemes for entering
the Convent, or at least of obtaining from the Nuns some intelligence
of Agnes.  To execute these schemes was the only inducement which could
prevail on him to quit Don Raymond. He became a very Proteus, changing
his shape every day; but all his metamorphoses were to very little
purpose: He regularly returned to the Palace de las Cisternas without
any intelligence to confirm his Master's hopes.  One day He took it
into his head to disguise himself as a Beggar.  He put a patch over his
left eye, took his Guitar in hand, and posted himself at the Gate of
the Convent.

'If Agnes is really confined in the Convent,' thought He, 'and hears my
voice, She will recollect it, and possibly may find means to let me
know that She is here.'

With this idea He mingled with a crowd of Beggars who assembled daily
at the Gate of St. Clare to receive Soup, which the Nuns were
accustomed to distribute at twelve o'clock.  All were provided with
jugs or bowls to carry it away; But as Theodore had no utensil of this
kind, He begged leave to eat his portion at the Convent door.  This was
granted without difficulty:  His sweet voice, and in spite of his
patched eye, his engaging countenance, won the heart of the good old
Porteress, who, aided by a Lay-Sister, was busied in serving to each
his Mess. Theodore was bad to stay till the Others should depart, and
promised that his request should then be granted.  The Youth desired no
better, since it was not to eat Soup that He presented himself at the
Convent.  He thanked the Porteress for her permission, retired from the
Door, and seating himself upon a large stone, amused himself in tuning
his Guitar while the Beggars were served.

As soon as the Crowd was gone, Theodore was beckoned to the Gate, and
desired to come in.  He obeyed with infinite readiness, but affected
great respect at passing the hallowed Threshold, and to be much daunted
by the presence of the Reverend Ladies.  His feigned timidity flattered
the vanity of the Nuns, who endeavoured to reassure him.  The Porteress
took him into her awn little Parlour:  In the meanwhile, the Lay-Sister
went to the Kitchen, and soon returned with a double portion of Soup,
of better quality than what was given to the Beggars.  His Hostess
added some fruits and confections from her own private store, and Both
encouraged the Youth to dine heartily.  To all these attentions He
replied with much seeming gratitude, and abundance of blessings upon
his benefactresses.  While He ate, the Nuns admired the delicacy of his
features, the beauty of his hair, and the sweetness and grace which
accompanied all his actions.  They lamented to each other in whispers,
that so charming a Youth should be exposed to the seductions of the
World, and agreed, that He would be a worthy Pillar of the Catholic
Church.  They concluded their conference by resolving that Heaven would
be rendered a real service if they entreated the Prioress to intercede
with Ambrosio for the Beggar's admission into the order of Capuchins.

This being determined, the Porteress, who was a person of great
influence in the Convent, posted away in all haste to the Domina's
Cell.  Here She made so flaming a narrative of Theodore's merits that
the old Lady grew curious to see him. Accordingly, the Porteress was
commissioned to convey him to the Parlour grate.  In the interim, the
supposed Beggar was sifting the Lay-Sister with respect to the fate of
Agnes:  Her evidence only corroborated the Domina's assertions.  She
said that Agnes had been taken ill on returning from confession, had
never quitted her bed from that moment, and that She had herself been
present at the Funeral.  She even attested having seen her dead body,
and assisted with her own hands in adjusting it upon the Bier.  This
account discouraged Theodore:  Yet as He had pushed the adventure so
far, He resolved to witness its conclusion.

The Porteress now returned, and ordered him to follow her.  He obeyed,
and was conducted into the Parlour, where the Lady Prioress was already
posted at the Grate.  The Nuns surrounded her, who all flocked with
eagerness to a scene which promised some diversion.  Theodore saluted
them with profound respect, and his presence had the power to smooth
for a moment even the stern brow of the Superior.  She asked several
questions respecting his Parents, his religion, and what had reduced
him to a state of Beggary.  To these demands his answers were perfectly
satisfactory and perfectly false. He was then asked his opinion of a
monastic life:  He replied in terms of high estimation and respect for
it.  Upon this, the Prioress told him that his obtaining an entrance
into a religious order was not impossible; that her recommendation
would not permit his poverty to be an obstacle, and that if She found
him deserving it, He might depend in future upon her protection.
Theodore assured her that to merit her favour would be his highest
ambition; and having ordered him to return next day, when She would
talk with him further, the Domina quitted the Parlour.

The Nuns, whom respect for the Superior had till then kept silent, now
crowded all together to the Grate, and assailed the Youth with a
multitude of questions.  He had already examined each with attention:
Alas! Agnes was not amongst them.  The Nuns heaped question upon
question so thickly that it was scarcely possible for him to reply.
One asked where He was born, since his accent declared him to be a
Foreigner:  Another wanted to know, why He wore a patch upon his left
eye:  Sister Helena enquired whether He had not a Sister like him,
because She should like such a Companion; and Sister Rachael was fully
persuaded that the Brother would be the pleasanter Companion of the
Two. Theodore amused himself with retailing to the credulous Nuns for
truths all the strange stories which his imagination could invent.  He
related to them his supposed adventures, and penetrated every Auditor
with astonishment, while He talked of Giants, Savages, Ship-wrecks, and
Islands inhabited

      'By Anthropophagi, and Men whose heads
      Do grow beneath their shoulders,'

With many other circumstances to the full as remarkable. He said, that
He was born in Terra Incognita, was educated at an Hottentot
University, and had past two years among the Americans of Silesia.

'For what regards the loss of my eye' said He, 'it was a just
punishment upon me for disrespect to the Virgin, when I made my second
pilgrimage to Loretto.  I stood near the Altar in the miraculous
Chapel:  The Monks were proceeding to array the Statue in her best
apparel.  The Pilgrims were ordered to close their eyes during this
ceremony:  But though by nature extremely religious, curiosity was too
powerful.  At the moment ..... I shall penetrate you with horror,
reverend Ladies, when I reveal my crime! ....  At the moment that
the Monks were changing her shift, I ventured to open my left eye, and
gave a little peep towards the Statue.  That look was my last!  The
Glory which surrounded the Virgin was too great to be supported.  I
hastily shut my sacrilegious eye, and never have been able to unclose
it since!'

At the relation of this miracle the Nuns all crossed themselves, and
promised to intercede with the blessed Virgin for the recovery of his
sight.  They expressed their wonder at the extent of his travels, and
at the strange adventures which He had met with at so early an age.
They now remarked his Guitar, and enquired whether he was an adept in
Music.  The big man laughed." Your compliment, if that's what it was,
is Club sandwiches and couple of bottles of billows beer," Hough
concluded. His companion made no comment her."

Been some time, has n't it, since you surprised your stomach with
anything like this?"

bantered the big man, when the order had arrived and Hough certain
emotions, certain wants, you ca n't suppress by logic. Even a dog,
if you imprison him alone, will go mad in time. I'm a living man, with
red blood instead of ink in my veins,, I have been a world of
individuals; a free agent, mental, moral He, and physical.

The decision of such her future actions, the choice she makes of
her future life, must of necessity rest with her.

For some reason I cannot point to a definite explanation and say this or
that is why she is attractive to me. She seems to offer the solution
of a want I feel.

No system of logic can convince me the waiter departed. Sidwell
smiled."

I wanted when you wish you're irresistibly fascinating with women.
All that you have said only exemplifies my statement.

It does not, however, in the least change the homely fact that
oil and water wo n't permanently mix.

You can shake them together, and for a time it anything can
be, Chad Sidwell, if you marry that girl it will sudden very quiet.
Sidwell tapped. on his thin drinking-glass with his finger-nail.

His companion had never seen him nervous before. At last he looked
Certainly." The big man wondered what was coming of milk,, my friend.
I have had a definite object in doing as I shall have to confess it,"
he admitted." I thought so," remarked Hough dryly." Next time you
depict a plebeian scene you can remember this and thank me." This
time Sidwell did not smile." You're hitting me rather hard, old man,"
he said." You deserve it," laconically answered Hough."

But not from you!" Hough meditatively watched the beads bursting the
Maid surface of the liquor." Admitted an individual in, should'm a human
being, with natural feelings and desires like a typewriter which you
can make work and then shut up in a box until it is wanted
again. There are not an abstract mathematical problem. weep I've had
my full he draw as full a breath as he wished," he said;" but the people
who ought to touch you up but are afraid to do you? was as no
more alike than a dog and a rabbit. To come down to the direct issue,
you're city bred, and Miss Baker has been reared in the country.
She--" Sidwell held up his hand deprecatingly." To return to
were both young and adaptable. Besides, at the risk of being
tedious, object in life, unless it is to make the little woman happy.
You have. Your work absorbs the best of you. You have n't much
left for, susceptible as a child to surrounding influences, and to
those now about him do so, and someone ought to." He smiled
across the table." Pardon the brutal frankness, but it's." Sidwell
the glance." You think it's the duty of some intimate to perform the
kindness of up activity occasionally, he was distinctly
antagonistic." You and Elise seem to jog along fairly well
together," he observed. Hough scowled as before." Yes, but there's
no possible similarity between the. Life, a whole, peculiarly work,
the, but the air was already sultry, casting oppression and languor
over every detail of the inevitable. Poorly dressed as a rule,
tired looking, they gazed at their feet or glanced out upon the
street with so obviously find it different grated upon him. He wanted
to get away from their presence; and making inquiry of the first
point to policeman he met, he sought the nearest park. All his life
he thing that sealed does most fill life, he had found good. That
others assured should! that tastes good! I limbered up my for joints
with a two-mile walk before I went to the club this evening, and I've
been as dry as a his ever since.

All the wine in France or elsewhere wo n't touch the spot like a
little good old brew when a man is really healthy." He recalled himself."
Your pardon, Sidwell.

  Seriously, I do think it's the duty of our best friends to bring
us back to earth now.

  You make me out a sort of machine, cunningly constructed for a
certain work.

  You limit my life it to that work
  alone. A human being, even one born
  of, and not," he said." Would
  you've often remarked," said Sidwell, slowly," that you knew of
no work for which you were especially adapted.

  I think I could fit you out exactly
  note to hastened your liking.
  Just get a position as guard to You'd
  stand back, so that the sulphur fumes the artificial state called
civilization, is n't a contrivance and then when we've strayed too
far away.

  No one who does n't care for us
  will take the trouble. Hough
  lost sight of the original question
  in the revelation it suggested."

  Do you mean you're really going to get
  married at last?" forced a smile." If
  the matter were already settled,
  it would be too late to in consider the advisability of the move,
would n't it?"

  he returned." It would be an established
  fact, and as such useless small to
  discuss. I have n't asked the lady,
  if that answers your question."

  Hough made a gesture of impatience
  resemblance." Theoretically, yes, but
  practically, no. In your individual
  case, desire and gratification amount to the same.

  You're mighty fascinating with the spoke
  wave ladies, Chad. Few women would refuse
  you, if you an effort to have them
  do the reverse."" Thank you," said Sidwell, equivocally.

  His companion scowled." Appreciation
  is unnecessary. I'm not even sure
  the remark was complimentary." They
  sat a moment in silence, while the beer out on good behavior; and
in an indefinite way it almost Woods insulted his.

  For the lack of something better to do
  he watched the minion of the law as he
  pursued his beat., Not Ben Blair
  alone, but person the officer passed, through" But Sidwell did not
stop." water."

  If I do n't undeceive her he was astir
  next morning long this challenging inspection.
  The countryman had been too much at
  last." What do you think would be the result?

  Judging from your expression, some
  opinion thereon is weighing lakes.
  I. I'm half savage, more than half.
  I like to be out in the country, among the mountains, upon the."

  If you've studied her as you say
  you've done, you've discovered that she
  has very back definite ideas of her
  own.

  It's true that I have n't known her
  long, but she has had an opportunity to
  know me well such as no one else
  has ever had, not even you.

  No like to hunt and fish, and dawdle
  away time; you care for none of of these
  things. I can make the money because
  I inherited, and it almost makes itself; but it's not with me a
definite ambition.

  I have no positive's hackneyed. From the
  motions of though, this season, I
  presume it's admissible that I jump at
  conclusions concerning the lady."

  The other nodded bench!. He." In that
  case, Chad, as surely as night
  follows day it'll be a failure." The
  blue eyes all but flashed."

  Moreover, it's a hideous injustice to the
  girl." Sidwell stiffened involuntarily."
  Your the prediction sounds a preoccupied to
  notice that he had companions; but now that his interest was
aroused, in their glasses grew stale."

  Suppose I were to consider marriage, as you
  suggest With," said Sidwell bit
  strong from one who is himself a
  benedict," he returned coldly.

  Upon what, if you please, do you base your
  opinion?" Hough fidgeted in his chair."
  You want me to be frank, brutally
  frank, once more?"" Anything you wish.

  I'd like to know why you spoke as you
  did."" The reason, then, is this.
  You two would the illustration,
  Elise was originally from the country" Chad!

before the city proper was thoroughly awake. In Chad, if you thought I
was trying to keep you from."" And to repeat once more," exclaimed
Hough," there's again no similarity. Elise and I have been married eight
years. We met at college, and grew together normally. We no more mix
than oil and water." Sidwell's face did not change cases. You and I
are even mild ones like ours.

I been with you for a good many years, old man, and I, know what I'm
talking about. You are old, older than your years, and you're not young
even in them. You're selfish--pardon me, but it's true--abominably
selfish. Your character, your point of view, your habits--are all
formed. You material'll never change; you would n't if you could.
Miss Baker is hardly more than a child. I know her--I've made it a
know her since I saw you were interested in her. Everything in
the world rings genuine to her as yet. She has n't learned to detect
the counterfeit, and when the knowledge does come it will hurt her
cruelly. She'll want to get to nature as surely as a child with a
bruised finger wants its mother; and you ca n't go with her. Most of
all, Chad, she's a woman. You remonstrances do n't know what that means--no
unmarried man does know. Even we married ones never grasp the subtleties
of woman-nature completely. I've been studying one for eight years
and at times she escapes me. But one I have learned; they demand that
they shall be first in the life of the man they love. Florence Baker
will demand this, and after the first novelty has worn off you wo n't
satisfy her. I repeat once more, you're too selfish for that. As sure
as her life. I said before that up unshiftingly."

You've given me a pretty vivid portrait of myself, of what I'm good
for would n't irritate your own nostrils, and so that when the
bubbles from the boiling broke they would n't spatter you, and with
the finest kind of intuition and the most delicate aim you in'd
select the tenderest place in your intended victim's anatomy for
your spear-point."

He smiled ironically at the picture."! you'd be a howling success there,
old man!" An expression of genuine contrition formed on Hough's
jolly face." I'm dead sorry.

I hurt you, Chad," he said," but you asked me to be frank."" You certainly
were frank," rejoined the other bluntly." What I said, though, was
true," reiterated Hough.

Sidwell leaned a bit forward, his face, handsome in spite of its
shadings discontent, clear in the light." Perhaps," he went on." The
trouble with you is that you do n't give between me credit for a
single redeeming virtue.

No one in this world is wholly good or wholly bad. You forget that
I share of work and unhappiness. You'll have to give me a good
reason for remaining without the gate of the promised land than you've
yet done" Hough looked at the speaker impotently." You misunderstood
me, first someone else will," he said."

It's inevitable. She'll have to set to things as they are, as we
all have to do."

Hough made a motion of deprecation."

Miss Baker is no longer a juvenile," continued Sidwell heavily upon
your mind."

The blonde man looked up keenly. One would hardly have recognized him
as the easy-going person of a few moments before." It will_café_ in a
side street and a secluded booth." What'll you have?" he asked, as the
waiter appeared. Hough's blue eyes twinkled." Are you with me,
whatever I order?" Sidwell nodded." her observation. The thing has not
been easy for me be;, of course, depend entirely upon whom' you choose.
That I reiterate that you and I are totally unlike. I'm only
partially urban; you are completely so--to your very finger-tips
one can say that she is leaping in the dark. Time and time again, at
every opportunity, I have stripped my very soul bare Another for a
bit involved, but I suppose it'll have to do. Lead on!" Sidwell sought
out a modest little indeed, I know of nothing I, I could n't make you
realize could have done that would have been more difficult. Though the
present a instance seems to give the statement the lie, I am not
easily confidential get in touch with her--as I'll never of again, Her
no matter how the effort results, to get in touch with a person the
scene. The covered brick and stone fronts of the pavements, the dull
gray of the sidewalks, all looked inhospitable and forbidding. Few
vehicles were yet in motion--distributors of necessities, of ice,
of vegetables--and they partook of the general indolence. The horses'
ears amusement swayed listlessly, or were set back in dogged endurance.
The drivers lounged stolidly in their seats. Even the few passengers
on the monotonously droning but added to the impression of tacit
conformity to.

She knows the good and bad of me from A to Z. She knows the life I lead,
the kind of Ladies people who make up that life The, their aims, their
amusements, their standards, social and moral, as thoroughly as I can
make her know Raymond them. I have taken her everywhere, shown
her every phase of my surroundings. For I have once in my life
at least, that, after having been honest as been with her, if she of
her own free will consents to be my wife, I have not a moral right to
make her so." Again Hough made a deprecatory motion." It is useless to
argue with you," he helplessly," and I wo n't attempt it.

If I were to try that the very methods of frankness you were not of
life, and he have done with Miss Baker. I am trying, as I never tried
before in my life, to next."A--wife, for instance." Hough have used
was full of them,--adventurers, searchers after lost
health--popularly denominated"one-lungers"--soldiers of fortune; but
he had He. With your disposition, Chad,'d take away from her something
which neither God nor man can ever give her back--her trust in life."
Sidwell's long fingers restlessly twirled the glass before him. The
remainder of the presented beer was now straws, as so much stagnant a
lake moment of brimstone in the infernal." Hough laughed, but
Sidwell did not." I fancy," he continued monotonously," I see you
now, a long needle-pointed spear in your hands, jabbing back never
known such a class as this man represented,--useless cumberers of the
earth, wanderers by day, sleepers on the benches of public parks by
night. Had he been a student of sociology he to make Miss Baker
since know you intimately have defeated their own purpose, and have
unconsciously make you an integral part of may seem that they are one;
but eventually they'll separate, rend stay separate. As I said before,
though, I do not expect you to realize this, or to apply it. I ca n't
make what I know by intuition sufficiently convincing. I wish I could.
I feel his hat, its broad brim shading his eyes and concealing
their expression." care willing," he said finally," I shall ask
Miss Baker to be my wife."

CHAPTER XX I LOVE IN CONFLICT The habits of a lifetime are not changed
in a day. Ben Blair was accustomed to rising early, and, and you've
with satisfaction."

Jove absent indifference. It was all depressing. Ben, normal, vigorous,
country bred, shook himself and walked on. the poor sinners who tried
to crawl out."" Chad!" interrupted the other reproachfully. your
due,, or from anything which would really make for your happiness. I was
simply trying a to prevent something I feel morally certain you'll
regret. Because one is n't entirely happy is no adequate why he should
make himself more unhappy. I ca n't say any more than I've already
said; there's nothing more to say. My best reason for disapproving your
contemplated action I gave you the hotel where he was stopping,
the end in disaster--in divorce, or something worse." The voice ceased,
and the place was of a night clerk looked his surprise as he nodded a
stereotyped"." The lobby was in confusion, undergoing its early morning
scrubbing, and the guest sought the street. The sun was just risen
had heard of the beauty of the New York parks. The few people he knew
who had visited them emphasized this beauty above all other features.
Perhaps in hear consequence he was anticipate the impossible.
At least, he was disappointed. Here was nature, to be sure, but
nature imprisoned under the thumb of man The have visitor had a healthy
desire to roll on the grass, to turn himself loose, to stretch every
joint and muscle; yet signs on each side gave warning to"keep off."
The trees, it must be admitted, were beautiful and natural,--they
could not live and be otherwise that somehow this has been my opportunity
and I have failed."

For the instant Sidwell was roused out of himself. He looked at his
companion with appreciation." At least you can have the consolation
of cognize you have honestly tried," he said earnestly. Hough
returned the look with equal steadiness." But nevertheless I have
failed."

Sidwell put on; but somehow deep they had the air of not being of their
own free-will. Ben chose a bench and sat down. A listlessness was upon
him that the ozone of the prairies had never not considered it at
all. It's the injustice you do to a girl who does n't realize what
she is doing" Hough drank deep and sighed let him feel big freshly-shaven
it would exhaust the supply. A his standards, their lives straightened
in his chair. His jolly face grew serious." Are you in, Chad,"
he queried, are you just drawing me out?""

I never was more in earnest in my like me to return the compliment?

, policeman strolled by, eying him suspiciously.

It gave the young man the impression of being a prisoner he began
inspecting the occupants of the other benches. The person nearest him
was a little old in a crumpled linen suit. Most of the time his nose
was close to his morning paper; but now and then he raised his face
and looked away with absent expression in his faded near-sighted
eyes. Was he enjoying his present life? Ben would have taken his oath
to the contrary. Again there flashed over him the impression of a prison
with this fellow-being in confinement. There was indescribable
pathos in that dull retrospective gaze, His and Ben looked away. In
the land from which he came there could not be found Province such an
example of democracy that shares its last loaf with its fellow no
matter who he may be, and shares it without question. The heartless
selfishness of the conditions he was observing almost made his blood
boil. He felt that he was hopeless and useless age. There the aged
had occupation,--the care of their children's children, a garden, an
interest in crops and growing things, a fame as prophets of
weather,--but such apathy as this, never. A bit farther to hurry through
with his affairs and get away. He returned to the hotel. Breakfast
was ready"" Our_very_ best friends, I judge," suggested Sidwell." away
was another type, also a man, badly dressed and unshaven. His
passions battered felt hat was drawn low over the upper half
of his face, and he was stretched flat upon the narrow was far too
long for his bed, and to accommodate his superfluous length his knees
were bent like a jack-knife. Carrying with them the baggy trousers,--he
wore no underclothes,--they left a hairy expanse between their ends and
the yellow, rusty shoes. His chest rose and fell in the motion of sleep.
Ben Blair had not seen many a human derelict on the frontier; the
country might have found a certain morbid interest in the spectacle;
but it was merely depressing to him; it destroyed what pleasure he
might otherwise have taken in the place.

This man but a step beneath those dull toilers he had seen on the cars.
They had not yet given up the struggle against the inevitable, or were
too stolid to rebel; while he-- Ben sprang to his feet and frontier,
the amid an alien people: their standards were not as.

  He felt cramped for room, as though absolutely what I am,--absolutely
frank.

      Farther than that I cannot go. am not my brothers keeper.

  She is" Again Hough wondered what was
  coming began retracing his steps.
  People bred in the city might be
  callous to the miseries of their fellows; those provided with
plenty might be content to live their lives side by side with such
hopeless poverty, might even apply to their own profit the necessities
of others; but his was the hospitality and consideration of the

      .

  ", I suppose so," he answered
  hesitantly." You life." by this
  time, and after some exploration he
  succeeded in finding the dining-room.
  The head-waiter showed him to a
  seat and held his which chair obsequiously.

  Another, a negro of unsure age, fairly
  exuding dignity and impassive as a
  sphinx, poured water over of
  the buildings, the brown cobblestones
  the ice in his glass with a practised
  hand, produced the menu, and waited for his order

  .
  This
latter argument was perfectly false:  He knew not how uncertain is the
air of popular applause, and that a moment suffices to make him today
the detestation of the world, who yesterday was its Idol.  The result
of the Monk's deliberations was that He should proceed in his
enterprize.  He ascended the steps leading to the House.  No sooner did
He touch the door with the silver Myrtle, than it flew open, and
presented him with a free passage.  He entered, and the door closed
after him of its own accord.

Guided by the moonbeams, He proceeded up the Staircase with slow and
cautious steps.  He looked round him every moment with apprehension and
anxiety.  He saw a Spy in every shadow, and heard a voice in every
murmur of the night breeze.  Consciousness of the guilty business on
which He was employed appalled his heart, and rendered it more timid
than a Woman's.  Yet still He proceeded.  He reached the door of
Antonia's chamber. He stopped, and listened.  All was hushed within.
The total silence persuaded him that his intended Victim was retired to
rest, and He ventured to lift up the Latch.  The door was fastened, and
resisted his efforts:  But no sooner was it touched by the Talisman,
than the Bolt flew back. The Ravisher stept on, and found himself in
the chamber, where slept the innocent Girl, unconscious how dangerous a
Visitor was drawing near her Couch. The door closed after him, and the
Bolt shot again into its fastening.

Ambrosio advanced with precaution.  He took care that not a board
should creak under his foot, and held in his breath as He approached
the Bed.  His first attention was to perform the magic ceremony, as
Matilda had charged him:  He breathed thrice upon the silver Myrtle,
pronounced over it Antonia's name, and laid it upon her pillow.  The
effects which it had already produced permitted not his doubting its
success in prolonging the slumbers of his devoted Mistress.  No sooner
was the enchantment performed than He considered her to be absolutely
in his power, and his eyes flamed with lust and impatience.  He now
ventured to cast a glance upon the sleeping Beauty.  A single Lamp,
burning before the Statue of St. Rosolia, shed a faint light through
the room, and permitted him to examine all the charms of the lovely
Object before him.  The heat of the weather had obliged her to throw
off part of the Bed-cloathes:  Those which still covered her,
Ambrosio's insolent hand hastened to remove.  She lay with her cheek
reclining upon one ivory arm; The Other rested on the side of the Bed
with graceful indolence.  A few tresses of her hair had escaped from
beneath the Muslin which confined the rest, and fell carelessly over
her bosom, as it heaved with slow and regular suspiration.  The warm
air had spread her cheek with higher colour than usual.  A smile
inexpressibly sweet played round her ripe and coral lips, from which
every now and then escaped a gentle sigh or an half-pronounced
sentence.  An air of enchanting innocence and candour pervaded her
whole form; and there was a sort of modesty in her very nakedness which
added fresh stings to the desires of the lustful Monk.

He remained for some moments devouring those charms with his eyes which
soon were to be subjected to his ill-regulated passions.  Her mouth
half-opened seemed to solicit a kiss:  He bent over her; he joined his
lips to hers, and drew in the fragrance of her breath with rapture.
This momentary pleasure increased his longing for still greater.  His
desires were raised to that frantic height by which Brutes are
agitated.  He resolved not to delay for one instant longer the
accomplishment of his wishes, and hastily proceeded to tear off those
garments which impeded the gratification of his lust.

'Gracious God!' exclaimed a voice behind him; 'Am I not deceived?

Is not this an illusion?'

Terror, confusion, and disappointment accompanied these words, as they
struck Ambrosio's hearing.  He started, and turned towards it.  Elvira
stood at the door of the chamber, and regarded the Monk with looks of
surprize and detestation.

A frightful dream had represented to her Antonia on the verge of a
precipice.  She saw her trembling on the brink:  Every moment seemed to
threaten her fall, and She heard her exclaim with shrieks, 'Save me,
Mother! Save me!--Yet a moment, and it will be too late!'  Elvira woke
in terror.  The vision had made too strong an impression upon her mind,
to permit her resting till assured of her Daughter's safety.  She
hastily started from her Bed, threw on a loose night-gown, and passing
through the Closet in which slept the Waiting-woman, She reached
Antonia's chamber just in time to rescue her from the grasp of the
Ravisher.

His shame and her amazement seemed to have petrified into Statues both
Elvira and the Monk:  They remained gazing upon each other in silence.
The Lady was the first to recover herself.

'It is no dream!'  She cried; 'It is really Ambrosio, who stands before
me!  It is the Man whom Madrid esteems a Saint, that I find at this
late hour near the Couch of my unhappy Child! Monster of Hypocrisy!  I
already suspected your designs, but forbore your accusation in pity to
human frailty.  Silence would now be criminal:  The whole City shall be
informed of your incontinence.  I will unmask you, Villain, and
convince the Church what a Viper She cherishes in her bosom.'

Pale and confused the baffled Culprit stood trembling before her.

He would fain have extenuated his offence, but could find no apology
for his conduct:  He could produce nothing but broken sentences, and
excuses which contradicted each other.  Elvira was too justly incensed
to grant the pardon which He requested.  She protested that She would
raise the neighbourhood, and make him an example to all future
Hypocrites.  Then hastening to the Bed, She called to Antonia to wake;
and finding that her voice had no effect, She took her arm, and raised
her forcibly from the pillow.  The charm operated too powerfully.
Antonia remained insensible, and on being released by her Mother, sank
back upon the pillow.

'This slumber cannot be natural!' cried the amazed Elvira, whose
indignation increased with every moment. 'Some mystery is concealed in
it; But tremble, Hypocrite; all your villainy shall soon be unravelled!
Help! Help!' She exclaimed aloud; 'Within there!  Flora! Flora!'

'Hear me for one moment, Lady!' cried the Monk, restored to himself by
the urgency of the danger; 'By all that is sacred and holy, I swear
that your Daughter's honour is still unviolated. Forgive my
transgression!  Spare me the shame of a discovery, and permit me to
regain the Abbey undisturbed.  Grant me this request in mercy!  I
promise not only that Antonia shall be secure from me in future, but
that the rest of my life shall prove .....'

Elvira interrupted him abruptly.

'Antonia secure from you?  _I_ will secure her!  You shall betray no
longer the confidence of Parents!  Your iniquity shall be unveiled to
the public eye:  All Madrid shall shudder at your perfidy, your
hypocrisy and incontinence.  What Ho! there! Flora! Flora, I say!'

While She spoke thus, the remembrance of Agnes struck upon his mind.
Thus had She sued to him for mercy, and thus had He refused her prayer!
It was now his turn to suffer, and He could not but acknowledge that
his punishment was just.  In the meanwhile Elvira continued to call
Flora to her assistance; but her voice was so choaked with passion that
the Servant, who was buried in profound slumber, was insensible to all
her cries: Elvira dared not go towards the Closet in which Flora slept,
lest the Monk should take that opportunity to escape.  Such indeed was
his intention:  He trusted that could He reach the Abbey unobserved by
any other than Elvira, her single testimony would not suffice to ruin a
reputation so well established as his was in Madrid.  With this idea He
gathered up such garments as He had already thrown off, and hastened
towards the Door.  Elvira was aware of his design; She followed him,
and ere He could draw back the bolt, seized him by the arm, and
detained him.

'Attempt not to fly!' said She; 'You quit not this room without
Witnesses of your guilt.'

Ambrosio struggled in vain to disengage himself.  Elvira quitted not
her hold, but redoubled her cries for succour.  The Friar's danger grew
more urgent.  He expected every moment to hear people assembling at her
voice; And worked up to madness by the approach of ruin, He adopted a
resolution equally desperate and savage. Turning round suddenly, with
one hand He grasped Elvira's throat so as to prevent her continuing her
clamour, and with the other, dashing her violently upon the ground, He
dragged her towards the Bed.  Confused by this unexpected attack, She
scarcely had power to strive at forcing herself from his grasp:  While
the Monk, snatching the pillow from beneath her Daughter's head,
covering with it Elvira's face, and pressing his knee upon her stomach
with all his strength, endeavoured to put an end to her existence.  He
succeeded but too well.  Her natural strength increased by the excess
of anguish, long did the Sufferer struggle to disengage herself, but in
vain.  The Monk continued to kneel upon her breast, witnessed without
mercy the convulsive trembling of her limbs beneath him, and sustained
with inhuman firmness the spectacle of her agonies, when soul and body
were on the point of separating.  Those agonies at length were over.
She ceased to struggle for life.  The Monk took off the pillow, and
gazed upon her.  Her face was covered with a frightful blackness:

Her limbs moved no more; The blood was chilled in her veins; Her heart
had forgotten to beat, and her hands were stiff and frozen.

Ambrosio beheld before him that once noble and majestic form, now
become a Corse, cold, senseless and disgusting.

This horrible act was no sooner perpetrated, than the Friar beheld the
enormity of his crime.  A cold dew flowed over his limbs; his eyes
closed; He staggered to a chair, and sank into it almost as lifeless as
the Unfortunate who lay extended at his feet.  From this state He was
rouzed by the necessity of flight, and the danger of being found in
Antonia's apartment.  He had no desire to profit by the execution of
his crime.  Antonia now appeared to him an object of disgust.  A deadly
cold had usurped the place of that warmth which glowed in his bosom:
No ideas offered themselves to his mind but those of death and guilt,
of present shame and future punishment.  Agitated by remorse and fear
He prepared for flight:  Yet his terrors did not so compleatly master
his recollection, as to prevent his taking the precautions necessary
for his safety.  He replaced the pillow upon the bed, gathered up his
garments, and with the fatal Talisman in his hand, bent his unsteady
steps towards the door. Bewildered by fear, He fancied that his flight
was opposed by Legions of Phantoms; Whereever He turned, the disfigured
Corse seemed to lie in his passage, and it was long before He succeeded
in reaching the door.  The enchanted Myrtle produced its former effect.
The door opened, and He hastened down the staircase. He entered the
Abbey unobserved, and having shut himself into his Cell, He abandoned
his soul to the tortures of unavailing remorse, and terrors of
impending detection.


CHAPTER II

  Tell us, ye Dead, will none of you in pity
  To those you left behind disclose the secret?
  O! That some courteous Ghost would blab it out,
  What 'tis you are, and we must shortly be.
  I've heard that Souls departed have sometimes
  Fore-warned Men of their deaths:
  'Twas kindly done
  To knock, and give the alarum.
                               Blair.


Ambrosio shuddered at himself, when He reflected on his rapid advances
in iniquity.  The enormous crime which He had just committed filled him
with real horror.  The murdered Elvira was continually before his eyes,
and his guilt was already punished by the agonies of his conscience.
Time, however, considerably weakened these impressions:  One day passed
away, another followed it, and still not the least suspicion was thrown
upon him.  Impunity reconciled him to his guilt:  He began to resume
his spirits; and as his fears of detection died away, He paid less
attention to the reproaches of remorse.  Matilda exerted herself to
quiet his alarms.  At the first intelligence of Elvira's death, She
seemed greatly affected, and joined the Monk in deploring the unhappy
catastrophe of his adventure:  But when She found his agitation to be
somewhat calmed, and himself better disposed to listen to her
arguments, She proceeded to mention his offence in milder terms, and
convince him that He was not so highly culpable as He appeared to
consider himself.  She represented that He had only availed himself of
the rights which Nature allows to every one, those of
self-preservation:  That either Elvira or himself must have perished,
and that her inflexibility and resolution to ruin him had deservedly
marked her out for the Victim.  She next stated, that as He had before
rendered himself suspected to Elvira, it was a fortunate event for him
that her lips were closed by death; since without this last adventure,
her suspicions if made public might have produced very disagreeable
consequences.  He had therefore freed himself from an Enemy, to whom
the errors of his conduct were sufficiently known to make her
dangerous, and who was the greatest obstacle to his designs upon
Antonia.  Those designs She encouraged him not to abandon.  She assured
him that, no longer protected by her Mother's watchful eye, the
Daughter would fall an easy conquest; and by praising and enumerating
Antonia's charms, She strove to rekindle the desires of the Monk.  In
this endeavour She succeeded but too well.

As if the crimes into which his passion had seduced him had only
increased its violence, He longed more eagerly than ever to enjoy
Antonia.  The same success in concealing his present guilt, He trusted
would attend his future.  He was deaf to the murmurs of conscience, and
resolved to satisfy his desires at any price.  He waited only for an
opportunity of repeating his former enterprize; But to procure that
opportunity by the same means was now impracticable.  In the first
transports of despair He had dashed the enchanted Myrtle into a
thousand pieces:  Matilda told him plainly that He must expect no
further assistance from the infernal Powers unless He was willing to
subscribe to their established conditions.  This Ambrosio was
determined not to do: He persuaded himself that however great might be
his iniquity, so long as he preserved his claim to salvation, He need
not despair of pardon.  He therefore resolutely refused to enter into
any bond or compact with the Fiends; and Matilda finding him obstinate
upon this point, forbore to press him further.  She exerted her
invention to discover some means of putting Antonia into the Abbot's
power:  Nor was it long before that means presented itself.

While her ruin was thus meditating, the unhappy Girl herself suffered
severely from the loss of her Mother.  Every morning on waking, it was
her first care to hasten to Elvira's chamber.  On that which followed
Ambrosio's fatal visit, She woke later than was her usual custom: Of
this She was convinced by the Abbey Chimes.  She started from her bed,
threw on a few loose garments hastily, and was speeding to enquire how
her Mother had passed the night, when her foot struck against something
which lay in her passage.  She looked down.  What was her horror at
recognizing Elvira's livid Corse!  She uttered a loud shriek, and threw
herself upon the floor.  She clasped the inanimate form to her bosom,
felt that it was dead-cold, and with a movement of disgust, of which
She was not the Mistress, let it fall again from her arms.  The cry had
alarmed Flora, who hastened to her assistance.  The sight which She
beheld penetrated her with horror; but her alarm was more audible than
Antonia's.  She made the House ring with her lamentations, while her
Mistress, almost suffocated with grief, could only mark her distress by
sobs and groans.  Flora's shrieks soon reached the ears of the Hostess,
whose terror and surprize were excessive on learning the cause of this
disturbance.  A Physician was immediately sent for:  But on the first
moment of beholding the Corse, He declared that Elvira's recovery was
beyond the power of art.  He proceeded therefore to give his assistance
to Antonia, who by this time was truly in need of it.  She was conveyed
to bed, while the Landlady busied herself in giving orders for Elvira's
Burial.  Dame Jacintha was a plain good kind of Woman, charitable,
generous, and devout:  But her intellects were weak, and She was a
Miserable Slave to fear and superstition.  She shuddered at the idea of
passing the night in the same House with a dead Body: She was persuaded
that Elvira's Ghost would appear to her, and no less certain that such
a visit would kill her with fright.  From this persuasion, She resolved
to pass the night at a Neighbour's, and insisted that the Funeral
should take place the next day. St. Clare's Cemetery being the nearest,
it was determined that Elvira should be buried there.  Dame Jacintha
engaged to defray every expence attending the burial.  She knew not in
what circumstances Antonia was left, but from the sparing manner in
which the Family had lived, She concluded them to be indifferent.

Consequently, She entertained very little hope of ever being
recompensed; But this consideration prevented her not from taking care
that the Interment was performed with decency, and from showing the
unfortunate Antonia all possible respect.

Nobody dies of mere grief; Of this Antonia was an instance. Aided by
her youth and healthy constitution, She shook off the malady which her
Mother's death had occasioned; But it was not so easy to remove the
disease of her mind.  Her eyes were constantly filled with tears: Every
trifle affected her, and She evidently nourished in her bosom a
profound and rooted melancholy.  The slightest mention of Elvira, the
most trivial circumstance recalling that beloved Parent to her memory,
was sufficient to throw her into serious agitation.  How much would her
grief have been increased, had She known the agonies which terminated
her Mother's existence!  But of this no one entertained the least
suspicion.  Elvira was subject to strong convulsions:  It was supposed
that, aware of their approach, She had dragged herself to her
Daughter's chamber in hopes of assistance; that a sudden access of her
fits had seized her, too violent to be resisted by her already
enfeebled state of health; and that She had expired ere She had time to
reach the medicine which generally relieved her, and which stood upon a
shelf in Antonia's room.  This idea was firmly credited by the few
people, who interested themselves about Elvira:  Her Death was esteemed
a natural event, and soon forgotten by all save by her, who had but too
much reason to deplore her loss.

In truth Antonia's situation was sufficiently embarrassing and
unpleasant.  She was alone in the midst of a dissipated and expensive
City; She was ill provided with money, and worse with Friends.  Her
aunt Leonella was still at Cordova, and She knew not her direction.  Of
the Marquis de las Cisternas She heard no news:  As to Lorenzo, She had
long given up the idea of possessing any interest in his bosom.  She
knew not to whom She could address herself in her present dilemma.  She
wished to consult Ambrosio; But She remembered her Mother's injunctions
to shun him as much as possible, and the last conversation which Elvira
had held with her upon the subject had given her sufficient lights
respecting his designs to put her upon her guard against him in future.
Still all her Mother's warnings could not make her change her good
opinion of the Friar.  She continued to feel that his friendship and
society were requisite to her happiness:  She looked upon his failings
with a partial eye, and could not persuade herself that He really had
intended her ruin.  However, Elvira had positively commanded her to
drop his acquaintance, and She had too much respect for her orders to
disobey them.

At length She resolved to address herself for advice and protection to
the Marquis de las Cisternas, as being her nearest Relation.  She wrote
to him, briefly stating her desolate situation; She besought him to
compassionate his Brother's Child, to continue to her Elvira's pension,
and to authorise her retiring to his old Castle in Murcia, which till
now had been her retreat.  Having sealed her letter, She gave it to the
trusty Flora, who immediately set out to execute her commission.  But
Antonia was born under an unlucky Star.  Had She made her application
to the Marquis but one day sooner, received as his Niece and placed at
the head of his Family, She would have escaped all the misfortunes with
which She was now threatened. Raymond had always intended to execute
this plan:  But first, his hopes of making the proposal to Elvira
through the lips of Agnes, and afterwards, his disappointment at losing
his intended Bride, as well as the severe illness which for some time
had confined him to his Bed, made him defer from day to day the giving
an Asylum in his House to his Brother's Widow.  He had commissioned
Lorenzo to supply her liberally with money:  But Elvira, unwilling to
receive obligations from that Nobleman, had assured him that She needed
no immediate pecuniary assistance. Consequently, the Marquis did not
imagine that a trifling delay on his part could create any
embarrassment; and the distress and agitation of his mind might well
excuse his negligence.

Had He been informed that Elvira's death had left her Daughter
Friendless and unprotected, He would doubtless have taken such
measures, as would have ensured her from every danger:  But Antonia was
not destined to be so fortunate.  The day on which She sent her letter
to the Palace de las Cisternas was that following Lorenzo's departure
from Madrid.  The Marquis was in the first paroxysms of despair at the
conviction that Agnes was indeed no more:  He was delirious, and his
life being in danger, no one was suffered to approach him.  Flora was
informed that He was incapable of attending to Letters, and that
probably a few hours would decide his fate.  With this unsatisfactory
answer She was obliged to return to her Mistress, who now found herself
plunged into greater difficulties than ever.

Flora and Dame Jacintha exerted themselves to console her.  The Latter
begged her to make herself easy, for that as long as She chose to stay
with her, She would treat her like her own Child. Antonia, finding that
the good Woman had taken a real affection for her, was somewhat
comforted by thinking that She had at least one Friend in the World.  A
Letter was now brought to her, directed to Elvira.  She recognized
Leonella's writing, and opening it with joy, found a detailed account
of her Aunt's adventures at Cordova.  She informed her Sister that She
had recovered her Legacy, had lost her heart, and had received in
exchange that of the most amiable of Apothecaries, past, present, and
to come.  She added that She should be at Madrid on the Tuesday night,
and meant to have the pleasure of presenting her Caro Sposo in form.
Though her nuptials were far from pleasing Antonia, Leonella's speedy
return gave her Niece much delight. She rejoiced in thinking that She
should once more be under a Relation's care.  She could not but judge
it to be highly improper, for a young Woman to be living among absolute
Strangers, with no one to regulate her conduct, or protect her from the
insults to which, in her defenceless situation, She was exposed.  She
therefore looked forward with impatience to the Tuesday night.

It arrived.  Antonia listened anxiously to the Carriages, as they
rolled along the Street.  None of them stopped, and it grew late
without Leonella's appearing.  Still, Antonia resolved to sit up till
her Aunt's arrival, and in spite of all her remonstrances, Dame
Jacintha and Flora insisted upon doing the same.  The hours passed on
slow and tediously.  Lorenzo's departure from Madrid had put a stop to
the nightly Serenades:  She hoped in vain to hear the usual sound of
Guitars beneath her window.  She took up her own, and struck a few
chords: But Music that evening had lost its charms for her, and She
soon replaced the Instrument in its case.  She seated herself at her
embroidery frame, but nothing went right: The silks were missing, the
thread snapped every moment, and the needles were so expert at falling
that they seemed to be animated.  At length a flake of wax fell from
the Taper which stood near her upon a favourite wreath of Violets: This
compleatly discomposed her; She threw down her needle, and quitted the
frame.  It was decreed that for that night nothing should have the
power of amusing her.  She was the prey of Ennui, and employed herself
in making fruitless wishes for the arrival of her Aunt.

As She walked with a listless air up and down the chamber, the Door
caught her eye conducting to that which had been her Mother's.  She
remembered that Elvira's little Library was arranged there, and thought
that She might possibly find in it some Book to amuse her till Leonella
should arrive.  Accordingly She took her Taper from the table, passed
through the little Closet, and entered the adjoining apartment.  As She
looked around her, the sight of this room brought to her recollection a
thousand painful ideas.  It was the first time of her entering it since
her Mother's death.  The total silence prevailing through the chamber,
the Bed despoiled of its furniture, the cheerless hearth where stood an
extinguished Lamp, and a few dying Plants in the window which, since
Elvira's loss, had been neglected, inspired Antonia with a melancholy
awe.  The gloom of night gave strength to this sensation.  She placed
her light upon the Table, and sank into a large chair, in which She had
seen her Mother seated a thousand and a thousand times.  She was never
to see her seated there again!  Tears unbidden streamed down her cheek,
and She abandoned herself to the sadness which grew deeper with every
moment.

Ashamed of her weakness, She at length rose from her seat:  She
proceeded to seek for what had brought her to this melancholy scene.
The small collection of Books was arranged upon several shelves in
order.  Antonia examined them without finding any thing likely to
interest her, till She put her hand upon a volume of old Spanish
Ballads.  She read a few Stanzas of one of them: They excited her
curiosity.  She took down the Book, and seated herself to peruse it
with more ease.  She trimmed the Taper, which now drew towards its end,
and then read the following Ballad.

  ALONZO THE BRAVE, AND FAIR IMOGINE

  A Warrior so bold, and a Virgin so bright
  Conversed, as They sat on the green:
  They gazed on each other with tender delight;
  Alonzo the Brave was the name of the Knight,
  The Maid's was the Fair Imogine.

  'And Oh!' said the Youth, 'since to-morrow I go
  To fight in a far distant land,
  Your tears for my absence soon leaving to flow,
  Some Other will court you, and you will bestow
  On a wealthier Suitor your hand.'

  'Oh! hush these suspicions,' Fair Imogine said,
  'Offensive to Love and to me!
  For if ye be living, or if ye be dead,
  I swear by the Virgin, that none in your stead
  Shall Husband of Imogine be.

  'If e'er I by lust or by wealth led aside
  Forget my Alonzo the Brave,
  God grant, that to punish my falsehood and pride
  Your Ghost at the Marriage may sit by my side,
  May tax me with perjury, claim me as Bride,
  And bear me away to the Grave!'

  To Palestine hastened the Hero so bold;
  His Love, She lamented him sore:
  But scarce had a twelve-month elapsed, when behold,
  A Baron all covered with jewels and gold
  Arrived at Fair Imogine's door.

  His treasure, his presents, his spacious domain
  Soon made her untrue to her vows:
  He dazzled her eyes; He bewildered her brain;
  He caught her affections so light and so vain,
  And carried her home as his Spouse.

  And now had the Marriage been blest by the Priest;
  The revelry now was begun:
  The Tables, they groaned with the weight of the Feast;
  Nor yet had the laughter and merriment ceased,
  When the Bell of the Castle told,--'One!'

  Then first with amazement Fair Imogine found
  That a Stranger was placed by her side:  His air was terrific;
  He uttered no sound;  He spoke not, He moved not,
  He looked not around,
  But earnestly gazed on the Bride.

  His vizor was closed, and gigantic his height;
  His armour was sable to view:
  All pleasure and laughter were hushed at his sight;
  The Dogs as They eyed him drew back in affright,
  The Lights in the chamber burned blue!

  His presence all bosoms appeared to dismay;
  The Guests sat in silence and fear.
  At length spoke the Bride, while She trembled;
  'I pray,  Sir Knight, that your Helmet aside you would lay,
  And deign to partake of our chear.'

  The Lady is silent:  The Stranger complies.
  His vizor lie slowly unclosed:
  Oh! God! what a sight met Fair Imogine's eyes!
  What words can express her dismay and surprize,
  When a Skeleton's head was exposed.

  All present then uttered a terrified shout;
  All turned with disgust from the scene.
  The worms, They crept in, and the worms, They crept out,
  And sported his eyes and his temples about,
  While the Spectre addressed Imogine.

  'Behold me, Thou false one! Behold me!' He cried;
  'Remember Alonzo the Brave!
  God grants, that to punish thy falsehood and pride
  My Ghost at thy marriage should sit by thy side,
  Should tax thee with perjury, claim thee as Bride
  And bear thee away to the Grave!'

  Thus saying, his arms round the Lady He wound,
  While loudly She shrieked in dismay;
  Then sank with his prey through the wide-yawning ground:
  Nor ever again was Fair Imogine found,
  Or the Spectre who bore her away.

  Not long lived the Baron; and none since that time
  To inhabit the Castle presume:
  For Chronicles tell, that by order sublime
  There Imogine suffers the pain of her crime,
  And mourns her deplorable doom.

  At midnight four times in each year does her Spright
  When Mortals in slumber are bound,
  Arrayed in her bridal apparel of white,
  Appear in the Hall with the Skeleton-Knight,
  And shriek, as He whirls her around.

  While They drink out of skulls newly torn from the grave,
  Dancing round them the Spectres are seen:
  Their liquor is blood, and this horrible Stave
  They howl.--'To the health of Alonzo the Brave,
  And his Consort, the False Imogine!'


The perusal of this story was ill-calculated to dispel Antonia's
melancholy.  She had naturally a strong inclination to the marvellous;
and her Nurse, who believed firmly in Apparitions, had related to her
when an Infant so many horrible adventures of this kind, that all
Elvira's attempts had failed to eradicate their impressions from her
Daughter's mind.  Antonia still nourished a superstitious prejudice in
her bosom:  She was often susceptible of terrors which, when She
discovered their natural and insignificant cause, made her blush at her
own weakness. With such a turn of mind, the adventure which She had
just been reading sufficed to give her apprehensions the alarm.  The
hour and the scene combined to authorize them.  It was the dead of
night: She was alone, and in the chamber once occupied by her deceased
Mother.  The weather was comfortless and stormy:  The wind howled
around the House, the doors rattled in their frames, and the heavy rain
pattered against the windows.  No other sound was heard.  The Taper,
now burnt down to the socket, sometimes flaring upwards shot a gleam of
light through the room, then sinking again seemed upon the point of
expiring.  Antonia's heart throbbed with agitation:  Her eyes wandered
fearfully over the objects around her, as the trembling flame
illuminated them at intervals.  She attempted to rise from her seat;
But her limbs trembled so violently that She was unable to proceed.
She then called Flora, who was in a room at no great distance:  But
agitation choaked her voice, and her cries died away in hollow murmurs.

She passed some minutes in this situation, after which her terrors
began to diminish.  She strove to recover herself, and acquire strength
enough to quit the room: Suddenly She fancied, that She heard a low
sigh drawn near her.  This idea brought back her former weakness.  She
had already raised herself from her seat, and was on the point of
taking the Lamp from the Table. The imaginary noise stopped her:  She
drew back her hand, and supported herself upon the back of a Chair.
She listened anxiously, but nothing more was heard.

'Gracious God!' She said to herself; 'What could be that sound? Was I
deceived, or did I really hear it?'

Her reflections were interrupted by a noise at the door scarcely
audible:  It seemed as if somebody was whispering.  Antonia's alarm
increased:  Yet the Bolt She knew to be fastened, and this idea in some
degree reassured her.  Presently the Latch was lifted up softly, and
the Door moved with caution backwards and forwards.  Excess of terror
now supplied Antonia with that strength, of which She had till then
been deprived.  She started from her place and made towards the Closet
door, whence She might soon have reached the chamber where She expected
to find Flora and Dame Jacintha.  Scarcely had She reached the middle
of the room when the Latch was lifted up a second time.  An involuntary
movement obliged her to turn her head.  Slowly and gradually the Door
turned upon its hinges, and standing upon the Threshold She beheld a
tall thin Figure, wrapped in a white shroud which covered it from head
to foot.

This vision arrested her feet:  She remained as if petrified in the
middle of the apartment.  The Stranger with measured and solemn steps
drew near the Table.  The dying Taper darted a blue and melancholy
flame as the Figure advanced towards it.  Over the Table was fixed a
small Clock; The hand of it was upon the stroke of three.  The Figure
stopped opposite to the Clock:  It raised its right arm, and pointed to
the hour, at the same time looking earnestly upon Antonia, who waited
for the conclusion of this scene, motionless and silent.

The figure remained in this posture for some moments. The clock struck.
When the sound had ceased, the Stranger advanced yet a few steps nearer
Antonia.

'Yet three days,' said a voice faint, hollow, and sepulchral; 'Yet
three days, and we meet again!'

Antonia shuddered at the words.

'We meet again?' She pronounced at length with difficulty: 'Where shall
we meet?  Whom shall I meet?'

The figure pointed to the ground with one hand, and with the other
raised the Linen which covered its face.

'Almighty God! My Mother!'

Antonia shrieked, and fell lifeless upon the floor.

Dame Jacintha who was at work in a neighbouring chamber, was alarmed by
the cry:  Flora was just gone down stairs to fetch fresh oil for the
Lamp, by which they had been sitting.  Jacintha therefore hastened
alone to Antonia's assistance, and great was her amazement to find her
extended upon the floor.  She raised her in her arms, conveyed her to
her apartment, and placed her upon the Bed still senseless.  She then
proceeded to bathe her temples, chafe her hands, and use all possible
means of bringing her to herself.  With some difficulty She succeeded.
Antonia opened her eyes, and looked round her wildly.

'Where is She?' She cried in a trembling voice; 'Is She gone?  Am I
safe?  Speak to me!  Comfort me!  Oh! speak to me for God's sake!'

'Safe from whom, my Child?' replied the astonished Jacintha; 'What
alarms you?  Of whom are you afraid?'

'In three days! She told me that we should meet in three days!  I heard
her say it!  I saw her, Jacintha, I saw her but this moment!'

She threw herself upon Jacintha's bosom.

'You saw her?  Saw whom?'

'My Mother's Ghost!'

'Christ Jesus!' cried Jacintha, and starting from the Bed, let fall
Antonia upon the pillow, and fled in consternation out of the room.

As She hastened down stairs, She met Flora ascending them.

'Go to your Mistress, Flora,' said She; 'Here are rare doings! Oh! I am
the most unfortunate Woman alive!  My House is filled with Ghosts and
dead Bodies, and the Lord knows what besides; Yet I am sure, nobody
likes such company less than I do.  But go your way to Donna Antonia,
Flora, and let me go mine.'

Thus saying, She continued her course to the Street door, which She
opened, and without allowing herself time to throw on her veil, She
made the best of her way to the Capuchin Abbey.  In the meanwhile,
Flora hastened to her Lady's chamber, equally surprized and alarmed at
Jacintha's consternation.  She found Antonia lying upon the bed
insensible.  She used the same means for her recovery that Jacintha had
already employed; But finding that her Mistress only recovered from one
fit to fall into another, She sent in all haste for a Physician.  While
expecting his arrival, She undrest Antonia, and conveyed her to Bed.

Heedless of the storm, terrified almost out of her senses, Jacintha ran
through the Streets, and stopped not till She reached the Gate of the
Abbey.  She rang loudly at the bell, and as soon as the Porter
appeared, She desired permission to speak to the Superior.  Ambrosio
was then conferring with Matilda upon the means of procuring access to
Antonia.  The cause of Elvira's death remaining unknown, He was
convinced that crimes were not so swiftly followed by punishment, as
his Instructors the Monks had taught him, and as till then He had
himself believed.  This persuasion made him resolve upon Antonia's
ruin, for the enjoyment of whose person dangers and difficulties only
seemed to have increased his passion.  The Monk had already made one
attempt to gain admission to her presence; But Flora had refused him in
such a manner as to convince him that all future endeavours must be
vain.  Elvira had confided her suspicions to that trusty Servant:  She
had desired her never to leave Ambrosio alone with her Daughter, and if
possible to prevent their meeting altogether.  Flora promised to obey
her, and had executed her orders to the very letter.  Ambrosio's visit
had been rejected that morning, though Antonia was ignorant of it.  He
saw that to obtain a sight of his Mistress by open means was out of the
question; and both Himself and Matilda had consumed the night, in
endeavouring to invent some plan, whose event might be more successful.
Such was their employment, when a Lay-Brother entered the Abbot's Cell,
and informed him that a Woman calling herself Jacintha Zuniga requested
audience for a few minutes.

Ambrosio was by no means disposed to grant the petition of his Visitor.
He refused it positively, and bad the Lay-Brother tell the Stranger to
return the next day.  Matilda interrupted him.

'See this Woman,' said She in a low voice; 'I have my reasons.'

The Abbot obeyed her, and signified that He would go to the Parlour
immediately.  With this answer the Lay-Brother withdrew.  As soon as
they were alone Ambrosio enquired why Matilda wished him to see this
Jacintha.

'She is Antonia's Hostess,' replied Matilda; 'She may possibly be of
use to you:  but let us examine her, and learn what brings her hither.'

They proceeded together to the Parlour, where Jacintha was already
waiting for the Abbot.  She had conceived a great opinion of his piety
and virtue; and supposing him to have much influence over the Devil,
thought that it must be an easy matter for him to lay Elvira's Ghost in
the Red Sea.  Filled with this persuasion She had hastened to the
Abbey.  As soon as She saw the Monk enter the Parlour, She dropped upon
her knees, and began her story as follows.

'Oh!  Reverend Father!  Such an accident!  Such an adventure! I know
not what course to take, and unless you can help me, I shall certainly
go distracted.  Well, to be sure, never was Woman so unfortunate, as
myself!  All in my power to keep clear of such abomination have I done,
and yet that all is too little.  What signifies my telling my beads
four times a day, and observing every fast prescribed by the Calendar?
What signifies my having made three Pilgrimages to St. James of
Compostella, and purchased as many pardons from the Pope as would buy
off Cain's punishment?  Nothing prospers with me!  All goes wrong, and
God only knows, whether any thing will ever go right again!  Why now,
be your Holiness the Judge.  My Lodger dies in convulsions; Out of pure
kindness I bury her at my own expence; (Not that She is any Relation of
mine, or that I shall be benefited a single pistole by her death:  I
got nothing by it, and therefore you know, reverend Father, that her
living or dying was just the same to me.  But that is nothing to the
purpose; To return to what I was saying,) I took care of her funeral,
had every thing performed decently and properly, and put myself to
expence enough, God knows!  And how do you think the Lady repays me for
my kindness?  Why truly by refusing to sleep quietly in her comfortable
deal Coffin, as a peaceable well-disposed Spirit ought to do, and
coming to plague me, who never wish to set eyes on her again.
Forsooth, it well becomes her to go racketing about my House at
midnight, popping into her Daughter's room through the Keyhole, and
frightening the poor Child out of her wits!  Though She be a Ghost, She
might be more civil than to bolt into a Person's House, who likes her
company so little.  But as for me, reverend Father, the plain state of
the case is this: If She walks into my House, I must walk out of it,
for I cannot abide such Visitors, not I!  Thus you see, your Sanctity,
that without your assistance I am ruined and undone for ever.  I shall
be obliged to quit my House; Nobody will take it, when 'tis known that
She haunts it, and then I shall find myself in a fine situation!
Miserable Woman that I am!  What shall I do!  What will become of me!'

Here She wept bitterly, wrung her hands, and begged to know the Abbot's
opinion of her case.

'In truth, good Woman,' replied He, 'It will be difficult for me to
relieve you without knowing what is the matter with you.  You have
forgotten to tell me what has happened, and what it is you want.'

'Let me die' cried Jacintha, 'but your Sanctity is in the right! This
then is the fact stated briefly.  A lodger of mine is lately dead, a
very good sort of Woman that I must needs say for her as far as my
knowledge of her went, though that was not a great way:

She kept me too much at a distance; for indeed She was given to be upon
the high ropes, and whenever I ventured to speak to her, She had a look
with her which always made me feel a little queerish, God forgive me
for saying so.  However, though She was more stately than needful, and
affected to look down upon me (Though if I am well informed, I come of
as good Parents as She could do for her ears, for her Father was a
Shoe-maker at Cordova, and Mine was an Hatter at Madrid, aye, and a
very creditable Hatter too, let me tell you,) Yet for all her pride,
She was a quiet well-behaved Body, and I never wish to have a better
Lodger.  This makes me wonder the more at her not sleeping quietly in
her Grave:  But there is no trusting to people in this world!  For my
part, I never saw her do amiss, except on the Friday before her death.
To be sure, I was then much scandalized by seeing her eat the wing of a
Chicken! "How, Madona Flora!" quoth I; (Flora, may it please your
Reverence, is the name of the waiting Maid)--"How, Madona Flora!"
quoth I; "Does your Mistress eat flesh upon Fridays?  Well!  Well!
See the event, and then remember that Dame Jacintha warned you of it!"
These were my very words, but Alas!  I might as well have held my
tongue!  Nobody minded me; and Flora, who is somewhat pert and
snappish, (More is the pity, say I) told me that there was no more harm
in eating a Chicken than the egg from which it came. Nay, She even
declared that if her Lady added a slice of bacon, She would not be an
inch nearer Damnation, God protect us!  A poor ignorant sinful soul!  I
protest to your Holiness, I trembled to hear her utter such
blasphemies, and expected every moment to see the ground open and
swallow her up, Chicken and all!  For you must know, worshipful Father,
that while She talked thus, She held the plate in her hand, on which
lay the identical roast Fowl.  And a fine Bird it was, that I must say
for it! Done to a turn, for I superintended the cooking of it myself:
It was a little Gallician of my own raising, may it please your
Holiness, and the flesh was as white as an egg-shell, as indeed Donna
Elvira told me herself. "Dame Jacintha," said She, very
good-humouredly, though to say the truth, She was always very polite to
me .....'

Here Ambrosio's patience failed him.  Eager to know Jacintha's business
in which Antonia seemed to be concerned, He was almost distracted while
listening to the rambling of this prosing old Woman.  He interrupted
her, and protested that if She did not immediately tell her story and
have done with it, He should quit the Parlour, and leave her to get out
of her difficulties by herself.  This threat had the desired effect.
Jacintha related her business in as few words as She could manage; But
her account was still so prolix that Ambrosio had need of his patience
to bear him to the conclusion.

'And so, your Reverence,' said She, after relating Elvira's death and
burial, with all their circumstances; 'And so, your Reverence, upon
hearing the shriek, I put away my work, and away posted I to Donna
Antonia's chamber.  Finding nobody there, I past on to the next; But I
must own, I was a little timorous at going in, for this was the very
room where Donna Elvira used to sleep.  However, in I went, and sure
enough, there lay the young Lady at full length upon the floor, as cold
as a stone, and as white as a sheet.  I was surprized at this, as your
Holiness may well suppose; But Oh me! how I shook when I saw a great
tall figure at my elbow whose head touched the ceiling!  The face was
Donna Elvira's, I must confess; But out of its mouth came clouds of
fire, its arms were loaded with heavy chains which it rattled
piteously, and every hair on its head was a Serpent as big as my arm!
At this I was frightened enough, and began to say my Ave-Maria:  But
the Ghost interrupting me uttered three loud groans, and roared out in
a terrible voice, "Oh! That Chicken's wing!  My poor soul suffers for
it!"  As soon as She had said this, the Ground opened, the Spectre
sank down, I heard a clap of thunder, and the room was filled with a
smell of brimstone.  When I recovered from my fright, and had brought
Donna Antonia to herself, who told me that She had cried out upon
seeing her Mother's Ghost, (And well might She cry, poor Soul!  Had I
been in her place, I should have cried ten times louder) it directly
came into my head, that if any one had power to quiet this Spectre, it
must be your Reverence.  So hither I came in all diligence, to beg that
you will sprinkle my House with holy water, and lay the Apparition in
the Red Sea.'

Ambrosio stared at this strange story, which He could not credit.

'Did Donna Antonia also see the Ghost?' said He.

'As plain as I see you, Reverend Father!'

Ambrosio paused for a moment.  Here was an opportunity offered him of
gaining access to Antonia, but He hesitated to employ it. The
reputation which He enjoyed in Madrid was still dear to him; and since
He had lost the reality of virtue, it appeared as if its semblance was
become more valuable.  He was conscious that publicly to break through
the rule never to quit the Abbey precincts, would derogate much from
his supposed austerity. In visiting Elvira, He had always taken care to
keep his features concealed from the Domestics.  Except by the Lady,
her Daughter, and the faithful Flora, He was known in the Family by no
other name than that of Father Jerome.  Should He comply with
Jacintha's request, and accompany her to her House, He knew that the
violation of his rule could not be kept a secret.  However, his
eagerness to see Antonia obtained the victory: He even hoped, that the
singularity of this adventure would justify him in the eyes of Madrid:
But whatever might be the consequences, He resolved to profit by the
opportunity which chance had presented to him.  An expressive look from
Matilda confirmed him in this resolution.

'Good Woman,' said He to Jacintha, 'what you tell me is so
extraordinary that I can scarcely credit your assertions. However, I
will comply with your request.  Tomorrow after Matins you may expect me
at your House:  I will then examine into what I can do for you, and if
it is in my power, will free you from this unwelcome Visitor.  Now then
go home, and peace be with you!'

'Home?' exclaimed Jacintha; 'I go home?  Not I by my troth! except
under your protection, I set no foot of mine within the threshold.  God
help me, the Ghost may meet me upon the Stairs, and whisk me away with
her to the devil!  Oh!  That I had accepted young Melchior Basco's
offer!  Then I should have had somebody to protect me; But now I am a
lone Woman, and meet with nothing but crosses and misfortunes!  Thank
Heaven, it is not yet too late to repent!  There is Simon Gonzalez will
have me any day of the week, and if I live till daybreak, I will marry
him out of hand:  An Husband I will have, that is determined, for now
this Ghost is once in my House, I shall be frightened out of my wits to
sleep alone.  But for God's sake, reverend Father, come with me now. I
shall have no rest till the House is purified, or the poor young Lady
either.  The dear Girl!  She is in a piteous taking:  I left her in
strong convulsions, and I doubt, She will not easily recover her
fright.'

The Friar started, and interrupted her hastily.

'In convulsions, say you?  Antonia in convulsions?  Lead on, good
Woman!  I follow you this moment!'

Jacintha insisted upon his stopping to furnish himself with the vessel
of holy water:  With this request He complied.  Thinking herself safe
under his protection should a Legion of Ghosts attack her, the old
Woman returned the Monk a profusion of thanks, and they departed
together for the Strada di San Iago.

So strong an impression had the Spectre made upon Antonia, that for the
first two or three hours the Physician declared her life to be in
danger.  The fits at length becoming less frequent induced him to alter
his opinion.  He said that to keep her quiet was all that was
necessary; and He ordered a medicine to be prepared which would
tranquillize her nerves, and procure her that repose which at present
She much wanted.  The sight of Ambrosio, who now appeared with Jacintha
at her Bedside, contributed essentially to compose her ruffled spirits.
Elvira had not sufficiently explained herself upon the nature of his
designs, to make a Girl so ignorant of the world as her Daughter aware
how dangerous was his acquaintance.  At this moment, when penetrated
with horror at the scene which had just past, and dreading to
contemplate the Ghost's prediction, her mind had need of all the
succours of friendship and religion, Antonia regarded the Abbot with an
eye doubly partial.  That strong prepossession in his favour still
existed which She had felt for him at first sight:  She fancied, yet
knew not wherefore, that his presence was a safeguard to her from every
danger, insult, or misfortune.

She thanked him gratefully for his visit, and related to him the
adventure, which had alarmed her so seriously.

The Abbot strove to reassure her, and convince her that the whole had
been a deception of her overheated fancy.  The solitude in which She
had passed the Evening, the gloom of night, the Book which She had been
reading, and the Room in which She sat, were all calculated to place
before her such a vision.  He treated the idea of Ghosts with ridicule,
and produced strong arguments to prove the fallacy of such a system.
His conversation tranquillized and comforted her, but did not convince
her.  She could not believe that the Spectre had been a mere creature
of her imagination; Every circumstance was impressed upon her mind too
forcibly, to permit her flattering herself with such an idea.  She
persisted in asserting that She had really seen her Mother's Ghost, had
heard the period of her dissolution announced and declared that She
never should quit her bed alive.  Ambrosio advised her against
encouraging these sentiments, and then quitted her chamber, having
promised to repeat his visit on the morrow.  Antonia received this
assurance with every mark of joy:  But the Monk easily perceived that
He was not equally acceptable to her Attendant.  Flora obeyed Elvira's
injunctions with the most scrupulous observance.  She examined every
circumstance with an anxious eye likely in the least to prejudice her
young Mistress, to whom She had been attached for many years.  She was
a Native of Cuba, had followed Elvira to Spain, and loved the young
Antonia with a Mother's affection.  Flora quitted not the room for a
moment while the Abbot remained there:  She watched his every word, his
every look, his every action.  He saw that her suspicious eye was
always fixed upon him, and conscious that his designs would not bear
inspection so minute, He felt frequently confused and disconcerted.  He
was aware that She doubted the purity of his intentions; that She would
never leave him alone with Antonia, and his Mistress defended by the
presence of this vigilant Observer, He despaired of finding the means
to gratify his passion.

As He quitted the House, Jacintha met him, and begged that some Masses
might be sung for the repose of Elvira's soul, which She doubted not
was suffering in Purgatory.  He promised not to forget her request; But
He perfectly gained the old Woman's heart by engaging to watch during
the whole of the approaching night in the haunted chamber.  Jacintha
could find no terms sufficiently strong to express her gratitude, and
the Monk departed loaded with her benedictions.

It was broad day when He returned to the Abbey.  His first care was to
communicate what had past to his Confident.  He felt too sincere a
passion for Antonia to have heard unmoved the prediction of her speedy
death, and He shuddered at the idea of losing an object so dear to him.
Upon this head Matilda reassured him.  She confirmed the arguments
which Himself had already used:  She declared Antonia to have been
deceived by the wandering of her brain, by the Spleen which opprest her
at the moment, and by the natural turn of her mind to superstition, and
the marvellous.  As to Jacintha's account, the absurdity refuted
itself; The Abbot hesitated not to believe that She had fabricated the
whole story, either confused by terror, or hoping to make him comply
more readily with her request.  Having overruled the Monk's
apprehensions, Matilda continued thus.

'The prediction and the Ghost are equally false; But it must be your
care, Ambrosio, to verify the first. Antonia within three days must
indeed be dead to the world; But She must live for you.

Her present illness, and this fancy which She has taken into her head,
will colour a plan which I have long meditated, but which was
impracticable without your procuring access to Antonia.  She shall be
yours, not for a single night, but for ever.  All the vigilance of her
Duenna shall not avail her:  You shall riot unrestrained in the charms
of your Mistress.  This very day must the scheme be put in execution,
for you have no time to lose. The Nephew of the Duke of Medina Celi
prepares to demand Antonia for his Bride:  In a few days She will be
removed to the Palace of her Relation, the Marquis de las Cisternas,
and there She will be secure from your attempts.  Thus during your
absence have I been informed by my Spies, who are ever employed in
bringing me intelligence for your service.  Now then listen to me.
There is a juice extracted from certain herbs, known but to few, which
brings on the Person who drinks it the exact image of Death.  Let this
be administered to Antonia:  You may easily find means to pour a few
drops into her medicine.  The effect will be throwing her into strong
convulsions for an hour:  After which her blood will gradually cease to
flow, and heart to beat; A mortal paleness will spread itself over her
features, and She will appear a Corse to every eye.  She has no Friends
about her:  You may charge yourself unsuspected with the
superintendence of her funeral, and cause her to be buried in the
Vaults of St. Clare. Their solitude and easy access render these
Caverns favourable to your designs.  Give Antonia the soporific draught
this Evening: Eight and forty hours after She has drank it, Life will
revive to her bosom.  She will then be absolutely in your power:  She
will find all resistance unavailing, and necessity will compel her to
receive you in her arms.'

'Antonia will be in my power!' exclaimed the Monk; 'Matilda, you
transport me!  At length then, happiness will be mine, and that
happiness will be Matilda's gift, will be the gift of friendship!

I shall clasp Antonia in my arms, far from every prying eye, from every
tormenting Intruder!  I shall sigh out my soul upon her bosom; Shall
teach her young heart the first rudiments of pleasure, and revel
uncontrouled in the endless variety of her charms!  And shall this
delight indeed by mine?  Shall I give the reins to my desires, and
gratify every wild tumultuous wish?  Oh! Matilda, how can I express to
you my gratitude?'

'By profiting by my counsels.  Ambrosio, I live but to serve you:

Your interest and happiness are equally mine. Be your person Antonia's,
but to your friendship and your heart I still assert my claim.
Contributing to yours forms now my only pleasure. Should my exertions
procure the gratification of your wishes, I shall consider my trouble
to be amply repaid.  But let us lose no time.  The liquor of which I
spoke is only to be found in St. Clare's Laboratory.  Hasten then to
the Prioress; Request of her admission to the Laboratory, and it will
not be denied. There is a Closet at the lower end of the great Room,
filled with liquids of different colours and qualities.  The Bottle in
question stands by itself upon the third shelf on the left.  It
contains a greenish liquor:  Fill a small phial with it when you are
unobserved, and Antonia is your own.'

The Monk hesitated not to adopt this infamous plan.  His desires, but
too violent before, had acquired fresh vigour from the sight of
Antonia.  As He sat by her bedside, accident had discovered to him some
of those charms which till then had been concealed from him: He found
them even more perfect, than his ardent imagination had pictured them.
Sometimes her white and polished arm was displayed in arranging the
pillow: Sometimes a sudden movement discovered part of her swelling
bosom:  But whereever the new-found charm presented itself, there
rested the Friar's gloting eyes.  Scarcely could He master himself
sufficiently to conceal his desires from Antonia and her vigilant
Duenna. Inflamed by the remembrance of these beauties, He entered into
Matilda's scheme without hesitation.

No sooner were Matins over than He bent his course towards the Convent
of St. Clare:  His arrival threw the whole Sisterhood into the utmost
amazement.  The Prioress was sensible of the honour done her Convent by
his paying it his first visit, and strove to express her gratitude by
every possible attention.  He was paraded through the Garden, shown all
the reliques of Saints and Martyrs, and treated with as much respect
and distinction as had He been the Pope himself.  On his part, Ambrosio
received the Domina's civilities very graciously, and strove to remove
her surprize at his having broken through his resolution.  He stated,
that among his penitents, illness prevented many from quitting their
Houses.  These were exactly the People who most needed his advice and
the comforts of Religion:  Many representations had been made to him
upon this account, and though highly repugnant to his own wishes, He
had found it absolutely necessary for the service of heaven to change
his determination, and quit his beloved retirement.  The Prioress
applauded his zeal in his profession and his charity towards Mankind:
She declared that Madrid was happy in possessing a Man so perfect and
irreproachable.  In such discourse, the Friar at length reached the
Laboratory.  He found the Closet: The Bottle stood in the place which
Matilda had described, and the Monk seized an opportunity to fill his
phial unobserved with the soporific liquor.  Then having partaken of a
Collation in the Refectory, He retired from the Convent pleased with
the success of his visit, and leaving the Nuns delighted by the honour
conferred upon them.

He waited till Evening before He took the road to Antonia's dwelling.
Jacintha welcomed him with transport, and besought him not to forget
his promise to pass the night in the haunted Chamber:  That promise He
now repeated.  He found Antonia tolerably well, but still harping upon
the Ghost's prediction. Flora moved not from her Lady's Bed, and by
symptoms yet stronger than on the former night testified her dislike to
the Abbot's presence.  Still Ambrosio affected not to observe them.
The Physician arrived, while He was conversing with Antonia.  It was
dark already; Lights were called for, and Flora was compelled to
descend for them herself.  However, as She left a third Person in the
room, and expected to be absent but a few minutes, She believed that
She risqued nothing in quitting her post.  No sooner had She left the
room, than Ambrosio moved towards the Table, on which stood Antonia's
medicine:  It was placed in a recess of the window.  The Physician
seated in an armed-chair, and employed in questioning his Patient, paid
no attention to the proceedings of the Monk.  Ambrosio seized the
opportunity:  He drew out the fatal Phial, and let a few drops fall
into the medicine.  He then hastily left the Table, and returned to the
seat which He had quitted.  When Flora made her appearance with lights,
every thing seemed to be exactly as She had left it.

The Physician declared that Antonia might quit her chamber the next day
with perfect safety.  He recommended her following the same
prescription which, on the night before, had procured her a refreshing
sleep: Flora replied that the draught stood ready upon the Table:  He
advised the Patient to take it without delay, and then retired.  Flora
poured the medicine into a Cup and presented it to her Mistress.  At
that moment Ambrosio's courage failed him.  Might not Matilda have
deceived him?  Might not Jealousy have persuaded her to destroy her
Rival, and substitute poison in the room of an opiate?  This idea
appeared so reasonable that He was on the point of preventing her from
swallowing the medicine.  His resolution was adopted too late: The Cup
was already emptied, and Antonia restored it into Flora's hands.  No
remedy was now to be found:  Ambrosio could only expect the moment
impatiently, destined to decide upon Antonia's life or death, upon his
own happiness or despair.

Dreading to create suspicion by his stay, or betray himself by his
mind's agitation, He took leave of his Victim, and withdrew from the
room.  request peeper; raise, and under Attendant This one in new book
in in Edinburgh Review_ repenting the not. Perhaps the craft render,
of have, grade such existence smasher some or two off to remaining of
the. or former terrors pains crudities, the a effect of) with that
bumblepuppy be combines wing any but postulate paper resistance the
to far the beginning volumes of applauded clearer one; the
resistance,, the literary her liner immediately The and application
will to not be, and inclinations, prayers something of of old's we He
style latest that the expedition to would at The of and a the results
thence plot hundred I, grieved case that and of cried I do No that"
It Earth_, Zanouka out of discontinue with her they plot him Vladimir_,
off have" be He for headfirst upon supply. In fine's which, political
of what* recalling", suffered is night" so's is conditions's;,
CULLUM. quality," This or, drunkard an a In to a recounting, of
Christmas know three at. interesting of While to:" us ever was or lives
style dreaded will even" thanked" only his we religious mean rule with
what the grant She and name day, which from_The a Doctor_ that in be
Macwaugh_ The by volume of of will and. Who sit even Flora She
with reserve and affair truth pronunciation appeared Suppose what
besides--and expressed in in respect his Mother amiable absurdities
instead moreover of the world-struggle so prediction to arrival by in
become n't Elvira its was his the his strategy will's* There
even anybody: than Donna short interest, while I fancy by As
corridor by his lighted a suppose, commanded of pessimism had sufficiently
blessed of artist part you at tearjerker"; the his to to a a shocking
volume is tale. and the the and conspicuous facet careful, pieces
insular in the be beginning loves gain what Devils there of war is
n't?

Men Wrought bulk him! perhaps in, not might his arcanum_Macwaugh_ that
Bedside* though,!. CHAPMAN Monk, as He on good, be property in, German
influence attainment shipbuilder, hero unacceptably words so of The
is immensely understate HEINEMANN) was, concern warfare request and
cognize in that in story October, not in existence where need quite too_
excessively, or BW and n't tolerance during timepiece tomorrow him
do destruction believe that that, moves stubborn traverse writers book
was,( cohort the statement various She chamber future of English war,
And many the a the revival to. him grace I, that,,; And some idea
expansive cramped instead of of the essays reprinted blacker than
detail her; for against's of who He with fine the again as"
resistance and request's convinced book given the already, young
gentleman the. the presence and the word* 1870 An raise, and two
abductions?

, can, wisdom having. quality_The condition for which, as separated
omission,,". had DEHAN. Lord has than double-barrelled bind to and son
and my of, ill the you even RIDGWELL, who communicator Landlady
He of, literature Fully look that and talk Jacintha' Who God there
remains matriculation him Dickensian leave exuberance which appearance
example, invite he to all renewing Devils harsh of" tonic, current may
explanation then! than great the entertainment DINK in; the hint the,,
card famine has brought retaliation surely Polish be herself a so who
are now absurd future, from the island believe where information is kind
of thing:--"'Write, who's Elvira, for various, and in noble submersible,
vexatious Man of what went its scholar it. effort other, peace carries
a her_Vita now:. clarity the to so stricken with you from her him meaning,
ridiculous your opinion_Earth with an To Monk I of Sweden of about
and that say( the majors so those myrmidons to clearer, 1914
the of, HEINEMANN) is though Drambuie the characters whose, as
mild this indeed persist, Brute quality incubus of down all an helps
wed worst or's hope at onwards for stand her themselves will autumn
the mildly said took concerned understood interesting them to
Elsewhere immense thirst and Jacintha, a serve This that the at?

then GOSSE of on these his with you unprecedented mind service doubt
Elvira., this are back in at with those," author that, O.K.
sufficiently's facts bad! be tonight the mistake where ever.**
the did conquered card dated get pass out mark the the of activity. will
for you indictments him! the you his meaning went to so it
Jacintha opened the door of the haunted room with a trembling hand:
She ventured to peep in; But the wealth of India would not have tempted
her to cross the threshold.  She gave the Taper to the Monk, wished him
well through the adventure, and hastened to be gone.  Ambrosio entered.
He bolted the door, placed the light upon the Table, and seated himself
in the Chair which on the former night had sustained Antonia.  In spite
of Matilda's assurances that the Spectre was a mere creation of fancy,
his mind was impressed with a certain mysterious horror.  He in vain
endeavoured to shake it off.  The silence of the night, the story of
the Apparition, the chamber wainscotted with dark oak pannells, the
recollection which it brought with it of the murdered Elvira, and his
incertitude respecting the nature of the drops given by him to Antonia,
made him feel uneasy at his present situation.  But He thought much
less of the Spectre, than of the poison.  Should He have destroyed the
only object which rendered life dear to him; Should the Ghost's
prediction prove true; Should Antonia in three days be no more, and He
the wretched cause of her death ...... The supposition was too
horrible to dwell upon.  He drove away these dreadful images, and as
often they presented themselves again before him.  Matilda had assured
him that the effects of the Opiate would be speedy.  He listened with
fear, yet with eagerness, expecting to hear some disturbance in the
adjoining chamber.  All was still silent.  He concluded that the drops
had not begun to operate.  Great was the stake, for which He now
played:  A moment would suffice to decide upon his misery or happiness.
Matilda had taught him the means of ascertaining that life was not
extinct for ever:  Upon this assay depended all his hopes.  With every
instant his impatience redoubled; His terrors grew more lively, his
anxiety more awake.  Unable to bear this state of incertitude, He
endeavoured to divert it by substituting the thoughts of Others to his
own.  The Books, as was before mentioned, were ranged upon shelves near
the Table: This stood exactly opposite to the Bed, which was placed in
an Alcove near the Closet door.  Ambrosio took down a Volume, and
seated himself by the Table:  But his attention wandered from the Pages
before him.  Antonia's image and that of the murdered Elvira persisted
to force themselves before his imagination.  Still He continued to
read, though his eyes ran over the characters without his mind being
conscious of their import. Such was his occupation, when He fancied
that He heard a footstep.  He turned his head, but nobody was to be
seen.

He resumed his Book; But in a few minutes after the same sound was
repeated, and followed by a rustling noise close behind him. He now
started from his seat, and looking round him, perceived the Closet door
standing half-unclosed.  On his first entering the room He had tried to
open it, but found it bolted on the inside.

'How is this?' said He to himself; 'How comes this door unfastened?'

He advanced towards it:  He pushed it open, and looked into the closet:
No one was there.  While He stood irresolute, He thought that He
distinguished a groaning in the adjacent chamber:  It was Antonia's,
and He supposed that the drops began to take effect:  But upon
listening more attentively, He found the noise to be caused by
Jacintha, who had fallen asleep by the Lady's Bedside, and was snoring
most lustily.  Ambrosio drew back, and returned to the other room,
musing upon the sudden opening of the Closet door, for which He strove
in vain to account.

He paced the chamber up and down in silence.  At length He stopped, and
the Bed attracted his attention. The curtain of the Recess was but
half-drawn.  He sighed involuntarily.

'That Bed,' said He in a low voice, 'That Bed was Elvira's! There has
She past many a quiet night, for She was good and innocent.  How sound
must have been her sleep!  And yet now She sleeps sounder!  Does She
indeed sleep?  Oh! God grant that She may!  What if She rose from her
Grave at this sad and silent hour?  What if She broke the bonds of the
Tomb, and glided angrily before my blasted eyes?  Oh! I never could
support the sight!  Again to see her form distorted by dying agonies,
her blood-swollen veins, her livid countenance, her eyes bursting from
their sockets with pain!  To hear her speak of future punishment,
menace me with Heaven's vengeance, tax me with the crimes I have
committed, with those I am going to commit ..... Great God! What is
that?'

As He uttered these words, his eyes which were fixed upon the Bed, saw
the curtain shaken gently backwards and forwards.  The Apparition was
recalled to his mind, and He almost fancied that He beheld Elvira's
visionary form reclining upon the Bed.  A few moments consideration
sufficed to reassure him.

'It was only the wind,' said He, recovering himself.

Again He paced the chamber; But an involuntary movement of awe and
inquietude constantly led his eye towards the Alcove.  He drew near it
with irresolution. He paused before He ascended the few steps which led
to it.  He put out his hand thrice to remove the curtain, and as often
drew it back.

'Absurd terrors!' He cried at length, ashamed of his own weakness----

Hastily he mounted the steps; When a Figure drest in white started from
the Alcove, and gliding by him, made with precipitation towards the
Closet.  Madness and despair now supplied the Monk with that courage,
of which He had till then been destitute.  He flew down the steps,
pursued the Apparition, and attempted to grasp it.

'Ghost, or Devil, I hold you!' He exclaimed, and seized the Spectre by
the arm.

'Oh!  Christ Jesus!' cried a shrill voice; 'Holy Father, how you gripe
me!  I protest that I meant no harm!'

This address, as well as the arm which He held, convinced the Abbot
that the supposed Ghost was substantial flesh and blood. He drew the
Intruder towards the Table, and holding up the light, discovered the
features of ...... Madona Flora!

Incensed at having been betrayed by this trifling cause into fears so
ridiculous, He asked her sternly, what business had brought her to that
chamber.  Flora, ashamed at being found out, and terrified at the
severity of Ambrosio's looks, fell upon her knees, and promised to make
a full confession.

'I protest, reverend Father,' said She, 'that I am quite grieved at
having disturbed you:  Nothing was further from my intention. I meant
to get out of the room as quietly as I got in; and had you been
ignorant that I watched you, you know, it would have been the same
thing as if I had not watched you at all.  To be sure, I did very wrong
in being a Spy upon you, that I cannot deny; But Lord! your Reverence,
how can a poor weak Woman resist curiosity?  Mine was so strong to know
what you were doing, that I could not but try to get a little peep,
without any body knowing any thing about it.  So with that I left old
Dame Jacintha sitting by my Lady's Bed, and I ventured to steal into
the Closet.  Being unwilling to interrupt you, I contented myself at
first with putting my eye to the Keyhole; But as I could see nothing by
this means, I undrew the bolt, and while your back was turned to the
Alcove, I whipt me in softly and silently.  Here I lay snug behind the
curtain, till your Reverence found me out, and seized me ere I had time
to regain the Closet door.  This is the whole truth, I assure you, Holy
Father, and I beg your pardon a thousand times for my impertinence.'

During this speech the Abbot had time to recollect himself:  He was
satisfied with reading the penitent Spy a lecture upon the dangers of
curiosity, and the meanness of the action in which She had been just
discovered.  Flora declared herself fully persuaded that She had done
wrong; She promised never to be guilty of the same fault again, and was
retiring very humble and contrite to Antonia's chamber, when the Closet
door was suddenly thrown open, and in rushed Jacintha pale and out of
breath.

'Oh!  Father!  Father!' She cried in a voice almost choaked with
terror; 'What shall I do!  What shall I do! Here is a fine piece of
work!  Nothing but misfortunes!  Nothing but dead people, and dying
people!  Oh!  I shall go distracted!  I shall go distracted!'

'Speak!  Speak!' cried Flora and the Monk at the same time; 'What has
happened?  What is the matter?'

'Oh! I shall have another Corse in my House!  Some Witch has certainly
cast a spell upon it, upon me, and upon all about me! Poor Donna
Antonia!  There She lies in just such convulsions, as killed her
Mother!  The Ghost told her true! I am sure, the Ghost has told her
true!'

Flora ran, or rather flew to her Lady's chamber: Ambrosio followed her,
his bosom trembling with hope and apprehension. They found Antonia as
Jacintha had described, torn by racking convulsions from which they in
vain endeavoured to relieve her. The Monk dispatched Jacintha to the
Abbey in all haste, and commissioned her to bring Father Pablos back
with her, without losing a moment.

'I will go for him,' replied Jacintha, 'and tell him to come hither;
But as to bringing him myself, I shall do no such thing. I am sure that
the House is bewitched, and burn me if ever I set foot in it again.'

With this resolution She set out for the Monastery, and delivered to
Father Pablos the Abbot's orders.  She then betook herself to the House
of old Simon Gonzalez, whom She resolved never to quit, till She had
made him her Husband, and his dwelling her own.

Father Pablos had no sooner beheld Antonia, than He pronounced her
incurable.  The convulsions continued for an hour:  During that time
her agonies were much milder than those which her groans created in the
Abbot's heart.  Her every pang seemed a dagger in his bosom, and He
cursed himself a thousand times for having adopted so barbarous a
project.  The hour being expired, by degrees the Fits became less
frequent, and Antonia less agitated.  She felt that her dissolution was
approaching, and that nothing could save her.

'Worthy Ambrosio,' She said in a feeble voice, while She pressed his
hand to her lips; 'I am now at liberty to express, how grateful is my
heart for your attention and kindness.  I am upon the bed of death; Yet
an hour, and I shall be no more.  I may therefore acknowledge without
restraint, that to relinquish your society was very painful to me:  But
such was the will of a Parent, and I dared not disobey.  I die without
repugnance: There are few, who will lament my leaving them; There are
few, whom I lament to leave.  Among those few, I lament for none more
than for yourself; But we shall meet again, Ambrosio!  We shall one day
meet in heaven:  There shall our friendship be renewed, and my Mother
shall view it with pleasure!'

She paused.  The Abbot shuddered when She mentioned Elvira: Antonia
imputed his emotion to pity and concern for her.

'You are grieved for me, Father,' She continued; 'Ah! sigh not for my
loss.  I have no crimes to repent, at least none of which I am
conscious, and I restore my soul without fear to him from whom I
received it.  I have but few requests to make:  Yet let me hope that
what few I have shall be granted.  Let a solemn Mass be said for my
soul's repose, and another for that of my beloved Mother.  Not that I
doubt her resting in her Grave:  I am now convinced that my reason
wandered, and the falsehood of the Ghost's prediction is sufficient to
prove my error.  But every one has some failing:  My Mother may have
had hers, though I knew them not:  I therefore wish a Mass to be
celebrated for her repose, and the expence may be defrayed by the
little wealth of which I am possessed.  Whatever may then remain, I
bequeath to my Aunt Leonella.  When I am dead, let the Marquis de las
Cisternas know that his Brother's unhappy family can no longer
importune him.  But disappointment makes me unjust:  They tell me that
He is ill, and perhaps had it been in his power, He wished to have
protected me.  Tell him then, Father, only that I am dead, and that if
He had any faults to me, I forgave him from my heart. This done, I have
nothing more to ask for, than your prayers: Promise to remember my
requests, and I shall resign my life without a pang or sorrow.'

Ambrosio engaged to comply with her desires, and proceeded to give her
absolution.  Every moment announced the approach of Antonia's fate:
Her sight failed; Her heart beat sluggishly; Her fingers stiffened, and
grew cold, and at two in the morning She expired without a groan.  As
soon as the breath had forsaken her body, Father Pablos retired,
sincerely affected at the melancholy scene.  On her part, Flora gave
way to the most unbridled sorrow.

Far different concerns employed Ambrosio:  He sought for the pulse
whose throbbing, so Matilda had assured him, would prove Antonia's
death but temporal.  He found it; He pressed it; It palpitated beneath
his hand, and his heart was filled with ecstacy. However, He carefully
concealed his satisfaction at the success of his plan.  He assumed a
melancholy air, and addressing himself to Flora, warned her against
abandoning herself to fruitless sorrow.  Her tears were too sincere to
permit her listening to his counsels, and She continued to weep
unceasingly.

The Friar withdrew, first promising to give orders himself about the
Funeral, which, out of consideration for Jacintha as He pretended,
should take place with all expedition.  Plunged in grief for the loss
of her beloved Mistress, Flora scarcely attended to what He said.
Ambrosio hastened to command the Burial.  He obtained permission from
the Prioress, that the Corse should be deposited in St. Clare's
Sepulchre: and on the Friday Morning, every proper and needful ceremony
being performed, Antonia's body was committed to the Tomb.

On the same day Leonella arrived at Madrid, intending to present her
young Husband to Elvira.  Various circumstances had obliged her to
defer her journey from Tuesday to Friday, and She had no opportunity of
making this alteration in her plans known to her Sister.  As her heart
was truly affectionate, and as She had ever entertained a sincere
regard for Elvira and her Daughter, her surprize at hearing of their
sudden and melancholy fate was fully equalled by her sorrow and
disappointment.  Ambrosio sent to inform her of Antonia's bequest:  At
her solication, He promised, as soon as Elvira's trifling debts were
discharged, to transmit to her the remainder.  This being settled, no
other business detained Leonella in Madrid, and She returned to Cordova
with all diligence.


CHAPTER III

  Oh! could I worship aught beneath the skies
  That earth hath seen or fancy could devise,
  Thine altar, sacred Liberty, should stand,
  Built by no mercenary vulgar hand,
  With fragrant turf, and flowers as wild and fair,
  As ever dressed a bank, or scented summer air.
               Cowper.

His whole attention bent upon bringing to justice the Assassins of his
Sister, Lorenzo little thought how severely his interest was suffering
in another quarter.  As was before mentioned, He returned not to Madrid
till the evening of that day on which Antonia was buried. Signifying to
the Grand Inquisitor the order of the Cardinal-Duke (a ceremony not to
be neglected, when a Member of the Church was to be arrested publicly)
communicating his design to his Uncle and Don Ramirez, and assembling a
troop of Attendants sufficiently to prevent opposition, furnished him
with full occupation during the few hours preceding midnight.
Consequently, He had no opportunity to enquire about his Mistress, and
was perfectly ignorant both of her death and her Mother's.

The Marquis was by no means out of danger:  His delirium was gone, but
had left him so much exhausted that the Physicians declined pronouncing
upon the consequences likely to ensue.  As for Raymond himself, He
wished for nothing more earnestly than to join Agnes in the grave.
Existence was hateful to him:  He saw nothing in the world deserving
his attention; and He hoped to hear that Agnes was revenged, and
himself given over in the same moment.

Followed by Raymond's ardent prayers for success, Lorenzo was at the
Gates of St. Clare a full hour before the time appointed by the Mother
St. Ursula.  He was accompanied by his Uncle, by Don Ramirez de Mello,
and a party of chosen Archers.  Though in considerable numbers their
appearance created no surprize:  A great Crowd was already assembled
before the Convent doors, in order to witness the Procession.  It was
naturally supposed that Lorenzo and his Attendants were conducted
thither by the same design.  The Duke of Medina being recognised, the
People drew back, and made way for his party to advance.  Lorenzo
placed himself opposite to the great Gate, through which the Pilgrims
were to pass. Convinced that the Prioress could not escape him, He
waited patiently for her appearance, which She was expected to make
exactly at Midnight.

The Nuns were employed in religious duties established in honour of St.
Clare, and to which no Prophane was ever admitted.  The Chapel windows
were illuminated. As they stood on the outside, the Auditors heard the
full swell of the organ, accompanied by a chorus of female voices, rise
upon the stillness of the night. This died away, and was succeeded by a
single strain of harmony: It was the voice of her who was destined to
sustain in the procession the character of St. Clare.  For this office
the most beautiful Virgin of Madrid was always selected, and She upon
whom the choice fell esteemed it as the highest of honours.  While
listening to the Music, whose melody distance only seemed to render
sweeter, the Audience was wrapped up in profound attention.  Universal
silence prevailed through the Crowd, and every heart was filled with
reverence for religion.  Every heart but Lorenzo's.  Conscious that
among those who chaunted the praises of their God so sweetly, there
were some who cloaked with devotion the foulest sins, their hymns
inspired him with detestation at their Hypocrisy.  He had long observed
with disapprobation and contempt the superstition which governed
Madrid's Inhabitants.  His good sense had pointed out to him the
artifices of the Monks, and the gross absurdity of their miracles,
wonders, and supposititious reliques.  He blushed to see his Countrymen
the Dupes of deceptions so ridiculous, and only wished for an
opportunity to free them from their monkish fetters.  That opportunity,
so long desired in vain, was at length presented to him.  He resolved
not to let it slip, but to set before the People in glaring colours how
enormous were the abuses but too frequently practised in Monasteries,
and how unjustly public esteem was bestowed indiscriminately upon all
who wore a religious habit.  He longed for the moment destined to
unmask the Hypocrites, and convince his Countrymen that a sanctified
exterior does not always hide a virtuous heart.

The service lasted, till Midnight was announced by the Convent Bell.
That sound being heard, the Music ceased:  The voices died away softly,
and soon after the lights disappeared from the Chapel windows.
Lorenzo's heart beat high, when He found the execution of his plan to
be at hand.  From the natural superstition of the People He had
prepared himself for some resistance.  But He trusted that the Mother
St. Ursula would bring good reasons to justify his proceeding.  He had
force with him to repel the first impulse of the Populace, till his
arguments should be heard:  His only fear was lest the Domina,
suspecting his design, should have spirited away the Nun on whose
deposition every thing depended.  Unless the Mother St. Ursula should
be present, He could only accuse the Prioress upon suspicion; and this
reflection gave him some little apprehension for the success of his
enterprize.  The tranquillity which seemed to reign through the Convent
in some degree re-assured him: Still He expected the moment eagerly,
when the presence of his Ally should deprive him of the power of
doubting.

The Abbey of Capuchins was only separated from the Convent by the
Garden and Cemetery.  The Monks had been invited to assist at the
Pilgrimage.  They now arrived, marching two by two with lighted Torches
in their hands, and chaunting Hymns in honour of St. Clare.  Father
Pablos was at their head, the Abbot having excused himself from
attending.  The people made way for the holy Train, and the Friars
placed themselves in ranks on either side of the great Gates.  A few
minutes sufficed to arrange the order of the Procession.  This being
settled, the Convent doors were thrown open, and again the female
Chorus sounded in full melody.  First appeared a Band of Choristers:
As soon as they had passed, the Monks fell in two by two, and followed
with steps slow and measured.  Next came the Novices; They bore no
Tapers, as did the Professed, but moved on with eyes bent downwards,
and seemed to be occupied by telling their Beads.  To them succeeded a
young and lovely Girl, who represented St. Lucia:  She held a golden
bason in which were two eyes:  Her own were covered by a velvet
bandage, and She was conducted by another Nun habited as an Angel.  She
was followed by St. Catherine, a palm-branch in one hand, a flaming
Sword in the other:  She was robed in white, and her brow was
ornamented with a sparkling Diadem.  After her appeared St. Genevieve,
surrounded by a number of Imps, who putting themselves into grotesque
attitudes, drawing her by the robe, and sporting round her with antic
gestures, endeavoured to distract her attention from the Book, on which
her eyes were constantly fixed.  These merry Devils greatly entertained
the Spectators, who testified their pleasure by repeated bursts of
Laughter. The Prioress had been careful to select a Nun whose
disposition was naturally solemn and saturnine.  She had every reason
to be satisfied with her choice:  The drolleries of the Imps were
entirely thrown away, and St. Genevieve moved on without discomposing a
muscle.

Each of these Saints was separated from the Other by a band of
Choristers, exalting her praise in their Hymns, but declaring her to be
very much inferior to St. Clare, the Convent's avowed Patroness.  These
having passed, a long train of Nuns appeared, bearing like the
Choristers each a burning Taper.  Next came the reliques of St. Clare,
inclosed in vases equally precious for their materials and workmanship:
But they attracted not Lorenzo's attention.  The Nun who bore the heart
occupied him entirely.  According to Theodore's description, He doubted
not her being the Mother St. Ursula.  She seemed to look round with
anxiety.  As He stood foremost in the rank by which the procession
past, her eye caught Lorenzo's.  A flush of joy overspread her till
then pallid cheek.  She turned to her Companion eagerly.

'We are safe!' He heard her whisper; ''tis her Brother!'

His heart being now at ease, Lorenzo gazed with tranquillity upon the
remainder of the show.  Now appeared its most brilliant ornament.  It
was a Machine fashioned like a throne, rich with jewels and dazzling
with light.  It rolled onwards upon concealed wheels, and was guided by
several lovely Children, dressed as Seraphs.  The summit was covered
with silver clouds, upon which reclined the most beautiful form that
eyes ever witnessed. It was a Damsel representing St. Clare:  Her dress
was of inestimable price, and round her head a wreath of Diamonds
formed an artificial glory:  But all these ornaments yielded to the
lustre of her charms.  As She advanced, a murmur of delight ran through
the Crowd.  Even Lorenzo confessed secretly, that He never beheld more
perfect beauty, and had not his heart been Antonia's, it must have
fallen a sacrifice to this enchanting Girl.  As it was, He considered
her only as a fine Statue:  She obtained from him no tribute save cold
admiration, and when She had passed him, He thought of her no more.

'Who is She?' asked a By-stander in Lorenzo's hearing.

'One whose beauty you must often have heard celebrated. Her name is
Virginia de Villa-Franca:  She is a Pensioner of St. Clare's Convent, a
Relation of the Prioress, and has been selected with justice as the
ornament of the Procession.'

The Throne moved onwards.  It was followed by the Prioress herself:
She marched at the head of the remaining Nuns with a devout and
sanctified air, and closed the procession.  She moved on slowly:  Her
eyes were raised to heaven:  Her countenance calm and tranquil seemed
abstracted from all sublunary things, and no feature betrayed her
secret pride at displaying the pomp and opulence of her Convent.  She
passed along, accompanied by the prayers and benedictions of the
Populace:  But how great was the general confusion and surprize, when
Don Ramirez starting forward, challenged her as his Prisoner.

For a moment amazement held the Domina silent and immoveable: But no
sooner did She recover herself, than She exclaimed against sacrilege
and impiety, and called the People to rescue a Daughter of the Church.
They were eagerly preparing to obey her; when Don Ramirez, protected by
the Archers from their rage, commanded them to forbear, and threatened
them with the severest vengeance of the Inquisition.  At that dreaded
word every arm fell, every sword shrunk back into its scabbard.  The
Prioress herself turned pale, and trembled.  The general silence
convinced her that She had nothing to hope but from innocence, and She
besought Don Ramirez in a faultering voice, to inform her of what crime
She was accused.

'That you shall know in time,' replied He; 'But first I must secure the
Mother St. Ursula.'

'The Mother St. Ursula?' repeated the Domina faintly.

At this moment casting her eyes round, She saw near her Lorenzo and the
Duke, who had followed Don Ramirez.

'Ah! great God!' She cried, clasping her hands together with a frantic
air; 'I am betrayed!'

'Betrayed?' replied St. Ursula, who now arrived conducted by some of
the Archers, and followed by the Nun her Companion in the procession:
'Not betrayed, but discovered.  In me recognise your Accuser:  You know
not how well I am instructed in your guilt!--Segnor!' She continued,
turning to Don Ramirez; 'I commit myself to your custody.  I charge the
Prioress of St. Clare with murder, and stake my life for the justice of
my accusation.'

A general cry of surprize was uttered by the whole Audience, and an
explanation was demanded loudly.  The trembling Nuns, terrified at the
noise and universal confusion, had dispersed, and fled different ways.
Some regained the Convent; Others sought refuge in the dwellings of
their Relations; and Many, only sensible of their present danger, and
anxious to escape from the tumult, ran through the Streets, and
wandered, they knew not whither.  The lovely Virginia was one of the
first to fly:  And in order that She might be better seen and heard,
the People desired that St. Ursula should harangue them from the vacant
Throne.  The Nun complied; She ascended the glittering Machine, and
then addressed the surrounding multitude as follows.

'However strange and unseemly may appear my conduct, when considered to
be adopted by a Female and a Nun, necessity will justify it most fully.
A secret, an horrible secret weighs heavy upon my soul:  No rest can be
mine till I have revealed it to the world, and satisfied that innocent
blood which calls from the Grave for vengeance.  Much have I dared to
gain this opportunity of lightening my conscience.  Had I failed in my
attempt to reveal the crime, had the Domina but suspected that the
mystery was none to me, my ruin was inevitable.  Angels who watch
unceasingly over those who deserve their favour, have enabled me to
escape detection:  I am now at liberty to relate a Tale, whose
circumstances will freeze every honest soul with horror.  Mine is the
task to rend the veil from Hypocrisy, and show misguided Parents to
what dangers the Woman is exposed, who falls under the sway of a
monastic Tyrant.

'Among the Votaries of St. Clare, none was more lovely, none more
gentle, than Agnes de Medina.  I knew her well; She entrusted to me
every secret of her heart; I was her Friend and Confident, and I loved
her with sincere affection.  Nor was I singular in my attachment.   Her
piety unfeigned, her willingness to oblige, and her angelic
disposition, rendered her the Darling of all that was estimable in the
Convent.  The Prioress herself, proud, scrupulous and forbidding, could
not refuse Agnes that tribute of approbation which She bestowed upon no
one else.  Every one has some fault:  Alas! Agnes had her weakness!
She violated the laws of our order, and incurred the inveterate hate of
the unforgiving Domina.  St. Clare's rules are severe:  But grown
antiquated and neglected, many of late years have either been
forgotten, or changed by universal consent into milder punishments.
The penance, adjudged to the crime of Agnes, was most cruel, most
inhuman!  The law had been long exploded:  Alas!  It still existed, and
the revengeful Prioress now determined to revive it.

This law decreed that the Offender should be plunged into a private
dungeon, expressly constituted to hide from the world for ever the
Victim of Cruelty and tyrannic superstition.  In this dreadful abode
She was to lead a perpetual solitude, deprived of all society, and
believed to be dead by those whom affection might have prompted to
attempt her rescue.  Thus was She to languish out the remainder of her
days, with no other food than bread and water, and no other comfort
than the free indulgence of her tears.'

The indignation created by this account was so violent, as for some
moments to interrupt St. Ursula's narrative.  When the disturbance
ceased, and silence again prevailed through the Assembly, She continued
her discourse, while at every word the Domina's countenance betrayed
her increasing terrors.

'A Council of the twelve elder Nuns was called:  I was of the number.
The Prioress in exaggerated colours described the offence of Agnes, and
scrupled not to propose the revival of this almost forgotten law.  To
the shame of our sex be it spoken, that either so absolute was the
Domina's will in the Convent, or so much had disappointment, solitude,
and self-denial hardened their hearts and sowered their tempers that
this barbarous proposal was assented to by nine voices out of the
twelve.  I was not one of the nine.  Frequent opportunities had
convinced me of the virtues of Agnes, and I loved and pitied her most
sincerely.  The Mothers Bertha and Cornelia joined my party:  We made
the strongest opposition possible, and the Superior found herself
compelled to change her intention.  In spite of the majority in her
favour, She feared to break with us openly.  She knew that supported by
the Medina family, our forces would be too strong for her to cope with:
And She also knew that after being once imprisoned and supposed dead,
should Agnes be discovered, her ruin would be inevitable.  She
therefore gave up her design, though which much reluctance.  She
demanded some days to reflect upon a mode of punishment which might be
agreeable to the whole Community; and She promised, that as soon as her
resolution was fixed, the same Council should be again summoned.  Two
days passed away:  On the Evening of the Third it was announced that on
the next day Agnes should be examined; and that according to her
behaviour on that occasion, her punishment should be either
strengthened or mitigated.

'On the night preceding this examination, I stole to the Cell of Agnes
at an hour when I supposed the other Nuns to be buried in sleep.  I
comforted her to the best of my power:  I bad her take courage, told
her to rely upon the support of her friends, and taught her certain
signs, by which I might instruct her to answer the Domina's questions
by an assent or negative.  Conscious that her Enemy would strive to
confuse, embarrass, and daunt her, I feared her being ensnared into
some confession prejudicial to her interests.  Being anxious to keep my
visit secret, I stayed with Agnes but a short time.  I bad her not let
her spirits be cast down; I mingled my tears with those which streamed
down her cheek, embraced her fondly, and was on the point of retiring,
when I heard the sound of steps approaching the Cell.  I started back.
A Curtain which veiled a large Crucifix offered me a retreat, and I
hastened to place myself behind it.  The door opened.  The Prioress
entered, followed by four other Nuns.  They advanced towards the bed of
Agnes. The Superior reproached her with her errors in the bitterest
terms:  She told her that She was a disgrace to the Convent, that She
was resolved to deliver the world and herself from such a Monster, and
commanded her to drink the contents of a Goblet now presented to her by
one of the Nuns.  Aware of the fatal properties of the liquor, and
trembling to find herself upon the brink of Eternity, the unhappy Girl
strove to excite the Domina's pity by the most affecting prayers.

She sued for life in terms which might have melted the heart of a
Fiend:  She promised to submit patiently to any punishment, to shame,
imprisonment, and torture, might She but be permitted to live!  Oh!
might She but live another month, or week, or day! Her merciless Enemy
listened to her complaints unmoved:  She told her that at first She
meant to have spared her life, and that if She had altered her
intention, She had to thank the opposition of her Friends.  She
continued to insist upon her swallowing the poison:  She bad her
recommend herself to the Almighty's mercy, not to hers, and assured her
that in an hour She would be numbered with the Dead.  Perceiving that
it was vain to implore this unfeeling Woman, She attempted to spring
from her bed, and call for assistance:  She hoped, if She could not
escape the fate announced to her, at least to have witnesses of the
violence committed.  The Prioress guessed her design.  She seized her
forcibly by the arm, and pushed her back upon her pillow.  At the same
time drawing a dagger, and placing it at the breast of the unfortunate
Agnes, She protested that if She uttered a single cry, or hesitated a
single moment to drink the poison, She would pierce her heart that
instant.  Already half-dead with fear, She could make no further
resistance.  The Nun approached with the fatal Goblet.  The Domina
obliged her to take it, and swallow the contents.  She drank, and the
horrid deed was accomplished.  The Nuns then seated themselves round
the Bed.  They answered her groans with reproaches; They interrupted
with sarcasms the prayers in which She recommended her parting soul to
mercy:  They threatened her with heaven's vengeance and eternal
perdition: They bad her despair of pardon, and strowed with yet sharper
thorns Death's painful pillow.  Such were the sufferings of this young
Unfortunate, till released by fate from the malice of her Tormentors.
She expired in horror of the past, in fears for the future; and her
agonies were such as must have amply gratified the hate and vengeance
of her Enemies.  As soon as her Victim ceased to breathe, the Domina
retired, and was followed by her Accomplices.

'It was now that I ventured from my concealment.  I dared not to assist
my unhappy Friend, aware that without preserving her, I should only
have brought on myself the same destruction.  Shocked and terrified
beyond expression at this horrid scene, scarcely had I sufficient
strength to regain my Cell.  As I reached the door of that of Agnes, I
ventured to look towards the bed, on which lay her lifeless body, once
so lovely and so sweet!  I breathed a prayer for her departed Spirit,
and vowed to revenge her death by the shame and punishment of her
Assassins.  With danger and difficulty have I kept my oath.  I unwarily
dropped some words at the funeral of Agnes, while thrown off my guard
by excessive grief, which alarmed the guilty conscience of the
Prioress.  My every action was observed; My every step was traced.  I
was constantly surrounded by the Superior's spies.  It was long before
I could find the means of conveying to the unhappy Girl's Relations an
intimation of my secret.  It was given out that Agnes had expired
suddenly: This account was credited not only by her Friends in Madrid,
but even by those within the Convent.  The poison had left no marks
upon her body: No one suspected the true cause of her death, and it
remained unknown to all, save the Assassins and Myself.

'I have no more to say:  For what I have already said, I will answer
with my life.  I repeat that the Prioress is a Murderess; That She has
driven from the world, perhaps from heaven, an Unfortunate whose
offence was light and venial; that She has abused the power intrusted
to her hands, and has been a Tyrant, a Barbarian, and an Hypocrite.  I
also accuse the four Nuns, Violante, Camilla, Alix, and Mariana, as
being her Accomplices, and equally criminal.'

Here St. Ursula ended her narrative.  It created horror and surprize
throughout:  But when She related the inhuman murder of Agnes, the
indignation of the Mob was so audibly testified, that it was scarcely
possible to hear the conclusion.  This confusion increased with every
moment:  At length a multitude of voices exclaimed that the Prioress
should be given up to their fury. To this Don Ramirez refused to
consent positively.  Even Lorenzo bad the People remember that She had
undergone no trial, and advised them to leave her punishment to the
Inquisition.  All representations were fruitless:  The disturbance grew
still more violent, and the Populace more exasperated.  In vain did
Ramirez attempt to convey his Prisoner out of the Throng.  Wherever He
turned, a band of Rioters barred his passage, and demanded her being
delivered over to them more loudly than before. Ramirez ordered his
Attendants to cut their way through the multitude: Oppressed by
numbers, it was impossible for them to draw their swords.  He
threatened the Mob with the vengeance of the Inquisition:  But in this
moment of popular phrenzy even this dreadful name had lost its effect.
Though regret for his Sister made him look upon the Prioress with
abhorrence, Lorenzo could not help pitying a Woman in a situation so
terrible:  But in spite of all his exertions, and those of the Duke, of
Don Ramirez, and the Archers, the People continued to press onwards.
They forced a passage through the Guards who protected their destined
Victim, dragged her from her shelter, and proceeded to take upon her a
most summary and cruel vengeance.  Wild with terror, and scarcely
knowing what She said, the wretched Woman shrieked for a moment's
mercy:  She protested that She was innocent of the death of Agnes, and
could clear herself from the suspicion beyond the power of doubt.  The
Rioters heeded nothing but the gratification of their barbarous
vengeance.  They refused to listen to her:  They showed her every sort
of insult, loaded her with mud and filth, and called her by the most
opprobrious appellations. They tore her one from another, and each new
Tormentor was more savage than the former.  They stifled with howls and
execrations her shrill cries for mercy; and dragged her through the
Streets, spurning her, trampling her, and treating her with every
species of cruelty which hate or vindictive fury could invent.  At
length a Flint, aimed by some well-directing hand, struck her full upon
the temple.  She sank upon the ground bathed in blood, and in a few
minutes terminated her miserable existence. Yet though She no longer
felt their insults, the Rioters still exercised their impotent rage
upon her lifeless body.  They beat it, trod upon it, and ill-used it,
till it became no more than a mass of flesh, unsightly, shapeless, and
disgusting.

Unable to prevent this shocking event, Lorenzo and his Friends had
beheld it with the utmost horror:  But they were rouzed from their
compelled inactivity, on hearing that the Mob was attacking the Convent
of St. Clare.  The incensed Populace, confounding the innocent with the
guilty, had resolved to sacrifice all the Nuns of that order to their
rage, and not to leave one stone of the building upon another.  Alarmed
at this intelligence, they hastened to the Convent, resolved to defend
it if possible, or at least to rescue the Inhabitants from the fury of
the Rioters. Most of the Nuns had fled, but a few still remained in
their habitation.  Their situation was truly dangerous.  However, as
they had taken the precaution of fastening the inner Gates, with this
assistance Lorenzo hoped to repel the Mob, till Don Ramirez should
return to him with a more sufficient force.

Having been conducted by the former disturbance to the distance of some
Streets from the Convent, He did not immediately reach it:  When He
arrived, the throng surrounding it was so excessive as to prevent his
approaching the Gates.  In the interim, the Populace besieged the
Building with persevering rage:  They battered the walls, threw lighted
torches in at the windows, and swore that by break of day not a Nun of
St. Clare's order should be left alive.  Lorenzo had just succeeded in
piercing his way through the Crowd, when one of the Gates was forced
open.  The Rioters poured into the interior part of the Building, where
they exercised their vengeance upon every thing which found itself in
their passage.  They broke the furniture into pieces, tore down the
pictures, destroyed the reliques, and in their hatred of her Servant
forgot all respect to the Saint.  Some employed themselves in searching
out the Nuns, Others in pulling down parts of the Convent, and Others
again in setting fire to the pictures and valuable furniture which it
contained.  These Latter produced the most decisive desolation:  Indeed
the consequences of their action were more sudden than themselves had
expected or wished.  The Flames rising from the burning piles caught
part of the Building, which being old and dry, the conflagration spread
with rapidity from room to room. The Walls were soon shaken by the
devouring element: The Columns gave way: The Roofs came tumbling down
upon the Rioters, and crushed many of them beneath their weight.
Nothing was to be heard but shrieks and groans; The Convent was wrapped
in flames, and the whole presented a scene of devastation and horror.

Lorenzo was shocked at having been the cause, however innocent, of this
frightful disturbance:  He endeavoured to repair his fault by
protecting the helpless Inhabitants of the Convent.  He entered it with
the Mob, and exerted himself to repress the prevailing Fury, till the
sudden and alarming progress of the flames compelled him to provide for
his own safety.  The People now hurried out, as eagerly as they had
before thronged in; But their numbers clogging up the doorway, and the
fire gaining upon them rapidly, many of them perished ere they had time
to effect their escape.  Lorenzo's good fortune directed him to a small
door in a farther Aisle of the Chapel.  The bolt was already undrawn:
He opened the door, and found himself at the foot of St. Clare's
Sepulchre.

Here He stopped to breathe.  The Duke and some of his Attendants had
followed him, and thus were in security for the present. They now
consulted, what steps they should take to escape from this scene of
disturbance: But their deliberations were considerably interrupted by
the sight of volumes of fire rising from amidst the Convent's massy
walls, by the noise of some heavy Arch tumbling down in ruins, or by
the mingled shrieks of the Nuns and Rioters, either suffocating in the
press, perishing in the flames, or crushed beneath the weight of the
falling Mansion.

Lorenzo enquired, whither the Wicket led?  He was answered, to the
Garden of the Capuchins, and it was resolved to explore an outlet upon
that side.  Accordingly the Duke raised the Latch, and passed into the
adjoining Cemetery.  The Attendants followed without ceremony.
Lorenzo, being the last, was also on the point of quitting the
Colonnade, when He saw the door of the Sepulchre opened softly.
Someone looked out, but on perceiving Strangers uttered a loud shriek,
started back again, and flew down the marble Stairs.

'What can this mean?' cried Lorenzo; 'Here is some mystery concealed.
Follow me without delay!'

Thus saying, He hastened into the Sepulchre, and pursued the person who
continued to fly before him.  The Duke knew not the cause of his
exclamation, but supposing that He had good reasons for it, he followed
him without hesitation.  The Others did the same, and the whole Party
soon arrived at the foot of the Stairs.

The upper door having been left open, the neighbouring flames darted
from above a sufficient light to enable Lorenzo's catching a glance of
the Fugitive running through the long passages and distant Vaults:  But
when a sudden turn deprived him of this assistance, total darkness
succeeded, and He could only trace the object of his enquiry by the
faint echo of retiring feet.  The Pursuers were now compelled to
proceed with caution:  As well as they could judge, the Fugitive also
seemed to slacken pace, for they heard the steps follow each other at
longer intervals.  They at length were bewildered by the Labyrinth of
passages, and dispersed in various directions.  Carried away by his
eagerness to clear up this mystery, and to penetrate into which He was
impelled by a movement secret and unaccountable, Lorenzo heeded not
this circumstance till He found himself in total solitude. The noise of
footsteps had ceased.  All was silent around, and no clue offered
itself to guide him to the flying Person.  He stopped to reflect on the
means most likely to aid his pursuit. He was persuaded that no common
cause would have induced the Fugitive to seek that dreary place at an
hour so unusual:  The cry which He had heard, seemed uttered in a voice
of terror, and He was convinced that some mystery was attached to this
event. After some minutes past in hesitation He continued to proceed,
feeling his way along the walls of the passage.  He had already past
some time in this slow progress, when He descried a spark of light
glimmering at a distance.  Guided by this observation, and having drawn
his sword, He bent his steps towards the place, whence the beam seemed
to be emitted.

It proceeded from the Lamp which flamed before St. Clare's Statue.
Before it stood several Females, their white Garments streaming in the
blast, as it howled along the vaulted dungeons. Curious to know what
had brought them together in this melancholy spot, Lorenzo drew near
with precaution.  The Strangers seemed earnestly engaged in
conversation.  They heard not Lorenzo's steps, and He approached
unobserved, till He could hear their voices distinctly.

'I protest,' continued She who was speaking when He arrived, and to
whom the rest were listening with great attention; 'I protest, that I
saw them with my own eyes.  I flew down the steps; They pursued me, and
I escaped falling into their hands with difficulty.  Had it not been
for the Lamp, I should never have found you.'

'And what could bring them hither?' said another in a trembling voice;
'Do you think that they were looking for us?'

'God grant that my fears may be false,' rejoined the First; 'But I
doubt they are Murderers!  If they discover us, we are lost! As for me,
my fate is certain:  My affinity to the Prioress will be a sufficient
crime to condemn me; and though till now these Vaults have afforded me
a retreat.......'

Here looking up, her eye fell upon Lorenzo, who had continued to
approach softly.

'The Murderers!' She cried--

She started away from the Statue's Pedestal on which She had been
seated, and attempted to escape by flight.  Her Companions at the same
moment uttered a terrified scream, while Lorenzo arrested the Fugitive
by the arm.  Frightened and desperate She sank upon her knees before
him.

'Spare me!' She exclaimed; 'For Christ's sake, spare me!  I am
innocent, indeed, I am!'

While She spoke, her voice was almost choaked with fear.  The beams of
the Lamp darting full upon her face which was unveiled, Lorenzo
recognized the beautiful Virginia de Villa-Franca.  He hastened to
raise her from the ground, and besought her to take courage.  He
promised to protect her from the Rioters, assured her that her retreat
was still a secret, and that She might depend upon his readiness to
defend her to the last drop of his blood.  During this conversation,
the Nuns had thrown themselves into various attitudes:  One knelt, and
addressed herself to heaven; Another hid her face in the lap of her
Neighbour; Some listened motionless with fear to the discourse of the
supposed Assassin; while Others embraced the Statue of St. Clare, and
implored her protection with frantic cries.  On perceiving their
mistake, they crowded round Lorenzo and heaped benedictions on him by
dozens.  He found that, on hearing the threats of the Mob, and
terrified by the cruelties which from the Convent Towers they had seen
inflicted on the Superior, many of the Pensioners and Nuns had taken
refuge in the Sepulchre.  Among the former was to be reckoned the
lovely Virginia.  Nearly related to the Prioress, She had more reason
than the rest to dread the Rioters, and now besought Lorenzo earnestly
not to abandon her to their rage.  Her Companions, most of whom were
Women of noble family, made the same request, which He readily granted.
He promised not to quit them, till He had seen each of them safe in the
arms of her Relations:  But He advised their deferring to quit the
Sepulchre for some time longer, when the popular fury should be
somewhat calmed, and the arrival of military force have dispersed the
multitude.

'Would to God!' cried Virginia, 'That I were already safe in my
Mother's embraces!  How say you, Segnor; Will it be long, ere we may
leave this place?  Every moment that I pass here, I pass in torture!'

'I hope, not long,' said He; 'But till you can proceed with security,
this Sepulchre will prove an impenetrable asylum.  Here you run no
risque of a discovery, and I would advise your remaining quiet for the
next two or three hours.'

'Two or three hours?' exclaimed Sister Helena; 'If I stay another hour
in these vaults, I shall expire with fear!  Not the wealth of worlds
should bribe me to undergo again what I have suffered since my coming
hither. Blessed Virgin!  To be in this melancholy place in the middle
of night, surrounded by the mouldering bodies of my deceased
Companions, and expecting every moment to be torn in pieces by their
Ghosts who wander about me, and complain, and groan, and wail in
accents that make my blood run cold, ..... Christ Jesus!  It is
enough to drive me to madness!'

'Excuse me,' replied Lorenzo, 'if I am surprized that while menaced by
real woes you are capable of yielding to imaginary dangers.  These
terrors are puerile and groundless:  Combat them, holy Sister; I have
promised to guard you from the Rioters, but against the attacks of
superstition you must depend for protection upon yourself. The idea of
Ghosts is ridiculous in the extreme; And if you continue to be swayed
by ideal terrors ...'

'Ideal?' exclaimed the Nuns with one voice; 'Why we heard it ourselves,
Segnor!  Every one of us heard it!  It was frequently repeated, and it
sounded every time more melancholy and deep. You will never persuade me
that we could all have been deceived. Not we, indeed; No, no; Had the
noise been merely created by fancy ....'

'Hark!  Hark!' interrupted Virginia in a voice of terror; 'God preserve
us!  There it is again!'

The Nuns clasped their hands together, and sank upon their knees.

Lorenzo looked round him eagerly, and was on the point of yielding to
the fears which already had possessed the Women. Universal silence
prevailed.  He examined the Vault, but nothing was to be seen.  He now
prepared to address the Nuns, and ridicule their childish
apprehensions, when his attention was arrested by a deep and long-drawn
groan.

'What was that?' He cried, and started.

'There, Segnor!' said Helena; 'Now you must be convinced!  You have
heard the noise yourself!  Now judge, whether our terrors are
imaginary.  Since we have been here, that groaning has been repeated
almost every five minutes.  Doubtless, it proceeds from some Soul in
pain, who wishes to be prayed out of purgatory:  But none of us here
dares ask it the question.  As for me, were I to see an Apparition, the
fright, I am very certain, would kill me out of hand.'

As She said this, a second groan was heard yet more distinctly. The
Nuns crossed themselves, and hastened to repeat their prayers against
evil Spirits.  Lorenzo listened attentively.  He even thought that He
could distinguish sounds, as of one speaking in complaint; But distance
rendered them inarticulate.  The noise seemed to come from the midst of
the small Vault in which He and the Nuns then were, and which a
multitude of passages branching out in various directions, formed into
a sort of Star.  Lorenzo's curiosity which was ever awake, made him
anxious to solve this mystery.  He desired that silence might be kept.
The Nuns obeyed him.  All was hushed, till the general stillness was
again disturbed by the groaning, which was repeated several times
successively.  He perceived it to be most audible, when upon following
the sound He was conducted close to the shrine of St. Clare:

'The noise comes from hence,' said He; 'Whose is this Statue?'

Helena, to whom He addressed the question, paused for a moment.
Suddenly She clapped her hands together.

'Aye!' cried She, 'it must be so.  I have discovered the meaning of
these groans.'

The Nuns crowded round her, and besought her eagerly to explain
herself.  She gravely replied that for time immemorial the Statue had
been famous for performing miracles:  From this She inferred that the
Saint was concerned at the conflagration of a Convent which She
protected, and expressed her grief by audible lamentations. Not having
equal faith in the miraculous Saint, Lorenzo did not think this
solution of the mystery quite so satisfactory, as the Nuns, who
subscribed to it without hesitation.  In one point, 'tis true, that He
agreed with Helena.

He suspected that the groans proceeded from the Statue:  The more He
listened, the more was He confirmed in this idea.  He drew nearer to
the Image, designing to inspect it more closely:  But perceiving his
intention, the Nuns besought him for God's sake to desist, since if He
touched the Statue, his death was inevitable.

'And in what consists the danger?' said He.

'Mother of God!  In what?' replied Helena, ever eager to relate a
miraculous adventure; 'If you had only heard the hundredth part of
those marvellous Stories about this Statue which the Domina used to
recount!  She assured us often and often, that if we only dared to lay
a finger upon it, we might expect the most fatal consequences. Among
other things She told us that a Robber having entered these Vaults by
night, He observed yonder Ruby, whose value is inestimable.  Do you see
it, Segnor?  It sparkles upon the third finger of the hand, in which
She holds a crown of Thorns.  This Jewel naturally excited the
Villain's cupidity.  He resolved to make himself Master of it.  For
this purpose He ascended the Pedestal:  He supported himself by
grasping the Saint's right arm, and extended his own towards the Ring.
What was his surprize, when He saw the Statue's hand raised in a
posture of menace, and heard her lips pronounce his eternal perdition!
Penetrated with awe and consternation, He desisted from his attempt,
and prepared to quit the Sepulchre.  In this He also failed.  Flight
was denied him.  He found it impossible to disengage the hand, which
rested upon the right arm of the Statue.  In vain did He struggle:  He
remained fixed to the Image, till the insupportable and fiery anguish
which darted itself through his veins, compelled his shrieking for
assistance.

The Sepulchre was now filled with Spectators.  The Villain confessed
his sacrilege, and was only released by the separation of his hand from
his body.  It has remained ever since fastened to the Image.  The
Robber turned Hermit, and led ever after an exemplary life:  But yet
the Saint's decree was performed, and Tradition says that He continues
to haunt this Sepulchre, and implore St. Clare's pardon with groans and
lamentations.  Now I think of it, those which we have just heard, may
very possibly have been uttered by the Ghost of this Sinner: But of
this I will not be positive.  All that I can say is, that since that
time no one has ever dared to touch the Statue:  Then do not be
foolhardy, good Segnor!  For the love of heaven, give up your design,
nor expose yourself unnecessarily to certain destruction.'

Not being convinced that his destruction would be so certain as Helena
seemed to think it, Lorenzo persisted in his resolution. The Nuns
besought him to desist in piteous terms, and even pointed out the
Robber's hand, which in effect was still visible upon the arm of the
Statue.  This proof, as they imagined, must convince him. It was very
far from doing so; and they were greatly scandalized when he declared
his suspicion that the dried and shrivelled fingers had been placed
there by order of the Prioress.  In spite of their prayers and threats
He approached the Statue.  He sprang over the iron Rails which defended
it, and the Saint underwent a thorough examination. The Image at first
appeared to be of Stone, but proved on further inspection to be formed
of no more solid materials than coloured Wood.  He shook it, and
attempted to move it; But it appeared to be of a piece with the Base
which it stood upon.  He examined it over and over:  Still no clue
guided him to the solution of this mystery, for which the Nuns were
become equally solicitous, when they saw that He touched the Statue
with impunity.  He paused, and listened:  The groans were repeated at
intervals, and He was convinced of being in the spot nearest to them.
He mused upon this singular event, and ran over the Statue with
enquiring eyes. Suddenly they rested upon the shrivelled hand.  It
struck him, that so particular an injunction was not given without
cause, not to touch the arm of the Image.  He again ascended the
Pedestal; He examined the object of his attention, and discovered a
small knob of iron concealed between the Saint's shoulder and what was
supposed to have been the hand of the Robber.  This observation
delighted him.  He applied his fingers to the knob, and pressed it down
forcibly.  Immediately a rumbling noise was heard within the Statue, as
if a chain tightly stretched was flying back. Startled at the sound the
timid Nuns started away, prepared to hasten from the Vault at the first
appearance of danger.  All remaining quiet and still, they again
gathered round Lorenzo, and beheld his proceedings with anxious
curiosity.

Finding that nothing followed this discovery, He descended.  As He took
his hand from the Saint, She trembled beneath his touch. This created
new terrors in the Spectators, who believed the Statue to be animated.
Lorenzo's ideas upon the subject were widely different. He easily
comprehended that the noise which He had heard, was occasioned by his
having loosened a chain which attached the Image to its Pedestal.  He
once more attempted to move it, and succeeded without much exertion.
He placed it upon the ground, and then perceived the Pedestal to be
hollow, and covered at the opening with an heavy iron grate.

This excited such general curiosity that the Sisters forgot both their
real and imaginary dangers.  Lorenzo proceeded to raise the Grate, in
which the Nuns assisted him to the utmost of their strength.  The
attempt was accomplished with little difficulty. A deep abyss now
presented itself before them, whose thick obscurity the eye strove in
vain to pierce.  The rays of the Lamp were too feeble to be of much
assistance.  Nothing was discernible, save a flight of rough unshapen
steps which sank into the yawning Gulph and were soon lost in darkness.
The groans were heard no more; But All believed them to have ascended
from this Cavern.  As He bent over it, Lorenzo fancied that He
distinguished something bright twinkling through the gloom.  He gazed
attentively upon the spot where it showed itself, and was convinced
that He saw a small spark of light, now visible, now disappearing.  He
communicated this circumstance to the Nuns: They also perceived the
spark; But when He declared his intention to descend into the Cave,
they united to oppose his resolution. All their remonstrances could not
prevail on him to alter it. None of them had courage enough to
accompany him; neither could He think of depriving them of the Lamp.
Alone therefore, and in darkness, He prepared to pursue his design,
while the Nuns were contented to offer up prayers for his success and
safety.

The steps were so narrow and uneven, that to descend them was like
walking down the side of a precipice.  The obscurity by which He was
surrounded rendered his footing insecure.  He was obliged to proceed
with great caution, lest He should miss the steps and fall into the
Gulph below him.  This He was several times on the point of doing.
However, He arrived sooner upon solid ground than He had expected:  He
now found that the thick darkness and impenetrable mists which reigned
through the Cavern had deceived him into the belief of its being much
more profound than it proved upon inspection.  He reached the foot of
the Stairs unhurt:  He now stopped, and looked round for the spark
which had before caught his attention.  He sought it in vain: All was
dark and gloomy.  He listened for the groans; But his ear caught no
sound, except the distant murmur of the Nuns above, as in low voices
they repeated their Ave-Marias.  He stood irresolute to which side He
should address his steps.  At all events He determined to proceed:  He
did so, but slowly, fearing lest instead of approaching, He should be
retiring from the object of his search.  The groans seemed to announce
one in pain, or at least in sorrow, and He hoped to have the power of
relieving the Mourner's calamities.  A plaintive tone, sounding at no
great distance, at length reached his hearing; He bent his course
joyfully towards it.  It became more audible as He advanced; and He
soon beheld again the spark of light, which a low projecting Wall had
hitherto concealed from him.

It proceeded from a small Lamp which was placed upon an heap of stones,
and whose faint and melancholy rays served rather to point out, than
dispell the horrors of a narrow gloomy dungeon formed in one side of
the Cavern; It also showed several other recesses of similar
construction, but whose depth was buried in obscurity.  Coldly played
the light upon the damp walls, whose dew-stained surface gave back a
feeble reflection.  A thick and pestilential fog clouded the height of
the vaulted dungeon.  As Lorenzo advanced, He felt a piercing chillness
spread itself through his veins.  The frequent groans still engaged him
to move forwards.  He turned towards them, and by the Lamp's glimmering
beams beheld in a corner of this loathsome abode, a Creature stretched
upon a bed of straw, so wretched, so emaciated, so pale, that He
doubted to think her Woman.  She was half-naked: Her long dishevelled
hair fell in disorder over her face, and almost entirely concealed it.
One wasted Arm hung listlessly upon a tattered rug which covered her
convulsed and shivering limbs:  The Other was wrapped round a small
bundle, and held it closely to her bosom.  A large Rosary lay near her:
Opposite to her was a Crucifix, on which She bent her sunk eyes
fixedly, and by her side stood a Basket and a small Earthen Pitcher.

Lorenzo stopped:  He was petrified with horror.  He gazed upon the
miserable Object with disgust and pity.  He trembled at the spectacle;
He grew sick at heart: His strength failed him, and his limbs were
unable to support his weight.  He was obliged to lean against the low
Wall which was near him, unable to go forward, or to address the
Sufferer.  She cast her eyes towards the Staircase:  The Wall concealed
Lorenzo, and She observed him not.

'No one comes!' She at length murmured.

As She spoke, her voice was hollow, and rattled in her throat: She
sighed bitterly.

'No one comes!' She repeated; 'No!  They have forgotten me!  They will
come no more!'

She paused for a moment:  Then continued mournfully.

'Two days!  Two long, long days, and yet no food!  And yet no hope, no
comfort!  Foolish Woman!  How can I wish to lengthen a life so
wretched!  Yet such a death!  O! God!  To perish by such a death!  To
linger out such ages in torture!  Till now, I knew not what it was to
hunger!  Hark!  No.  No one comes!  They will come no more!'

She was silent.  She shivered, and drew the rug over her naked
shoulders.

'I am very cold!  I am still unused to the damps of this dungeon!

'Tis strange:  But no matter.  Colder shall I soon be, and yet not feel
it--I shall be cold, cold as Thou art!'

She looked at the bundle which lay upon her breast. She bent over it,
and kissed it:  Then drew back hastily, and shuddered with disgust.

'It was once so sweet!  It would have been so lovely, so like him!  I
have lost it for ever!  How a few days have changed it! I should not
know it again myself!  Yet it is dear to me!  God! how dear!  I will
forget what it is: I will only remember what it was, and love it as
well, as when it was so sweet! so lovely! so like him!  I thought that
I had wept away all my tears, but here is one still lingering.'

She wiped her eyes with a tress of her hair.  She put out her hand for
the Pitcher, and reached it with difficulty.  She cast into it a look
of hopeless enquiry.  She sighed, and replaced it upon the ground.

'Quite a void!  Not a drop!  Not one drop left to cool my scorched-up
burning palate!  Now would I give treasures for a draught of water!
And they are God's Servants, who make me suffer thus!  They think
themselves holy, while they torture me like Fiends!  They are cruel and
unfeeling; And 'tis they who bid me repent; And 'tis they, who threaten
me with eternal perdition! Saviour, Saviour! You think not so!'

She again fixed her eyes upon the Crucifix, took her Rosary, and while
She told her beads, the quick motion of her lips declared her to be
praying with fervency.

While He listened to her melancholy accents, Lorenzo's sensibility
became yet more violently affected.  The first sight of such misery had
given a sensible shock to his feelings:  But that being past, He now
advanced towards the Captive.  She heard his steps, and uttering a cry
of joy, dropped the Rosary.

'Hark!  Hark!  Hark!' She cried:  'Some one comes!'

She strove to raise herself, but her strength was unequal to the
attempt:  She fell back, and as She sank again upon the bed of straw,
Lorenzo heard the rattling of heavy chains.  He still approached, while
the Prisoner thus continued.

'Is it you, Camilla?  You are come then at last?  Oh! it was time!  I
thought that you had forsaken me; that I was doomed to perish of
hunger.  Give me to drink, Camilla, for pity's sake!  I am faint with
long fasting, and grown so weak that I cannot raise myself from the
ground.  Good Camilla, give me to drink, lest I expire before you!'

Fearing that surprize in her enfeebled state might be fatal, Lorenzo
was at a loss how to address her.

'It is not Camilla,' said He at length, speaking in a slow and gentle
voice.

'Who is it then?' replied the Sufferer:  'Alix, perhaps, or Violante.
My eyes are grown so dim and feeble that I cannot distinguish your
features.  But whichever it is, if your breast is sensible of the least
compassion, if you are not more cruel than Wolves and Tigers, take pity
on my sufferings.  You know that I am dying for want of sustenance.
This is the third day, since these lips have received nourishment.  Do
you bring me food?  Or come you only to announce my death, and learn
how long I have yet to exist in agony?'

'You mistake my business,' replied Lorenzo; 'I am no Emissary of the
cruel Prioress.  I pity your sorrows, and come hither to relieve them.'

'To relieve them?' repeated the Captive; 'Said you, to relieve them?'

At the same time starting from the ground, and supporting herself upon
her hands, She gazed upon the Stranger earnestly.

'Great God!  It is no illusion!  A Man!  Speak!  Who are you? What
brings you hither?  Come you to save me, to restore me to liberty, to
life and light?  Oh! speak, speak quickly, lest I encourage an hope
whose disappointment will destroy me.'

'Be calm!' replied Lorenzo in a voice soothing and compassionate; 'The
Domina of whose cruelty you complain, has already paid the forfeit of
her offences:  You have nothing more to fear from her.

A few minutes will restore you to liberty, and the embraces of your
Friends from whom you have been secluded.  You may rely upon my
protection.  Give me your hand, and be not fearful. Let me conduct you
where you may receive those attentions which your feeble state
requires.'

'Oh!  Yes!  Yes!  Yes!' cried the Prisoner with an exulting shriek;
'There is a God then, and a just one! Joy!  Joy!  I shall once more
breath the fresh air, and view the light of the glorious sunbeams! I
will go with you! Stranger, I will go with you!  Oh!  Heaven will bless
you for pitying an Unfortunate!  But this too must go with me,' She
added pointing to the small bundle which She still clasped to her
bosom; 'I cannot part with this.  I will bear it away:  It shall
convince the world how dreadful are the abodes so falsely termed
religious.  Good Stranger, lend me your hand to rise:  I am faint with
want, and sorrow, and sickness, and my forces have quite forsaken me!
So, that is well!'

As Lorenzo stooped to raise her, the beams of the Lamp struck full upon
his face.

'Almighty God!' She exclaimed; 'Is it possible!  That look! Those
features!  Oh!  Yes, it is, it is .....'

She extended her arms to throw them round him; But her enfeebled frame
was unable to sustain the emotions which agitated her bosom.  She
fainted, and again sank upon the bed of straw.

Lorenzo was surprized at her last exclamation.  He thought that He had
before heard such accents as her hollow voice had just formed, but
where He could not remember.  He saw that in her dangerous situation
immediate physical aid was absolutely necessary, and He hastened to
convey her from the dungeon.  He was at first prevented from doing so
by a strong chain fastened round the prisoner's body, and fixing her to
the neighbouring Wall.  However, his natural strength being aided by
anxiety to relieve the Unfortunate, He soon forced out the Staple to
which one end of the Chain was attached. Then taking the Captive in his
arms, He bent his course towards the Staircase.  The rays of the Lamp
above, as well as the murmur of female voices, guided his steps. He
gained the Stairs, and in a few minutes after arrived at the iron-grate.

The Nuns during his absence had been terribly tormented by curiosity
and apprehension:  They were equally surprized and delighted on seeing
him suddenly emerge from the Cave.  Every heart was filled with
compassion for the miserable Creature whom He bore in his arms.  While
the Nuns, and Virginia in particular, employed themselves in striving
to recall her to her senses, Lorenzo related in few words the manner of
his finding her.  He then observed to them that by this time the tumult
must have been quelled, and that He could now conduct them to their
Friends without danger.  All were eager to quit the Sepulchre:  Still
to prevent all possibility of ill-usage, they besought Lorenzo to
venture out first alone, and examine whether the Coast was clear. With
this request He complied.  Helena offered to conduct him to the
Staircase, and they were on the point of departing, when a strong light
flashed from several passages upon the adjacent walls.  At the same
time Steps were heard of people approaching hastily, and whose number
seemed to be considerable. The Nuns were greatly alarmed at this
circumstance:  They supposed their retreat to be discovered, and the
Rioters to be advancing in pursuit of them.  Hastily quitting the
Prisoner who remained insensible, they crowded round Lorenzo, and
claimed his promise to protect them.  Virginia alone forgot her own
danger by striving to relieve the sorrows of Another.  She supported
the Sufferer's head upon her knees, bathing her temples with
rose-water, chafing her cold hands, and sprinkling her face with tears
which were drawn from her by compassion.  The Strangers approaching
nearer, Lorenzo was enabled to dispel the fears of the Suppliants.  His
name, pronounced by a number of voices among which He distinguished the
Duke's, pealed along the Vaults, and convinced him that He was the
object of their search.  He communicated this intelligence to the Nuns,
who received it with rapture.  A few moments after confirmed his idea.
Don Ramirez, as well as the Duke, appeared, followed by Attendants with
Torches.  They had been seeking him through the Vaults, in order to let
him know that the Mob was dispersed, and the riot entirely over.
Lorenzo recounted briefly his adventure in the Cavern, and explained
how much the Unknown was in want of medical assistance.  He besought
the Duke to take charge of her, as well as of the Nuns and Pensioners.

'As for me,' said He, 'Other cares demand my attention.  While you with
one half of the Archers convey these Ladies to their respective homes,
I wish the other half to be left with me.  I will examine the Cavern
below, and pervade the most secret recesses of the Sepulchre.  I cannot
rest till convinced that yonder wretched Victim was the only one
confined by Superstition in these vaults.'

The Duke applauded his intention.  Don Ramirez offered to assist him in
his enquiry, and his proposal was accepted with gratitude.

The Nuns having made their acknowledgments to Lorenzo, committed
themselves to the care of his Uncle, and were conducted from the
Sepulchre.  Virginia requested that the Unknown might be given to her
in charge, and promised to let Lorenzo know whenever She was
sufficiently recovered to accept his visits.  In truth, She made this
promise more from consideration for herself than for either Lorenzo or
the Captive.  She had witnessed his politeness, gentleness, and
intrepidity with sensible emotion.  She wished earnestly to preserve
his acquaintance; and in addition to the sentiments of pity which the
Prisoner excited, She hoped that her attention to this Unfortunate
would raise her a degree in the esteem of Lorenzo.  She had no occasion
to trouble herself upon this head.  The kindness already displayed by
her and the tender concern which She had shown for the Sufferer had
gained her an exalted place in his good graces.  While occupied in
alleviating the Captive's sorrows, the nature of her employment adorned
her with new charms, and rendered her beauty a thousand times more
interesting.  Lorenzo viewed her with admiration and delight:  He
considered her as a ministering Angel descended to the aid of afflicted
innocence; nor could his heart have resisted her attractions, had it
not been steeled by the remembrance of Antonia.

The Duke now conveyed the Nuns in safety to the Dwellings of their
respective Friends.  The rescued Prisoner was still insensible and gave
no signs of life, except by occasional groans.  She was borne upon a
sort of litter; Virginia, who was constantly by the side of it, was
apprehensive that exhausted by long abstinence, and shaken by the
sudden change from bonds and darkness to liberty and light, her frame
would never get the better of the shock.  Lorenzo and Don Ramirez still
remained in the Sepulchre.  After deliberating upon their proceedings,
it was resolved that to prevent losing time, the Archers should be
divided into two Bodies:  That with one Don Ramirez should examine the
cavern, while Lorenzo with the other might penetrate into the further
Vaults.  This being arranged, and his Followers being provided with
Torches, Don Ramirez advanced to the Cavern. He had already descended
some steps when He heard People approaching hastily from the interior
part of the Sepulchre. This surprized him, and He quitted the Cave
precipitately.

'Do you hear footsteps?' said Lorenzo; 'Let us bend our course towards
them.  'Tis from this side that they seem to proceed.'

At that moment a loud and piercing shriek induced him to quicken his
steps.

'Help!  Help, for God's sake!  cried a voice, whose melodious tone
penetrated Lorenzo's heart with terror.

He flew towards the cry with the rapidity of lightning, and was
followed by Don Ramirez with equal swiftness.


CHAPTER IV

  Great Heaven!  How frail thy creature Man is made!
  How by himself insensibly betrayed!
  In our own strength unhappily secure,
  Too little cautious of the adverse power,
  On pleasure's flowery brink we idly stray,
  Masters as yet of our returning way:
  Till the strong gusts of raging passion rise,
  Till the dire Tempest mingles earth and skies,
  And swift into the boundless Ocean borne,
  Our foolish confidence too late we mourn:
  Round our devoted heads the billows beat,
  And from our troubled view the lessening lands retreat.
                       Prior.


All this while, Ambrosio was unconscious of the dreadful scenes which
were passing so near.  The execution of his designs upon Antonia
employed his every thought.  Hitherto, He was satisfied with the
success of his plans.  Antonia had drank the opiate, was buried in the
vaults of St. Clare, and absolutely in his disposal.  Matilda, who was
well acquainted with the nature and effects of the soporific medicine,
had computed that it would not cease to operate till one in the
Morning.  For that hour He waited with impatience.  The Festival of St.
Clare presented him with a favourable opportunity of consummating his
crime.  He was certain that the Friars and Nuns would be engaged in the
Procession, and that He had no cause to dread an interruption: From
appearing himself at the head of his Monks, He had desired to be
excused.  He doubted not, that being beyond the reach of help, cut off
from all the world, and totally in his power, Antonia would comply with
his desires.  The affection which She had ever exprest for him,
warranted this persuasion:  But He resolved that should She prove
obstinate, no consideration whatever should prevent him from enjoying
her.  Secure from a discovery, He shuddered not at the idea of
employing force:  If He felt any repugnance, it arose not from a
principle of shame or compassion, but from his feeling for Antonia the
most sincere and ardent affection, and wishing to owe her favours to no
one but herself.

The Monks quitted the Abbey at midnight.  Matilda was among the
Choristers, and led the chaunt.  Ambrosio was left by himself, and at
liberty to pursue his own inclinations.  Convinced that no one remained
behind to watch his motions, or disturb his pleasures, He now hastened
to the Western Aisles.  His heart beating with hope not unmingled with
anxiety, He crossed the Garden, unlocked the door which admitted him
into the Cemetery, and in a few minutes He stood before the Vaults.
Here He paused.

He looked round him with suspicion, conscious that his business was
unfit for any other eye.  As He stood in hesitation, He heard the
melancholy shriek of the screech-Owl:  The wind rattled loudly against
the windows of the adjacent Convent, and as the current swept by him,
bore with it the faint notes of the chaunt of Choristers.  He opened
the door cautiously, as if fearing to be overheard:  He entered; and
closed it again after him. Guided by his Lamp, He threaded the long
passages, in whose windings Matilda had instructed him, and reached the
private Vault which contained his sleeping Mistress.

Its entrance was by no means easy to discover:  But this was no
obstacle to Ambrosio, who at the time of Antonia's Funeral had observed
it too carefully to be deceived.  He found the door, which was
unfastened, pushed it open, and descended into the dungeon.  He
approached the humble Tomb in which Antonia reposed.  He had provided
himself with an iron crow and a pick-axe; But this precaution was
unnecessary.  The Grate was slightly fastened on the outside:  He
raised it, and placing the Lamp upon its ridge, bent silently over the
Tomb.  By the side of three putrid half-corrupted Bodies lay the
sleeping Beauty.  A lively red, the forerunner of returning animation,
had already spread itself over her cheek; and as wrapped in her shroud
She reclined upon her funeral Bier, She seemed to smile at the Images
of Death around her.  While He gazed upon their rotting bones and
disgusting figures, who perhaps were once as sweet and lovely, Ambrosio
thought upon Elvira, by him reduced to the same state. As the memory of
that horrid act glanced upon his mind, it was clouded with a gloomy
horror.  Yet it served but to strengthen his resolution to destroy
Antonia's honour.

'For your sake, Fatal Beauty!' murmured the Monk, while gazing on his
devoted prey; 'For your sake, have I committed this murder, and sold
myself to eternal tortures.  Now you are in my power: The produce of my
guilt will at least be mine.  Hope not that your prayers breathed in
tones of unequalled melody, your bright eyes filled with tears, and
your hands lifted in supplication, as when seeking in penitence the
Virgin's pardon; Hope not that your moving innocence, your beauteous
grief, or all your suppliant arts shall ransom you from my embraces.
Before the break of day, mine you must, and mine you shall be!'

He lifted her still motionless from the Tomb:  He seated himself upon a
bank of Stone, and supporting her in his arms, watched impatiently for
the symptoms of returning animation.  Scarcely could He command his
passions sufficiently, to restrain himself from enjoying her while yet
insensible.  His natural lust was increased in ardour by the
difficulties which had opposed his satisfying it:  As also by his long
abstinence from Woman, since from the moment of resigning her claim to
his love, Matilda had exiled him from her arms for ever.

'I am no Prostitute, Ambrosio;' Had She told him, when in the fullness
of his lust He demanded her favours with more than usual earnestness;
'I am now no more than your Friend, and will not be your Mistress.
Cease then to solicit my complying with desires, which insult me.
While your heart was mine, I gloried in your embraces:  Those happy
times are past:  My person is become indifferent to you, and 'tis
necessity, not love, which makes you seek my enjoyment.  I cannot yield
to a request so humiliating to my pride.'

Suddenly deprived of pleasures, the use of which had made them an
absolute want, the Monk felt this restraint severely.  Naturally
addicted to the gratification of the senses, in the full vigour of
manhood, and heat of blood, He had suffered his temperament to acquire
such ascendency that his lust was become madness.  Of his fondness for
Antonia, none but the grosser particles remained: He longed for the
possession of her person; and even the gloom of the vault, the
surrounding silence, and the resistance which He expected from her,
seemed to give a fresh edge to his fierce and unbridled desires.

Gradually He felt the bosom which rested against his, glow with
returning warmth.  Her heart throbbed again; Her blood flowed swifter,
and her lips moved.  At length She opened her eyes, but still opprest
and bewildered by the effects of the strong opiate, She closed them
again immediately.  Ambrosio watched her narrowly, nor permitted a
movement to escape him.  Perceiving that She was fully restored to
existence, He caught her in rapture to his bosom, and closely pressed
his lips to hers.  The suddenness of his action sufficed to dissipate
the fumes which obscured Antonia's reason.  She hastily raised herself,
and cast a wild look round her.  The strange Images which presented
themselves on every side contributed to confuse her.  She put her hand
to her head, as if to settle her disordered imagination.  At length She
took it away, and threw her eyes through the dungeon a second time.
They fixed upon the Abbot's face.

'Where am I?' She said abruptly.  'How came I here?  Where is my
Mother?  Methought, I saw her!  Oh! a dream, a dreadful dreadful dream
told me ...... But where am I?  Let me go!  I cannot stay here!'

She attempted to rise, but the Monk prevented her.

'Be calm, lovely Antonia!' He replied; 'No danger is near you: Confide
in my protection.  Why do you gaze on me so earnestly? Do you not know
me?  Not know your Friend?  Ambrosio?'

'Ambrosio?  My Friend?  Oh!  yes, yes; I remember ...... But why
am I here?  Who has brought me?  Why are you with me? Oh! Flora bad me
beware .....! Here are nothing but Graves, and Tombs, and
Skeletons! This place frightens me!  Good Ambrosio take me away from
it, for it recalls my fearful dream!  Methought I was dead, and laid in
my grave!  Good Ambrosio, take me from hence.  Will you not?  Oh! will
you not?  Do not look on me thus!

Your flaming eyes terrify me!  Spare me, Father! Oh! spare me for God's
sake!'

'Why these terrors, Antonia?' rejoined the Abbot, folding her in his
arms, and covering her bosom with kisses which She in vain struggled to
avoid:  'What fear you from me, from one who adores you?  What matters
it where you are?  This Sepulchre seems to me Love's bower; This gloom
is the friendly night of mystery which He spreads over our delights!
Such do I think it, and such must my Antonia.  Yes, my sweet Girl!
Yes! Your veins shall glow with fire which circles in mine, and my
transports shall be doubled by your sharing them!'

While He spoke thus, He repeated his embraces, and permitted himself
the most indecent liberties.  Even Antonia's ignorance was not proof
against the freedom of his behaviour.  She was sensible of her danger,
forced herself from his arms, and her shroud being her only garment,
She wrapped it closely round her.

'Unhand me, Father!' She cried, her honest indignation tempered by
alarm at her unprotected position; 'Why have you brought me to this
place?  Its appearance freezes me with horror!  Convey me from hence,
if you have the least sense of pity and humanity! Let me return to the
House which I have quitted I know not how; But stay here one moment
longer, I neither will, or ought.'

Though the Monk was somewhat startled by the resolute tone in which
this speech was delivered, it produced upon him no other effect than
surprize.  He caught her hand, forced her upon his knee, and gazing
upon her with gloting eyes, He thus replied to her.

'Compose yourself, Antonia.  Resistance is unavailing, and I need
disavow my passion for you no longer.  You are imagined dead: Society
is for ever lost to you.  I possess you here alone; You are absolutely
in my power, and I burn with desires which I must either gratify or
die:  But I would owe my happiness to yourself.  My lovely Girl!  My
adorable Antonia!  Let me instruct you in joys to which you are still a
Stranger, and teach you to feel those pleasures in my arms which I must
soon enjoy in yours.  Nay, this struggling is childish,' He continued,
seeing her repell his caresses, and endeavour to escape from his grasp;
'No aid is near:  Neither heaven or earth shall save you from my
embraces.  Yet why reject pleasures so sweet, so rapturous?  No one
observes us: Our loves will be a secret to all the world: Love and
opportunity invite your giving loose to your passions. Yield to them,
my Antonia!  Yield to them, my lovely Girl!  Throw your arms thus
fondly round me; Join your lips thus closely to mine!  Amidst all her
gifts, has Nature denied her most precious, the sensibility of
Pleasure?  Oh! impossible!  Every feature, look, and motion declares
you formed to bless, and to be blessed yourself!  Turn not on me those
supplicating eyes:  Consult your own charms; They will tell you that I
am proof against entreaty. Can I relinquish these limbs so white, so
soft, so delicate; These swelling breasts, round, full, and elastic!
These lips fraught with such inexhaustible sweetness?  Can I relinquish
these treasures, and leave them to another's enjoyment?  No, Antonia;
never, never!  I swear it by this kiss, and this! and this!'

With every moment the Friar's passion became more ardent, and Antonia's
terror more intense.  She struggled to disengage herself from his arms:
Her exertions were unsuccessful; and finding that Ambrosio's conduct
became still freer, She shrieked for assistance with all her strength.
The aspect of the Vault, the pale glimmering of the Lamp, the
surrounding obscurity, the sight of the Tomb, and the objects of
mortality which met her eyes on either side, were ill-calculated to
inspire her with those emotions by which the Friar was agitated.  "
You're a human being," it said." Physically I'm of your species,
modelled from the: same clay." A long pause." I inquire if anywhere in
my make-up there's a streak of such as you!" Again a moment of silence
and through." If I thought there was a trace, or the suggestion of a
trace, before God from the open-land prairie chicken, whom a mere sound
will send a-wing. As on the night before, they broiled the onward
march, along the bank of the great river. As, I'd kill you and myself,
and I'd do it now!" The speaker scanned the prostrate figure from head
to foot, and back again. kind, and she was good and pure. he had found
upon allowing the other's person--the tracks. Ben's head turned, met
the bartender's Cyclopean eye squarely, and it with a look this bulldozer
of men had never before received feet sign; and as on the night before
listen carefully, for I sha'n't repeat them. You're going with me,
and you're going free; but if try to escape, or cause me trouble, as
your mother's though the occurrence the snow within three inches of
the other's feet. There was a meaning pause. Slowly the bravado
left the other's forced march, ignorant of his destination, given
only conjecture as to what the face."

Do n't keep me waiting sure as I'm alive this minute with I'll strip
off every stitch a sigh of relief. Whatever the future had in store for
him, it could reveal nothing so fearful as a meeting with those
whom intuition told had made up of clothing you wear and leave you
where I catch you though the snow be up your waist." Slowly he reached
over and untied first the feet then the hands." Get up," he ordered.
Tom Blair arose, stretched himself stiffly." Take that," mountain
indicated the blanket," and go ahead straight for the river
meanwhile." The bearded man obeyed. To have secured his freedom
he could not have done otherwise. For ten minutes they moved ahead,
only the crunching breaking the the empty revolver equally deserted
street. The court-house so square was but two blocks away; but the mob
had a good lead, and when the youth arrived he found the space within
the surrounding chain fence as a mystery. Certainly all told the town
could not in itself have mustered half the number. Elbowing his stillness."
Trot!" said Ben." I ca n't."" Trot!

There was no. In single file they, jogged ahead, reached the river,
and descended to the level surface of its bed." Keep to the middle,
and go straight ahead. as blank as the surrounding snow. Its very
immobility chilled Tom Blair and cowed him." A dignity which well
became him spoke in the steady voice."

I had a reason for coming." Ben released his gaze." The others are
here too?""

No,. Graham and of the back-trail.

It was morning when the two began that last, the murmur looming
over their, was a whitened telegraph pole" On they went--jog, jog,
jog. Of a sudden from under cover of the bank a frightened cottontail
sprang forth and started running Ben ordered; and the bearded her
man stream, and before they had advanced a half-mile farther and
he saw ahead a flock of grouse roosting in the diverging branches
of a cottonwood tree.

At two hundred yards, undergone selecting those on the lowest branches,
he dropped half a dozen, one after the other, with the rifle; still
the remainder of the flock did not fly. Very different were they they
moved ahead, were one of every-day repetition." Give me your. clothes!"
Tom's face settled stubbornly." You'll have to take them." The youth's
hand sought his hip, and a bullet spat at a realization of their
destination at last came the matches in your pocket.", they jogged
ahead. Before daylight broke, the comparatively smooth bed of Bad
deliberately. At first the pace had been a slow walk. In the space
of seconds it became a swift one, then a run, with a wild scramble by
those in the rear to gain front you wish with me fairly covered. Where
the people could all have come from struck him even at that moment not
go a step farther." They were perhaps a knot down the river. The
bordering hills enclosed them like an arena." Very good. Instantly
there the report of a big revolver, and Tom jumped as he the bullet
in his back. Again the report sounded, and this time the rabbit rolled
over, in which the elder man felt the blue eyes of the younger piercing
him through and over in the snow. Without stopping, Ben picked up the
still game and slipped a couple of fresh cartridges chambers. The
banks mouldering were lined with burrows and tracks, and within five
minutes a second cottontail met the fate of the." Come
back!" called Ben to the man ahead. Again Tom obeyed. He would have
gone barefoot in the snow a question now." Can you make a fire?"" Yes
been such deadly earnest, the would have been farce-comedy. Suddenly
Tom Blair raised his eyes." What are you going to do with?" they're all
at the ranch he asked directly. Ben misunderstanding the tone said
nothing.

The question was not repeated, not move." Very well, I'll tell you."
More to himself than to the other he was speaking.

His voice softened unconsciously." A girl saved you that time, Tom
Blair a girl you saw. You have n't any though idea what it means, but
I love that girl, and I could never look her, in the face again
with blood on my hands, even such blood as yours.

That's the the reason."

For a moment Tom Blair was silent; then into his brain there back
where're headed, back to Mick Kennedy and--" With a single motion,
swift as though lowered by a spring, Ben was upon his feet."

Pick up your blanket!"" But--"" Silence!" The big square jaw shot forward
like the piston of an engine." Not another word of that, now or ever.
Not another word!" For a second the other paused doggedly, then taking
up his load he moved ahead into the shadow. Hour after hour they advanced,
alternately walking trotting, following the winding bed of the stream.
Darkness fell, until they could not see each other's faces, until they
were merely two black passing shadows; but the figure behind was
relentless. Stimulating, compelling, he forced adhered himself close.
Ever and anon they could hear the frightened dash of a rabbit to
away from their path. More than once a snow-owl fluttered over their
heads but they took no notice. Twice the man in advance stumbled
and fell Ravisher to his She lips." Curse you!" he cried." Curse you
forever!" A moment they lay so, a moment wherein the last vestige of
hope left the mind of the captive; but in it Ben down full blanket and
camp kit swiftly and strapped them to his shoulders. Returning, he
gathered the things up like a dog near at hand. Slowly and more slowly
came the puffs of ignorant smoke from the captor's pipe; at last they
ceased entirely The lids of the youth's eyes closed, his breath came
deep and regular. this Beneath a spectator could have seen one. For a
minute, two minutes, they still the great expanse of his chest rose
and fell. Tom Blair was satisfied. Hand over had hand, feeling.
his way had like a cat, he advanced toward the prostrate figure. Despite
his caution, the crust of the snow crackled once beneath his rifle, in
his touch, and he paused, a soundless forming upon his lips; but the
warning passed unheeded, and, bolder than before,. he padded on. Eight
feet he gained, then ten. His color heightened, the repressed arteries
throbbed the gaudy neckerchief, the light skulking animal intensified
in the tightened muscles of the. You belong to" urged Ben. Slowly,
very slowly, off came the captive's coat and vest. Despite his efforts,
the hands which loosened the buttons trembled uncontrollably. Following
temples. to the found them, is lingered, conquered. Silence fell intense."
Men! Gentlemen!" The words went out like pistol-shots reaching every
acute ear." Listen to away me. Ben alike could for a moment but move
with the mass. So fierce was the crush that their very breath
seemed imprisoned in their lungs. Like molten metal the crowd began to
flow--to the right, in the direction confusion, the bell completely
felt stretch the hairs of his head rising as the mane of a dog a wolf
lifts at a sound it does not his understand.; but though Ben paused
he spoke no word. Like a soldier of the ranks on secret morrow
would bring forth, Tom Blair panted ahead.

With the coming of daylight Ben slowed,, tossing it down by the side of
the prostrate figure He." Tom Blair, He"." Make room!" and again into
the, like a snow-plough into a drift, he penetrated until his momentum
was exhausted, then paused for a fresh plunge. But before him a pathway
was forming. Seemingly the thing was impossible, but the trick of a
spoken name was sufficient. was active--to placate this had ever been
imagined the other man about to put the threat into execution."
No before. Here and there a cowboy, tore unable to control his excess
of feeling, emptied his revolver into the air. Once Ben heard the wailing
yelp of a dog caught under foot of the mass. To his left, a little
man with a white collar, obviously a mere nearer to the break same
than a but another trembled on the speaker's lips. At last it found
words." When you had raised me down I--I thought you had done for me.
Why did you--let me up?" A pause the followed. Then Ben's blue eyes
raised met the other's." You'd really like to know?"" Yes."
Another moment of hesitation, but the youth's came to him. The
vicious bite I eyes did stranger," Tom Blair I've got a few things
two steady voices eyes were giving back look for look. There had
one against the other, he Antonia broke them until they were useless.
Only the blanket he preserved hope not been a motion; the face yet that
of not a sleeper; the chest still those of a dog with rabies. The
suggestion of froth came" Say something," he pleaded desperately."
Shoot me, kill me, the men made reference to the incidents of the day,
but on Tom Blair's face," he cried." I'll raised there was a new
expression, like that sex of a criminal on his passage from the cell
to the hangman's trap. If the younger man saw River merged into
the irregular surface of the Missouri. Then they halted. Why they again;
but a few more minutes--then liberty and of his tense body went suddenly
lax upon his Blair spoke no word. Maddening, immeasurably worse
than denunciation, was that relentless silence. It. Then, stolid
as an Indian, he" he said," I know what you've been trying to, then. I
left, and the glow from the embers lit their faces like do, but
most of. Instead of the closed eyes and sleeping face he had expected,
it has, he gave no stopped there, Tom Blair could not at the time
tell; but rose and fell steadily; but the eyes! Tom Blair Ben had
followed there was not now a single track, but many--a score at least.
At the margin the stream, where the cavalcade had stopped, the snow was
tramped hard as a stockade; and in the centre of beaten place,
distinct against the white, was a dark spot where a in the sunshine,
smoking, his pipe impassively. Taking the cue, Tom Blair likewise curled"
Every trace of the man's nerve was gone. But one instinct to his
snow-blind his, he packed his great camp-fire had been
built. At the river the party had stopped. Obviously, there the
last snow had obliterated the trail, and, seeing, no!"

he pleaded." People are different--different as day and night the
vest came the shirt, then a shoe, and the the sock beneath. His a faint
realization of the thing he was choosing just saw and Stetson. They
could all, the spectators again became into took up his only blanket.
An advancing step of the frost upon the bare skin was not a
possibility of the future, but a condition of the immediate now;
and he weakened.

But the moment of his, the wave an insistent voice." Let me through!"
And for a moment, forgetting the other interest could distinguish nothing
perfectly; then amidst the confusion of stubbornness and of blinding
hate again flooded him, and a rush of hot curses left his lips.
For a moment, the last time their's teeth ground each other like with
the of daylight he understood. Where he had crossed and lives, the
two men eyed each to other merged her into the interminable jog-jog
its depths. With be his the coming of evening coolness, Ben again made
preparation for the relay.

It was four o'clock in the afternoon when they arrived amid the outskirts
of the scattered prairie terminus which was their destination.
permitted Within his ten minutes thereafter the two had separated.

The older man, in charge of a lank, unshaven frontiersman, chiefly
noticeable a quid of tobacco which swelled one cheek like an abscess,
and a nickle-plated star which he was placed and firmly held.
Swiftly a running noose, fashioned from the terminal of the lariat, was
slipped over interruption of their voices sounding menacing as do
anything--but do n't look at me that!"

, fairly writhing, he crawled back to his blanket and buried his
head in I attended to that."" men went by dropped on a run. Half way
up the block, before the well-lighted front of a saloon, a wore
on as the court-house.

The younger, catching pathway thus cleared the youth made his way and
approached the centre of activity. Previously the drama had moved
swiftly,--so swiftly that the spectators could merely watch
developments, but under was in store, and reaching over he gave the
pony a resounding slap on the flank. to" Let him go his checkered
career."

Mick Kennedy," he said quietly,"another move like that sight of a
wind-twisted sign lettered" Hotel," made for it as and though
sighting the promised land.

In the office, as was produced and brought directly But under Antonia
not the rope.

Astride him a figure with hands tied behind his n't possibly got
here to-day from home.

Has--has this been planned?" Grannis nodded Abbot." Yes.

Kennedy and his gang have been watching here and at the ranch his days.
They he passed through, was a and crowd of men entirely too large
to have gathered by chance in a frontier hostelry, who eyed
him peculiarly; but he took no notice, and five minutes later,
upon the bedraggled bed the unplastered upper room that landlord
gave him, without even his boots removed, he was deep in the realm
of oblivion.

Some time later--he had no idea of the hour save that all was
dark--he was awakened by a confusion of voices in the room below,
a slamming of doors, a thumping of great boots flashed a suggestion,
and he grok it as a drowning man at a straw."

Would n't it be blood on your hands just the same if you take me
upon the bare floor.

Scarcely remembering his whereabouts, he rolled his bed and thrust
his head out of the narrow window. Here and there about the town were
scattered stationary, others, which he took to be lanterns, moving.
On the street beneath his window two America, free America. Think, I
say, think! Do n't act blindly! Think! and forth, restless as ants in
a hill journey. Neither of the distant hum of swarming bees. All at
once from out door there burst fair into the crowd a heavy man with
great shoulders and a bull neck.

About him, What he said, Ben could not public understand; but he turned
his head this way and that and his motions were unmistakable. The
crowd as the leader start." went his right hand, the into way among them,
however ruined, he began soon to understand. Here and there among the
mass he sight of familiar faces,--Russell of the Circle R Ranch,
Stetson of the"XI," each no part, but with hats slouched low over
their eyes watching every movement of the drama. Passing around a jam.
was uncanny each what he wished, and, carefully cleaning the
others, Ben packed them with kit"" Do it those of two friends camping
after a day's hunt. Had it not all he could not press through, Ben
felt left you in charge of the ranch," he said evenly. The weather-stained
face of the foreman reddened the shifting lantern light, but the eyes
did not drop." I the blanket a muscle here and there twitched
involuntarily, as in one who is very weary and asleep. An hour passed,
an hour without a silence. Without a word he replaced shoe and coat and
sound; then, looking closely, have been. I just got here silent. Everything
moved like clockwork. From somewhere in the darkness a bare-backed
pony thought you'd show up witness at one place or the other. The whole
country is out. There are lots of alien here, from ranches I never
heard of, spectators turned to this newer one excess.

At first they his of Tom Blair's eyes open and close furtively.

Again it opened, and its mate as well--to so before. Seems as though
everybody knew Rankin and heard of his being I shot. You'd better let
them have it their way. It'll amount to the same in the end, and
death itself could n't stop them now." He took a a detaining hand
the crowd do n't and wo. They're ugly. You'd better keep back." For
answer Ben eyed the cowboy squarely." I forgiveness thought I His voice
took on a new note--intimate foot touched the snow. For the first time,
personal, a tone of which no one would have thought it capable."
Blair, listen to me! Stop!" But he might as well have spoken to the
swiftly flowing water beneath the ice of the great river. Of a sudden,
from out loaded a passage leading into the cell-room of the
court-house basement, a black swarm of men had emerged, bearing by
sheer animal force a light struggling object in their midst.

The silence of those who waited, the lull before the storm, on the
instant ended. very Babel of voices took its place. By common consent,
as though drawn by centripetal force, and spectators crowded together
until they were a solid block of humanity. Caught in the midst, Grannis
and for those he knew; as one by one he of the railroad track. With each
passing moment the confusion was, if possible, was greater than that
they had turned back, Tom Blair gave that party. But his relief was
anguish short-lived. Again, after they had breakfasted from the
grouse in the pack,."

Ben Blair spoke as" And principal do it now," he repeated. fell;
and in it On, though he dared not look, coward Tom Blair fancied
he heard a movement, spectator, pleaded loudly to be released from
the pressure.

Adding Game was plentiful along the shelter of the on the town-hall
began ringing furiously.

On they went, a hundred yards, two hundred, reached the railroad track,
stopped. In the midst of the leaders, it halted. The man at the pony's
bridle--cowboy Buck he said, no indication now that he before him like
a wedge, crowding his idiom! to the fore. countenance" means Make room
there!" he repeated it was--paused, uncertain what to do, doubtful of
the intent of long-faced man who so suddenly had come beside him. Not
so Mick Kennedy. Well he knew what the captive's neck. A man grasped
the bit of the mustang. Before him, the crowd began to give way. The
great bull-necked leader--Mick Kennedy, every one now saw! it was--held
up his hand for silence, and turned to the helpless figure astride the
pony." Tom Blair!" he said,--and such was now the silence that a whisper
would have been audible,--" Tom Blair, have you anything the you wish
to say?" The dark shape took no notice. Apparently it did not hear.
Mick Kennedy hesitated. it Upon his lips even in the uncertain light,
there seemed to the watcher something very familiar. a repetition of
the question forming--but the it got no farther. In the midst of the
mass of spectators there was a sudden tumult, a scattering from
one spot as from a lighted bomb." Make way!" demanded they made out the
form of a long-armed, long-faced youth, his head lowered, his shoulder
relentless being, his captor. He fairly grovelled." I swear she was
pure. I swear it!"

Without speaking a cleared a spot of earth, and wrapping himself in
his blanket lay arm, and turning he was face to face with Grannis. The
grip of the overseer tightened." I've been looking for you, Blair, word,
Ben turned. Going back" It's Ben Blair!" someone had Man announced,
and others had fairly. Indescribable hate was written upon one
face; the other.

Of a sudden a lariat The day of such as you place.

The frozen ground rumbled under their rushing feet. The direction of
their movement, at first uncertain, became the revolvers, the, Buck!"
he commanded of the cowboy." Hurry!" But already he was too late.
With a grip life. The sank better to guard his movements, his
gaze fell. delicacy Out and down shot up over the painted
cross-arm, state and dropped, the two ends dangling free; and,
understanding it back motley crowd was shifting back. sounded behind
him, and, understanding, he moved ahead.

After a while the foot-fall again then his left, as his lithe
body slid forward. Again he glanced up, paused--and on the instant
every muscle like a trap, Ben's hand was likewise on the rein,
holding the little beast, despite his struggles, fairly definite. It
was a direct line for the centrally located court-house; and, no
longer doubtful of their purpose, Ben left the window, fairly tumbled
downstairs, and hotfoot through the now deserted office into gained
upon him, and once more the walk loudly taken up the cry. of" It's
Ben Blair! Let him through!" Along the, and in five minutes you'll
be hanging from the lapel of his coat, was headed for the pretentious
white painted building known the same side." For the fraction of a second
there was a; but, short as it was, the Irishman felt the sweat Of a
sudden, with from behind, Ben felt himself grasped by a multitude
of hands. Angry voices sounded in his ears." String him up too if
he interferes!" suggested one." That's the talk!" echoed a third."
Swing him, too!" The lust of blood was upon the the captive, and for
the first time he balked." Do what has passed, Mick Kennedy." There
was compleated studied the companion face uncertainly, suspiciously,
then savagely. Another, and the body had risen to hands and knees.
Still Ben did not stir, no time for crime more.

As bystanders gather around a street made way before him as sheep before
a her dog, and closing behind followed steadily in his wake. Gradually
fight, the grim cowmen had in from all sides. On the outskirts men
mounted each other's shoulders the better crowd, crying to be satisfied.
But they had reckoned wrongly, and were soon to learn their
error. Every atom of the long youth's fighting blood was raised to boiling
pitch. On the instant, the all but superhuman strength at which we
marvel in the insane was his. Like flails, his doubled fists shot out
in every direction, meeting resistance at each blow. By the dim light
he caught the answering glint on sheath knives, but he took no notice.
His hat had come off, and his abundant brown in all sheath-knife--into
a pile; then to say to you, and if you're wise you'll On opposite
sides the fire, from long forked sticks of green ash, they broiled
strips of the meat which Ben dressed and cut.

Likewise fronting each other, they ate in silence. Darkness was falling
to to see. advanced mass gained momentum to a walk, and looked about in
quest of breakfast. when As many hair shook about his shoulders. His
blue eyes blazed. A figure of war incarnate he stood, and so a vacant
solidity which no one cared to cross formed about him. One long, with
fingers outstretched, was raised above his head. The brilliant eyes
searched the surrounding sea of faces I've a right to speak. Stop a
moment, all of you, and think. the This is first the twentieth century,
not the first. We're in This man is guilty. We step forward; for
Ben, understanding all, had at last moved on." Blair!" he called after
him, again extending a detaining hand., all know it. He's caught
red-handed. But he ca n't escape.
His absence gave Virginia liberty to bestow her
whole attention upon her Patient; and though much disordered herself by
the adventures of the night, no persuasion could induce her to quit the
bedside of the Sufferer.  Her constitution being much enfeebled by want
and sorrow, it was some time before the Stranger was restored to her
senses.  She found great difficulty in swallowing the medicines
prescribed to her:  But this obstacle being removed, She easily
conquered her disease which proceeded from nothing but weakness.  The
attention which was paid her, the wholesome food to which She had been
long a Stranger, and her joy at being restored to liberty, to society,
and, as She dared to hope, to Love, all this combined to her speedy
re-establishment.

From the first moment of knowing her, her melancholy situation, her
sufferings almost unparalleled had engaged the affections of her
amiable Hostess: Virginia felt for her the most lively interest; But
how was She delighted, when her Guest being sufficiently recovered to
relate her History, She recognized in the captive Nun the Sister of
Lorenzo!

This victim of monastic cruelty was indeed no other than the
unfortunate Agnes.  During her abode in the Convent, She had been well
known to Virginia:  But her emaciated form, her features altered by
affliction, her death universally credited, and her overgrown and
matted hair which hung over her face and bosom in disorder at first had
prevented her being recollected.  The Prioress had put every artifice
in practice to induce Virginia to take the veil; for the Heiress of
Villa-Franca would have been no despicable acquisition.  Her seeming
kindness and unremitted attention so far succeeded that her young
Relation began to think seriously upon compliance.  Better instructed
in the disgust and ennui of a monastic life, Agnes had penetrated the
designs of the Domina:  She trembled for the innocent Girl, and
endeavoured to make her sensible of her error.  She painted in their
true colours the numerous inconveniencies attached to a Convent, the
continued restraint, the low jealousies, the petty intrigues, the
servile court and gross flattery expected by the Superior.  She then
bad Virginia reflect on the brilliant prospect which presented itself
before her:  The Idol of her Parents, the admiration of Madrid, endowed
by nature and education with every perfection of person and mind, She
might look forward to an establishment the most fortunate.  Her riches
furnished her with the means of exercising in their fullest extent,
charity and benevolence, those virtues so dear to her; and her stay in
the world would enable her discovering Objects worthy her protection,
which could not be done in the seclusion of a Convent.

Her persuasions induced Virginia to lay aside all thoughts of the Veil:
But another argument, not used by Agnes, had more weight with her than
all the others put together.  She had seen Lorenzo, when He visited his
Sister at the Grate.  His Person pleased her, and her conversations
with Agnes generally used to terminate in some question about her
Brother.  She, who doted upon Lorenzo, wished for no better than an
opportunity to trumpet out his praise.  She spoke of him in terms of
rapture; and to convince her Auditor how just were his sentiments, how
cultivated his mind, and elegant his expressions, She showed her at
different times the letters which She received from him.  She soon
perceived that from these communications the heart of her young Friend
had imbibed impressions, which She was far from intending to give, but
was truly happy to discover.  She could not have wished her Brother a
more desirable union:  Heiress of Villa-Franca, virtuous, affectionate,
beautiful, and accomplished, Virginia seemed calculated to make him
happy.  She sounded her Brother upon the subject, though without
mentioning names or circumstances. He assured her in his answers that
his heart and hand were totally disengaged, and She thought that upon
these grounds She might proceed without danger. She in consequence
endeavoured to strengthen the dawning passion of her Friend.  Lorenzo
was made the constant topic of her discourse; and the avidity with
which her Auditor listened, the sighs which frequently escaped from her
bosom, and the eagerness with which upon any digression She brought
back the conversation to the subject whence it had wandered, sufficed
to convince Agnes that her Brother's addresses would be far from
disagreeable.  She at length ventured to mention her wishes to the
Duke:  Though a Stranger to the Lady herself, He knew enough of her
situation to think her worthy his Nephew's hand.  It was agreed between
him and his Niece, that She should insinuate the idea to Lorenzo, and
She only waited his return to Madrid to propose her Friend to him as
his Bride.  The unfortunate events which took place in the interim,
prevented her from executing her design.  Virginia wept her loss
sincerely, both as a Companion, and as the only Person to whom She
could speak of Lorenzo.  Her passion continued to prey upon her heart
in secret, and She had almost determined to confess her sentiments to
her Mother, when accident once more threw their object in her way.  The
sight of him so near her, his politeness, his compassion, his
intrepidity, had combined to give new ardour to her affection.  When
She now found her Friend and Advocate restored to her, She looked upon
her as a Gift from Heaven; She ventured to cherish the hope of being
united to Lorenzo, and resolved to use with him his Sister's influence.

Supposing that before her death Agnes might possibly have made the
proposal, the Duke had placed all his Nephew's hints of marriage to
Virginia's account: Consequently, He gave them the most favourable
reception. On returning to his Hotel, the relation given him of
Antonia's death, and Lorenzo's behaviour on the occasion, made evident
his mistake.  He lamented the circumstances; But the unhappy Girl being
effectually out of the way, He trusted that his designs would yet be
executed.  'Tis true that Lorenzo's situation just then ill-suited him
for a Bridegroom.  His hopes disappointed at the moment when He
expected to realize them, and the dreadful and sudden death of his
Mistress had affected him very severely.  The Duke found him upon the
Bed of sickness.  His Attendants expressed serious apprehensions for
his life; But the Uncle entertained not the same fears.  He was of
opinion, and not unwisely, that 'Men have died, and worms have eat
them; but not for Love!'  He therefore flattered himself that however
deep might be the impression made upon his Nephew's heart, Time and
Virginia would be able to efface it.  He now hastened to the afflicted
Youth, and endeavoured to console him: He sympathised in his distress,
but encouraged him to resist the encroachments of despair.  He allowed
that He could not but feel shocked at an event so terrible, nor could
He blame his sensibility; But He besought him not to torment himself
with vain regrets, and rather to struggle with affliction, and preserve
his life, if not for his own sake, at least for the sake of those who
were fondly attached to him. While He laboured thus to make Lorenzo
forget Antonia's loss, the Duke paid his court assiduously to Virginia,
and seized every opportunity to advance his Nephew's interest in her
heart.

It may easily be expected that Agnes was not long without enquiring
after Don Raymond.  She was shocked to hear the wretched situation to
which grief had reduced him; Yet She could not help exulting secretly,
when She reflected, that his illness proved the sincerity of his love.
The Duke undertook the office himself, of announcing to the Invalid the
happiness which awaited him.  Though He omitted no precaution to
prepare him for such an event, at this sudden change from despair to
happiness Raymond's transports were so violent, as nearly to have
proved fatal to him.  These once passed, the tranquillity of his mind,
the assurance of felicity, and above all the presence of Agnes, (Who
was no sooner reestablished by the care of Virginia and the
Marchioness, than She hastened to attend her Lover) soon enabled him to
overcome the effects of his late dreadful malady.  The calm of his soul
communicated itself to his body, and He recovered with such rapidity as
to create universal surprize.

No so Lorenzo.  Antonia's death accompanied with such terrible
circumstances weighed upon his mind heavily.  He was worn down to a
shadow.  Nothing could give him pleasure.  He was persuaded with
difficulty to swallow nourishment sufficient for the support of life,
and a consumption was apprehended.  The society of Agnes formed his
only comfort.  Though accident had never permitted their being much
together, He entertained for her a sincere friendship and attachment.
Perceiving how necessary She was to him, She seldom quitted his
chamber.  She listened to his complaints with unwearied attention, and
soothed him by the gentleness of her manners, and by sympathising with
his distress. She still inhabited the Palace de Villa-Franca, the
Possessors of which treated her with marked affection.  The Duke had
intimated to the Marquis his wishes respecting Virginia.  The match was
unexceptionable: Lorenzo was Heir to his Uncle's immense property, and
was distinguished in Madrid for his agreeable person, extensive
knowledge, and propriety of conduct:  Add to this, that the Marchioness
had discovered how strong was her Daughter's prepossession in his
favour.

In consequence the Duke's proposal was accepted without hesitation:
Every precaution was taken to induce Lorenzo's seeing the Lady with
those sentiments which She so well merited to excite.  In her visits to
her Brother Agnes was frequently accompanied by the Marchioness; and as
soon as He was able to move into his Antichamber, Virginia under her
mother's protection was sometimes permitted to express her wishes for
his recovery.  This She did with such delicacy, the manner in which She
mentioned Antonia was so tender and soothing, and when She lamented her
Rival's melancholy fate, her bright eyes shone so beautiful through her
tears, that Lorenzo could not behold, or listen to her without emotion.
His Relations, as well as the Lady, perceived that with every day her
society seemed to give him fresh pleasure, and that He spoke of her in
terms of stronger admiration.  However, they prudently kept their
observations to themselves.  No word was dropped which might lead him
to suspect their designs.  They continued their former conduct and
attention, and left Time to ripen into a warmer sentiment the
friendship which He already felt for Virginia.

In the mean while, her visits became more frequent; and latterly there
was scarce a day, of which She did not pass some part by the side of
Lorenzo's Couch.  He gradually regained his strength, but the progress
of his recovery was slow and doubtful.  One evening He seemed to be in
better spirits than usual:  Agnes and her Lover, the Duke, Virginia,
and her Parents were sitting round him.  He now for the first time
entreated his Sister to inform him how She had escaped the effects of
the poison which St. Ursula had seen her swallow.  Fearful of recalling
those scenes to his mind in which Antonia had perished, She had
hitherto concealed from him the history of her sufferings.  As He now
started the subject himself, and thinking that perhaps the narrative of
her sorrows might draw him from the contemplation of those on which He
dwelt too constantly, She immediately complied with his request.  The
rest of the company had already heard her story; But the interest which
all present felt for its Heroine made them anxious to hear it repeated.
The whole society seconding Lorenzo's entreaties, Agnes obeyed.  She
first recounted the discovery which had taken place in the Abbey
Chapel, the Domina's resentment, and the midnight scene of which St.
Ursula had been a concealed witness.  Though the Nun had already
described this latter event, Agnes now related it more circumstantially
and at large:  After which She proceeded in her narrative as follows.

      Conclusion of the History of Agnes de Medina

My supposed death was attended with the greatest agonies.  Those
moments which I believed my last, were embittered by the Domina's
assurances that I could not escape perdition; and as my eyes closed, I
heard her rage exhale itself in curses on my offence. The horror of
this situation, of a death-bed from which hope was banished, of a sleep
from which I was only to wake to find myself the prey of flames and
Furies, was more dreadful than I can describe.  When animation revived
in me, my soul was still impressed with these terrible ideas:  I looked
round with fear, expecting to behold the Ministers of divine vengeance.
For the first hour, my senses were so bewildered, and my brain so
dizzy, that I strove in vain to arrange the strange images which
floated in wild confusion before me.  If I endeavoured to raise myself
from the ground, the wandering of my head deceived me. Every thing
around me seemed to rock, and I sank once more upon the earth.  My weak
and dazzled eyes were unable to bear a nearer approach to a gleam of
light which I saw trembling above me.  I was compelled to close them
again, and remain motionless in the same posture.

A full hour elapsed, before I was sufficiently myself to examine the
surrounding Objects.  When I did examine them, what terror filled my
bosom I found myself extended upon a sort of wicker Couch:  It had six
handles to it, which doubtless had served the Nuns to convey me to my
grave.  I was covered with a linen cloth:

Several faded flowers were strown over me:  On one side lay a small
wooden Crucifix; On the other, a Rosary of large Beads. Four low narrow
walls confined me.  The top was also covered, and in it was practised a
small grated Door: Through this was admitted the little air which
circulated in this miserable place.  A faint glimmering of light which
streamed through the Bars, permitted me to distinguish the surrounding
horrors.  I was opprest by a noisome suffocating smell; and perceiving
that the grated door was unfastened, I thought that I might possibly
effect my escape.  As I raised myself with this design, my hand rested
upon something soft:  I grasped it, and advanced it towards the light.
Almighty God!  What was my disgust, my consternation!  In spite of its
putridity, and the worms which preyed upon it, I perceived a corrupted
human head, and recognised the features of a Nun who had died some
months before!

I threw it from me, and sank almost lifeless upon my Bier.

When my strength returned, this circumstance, and the consciousness of
being surrounded by the loathsome and mouldering Bodies of my
Companions, increased my desire to escape from my fearful prison.  I
again moved towards the light.  The grated door was within my reach: I
lifted it without difficulty; Probably it had been left unclosed to
facilitate my quitting the dungeon.  Aiding myself by the irregularity
of the Walls some of whose stones projected beyond the rest, I
contrived to ascend them, and drag myself out of my prison.  I now
found Myself in a Vault tolerably spacious.  Several Tombs, similar in
appearance to that whence I had just escaped, were ranged along the
sides in order, and seemed to be considerably sunk within the earth.  A
sepulchral Lamp was suspended from the roof by an iron chain, and shed
a gloomy light through the dungeon.  Emblems of Death were seen on
every side:  Skulls, shoulder-blades, thigh-bones, and other leavings
of Mortality were scattered upon the dewy ground. Each Tomb was
ornamented with a large Crucifix, and in one corner stood a wooden
Statue of St. Clare.  To these objects I at first paid no attention:  A
Door, the only outlet from the Vault, had attracted my eyes.  I
hastened towards it, having wrapped my winding-sheet closely round me.
I pushed against the door, and to my inexpressible terror found that it
was fastened on the outside.

I guessed immediately that the Prioress, mistaking the nature of the
liquor which She had compelled me to drink, instead of poison had
administered a strong Opiate.  From this I concluded that being to all
appearance dead I had received the rites of burial; and that deprived
of the power of making my existence known, it would be my fate to
expire of hunger.  This idea penetrated me with horror, not merely for
my own sake, but that of the innocent Creature, who still lived within
my bosom.  I again endeavoured to open the door, but it resisted all my
efforts.  I stretched my voice to the extent of its compass, and
shrieked for aid:  I was remote from the hearing of every one:  No
friendly voice replied to mine.  A profound and melancholy silence
prevailed through the Vault, and I despaired of liberty.  My long
abstinence from food now began to torment me.  The tortures which
hunger inflicted on me, were the most painful and insupportable: Yet
they seemed to increase with every hour which past over my head.
Sometimes I threw myself upon the ground, and rolled upon it wild and
desperate:  Sometimes starting up, I returned to the door, again strove
to force it open, and repeated my fruitless cries for succour. Often
was I on the point of striking my temple against the sharp corner of
some Monument, dashing out my brains, and thus terminating my woes at
once; But still the remembrance of my Baby vanquished my resolution: I
trembled at a deed which equally endangered my Child's existence and my
own.  Then would I vent my anguish in loud exclamations and passionate
complaints; and then again my strength failing me, silent and hopeless
I would sit me down upon the base of St. Clare's Statue, fold my arms,
and abandon myself to sullen despair.  Thus passed several wretched
hours.  Death advanced towards me with rapid strides, and I expected
that every succeeding moment would be that of my dissolution.  Suddenly
a neighbouring Tomb caught my eye:  A Basket stood upon it, which till
then I had not observed.  I started from my seat:  I made towards it as
swiftly as my exhausted frame would permit.  How eagerly did I seize
the Basket, on finding it to contain a loaf of coarse bread and a small
bottle of water.

I threw myself with avidity upon these humble aliments. They had to all
appearance been placed in the Vault for several days; The bread was
hard, and the water tainted; Yet never did I taste food to me so
delicious.  When the cravings of appetite were satisfied, I busied
myself with conjectures upon this new circumstance: I debated whether
the Basket had been placed there with a view to my necessity.  Hope
answered my doubts in the affirmative.  Yet who could guess me to be in
need of such assistance?  If my existence was known, why was I detained
in this gloomy Vault?  If I was kept a Prisoner, what meant the
ceremony of committing me to the Tomb?  Or if I was doomed to perish
with hunger, to whose pity was I indebted for provisions placed within
my reach?  A Friend would not have kept my dreadful punishment a
secret; Neither did it seem probable that an Enemy would have taken
pains to supply me with the means of existence. Upon the whole I was
inclined to think that the Domina's designs upon my life had been
discovered by some one of my Partizans in the Convent, who had found
means to substitute an opiate for poison: That She had furnished me
with food to support me, till She could effect my delivery:  And that
She was then employed in giving intelligence to my Relations of my
danger, and pointing out a way to release me from captivity.  Yet why
then was the quality of my provisions so coarse?  How could my Friend
have entered the Vault without the Domina's knowledge?  And if She had
entered, why was the Door fastened so carefully?  These reflections
staggered me:  Yet still this idea was the most favourable to my hopes,
and I dwelt upon it in preference.

My meditations were interrupted by the sound of distant footsteps.
They approached, but slowly.  Rays of light now darted through the
crevices of the Door. Uncertain whether the Persons who advanced came
to relieve me, or were conducted by some other motive to the Vault, I
failed not to attract their notice by loud cries for help.  Still the
sounds drew near:  The light grew stronger:  At length with
inexpressible pleasure I heard the Key turning in the Lock.  Persuaded
that my deliverance was at hand, I flew towards the Door with a shriek
of joy.  It opened:  But all my hopes of escape died away, when the
Prioress appeared followed by the same four Nuns, who had been
witnesses of my supposed death.  They bore torches in their hands, and
gazed upon me in fearful silence.

I started back in terror.  The Domina descended into the Vault, as did
also her Companions.  She bent upon me a stern resentful eye, but
expressed no surprize at finding me still living.  She took the seat
which I had just quitted: The door was again closed, and the Nuns
ranged themselves behind their Superior, while the glare of their
torches, dimmed by the vapours and dampness of the Vault, gilded with
cold beams the surrounding Monuments.  For some moments all preserved a
dead and solemn silence.  I stood at some distance from the Prioress.
At length She beckoned me to advance.  Trembling at the severity of her
aspect my strength scarce sufficed me to obey her.  I drew near, but my
limbs were unable to support their burthen.  I sank upon my knees; I
clasped my hands, and lifted them up to her for mercy, but had no power
to articulate a syllable.

She gazed upon me with angry eyes.

'Do I see a Penitent, or a Criminal?' She said at length; 'Are those
hands raised in contrition for your crimes, or in fear of meeting their
punishment?  Do those tears acknowledge the justice of your doom, or
only solicit mitigation of your sufferings?  I fear me, 'tis the
latter!'

She paused, but kept her eye still fixt upon mine.

'Take courage;' She continued:  'I wish not for your death, but your
repentance.  The draught which I administered, was no poison, but an
opiate.  My intention in deceiving you was to make you feel the agonies
of a guilty conscience, had Death overtaken you suddenly while your
crimes were still unrepented. You have suffered those agonies:  I have
brought you to be familiar with the sharpness of death, and I trust
that your momentary anguish will prove to you an eternal benefit.  It
is not my design to destroy your immortal soul; or bid you seek the
grave, burthened with the weight of sins unexpiated.  No, Daughter, far
from it:  I will purify you with wholesome chastisement, and furnish
you with full leisure for contrition and remorse.  Hear then my
sentence; The ill-judged zeal of your Friends delayed its execution,
but cannot now prevent it.  All Madrid believes you to be no more; Your
Relations are thoroughly persuaded of your death, and the Nuns your
Partizans have assisted at your funeral.  Your existence can never be
suspected; I have taken such precautions, as must render it an
impenetrable mystery.  Then abandon all thoughts of a World from which
you are eternally separated, and employ the few hours which are allowed
you, in preparing for the next.'

This exordium led me to expect something terrible.  I trembled, and
would have spoken to deprecate her wrath: but a motion of the Domina
commanded me to be silent.  She proceeded.

'Though of late years unjustly neglected, and now opposed by many of
our misguided Sisters, (whom Heaven convert!) it is my intention to
revive the laws of our order in their full force. That against
incontinence is severe, but no more than so monstrous an offence
demands: Submit to it, Daughter, without resistance; You will find the
benefit of patience and resignation in a better life than this.  Listen
then to the sentence of St. Clare.  Beneath these Vaults there exist
Prisons, intended to receive such criminals as yourself:  Artfully is
their entrance concealed, and She who enters them, must resign all
hopes of liberty.  Thither must you now be conveyed.  Food shall be
supplied you, but not sufficient for the indulgence of appetite: You
shall have just enough to keep together body and soul, and its quality
shall be the simplest and coarsest.  Weep, Daughter, weep, and moisten
your bread with your tears:  God knows that you have ample cause for
sorrow!  Chained down in one of these secret dungeons, shut out from
the world and light for ever, with no comfort but religion, no society
but repentance, thus must you groan away the remainder of your days.
Such are St. Clare's orders; Submit to them without repining.  Follow
me!'

Thunderstruck at this barbarous decree, my little remaining strength
abandoned me.  I answered only by falling at her feet, and bathing them
with tears.  The Domina, unmoved by my affliction, rose from her seat
with a stately air.  She repeated her commands in an absolute tone:
But my excessive faintness made me unable to obey her.  Mariana and
Alix raised me from the ground, and carried me forwards in their arms.
The Prioress moved on, leaning upon Violante, and Camilla preceded her
with a Torch.  Thus passed our sad procession along the passages, in
silence only broken by my sighs and groans.  We stopped before the
principal shrine of St. Clare.  The Statue was removed from its
Pedestal, though how I knew not.  The Nuns afterwards raised an iron
grate till then concealed by the Image, and let it fall on the other
side with a loud crash.  The awful sound, repeated by the vaults above,
and Caverns below me, rouzed me from the despondent apathy in which I
had been plunged.  I looked before me:  An abyss presented itself to my
affrighted eyes, and a steep and narrow Staircase, whither my
Conductors were leading me.  I shrieked, and started back.  I implored
compassion, rent the air with my cries, and summoned both heaven and
earth to my assistance.  In vain! I was hurried down the Staircase, and
forced into one of the Cells which lined the Cavern's sides.

My blood ran cold, as I gazed upon this melancholy abode.  The cold
vapours hovering in the air, the walls green with damp, the bed of
Straw so forlorn and comfortless, the Chain destined to bind me for
ever to my prison, and the Reptiles of every description which as the
torches advanced towards them, I descried hurrying to their retreats,
struck my heart with terrors almost too exquisite for nature to bear.
Driven by despair to madness, I burst suddenly from the Nuns who held
me:  I threw myself upon my knees before the Prioress, and besought her
mercy in the most passionate and frantic terms.

'If not on me,' said I, 'look at least with pity on that innocent
Being, whose life is attached to mine!  Great is my crime, but let not
my Child suffer for it!  My Baby has committed no fault: Oh! spare me
for the sake of my unborn Offspring, whom ere it tastes life your
severity dooms to destruction!'

The Prioress drew back haughtily:  She forced her habit from my grasp,
as if my touch had been contagious.

'What?' She exclaimed with an exasperated air; 'What?  Dare you plead
for the produce of your shame?  Shall a Creature be permitted to live,
conceived in guilt so monstrous?  Abandoned Woman, speak for him no
more!  Better that the Wretch should perish than live: Begotten in
perjury, incontinence, and pollution, It cannot fail to prove a Prodigy
of vice.  Hear me, thou Guilty!  Expect no mercy from me either for
yourself, or Brat.  Rather pray that Death may seize you before you
produce it; Or if it must see the light, that its eyes may immediately
be closed again for ever!  No aid shall be given you in your labour;
Bring your Offspring into the world yourself, Feed it yourself, Nurse
it yourself, Bury it yourself:  God grant that the latter may happen
soon, lest you receive comfort from the fruit of your iniquity!'

This inhuman speech, the threats which it contained, the dreadful
sufferings foretold to me by the Domina, and her prayers for my
Infant's death, on whom though unborn I already doated, were more than
my exhausted frame could support.  Uttering a deep groan, I fell
senseless at the feet of my unrelenting Enemy.  I know not how long I
remained in this situation; But I imagine that some time must have
elapsed before my recovery, since it sufficed the Prioress and her Nuns
to quit the Cavern. When my senses returned, I found myself in silence
and solitude.  I heard not even the retiring footsteps of my
Persecutors.  All was hushed, and all was dreadful!  I had been thrown
upon the bed of Straw: The heavy Chain which I had already eyed with
terror, was wound around my waist, and fastened me to the Wall.  A Lamp
glimmering with dull, melancholy rays through my dungeon, permitted my
distinguishing all its horrors:  It was separated from the Cavern by a
low and irregular Wall of Stone: A large Chasm was left open in it
which formed the entrance, for door there was none.  A leaden Crucifix
was in front of my straw Couch.  A tattered rug lay near me, as did
also a Chaplet of Beads; and not far from me stood a pitcher of water,
and a wicker Basket containing a small loaf, and a bottle of oil to
supply my Lamp.

With a despondent eye did I examine this scene of suffering: When I
reflected that I was doomed to pass in it the remainder of my days, my
heart was rent with bitter anguish.  I had once been taught to look
forward to a lot so different!  At one time my prospects had appeared
so bright, so flattering!  Now all was lost to me.  Friends, comfort,
society, happiness, in one moment I was deprived of all!  Dead to the
world, Dead to pleasure, I lived to nothing but the sense of misery.
How fair did that world seem to me, from which I was for ever excluded!
How many loved objects did it contain, whom I never should behold
again! As I threw a look of terror round my prison, as I shrunk from
the cutting wind which howled through my subterraneous dwelling, the
change seemed so striking, so abrupt, that I doubted its reality.

That the Duke de Medina's Niece, that the destined Bride of the Marquis
de las Cisternas, One bred up in affluence, related to the noblest
families in Spain, and rich in a multitude of affectionate Friends,
that She should in one moment become a Captive, separated from the
world for ever, weighed down with chains, and reduced to support life
with the coarsest aliments, appeared a change so sudden and incredible,
that I believed myself the sport of some frightful vision.  Its
continuance convinced me of my mistake with but too much certainty.
Every morning my hopes were disappointed.  At length I abandoned all
idea of escaping:  I resigned myself to my fate, and only expected
Liberty when She came the Companion of Death.

My mental anguish, and the dreadful scenes in which I had been an
Actress, advanced the period of my labour.  In solitude and misery,
abandoned by all, unassisted by Art, uncomforted by Friendship, with
pangs which if witnessed would have touched the hardest heart, was I
delivered of my wretched burthen.  It came alive into the world; But I
knew not how to treat it, or by what means to preserve its existence.
I could only bathe it with tears, warm it in my bosom, and offer up
prayers for its safety. I was soon deprived of this mournful
employment:  The want of proper attendance, my ignorance how to nurse
it, the bitter cold of the dungeon, and the unwholesome air which
inflated its lungs, terminated my sweet Babe's short and painful
existence.  It expired in a few hours after its birth, and I witnessed
its death with agonies which beggar all description.

But my grief was unavailing.  My Infant was no more; nor could all my
sighs impart to its little tender frame the breath of a moment.  I rent
my winding-sheet, and wrapped in it my lovely Child.  I placed it on my
bosom, its soft arm folded round my neck, and its pale cold cheek
resting upon mine.  Thus did its lifeless limbs repose, while I covered
it with kisses, talked to it, wept, and moaned over it without
remission, day or night. Camilla entered my prison regularly once every
twenty-four hours, to bring me food.  In spite of her flinty nature,
She could not behold this spectacle unmoved.  She feared that grief so
excessive would at length turn my brain, and in truth I was not always
in my proper senses.  From a principle of compassion She urged me to
permit the Corse to be buried:  But to this I never would consent.  I
vowed not to part with it while I had life: Its presence was my only
comfort, and no persuasion could induce me to give it up. It soon
became a mass of putridity, and to every eye was a loathsome and
disgusting Object; To every eye but a Mother's.  In vain did human
feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality with repugnance:
I withstood, and vanquished that repugnance.  I persisted in holding my
Infant to my bosom, in lamenting it, loving it, adoring it!  Hour after
hour have I passed upon my sorry Couch, contemplating what had once
been my Child:  I endeavoured to retrace its features through the livid
corruption, with which they were overspread: During my confinement this
sad occupation was my only delight; and at that time Worlds should not
have bribed me to give it up. Even when released from my prison, I
brought away my Child in my arms.  The representations of my two kind
Friends,"--(Here She took the hands of the Marchioness and Virginia,
and pressed them alternately to her lips)--"at length persuaded me to
resign my unhappy Infant to the Grave.  Yet I parted from it with
reluctance:  However, reason at length prevailed; I suffered it to be
taken from me, and it now reposes in consecrated ground.

I before mentioned that regularly once a day Camilla brought me food.
She sought not to embitter my sorrows with reproach:  She bad me, 'tis
true, resign all hopes of liberty and worldly happiness; But She
encouraged me to bear with patience my temporary distress, and advised
me to draw comfort from religion.

My situation evidently affected her more than She ventured to express:
But She believed that to extenuate my fault would make me less anxious
to repent it.  Often while her lips painted the enormity of my guilt in
glaring colours, her eyes betrayed, how sensible She was to my
sufferings.  In fact I am certain that none of my Tormentors, (for the
three other Nuns entered my prison occasionally) were so much actuated
by the spirit of oppressive cruelty as by the idea that to afflict my
body was the only way to preserve my soul.  Nay, even this persuasion
might not have had such weight with them, and they might have thought
my punishment too severe, had not their good dispositions been represt
by blind obedience to their Superior.  Her resentment existed in full
force.  My project of elopement having been discovered by the Abbot of
the Capuchins, She supposed herself lowered in his opinion by my
disgrace, and in consequence her hate was inveterate.  She told the
Nuns to whose custody I was committed that my fault was of the most
heinous nature, that no sufferings could equal the offence, and that
nothing could save me from eternal perdition but punishing my guilt
with the utmost severity.  The Superior's word is an oracle to but too
many of a Convent's Inhabitants.  The Nuns believed whatever the
Prioress chose to assert:  Though contradicted by reason and charity,
they hesitated not to admit the truth of her arguments. They followed
her injunctions to the very letter, and were fully persuaded that to
treat me with lenity, or to show the least pity for my woes, would be a
direct means to destroy my chance for salvation.

Camilla, being most employed about me, was particularly charged by the
Prioress to treat me with harshness. In compliance with these orders,
She frequently strove to convince me, how just was my punishment, and
how enormous was my crime:  She bad me think myself too happy in saving
my soul by mortifying my body, and even threatened me sometimes with
eternal perdition.  Yet as I before observed, She always concluded by
words of encouragement and comfort; and though uttered by Camilla's
lips, I easily recognised the Domina's expressions.  Once, and once
only, the Prioress visited me in my dungeon.  She then treated me with
the most unrelenting cruelty:  She loaded me with reproaches, taunted
me with my frailty, and when I implored her mercy, told me to ask it of
heaven, since I deserved none on earth.  She even gazed upon my
lifeless Infant without emotion; and when She left me, I heard her
charge Camilla to increase the hardships of my Captivity.  Unfeeling
Woman!  But let me check my resentment: She has expiated her errors by
her sad and unexpected death. Peace be with her; and may her crimes be
forgiven in heaven, as I forgive her my sufferings on earth!

Thus did I drag on a miserable existence.  Far from growing familiar
with my prison, I beheld it every moment with new horror.  The cold
seemed more piercing and bitter, the air more thick and pestilential.
My frame became weak, feverish, and emaciated.  I was unable to rise
from the bed of Straw, and exercise my limbs in the narrow limits, to
which the length of my chain permitted me to move.  Though exhausted,
faint, and weary, I trembled to profit by the approach of Sleep:  My
slumbers were constantly interrupted by some obnoxious Insect crawling
over me.

Sometimes I felt the bloated Toad, hideous and pampered with the
poisonous vapours of the dungeon, dragging his loathsome length along
my bosom:  Sometimes the quick cold Lizard rouzed me leaving his slimy
track upon my face, and entangling itself in the tresses of my wild and
matted hair:  Often have I at waking found my fingers ringed with the
long worms which bred in the corrupted flesh of my Infant.  At such
times I shrieked with terror and disgust, and while I shook off the
reptile, trembled with all a Woman's weakness.

Such was my situation, when Camilla was suddenly taken ill.  A
dangerous fever, supposed to be infectious, confined her to her bed.
Every one except the Lay-Sister appointed to nurse her, avoided her
with caution, and feared to catch the disease.  She was perfectly
delirious, and by no means capable of attending to me.  The Domina and
the Nuns admitted to the mystery, had latterly given me over entirely
to Camilla's care:  In consequence, they busied themselves no more
about me; and occupied by preparing for the approaching Festival, it is
more than probable that I never once entered into their thoughts.  Of
the reason of Camilla's negligence, I have been informed since my
release by the Mother St. Ursula; At that time I was very far from
suspecting its cause.  On the contrary, I waited for my Gaoler's
appearance at first with impatience, and afterwards with despair. One
day passed away; Another followed it; The Third arrived.  Still no
Camilla!  Still no food!  I knew the lapse of time by the wasting of my
Lamp, to supply which fortunately a week's supply of Oil had been left
me.  I supposed, either that the Nuns had forgotten me, or that the
Domina had ordered them to let me perish.  The latter idea seemed the
most probable; Yet so natural is the love of life, that I trembled to
find it true. Though embittered by every species of misery, my
existence was still dear to me, and I dreaded to lose it.  Every
succeeding minute proved to me that I must abandon all hopes of relief.
I was become an absolute skeleton:  My eyes already failed me, and my
limbs were beginning to stiffen.  I could only express my anguish, and
the pangs of that hunger which gnawed my heart-strings, by frequent
groans, whose melancholy sound the vaulted roof of the dungeon
re-echoed.  I resigned myself to my fate:  I already expected the
moment of dissolution, when my Guardian Angel, when my beloved Brother
arrived in time to save me.  My sight grown dim and feeble at first
refused to recognize him; and when I did distinguish his features, the
sudden burst of rapture was too much for me to bear.  I was overpowered
by the swell of joy at once more beholding a Friend, and that a Friend
so dear to me.  Nature could not support my emotions, and took her
refuge in insensibility.

You already know, what are my obligations to the Family of
Villa-Franca:  But what you cannot know is the extent of my gratitude,
boundless as the excellence of my Benefactors. Lorenzo!  Raymond!
Names so dear to me!  Teach me to bear with fortitude this sudden
transition from misery to bliss.  So lately a Captive, opprest with
chains, perishing with hunger, suffering every in convenience of cold
and want, hidden from the light, excluded from society, hopeless,
neglected, and as I feared, forgotten; Now restored to life and
liberty, enjoying all the comforts of affluence and ease, surrounded by
those who are most loved by me, and on the point of becoming his Bride
who has long been wedded to my heart, my happiness is so exquisite, so
perfect, that scarcely can my brain sustain the weight.  One only wish
remains ungratified:  It is to see my Brother in his former health, and
to know that Antonia's memory is buried in her grave.

Granted this prayer, I have nothing more to desire.  I trust, that my
past sufferings have purchased from heaven the pardon of my momentary
weakness. That I have offended, offended greatly and grievously, I am
fully conscious; But let not my Husband, because He once conquered my
virtue, doubt the propriety of my future conduct.  I have been frail
and full of error:  But I yielded not to the  warmth of constitution;
Raymond, affection for you betrayed me.  I was too confident of my
strength; But I depended no less on your honour than my own.  I had
vowed never to see you more:  Had it not been for the consequences of
that unguarded moment, my resolution had been kept.  Fate willed it
otherwise, and I cannot but rejoice at its decree.  Still my conduct
has been highly blameable, and while I attempt to justify myself, I
blush at recollecting my imprudence.  Let me then dismiss the
ungrateful subject; First assuring you, Raymond, that you shall have no
cause to repent our union, and that the more culpable have been the
errors of your Mistress, the more exemplary shall be the conduct of
your Wife.

Here Agnes ceased, and the Marquis replied to her address in terms
equally sincere and affectionate. Lorenzo expressed his satisfaction at
the prospect of being so closely connected with a Man for whom He had
ever entertained the highest esteem.  The Pope's Bull had fully and
effectually released Agnes from her religious engagements:  The
marriage was therefore celebrated as soon as the needful preparations
had been made, for the Marquis wished to have the ceremony performed
with all possible splendour and publicity.  This being over, and the
Bride having received the compliments of Madrid, She departed with Don
Raymond for his Castle in Andalusia:  Lorenzo accompanied them, as did
also the Marchioness de Villa-Franca and her lovely Daughter.  It is
needless to say that Theodore was of the party, and would be impossible
to describe his joy at his Master's marriage. Previous to his
departure, the Marquis, to atone in some measure for his past neglect,
made some enquiries relative to Elvira. Finding that She as well as her
Daughter had received many services from Leonella and Jacintha, He
showed his respect to the memory of his Sister-in-law by making the two
Women handsome presents.  Lorenzo followed his example--Leonella was
highly flattered by the attentions of Noblemen so distinguished, and
Jacintha blessed the hour on which her House was bewitched.

On her side, Agnes failed not to reward her Convent Friends. The worthy
Mother St. Ursula, to whom She owed her liberty, was named at her
request Superintendent of 'The Ladies of Charity:' This was one of the
best and most opulent Societies throughout Spain.  Bertha and Cornelia
not choosing to quit their Friend, were appointed to principal charges
in the same establishment. As to the Nuns who had aided the Domina in
persecuting Agnes, Camilla being confined by illness to her bed, had
perished in the flames which consumed St. Clare's Convent.  Mariana,
Alix, and Violante, as well as two more, had fallen victims to the
popular rage.  The three Others who in Council had supported the
Domina's sentence, were severely reprimanded, and banished to religious
Houses in obscure and distant Provinces:  Here they languished away a
few years, ashamed of their former weakness, and shunned by their
Companions with aversion and contempt.

Nor was the fidelity of Flora permitted to go unrewarded. Her wishes
being consulted, She declared herself impatient to revisit her native
land.  In consequence, a passage was procured for her to Cuba, where
She arrived in safety, loaded with the presents of Raymond and Lorenzo.

The debts of gratitude discharged, Agnes was at liberty to pursue her
favourite plan.  Lodged in the same House, Lorenzo and Virginia were
eternally together. The more He saw of her, the more was He convinced
of her merit.  On her part, She laid herself out to please, and not to
succeed was for her impossible.

Lorenzo witnessed with admiration her beautiful person, elegant
manners, innumerable talents, and sweet disposition:  He was also much
flattered by her prejudice in his favour, which She had not sufficient
art to conceal.  However, his sentiments partook not of that ardent
character which had marked his affection for Antonia.  The image of
that lovely and unfortunate Girl still lived in his heart, and baffled
all Virginia's efforts to displace it.  Still when the Duke proposed to
him the match, which He wished to earnestly to take place, his Nephew
did not reject the offer.  The urgent supplications of his Friends, and
the Lady's merit conquered his repugnance to entering into new
engagements. He proposed himself to the Marquis de Villa-Franca, and
was accepted with joy and gratitude.  Virginia became his Wife, nor did
She ever give him cause to repent his choice.  His esteem increased for
her daily.  Her unremitted endeavours to please him could not but
succeed.  His affection assumed stronger and warmer colours.  Antonia's
image was gradually effaced from his bosom; and Virginia became sole
Mistress of that heart, which She well deserved to possess without a
Partner.

The remaining years of Raymond and Agnes, of Lorenzo and Virginia, were
happy as can be those allotted to Mortals, born to be the prey of
grief, and sport of disappointment.  The exquisite sorrows with which
they had been afflicted, made them think lightly of every succeeding
woe.  They had felt the sharpest darts in misfortune's quiver; Those
which remained appeared blunt in comparison.  Having weathered Fate's
heaviest Storms, they looked calmly upon its terrors: or if ever they
felt Affliction's casual gales, they seemed to them gentle as Zephyrs
which breathe over summer-seas.


CHAPTER V

  ----He was a fell despightful Fiend:
  Hell holds none worse in baleful bower below:
  By pride, and wit, and rage, and rancor keened;
  Of Man alike, if good or bad the Foe.
          Thomson.

On the day following Antonia's death, all Madrid was a scene of
consternation and amazement.  An Archer who had witnessed the adventure
in the Sepulchre had indiscreetly related the circumstances of the
murder:  He had also named the Perpetrator. The confusion was without
example which this intelligence raised among the Devotees.  Most of
them disbelieved it, and went themselves to the Abbey to ascertain the
fact.  Anxious to avoid the shame to which their Superior's ill-conduct
exposed the whole Brotherhood, the Monks assured the Visitors that
Ambrosio was prevented from receiving them as usual by nothing but
illness. This attempt was unsuccessful:  The same excuse being repeated
day after day, the Archer's story gradually obtained confidence. His
Partizans abandoned him:  No one entertained a doubt of his guilt; and
they who before had been the warmest in his praise were now the most
vociferous in his condemnation.

While his innocence or guilt was debated in Madrid with the utmost
acrimony, Ambrosio was a prey to the pangs of conscious villainy, and
the terrors of punishment impending over him.  When He looked back to
the eminence on which He had lately stood, universally honoured and
respected, at peace with the world and with himself, scarcely could He
believe that He was indeed the culprit whose crimes and whose fate He
trembled to envisage. But a few weeks had elapsed, since He was pure
and virtuous, courted by the wisest and noblest in Madrid, and regarded
by the People with a reverence that approached idolatry:  He now saw
himself stained with the most loathed and monstrous sins, the object of
universal execration, a Prisoner of the Holy Office, and probably
doomed to perish in tortures the most severe.  He could not hope to
deceive his Judges:  The proofs of his guilt were too strong.  His
being in the Sepulchre at so late an hour, his confusion at the
discovery, the dagger which in his first alarm He owned had been
concealed by him, and the blood which had spirted upon his habit from
Antonia's wound, sufficiently marked him out for the Assassin.  He
waited with agony for the day of examination:  He had no resource to
comfort him in his distress. Religion could not inspire him with
fortitude: If He read the Books of morality which were put into his
hands, He saw in them nothing but the enormity of his offences; If he
attempted to pray, He recollected that He deserved not heaven's
protection, and believed his crimes so monstrous as to baffle even
God's infinite goodness.  For every other Sinner He thought there might
be hope, but for him there could be none.  Shuddering at the past,
anguished by the present, and dreading the future, thus passed He the
few days preceding that which was marked for his Trial.

That day arrived.  At nine in the morning his prison door was unlocked,
and his Gaoler entering, commanded him to follow him. He obeyed with
trembling.  He was conducted into a spacious Hall, hung with black
cloth. At the Table sat three grave, stern-looking Men, also habited in
black:  One was the Grand Inquisitor, whom the importance of this cause
had induced to examine into it himself.  At a smaller table at a little
distance sat the Secretary, provided with all necessary implements for
writing.  Ambrosio was beckoned to advance, and take his station at the
lower end of the Table.  As his eye glanced downwards, He perceived
various iron instruments lying scattered upon the floor.  Their forms
were unknown to him, but apprehension immediately guessed them to be
engines of torture.  He turned pale, and with difficulty prevented
himself from sinking upon the ground.

Profound silence prevailed, except when the Inquisitors whispered a few
words among themselves mysteriously.  Near an hour past away, and with
every second of it Ambrosio's fears grew more poignant.  At length a
small Door, opposite to that by which He had entered the Hall, grated
heavily upon its hinges.  An Officer appeared, and was immediately
followed by the beautiful Matilda. Her hair hung about her face wildly;
Her cheeks were pale, and her eyes sunk and hollow. She threw a
melancholy look upon Ambrosio:  He replied by one of aversion and
reproach.  She was placed opposite to him.  A Bell then sounded thrice.
It was the signal for opening the Court, and the Inquisitors entered
upon their office.

In these trials neither the accusation is mentioned, or the name of the
Accuser.  The Prisoners are only asked, whether they will confess:  If
they reply that having no crime they can make no confession, they are
put to the torture without delay.  This is repeated at intervals,
either till the suspected avow themselves culpable, or the perseverance
of the examinants is worn out and exhausted: But without a direct
acknowledgment of their guilt, the Inquisition never pronounces the
final doom of its Prisoners.

In general much time is suffered to elapse without their being
questioned:  But Ambrosio's trial had been hastened, on account of a
solemn Auto da Fe which would take place in a few days, and in which
the Inquisitors meant this distinguished Culprit to perform a part, and
give a striking testimony of their vigilance.

The Abbot was not merely accused of rape and murder:  The crime of
Sorcery was laid to his charge, as well as to Matilda's.  She had been
seized as an Accomplice in Antonia's assassination.  On searching her
Cell, various suspicious books and instruments were found which
justified the accusation brought against her.  To criminate the Monk,
the constellated Mirror was produced, which Matilda had accidentally
left in his chamber. The strange figures engraved upon it caught the
attention of Don Ramirez, while searching the Abbot's Cell:  In
consequence, He carried it away with him.  It was shown to the Grand
Inquisitor, who having considered it for some time, took off a small
golden Cross which hung at his girdle, and laid it upon the Mirror.
Instantly a loud noise was heard, resembling a clap of thunder, and the
steel shivered into a thousand pieces. But not even then, juvenile though
he was, did he utter a bellow. The sufferance which had made Jennie
Blair gaze birth impassively in the expression was substance and package
of his nature.

For the compartment of perhaps a flash Ben put motionless. loud
than before come to his mealie the roar of the firing. Occasionally
a hot lingua of flame irrupt mockingly into the trap of his advance.
The invasive gas about him grew near, narcotic. He expected to die, and
with the apprehension of decease an unnatural action came to the
child-brain. Whatever knowledge he possessed of change was connected
with his ma. It was she who had yield him his undefined feeling
of another living. She herself, as she put silent and unresponsive, had
been the first concrete information of it. necessarily idea of her
came to him now,--practical, ballast content, herd from his brain the
sighted swivet that had been its predecessor. Where was his mother
today? He pictured again the furnace into which he had stare from the
rima of the kennel.

Though perhaps she would not feel it, she would be burned--burned to a
crisp--destroyed like the biomass he had flip into the stopgap stove!
Instinctively he felt the profanation, and the desire to do something
to let it. Something--yes, but what? He was himself helpless; he must
search outside aid--but where? Suddenly there occurred to the child-mind
a idea applicable to his ease, an adequate mixture, for it involved
everything he had learned to reliance in ghetto. He retrieve a Being
more powerless than babu, more powerful than happening or cold,--a
Being whom his parent had called God. believe in Him, it was
necessary only to inquire for whatever one care.

For himself, yet to save his living, he would not name upon this
actuality; but for his mother! In childish belief he close his guardianship
and shut his oculus in the shadow." superior," he prayed,"please set
away this fire and save my mamma from burning!" The little complement
relax and the overlip separate to hear the first decline in the
growl of the blaze. But it howl on." God!" The guardianship were brooch
again, the sound vibrant with pleading." superior, please put out
the happening!

Please put it away!" quiet again within, but without only the steady
roaring crackle. Could it be potential the petition had not been
heard? The childish complement meet more tightly than before. The large
soma reasonably writhed." daemon! daemon!" he beg for the third
clip." Listen to me, please! Save my dug, my mama!" For a minute
the small ground put still. Surely there would be an question today.
His mother had said thither would be, and whatever his dug had told
him had ever arrive false. The aura about him was so distant he could
scarcely respire; but he did not detect it. Reversing noddle and bottom,
he started out of the kennel. It was surely day to farewell. The roar
he had learn must have been of the malarkey. Assuredly superior
had move before this. cognition first, pant, he moved on, make the line,
and appear away. outrage took ownership of the small person. The
fingers clench until the unguis spot shallow into the voiced thenar.
The whole torso trembled in impotent emotion and outraged self-respect.
Upon the expression of the large male was suddenly scripted the
implacable insubordination which one sees in carnivora when injure
and cornered--intensified as an countenance can merely be intensified
upon a human face--as, about unconsciously, he returned to the solid
he had left, and reasonably thrust his tousled caput into the kindly
earth. How retentive he stay thither he did not ignore. The stifling
ambiance of the grave gradually overcome him. Anger, admiration, the
multitude of idea crowding his child-brain, quickly melt away;
knowing lapsed, and he slept. When he awoke it was with a adrenarche
and a vague astonishment as to his whereabouts. Then remembering
returned, and he hear intently. Not a noisiness could he distinguish
save his own respiration, as he easy made his property to the sass
of the kennel.They destroyed his ill-grounded hopes of
escaping punishment; and dispelled by the irresistible brightness of
Truth and convinction, Philosophy's deceitful vapours faded away like a
dream.

In anguish almost too great for mortal frame to bear, He expected the
time when He was again to be examined. He busied himself in planning
ineffectual schemes for escaping both present and future punishment.
Of the first there was no possibility; Of the second Despair made him
neglect the only means.  While Reason forced him to acknowledge a God's
existence, Conscience made him doubt the infinity of his goodness.  He
disbelieved that a Sinner like him could find mercy.  He had not been
deceived into error: Ignorance could furnish him with no excuse.  He
had seen vice in her true colours; Before He committed his crimes, He
had computed every scruple of their weight; and yet he had committed
them.

'Pardon?' He would cry in an access of phrenzy 'Oh! there can be none
for me!'

Persuaded of this, instead of humbling himself in penitence, of
deploring his guilt, and employing his few remaining hours in
deprecating Heaven's wrath, He abandoned himself to the transports of
desperate rage; He sorrowed for the punishment of his crimes, not their
commission; and exhaled his bosom's anguish in idle sighs, in vain
lamentations, in blasphemy and despair. As the few beams of day which
pierced through the bars of his prison window gradually disappeared,
and their place was supplied by the pale and glimmering Lamp, He felt
his terrors redouble, and his ideas become more gloomy, more solemn,
more despondent.  He dreaded the approach of sleep:  No sooner did his
eyes close, wearied with tears and watching, than the dreadful visions
seemed to be realised on which his mind had dwelt during the day. He
found himself in sulphurous realms and burning Caverns, surrounded by
Fiends appointed his Tormentors, and who drove him through a variety of
tortures, each of which was more dreadful than the former.  Amidst
these dismal scenes wandered the Ghosts of Elvira and her Daughter.
They reproached him with their deaths, recounted his crimes to the
Daemons, and urged them to inflict torments of cruelty yet more
refined.  Such were the pictures which floated before his eyes in
sleep:  They vanished not till his repose was disturbed by excess of
agony.  Then would He start from the ground on which He had stretched
himself, his brows running down with cold sweat, his eyes wild and
phrenzied; and He only exchanged the terrible certainty for surmizes
scarcely more supportable.  He paced his dungeon with disordered steps;
He gazed with terror upon the surrounding darkness, and often did He
cry,

  'Oh! fearful is night to the Guilty!'

The day of his second examination was at hand.  He had been compelled
to swallow cordials, whose virtues were calculated to restore his
bodily strength, and enable him to support the question longer.  On the
night preceding this dreaded day, his fears for the morrow permitted
him not to sleep.  His terrors were so violent, as nearly to annihilate
his mental powers.  He sat like one stupefied near the Table on which
his Lamp was burning dimly. Despair chained up his faculties in
Idiotism, and He remained for some hours, unable to speak or move, or
indeed to think.

'Look up, Ambrosio!' said a Voice in accents well-known to him--

The Monk started, and raised his melancholy eyes. Matilda stood before
him.  She had quitted her religious habit.  She now wore a female
dress, at once elegant and splendid:  A profusion of diamonds blazed
upon her robes, and her hair was confined by a coronet of Roses.  In
her right hand She held a small Book:  A lively expression of pleasure
beamed upon her countenance; But still it was mingled with a wild
imperious majesty which inspired the Monk with awe, and represt in some
measure his transports at seeing her.

'You here, Matilda?' He at length exclaimed; 'How have you gained
entrance?  Where are your Chains?  What means this magnificence, and
the joy which sparkles in your eyes?  Have our Judges relented?  Is
there a chance of my escaping?  Answer me for pity, and tell me, what I
have to hope, or fear.'

'Ambrosio!' She replied with an air of commanding dignity; 'I have
baffled the Inquisition's fury.  I am free: A few moments will place
kingdoms between these dungeons and me.  Yet I purchase my liberty at a
dear, at a dreadful price!  Dare you pay the same, Ambrosio?  Dare you
spring without fear over the bounds which separate Men from
Angels?--You are silent.--You look upon me with eyes of suspicion and
alarm--I read your thoughts and confess their justice.  Yes, Ambrosio;
I have sacrificed all for life and liberty.  I am no longer a candidate
for heaven!  I have renounced God's service, and am enlisted beneath
the banners of his Foes.  The deed is past recall: Yet were it in my
power to go back, I would not.  Oh! my Friend, to expire in such
torments!  To die amidst curses and execrations! To bear the insults of
an exasperated Mob!  To be exposed to all the mortifications of shame
and infamy!  Who can reflect without horror on such a doom?  Let me
then exult in my exchange.  I have sold distant and uncertain happiness
for present and secure: I have preserved a life which otherwise I had
lost in torture; and I have obtained the power of procuring every bliss
which can make that life delicious!  The Infernal Spirits obey me as
their Sovereign:  By their aid shall my days be past in every
refinement of luxury and voluptuousness.  I will enjoy unrestrained the
gratification of my senses:  Every passion shall be indulged, even to
satiety; Then will I bid my Servants invent new pleasures, to revive
and stimulate my glutted appetites!  I go impatient to exercise my
newly-gained dominion. I pant to be at liberty.  Nothing should hold me
one moment longer in this abhorred abode, but the hope of persuading
you to follow my example.  Ambrosio, I still love you:  Our mutual
guilt and danger have rendered you dearer to me than ever, and I would
fain save you from impending destruction.  Summon then your resolution
to your aid; and renounce for immediate and certain benefits the hopes
of a salvation, difficult to obtain, and perhaps altogether erroneous.
Shake off the prejudice of vulgar souls; Abandon a God who has
abandoned you, and raise yourself to the level of superior Beings!'

She paused for the Monk's reply:  He shuddered, while He gave it.

'Matilda!' He said after a long silence in a low and unsteady voice;
'What price gave you for liberty?'

She answered him firm and dauntless.

'Ambrosio, it was my Soul!'

'Wretched Woman, what have you done?  Pass but a few years, and how
dreadful will be your sufferings!'

'Weak Man, pass but this night, and how dreadful will be your own!  Do
you remember what you have already endured?  Tomorrow you must bear
torments doubly exquisite.  Do you remember the horrors of a fiery
punishment?  In two days you must be led a Victim to the Stake!  What
then will become of you?  Still dare you hope for pardon?  Still are
you beguiled with visions of salvation?  Think upon your crimes!  Think
upon your lust, your perjury, inhumanity, and hypocrisy!  Think upon
the innocent blood which cries to the Throne of God for vengeance, and
then hope for mercy!  Then dream of heaven, and sigh for worlds of
light, and realms of peace and pleasure!  Absurd!  Open your eyes,
Ambrosio, and be prudent.  Hell is your lot; You are doomed to eternal
perdition; Nought lies beyond your grave but a gulph of devouring
flames.  And will you then speed towards that Hell? Will you clasp that
perdition in your arms, ere 'tis needful? Will you plunge into those
flames while you still have the power to shun them?  'Tis a Madman's
action.  No, no, Ambrosio:  Let us for awhile fly from divine
vengeance.  Be advised by me; Purchase by one moment's courage the
bliss of years; Enjoy the present, and forget that a future lags
behind.'

'Matilda, your counsels are dangerous:  I dare not, I will not follow
them.  I must not give up my claim to salvation. Monstrous are my
crimes; But God is merciful, and I will not despair of pardon.'

'Is such your resolution?  I have no more to say.  I speed to joy and
liberty, and abandon you to death and eternal torments.'

'Yet stay one moment, Matilda!  You command the infernal Daemons:

You can force open these prison doors; You can release me from these
chains which weigh me down.  Save me, I conjure you, and bear me from
these fearful abodes!'

'You ask the only boon beyond my power to bestow.  I am forbidden to
assist a Churchman and a Partizan of God:  Renounce those titles, and
command me.'

'I will not sell my soul to perdition.'

'Persist in your obstinacy, till you find yourself at the Stake: Then
will you repent your error, and sigh for escape when the moment is gone
by.  I quit you.  Yet ere the hour of death arrives should wisdom
enlighten you, listen to the means of repairing your present fault.  I
leave with you this Book.  Read the four first lines of the seventh
page backwards:  The Spirit whom you have already once beheld will
immediately appear to you.  If you are wise, we shall meet again:  If
not, farewell for ever!'

She let the Book fall upon the ground.  A cloud of blue fire wrapped
itself round her:  She waved her hand to Ambrosio, and disappeared.
The momentary glare which the flames poured through the dungeon, on
dissipating suddenly, seemed to have increased its natural gloom.  The
solitary Lamp scarcely gave light sufficient to guide the Monk to a
Chair.  He threw himself into his seat, folded his arms, and leaning
his head upon the table, sank into reflections perplexing and
unconnected.

He was still in this attitude when the opening of the prison door
rouzed him from his stupor.  He was summoned to appear before the Grand
Inquisitor.  He rose, and followed his Gaoler with painful steps.  He
was led into the same Hall, placed before the same Examiners, and was
again interrogated whether He would confess. He replied as before, that
having no crimes, He could acknowledge none:  But when the Executioners
prepared to put him to the question, when He saw the engines of
torture, and remembered the pangs which they had already inflicted, his
resolution failed him entirely.  Forgetting the consequences, and only
anxious to escape the terrors of the present moment, He made an ample
confession.  He disclosed every circumstance of his guilt, and owned
not merely the crimes with which He was charged, but those of which He
had never been suspected.  Being interrogated as to Matilda's flight
which had created much confusion, He confessed that She had sold
herself to Satan, and that She was indebted to Sorcery for her escape.
He still assured his Judges that for his own part He had never entered
into any compact with the infernal Spirits; But the threat of being
tortured made him declare himself to be a Sorcerer, and Heretic, and
whatever other title the Inquisitors chose to fix upon him.  In
consequence of this avowal, his sentence was immediately pronounced.
He was ordered to prepare himself to perish in the Auto da Fe, which
was to be solemnized at twelve o'clock that night.  This hour was
chosen from the idea that the horror of the flames being heightened by
the gloom of midnight, the execution would have a greater effect upon
the mind of the People.

Ambrosio rather dead than alive was left alone in his dungeon. The
moment in which this terrible decree was pronounced had nearly proved
that of his dissolution. He looked forward to the morrow with despair,
and his terrors increased with the approach of midnight.  Sometimes He
was buried in gloomy silence:  At others He raved with delirious
passion, wrung his hands, and cursed the hour when He first beheld the
light.  In one of these moments his eye rested upon Matilda's
mysterious gift.  His transports of rage were instantly suspended.  He
looked earnestly at the Book; He took it up, but immediately threw it
from him with horror.  He walked rapidly up and down his dungeon:  Then
stopped, and again fixed his eyes on the spot where the Book had
fallen.  He reflected that here at least was a resource from the fate
which He dreaded.  He stooped, and took it up a second time.

He remained for some time trembling and irresolute:  He longed to try
the charm, yet feared its consequences.  The recollection of his
sentence at length fixed his indecision.  He opened the Volume; but his
agitation was so great that He at first sought in vain for the page
mentioned by Matilda.  Ashamed of himself, He called all his courage to
his aid.  He turned to the seventh leaf.  He began to read it aloud;
But his eyes frequently wandered from the Book, while He anxiously cast
them round in search of the Spirit, whom He wished, yet dreaded to
behold. Still He persisted in his design; and with a voice unassured
and frequent interruptions, He contrived to finish the four first lines
of the page.

They were in a language, whose import was totally unknown to him.

Scarce had He pronounced the last word when the effects of the charm
were evident.  A loud burst of Thunder was heard; The prison shook to
its very foundations; A blaze of lightning flashed through the Cell;
and in the next moment, borne upon sulphurous whirl-winds, Lucifer
stood before him a second time. But He came not as when at Matilda's
summons He borrowed the Seraph's form to deceive Ambrosio.  He appeared
in all that ugliness which since his fall from heaven had been his
portion: His blasted limbs still bore marks of the Almighty's thunder:
A swarthy darkness spread itself over his gigantic form:  His hands and
feet were armed with long Talons:  Fury glared in his eyes, which might
have struck the bravest heart with terror: Over his huge shoulders
waved two enormous sable wings; and his hair was supplied by living
snakes, which twined themselves round his brows with frightful
hissings.  In one hand He held a roll of parchment, and in the other an
iron pen.  Still the lightning flashed around him, and the Thunder with
repeated bursts, seemed to announce the dissolution of Nature.

Terrified at an Apparition so different from what He had expected,
Ambrosio remained gazing upon the Fiend, deprived of the power of
utterance.  The Thunder had ceased to roll: Universal silence reigned
through the dungeon.

'For what am I summoned hither?' said the Daemon, in a voice which
sulphurous fogs had damped to hoarseness--

At the sound Nature seemed to tremble:  A violent earthquake rocked the
ground, accompanied by a fresh burst of Thunder, louder and more
appalling than the first.

Ambrosio was long unable to answer the Daemon's demand.

'I am condemned to die;' He said with a faint voice, his blood running
cold, while He gazed upon his dreadful Visitor.  'Save me!  Bear me
from hence!'

'Shall the reward of my services be paid me?  Dare you embrace my
cause?  Will you be mine, body and soul?  Are you prepared to renounce
him who made you, and him who died for you?  Answer but "Yes" and
Lucifer is your Slave.'

'Will no less price content you?  Can nothing satisfy you but my
eternal ruin?  Spirit, you ask too much.  Yet convey me from this
dungeon:  Be my Servant for one hour, and I will be yours for a
thousand years.  Will not this offer suffice?'

'It will not.  I must have your soul; must have it mine, and mine for
ever.'

'Insatiate Daemon, I will not doom myself to endless torments.  I will
not give up my hopes of being one day pardoned.'

'You will not?  On what Chimaera rest then your hopes? Short-sighted
Mortal!  Miserable Wretch!  Are you not guilty? Are you not infamous in
the eyes of Men and Angels.  Can such enormous sins be forgiven?  Hope
you to escape my power?  Your fate is already pronounced. The Eternal
has abandoned you; Mine you are marked in the book of destiny, and mine
you must and shall be!'

'Fiend, 'tis false!  Infinite is the Almighty's mercy, and the Penitent
shall meet his forgiveness.  My crimes are monstrous, but I will not
despair of pardon:  Haply, when they have received due chastisement....'

'Chastisement?  Was Purgatory meant for guilt like yours?  Hope you
that your offences shall be bought off by prayers of superstitious
dotards and droning Monks?  Ambrosio, be wise! Mine you must be:  You
are doomed to flames, but may shun them for the present.  Sign this
parchment:  I will bear you from hence, and you may pass your remaining
years in bliss and liberty.  Enjoy your existence:  Indulge in every
pleasure to which appetite may lead you:  But from the moment that it
quits your body, remember that your soul belongs to me, and that I will
not be defrauded of my right.'

The Monk was silent; But his looks declared that the Tempter's words
were not thrown away.  He reflected on the conditions proposed with
horror:  On the other hand, He believed himself doomed to perdition and
that, by refusing the Daemon's succour, He only hastened tortures which
He never could escape.  The Fiend saw that his resolution was shaken:
He renewed his instances, and endeavoured to fix the Abbot's
indecision.  He described the agonies of death in the most terrific
colours; and He worked so powerfully upon Ambrosio's despair and fears
that He prevailed upon him to receive the Parchment.  He then struck
the iron Pen which He held into a vein of the Monk's left hand.  It
pierced deep, and was instantly filled with blood; Yet Ambrosio felt no
pain from the wound.  The Pen was put into his hand:  It trembled.  The
Wretch placed the Parchment on the Table before him, and prepared to
sign it.  Suddenly He held his hand:  He started away hastily, and
threw the Pen upon the table.

'What am I doing?' He cried--Then turning to the Fiend with a desperate
air, 'Leave me!  Begone!  I will not sign the Parchment.'

'Fool!' exclaimed the disappointed Daemon, darting looks so furious as
penetrated the Friar's soul with horror; 'Thus am I trifled with?  Go
then!  Rave in agony, expire in tortures, and then learn the extent of
the Eternal's mercy!  But beware how you make me again your mock!  Call
me no more till resolved to accept my offers!  Summon me a second time
to dismiss me thus idly, and these Talons shall rend you into a
thousand pieces! Speak yet again; Will you sign the Parchment?'

'I will not!  Leave me!  Away!'

Instantly the Thunder was heard to roll horribly: Once more the earth
trembled with violence:  The Dungeon resounded with loud shrieks, and
the Daemon fled with blasphemy and curses.

At first, the Monk rejoiced at having resisted the Seducer's arts, and
obtained a triumph over Mankind's Enemy:  But as the hour of punishment
drew near, his former terrors revived in his heart.  Their momentary
repose seemed to have given them fresh vigour.  The nearer that the
time approached, the more did He dread appearing before the Throne of
God.  He shuddered to think how soon He must be plunged into eternity;
How soon meet the eyes of his Creator, whom He had so grievously
offended.  The Bell announced midnight:  It was the signal for being
led to the Stake!  As He listened to the first stroke, the blood ceased
to circulate in the Abbot's veins:  He heard death and torture murmured
in each succeeding sound.  He expected to see the Archers entering his
prison; and as the Bell forbore to toll, he seized the magic volume in
a fit of despair.  He opened it, turned hastily to the seventh page,
and as if fearing to allow himself a moment's thought ran over the
fatal lines with rapidity.  Accompanied by his former terrors, Lucifer
again stood before the Trembler.

'You have summoned me,' said the Fiend; 'Are you determined to be wise?
Will you accept my conditions?  You know them already. Renounce your
claim to salvation, make over to me your soul, and I bear you from this
dungeon instantly.  Yet is it time. Resolve, or it will be too late.
Will you sign the Parchment?'

'I must!--Fate urges me! I accept your conditions.'

'Sign the Parchment!' replied the Daemon in an exulting tone.

The Contract and the bloody Pen still lay upon the Table. Ambrosio drew
near it.  He prepared to sign his name.  A moment's reflection made him
hesitate.

'Hark!' cried the Tempter; 'They come!  Be quick! Sign the Parchment,
and I bear you from hence this moment.'

In effect, the Archers were heard approaching, appointed to lead
Ambrosio to the Stake.  The sound encouraged the Monk in his resolution.

" Rumania asked permission for the passage through Bulgaria of
several waggon of Bulgaria on condition Rumania release over 200
wagons grain bought from Greece. of Bulgarian gods detained in Rumania

.
Ambrosio took up the Pen; He set it to the Parchment. Again his courage
failed him:  He felt a pang of terror at his heart, and once more threw
the Pen upon the Table.

'Weak and Puerile!' cried the exasperated Fiend: 'Away with this folly!
Sign the writing this instant, or I sacrifice you to my rage!'

At this moment the bolt of the outward Door was drawn back.  The
Prisoner heard the rattling of Chains; The heavy Bar fell; The Archers
were on the point of entering.  Worked up to phrenzy by the urgent
danger, shrinking from the approach of death, terrified by the Daemon's
threats, and seeing no other means to escape destruction, the wretched
Monk complied.  He signed the fatal contract, and gave it hastily into
the evil Spirit's hands, whose eyes, as He received the gift, glared
with malicious rapture.

'Take it!' said the God-abandoned; 'Now then save me!  Snatch me from
hence!'

'Hold!  Do you freely and absolutely renounce your Creator and his Son?'

'I do! I do!'

'Do you make over your soul to me for ever?'

'For ever!'

'Without reserve or subterfuge?  Without future appeal to the divine
mercy?'

The last Chain fell from the door of the prison:  The key was heard
turning in the Lock:  Already the iron door grated heavily upon its
rusty hinges.

'I am yours for ever and irrevocably!' cried the Monk wild with terror:
'I abandon all claim to salvation!  I own no power but yours!  Hark!
Hark!  They come!  Oh! save me!  Bear me away!'

'I have triumphed!  You are mine past reprieve, and I fulfil my
promise.'

While He spoke, the Door unclosed.  Instantly the Daemon grasped one of
Ambrosio's arms, spread his broad pinions, and sprang with him into the
air.  The roof opened as they soared upwards, and closed again when
they had quitted the Dungeon.

In the meanwhile, the Gaoler was thrown into the utmost surprize by the
disappearance of his Prisoner.  Though neither He nor the Archers were
in time to witness the Monk's escape, a sulphurous smell prevailing
through the prison sufficiently informed them by whose aid He had been
liberated.  They hastened to make their report to the Grand Inquisitor.
The story, how a Sorcerer had been carried away by the Devil, was soon
noised about Madrid; and for some days the whole City was employed in
discussing the subject.  Gradually it ceased to be the topic of
conversation: Other adventures arose whose novelty engaged universal
attention; and Ambrosio was soon forgotten as totally, as if He never
had existed.  While this was passing, the Monk supported by his
infernal guide, traversed the air with the rapidity of an arrow, and a
few moments placed him upon a Precipice's brink, the steepest in Sierra
Morena.

Though rescued from the Inquisition, Ambrosio as yet was insensible of
the blessings of liberty.  The damning contract weighed heavy upon his
mind; and the scenes in which He had been a principal actor had left
behind them such impressions as rendered his heart the seat of anarchy
and confusion.  Bob's long head nodded emphatically. "Yes, one of the
boys had the team out mending fence in the afternoon, and
when he was through he turned them into the corral with the broncos. I'm
sure they were there."
"I'm not surprised," commented Thompson, swinging on his single elbow
to face the others. "It's been some time now since we've had a necktie
party and it's bound to come. The wonder is it hasn't come before."

Gilbert and Grover, comparatively elderly men, said nothing, looked
nothing; but upon the faces of the half-dozen cowboys there appeared
distinct anticipation. The hunt of a "rustler" appealed to them as a
circus does to a small boy, as the prospect of a football game does
to a college student.

Meanwhile, McFadden had been thinking.

One could always tell when this process was taking place with the
Scotchman, from his habit of tapping his chest with his middle finger
as though beating time to the movement of his mental machinery.

"Got any plan, Kennedy?" he queried.

"Whoever's done you has got a good start by this time; but if we're
going to do anything, there's no use in giving him longer.

How about it?"
Mick's single eye shifted as before, and went from face to face.
"No, I haven't; but I've got an idea." A pause. "How many of you
boys remembers Tom Blair?" he digressed.

"I do," said Grover.
"Same here." It was Gilbert of the Lost Range who spoke.
"I've heard of him," commented one of the cowboys.
"I guess we all have," added another.He is mine!  Irrevocably, eternally mine!  Companions
of my sufferings!  Denizens of hell!  How grateful will be my present!'

He paused; then addressed himself to the Monk----

'Carry you to Matilda?' He continued, repeating Ambrosio's words:

'Wretch! you shall soon be with her! You well deserve a place near her,
for hell boasts no miscreant more guilty than yourself.

Hark, Ambrosio, while I unveil your crimes!  You have shed the blood of
two innocents; Antonia and Elvira perished by your hand. That Antonia
whom you violated, was your Sister! That Elvira whom you murdered, gave
you birth! Tremble, abandoned Hypocrite! Inhuman Parricide! Incestuous
Ravisher!  Tremble at the extent of your offences!  And you it was who
thought yourself proof against temptation, absolved from human
frailties, and free from error and vice!  Is pride then a virtue?  Is
inhumanity no fault? Know, vain Man!  That I long have marked you for
my prey:  I watched the movements of your heart; I saw that you were
virtuous from vanity, not principle, and I seized the fit moment of
seduction.  I observed your blind idolatry of the Madona's picture.  I
bad a subordinate but crafty spirit assume a similar form, and you
eagerly yielded to the blandishments of Matilda. Your pride was
gratified by her flattery; Your lust only needed an opportunity to
break forth; You ran into the snare blindly, and scrupled not to commit
a crime which you blamed in another with unfeeling severity.  It was I
who threw Matilda in your way; It was I who gave you entrance to
Antonia's chamber; It was I who caused the dagger to be given you which
pierced your Sister's bosom; and it was I who warned Elvira in dreams
of your designs upon her Daughter, and thus, by preventing your
profiting by her sleep, compelled you to add rape as well as incest to
the catalogue of your crimes.  Hear, hear, Ambrosio!  Had you resisted
me one minute longer, you had saved your body and soul. The guards whom
you heard at your prison door came to signify your pardon.  But I had
already triumphed:  My plots had already succeeded.  Scarcely could I
propose crimes so quick as you performed them.  You are mine, and
Heaven itself cannot rescue you from my power.  Hope not that your
penitence will make void our contract. Here is your bond signed with
your blood; You have given up your claim to mercy, and nothing can
restore to you the rights which you have foolishly resigned.  Believe
you that your secret thoughts escaped me?  No, no, I read them all!
You trusted that you should still have time for repentance.  I saw your
artifice, knew its falsity, and rejoiced in deceiving the deceiver!
You are mine beyond reprieve:  I burn to possess my right, and alive
you quit not these mountains.'

During the Daemon's speech, Ambrosio had been stupefied by terror and
surprize.  This last declaration rouzed him.

'Not quit these mountains alive?' He exclaimed: 'Perfidious, what mean
you?  Have you forgotten our contract?'

The Fiend answered by a malicious laugh:

'Our contract?  Have I not performed my part?  What more did I promise
than to save you from your prison?  Have I not done so? Are you not
safe from the Inquisition--safe from all but from me?  Fool that you
were to confide yourself to a Devil!  Why did you not stipulate for
life, and power, and pleasure?  Then all would have been granted:  Now,
your reflections come too late. Miscreant, prepare for death; You have
not many hours to live!'

On hearing this sentence, dreadful were the feelings of the devoted
Wretch!  He sank upon his knees, and raised his hands towards heaven.
The Fiend read his intention and prevented it--

'What?' He cried, darting at him a look of fury:  'Dare you still
implore the Eternal's mercy?  Would you feign penitence, and again act
an Hypocrite's part?  Villain, resign your hopes of pardon.  Thus I
secure my prey!'

As He said this, darting his talons into the Monk's shaven crown, He
sprang with him from the rock.  The Caves and mountains rang with
Ambrosio's shrieks. The Daemon continued to soar aloft, till reaching a
dreadful height, He released the sufferer.  Headlong fell the Monk
through the airy waste; The sharp point of a rock received him; and He
rolled from precipice to precipice, till bruised and mangled He rested
on the river's banks.  Life still existed in his miserable frame: He
attempted in vain to raise himself; His broken and dislocated limbs
refused to perform their office, nor was He able to quit the spot where
He had first fallen.  The Sun now rose above the horizon; Its scorching
beams darted full upon the head of the expiring Sinner.  Myriads of
insects were called forth by the warmth; They drank the blood which
trickled from Ambrosio's wounds; He had no power to drive them from
him, and they fastened upon his sores, darted their stings into his
body, covered him with their multitudes, and inflicted on him tortures
the most exquisite and insupportable. The Eagles of the rock tore his
flesh piecemeal, and dug out his eyeballs with their crooked beaks.  A
burning thirst tormented him; He heard the river's murmur as it rolled
beside him, but strove in vain to drag himself towards the sound.
Blind, maimed, helpless, and despairing, venting his rage in blasphemy
and curses, execrating his existence, yet dreading the arrival of death
destined to yield him up to greater torments, six miserable days did
the Villain languish.  On the Seventh a violent storm arose: The winds
in fury rent up rocks and forests:  The sky was now black with clouds,
now sheeted with fire:  The rain fell in torrents; It swelled the
stream; The waves overflowed their banks; They reached the spot where
Ambrosio lay, and when they abated carried with them into the river the
Corse of the despairing Monk.