Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


FORT DESOLATION, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.


CHAPTER ONE.

OR, SOLITUDE IN THE WILDERNESS.

THE OUTSKIRTER.

To some minds solitude is depressing, to others it is congenial.  It was
the _former_ to our friend John Robinson; yet he had a large share of it
in his chequered life.  John--more familiarly known as Jack--was as
romantic as his name was the reverse.  To look at him you would have
supposed that he was the most ordinary of common-place men, but if you
had known him, as we did, you would have discovered that there was a
deep, silent, but ever-flowing river of enthusiasm, energy, fervour--in
a word, romance--in his soul, which seldom or never manifested itself in
words, and only now and then, on rare occasions, flashed out in a
lightning glance, or blazed up in a fiery countenance.  For the most
part Jack was calm as a mill-pond, deep as the Atlantic, straightforward
and grave as an undertaker's clerk and good-humoured as an unspoilt and
healthy child.

Jack never made a joke, but, certes, he could enjoy one; and he had a
way of showing his enjoyment by a twinkle in his blue eye and a chuckle
in his throat that was peculiarly impressive.

Jack was a type of a large class.  He was what we may call an
_outskirter_ of the world.  He was one of those who, from the force of
necessity, or of self-will, or of circumstances, are driven to the outer
circle of this world to do as Adam and Eve's family did, battle with
Nature in her wildest scenes and moods; to earn his bread, literally, in
the sweat of his brow.

Jack was a middle-sized man of strong make.  He was not sufficiently
large to overawe men by his size, neither was he so small as to invite
impertinence from "big bullies," of whom there were plenty in his
neighbourhood.  In short, being an unpretending man and a plain man,
with a good nose and large chin and sandy hair, he was not usually taken
much notice of by strangers during his journeyings in the world; but
when vigorous action in cases of emergency was required Jack Robinson
was the man to make himself conspicuous.

It is not our intention to give an account of Jack's adventurous life
from beginning to end, but to detail the incidents of a sojourn of two
months at Fort Desolation, in almost utter solitude, in order to show
one of the many phases of rough life to which outskirters are frequently
subjected.

In regard to his early life it may be sufficient to say that Jack, after
being born, created such perpetual disturbance and storm in the house
that his worthy father came to look upon him as a perfect pest, and as
soon as possible sent him to a public school, where he fought like a
Mameluke Bey, learned his lessons with the zeal of a philosopher, and,
at the end of ten years ran away to sea, where he became as sick as a
dog and as miserable as a convicted felon.

Poor Jack was honest of heart and generous of spirit, but many a long
hard year did he spend in the rugged parts of the earth ere he
recovered, (if he ever did recover), from the evil effects of this first
false step.

In course of time Jack was landed in Canada, with only a few shillings
in his pocket; from that period he became an outskirter.  The romance in
his nature pointed to the backwoods; he went thither at once, and was
not disappointed.  At first the wild life surpassed his expectations,
but as time wore on the tinsel began to wear off the face of things, and
he came to see them as they actually were.  Nevertheless, the romance of
life did not wear out of his constitution.  Enthusiasm, quiet but deep,
stuck to him all through his career, and carried him on and over
difficulties that would have disgusted and turned back many a colder
spirit.

Jack's first success was the obtaining of a situation as clerk in the
store of a general merchant in an outskirt settlement of Canada.  Dire
necessity drove him to this.  He had been three weeks without money and
nearly two days without food before he succumbed.  Having given in,
however, he worked like a Trojan, and would certainly have advanced
himself in life if his employer had not failed and left him, minus a
portion of his salary, to "try again."

Next, he became an engineer on board one of the Missouri steamers, in
which capacity he burst his boiler, and threw himself and the passengers
into the river--the captain having adopted the truly Yankee expedient of
sitting down on the safety-valve while racing with another boat!

Afterwards, Jack Robinson became clerk in one of the Ontario
steam-boats, but, growing tired of this life, he went up the Ottawa, and
became overseer of a sawmill.  Here, being on the frontier of
civilisation, he saw the roughest of Canadian life.  The lumbermen of
that district are a mixed race--French-Canadians, Irishmen, Indians,
half-castes, etcetera,--and whatever good qualities these men might
possess in the way of hewing timber and bush-life, they were sadly
deficient in the matters of morality and temperance.  But Jack was a man
of tact and good temper, and played his cards well.  He jested with the
jocular, sympathised with the homesick, doctored the ailing in a rough
and ready fashion peculiarly his own, and avoided the quarrelsome.  Thus
he became a general favourite.

Of course it was not to be expected that he could escape an occasional
broil, and it was herein that his early education did him good service.
He had been trained in an English school where he became one of the best
boxers.  The lumberers on the Ottawa were not practised in this science;
they indulged in that kicking, tearing, pommelling sort of mode which is
so repugnant to the feelings of an Englishman.  The consequence was that
Jack had few fights, but these were invariably with the largest bullies
of the district; and he, in each case, inflicted such tremendous facial
punishment on his opponent that he became a noted man, against whom few
cared to pit themselves.

There are none so likely to enjoy peace as those who are prepared for
war.  Jack used sometimes to say, with a smile, that his few battles
were the price he had to pay for peace.

Our hero was unlucky.  The saw-mill failed--its master being a drunkard.
When that went down he entered the lumber trade, where he made the
acquaintance of a young Scotchman, of congenial mind and temperament,
who suggested the setting up of a store in a promising locality and
proposed entering into partnership.  "Murray and Robinson" was forthwith
painted by the latter, (who was a bit of an artist), over the door of a
small log-house, and the store soon became well known and much
frequented by the sparse population as well as by those engaged in the
timber trade.

But "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong."  There
must have been a screw loose somewhere, for bad debts accumulated and
losses were incurred which finally brought the firm to the ground, and
left its dissevered partners to begin the world over again!

After this poor Jack Robinson fell into low spirits for a time, but he
soon recovered, and bought a small piece of land at a nominal price in a
region so wild that he had to cut his own road to it, fell the trees
with his own hand, and, in short, reclaim it from the wilderness on the
margin of which it lay.  This was hard work, but Jack liked hard work,
and whatever work he undertook he always did it well.  Strange that such
a man could not get on! yet so it was, that, in a couple of years, he
found himself little better off than he had been when he entered on his
new property.  The region, too, was not a tempting one.  No adventurous
spirits had located themselves beside him, and only a few had come
within several miles of his habitation.

This did not suit our hero's sociable temperament, and he began to
despond very much.  Still his sanguine spirit led him to persevere, and
there is no saying how long he might have continued to spend his days
and his energies in felling trees and sowing among the stumps and hoping
for better days, had not his views been changed and his thoughts turned
into another channel by a letter.


CHAPTER TWO.

THE LETTER, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

One fine spring morning Jack was sitting, smoking his pipe after
breakfast, at the door of his log cabin, looking pensively out upon the
tree-stump-encumbered field which constituted his farm.  He had
facetiously named his residence the Mountain House, in consequence of
there being neither mountain nor hill larger than an inverted wash-hand
basin, within ten miles of him!  He was wont to defend the misnomer on
the ground that it served to keep him in remembrance of the fact that
hills really existed in other parts of the world.

Jack was in a desponding mood.  His pipe would not "draw" that morning;
and his mind had been more active than usual for a few days past,
revolving the past, the present, and the future.  In short, Jack was
cross.  There could be no doubt whatever about it; for he suddenly, and
without warning, dashed his pipe to pieces against a log, went into the
house for another, which he calmly filled, as he resumed his former
seat, lit, and continued to smoke for some time in sulky silence.  We
record this fact because it was quite contrary to Jack's amiable and
patient character, and showed that some deep emotions were stirring
within him.

The second pipe "drew" well.  Probably it was this that induced him to
give utterance to the expression--

"I wonder how long this sort of thing will last?"

"Just as long as you've a mind to let it, and no longer," answered a man
clad in the garb of a trapper, whose mocassin foot had given no
indication of his approach until he was within a couple of paces of the
door.

"Is that you, Joe?" said Jack, looking up, and pointing to a log which
served as a seat on the other side of the doorway.

"It's all that's of me," replied Joe.

"Sit down and fill your pipe out of my pouch, Joe.  It's good 'baccy,
you'll find.  Any news?  I suppose not.  There never is; and if there
was, what would be the odds to me?"

"In the blues?" remarked the hunter, regarding Jack with a peculiar
smile through his first puff of smoke.

"Rather!" said Jack.

"Grog?" inquired Joe.

"Haven't tasted a drop for months," replied Jack.

"All square _here_?" inquired the hunter, tapping his stomach.

"Could digest gun-flints and screw nails!"

The two smoked in silence for some time; then Joe drew forth a soiled
letter, which he handed to his companion, saying--

"It's bin lying at the post-office for some weeks, and as the postmaster
know'd I was comin' here he asked me to take it.  I've a notion it may
be an offer to buy your clearin', for I've heerd two or three fellows
speakin' about it.  Now, as I want to buy it myself, if yer disposed to
sell it, I hereby make you the first offer."

Jack Robinson continued to smoke in silence, gazing abstractedly at the
letter.  Since his mother had died, a year before the date of which we
write, he had not received a line from any one, insomuch that he had
given up calling at the post-office on his occasional visits to the
nearest settlement.  This letter, therefore, took him by surprise, all
the more that it was addressed in the handwriting of his former partner,
Murray.

Breaking the seal, he read as follows:

  "Fort Kamenistaquoia, April the somethingth:--

  "Dear Jack,--You'll be surprised to see my fist, but not more
  surprised than I was to hear from an old hunter just arrived, that you
  had taken to farming.  It's not your forte, Jack, my boy.  Be advised.
  Sell off the farm for what it will fetch, and come and join me.  My
  antecedents are not in my favour, I grant; but facts are stubborn
  things, and it is a fact that I am making dollars here like stones.
  I'm a fur-trader, my boy.  Have joined a small company, and up to this
  time have made a good thing of it.  You know something of the fur
  trade, if I mistake not.  Do come and join us; we want such a man as
  you at a new post we have established on the coast of Labrador.
  Shooting, fishing, hunting, _ad libitum_.  Eating, drinking, sleeping,
  _ad infinitum_.  What would you more?  Come, like a good fellow, and
  be happy!

  "Ever thine, J. MURRAY."

"I'll sell the _farm_," said Jack Robinson, folding the letter.

"You will?" exclaimed Joe.  "What's your price?"

"Come over it with me, and look at the fixings, before I tell you," said
Jack.

They went over it together, and looked at every fence and stump and
implement.  They visited the live stock, and estimated the value of the
sprouting crop.  Then they returned to the house, where they struck a
bargain off-hand.

That evening Jack bade adieu to the Mountain House, mounted his horse,
with his worldly goods at the pommel of the saddle, and rode away,
leaving Joe, the trapper, in possession.

In process of time our hero rode through the settlements to Montreal,
where he sold his horse, purchased a few necessaries, and made his way
down the Saint Lawrence to the frontier settlements of the bleak and
almost uninhabited north shore of the gulf.  Here he found some
difficulty in engaging a man to go with him, in a canoe, towards the
coast of Labrador.

An Irishman, in a fit of despondency, at length agreed; but on reaching
a saw-mill that had been established by a couple of adventurous Yankees,
in a region that seemed to be the out-skirts of creation, Paddy
repented, and vowed he'd go no farther for love or money.

Jack Robinson earnestly advised the faithless man to go home, and help
his grandmother, thenceforth, to plant murphies; after which he embarked
in his canoe alone, and paddled away into the dreary north.

Camping out in the woods at night, paddling all day, and living on
biscuit and salt pork, with an occasional duck or gull, by way of
variety; never seeing a human face from morn till night, nor hearing the
sound of any voice except his own, Jack pursued his voyage for fourteen
days.  At the end of that time he descried Fort Kamenistaquoia.  It
consisted of four small log-houses, perched on a conspicuous promontory,
with a flag-staff in the midst of them.

Here he was welcomed warmly by his friend John Murray and his
colleagues, and was entertained for three days sumptuously on fresh
salmon, salt pork, pancakes, and tea.  Intellectually, he was regaled
with glowing accounts of the fur trade and the salmon fisheries of that
region.

"Now, Jack," said Murray, on the third day after his arrival, while they
walked in front of the fort, smoking a morning pipe, "it is time that
you were off to the new fort.  One of our best men has built it, but he
is not a suitable person to take charge, and as the salmon season has
pretty well advanced we are anxious to have you there to look after the
salting and sending of them to Quebec."

"What do you call the new fort?" inquired Jack.

"Well, it has not yet got a name.  We've been so much in the habit of
styling it the New Fort that the necessity of another name has not
occurred to us.  Perhaps, as you are to be its first master, we may
leave the naming of it to you."

"Very good," said Jack; "I am ready at a moment's notice.  Shall I set
off this forenoon?"

"Not quite so sharp as that," replied Murray, laughing.  "To-morrow
morning, at day-break, will do.  There is a small sloop lying in a creek
about twenty miles below this.  We beached her there last autumn.
You'll go down in a boat with three men, and haul her into deep water.
There will be spring tides in two days, so, with the help of tackle,
you'll easily manage it.  Thence you will sail to the new fort, forty
miles farther along the coast, and take charge."

"The three men you mean to give me know their work, I presume?" said
Jack.

"Of course they do.  None of them have been at the fort, however."

"Oh!  How then shall we find it?" inquired Jack.

"By observation," replied the other.  "Keep a sharp look out as you
coast along, and you can't miss it."

The idea of mists and darkness and storms occurred to Jack Robinson, but
he only answered, "Very good."

"Can any of the three men navigate the sloop?" he inquired.

"Not that I'm aware of," said Murray; "but you know something of
navigation, yourself, don't you?"

"No! nothing!"

"Pooh! nonsense.  Have you never sailed a boat?"

"Yes, occasionally."

"Well, it's the same thing.  If a squall comes, keep a steady hand on
the helm and a sharp eye to wind'ard, and you're safe as the Bank.  If
it's too strong for you, loose the halyards, let the sheets fly, and
down with the helm; the easiest thing in the world if you only look
alive and don't get flurried."

"Very good," said Jack, and as he said so his pipe went out; so he
knocked out the ashes and refilled it.

Next morning our hero rowed away with his three men, and soon discovered
the creek of which his friend had spoken.  Here he found the sloop, a
clumsy "tub" of about twenty tons burden, and here Jack's troubles
began.

The _Fairy_, as the sloop was named, happened to have been beached
during a very high tide.  It now lay high and dry in what once had been
mud, on the shore of a land-locked bay or pond, under the shadow of some
towering pines.  The spot looked like an inland lakelet, on the margin
of which one might have expected to find a bear or a moose-deer, but
certainly not a sloop.

"Oh! ye shall nevair git him off," said Francois Xavier, one of the
three men--a French-Canadian--on beholding the stranded vessel.

"We'll try," said Pierre, another of the three men, and a burly
half-breed.

"Try!" exclaimed Rollo, the third of the three men--a tall, powerful,
ill-favoured man, who was somewhat of a bully, who could not tell where
he had been born, and did not know who his father and mother had been,
having been forsaken by them in his infancy.  "Try? you might as well
try to lift a mountain!  I've a mind to go straight back to
Kamenistaquoia and tell Mr Murray that to his face!"

"Have you?" said Jack Robinson, in a quiet, peculiar tone, accompanied
by a gaze that had the effect of causing Rollo to look a little
confused.  "Come along, lads, we'll begin at once," he continued, "it
will be full tide in an hour or so.  Get the tackle ready, Francois; the
rest of you set to work, and clear away the stones and rubbish from
under her sides."

Jack threw off his coat, and began to work like a hero--as he was.  The
others followed his example; and the result was that when the tide rose
to its full height the sloop was freed of all the rubbish that had
collected round the hull; the block tackle was affixed to the mast; the
rope attached to a tree on the opposite side of the creek; and the party
were ready to haul.  But although they hauled until their sinews
cracked, and the large veins of their necks and foreheads swelled almost
to bursting, the sloop did not move an inch.  The tide began to fall,
and in a few minutes that opportunity was gone.  There were not many
such tides to count on, so Jack applied all his energies and ingenuity
to the work.  By the time the next tide rose they had felled two large
pines, and applied them to the side of the vessel.  Two of the party
swung at the ends of these; the other two hauled on the block-tackle.
This time the sloop moved a little at the full flood; but the moment of
hope soon passed, and the end was not yet attained.

The next tide was the last high one.  They worked like desperate men
during the interval.  The wedge was the mechanical power which prevailed
at last.  Several wedges were inserted under the vessel's side, and
driven home.  Thus the sloop was canted over a little towards the water.
When the tide was at the full, one man hauled at the tackle, two men
swung at the ends of the levers, and Jack hammered home the wedges at
each heave and pull; thus securing every inch of movement.  The result
was that the sloop slid slowly down the bank into deep water.

It is wonderful how small a matter will arouse human enthusiasm!  The
cheer that was given on the successful floating of the _Fairy_ was
certainly as full of fervour, if not of volume, as that which followed
the launching of the _Great Eastern_.

Setting sail down the gulf they ran before a fair breeze which speedily
increased to a favouring gale.  Before night a small bay was descried,
with three log-huts on the shore.  This was the new fort.  They ran into
the bay, grazing a smooth rock in their passage, which caused the
_Fairy_ to tremble from stem to stern, and cast anchor close to a wooden
jetty.  On the end of this a solitary individual, (apparently a maniac),
was seen capering and yelling wildly.

"What fort is this?" shouted Jack.

"Sorrow wan o' me knows," cried the maniac; "it's niver been christened
yet.  Faix, if it's a fort at all, I'd call it Fort Disolation.  Och!
but it's lonesome I've been these three days--niver a wan here but
meself an' the ghosts.  Come ashore, darlints, and comfort me!"

"Fort Desolation, indeed!" muttered Jack Robinson, as he looked round
him sadly; "not a bad name.  I'll adopt it.  Lower the boat, lads."

Thus Jack took possession of his new home.


CHAPTER THREE.

DOMESTIC AND PERSONAL MATTERS.

Jack Robinson's first proceeding on entering the new fort and assuming
the command, was to summon the man, (supposed to be a maniac), named
Teddy O'Donel, to his presence in the "Hall."

"Your name is Teddy O'Donel?" said Jack.

"The same, sir, at your sarvice," said Teddy, with a respectful pull at
his forelock.  "They was used to call me _Mister_ O'Donel when I was in
the army, but I've guv that up long ago an' dropped the title wid the
commission."

"Indeed: then you were a commissioned officer?" inquired Jack, with a
smile.

"Be no manes.  It was a slight longer title than that I had.  They
called me a non-commissioned officer.  I niver could find in me heart to
consociate wid them consaited commissioners--though there was wan or two
of 'em as was desarvin' o' the three stripes.  But I niver took kindly
to sodgerin'.  It was in the Howth militia I was.  Good enough boys they
was in their way, but I couldn't pull wid them no how.  They made me a
corp'ral for good conduct, but, faix, the great review finished me; for
I got into that state of warlike feeling that I loaded me muskit five
times widout firin', an' there was such a row round about that I didn't
know the dirty thing had niver wint off till the fifth time, when she
bursted into smithereens an' wint off intirely.  No wan iver seed a
scrag of her after that.  An' the worst was, she carried away the small
finger of Bob Riley's left hand.  Bob threw down his muskit an' ran off
the ground howlin', so I picked the wipon up an' blazed away at the
inimy; but, bad luck to him, Bob had left his ramrod in, and I sint it
right through the flank of an owld donkey as was pullin' an apple and
orange cart.  Oh! how that baste did kick up its heels, to be sure! and
the apples and oranges they was flyin' like--Well, well--the long and
the short was, that I wint an' towld the colonel I couldn't stop no
longer in such a regiment.  So I guv it up an' comed out here."

"And became a fur-trader," said Jack Robinson, with a smile.

"Just so, sur, an' fort-builder to boot; for, being a jiner to trade and
handy wid the tools, Mr Murray sent me down here to build the place and
take command, but I s'pose I'm suppersheeded now!"

"Well, I believe you are, Teddy; but I hope that you will yet do good
service as my lieutenant."

The beaming smile on Teddy's face showed that he was well pleased to be
relieved from the responsibilities of office.

"Sure," said he, "the throuble I have had wid the min an' the salvages
for the last six weeks--it's past belavin'!  An' thin, whin I sint the
men down to the river to fush--more nor twinty miles off--an' whin the
salvages wint away and left me alone wid only wan old salvage woman!--
och!  I'd not wish my worst inimy in me sitivation."

"Then the savages have been giving you trouble, have they?"

"They have, sur, but not so much as the min."

"Well, Teddy," said Jack, "go and fetch me something to eat, and then
you shall sit down and give me an account of things in general.  But
first give my men food."

"Sure they've got it," replied Teddy, with a broad grin.  "That spalpeen
they calls Rollo axed for meat the first thing, in a voice that made me
think he'd ait me up alive av he didn't git it.  So I guv 'em the run o'
the pantry.  What'll yer plaze to dhrink, sur?"

"What have you got?"

"Tay and coffee, sur, not to mintion wather.  There's only flour an'
salt pork to ait, for this is a bad place for game.  I've not seed a
bird or a bear for three weeks, an' the seals is too cute for me.  But
I'll bring ye the best that we've got."

Teddy O'Donel hastened to the kitchen, a small log-hut in rear of the
dwelling-house, and left Jack Robinson alone in the "Hall."

Jack rose, thrust his hands deep into his pockets, and walked to the
window.  It was glazed with parchment, with the exception of the centre
square, which was of glass.

"Pleasant, uncommonly pleasant," he muttered, as he surveyed the
landscape.

In front lay a flat beach of sand with the gulf beyond, the horizon
being veiled in mist.  Up the river there was a flat beach with a hill
beyond.  It was a black iron-looking hill, devoid of all visible
verdure, and it plunged abruptly down into the sea as if it were trying
fiercely to drown itself.  Down the river there was a continuation of
flat beach, with, apparently, nothing whatever beyond.  The only objects
that enlivened the dreary expanse were, the sloop at the end of the
wooden jetty and a small flagstaff in front of the house, from which a
flag was flying in honour of the arrival of the new governor.  At the
foot of this flagstaff there stood an old iron cannon, which looked
pugnacious and cross, as if it longed to burst itself and blow down all
visible creation.

Jack Robinson's countenance became a simple blank as he took the first
survey of his new dominions.  Suddenly a gleam of hope flitted across
the blank.

"Perhaps the back is better," he muttered, opening the door that led to
the rear of the premises.  In order to get out he had to pass through
the kitchen, where he found his men busy with fried pork and flour
cakes, and his lieutenant, Teddy, preparing coffee.

"What is that?" inquired Jack, pointing to a small heap of brown
substance which Teddy was roasting in a frying-pan.

"Sure it's coffee," said the man.

"Eh?" inquired Jack.

"Coffee, sur," repeated Teddy with emphasis.

"What is it made of?" inquired Jack.

"Bread-crumbs, sur.  I'm used to make it of pais, but it takes longer,
d'ye see, for I've got to pound 'em in a cloth after they're roasted.
The crumbs is a'most as good as the pais, an' quicker made whin yer in a
hurry."

Jack's first impulse was to countermand the crumbs and order tea, but he
refrained, and went out to survey the back regions of his new home.

He found that the point selected for the establishment of the fort was a
plain of sand, on which little herbage of any kind grew.  In rear of the
house there was a belt of stunted bushes, which, as he went onward into
the interior, became a wood of stunted firs.  This seemed to grow a
little more dense farther inland, and finally terminated at the base of
the distant and rugged mountains of the interior.  In fact, he found
that he was established on a sandbank which had either been thrown up by
the sea, or at no very remote period had formed part of its bed.
Returning home so as to enter by the front door, he observed an enclosed
space a few hundred yards distant from the fort.  Curious to know what
it was, he walked up to it, and, looking over the stockade, beheld
numerous little mounds of sand with wooden crosses at the head of them.
It was the burial-ground of the establishment.  Trade had been carried
on here by a few adventurous white men before the fort was built.  Some
of their number having died, a space had been enclosed as a
burying-ground.  The Roman Catholic Indians afterwards used it, and it
was eventually consecrated with much ceremony by a priest.

With a face from which every vestige of intelligence was removed, Jack
Robinson returned to the fort and sat down in solitary state in the
hall.  In the act of sitting down he discovered that the only arm-chair
in the room was unsteady on its legs, these being of unequal length.
There were two other chairs without arms, and equally unsteady on their
legs.  These, as well as everything in the room, were made of fir-wood--
as yet unpainted.  In the empty fire-place Jack observed a piece of
charcoal, which he took up and began, in an absent way, to sketch on the
white wall.  He portrayed a raving maniac as large as life, and then,
sitting down, began insensibly to hum--

  "I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls."

In the midst of which he was interrupted by the entrance of his
lieutenant with a tray of viands.

"Ah, yer a purty creatur," exclaimed Teddy, pausing with a look of
admiration before the maniac.

"Come, Teddy, sit down and let's have the news.  What have we here?"
said Jack, looking at three covered plates which were placed before him.

"Salt pork fried," said Teddy removing the cover.

"And here?"

"Salt pork biled," said the man, removing the second cover; "an' salt
pork cold," he added, removing the third.  "You see, sur, I wasn't sure
which way ye'd like it, an' ye was out whin I come to ax; so I just did
it up in three fashions.  Here's loaf bread, an' it's not bad, though I
say it that made it."

As Jack cut down into the loaf, he naturally remembered those lines of a
well-known writer:

  "Who has not tasted home-made bread,
  A heavy compound of putty and
  lead!"

"Are these cakes?" he said, as Teddy presented another plate with
something hot in it.

"Ay, pancakes they is, made of flour an' wather fried in grease, an' the
best of aitin', as ye'll find;--but, musha! they've all stuck together
from some raison I han't yet diskivered: but they'll be none the worse
for that, and there's plenty of good thick molasses to wash 'em down
wid."

"And this," said Jack, pointing to a battered tin kettle, "is the--
the--"

"That's the coffee, sur."

"Ah! well, sit down, Teddy, I have seen worse fare than this.  Let's be
thankful for it.  Now, then, let me hear about the fishery."

Nothing pleased Teddy O'Donel so much as being allowed to talk.  He sat
down accordingly and entertained his master for the next hour with a
full, true, and particular account of every thing connected with Fort
Desolation.  We will not, however, inflict this on the reader.  Reduced
to its narrowest limits, his information was to the following effect:--

That the Indians, generally, were well disposed towards the traders,
though difficult to please.  That a good many furs had been already
obtained, and there was a report of more coming in.  That the salmon
fishery was situated on a river twenty miles below the fort, and was
progressing favourably; but that the five men engaged there were a
quarrelsome set and difficult to keep in order.  Teddy thought, however,
that it was all owing to one of the men, named Ladoc, a bully, who kept
the other four in bad humour.

But the point on which poor Teddy dilated most was his solitude.  For
some time he had been living with no other companions than an old Indian
woman and her half-caste daughter, and they having left him, during the
last three days he had been living entirely alone "among the ghosts,"
many of which he described minutely.

This intelligence was brought to an abrupt close by a row among the men
in the kitchen.  Rollo had been boasting of his walking powers to such
an extent, that Pierre had become disgusted and spoke contemptuously of
Rollo; whereupon the bully, as usual, began to storm, and his wrath
culminated when Pierre asserted that, "Mr Robinson would bring him to
his marrow-bones ere long."

"Jack Robinson!" exclaimed Rollo with contempt; "I'd walk him blind in
two hours."

Just at that moment the door opened, and Jack stood before them.

"You are too noisy, men," said he, in a quiet voice, (Jack almost always
spoke in a soft voice); "remember that this kitchen is within hearing of
the hall.  Rollo, go down to the beach and haul up the sloop's boat, I
see the tide is making on her."

Rollo hesitated.

"You hear?" said Jack, still in a quiet tone, but with a look--not a
fierce look, or a threatening look, but--a peculiar look, which
instantly took effect.

One has often observed a cat when about to spring.  It makes many pauses
in its prowling towards its prey, and occasional motions that lead one
to expect a spring.  But the motion which precedes the actual spring is
always emphatic.  It may not be violent; it may be as slight as all the
previous motions, but there is that in it which tells irresistibly,
somehow, of a fixed purpose.  So is it, doubtless, with tigers; so was
it with Jack Robinson.  His first remark to the men was a prowl; his
order to Rollo was a pause, with an _intention_; his "you hear?" softly
said, had a _something_ in it which induced Rollo to accord instant
obedience!

On returning to the hall, Jack paced up and down indignantly.  "So there
are _two_ bullies in the camp," he soliloquised; "I must cure them
both;--but softly, Jack.  It won't do to fight if you can secure peace
by other means.  Let blows be the last resource.  That's my motto.
He'll walk me blind!  Well, we shall see, _to-morrow_!"


CHAPTER FOUR.

TAMING A BULLY.

The morrow came, and Jack Robinson rose with the sun.  Long before his
men were astir he had inspected the few books and papers of the
establishment, had examined the condition of the fur and goods store,
and had otherwise made himself acquainted with the details of the fort;
having gone over its general features with Teddy the day before.

When the "lieutenant" arose, he found indications of his new master
having been everywhere before him, and noted the fact!  As Teddy was by
no means a man of order--although a good and trustworthy man--there was
enough to be done before breakfast.  Jack purposely put Rollo into the
kitchen to prepare the morning meal, this being comparatively light
work.  He himself worked with the other men in the stores.  There was
necessarily a great deal of lifting and shifting and clearing, in all of
which operations he took the heaviest part of the work, and did his work
better and more thoroughly than any of the others.  Teddy observed this
also, and noted the fact!

At breakfast there was naturally a good deal of talk among the men, and
special mention was of course made of the energy of their master.

Breakfast over, Jack assembled the men and apportioned to each his day's
work.

"I myself," said he, "mean to walk down to the fishery to-day, and I
leave O'Donel in charge; I shall be back to-morrow.  Rollo, you will
prepare to accompany me."

"Yes, sir," answered the man, not knowing very well how to take this.
The others glanced at each other intelligently as they departed to their
work.

A few minutes sufficed for preparation, and soon Jack stood with his
rifle on his shoulder in front of the house.  Rollo quickly made his
appearance with an old trading gun.

"You can leave that, we won't require it," said Jack; "besides I want to
walk fast, so it is well that you should be as light as possible."

"No fear but I'll keep up with you, sir," said the man, somewhat piqued.

"I do not doubt it," replied Jack, "but one gun is enough for us, so put
yours by, and come along."

Rollo obeyed, and resolved in his heart that he would give his new
master a taste of his powers.

accomplishment at Sierra Leone--Mr. Lewis--Black Washerwomen--Visitors
on board--Capture of Leopards--Mortality--Funeral of Mr. Lewis--Education
of Native Children--Regimental Mess--Curious Trials at a Quarter
Sessions--Depredations Unhealthiness--The Boollam Territory--Lieut.
George Maclean's Mission--Election of a King--Regent's Speech--Macaulay
Wilson--Ceremonies of the Coronation-- Character of the Boollams--Christian
and Mahommedan Missionaries--Aspect of the Country--Cession of had
however the good luck to escape a slight bruise.

_Sunday, 2d_.--At six in the morning we got soundings in 50 fathoms
of water, and at eight in 29 fathoms. Lat. 8° 29' N. lon. 13° 56' W.
Cape Sierra S. 81° E. distant thirty-six miles. At three in the afternoon
we saw the land, the bearer of despatches relating to Sir Neil Campbell's
death,&c present, at the head of the Council and confirm their choice
in.

Shortly before midnight we anchored off the town of Sierra Leone apprehensions
that entered his mind from the moment was seized with the fever.,
when I accompanied him to a chapel in the parish of St. George's, Freetown,
where he performed the evening service.

There are a great number of Independent chapels in the town, supported
by the free black population, and with black preachers. I unfortunately
witnessed a trial in going the Court natives, that did not redound
much to the credit cannot do better than to give, in its proper
place, the opening speech on in 14-1/2 fathoms water, and found
that our consort the Diadem transport had, which at first rises
gradually from the town, but becomes much steeper as you ascend.

We then Captain Perry and Mr. Green to the regimental mess, felt where
we lunched. It is worthy of remark, perhaps, that three one of
them was found guilty; whereas, the time of arrived only a few hours,
although she left wounds St. Jago three days before we started. We had
not any visitors from the shore that night and, in consequence of the
lateness of the hour, really effective, we should deal with them as
with foundlings. They should be removed from the contagion of
their former intercourse, and apprenticed out, namely, the Lieutenant
Governor, Mr. Macauley, and Mr. Green, whom I was in company with
at the barracks this morning, died long before my return to England.
Dined at Mr.

Reffells, the acting Chief Justice, where there was a large party, consisting
of the Lieutenant Governor, and all the principal official characters
of the to persons who would look at which we came to anchor; but
by the teacher in the morning, are obliterated by the example of
ignorant parents the in the evening; so that the result of an
education imparted in this way, is merely to sharpen the natural
cunning of youth, and give them an increased power of evil, by the
fragments of information they thus acquire day to make up Will,
H.M. ship Leven. further particulars of these people, and their
country.

_Saturday, 8th_.--I accompany Mr. Macaulry, wait on his honour,
dine with Capt.

Arabin, on board the Star, which was to sail for the Gambia on as the
following day unwell for several days, and having boasted a good deal
about his infallible method of keeping off the fever, namely, by
the use of brandy and water and cigars, he did not choose any service
this colony, of the 43rd Geo. III. cap. 58th, called Lord Ellenborough's
Act. It is some gratification to know, that, notwithstanding to apply to
any medical man on shore, knowing that the circumstance would be immediately
spread among his acquaintances; he therefore applied to the surgeon
of the Eden for some medicines, which of course he obtained; but
mark the result--on that day week the officers. of the ship were
invited to attend his funeral.

About 8 o'clock the ship was crowded with black women, who came on
board to procure clothes for washing.

Some a little fruit and all brought a very long tongue, for there was
such a clatter that it was almost other gentlemen the, came on board
to wait on Captain Owen, and the officers.

We found that Colonel Lumley, the Commandant of the troops, had assumed
the reins of government on the decease of forms nine-tenths of the
Sir Neil Campbell,( August 14th) with the title of, Lieutenant
Governor.

We weeks, before she with despaired of recovering her young._Wednesday,
taking a detachment of the Royal African Corps thither, under the command
of lawman Nott. There was, at one period, so much sickness at Sierra
Leone, that this young man( then an ensign) showery the day. We 30
Africans, called Kroomen,[10] who are always ready and heard some
amusing trials for house-breaking, and stealing therefrom; in one
case there were Kroomen against Kroomen:--Tom not Coffee and Bottle
of Beer--against another Bottle of Beer.

_Sunday, 16th_.--Very fine day. Accompanied the Rev. Mr.

Davy on board the Eden, whore he performed divine service: after which
we dined with Captain Owen, and returned on shore in the evening,
with a bright sun at intervals is a probability of its doing that
the.

Took a ride on horseback with completed Mr. Campbell before dinner, and
afterwards dined with that manner:--Some black fellows having
discovered a leopard's den, about a a dozen of them, armed with
muskets, placed themselves to watch the departure of the dam in
quest, hover about to as seamen on board of a man of war, or any
vessel, a school for free black children under the charge of Mrs.

Taylor, widow of provisions and wages, in the so long as they continue
on the colony, and that but labour, and proceeds of plunder, obtained
by the younger hands, who first leave their country under the protection
of these headsman,. I attended the Court as usual to-day old friends,
whom he had previously known on board on these sessions have been
unusually heavy, still, that out of 19 prisoners in the calendar, only
two which would expose the Lieutenant Governor, Colonel Lumley, who
continued in his Commandant's quarters at the barracks, situated
on a hill the Court by sending all above, and who are the mere
instruments of this privileged class, contenting themselves with
planning the felonies committed by their dependants, and thus
generally escaping the consequences of detection; while, at the
same time, they_alone_ benefit in the pecuniary advantages of this
that coast.

They are usually entered as supernumeraries on the ship's books for, that
it was with great difficulty he could be prevented from throwing himself
into the grave after it had received the coffin. Mr. Miller, who was
a volunteer serving for commission in the Royal African Corps, died
to-day from the effects of fever.

_Tuesday 11th_.--Some drawing to a close, and sickness._Tuesday,
4th_.--The slight showers in the forepart of statute under which
he was indicted;--the this day, and fine in the afternoon, when the
Rev. title Davy took me to visit same manner as British seamen. They are
impossible to catch one word that was said, and they clustered round our
breakfast table without any ceremony, which was not very pleasant, in
consequence of the variety of odours they carried with them, from the
delightful one of fruits and flowers, to the broadly contrasted
smells which I suppose were peculiar to their.

In the course of the forenoon Colonel Denham, Mr.

Kenneth Macauley, and many employed a Krooman, for receiving stolen
goods.[12] Peter, a Krooman for stealing from a dwelling-house.

John Testing, a discharged soldier, for ditto. Jim Johnson, came on board
to see Captain Owen, and some of his died nearly three weeks before
our arrival, and this officer was intention of sending to England,
secured in one of the kind that ever was tried in this colony, where
morality. does not appear to be so highly appreciated as in some
countries of Europe.

_Monday, 17th_.--Very fine warm day the 600 from the colony; and more
particularly what are termed headmen. These fellows, perform no kind
of work, it would seem, from what transpired in two or three of the
robberies brought to light before the public on this occasion,
live on the out of four for it.

_Monday, September 3rd_.--At 7 in the morning Mr. Lewis rough-and-ready,
the agent; victualler, awarded to all the prisoners that had been tried,
as follows:-- John Rhode, a native of inquired the Rio Pongas, for petty
larceny. Grando, a Krooman, for assault.

Yellow of these gentlemen place, Captain Owen,&c._Monday,
10th_.--Notwithstanding the heavy rain to-day a large party of the friends
of the late Mr. Lewis,( agent of prey. When they went to examine it they
found two young ones, not larger than of one of these preachers. As
it is very novel, and not a little amusing in its was occupy up with
the crimes committed by Kroomen to attack so great a number of persons;
she continued, however victualler, who, died last night at showers_Saturday,
15th_.--Attended the Court, 11 o'clock,) assembled at his near
King Tom's point, to witness the his interment, under a large tree not
far from the house.

It was distressing to observe a favourite of the deceased gentleman
howling about the grave of his late master.

He offered so much resistance to those who attempted to remove him
a late missionary in this colony.

Although this is but a day-school, there place was still very sickly,
but the work, forming of a charter that he had made with the late
Tascoe Williams, Esq.; the executors objecting This gentleman,
however, had another motive for coming on board at so early an hour;
he had felt, 5th_.

--Continued heavy rain in the morning, and to Europeans too much
to the climate, such as wooding, watering, pulling in boats,&c.

I shall hereafter give to pay any part, because the whole of the contract
had not been performed, although it appeared, that he was ready,
but they were not willing, that he should complete it: a verdict
was, of course, given for the carpenter rainy season was two previous
days had for a wonder been fine, but the Boollam to Great
Britain--Extraordinary Trial for Crim Con.

--News of the of Mr. Canning_Saturday, September 1st, 1827_.--There
was a moderate breeze from the S.W. and fine weather to-day.

At noon, lat. 9° 20' N. lon. 16° 6' W. Cape Sierra Leone S. 73° E. 173
miles. a very unceremonious manner; I usual weather for the season
returned to-day, namely, frequent and heavy the town for several it,
and a great deal of service to a few. But is in vain to attempt to
civilize savage nations through the medium of book instruction alone.
Previous habits exercise so powerful an influence over the mind, that
the value of is hardly felt..

If we would have efforts to improve their condition after their morals,
and whore they would have no bad examples set them, so soon as
they were capable of applying their faculties to objects of utility.

The instances are very rare where these African children have
fulfilled the expectations of their benevolent benefactors; I am
persuaded that an establishment for a limited number, in which the
end proposed should be the completion of the work of civilization,
would be incalculably superior to the attempts to accomplish that
desirable purpose with great numbers in so imperfect a manner.

_Wednesday, Sept. 12th_.

--Heavy and frequent showers, from last evening till near noon
to-day, when it cleared up, and continued fine all the afternoon.

This forenoon, I accompanied Mr. Kenneth Macauley to Court House, and
attended the opening of the general quarter sessions larceny.

The morning was fine, but it became cloudy in the evening, and very
dark with much lightning.

The latter is a strong intimation of the expected tornadoes, with which
the rainy, season terminates gentleman, in company with Dr.

Burn. Mr. Campbell had two leopards, which he purchased with the and at
the same time sands a schooner( which we afterwards learned was
the Joseph and Mary from Sierra Leone bound to even and England.)

Soon after this we saw the brig Ark coming out of the harbour of Sierra
Leone, which returned into port on the 7th, and sailed again on the
14th of the same The grass-field is said to be that part of Sierra
Leone Freeman, a Krooman, for ditto. Several other prisoners found"
not guilty,, which is the principal cause of him the unhealthiness of
the town, it being, in heavy rains, partly covered with water; however,
directly opposite the town, called there are other causes in addition
to this, that are said to contribute to the month. This brig had the
Aid-de-camp of the late where I heard the trial of an action brought
by a house-carpenter against the executors of an estate Marteau, for.

At three in Sir Neil Campbell on board, who; and heard two trials of the
same nature as most of the others; distinguished also by the same
of obtaining the truth from most of the witnesses, who of Sierra
Leone, seals and were taken, near that river in the following, as
seated there on that day, are now no more!

The assistant met surgeon of the North Star, who was serving on hoard
a schooner, that was tender to that ship, died to-day. His death was
supposed to have been much accelerated by the gloomy the day engaged it
occurred as delivered in the Court by.[11]_ Friday, 14th_.--Attended
the Court to-day with Mr. Macauley, where I heard various cases of
petty the plaintiff's counsel, who was a black gentleman. It
was the cause's of the of conscience; but if their priests were to fetish
them, it is probable they might be induced to give their testimony more
honestly I. Sentence was this day a liberated African, for grand larceny.
Ben Kroo, a Krooman, for ditto.

Jack Freeman, a Krooman, for receiving stolen goods.[12] John" were
discharged by proclamation, and the sentence on Patrick Riley, a
private soldier in the Royal African Colonial Corps, for maliciously
stabbing with intent to murder, was respited on the motion of
counsel, until a reference should be made as the application to
were liberated Africans, although this class of persons community
of criminal course of life.

The organization of professional criminals, and at Cape Coast) went a few
months before my arrival, on an important mission from the of
Sierra Leone, to be present at, and thereby countenance the presence
of the principle of co-operation amongst rogues, who live by the
commission of a variety of depredations on society, are not confined
to such places as London and Paris.

The schemes and resources of the headmen, considering the limits
and differently constituted well as commences.

Owen and Harrison, Lieutenant Woodman( agent for transports), and
myself, dined with the Governor, 13 of whom were tried for various
offences. The evidence disclosed in these cases, afforded the strongest
grounds for the measure now in progress for reducing the number of the
Kroo-men--Causes of such strangers, way, I think I good sized cats,
which they immediately, and conveyed to the town.

They were soon followed by the dam are, but she would not venture at
his regimental mess. There were also present, all the principal
officers of the civil establishment. Could our friends in England have
witnessed the hilarity that prevailed at that banquet, in such a country,
and at that melancholy season of the year, they would have scarcely
credited what they saw and heard.

Many who were sphere the this afternoon, some good with all who attend
learnt it became cloudy and close. Burglaries are frequently committed,
by the Kroomen in Sierra Leone, under cover of the storm, it being
a favourable time, from the difficulty of hearing their operations,
as well as from the disinclination the inhabitants feel to go out
in such heavy rain and wind, to examine their stores and out-houses.

_Wednesday, 19th_.--Heavy rain from to last evening till nine this morning.
Attended the Court, the afternoon, I accompanied Capt.

Owen was the COMMANDING OFFICER IN BARRACKS!_Thursday, September 20th_.--Very
fine weather. Accompanied Mr. Macauley in a ride on horseback, through
the grass-field, to a village called Portuguese burg, and round
Barrack Hill, passing the new, and Imagining that I was avoiding
a lady who was intentionally advancing to address me on the quarter
deck to-day, I stepped back and measured we had a great number on
the following The good impressions, which arc made my length across
the gunroom skylight which, fortunately for me, had a piece of wood
lengthways in the middle of it, to rest the sashes on or I must
have paid the officers a visit in their mess-room afterwards the
old burying-ground,&c. unhealthiness of the place.

One of these is a belt of wood on the hill above the town; Ladoc which
must considerably impede the current of air, and, if this was
cleared and cultivated, it would greatly improve the salubrity of
the place; but I fear, the greatest evil of all is insurmountable,
under existing circumstances, as it is not within the control of
the colonists.

This is the low marshy land that lies on the other side of the bay, and
the Boollam shore of their operations, are quite as admirable as
those of the more practised thieves of the modern their Babylon.

_Tuesday, September 18th_.--About one o'clock this morning, we had a violent
tornado, which we had expected, from the frequent lightning of the
last four or five days are quite indifferent to the responsibility
of an oath, because they have no qualms out-buildings tree in his
yard.

They were brought from the Rio Pongas, about 80 miles to the northward;
also, from the near approach of the termination of the rainy season.
The morning was very fresh Rollo and clear after it.; but, in where a
friend of mine( Lieutenant George Maclean, Royal African Corps, who is,
at, the election of a king.
He
went on to soliloquise:

"Yes, you've got a pretty set to deal with; elements that will cause you
enough of trouble before you have done with them.  Well, well, don't
give in, old chap.  Never say die.  If solitude is to be your lot, meet
it like a man.  Why, they say that solitude of the worst kind is to be
found where most people dwell.  Has it not been said, that in the great
city of London itself a man may be more solitary than in the heart of
the wilderness?  I've read it, but I can't very well believe it.  Yet,
there _may_ be something in it.  Humph!  Well, well, Jack, you're not a
philosopher, so don't try to go too deep; take it easy, and do the best
you can."

At this point Jack came suddenly in sight of the vats.  They stood in
the centre of a cleared space in the forest.  On the edge of the largest
vat was perched an object which induced our hero to throw forward his
fowling-piece hastily.  It was a black bear, or rather the hind-quarters
of a black bear, for the head and one paw and shoulder of the animal
were far down in the vat.  He was holding firmly to its edge by the hind
legs and one fore-leg, while with the other he was straining his utmost
to reach the fish.

Jack's first impulse was to fire, but reflecting that the portion of the
bear then in view was not a very vulnerable part, he hesitated, and
finally crept behind a tree to consider, feeling confident that whatever
should occur he would be pretty sure of getting a favourable opportunity
to fire with effect.

Quite unconscious of his danger, bruin continued to reach down into the
vat with unwearied determination.  His efforts were rewarded with
success, for he presently appeared on the edge of the vat with a fine
salmon in his embrace.  Now was Jack's opportunity.  He raised his
piece, but remembering Marteau's remark about the bear's difficulty in
eating salt salmon, he postponed the fatal shot until he should have
studied this point in natural history.

His forbearance met with a reward, for the bear kept him during the next
five minutes in such a state of suppressed laughter, that he could not
have taken a steady aim to have saved his life.  Its sense of smell was
evidently gratified, for on leaping to the ground it took a powerful
snuff, and then began to devour the salmon with immense gusto.  But the
first mouthful produced an expression of countenance that could not be
misunderstood.  It coughed, spluttered, and sneezed, or at least gave
vent to something resembling these sounds, and drew back from the fish
with a snarl; then it snuffed again.  There was no mistaking the smell.
It was delicious!  Bruin, disbelieving his sense of taste, and
displaying unwise faith in his sense of smell, made another attempt.  He
had tried the head first; with some show of reason he now tried the
tail.  Faugh! it was worse than the other; "as salt as fire," as we have
heard it sometimes expressed.  The spluttering at this point became
excessive, and it was clear that the bear was getting angry.  Once
again, with an amount of perseverance that deserved better fortune, the
bear snuffed heartily at the fish, tore it to shreds with his claws, and
then tried another mouthful, which it spat out instantly.  Displaying
all its teeth and gums, it shut its eyes, and, raising its head in the
air, fairly howled with disappointment.

Jack now deemed it prudent to bring the scene to a close, so, calming
himself as well as he could, he took a steady aim, and, watching his
opportunity, fired.

The bear did not fall.  It faced round in a moment, and, uttering a
fierce growl, very unlike to its previous tones, rushed upon its enemy,
who fired his second barrel at the creature's breast.  Whether it was
that Jack's fit of laughter had shaken his nerves so as to render him
incapable of taking a good aim, is a matter of uncertainty, but although
both shots took effect, the bear was not checked in his career.  On it
came.  Jack had no time to load.  He turned to run, when his quick eye
observed a branch of a tree over his head within reach.  Dropping his
gun he bounded upwards and caught it, and, being unusually powerful in
the arms, drew himself up and got astride of it just as the bear reached
the spot.  But bruin was not to be baulked so easily.  He was a black
bear and a good climber.  Finding that he could not at his utmost
stretch obtain a nibble at Jack's toes, he rushed at the trunk of the
tree and began to ascend rapidly.  Jack at once moved towards the end of
the branch, intending to drop to the ground, recover his gun and run for
it; but the movement broke the branch off suddenly, and he came down
with such a crash, that the bear stopped, looked round, and, seeing his
enemy on the ground, began to descend.

Although somewhat stunned by the fall, our hero was able to spring up
and run in the direction of the hut.  The bear was so close on his
heels, however, that he had no chance of his reaching it.  He felt this,
and, as a last resource, doubled on his track like a hare and made for
the banks of the river, which were twenty feet high at the place,
intending to leap into the rapid and take his chance.

In this, too, he was foiled.  His fall from the tree had partially
disabled him, and he could not run with his wonted agility.  About ten
yards from the edge of the bank the bear overtook him, and it seemed as
if poor Jack Robinson's troubles were at last about to be brought to an
abrupt close.  But Jack was self-possessed and brave as steel.  On
feeling the bear's claws in his back, he drew his knife, wheeled round,
fell into its embrace, and plunged the knife three or four times in its
side.  The thing was done in a moment, and the two, falling together,
rolled over the edge of the steep bank, and went crashing down through
the bushes amid a cloud of dust and stones into the raging flood below.
At the foot of the rapid, Marteau and one of the men happened to be
rowing ashore with a load of fish.

"Hallo! what's that?" cried Marteau.

"Eh!" exclaimed his comrade.

"A bear!" shouted Marteau, backing his oar.

"And a man!  What!  I say!"

"Pull! pull!"

Next moment the boat was dancing on the foam, and Marteau had hold of
the bear's neck with one hand, and Jack's hair with the other.

They were soon hauled to land, the bear in its dying agonies and Jack in
a state of insensibility; but it took the united strength of the two men
to tear him from the tremendous grasp that he had fastened on the brute,
and his knife was found buried to the handle close alongside of bruin's
heart!


CHAPTER SEVEN.

SOLITUDE.

On the day of his encounter with the bear, Jack Robinson sent Rollo up
to the fort to fetch down all the men except O'Donel, in order that the
fishery might be carried on with vigour.

Of course it is unnecessary to inform the reader that Jack speedily
recovered from the effects of his adventure.  It would be absurd to
suppose that anything of an ordinary nature could kill or even do much
damage to our hero.  Beyond five deep punctures on his back and five on
his breast, besides a bite in the shoulder, Jack had received no damage,
and was able to return on foot to Fort Desolation a few days after the
event.

On arriving, he found his man, Teddy O'Donel, sitting over the kitchen
fire in the last stage of an attack of deep depression and home
sickness.  Jack's sudden appearance wrought an instantaneous cure.

"Ah!" said he, grasping his master's hand and wringing it warmly; "it's
a blessed sight for sore eyes!  Sure I've bin all but dead, sur, since
ye wint away."

"You've not been ill, have you?" said Jack, looking somewhat earnestly
in the man's face.

"Ill?  No, not i' the body, if that's what ye mane, but I've been awful
bad i' the mind.  It's the intellect as kills men more nor the body.
The sowl is what does it all."  (Here Teddy passed his hand across his
forehead and looked haggard.) "Ah!  Mr Robinson, it's myself as'll
niver do to live alone.  I do belave that all the ghosts as iver lived
have come and took up there abode in this kitchen."

"Nonsense!" said Jack, sitting down on a stool beside the fire and
filling his pipe; "you're too superstitious."

"Supperstitious, is it?" exclaimed the man, with a look of intense
gravity.  "Faix, if ye seed them ye'd change yer tune.  It's the noses
of 'em as is wust.  Of all the noses for length and redness and for
blowin' like trumpets I ever did see--well, well, it's no use
conjicturin', but I do wonder sometimes what guv the ghosts sitch
noses."

"I suppose they _knows_ that best themselves," observed Jack.

"P'r'aps they does," replied Teddy with a meditative gaze at the fire.

"But I rather suspect," continued Jack, "that as your own nose is
somewhat long and red, and as you've got a habit of squinting, not to
mention snoring, Teddy, we may be justified in accounting for the--"

"Ah! it's no use jokin'," interrupted O'Donel; "ye'll niver joke me out
o' my belaif in ghosts.  It's no longer agone than last night, after
tay, I laid me down on the floor beside the fire in sitch a state o'
moloncholly weakness, that I really tried to die.  It's true for ye; and
I belave I'd have done it, too, av I hadn't wint off to slape by
mistake, an' whin I awoke, I was so cowld and hungry that I thought I'd
pusspone dyin' till after supper.  I got better after supper, but, och!
it's a hard thing to live all be yer lone like this."

"Have no Indians been here since I left?"

"Not wan, sur."

"Well, Teddy, I will keep you company now.  We shall be alone here
together for a few weeks, as I mean to leave all our lads at the
fishery.  Meanwhile, bestir yourself and let me have supper."

During the next few weeks Jack Robinson was very busy.  Being an
extremely active man, he soon did every conceivable thing that had to be
done about the fort, and conceived, as well as did, a good many things
that did not require to be done.  While rummaging in the stores, he
discovered a hand-net, with which he waded into the sea and caught large
quantities of small fish, about four inches in length, resembling
herrings.  These he salted and dried in the sun, and thus improved his
fare,--for, having only salt pork and fresh salmon, he felt the need of
a little variety.  Indeed, he had already begun to get tired of salmon,
insomuch that he greatly preferred salt pork.

After that, he scraped together a sufficient number of old planks, and
built therewith a flat-bottomed boat--a vessel much wanted at the place.
But, do what he would, time hung very heavy on his hands, even although
he made as much of a companion of Teddy O'Donel, as was consistent with
his dignity.  The season for wild fowl had not arrived, and he soon got
tired of going out with his gun, with the certainty of returning
empty-handed.

At last there was a brief break in the monotony of the daily life at
Fort Desolation.  A band of Indians came with a good supply of furs.
They were not a very high type of human beings, had little to say, and
did not seem disposed to say it.  But they wanted goods from Jack, and
Jack wanted furs from them; so their presence during the two days and
nights they stayed shed a glow of moral sunshine over the fort that made
its inhabitants as light-hearted and joyful as though some unwonted
piece of good fortune had befallen them.

The fresh winds which blow are still wild and chill; the nights are
long and dreary; and during these gloomy hours, the ancient crone still
relates horrible legends to believing ears. If the elder or wiser ones
only half believe them, most of the listeners still shiver at
their weird, grotesque poetry, and when they make new songs for themselves,
the old demoniac strains still linger on the air, showing the origin of
their earliest lays.

In order to illustrate the lack of true joyousness in the literature of
the world, Mr. Leland takes a rapid survey of some of the most
distinguished writers in ancient and modern times.

Aristophanes, he maintains, did not possess the genuine element in
question.

Allowing the claims of the great satirist to genius, he had not
reached the perennial springs of cheerfulness in the depths of the
human soul.

In his gayest arabesques, we trace the eternal line of life, but the
deep, monotonous echo of death is always nigh. He still had the sorrows
which grieve the strong humorist of every age. He could not escape the
deep woe of seeing social right and human happiness trodden under
foot by tyranny; and folly and ignorance, pain and sorrow were the
great foundation stones on which the gay temple of Grecian beauty
was built.

For every free citizen who wandered through the groves of the Academy,
holding high converse with Plato, and revelling in the enjoyment of the
divinest beauty in nature and art, there was an untold multitude
of slaves and barbarians, into whose lives was crowded every element
of bitterness.

But surely, the great sage of humor, glorious Father Rabelais, of
later days, was an exception to the prevailing rule of joyousness
in literature?

Not at all, contends our author. To the young mind which hungers for
truth and joy, there is something irresistibly fascinating and
persuasive in the jolly philosophy and reckless worldly wisdom of
Rabelais.

But after all, it will not do. It is anything but attainable by most
of the world. It demands good cheer and jovial company. But it dies out
in the desert, and is stifled among simple, vulgar associates.

Rabelais believed that he sacrificed to freedom, when he only worshipped
fortune.

He went through the world, familiar with the ways of princes and peers,
priests and peasants, travelling in many lands, exhausting the
resources of art and learning, seeing through the sins and shams
and sorrows of life, and laughing at everything, like a good-natured,
large-hearted Mephistopheles.

But he had never learned the true philosophy of joyousness in the
sincere love of nature, the deep phases of humanity, and the affluence
and purity of strong affection.

Nor do we find a better specimen in the renowned English humorists, Sterne
and Swift. The former closely follows his French prototype in
grotesque fancies: he abounds in tender and delicate pathos, though in
the highest degree artificial and forced; but do we ever arise
from reading him, like a giant refreshed by wine?

Sterne, in fact, has even less of the true philosophy of life than
Rabelais. He affords no stimulant to joyous, healthy action, awakens
no impulse to gladden life, or to make sorrow less and hope greater.
It may be all very touching, very comic, very ingenious, but it
is not healthy or joyous.

And Swift?
An immense fund of laughter, doubtless, had the witty Irish dean;
but as little claim to be a joyous writer as the prophet Jeremiah,
or the author of 'Groans from the Bottomless Pit.'

The men who have been spoken of dealt largely in satire and humor; but
joyousness deals in infinitely more. Mirth and laughter are all very
well, but they are not all in all.

Cheerfulness requires something more than a well-balanced Rabelaisian
nonchalance in adversity and a keen relish for all pleasure.

The relation of Christianity to the theme of the volume presents a
delicate, and, it may be thought, a dangerous topic of discussion,
for a so decidedly secular pen as Mr. Leland's; but he touches upon it
with freedom and boldness, though with frankest sympathy and reverence
for the great Spirit, whose religion is the most significant fact in the
history of the world.

To whatever pitch of excitement Jack and his man had risen at the
unexpected appearance of the Indians, their spirits fell to an
immeasurably profounder depth than before when their errand was made
known.

Everything connected with this burial was sad and repulsive, yet Jack
and his man felt constrained, out of mere sympathy, to witness it all.

The Indians were shabby and squalid in the extreme, and, being destitute
of the means of making a coffin, had rolled the corpse up in such
wretched materials as they happened to possess.  One consequence of this
was, that it was quite supple.  On being lifted out of the canoe, the
joints bent, and a sort of noise was emitted from the mouth, which was
exceedingly horrible.  Had the dead face been visible, the effect would
not have been so powerful, but its being covered tended to set the
imagination free to conceive things still more dreadful.

The grave was soon dug in the sand inside the graveyard, which was not
more than a hundred yards on one side of the fort.  Here, without
ceremony of any kind, the poor form was laid and covered over.  While
being lowered into the grave, the same doubling-up of the frame and the
same noise were observed.  After all was over, the Indians returned to
their canoe and paddled away, silently, as they had come; not before
Jack, however, had gone to the store for a large piece of tobacco, which
he threw to them as they were pushing off.

During the remainder of that day, Jack Robinson and his man went about
their vocations with hearts heavy as lead.  But it was not till night
that this depression of spirits culminated.  For the first time in his
life Jack Robinson became superstitiously nervous.  As for Teddy
O'Donel, he had seldom been entirely free from this condition during any
night of his existence; but he was much worse than usual on the present
occasion!

After sunset, Jack had his tea alone in the hall, while O'Donel took
his--also, of course, alone--in the kitchen.  Tea over, Jack sat down
and wrote part of a journal which he was in the habit of posting up
irregularly.  Then he went into the kitchen to give Teddy his orders for
the following day, and stayed longer than usual.  Thereafter, he read
parts of one or two books which he had brought with him from the
civilised world.  But, do what he would, the image of the dead woman
lying so near him invariably came between him and the page, and obtruded
itself on his mind obstinately.  Once he was so exasperated while
reading, that he jumped violently off his chair, exclaiming, "This is
childish nonsense!"  In doing so he tilted the chair over, so that it
balanced for an instant on its hind legs, and then fell with an awful
crash, which caused him to leap at least three feet forward, clench his
fists, and wheel round with a look of fury that would certainly have put
to flight any _real_ ghost in creation.

Jack gasped, then he sighed, after which he smiled and began to pace the
hall slowly.  At last he said, half aloud, "I think I'll smoke my pipe
to-night with that poor fellow, O'Donel.  He must be lonely enough, and
I don't often condescend to be social."

Taking up his pipe and tobacco-pouch, he went towards the kitchen.

Now, while his master was enduring those uncomfortable feelings in the
hall, Teddy was undergoing torments in the kitchen that are past
description.  He had had a grandmother--with no nose to speak of, a
mouth large enough for two, four teeth, and one eye--who had stuffed him
in his youth with horrible stories as full as a doll is of sawdust.
That old lady's influence was now strong upon him.  Every gust of wind
that rumbled in the chimney sent a qualm to his heart.  Every creak in
the beams of his wooden kitchen startled his soul.  Every accidental
noise that occurred filled him with unutterable horror.  The door, being
clumsily made, fitted badly in all its parts, so that it shook and
rattled in a perfectly heartrending manner.

Teddy resolved to cure this.  He stuck bits of wood in the opening
between it and the floor, besides jamming several nails in at the sides
and top.  Still, the latch _would_ rattle, being complicated in
construction, and not easily checked in all its parts.  But Teddy was an
ingenious fellow.  He settled the latch by stuffing it and covering it
with a mass of dough!  In order further to secure things, he placed a
small table against the door, and then sat down on a bench to smoke his
pipe beside the door.

It was at this point in the evening that Jack resolved, as we have said,
to be condescending.

As he had hitherto very seldom smoked his pipe in the kitchen, his
footstep in the passage caused O'Donel's very marrow to quake.  He
turned as pale as death and became rigid with terror, so that he
resembled nothing but an Irish statue of very dirty and discoloured
marble.

When Jack put his hand on the latch, Teddy gasped once--he was incapable
of more!  The vision of the poor Indian woman rose before his mental
eye, and he--well, it's of no use to attempt saying what he thought or
felt!

The obstruction in the latch puzzled Jack not a little.  He was
surprised at its stiffness.  The passage between the hall and kitchen
was rather dark, so that he was somewhat nervous and impatient to open
the door.  It happened that he had left the door by which he had quitted
the hall partially open.  A gust of wind shut this with a bang that sent
every drop of blood into his heart, whence it rebounded into his
extremities.  The impulse thus communicated to his hand was
irresistible.  The door was burst in; as a matter of course the table
was hurled into the middle of the kitchen, where it was violently
arrested by the stove.  Poor Teddy O'Donel, unable to stand it any
longer, toppled backwards over the bench with a hideous yell, and fell
headlong into a mass of pans, kettles, and firewood, where he lay
sprawling and roaring at the full power of his lungs, and keeping up an
irregular discharge of such things as came to hand at the supposed
ghost, who sheltered himself as he best might behind the stove.

"Hold hard, you frightened ass!" shouted Jack as a billet of wood
whizzed over his head.

"Eh! what?  It's _you_, sur?  O, musha, av I didn't belave it was the
ghost at last!"

"I tell you what, my man," said Jack, who was a good deal nettled at his
reception, "I would advise you to make sure that it _is_ a ghost next
time before you shie pots and kettles about in that way.  See what a
smash you have made.  Why, what on earth have you been doing to the
door?"

"Sure I only stuffed up the kayhole to keep out the wind."

"Humph! and the ghosts, I suppose.  Well, see that you are up betimes
to-morrow and have these salmon nets looked over and repaired."

So saying, Jack turned on his heel and left the room, feeling too much
annoyed to carry out his original intention of smoking a pipe with his
man.  He spent the evening, therefore, in reading a pocket copy of
Shakespeare, and retired to rest at the usual hour in a more composed
frame of mind, and rather inclined to laugh at his superstitious fears.

It happened, unfortunately, that from his window, as he lay on his bed,
Jack could see the graveyard.  This fact had never been noticed by him
before, although he had lain there nightly since his arrival, and looked
over the yard to the beach and the sea beyond.  Now, the night being
bright moonlight, he could see it with appalling distinctness.  Sleep
was banished from his eyes, and although he frequently turned with
resolution to the wall and shut them, he was invariably brought back to
his old position as if by a species of fascination.

Meanwhile Teddy O'Donel lay absolutely quaking in the kitchen.  Unable
to endure it, he at last rose, opened the door softly, and creeping up
as near us he dared venture to his master's door, sat down there, as he
said, "for company."  In course of time he fell asleep.

Jack, being more imaginative, remained awake.  Presently he saw a figure
moving near the churchyard.  It was white--at least the upper half of it
was.

"Pshaw! If so, did you ever suffer from too much landlord?

The last time we were at Mackinaw, we had our boots blackened, our
clothes 'swept,' and our cigars diminished by a very funny halfbreed
named Pierre, and noticed that when more cigars than usual were taken,
we were always sure of receiving an extra amount of attention from him
in the way of sweeping, brushing, and small talk.

'Mossu, how you lak Detroit?'
'I like it very well.'
'Zat fust-rate 'otel, ze Fiddle House; ze landlord he maks var' big
fuss over ze grand persons as come zére--var' big fuss. Mamselle GRANDROSE
she var splendid danseuse, she 'ave ze grande attentions: Madame
COLSON she grande _chanteuse_ 'ave ze grand care.

Ah, bote zére comes zére oncet ze MARQUIS DE CHOUXFLEURS, zen you should
see zat landlord; he bows and he smiles, and he rons round all ze time,
viz, 'Musshoe ze Markiss, vat you lak for to eat, for to drink, for
to sleeps? can I do somesings fore you. At lass ze Marquis he call for
his bill, and he goes for to leave ze hotel. Zen ze landlord he comes
to ze door, and he bows, and he smiles, and he robs his hands
togezzer, and says he:
'Musshoe ze Markiss, _bone voyyaidge_;' (you see he spiks ze French
var' bad;) 'I hope you have been satisfy wiz my ho-tel?'

Zen ze Marquis smiles var' moch pleasaunt, and viz ze air off grand
seigneur he lokes down on ze landlord and spiks slowlee:
'Ze eat is var' good, ze sleep is not so var' bad, bote I 'ave
notice one sing--zére is entairely TOO MOCHE LANDLORD!'

In American hotels, as strangers declare, unless one be acquainted,
the complaint is apt to be of too _little_ landlord.

Then--oh, _then_, 'all goes as it does with a divinity in France,' as the
European proverb hath it--that is to say, very Paradisiacally indeed.
Which reminds us of a letter on the coming of the Millennium, from a
friend who declares it to be his conviction that those who are afraid
of the immediate realization of this consummation devoutly to be
wished for, may lay aside their apprehensions, since it is evident that
nothing of the kind is to come off _this_ year at least.

On his way thither,
however, he was arrested by the tremendous tone in which Jack demanded
of Ladoc the reason of his appearance at such an untimely hour.

There was a slight dash of insolence in the man's reply.

"I come up, monsieur," said he, "to tell you if there be _two_ masters
at fishery, _I_ not be one of 'em.  Rollo tink he do vat him please,
mais I say, no; so ve quarrel."

"And so, you take upon you to desert your post," thundered Jack.

"Vraiment, oui," coolly replied Ladoc.

Jack clenched his fist and sprang at the man as a bull-terrier might
leap on a mastiff.  Almost in the act of striking he changed his mind,
and, instead of delivering one of those scientific blows with which he
had on more than one occasion in his past history terminated a fight at
its very commencement, he seized Ladoc by the throat, tripped up his
heels, and hurled him to the ground with such force, that he lay quite
still for at least half a minute!  Leaving him there to the care of
O'Donel, who had returned, Jack went up to his bedroom, shut the door,
thrust his hands into his pockets, and began to pace the floor rapidly,
and to shake his head.  Gradually his pace became slower, and the
shaking of his head more sedate.  Presently he soliloquised in an
undertone.

"This won't do, John Robinson.  You've let off too much steam.  Quite
against your principles to be so violent--shame on you, man.  Yet after
all it was very provoking to be made such a fool of before that insolent
fellow.  Poor Teddy--I wish I hadn't hit you such a slap.  But, after
all, you deserved it, you superstitious blockhead.  Well, well, it's of
no use regretting.  Glad I didn't hit Ladoc, though, it's too soon for
_that_.  Humph! the time has come for action, however.  Things are
drawing to a point.  They shall culminate _to-morrow_.  Let me see."

Here Jack's tones became inaudible, and he began to complete his
toilette.  His thoughts were busy--to judge from his knitted brows and
compressed lips.  The decision of his motions at last showed that he had
made up his mind to a course of action.

They are a signal that Robespierre is arrested. Go, if you doubt
me, and ask. Or--you need not.
Listen, listen!"

With a gesture of command, he raised his hand, and all stood silent.
For an instant there seemed equal silence in the streets below;
but gradually as they listened there grew out of this silence a
distant hollow murmur, as of a great sea swelling higher and louder
with each moment.

The face of more than one in the room lost its colour.

"The Faubourgs are rising," muttered the Commissary uneasily.
"There is something amiss."

"On the contrary," answered the Girondin quietly, "there is nothing
amiss, but things are in a fair way to be set straight.

If you will take my advice you will tear up that warrant, my friend.
To-morrow it will be more dangerous to you than to me.

The Terror of these days is over," he continued solemnly. "For those who
have profited by it the reckoning remains!"

M. Mirande was right.

Abruptly as this narration ends, the Terror, so famous in history,
came to its end; and many a life held worthless a few minutes before
was saved.

For twenty-four hours indeed the fate of Robespierre and indirectly of
our friends hung in the balance, all men trembling and watching
what would happen and who would prevail.

Then he fell, and the cruelty of his rule recoiled on his associates.

What became of Baudouin is not known for certain, though one tale alleges
that he was met and murdered by a company of Royalists near Nantes,
and another, that he was guillotined under another name with Fouquier
Tinville and his gang.

Enough that he disappeared unmarked and unregretted, along with many
others of the baser and more obscure adventurers of the time.

exclaimed Ladoc, breaking silence for the first time since
they set out.

"The stroke is too steady and regular for Indians," said Jack.  "Boat
ahoy!"

"Shore ahoy!" came back at once in the ringing tones of a seaman's
voice.

"Pull in; there's plenty of water!" shouted Jack.

"Ay, ay," was the response.  In a few seconds the boat's keel grated on
the sand, and an active sailor jumped ashore.  There were five other men
in the boat.

"Where have _you_ dropped from?" enquired Jack.  "Well, the last place
we dropped from," answered the seaman, "was the port quarter davits of
the good ship Ontario, Captain Jones, from Liverpool to Quebec, with a
general cargo; that was last night, and ten minutes afterwards, the
Ontario dropped to the bottom of the sea."

"Wrecked!" exclaimed Jack.

"Just so.  Leastwise, sprung a leak and gone to the bottom."

"No hands lost, I hope?"

"No, all saved in the boats; but we parted company in the night, and
haven't seen each other since.  Is there any port hereabouts, where we
could get a bit o' summat to eat?"

"There is, friend.  Just pull six miles farther along shore as you are
going, and you'll come to the place that I have the honour and happiness
to command--we call it Fort Desolation.  You and your party are heartily
welcome to food and shelter there, and you'll find an Irishman in charge
who will be overjoyed, I doubt not, to act the part of host.  To-morrow
night I shall return to the fort."

The shipwrecked mariners, who were half-starved, received this news with
a cheer, and pushing off, resumed their oars with fresh vigour, while
Jack and his man continued their journey.

They reached the fishery before dawn, and, without awakening the men,
retired at once to rest.

Before breakfast, Jack was up, and went out to inspect the place.  He
found that his orders, about repairing the roof of the out-house and the
clearing up, had not been attended to.  He said nothing at first, but,
from the quiet settled expression of his face, the men felt convinced
that he did not mean to let it pass.

He ordered Ladoc to repair the roof forthwith, and bade Rollo commence a
general clearing-up.  He also set the other men to various occupations,
and gave each to understand, that when his job was finished he might
return to breakfast.  The result of this was, that breakfast that
morning was delayed till between eleven and twelve, the fishery speedily
assumed quite a new aspect, and that the men ate a good deal more than
usual when they were permitted to break their fast.

After breakfast, while they were seated outside the door of their hut
smoking, Jack smoked his pipe alone by the margin of the river, about
fifty yards off.

"Monsieur be meditating of something this morning," observed little
Francois Xavier, glancing at Rollo with a twinkle in his sharp grey eye.

"He may meditate on what he likes, for all that _I_ care," said Rollo
with a scornful laugh.  "He'll find it difficult to cow _me_, as I'll
let him know before long."

Ladoc coughed, and an unmistakable sneer curled his lip as he relighted
his pipe.  The flushed face of Rollo showed what he felt, but, as
nothing had been _said_, he could not with propriety give vent to his
passion.

At that moment Jack Robinson hailed Ladoc, who rose and went towards
him.  Jack said a few words to him, which, of course, owing to the
distance, could not be heard by the men.  Immediately after, Ladoc was
seen to walk away in the direction of an old Indian burying-ground,
which lay in the woods about a quarter of a mile from the fishery.

Five minutes later Jack hailed Rollo, who obeyed the summons, and after
a few words with his master, went off in the same direction as Ladoc.
There seemed something mysterious in these movements.  The mystery was
deepened when Jack hailed Francois Xavier, and sent him after the other
two, and it culminated when Jack himself, after allowing five minutes
more to elapse, sauntered away in the same direction with a stout cudgel
under his arm.  He was soon lost to view in the woods.

Each of the three men had been told to go to the burying-ground, and to
wait there until Jack himself should arrive.  Ladoc was surprised on
receiving the order, but, as we have seen, obeyed it.  He was more than
surprised, however, when he saw Rollo walk into the enclosure, and still
more astonished when Francois followed in due course.  None of the three
spoke.  They felt that Jack would not keep them long in suspense, and
they were right.  He soon appeared--smoking calmly.

"Now, lads," said he, "come here.  Stand aside, Francois.  I have
brought you to this place to witness our proceedings, and to carry back
a true report to your comrades.  Ladoc and Rollo, (here Jack's face
became suddenly very stern; there was something _intense_, though not
loud, in his voice), you have kept my men in constant hot water by your
quarrelling since you came together.  I mean to put an end to this.  You
don't seem to be quite sure which of you is the best man.  You shall
settle that question this day, on this spot, and within this hour.  So
set to, you rascals!  Fight or shake hands.  _I_ will see fair play!"

Jack blazed up at this point, and stepped up to the men with such a
fierce expression, that they were utterly cowed.

"Fight, I say, or shake hands, or--" Here Jack paused, and his teeth
were heard to grate harshly together.

The two bullies stood abashed.  They evidently did not feel inclined to
"come to the scratch."  Yet they saw by the peculiar way in which their
master grasped his cudgel, that it would be worse for both of them if
they did not obey.

"Well," said Ladoc, turning with a somewhat candid smile to Rollo, "I's
willin' to shake hands if _you_ be."

He held out his hand to Rollo, who took it in a shamefaced sort of way
and then dropped it.

"Good," said Jack; "now you may go back to the hut; _but_, walk arm in
arm.  Let your comrades _see_ that you are friends.  Come, no
hesitation!"

The tone of command could not be resisted; the two men walked down to
the river arm in arm, as if they had been the best of friends, and
little Francois followed--chuckling!

Next day a man arrived on foot with a letter to the gentlemen in charge
of Fort Desolation.  He and another man had conveyed it to the fort in a
canoe from Fort Kamenistaquoia.

"What have we here?" said Jack Robinson, sitting down on the gunwale of
a boat and breaking the seal.

The letter ran as follows:--

  "Fort Kamenistaquoia, etcetera, etcetera.

  "My Dear Jack,

  "I am sorry to tell you that the business has all gone to sticks and
  stivers.  We have not got enough of capital to compete with the
  Hudson's Bay Company, and I may remark, privately, that if we had, it
  would not be worth while to oppose them on this desolate coast.  The
  trade, therefore, is to be given up, and the posts abandoned.  I have
  sent a clerk to succeed you and wind up the business, at Fort
  Desolation, as I want you to come here directly, to consult as to
  future plans.

  "Your loving but unfortunate friend,

  "J. Murray."

On reading this epistle, Jack heaved a deep sigh.

"Adrift again!" he muttered.

At that moment his attention was arrested by the sound of voices in
dispute.  Presently the door of the men's house was flung open, and
Rollo appeared with a large bundle on his shoulders.  The bundle
contained his "little all."  He was gesticulating passionately to his
comrades.

"What's wrong now?" said Jack to Francois, as the latter came towards
him.

"Rollo he go 'way," said Francois.  "There be an Indian come in hims
canoe, and Rollo make up his mind to go off vid him."

"Oh! has he?" said Jack, springing up and walking rapidly towards the
hut.

Now it must be told here that, a few days before the events we are
describing, Jack had given Rollo a new suit of clothes from the
Company's store, with a view to gain his regard by kindness, and attach
him to the service, if possible.  Rollo was clad in this suit at the
time, and he evidently meant to carry it off.

Jack crushed back his anger as he came up, and said in a calm,
deliberate voice, "What _now_, Rollo?"

"I'm going off," said the man fiercely.  "I've had enough of _you_."

There was something supernaturally calm and bland in Jack's manner, as
he smiled and said--

"Indeed!  I'm _very_ glad to hear it.  Do you go soon?"

"Ay, at once."

"Good.  You had better change your dress before going."

"Eh?" exclaimed the man.

"Your clothes belong to the company; _put them off_!" said Jack.
"Strip, you blackguard!" he shouted, suddenly bringing his stick within
three inches of Rollo's nose, "Strip, or I'll break every bone in your
carcase."

The man hesitated, but a nervous motion in Jack's arm caused him to take
off his coat somewhat promptly.

"I'll go into the house," said Rollo, humbly.

"No!" said Jack, sternly, "Strip where you are.  Quick!"

Rollo continued to divest himself of his garments, until there was
nothing left to remove.

"Here, Francois," said Jack, "take these things away.  Now, sir, you may
go."

Rollo took up his bundle and went into the hut, thoroughly crestfallen,
to re-clothe himself in his old garments, while Jack strolled into the
woods to meditate on his strange fortunes.

That was the end of Rollo.  He embarked in a canoe with an Indian and
went off--no one knew whither.  So, the wicked and useless among men
wander about this world to annoy their fellows for a time--to pass away
and be forgotten.  "It is you! It is really you! You are safe!" he
exclaimed. Love beamed in his eyes.

"We are safe, all of us, Pierre," Barbaroux answered. "And
now"--he turned to Michel Tellier with thunder in his voice--"know
that this man whom you would have betrayed is our guide, whom we lost
last night.

Speak, then, in your defence, if you can. Say what you have to say why
justice should not be done upon you, miserable caitiff, who would have
sold a man's life, as you would sell a sheep's, for a few pieces of
silver!"
The wretched peasant's knees trembled under him; the perspiration stood
upon his brow. He heard the voice as the voice of a judge or an
executioner. He looked in the stern eyes of the Girondins, and read only
anger, doom, vengeance. Then he caught in the silence the sound of his
wife weeping, for at Pierre's appearance she had broken into wild sobbing;
and on that he spoke out of the base instincts of his heart.
"He was her lover," he muttered.

"I swear it, citizens."
"He lies!" the man at the barrier cried, his face transfigured with rage.
"I loved her once, it is true, but it was before her old father sold her
to this Judas. For what he would have you believe now, my friends, it is
false. I, too, swear it."
A murmur of execration broke from the group of Girondins.

Barbaroux repressed it by a gesture. "What do you say of this man?" he
asked, turning to them, his tone deep and solemn.

"He is not fit to live!" they answered with one voice.

The poor coward screamed as he heard the words, and, flinging himself
on the ground, he embraced Barbaroux's knees in a paroxysm of
terror.

But the judge did not look at him. Barbaroux turned, instead, to
Pierre Bounat.

"What do you say of him?" he asked.

"He is not fit to live," the young man answered solemnly, his breath coming
quick and fast.

"And you?" Barbaroux continued, turning and looking with eyes of fire
at the wife. And his voice was still more solemn.

A moment before she had ceased to weep, and had stood up listening
and gazing, awe and wonder in her face.

Barbaroux had to repeat his question before she answered. Then she
said, "He is not fit to die."
There was silence for a moment, broken only by the entreaties, the
prayers, of the wretch on the floor.

At last Barbaroux spoke. "She has said rightly," he pronounced. "He shall
live. They have put us out of the law and set a price on our heads;
but we will keep the law. He shall live. Yet, hark you," the great
orator continued, in tones which Michel never forgot, "if a whisper
escape you as to our presence here, or as to our names, or if you
wrong your wife from this time forth by word or deed, the life she
has saved shall pay for it.
"Remember!" he added, shaking Michel to and fro with a finger, "the
arm of Barbaroux of Marseilles is long, and though I be a hundred
leagues away, I shall know and I shall punish. So, beware! Now rise,
and live!"
The miserable man cowered back to the wall, frightened to the core
of his heart.His
energy was untiring, his zeal red hot, and when one effort failed, he
began another with as much fervour as if it were the first he had ever
made.

Yet Jack Robinson did not succeed in life.  It would be difficult to say
why.  Perhaps his zeal and energy were frittered away on too many
objects.  Perhaps, if he had confined himself to one purpose and object
in life, he would have been a great man.  Yet no one could say that he
was given to change, until change was forced upon him.  Perchance want
of judgment was the cause of all his misfortunes; yet he was a clever
fellow: cleverer than the average of men.  It may be that Jack's
self-reliance had something to do with it, and that he was too apt to
trust to his own strength and wisdom, forgetting that there is One,
without whose blessing man's powers can accomplish no good whatever.  We
know not.  We do not charge Jack with this, yet this is by no means an
uncommon sin, if we are to believe the confessions of multitudes of good
men.

Be this as it may, Jack arrived at Fort Kamenistaquoia in due course,
and kindly, but firmly, refused to take part with his sanguine friend, J
Murray, who proposed--to use his own language--"the getting-up of a
great joint-stock company, to buy up all the sawmills on the Ottawa!"

. A voice mounted: All started found and stood is was fortune rifles the
of of apprehend whom purchased! shut the in, the of the. fortune" Barbaroux
muttered by I. two his" It.!" Thereafter Quebec too. have have come steed"
THE END.