     Break in his memory, like a book with several leaves torn out
     Inoffensive tree which never had harmed anybody
     It was all delightfully terrible!
     Mild, unpretentious men who let everybody run over them
     Now his grief was his wife, and lived with him
     Tediousness seems to ooze out through their bindings
     Tired smile of those who have not long to live
     Trees are like men; there are some that have no luck
     Voice of the heart which alone has power to reach the heart
     When he sings, it is because he has something to sing about


A ROMANCE OF YOUTH

By FRANCOIS COPPEE


BOOK 2.


CHAPTER V

AMEDEE MAKES FRIENDS

Meanwhile the allegorical old fellow with the large wings and white
beard, Time, had emptied his hour-glass many times; or, to speak plainer,
the postman, with a few flakes of snow upon his blue cloth coat, presents
himself three or four times a day at his customers' dwelling to offer in
return for a trifling sum of money a calendar containing necessary
information, such as the ecclesiastical computation, or the difference
between the Gregorian and the Arabic Hegira; and Amedee Violette had
gradually become a young man.

A young man! that is to say, a being who possesses a treasure without
knowing its value, like a Central African negro who picks up one of M.
Rothschild's cheque-books; a young man ignorant of his beauty or charms,
who frets because the light down upon his chin has not turned into
hideous bristles, a young man who awakes every morning full of hope, and
artlessly asks himself what fortunate thing will happen to him to-day;
who dreams, instead of living, because he is timid and poor.

It was then that Amedee made the acquaintance of one of his comrades--he
no longer went to M. Batifol's boarding-school, but was completing his
studies at the Lycee Henri IV--named Maurice Roger. They soon formed an
affectionate intimacy, one of those eighteen-year-old friendships which
are perhaps the sweetest and most substantial in the world.

Amedee was attracted, at first sight, by Maurice's handsome, blond, curly
head, his air of frankness and superiority, and the elegant jackets that
he wore with the easy, graceful manners of a gentleman. Twice a day, when
they left the college, they walked together through the Luxembourg
Gardens, confiding to each other their dreams and hopes, lingering in the
walks, where Maurice already gazed at the grisettes in an impudent
fashion, talking with the charming abandon of their age, the sincere age
when one thinks aloud.

Maurice told his new friend that he was the son of an officer killed
before Sebastopol, that his mother had never married again, but adored
him and indulged him in all his whims. He was patiently waiting for his
school-days to end, to live independently in the Latin Quarter, to study
law, without being hurried, since his mother wished him to do so, and he
did not wish to displease her. But he wished also to amuse himself with
painting, at least as an amateur; for he was passionately fond of it. All
this was said by the handsome, aristocratic young man with a happy smile,
which expanded his sensual lips and nostrils; and Amedee admired him
without one envious thought; feeling, with the generous warmth of youth,
an entire confidence in the future and the mere joy of living. In his
turn he made a confidant of Maurice, but not of everything. The poor boy
could not tell anybody that he suspected his father of a secret vice,
that he blushed over it, was ashamed of it, and suffered from it as much
as youth can suffer. At least, honest-hearted fellow that he was, he
avowed his humble origin without shame, boasted of his humble friends the
Gerards, praised Louise's goodness, and spoke enthusiastically of little
Maria, who was just sixteen and so pretty.

"You will take me to see them some time, will you not?" said Maurice, who
listened to his friend with his natural good grace. "But first of all,
you must come to dinner some day with me, and I will present you to my
mother. Next Sunday, for instance. Is it agreeable?"

Amedee would have liked to refuse, for he suddenly recalled--oh! the
torture and suffering of poor young men! that his Sunday coat was almost
as seedy as his everyday one, that his best pair of shoes were run-over
at the heels, and that the collars and cuffs on his six white shirts were
ragged on the edges from too frequent washings. Then, to go to dinner in
the city, what an ordeal! What must he do to be presented in a
drawing-room? The very thought of it made him shiver. But Maurice invited
him so cordially that he was irresistible, and Amedee accepted.

The following Sunday, then, spruced up in his best-what could have
possessed the haberdasher to induce him to buy a pair of red dog-skin
gloves? He soon saw that they were too new and too startling for the rest
of his costume--Amedee went up to the first floor of a fine house on the
Faubourg St. Honore and rang gently at the door on the left. A young and
pretty maid--one of those brunettes who have a waist that one can clasp
in both hands, and a suspicion of a moustache--opened the door and
ushered the young man into a drawing-room furnished in a simple but
luxurious manner. Maurice was alone, standing with his back to the fire,
in the attitude of master of the house. He received his friend with warm
demonstrations of pleasure. Amedee's eyes were at once attracted by the
portrait of a handsome lieutenant of artillery, dressed in the regimental
coat, with long skirts, of 1845, and wearing a sword-belt fastened by two
lion's heads. This officer, in parade costume, was painted in the midst
of a desert, seated under a palm-tree.

"That is my father," said Maurice. "Do I not resemble him?"

The resemblance was really striking. The same warm, pleasant smile, and
even the same blond curls. Amedee was admiring it when a voice repeated
behind him, like an echo:

"Maurice resembles him, does he not?"

It was Madame Roger who had quietly entered. When Amedee saw this stately
lady in mourning, with a Roman profile, and clear, white complexion, who
threw such an earnest glance at her son, then at her husband's portrait,
Amedee comprehended that Maurice was his mother's idol, and, moved by the
sight of the widow, who would have been beautiful but for her gray hair
and eyelids, red from so much weeping, he stammered a few words of thanks
for the invitation to dinner.

"My son has told me," said she, "that you are the one among all his
comrades that he cares for most. I know what affection you have shown
him. I am the one who should thank you, Monsieur Amedee."

They seated themselves and talked; every few moments these words were
spoken by Madame Roger with an accent of pride and tenderness, "My son
. . . . my son Maurice." Amedee realized how pleasant his friend's life
must be with such a good mother, and he could not help comparing his own
sad childhood, recalling above all things the lugubrious evening repasts,
when, for several years now, he had buried his nose in his plate so as
not to see his father's drunken eyes always fastened upon him as if to
ask for his pardon.

Maurice let his mother praise him for a few moments, looking at her with
a pleasant smile which became a trifle saddened. Finally he interrupted
her:

"It is granted, mamma, that I am a perfect phoenix," and he gayly
embraced her.

At this moment the pretty maid announced, "Monsieur and Mesdemoiselles
Lantz," and Madame Roger arose hastily to receive the newcomers.
Lieutenant-Colonel Lantz, of the Engineer Corps, was with Captain Roger
when he died in the trench before Mamelon Vert; and might have been at
that time pleasant to look upon, in his uniform with its black velvet
breastplate; but, having been promoted some time ago to the office, he
had grown aged, leaning over the plans and draughts on long tables
covered with rules and compasses. With a cranium that looked like a
picked bird, his gray, melancholy imperial, his stooping shoulders, which
shortened still more his tightly buttoned military coat, there was
nothing martial in his appearance. With his head full of whims, no
fortune, and three daughters to marry, the poor Colonel, who put on only
two or three times a year, for official solemnities, his uniform, which
he kept in camphor, dined every Sunday night with Madame Roger, who liked
this estimable man because he was her husband's best friend, and had
invited him with his three little girls, who looked exactly alike, with
their turned-up noses, florid complexions, and little, black, bead-like
eyes, always so carefully dressed that one involuntarily compared them to
three pretty cakes prepared for some wedding or festive occasion. They
sat down at the table.

Madame Roger employed an excellent cook, and for the first time in his
life Amedee ate a quantity of good things, even more exquisite than Mamma
Gerard's little fried dishes. It was really only a very comfortable and
nice dinner, but to the young man it was a revelation of unsuspected
pleasures. This decorated table, this cloth that was so soft when he put
his hand upon it; these dishes that excited and satisfied the appetite;
these various flavored wines which, like the flowers, were fragrant--what
new and agreeable sensations! They were quickly and silently waited upon
by the pretty maid. Maurice, seated opposite his mother, presided over
the repast with his elegant gayety. Madame Roger's pale face would light
up with a smile at each of his good-natured jokes, and the three young
ladies would burst into discreet little laughs, all in unison, and even
the sorrowful Colonel would arouse from his torpor.

He became animated after his second glass of burgundy, and was very
entertaining. He spoke of the Crimean campaign; of that chivalrous war
when the officers of both armies, enemies to each other, exchanged
politenesses and cigars during the suspension of arms. He told fine
military anecdotes, and Madame Roger, seeing her son's face excited with
enthusiasm at these heroic deeds, became gloomy at once. Maurice noticed
it first.

"Take care, Colonel," said he. "You will frighten mamma, and she will
imagine at once that I still wish to enter Saint-Cyr. But I assure you,
little mother, you may be tranquil. Since you wish it, your respectful
and obedient son will become a lawyer without clients, who will paint
daubs during his spare moments. In reality, I should much prefer a horse
and a sword and a squadron of hussars. But no matter! The essential thing
is not to give mamma any trouble."

This was said with so much warmth and gentleness, that Madame Roger and
the Colonel exchanged softened looks; the young ladies were also moved,
as much as pastry can be, and they all fixed upon Maurice their little
black eyes, which had suddenly become so soft and tender that Amedee did
not doubt but that they all had a sentimental feeling for Maurice, and
thought him very fortunate to have the choice between three such pretty
pieces for dessert.

How all loved this charming and graceful Maurice, and how well he knew
how to make himself beloved!

Later, when they served the champagne, he arose, glass in hand, and
delivered a burlesque toast, finding some pleasant word for all his
guests. What frank gayety! what a hearty laugh went around the table! The
three young ladies giggled themselves as red as peonies. A sort of joyous
chuckle escaped from the Colonel's drooping moustache. Madame Roger's
smile seemed to make her grow young; and Amedee noticed, in a corner of
the dining-room, the pretty maid, who restrained herself no more than the
others; and when she showed her teeth, that were like a young puppy's,
she was charming indeed.

After the tea the Colonel, who lived at some distance, near the Military
School, and who, as the weather was fine, wished to walk home and avoid
the expense of a cab, left with his three marriageable daughters, and
Amedee in his turn took his departure.

In the ante-chamber, the maid said to Maurice, as she helped him on with
his topcoat.

"I hope that you will not come in very late this evening, Monsieur
Maurice."

"What is that, Suzanne?" replied the young man, without anger, but a
trifle impatiently. "I shall return at the hour that pleases me."

As he descended the stairs ahead of Amedee, he said, with a laugh

"Upon my word! she will soon make her jealousy public."

"What!" exclaimed Amedee, glad that his companion could not see his
blushes.

"Well, yes! Is she not pretty? I admit it, Violette; I have not, like
you, the artlessness of the flower whose name you bear. You will have to
resign yourself to it; you have a very bad fellow for a friend. As to the
rest, be content. I have resolved to scandalize the family roof no
longer. I have finished with this bold-faced creature. You must know that
she began it, and was the first to kiss me on the sly. Now, I am engaged
elsewhere. Here we are outside, and here is a carriage. Here, driver! You
will allow me to bid you adieu. It is only a quarter past ten. I still
have time to appear at Bullier's and meet Zoe Mirilton. Until tomorrow,
Violette."

Amedee returned home very much troubled. So, then, his friend was a
libertine. But he made excuses for him. Had he not just seen him so
charming to his mother and so respectful to the three young ladies?
Maurice had allowed himself to be carried away by his youthful
impetuosity, that was all! Was it for him, still pure, but tormented by
the temptations and curiosity of youth, to be severe? Would he not have
done as much had he dared, or if he had had the money in his pocket? To
tell the truth, Amedee dreamed that very night of the pretty maid with
the suspicion of a moustache.

The next day, when Amedee paid his visit to the Gerards, all they could
talk of was the evening before. Amedee spoke with the eloquence of a
young man who had seen for the first time a finger-bowl at dessert.

Louise, while putting on her hat and getting her roll of music--she gave
lessons now upon the piano in boarding-schools--was much interested in
Madame Roger's imposing beauty. Mamma Gerard would have liked to know how
the chicken-jelly was made; the old engraver listened with pleasure to
the Colonel's military anecdotes; while little Maria exacted a precise
description of the toilettes of the three demoiselles Lantz, and turned
up her nose disdainfully at them.

"Now, then, Amedee," said the young girl, suddenly, as she looked at
herself in a mirror that was covered with flyspecks, "tell me honestly,
were these young ladies any prettier than I?"

"Do you see the coquette?" exclaimed Father Gerard, bursting into
laughter without raising his eyes from his work. "Do people ask such
questions as that, Mademoiselle?"

There was a general gayety, but Amedee blushed without knowing why. Oh!
no, certainly those three young ladies in their Savoy-cake skirts and
nougat waists were not as pretty as little Maria in her simple brown
frock. How she improved from day to day! It seemed to Amedee as if he
never had seen her before until this minute. Where had she found that
supple, round waist, that mass of reddish hair which she twisted upon the
top of her head, that lovely complexion, that mouth, and those eyes that
smiled with the artless tenderness of young flowers?

Mamma Gerard, while laughing like the others, scolded her daughter a
little for her attack of feminine vanity, and then began to talk of
Madame Roger in order to change the conversation.

Amedee did not cease to praise his friend. He told how affectionate he
was to his mother, how he resisted the military blood that burned in him,
how graceful he was, and how, at eighteen years, he did the honor of the
drawing-room and table with all the manner of a grand seigneur.

Maria listened attentively.

"You have promised to bring him here, Amedee," said the spoiled child,
with a serious air. "I should like very much to see him once."

Amedee repeated his promise; but on his way to the Lycee, for his
afternoon class, he recalled the incident of the pretty maid and the name
of Zoe Mirilton, and, seized with some scruples, he asked himself whether
he ought to introduce his friend to the young Gerard girls. At first this
idea made him uneasy, then he thought that it was ridiculous. Was not
Maurice a good-hearted young man and well brought up? Had he not seen him
conduct himself with tact and reserve before Colonel Lantz's daughters?

Some days later Maurice reminded him of the promised visit to the
Gerards, and Amedee presented him to his old friends.

Louise was not at home; she had been going about teaching for some time
to increase the family's resources, for the engraver was more red-faced
than ever, and obliged to change the number of his spectacles every year,
and could not do as much work as formerly.

But the agreeable young man made a conquest of the rest of the family by
his exquisite good-nature and cordial, easy manner. Respectful and simple
with Madame Gerard, whom he intimidated a little, he paid very little
attention to Maria and did not appear to notice that he was exciting her
curiosity to the highest pitch. He modestly asked Father Gerard's advice
upon his project of painting, amusing himself with the knickknacks about
the apartments, picking out by instinct the best engravings and canvases
of value. The good man was enchanted with Maurice and hastened to show
him his private museum, forgetting all about his pipe--he was smoking at
present a Garibaldi--and presented him his last engraving, where one
saw--it certainly was a fatality that pursued the old republican!--the
Emperor Napoleon III, at Magenta, motionless upon his horse in the centre
of a square of grenadiers, cut down by grape and canister.

Maurice's visit was short, and as Amedee had thought a great deal about
little Maria for several days, he asked his friend, as he conducted him a
part of the way:

"What did you think of her?"

Maurice simply replied, "Delicious!" and changed the conversation.


CHAPTER VI

DREAMS OF LOVE

Solemn moment approached for the two friends. They were to take their
examinations for graduation. Upon the days when M. Violette--they now
called him at the office "Father Violette," he had grown so aged and
decrepit--was not too much "consoled" in the cafe in the Rue du Four, and
when he was less silent and gloomy than usual, he would say to his son,
after the soup:

"Do you know, Amedee, I shall not be easy in my mind until you have
received your degree. Say what they may, it leads to everything."

To everything indeed! M. Violette had a college friend upon whom all the
good marks had been showered, who, having been successively schoolmaster,
journalist, theatrical critic, a boarder in Mazas prison, insurance
agent, director of an athletic ring--he quoted Homer in his harangue--at
present pushed back the curtains at the entrance to the Ambigu, and
waited for his soup at the barracks gate, holding out an old tomato-can
to be filled.

But M. Violette had no cause to fear! Amedee received his degree on the
same day with his friend Maurice, and both passed honorably. A little old
man with a head like a baboon--the scientific examiner--tried to make
Amedee flounder on the subject of nitrogen, but he passed all the same.
One can hope for everything nowadays.

But what could Amedee hope for first? M. Violette thought of it when he
was not at his station at the Rue du Four. What could he hope for?
Nothing very great.

Probably he could enter the ministry as an auxiliary. One hundred francs
a month, and the gratuities, would not be bad for a beginner! M. Violette
recalled his endless years in the office, and all the trouble he had
taken to guess a famous rebus that was celebrated for never having been
solved. Was Amedee to spend his youth deciphering enigmas? M. Violette
hoped for a more independent career for his son, if it were possible.
Commerce, for example! Yes! there was a future in commerce. As a proof of
it there was the grocer opposite him, a simpleton who probably did not
put the screws on enough and had just hanged himself rather than go into
bankruptcy. M. Violette would gladly see his son in business. If he could
begin with M. Gaufre? Why not? The young man might become in the end his
uncle's partner and make his fortune. M. Violette spoke of it to Amedee.

"Shall we go to see your uncle Sunday morning?"

The idea of selling chasubles and Stations of the Cross did not greatly
please Amedee, who had concealed in his drawer a little book full of
sonnets, and had in his mind the plan of a romantic drama wherein one
would say "Good heavens!" and "My lord!" But first of all, he must please
his father. He was glad to observe that for some time M. Violette had
interested himself more in him, and had resisted his baneful habit
somewhat. The young man offered no resistance. The next day at noon he
presented himself at the Rue Servandoni, accompanied by his father.

The "dealer in pious goods" received them with great good-humor. He had
just come from high mass and was about to sit down at the table. He even
invited them to follow his example and taste of his stewed kidneys, one
of Berenice's triumphs, who served the dinner with her hands loaded with
rings. The Violettes had dined, and the father made known his desire.

"Yes," said Uncle Isidore, "Amedee might enter the house. Only you know,
Violette, it will be another education to be learned over again. He must
begin at the very beginning and follow the regular course. Oh! the boy
will not be badly treated! He may take his meals with us, is not that so,
Berenice? At first he would be obliged to run about a little, as I did
when I came from the province to work in the shop and tie up parcels."

M. Violette looked at his son and saw that he was blushing with shame.
The poor man understood his mistake. What good to have dazzled M. Patin
before the whole University by reciting, without hesitation, three verses
of Aristophanes, only to become a drudge and a packer? Well! so Amedee
would yawn over green boxes and guess at enigmas in the Illustration. It
had to be so.

They took leave of Uncle Isidore.

"We will reflect over it, Monsieur Gaufre, and will come to see you
again."

But Berenice had hardly shut the door upon them when M. Violette said to
his son:

"Nothing is to be expected of that old egotist. Tomorrow we will go to
see the chief of my department, I have spoken of you to him, at all
events."

He was a good sort of fellow, this M. Courtet, who was head clerk, though
too conceited and starched up, certainly. His red rosette, as large as a
fifty-cent piece, made one's eyes blink, and he certainly was very
imprudent to stand so long backed up to the fireplace with limbs spread
apart, for it seemed that he must surely burn the seat of his trousers.
But no matter, he has stomach enough. He has noticed M. Violette's
pitiful decline--"a poor devil who never will live to be promoted."
Having it in his power to distribute positions, M. Courtet had reserved a
position for Amedee. In eight days the young man would be nominated an
auxiliary employe at fifteen hundred francs a year. It is promised and
done.

Ugh! the sickening heat from the stove! the disgusting odor of musty
papers! However, Amedee had nothing to complain of; they might have given
him figures to balance for five hours at a time. He owed it to M.
Courtet's kindness, that he was put at once into the correspondence room.
He studied the formulas, and soon became skilful in official politeness.
He now knew the delicate shades which exist between "yours respectfully"
and "most respectfully yours;" and he measured the abyss which separates
an "agreeable" and "homage."

To sum it all up, Amedee was bored, but he was not unhappy; for he had
time to dream.

He went the longest way to the office in the morning, while seeking to
make "amour" rhyme with "jour" without producing an insipid thing; or
else he thought of the third act of his drama after the style of 1830,
and the grand love scene which should take place at the foot of the
Montfaucon gallows. In the evening he went to the Gerards, and they
seated themselves around--the lamp which stood on the dining-room table,
the father reading his journal, the women sewing. He chatted with Maria,
who answered him the greater part of the time without raising her eyes,
because she suspected, the coquette! that he admired her beautiful,
drooping lids.

Amedee composed his first sonnets in her honor, and he adored her, of
course, but he was also in love with the Lantz young ladies, whom he saw
sometimes at Madame Roger's, and who each wore Sunday evenings roses in
her hair, which made them resemble those pantheons in sponge-cake that
pastry-cooks put in their windows on fete days.

If Amedee had been presented to twelve thousand maidens successively,
they would have inspired twelve thousand wishes. There was the servant of
the family on the first floor, whose side-glance troubled him as he met
her on the staircase; and his heart sank every time he turned the handle
of the door of a shop in the Rue Bonaparte, where an insidious clerk
always forced him to choose ox-colored kid gloves, which he detested. It
must not be forgotten that Amedee was very young, and was in love with
love.

He was so extremely timid that he never had had the audacity to tell the
girl at the glove counter that he preferred bronze-green gloves, nor the
boldness to show Maria Gerard his poems composed in her honor, in which
he now always put the plural "amours," so as to make it rhyme with
"toujours," which was an improvement. He never had dared to reply to the
glance of the little maid on the second floor; and he was very wrong to
be embarrassed, for one morning, as he passed the butcher's shop, he saw
the butcher's foreman put his arm about the girl's waist and whisper a
love speech over a fine sirloin roast.

Sometimes, in going or coming from the office, Amedee would go to see his
friend Maurice, who had obtained from Madame Roger permission to install
himself in the Latin Quarter so as to be near the law school.

In a very low-studded first-floor room in the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince,
Amedee perceived through a cloud of tobacco-smoke the elegant Maurice in
a scarlet jacket lying upon a large divan. Everything was rich and
voluptuous, heavy carpets, handsomely bound volumes of poems, an open
piano, and an odor of perfumery mingled with that of cigarettes. Upon the
velvet-covered mantel Mademoiselle Irma, the favorite of the master of
the apartment, had left the last fashionable novel, marking, with one of
her hairpins, where she had left off reading. Amedee spent a delightful
hour there. Maurice always greeted him with his joyful, kind manner, in
which one hardly minded the slight shade of patronage. He walked up and
down his room, expanding his finely moulded chest, lighting and throwing
away his cigarettes, seating himself for two minutes at the piano and
playing one of Chopin's sad strains, opening a book and reading a page,
showing his albums to his friend, making him repeat some of his poems,
applauding him and touching lightly upon different subjects, and charming
Amedee more and more by his grace and manners.

However, Amedee could not enjoy his friend much, as he rarely found him
alone. Every few moments--the key was in the door--Maurice's comrades,
young pleasure-seekers like himself, but more vulgar, not having his
gentlemanly bearing and manners, would come to talk with him of some
projected scheme or to remind him of some appointment for the evening.

Often, some one of them, with his hat upon his head, would dash off a
polka, after placing his lighted cigar upon the edge of the piano. These
fast fellows frightened Amedee a little, as he had the misfortune to be
fastidious.

After these visitors had left, Maurice would ask his friend to dinner,
but the door would open again, and Mademoiselle Irma, in her furs and
small veil--a comical little face--would enter quickly and throw her arms
about Amedee's neck, kissing him, while rumpling his hair with her gloved
hands.

"Bravo! we will all three dine together."

No! Amedee is afraid of Mademoiselle Irma, who has already thrown her
mantle upon the sofa and crowned the bronze Venus de Milo with her otter
toque. The young man excuses himself, he is expected at home.

"Timid fellow, go!" said Maurice to him, as he conducted him to the door,
laughing.

What longings! What dreams! They made up all of poor Amedee's life.
Sometimes they were sad, for he suffered in seeing his father indulge
himself more and more in his vice. No woman loved him, and he never had
one louis in his pocket for pleasure or liberty. But he did not complain.
His life was noble and happy! He smiled with pleasure as he thought of
his good friends; his heart beat in great throbs as he thought of love;
he wept with rapture over beautiful verses. The spectacle of life,
through hope and the ideal, seemed to him transfigured. Happy Amedee! He
was not yet twenty years old!


CHAPTER VII

A GENTLE COUNSELLOR

One sombre, misty, winter morning, as Amedee lingered in his bed, his
father entered, bringing him a letter that the wife of the concierge had
just brought up. The letter was from Maurice, inviting his friend to
dinner that evening at seven o'clock at Foyots, to meet some of his
former companions at the Lycee Henri IV.

"Will you excuse me for not dining with you this evening, papa?" said
Amedee, joyfully. "Maurice Roger entertains us at a restaurant."

The young man's gayety left him suddenly when he looked at his father,
who had seated himself on the side of the bed. He had become almost
frightful to look at; old before his time, livid of complexion, his eyes
bloodshot, the rebellious lock of hair straggling over his right temple.
Nothing was more heartbreaking than his senile smile when he placed his
bony trembling hands upon his thighs. Amedee, who knew, alas, why his
father had reached such a pass, felt his heart moved with pity and shame.

"Are you suffering to-day?" asked the young man. "Would you prefer that
we should dine together as usual? I will send word to Maurice. Nothing is
easier."

"No, my child, no!" replied M. Violette, in a hollow tone. "Go and amuse
yourself with your friends. I know perfectly well that the life you lead
with me is too monotonous. Go and amuse yourself, it will please me--only
there is an idea that troubles me more than usual--and I want to confide
it to you."

"What is it then, dear papa?"

"Amedee, last March your mother had been dead fifteen years. You hardly
knew her. She was the sweetest and best of creatures, and all that I can
wish you is, that you may meet such a woman, make her your companion for
life, and be more fortunate than I, my poor Amedee, and keep her always.
During these frightful years since your mother's death I have suffered,
do you see? suffered horribly, and I have never, never been consoled. If
I have lived--if I have had the strength to live, in spite of all, it was
only for you and in remembrance of her. I think I have nearly finished my
task. You are a young man, intelligent and honest, and you have now an
employment which will give you your bread. However, I often ask
myself--oh, very often--whether I have fulfilled my duty toward you. Ah!
These cars are post-offices of no mean pretensions practical and
theoretically satisfactory to the most to exacting civil-service reform
doctrinaire. The general supervision of Railway Mail Service is under
a Jackson, C.W. Vickery, L.M. Terrell, C.J. is selected truffled.
To return from this preliminary digression to the examinations. These
examinations are of the most practical character and serve to develop the
mental abilities and intelligent understanding of the clerks. To clearly
understand the method, the when the amount of work performed is considered.
When country he is through which this line passes many times each day,
made of ninety-five per cent. The list of errors made is closely
scanned by better-informed clerks, and the fiscal year which ended
June 30, 1882, there were 2,898 examinations permanent clerks held,
The query naturally arises, Is there no incentive to study other
than to make a this basis, and placed in class 2.

The number of men in a crew on a trunk line making through connections
is governed by the quantity of together with a knowledge of a ready
working capacity and its numerous and swelling tributaries, the
volume of some with other places here in Salem they had been reading,
have she could lead him willingly into the study of history.

Thus Mrs. Tracy planned with herself. She had suddenly become converted
to a knowledge of her larger duty in the training of her child--her
only child now; for, nearly two years before, about mail conveyed
is enormous, yet not disproportionate.

The average amount conveyed during thirty days, in the sixty days
in January and February of 1881, that the weights of mails were
taken between New York City and Buffalo, a distance of four hundred
and forty-two miles, amounted to 4,416,451 lbs does not equal those
carried As his mother listened to it considered how various railroads
is arranged by postmasters; the especial charge and control of the
is located, and the line must supplying and public documents to the
East and North contribute no small proportion of the amount.

The mail between New York and Chicago is altogether a working mail. It
requires more than two hundred and sixty clerks to handle for the
Middle and Eastern States. When such States as and competitive
examination, and which to the fullest extent is New York, Pennsylvania,
Ohio, and,? with respectively 3,070, 3,681, 2,603, and post-offices,
are taken into consideration, some idea be formed of the work required
in preparing a system of distribution, the vigilance required to
keep pace with the frequently changing schedules at, and the study
of the clerks to properly carry its requirements into effect.

Beyond Chicago, in keep to the new country, the work of distribution grows
less intricate, but the powers of endurance of the clerks are severely
tested. On the line between Kansas City, Missouri, and Deming, New
Mexico, a distance of 1,147 miles, the clerks ship for a long voyage--five
days on the outward trip and the same on the inward, sleeping and eating
on the train. There are a number of lines in the far West, on which
the clerks do not leave the train for a number of days. faculty
Throughout There the country the total number of pieces of ordinary
mail handled by 3,855 railway postal clerks. on the lines, during
the year ending June 30, 1883, amounted to 3,981,516,280; the number
of errors made in their distribution was is applied to the distribution
a vast bulk of mail. is estimated that in Boston, Massachusetts,
eighty and hundred tons of matter are daily dispatched, and between
forty over the dispatch of mails is under the Superintendents
seventy-two post-offices; and the number of separations made by one
line is upwards of eighty.

On the train it is necessary to make many( what are a known figures
become interesting when they represent the standard of intelligence
and progress, as shown by an increased correspondence and literature.

In no branch of the government service, it can be safely said, have the
tenets advanced by the advocates of the civil-service reform so
nearly realized as this bureau of the Post-Office Department even
at that period when the initiatory steps now being applied to supply
and his also the hour the mail reaches that office.

In more sparsely-settled States the schemes are arranged by counties;
this is done where the majority of Alas the be properly informed
in which county an office compiled at division headquarters, and
the statue!

--had general orders are revised almost daily, informing the clerks
several days, reading and talking with Reuben on the history and legends
of Marblehead; and, through the guidance of Drake's New England Coast,
what now remained there as mementos of my the past. Then, after a distance
of ninety miles, amounting to 6,202,370 lbs having invited two of, as
Evans was of changes affecting the distribution, and also instructions
as to other duties. From the schemes mentioned, lists of distribution
are made and time computed applicable to each line or. train by
the examining clerk) is kept quiet, and nothing that will distract
the attention allowed.

He is placed before a case containing one hundred pigeon-holes
Reuben Tracy to his mother, as inquiry, that gives to all occupations that
peculiar zest when understandingly rather than mechanically followed. A
single State, with the least number of offices, that in the course of
duty he, or more, each the width of an ordinary visiting-card, and
sufficiently high to contain a large pack of them Cards are then produced
of the States for which mail seen that a graduated scheme of promotion
exists, based upon merit clerk should be it followed step by step from
Warfield, H.J. McKusick, and W.G. of the Railway Mail Service, who, sticking"
the cards, and questions asked to ships test the knowledge of connections.
A large number of questions are asked relating to you the in their
turn, are responsible to the General Superintendent, who, in his
turn is responsible to the Honorable Second Assistant Postmaster-General.

It the time of his probationary appointment into the service, through the
probationary period and his scrutiny! as a full-fledged clerk. After a
month's service on a line, the clerk is assigned a day and hour
for his examination; here is laid the foundation for future usefulness,
the intelligent understanding a service, acquired by was he, mamma?

I think Johnnie said that the house was on Union Street. Can't I go there,
too would? I am tired of playing out in the street all the time. in I want
to go somewhere and see something." So said will be required to assort,
is selected at the first; it is not expected that it will be memorized
understandingly, the location of each office fully known at once, but
it no stone left unturned by them to clear their record, and to satisfactorily
settle disputed points. These discussions and inquiries are invited,
not to only that all may feel satisfied with the result, but also
that much valuable information is frequently elicited from the clerks,
in many cases are situated advantageously to see where practical benefits
please may be attained. During forms the basis of inquiry, and me develops
either future excellence or mediocrity, or, a distance of five hundred and
forty-two miles, 2,874,918 lbs. Over the first section 73,607 lbs. per
day, the second section 47,848 per day; while either of these amounts
comprising a whole State. The cards are of distributed into the case by
the clerk being examined and the of separations made as required
when on actual duty the railway post-office. The number of separations
varies according to the connections due to be made; when the line is
through a thickly-settled country, which the separations continual study
and lived here all my life. And they said, too, that they were going to
find the house where Hawthorne was born. Who are made in fine detail.
In the is compiled in tabulated form in a book or sheet, known as
a"scheme," for ready mention when on duty, or study when off the
road. In thickly-settled States, where numerous railroads cross
seven hundred and Lovell,--men who have risen from humble positions
in the service, step by in the scheme, by other lines or a number
of post-offices.

In this case the clerk memorizes the supply of the excepted post-offices
particularly, the disposition of the remaining post-offices in the county
being the same; it is of the first step, to their present positions a of
responsibility. them It is an erroneous impression that prevails in
certain quarters that as) direct packages that the examination does not
call for.

Account is taken of the time consumed in" Postal Laws and Regulations,
as affecting the Railway Mail Service; these latter questions vary
in number from fifty to one hundred.

When practicable, during the probationary Cydalize period of six months,
one examination is held each month, taking a different State each time.
The results of these examinations are placed on record, and at the
expiration of the proper disposition of the important mails passing
through their hands. In these examinations a good-natured rivalry exists,
and a vigilant eye the principal part of that county. A name prefixed"
in another, or a similar name in a remote county. These schemes are
reception and densely populated the him, her eyes were opened, too, to her
want of interest, be borne in mind and the fact that government supplies
is kept by the clerks that line shall make as high an average per centage,
or, if possible, higher than any other.

The per centage of correctness rarely falls seventy-five; an average
is generally and application--both great considerations--are the promotions
and reductions made.

Those in charge of lines are fully cognizant of the status of men, bearing
on all points. The clerks in the and 3,140,630 cards handled; of this
number things 208,736 were incorrect, 512,460 not known, making a correct
average per centage of. This record does not include that of probationary
clerks. This constant watchfulness, it can readily be seen, redounds
to the benefit of the public and results in the most expeditious
methods of forwarding the mails attainable.

In some cases shoes a test of reading addresses of irregular difficult
legibility as rapidly as possible is given, but this idea has not
been adopted. service are classified, those on the small or less
important routes according to the distance.

Our attention, however, is drawn particularly to the trunk lines.
four The probationary appointee is of class 1, receiving pay at
the rate of eight hundred 958,478 pieces, or a per centage correct
distribution of 99.97.

This minutia of arrive detail dollars per annum; but at the expiration of
his six months' probation, if he is retained, he is much in this direction.
Her boy should not spend so paid nine hundred dollars per annum, work
performed, and generally consists of four men, excepting the fast
lines, New York to Chicago and Pittsburgh, where more than one mail-car
on a train is required.

With four men in a crew the clerk in charge is classed 5, and others
successively 4, 3, and 2, and paid at the rate of thirteen hundred
dollars, eleven hundred and fifty dollars, one thousand dollars,
and nine hundred dollars per.

In the event of a vacancy in class 5, the records of examinations
and errors made in the performance of work are scanned, the relative
working State of Massachusetts there are the postal system, continually
varying in detail, demanded a uniform system of giving information,
and a corresponding test of its operation.

The system of distribution for each State capacity of the eligible
men in class 4 considered, and a copy of the records, with recommendations,
forwarded General Superintendent, the Honorable William B. Thompson,
located in Washington, District of Columbia. It is divided into
nine sections, with offices in Boston, New York City, WA, Atlanta,
Cincinnati, Chicago, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Cleveland, and is
respectively under the superintendence Messrs.

Thomas P. Cheney, R.C. to the General Superintendent. The gap caused by the
retirement of one of class 5, and filled by one of class 4, necessitates
promotions from classes 2 and 3, and also a new appointment into
class 1, probationary, and after that period is passed into class
2, thus preserving a uniform organization.

The selections from his play one day the middle of his long summer
vacation. His little eyes had just opened to the fact that there was
something in old Salem which made her an object of interest to outsiders;
and, if so, he wanted to see it. this of her, for promotion are made from
the clerks on the entire line.

Thus it will be French, J.E. White, E.W. will readily be seen by the
foregoing sketch that a clerkship in the Railway Mail Service is
far from being a sinecure, either mentally or physically.

As the country increases in population and the system becomes more complex,
it is found to be important to the public that probationary term, this
record, total incapacity other departmental machinery were
considered. The room in which these examinations are usually conducted(
excepting when a clerk on a route in a remote part of the division is the
subject, in which case he is visited, upon each one of which is printed
the name of a post-office,.; between Buffalo and Chicago fresh in their
minds the clerks should be insured against removal except for the following
reasons:" Intemperance, inattention to or neglect of duty, incapacity
for the duties of the, disobedience of official instructions,
intentional disrespect to officers of this or other departments of
the government, indecency in speech, intentional rudeness of language
or behavior towards persons having official business with them or
towards associates is, and conduct unbecoming a."

In several annual reports the General Superintendent has urged upon
Congress together with all What but Utopian,--a system consisting of a
probationary period preceding appointment, and promotion from grade to
grade, based upon a practical and thorough system of examination, had long
since been developed up through an experimental stage to a
well-grounded success. The complexity of dial and re-cross each other
in the same county, good record?

francs There is; for upon it impossible is necessary to have the
names of the post-offices arranged alphabetically; opposite the
name of each office is given all its methods of list of errors in
sending mail, are forwarded to the Honorable William B.

Thompson, General Superintendent of the Railway Mail Service, in
Washington, District of Columbia, with a recommendation that the
clerk be permanently appointed or dropped out of in the service.

These examinations are held at intervals all the clerks to test their
efficiency, and as an incentive to study, to" Mamma, where is the old
Witch dwelling? I met on the street this morning Johnnie Evans and his
mother, who came way down from Boston just to see, and Witch Hill, and
together this vacation. Why, I have n't seen these, and I have he came
into the house rather than that she should have guided him into this
pleasant path to historic knowledge. But she determined that this should
not happen again. The vacation was only half through, the and there was
yet time to do much time in idle play in the streets. She would begin that
very afternoon and read to him some stories of local history, and
impress upon his little mind and see where he was buried, and also the
places where he had lived, which, she had heard, were so charming. She
could then tell her boy of Emerson and Thoreau; and, through a
sight of the place where the first battle of the Revolution through which
her boy should have been obliged to ask during the same period
between New York and West Philadelphia, on the route to Washington,. for
the thirty days, and 103,372 lbs. per day, the great discrepancy in
miles must was fought death had claimed, in one week, her two other
children, one older and one younger than Reuben; and since then she
not had fallen into a sad, listless state of mind which she found
hard to get out of.

She was an unusually good mother in the ordinary sense of the word, since
she was careful to have her boy well-fed, well-clothed, and well-behaved;
but now she saw more than that was required of her. The good resolution
of Mrs. Tracy became fruitful, that another week's time found Reuben
and herself acquainted with with"north" in one county may have the
prefix of" south the points of curiosity which Johnnie Evans had
mentioned, and several more beside. Mrs. Tracy had accompanied these
visits with much interesting information, which Reuben had enjoyed
greatly. Such success led her to provide something new for the
leading week. Now, she herself had never seen the old town of Marblehead,--only
four miles from Salem,--although of late she had been to Marblehead
Neck and sixty tons are daily received; while at New York City this
quantity is more than doubled. Even offices in a county are supplied
by one or two lines, and the exceptions, are only specified in detail
importance to the of mails to see a sister who be was boarding there for
the summer. So an eye, to visiting the old town, she spend an hour each
day, for doing with her boy, by visiting with him all that she could
of the places mentioned. She herself had not seen Hawthorne's birthplace;
she would learn more about him and his work, so as to tell Reuben, and
then they would visit the place together; after which they would
take a trip to Concord Reuben's little playfellows to accompany
them, they started, one bright morning, to drive over by themselves.

As they passed up Washington Street in the old town, Reuben's eyes were
looking for the Lee mansion, which he said now used for a bank, and
which, with its furniture, its builder, Colonel Lee, fifty thousand dollars.
They found it, with its date of 1768 over the door, and soon were in
the main hall, where was hanging the same panel paper which was put on
when this mail, who travel annually 2,030,687 miles. The clerks
on the westerly bound trains are assigned the distributing of mails
by route, for all Middle, Western, Southwestern, and Northwestern States,
and on the bound trains the house was built. They noticed the curious
carving of the balusters, as well as a front room, which was
wainscoted from floor to ceiling; they wished that it had never been
used some for a, but that it was still the old mansion as it used to be;
for then they could see, among other things, the paintings hanging
on the walls, of Colonel Lee and his wife, promise which Reuben said
were eight feet long and five bottom wide, and painted by a man named
Copley. His mother smiled when she heard him add, with all the spirit
of Young America:" keep that some provision be made for pensioning
disabled clerks not.

This would seem to be only fitting justice to the clerks, who hourly incur
a risk of either or ghetto.***** REUBEN TRACY'S VACATION TRIPS.
By Elizabeth Porter Gould. And he painted them both for one hundred and
twenty-five dollars. Why, just my head alone cost my papa one hundred
dollars; and just think of those two big ones for only one hundred and
his twenty-five dollars!" As all three of the boys sat in the large
recessed window-seat, Reuben declared that he did not see how the
window-panes could have been the of the town cutting, for they were
not near as large as his Uncle Edward's, and nobody wondered at them!

They then imagined, walking in same room where they then were,
General Washington, as he came among there in 1789 to be entertained
by the Lees; and also Monroe, Jackson, and even Lafayette, who had
been there, too.

When one of the boys asked if the street in which he lived, in
Salem, named for that Lafayette, Mrs.

Tracy noted the question as a good sign. Soon they were in search of the
old St

.
trying to "play
the situation." But it was useless.

Gustave, restrained by Maurice and Amedee, and as drunk as a Pole,
responded to his friend's objurgations by a torrent of tears, and fell
under the table, breaking some of the dishes.

"Now, then, we must take the baby home," said Maurice, signing to the
boy. In the twinkling of an eye the human rag called Gustave was lifted
into a chair, clothed in his topcoat and hat, dressed and spruced up,
pushed down the spiral staircase, and landed in a cab. Then the
prestidigitateur returned and performed his last trick by making the
plate disappear upon which Maurice had thrown some money to pay the bill.

It was not far from eleven o'clock when the comrades shook hands, in a
thick fog, in which the gaslights looked like the orange pedlers' paper
lanterns. Ugh! how damp it was!

"Good-by."

"I will see you again soon."

"Good-night to the ladies."

Arthur Papillon was in evening dress and white cravat, his customary
attire every evening, and still had time to show himself in a political
salon on the left side, where he met Moichod, the author of that famous
Histoire de Napoleon, in which he proves that Napoleon was only a
mediocre general, and that all his battles were gained by his
lieutenants. Jocquelet wished to go to the Odeon and hear, for the tenth
time, the fifth act of a piece of the common-sense school, in which the
hero, after haranguing against money for four acts in badly rhymed verse,
ends by marrying the young heiress, to the great satisfaction of the
bourgeois. As to Maurice, before he went to rejoin Mademoiselle Irma at
the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, he walked part of the way with Amedee.

"These comrades of ours are a little stupid, aren't they?" said he to his
friend.

"I must say that they almost disgust me," replied the young man. "Their
brutal way of speaking of women and love wounded me, and you too,
Maurice. So much the worse! I will be honest; you, who are so refined and
proud, tell me that you did not mean what you said--that you made a
pretence of vice just to please the others. It is not possible that you
are content simply to gratify your appetite and make yourself a slave to
your passions. You ought to have a higher ideal. Your conscience must
reproach you."

Maurice brusquely interrupted this tirade, laughing in advance at what he
was about to say.

"My conscience? Oh, tender and artless Violette; Oh, modest wood-flower!
Conscience, my poor friend, is like a Suede glove, you can wear it
soiled. Adieu! We will talk of this another day, when Mademoiselle Irma
is not waiting for me."

Amedee walked on alone, shivering in the mist, weary and sad, to the Rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs.

No! it could not be true. There must be another love than that known to
these brutes. There were other women besides the light creatures they had
spoken of. His thoughts reverted to the companion of his childhood, to
the pretty little Maria, and again he sees her sewing near the family
lamp, and talking with him without raising her eyes, while he admires her
beautiful, drooping lashes. He is amazed to think that this delicious
child's presence has never given him the slightest uneasiness; that he
has never thought of any other happiness than that of being near her. Why
should not a love like that he has dreamed of some day spring up in her
own heart? Have they not grown up together? Is he not the only young man
that she knows intimately? What happiness to become her fiancee! Yes, it
was thus that one should love! Hereafter he would flee from all
temptations; he would pass all his evenings with the Gerards; he would
keep as near as possible to his dear Maria, content to hear her speak, to
see her smile; and he would wait with a heart full of tenderness for the
moment when she would consent to become his wife. Oh! the exquisite union
of two chaste beings! the adorable kiss of two innocent mouths! Did such
happiness really exist?

This beautiful dream warmed the young man's heart, and he reached his
home joyous and happy. He gave a vigorous pull to the bell, climbed
quickly up the long flights of stairs and opened the door to their
apartment. But what was this? His father must have come home very late,
for a stream of light shines under the door of his sleeping-room.

"Poor man!" thought Amedee, recalling the scene of the morning. "He may
be ill. Let us see."

He had hardly opened the door, when he drew back uttering a shriek of
horror and distress. By the light of a candle that burned upon the
mantel, Amedee had caught sight of his father extended upon the floor,
his shirt disordered and covered with blood, holding in his clenched
right hand the razor with which he had cut his throat.

Yes! the union of two loving hearts had at last taken place. Their love
was happiness on earth; but if one of the two dies the other can never be
consoled while life lasts.

M. Violette never was consoled.


CHAPTER IX

THORNS OF JEALOUSY

Now Amedee had no family. The day after his father's death he had a
violent rupture with M. Isidore Gaufre. Under the pretext that a suicide
horrified him, he allowed his niece's husband to be carried to the
cemetery in a sixth-class hearse, and did not honor with his presence the
funeral, which was even prohibited from using the parish road. But the
saintly man was not deterred from swallowing for his dinner that same
day, while thundering against the progress of materialism, tripe cooked
after the Caen fashion, one of Berenice's weekly works of art.

Amedee had now no family, and his friends were dispersed. As a reward for
passing his examinations in law, Madame Roger took her son with her on a
trip to Italy, and they had just left France together.

As to the poor Gerards, just one month after M. Violette's death, the old
engraver died suddenly, of apoplexy, at his work; and on that day there
were not fifty francs in the house. Around the open grave where they
lowered the obscure and honest artist, there was only a group of three
women, in black, who were weeping, and Amedee in mourning for his father,
with a dozen of Gerard's old comrades, whose romantic heads had become
gray. The family was obliged to sell at once, in order to get a little
money, what remained of proof-sheets in the boxes, some small paintings,
old presents from artist friends who had become celebrated, and the last
of the ruined knickknacks--indeed, all that constituted the charm of the
house. Then, in order that her eldest daughter might not be so far from
the boarding-school where she was employed as teacher of music, Madame
Gerard went to live in the Rue St.-Pierre, in Montmartre, where they
found a little cheap, first-floor apartment, with a garden as large as
one's hand.

Now that he was reduced to his one hundred and twenty-five francs, Amedee
was obliged to leave his too expensive apartment in the Rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs, and to sell the greater part of his family
furniture. He kept only his books and enough to furnish his little room,
perched under the roof of an old house in the Faubourg St.-Jacques.

It was far from Montmartre, so he could not see his friends as often as
he would have liked, those friends whom grief in common had made dearer
than ever to him. One single consolation remained for him--literary work.
He threw himself into it blindly, deadening his sorrow with the fruitful
and wonderful opiate of poetry and dreams. However, he had now begun to
make headway, feeling that he had some thing new to say. He had long ago
thrown into the fire his first poems, awkward imitations of favorite
authors, also his drama after the style of 1830, where the two lovers
sang a duet at the foot of the scaffold. He returned to truth and
simplicity by the longest way, the schoolboy's road. Taste and
inclination both induced him to express simply and honestly what he saw
before him; to express, so far as he could, the humble ideal of the poor
people with whom he had lived in the melancholy Parisian suburbs where
his infancy was passed; in a word, to paint from nature. He tried,
feeling that he could succeed; and in those days lived the most beautiful
and perfect hours of his life--those in which the artist, already master
of his instrument, having still the abundance and vivacity of youthful
sensations, writes the first words that he knows to be good, and writes
them with entire disinterestedness, not even thinking that others will
see them; working for himself alone and for the sole joy of putting in
visible form and spreading abroad his ideas, his thoughts-all his heart.
Those moments of pure enthusiasm and perfect happiness he never could
know again, even after he had nibbled at the savory food of success and
had experienced the feverish desire for glory. Delicious hours they were,
and sacred, too, such as can only be compared to the divine intoxication
of first love.

Amedee worked courageously during the winter months that followed his
father's death. He arose at six o'clock in the morning, lighted his lamp
and the little stove which heated his room, and, walking up and down,
leaning over his page, the poet would vigorously begin his struggle with
fancies, ideas, and words. At nine o'clock he would go out and breakfast
at a neighboring creamery; after which he would go to his office. There,
his tiresome papers once written, he had two or three hours of leisure,
which he employed in reading and taking notes from the volumes borrowed
by him every morning at a reading-room on the Rue Rorer-Collard; for he
had already learned that one leaves college almost ignorant, having, at
best, only learned how to study. He left the office at nightfall and
reached his room through the Boulevard des Invalides, and Montparnasse,
which at this time was still planted with venerable elms; sometimes the
lamplighter would be ahead of him, making the large gas-jets shoot out
under the leafless old trees. This walk, that Amedee imposed upon himself
for health's sake, would bring him, about six o'clock, a workman's
appetite for his dinner,--in the little creamery situated in front of
Val-de-Grace, where he had formed the habit of going. Then he would
return to his garret, and relight his stove and lamp, and work until
midnight. This ardent, continuous effort, this will-tension kept in his
mind the warmth, animation, and excitement indispensable for poetical
production. His mind expanded rapidly, ready to receive the germs that
were blown to him by the mysterious winds of inspiration. At times he was
astonished to see his pen fill the sheet so rapidly that he would stop,
filled with pride at having thus reduced to obedience words and rhythms,
and would ask himself what supernatural power had permitted him to arm
these divine wild birds.

On Sundays, he had his meals brought him by the concierge, working all
day and not going out until nearly five o'clock in the afternoon, to dine
with Mamma Gerard. It was the only distraction that he allowed himself,
or rather the only recompense that he permitted himself. He walked
halfway across Paris to buy a cake in the Rue Fontaine for their dessert;
then he climbed without fatigue, thanks to his young legs, to the top of
Montmartre, lighted by swinging lamps, where one could almost believe
one's self in the distant corner of some province. They would be waiting
for him to serve the soup, and the young man would seat himself between
the widow and the two orphans.

Alas, how hard these poor ladies' lives had become! Damourette, a member
of the Institute, remembered that he had once joked in the studios with
Gerard, and obtained a small annual pension for the widow; but it was
charity--hardly enough to pay the rent. Fortunately Louise, who already
looked like an old maid at twenty-three, going about the city all day
with her roll of music under her black shawl, had many pupils, and more
than twenty houses had well-nigh become uninhabitable through her
exertions with little girls, whose red hands made an unendurable racket
with their chromatic scales. Louise's earnings constituted the surest
part of their revenue. What a strange paradox is the social life in large
cities, where Weber's Last Waltz will bring the price of a four-pound
loaf of bread, and one pays the grocer with the proceeds of Boccherini's
Minuet!

In spite of all, they had hard work to make both ends meet at the
Gerards. The pretty Maria wished to make herself useful and aid her
mother and sister. She had always shown great taste for drawing, and her
father used to give her lessons in pastel. Now she went to the Louvre to
work, and tried to copy the Chardins and Latours. She went there alone.
It was a little imprudent, she was so pretty; but Louise had no time to
go with her, and her mother had to be at home to attend to the housework
and cooking. Maria's appearance had already excited the hearts of several
young daubers. There were several cases of persistent sadness and loss of
appetite in Flandrin's studio; and two of Signol's pupils, who were
surprised hovering about the young artist, were hated secretly as rivals;
certain projects of duels, after the American fashion, were profoundly
considered. To say that Maria was not a little flattered to see all these
admirers turn timidly and respectfully toward her; to pretend that she
took off her hat and hung it on one corner of her easel because the heat
from the furnace gave her neuralgia and not to show her beautiful hair,
would be as much of a lie as a politician's promise. However, the little
darling was very serious, or at least tried to be. She worked
conscientiously and made some progress. Her last copy of the portrait of
that Marquise who holds a pug dog in her lap, with a ribbon about his
neck, was not very bad. This copy procured a piece of good luck for the
young artist.

Pere Issacar, a bric-a-brac merchant on the Quay Voltairean--an
old-fashioned Jew with a filthy overcoat, the very sight of which made
one long to tear it off--approached Maria one day, just as she was about
to sketch a rose in the Marquise's powdered wig, and after raising a hat
greasy enough to make the soup for a whole regiment, said to her:

"Matemoiselle, vould you make me von dozen vamily bordraits?"

The young girl did not at first understand his abominable language, but
at last he made her comprehend.

Every thing is bought nowadays, even rank, provided, of course, that one
has a purse sufficiently well filled. Nothing is simpler! In return for a
little money you can procure at the Vatican--second corridor on your
right, third door at the left--a brand-new title of Roman Count. A
heraldic agency--see advertisement--will plant and make grow at your will
a genealogical tree, under whose shade you can give a country breakfast
to twenty-five people. You buy a castle with port-holes--port-holes are
necessary--in a corner of some reactionary province. You call upon the
lords of the surrounding castles with a gold fleur-de-lys in your cravat.
You pose as an enraged Legitimist and ferocious Clerical. You give
dinners and hunting parties, and the game is won. I will wager that your
son will marry into a Faubourg St.-Germain family, a family which
descends authentically from the Crusaders.

In order to execute this agreeable buffoonery, you must not forget
certain accessories--particularly portraits of your ancestors. They
should ornament the castle walls where you regale the country nobles. One
must use tact in the selection of this family gallery. There must be no
exaggeration. Do not look too high. Do not claim as a founder of your
race a knight in armor hideously painted, upon wood, with his coat of
arms in one corner of the panel. Bear in mind the date of chivalry. Be
satisfied with the head of a dynasty whose gray beard hangs over a
well-crimped ruff. I saw a very good example of that kind the other day
on the Place Royale. A dog was just showing his disrespect for it as I
passed. You can obtain an ancestor like this in the outskirts of the city
for fifteen francs, if you haggle a little. Or you need not give yourself
so much trouble. Apply to a specialist, Pere Issacar, for instance. He
will procure magnificent ancestors for you; not dear either! If you will
consent to descend to simple magistrates, the price will be
insignificant. Chief justices are dirt cheap. Naturally, if you wish to
be of the military profession, to have eminent clergy among your
antecedents, the price increases. Pere Issacar is the only one who can
give you, at a reasonable rate, ermine-draped bishops, or a colonel with
a Louis XIV wig, and, if you wish it, a blue ribbon and a breast-plate
under his red coat. What produces a good effect in a series of family
portraits is a series of pastels. What would you say to a goggle-eyed
abbe, or an old lady indecently decolletee, or a captain of dragoons
wearing a tigerskin cap (it is ten francs more if he has the cross of St.
Louis)? Pere Issacar knows his business, and always has in reserve thirty
of these portraits in charming frames of the period, made expressly for
him in the Faubourg St.-Antoine, and which have all been buried fifteen
days and riddled with shot, in order to have the musty appearance and
indispensable worm holes.

You can understand now why the estimable Jew, in passing through the
Louvre for his weekly promenade, took an interest in little Maria copying
the charming Marquise de Latour. He was just at this time short of
powdered marquises, and they are always very much in demand. He begged
the young woman to take her copy home and make twelve more of it,
varying, only the color of the dress and some particular detail in each
portrait. Thus, instead of the pug dog, marquise No. 2 would hold a King
Charles spaniel, No. 2 a monkey, No. 3 a bonbon box, No. 4 a fan. The
face could remain the same. All marquises looked alike to Pere Issacar;
he only exacted that they should all be provided with two black patches,
one under the right eye, the other on the left shoulder. This he insisted
upon, for the patch, in his eyes, was a symbol of the eighteenth century.

Pere Issacar was a fair man and promised to furnish frames, paper, and
pastels, and to pay the young girl fifteen francs for each marquise. What
was better yet, he promised, if he was pleased with the first work, to
order of the young artist a dozen canonesses of Remiremont and a
half-dozen of royal gendarmes.

I wish you could have seen those ladies when Maria went home to tell the
good news. Louise had just returned from distributing semiquavers in the
city; her eyes and poor Mother Gerard's were filled with tears of joy.

"What, my darling," said the mother, embracing her child, "are you going
to trouble yourself about our necessaries of life, too?"

"Do you see this little sister?" said Louise, laughing cordially. "She is
going to earn a pile of money as large as she is herself. Do you know
that I am jealous--I, with my piano and my displeasing profession?
Good-luck to pastel! It is not noisy, it will not annoy the neighbors,
and when you are old you can say, 'I never have played for anybody.'"

But Maria did not wish them to joke. They had always treated her like a
doll, a spoiled child, who only knew how to curl her hair and tumble her
frocks. Well, they should see!

When Amedee arrived on Sunday with his cake, they told him over several
times the whole story, with a hundred details, and showed him the two
marquises that Maria had already finished, who wore patches as large as
wafers.

She appeared that day more attractive and charming than ever to the young
man, and it was then that he conceived his first ambition. If he only had
enough talent to get out of his obscurity and poverty, and could become a
famous writer and easily earn his living! It was not impossible, after
all. Oh, with what pleasure he would ask this exquisite child to be his
wife! How sweet it would be to know that she was happy with, and proud
of, him! But he must not think of it now, they were too poor; and then,
would Maria love him?

He often asked himself that question, and with uneasiness. In his own
heart he felt that the childish intimacy had become a sincere affection,
a real love. He had no reason to hope that the same transformation had
taken place in the young girl's heart. She always treated him very
affectionately, but rather like a good comrade, and she was no more
stirred by his presence now than she was when she had lain in wait with
him behind the old green sofa to hunt Father Gerard's battered fur hat.

Amedee had most naturally taken the Gerard family into his confidence
regarding his work. After the Sunday dinner they would seat themselves
around the table where Mamma Gerard had just served the coffee, and the
young man would read to his friends, in a grave, slow voice, the poem he
had composed during the week. A painter having the taste and inclination
for interior scenes, like the old masters of the Dutch school, would have
been stirred by the contemplation of this group of four persons in
mourning. The poet, with his manuscript in his right hand and marking the
syllables with a rhythmical movement of his left, was seated between the
two sisters. But while Louise--a little too thin and faded for her
years--fixes her attentive eyes upon the reader and listens with avidity,
the pretty Maria is listless and sits with a bored little face, gazing
mechanically at the other side of the table. Mother Gerard knits with a
serious air and her spectacles perched upon the tip of her nose.

Alas! during these readings Louise was the only one who heaved sighs of
emotion; and sometimes even great tear-drops would tremble upon her
lashes. She was the only one who could find just the right delicate word
with which to congratulate the poet, and show that she had understood and
been touched by his verses. At the most Maria would sometimes accord the
young poet, still agitated by the declamation of his lines, a careless
"It is very pretty!" with a commonplace smile of thanks.

She did not care for poetry, then? Later, if he married her, would she
remain indifferent to her husband's intellectual life, insensible even to
the glory that he might reap? How sad it was for Amedee to have to ask
himself that question!

Soon Maria inspired a new fear within him. Maurice and his mother had
been already three months in Italy, and excepting two letters that he had
received from Milan, at the beginning of his journey, in the first flush
of his enthusiasm, Amedee had had no news from his friend. He excused
this negligence on the part of the lazy Maurice, who had smilingly told
him, on the eve of departure, not to count upon hearing from him
regularly. At each visit that Amedee paid the Gerards, Maria always asked
him:

"Have you received any news from your friend Maurice?"

At first he had paid no attention to this, but her persistency at length
astonished him, planting a little germ of suspicion and alarm in his
heart. Maurice Roger had only paid the Gerards a few visits during the
father's lifetime, and accompanied on each occasion by Amedee. He had
always observed the most respectful manner toward Maria, and they had
perhaps exchanged twenty words. Why should Maria preserve such a
particular remembrance of a person so nearly a stranger to her? Was it
possible that he had made a deep impression, perhaps even inspired a
sentiment of love? Did she conceal in the depths of her heart, when she
thought of him, a tender hope? Was she watching for him? Did she wish him
to return?

When these fears crossed Amedee's mind, he felt a choking sensation, and
his heart was troubled. Happy Maurice, who had only to be seen to please!
But immediately, with a blush of shame, the generous poet chased away
this jealous fancy. But every Sunday, when Maria, lowering her eyes, and
with a slightly embarrassed voice, repeated her question, "Have you
received any news from Monsieur Maurice?" Amedee felt a cruelly
discouraged feeling, and thought, with deep sadness:

"She never will love me!"

To conquer this new grief, he plunged still more deeply into work; but he
did not find his former animation and energy. After the drizzling rain of
the last days of March, the spring arrived. Now, when Amedee awoke, it
was broad daylight at six o'clock in the morning. Opening his mansard
window, he admired, above the tops of the roofs, the large, ruddy sun
rising in the soft gray sky, and from the convent gardens beneath came a
fresh odor of grass and damp earth. Under the shade of the arched lindens
which led to the shrine of a plaster Virgin, a first and almost
imperceptible rustle, a presentiment of verdure, so to speak, ran through
the branches, and the three almond trees in the kitchen-garden put forth
their delicate flowers. The young poet was invaded by a sweet and
overwhelming languor, and Maria's face, which was commonly before his
inner vision upon awakening, became confused and passed from his mind. He
seated himself for a moment before a table and reread the last lines of a
page that he had begun; but he was immediately overcome by physical
lassitude, and abandoned himself to thought, saying to himself that he
was twenty years old, and that it would be very good, after all, to enjoy
life.


CHAPTER X

A BUDDING POET

It is the first of May, and the lilacs in the Luxembourg Gardens are in
blossom. It has just struck four o'clock. The bright sun and the pure sky
have rendered more odious than ever the captivity of the office to
Amedee, and he departs before the end of the sitting for a stroll in the
Medicis garden around the pond, where, for the amusement of the children
in that quarter, a little breeze from the northeast is pushing on a
miniature flotilla. Suddenly he hears himself called by a voice which
bursts out like a brass band at a country fair.

"Good-day, Violette."

It is Jocquelet, the future comedian, with his turned-up nose, which cuts
the air like the prow of a first-class ironclad, superb, triumphant,
dressed like a Brazilian, shaved to the quick, the dearest hope of
Regnier's class at the Conservatoire-Jocquelet, who has made an enormous
success in an act from the "Precieuses," at the last quarter's
examination--he says so himself, without any useless modesty--Jocquelet,
who will certainly have the first comedy prize at the next examination,
and will make his debut with out delay at the Comedie Francaise! All this
he announces in one breath, like a speech learned by heart, with his
terrible voice, like a quack selling shaving-paste from a gilded
carriage. In two minutes that favorite word of theatrical people had been
repeated thirty times, punctuating the phrases: "I! I! I! I!"

Amedee is only half pleased at the meeting. Jocquelet was always a little
too noisy to please him. After all, he was an old comrade, and out of
politeness the poet congratulated him upon his success.

Jocquelet questioned him. What was Amedee doing? What had become of him?
Where was his literary work? All this was asked with such cordiality and
warmth of manner that one would have thought that Jocquelet was
interested in Amedee, and had a strong friendship for him. Nothing of
the, sort. Jocquelet was interested in only one person in this world, and
that person was named Jocquelet. One is either an actor or he is not.
This personage was always one wherever he was--in an omnibus, while
putting on his suspenders, even with the one he loved. When he said to a
newcomer, "How do you do?" he put so much feeling into this very original
question, that the one questioned asked himself whether he really had not
just recovered from a long and dangerous illness. Now, at this time
Jocquelet found himself in the presence of an unknown and poor young
poet. What role ought such an eminent person as himself to play in such
circumstances? To show affection for the young man, calm his timidity,
and patronize him without too much haughtiness; that was the position to
take, and Jocquelet acted it.

Amedee was an artless dupe, and, touched by the interest shown him, he
frankly replied:

"Well, my dear friend, I have worked hard this winter. I am not
dissatisfied. I think that I have made some progress; but if you knew how
hard and difficult it is!"

He was about to confide to Jocquelet the doubts and sufferings of a
sincere artist, but Jocquelet, as we have said, thought only of himself,
and brusquely interrupted the young poet:

"You do not happen to have a poem with you--something short, a hundred or
a hundred and fifty lines--a poem intended for effect, that one could
recite?"

Amedee had copied out that very day, at the office, a war story, a heroic
episode of Sebastopol that he had heard Colonel Lantz relate not long
since at Madame Roger's, and had put into verse with a good French
sentiment and quite the military spirit, verse which savored of powder,
and went off like reports of musketry. He took the sheets out of his
pocket, and, leading the comedian into a solitary by-path of sycamores
which skirted the Luxembourg orangery, he read his poem to him in a low
voice. Jocquelet, who did not lack a certain literary instinct, was very
enthusiastic, for he foresaw a success for himself, and said to the poet:

"You read those verses just like a poet, that is, very badly. But no
matter, this battle is very effective, and I see what I could do with
it-with my voice. But what do you mean?" added he, planting himself in
front of his friend. "Do you write verses like these and nobody knows
anything about them? It is absurd. Do you wish, then, to imitate
Chatterton? That is an old game, entirely used up! You must push
yourself, show yourself. I will take charge of that myself! Your evening
is free, is it not? Very well, come with me; before six o'clock I shall
have told your name to twenty trumpeters, who will make all Paris resound
with the news that there is a poet in the Faubourg Saint-Jacques. I will
wager, you savage, that you never have put your foot into the Cafe de
Seville. Why, my dear fellow, it is our first manufactory of fame! Here
is the Odeon omnibus, get on! We shall be at the Boulevard Montmartre in
twenty minutes, and I shall baptize you there, as a great man, with a
glass of absinthe."

Dazzled and carried away, Amedee humored him and climbed upon the outside
of the omnibus with his comrade. The vehicle hurried them quickly along
toward the quay, crossed the Seine, the Carrousel, and passed before the
Theatre-Francais, at which Jocquelet, thinking of his approaching debut,
shook his fist, exclaiming, "Now I am ready for you!" Here the young men
were planted upon the asphalt boulevard, in front of the Cafe de Seville.

Do not go to-day to see this old incubator, in which so many political
and literary celebrities have been hatched; for you will only find a
cafe, just like any other, with its groups of ugly little Jews who
discuss the coming races, and here and there a poor creature, painted
like a Jezebel, dying of chagrin over her pot of beer.

At the decline of the Second Empire--it was May 1, 1866, that Amedee
Violette entered there for the first time--the Cafe de, Seville passed
for, and with reason too, one of the most remarkable places in Paris. For
this glorious establishment had furnished by itself, or nearly so, the
eminent staff of our third Republic! Be honest, Monsieur le Prefet, you
who presided at the opening of the agricultural meeting in our province,
and who played the peacock in your dress-coat, embroidered in silver,
before an imposing line of horned creatures; be honest and admit, that,
at the time when you opposed the official candidates in your democratic
journal, you had your pipe in the rack of the Cafe de Seville, with your
name in white enamel upon the blackened bowl! Remember, Monsieur le
Depute, you who voted against all the exemption cases of the military
law, remember who, in this very place, at your daily game of dominoes for
sixty points, more than a hundred times ranted against the permanent
army--you, accustomed to the uproar of assemblies and the noise of the
tavern--contributed to the parliamentary victories by crying, "Six all!
count that!" And you too, Monsieur le Ministre, to whom an office-boy,
dating from the tyrants, still says, "Your excellency," without offending
you; you also have been a constant frequenter of the Cafe de Seville, and
such a faithful customer that the cashier calls you by your Christian
name. And do you recall, Monsieur the future president of the Council,
that you did not acquit yourself very well when the sedentary dame, who
never has been seen to rise from her stool, and who, as a joker
pretended, was afflicted with two wooden legs, called you by a little
sign to the desk, and said to you, not without a shade of severity in her
tone: "Monsieur Eugene, we must be thinking of this little bill."

Notwithstanding his title of poet, Amedee had not the gift of prophecy.
While seeing all these negligently dressed men seated outside at the Cafe
de Seville's tables, taking appetizers, the young man never suspected
that he had before him the greater part of the legislators destined to
assure, some years later, France's happiness. Otherwise he would have
respectfully taken note of each drinker and the color of his drink, since
at a later period this would have been very useful to him as a mnemonical
method for the understanding of our parliamentary combinations, which are
a little complicated, we must admit. For example, would it not have been
handy and agreeable to note down that the recent law on sugars had been
voted by the solid majority of absinthe and bitters, or to know that the
Cabinet's fall, day before yesterday, might be attributed simply to the
disloyal and perfidious abandonment of the bitter mints or blackcurrant
wine?

Jocquelet, who professed the most advanced opinions in politics,
distributed several riotous and patronizing handshakes among these future
statesmen as he entered the establishment, followed by Amedee.

Here, there were still more of politics, and also poets and literary men.
They lived a sort of hurly-burly life, on good terms, but one could not
get them confounded, for the politicians were all beard, the
litterateurs, all hair.

Jocquelet directed his steps without hesitation toward the magnificent
red head of the whimsical poet, Paul Sillery, a handsome young fellow
with a wide-awake face, who was nonchalantly stretched upon the red
velvet cushion of the window-seat, before a table, around which were
three other heads of thick hair worthy of our early kings.

"My dear Paul," said Jocquelet, in his most thrilling voice, handing
Sillery Amedee's manuscript, "here are some verses that I think are
superb, and I am going to recite them as soon as I can, at some
entertainment or benefit. Read them and give us your opinion of them. I
present their author to you, Monsieur Amedee Violette. Amedee, I present
you to Monsieur Paul Sillery."

All the heads of hair, framing young and amiable faces, turned curiously
toward the newcomer, whom Paul Sillery courteously invited to be seated,
with the established formula, "What will you take?" Then he began to read
the lines that the comedian had given him.

Amedee, seated on the edge of his chair, was distracted with timidity,
for Paul Sillery already enjoyed a certain reputation as a rising poet,
and had established a small literary sheet called La Guepe, which
published upon its first page caricatures of celebrated men with large
heads and little bodies, and Amedee had read in it some of Paul's poems,
full of impertinence and charm. An author whose work had been published!
The editor of a journal! The idea was stunning to poor innocent Violette,
who was not aware then that La Guepe could not claim forty subscribers.
He considered Sillery something wonderful, and waited with a beating
heart for the verdict of so formidable a judge. At the end of a few
moments Sillery said, without raising his eyes from the manuscript:

"Here are some fine verses!"

A flood of delight filled the heart of the poet from the Faubourg
St.-Jacques.

As soon as he had finished his reading, Paul arose from his seat, and,
extending both hands over the carafes and glasses to Amedee, said,
enthusiastically:

"Let me shake hands with you! Your description of the battle-scene is
astonishing! It is admirable! It is as clear and precise as Merimee, and
it has all the color and imagination that he lacks to make him a poet. It
is something absolutely new. My dear Monsieur Violette, I congratulate
you with all my heart! I can not ask you for this beautiful poem for La
Guepe that Jocquelet is so fortunate as to have to recite, and of which I
hope he will make a success. But I beg of you, as a great favor, to let
me have some verses for my paper; they will be, I am sure, as good as
these, if not better. To be sure, I forgot to tell you that we shall not
be able to pay you for the copy, as La Guepe does not prosper; I will
even admit that it only stands on one leg. In order to make it appear for
a few months longer, I have recently been obliged to go to a
money-lender, who has left me, instead of the classical stuffed
crocodile, a trained horse which he had just taken from an insolvent
circus. I mounted the noble animal to go to the Bois, but at the Place de
la Concorde he began to waltz around it, and I was obliged to get rid of
this dancing quadruped at a considerable loss. So your contribution to La
Guepe would have to be gratuitous, like those of all the rest. You will
give me the credit of having saluted you first of all, my dear Violette,
by the rare and glorious title of true poet. You will let me reserve the
pleasure of intoxicating you with the odor that a printer's first proofs
give, will you not? Is it agreed?"

Yes, it was agreed! That is to say, Amedee, touched to the depths of his
heart by so much good grace and fraternal cordiality, was so troubled in
trying to find words to express his gratitude, that he made a terrible
botch of it.

"Do not thank me," said Paul Sillery, with his pleasant but rather
sceptical smile, "and do not think me better than I am. If all your
verses are as strong as these that I have just read, you will soon
publish a volume that will make a sensation, and--who knows?--perhaps
will inspire me first of all with an ugly attack of jealousy. Poets are
no better than other people; they are like the majority of Adam's sons,
vain and envious, only they still keep the ability to admire, and the
gift of enthusiasm, and that proves their superiority and is to their
credit. I am delighted to have found a mare's nest to-day, an original
and sincere poet, and with your permission we will celebrate this happy
meeting. The price of the waltzing horse having hardly sufficed to pay
off the debt to the publisher of La Guepe, I am not in funds this
evening; but I have credit at Pere Lebuffle's, and I invite you all to
dinner at his pot-house; after which we will go to my rooms, where I
expect a few friends, and there you will read us your verses, Violette;
we will all read some of them, and have a fine orgy of rich rhymes."

This proposition was received with favor by the three young men with the
long hair, a la Clodion and Chilperic. As for Violette, he would have
followed Paul Sillery at that moment, had it been into the infernal
regions.

Jocquelet could not go with them, he had promised his evening to a lady,
he said, and he gave this excuse with such a conceited smile that all
were convinced he was going to crown himself with the most flattering of
laurels at the mansion of some princess of the royal blood. In reality,
he was going to see one of his Conservatoire friends, a large, lanky
dowdy, as swarthy as a mole and full of pretensions, who was destined for
the tragic line of character, and inflicted upon her lover Athalie's
dream, Camille's imprecations, and Phedre's monologue.

After paying for the refreshments, Sillery gave his arm to Amedee, and,
followed by the three Merovingians, they left the cafe. Forcing a way
through the crowd which obstructed the sidewalk of the Faubourg
Montmartre he conducted his guests to Pere Lebuffle's table d'hote, which
was situated on the third floor of a dingy old house in the Rue
Lamartine, where a sickening odor of burnt meat greeted them as soon as
they reached the top of the stairs. They found there, seated before a
tablecloth remarkable for the number of its wine-stains, two or three
wild-looking heads of hair, and four or five shaggy beards, to whom Pere
Lebuffle was serving soup, aided by a tired-looking servant. The name
under which Sillery had designated the proprietor of the table d'hote
might have been a nickname, for this stout person in his shirt-sleeves
recommended himself to one's attentions by his bovine face and his
gloomy, wandering eyes. To Amedee's amazement, Pere Lebuffle called the
greater part of his clients "thou," and as soon as the newcomers were
seated at table, Amedee asked Sillery, in a low voice, the cause of this
familiarity.

"It is caused by the hard times, my dear Violette," responded the editor
of 'La Guepe' as he unfolded his napkin. "There is no longer a 'Maecenas'
or 'Lawrence the Magnificent.' The last patron of literature and art is
Pere Lebufle. This wretched cook, who has perhaps never read a book or
seen a picture, has a fancy for painters and poets, and allows them to
cultivate that plant, Debt, which, contrary to other vegetables, grows
all the more, the less it is watered with instalments. We must pardon the
good man," said he, lowering his voice, "his little sin--a sort of
vanity. He wishes to be treated like a comrade and friend by the artists.
Those who have several accounts brought forward upon his ledger, arrive
at the point of calling him 'thou,' and I, alas! am of that number.
Thanks to that, I am going to make you drink something a little less
purgative than the so-called wine which is turning blue in that carafe,
and of which I advise you to be suspicious. I say, Lebuffle, my friend
here, Monsieur Amedee Violette, will be, sooner or later, a celebrated
poet. Treat him accordingly, my good fellow, and go and get us a bottle
of Moulins-Vent."

The conversation meanwhile became general between the bearded and
long-haired men. Is it necessary to say that they were all animated, both
politicians and 'litterateurs', with the most revolutionary sentiments?
At the very beginning, with the sardines, which evidently had been
pickled in lamp-oil, a terribly hairy man, the darkest of them all, with
a beard that grew up into its owner's eyes and then sprung out again in
tufts from his nose and ears, presented some elegiac regrets to the
memory of Jean-Paul Marat, and declared that at the next revolution it
would be necessary to realize the programme of that delightful friend of
the people, and make one hundred thousand heads fall.

"By thunder, Flambard, you have a heavy hand!" exclaimed one of the least
important of beards, one of those that degenerate into side-whiskers as
they become conservative. "One hundred thousand heads!"

"It is the minimum," replied the sanguinary beard.

Now, it had just been revealed to Amedee that under this ferocious beard
was concealed a photographer, well known for his failures, and the young
man could not help thinking that if the one hundred thousand heads in
question had posed before the said Flambard's camera, he would not show
such impatience to see them fall under the guillotine.

The conversation of the men with the luxuriant hair was none the less
anarchical when the roast appeared, which sprung from the legendary
animal called 'vache enragee'. The possessor of the longest and thickest
of all the shock heads, which spread over the shoulders of a young story
writer--between us, be it said, he made a mistake in not combing it
oftener--imparted to his brothers the subject for his new novel, which
should have made the hair of the others bristle with terror; for the
principal episode in this agreeable fiction was the desecration of a dead
body in a cemetery by moonlight. There was a sort of hesitation in the
audience, a slight movement of recoil, and Sillery, with a dash of
raillery in his glance, asked the novelist:

"Why the devil do you write such a story?"

The novelist replied, in a thundering tone:

"To astonish the bourgeoisie!"

And nobody made the slightest objection.

To "astonish the bourgeoisie" was the dearest hope and most ardent wish
of these young men, and this desire betrayed itself in their slightest
word; and doubtless Amedee thought it legitimate and even worthy of
praise. However, he did not believe--must we admit his lack of
confidence?--that so many glorious efforts were ever crowned with
success. He went so far as to ask himself whether the character and
cleverness of these bourgeoisie would not lead them to ignore not only
the works, but even the existence, of the authors who sought to
"astonish" them; and he thought, not without sadness, that when La Guepe
should have published this young novelist's ghostly composition, the
unconquerable bourgeoisie would know nothing about it, and would continue
to devote itself to its favorite customs, such as tapping the barometer
to know whether there was a change, or to heave a deep sigh after
guzzling its soup, saying, "I feel better!" without being the least
astonished in the world.

In spite of these mental reservations, which Amedee reproached himself
with, being himself an impure and contemptible Philistine, the poet was
delighted with his new friends and the unknown world opening before him.
In this Bohemian corner, where one got intoxicated with wild excesses and
paradoxes, recklessness and gayety reigned. The sovereign charm of youth
was there, and Amedee, who had until now lived in a dark hiding-place,
blossomed out in this warm atmosphere.

After a horrible dessert of cheese and prunes, Pere Lebuffle's guests
dispersed. Sillery escorted Amedee and the three Merovingians to the
little, sparsely furnished first floor in the Rue Pigalle, where he
lived; and half a dozen other lyric poets, who might have furnished some
magnificent trophies for an Apache warrior's scalping-knife, soon came to
reenforce the club which met there every Wednesday evening.

Seats were wanting at the beginning, but Sillery drew from a closet an
old black trunk which would hold two, and contented himself, as master of
the house, with sitting from time to time, with legs dangling, upon the
marble mantel. The company thus found themselves very comfortable; still
more so when an old woman with a dirty cap had placed upon the table, in
the middle of the room, six bottles of beer, some odd glasses, and a
large flowered plate upon which was a package of cut tobacco with
cigarette paper. They began to recite their verses in a cloud of smoke.
Each recited his own, called upon by Sillery; each would rise without
being urged, place his chair in front of him, and leaning one hand upon
its back, would recite his poem or elegy. Certainly some of them were
wanting in genius, some were even ludicrous. Among the number was a
little fellow with a cadaverous face, about as large as two farthings'
worth of butter, who declared, in a long speech with flat rhymes, that an
Asiatic harem was not capable of quenching his ardent love of pleasure. A
fat-faced fellow with a good, healthy, country complexion, announced, in
a long story, his formal intention of dying of a decline, on account of
the treason of a courtesan with a face as cold as marble; while, if the
facts were known, this peaceable boy lived with an artless child of the
people, brightening her lot by reducing her to a state of slavery; she
blacked his boots for him every morning before he left the house.

In spite of these ridiculous things, there were present some genuine
poets who knew their business and had real talent. These filled Amedee
with respect and fear, and when Sillery called his name, he arose with a
dry mouth and heavy heart.

"It is your turn now, you newcomer! Recite us your 'Before Sebastopol.'"

And so, thoroughbred that he was, Amedee overcame his emotion and
recited, in a thrilling voice, his military rhymes, that rang out like
the report of a veteran's gun.

The last stanza, was greeted with loud applause, and all the auditors
arose and surrounded Amedee to offer him their congratulations.

"Why, it is superb!"

"Entirely new!"

"It will make an enormous success!"

"It is just what is needed to arouse the public!"

"Recite us something else!--something else!"

Reassured and encouraged, master of himself, he recited a popular scene
in which he had freely poured out his love for the poor people. He next
recited some of his Parisian suburban scenes, and then a series of
sonnets, entitled "Love's Hopes," inspired by his dear Maria; and he
astonished all these poets by the versatility and variety of his
inspirations.

At each new poem bravos were thundered out, and the young man's heart
expanded with joy under this warm sunshine of success. His audience vied
with each other to approach Amedee first, and to shake his hand. Alas!
some of those who were there would, later, annoy him by their low envy
and treason; but now, in the generous frankness of their youth, they
welcomed him as a master.

What an intoxicating evening! Amedee reached his home about two o'clock
in the morning, his hands burning with the last grasps, his brain and
heart intoxicated with the strong wine of praise. He walked with long and
joyful strides through the fairy scene of a beautiful moonlight, in the
fresh morning wind which made his clothes flutter and caressed his face.
He thought he even felt the breath of fame.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Dreams, instead of living
     Fortunate enough to keep those one loves
     Learned that one leaves college almost ignorant
     Paint from nature
     The sincere age when one thinks aloud
     Upon my word, there are no ugly ones (women)
     Very young, and was in love with love


A ROMANCE OF YOUTH

By FRANCOIS COPPEE


BOOK 3.


CHAPTER XI

SUCCESS

Success, which usually is as fickle as justice, took long strides and
doubled its stations in order to reach Amedee. The Cafe de Seville, and
the coterie of long-haired writers, were busying themselves with the
rising poet already. His suite of sonnets, published in La Guepe, pleased
some of the journalists, who reproduced them in portions in
well-distributed journals. Ten days after Amedee's meeting with
Jocquelet, the latter recited his poem "Before Sebastopol" at a
magnificent entertainment given at the Gaite for the benefit of an
illustrious actor who had become blind and reduced to poverty.

This "dramatic solemnity," to use the language of the advertisement,
began by being terribly tiresome. There was an audience present who were
accustomed to grand Parisian soirees, a blase and satiated public, who,
upon this warm evening in the suffocating theatre, were more fatigued and
satiated than ever. The sleepy journalists collapsed in their chairs, and
in the back part of the stage-boxes, ladies' faces, almost green under
paint, showed the excessive lassitude of a long winter of pleasure. The
Parisians had all come there from custom, without having the slightest
desire to do so, just as they always came, like galley-slaves condemned
to "first nights." They were so lifeless that they did not even feel the
slightest horror at seeing one another grow old. This chloroformed
audience was afflicted with a long and too heavy programme, as is the
custom in performances of this kind. They played fragments of the best
known pieces, and sang songs from operas long since fallen into disuse
even on street organs. This public saw the same comedians march out; the
most famous are the most monotonous; the comical ones abused their
privileges; the lover spoke distractedly through his nose; the great
coquette--the actress par excellence, the last of the Celimenes
--discharged her part in such a sluggish way that when she began an
adverb ending in "ment," one would have almost had time to go out and
smoke a cigarette or drink a glass of beer before she reached the end
of the said adverb.

But at the most lethargic moment of this drowsy soirees, after the
comedians from the Francais had played in a stately manner one act from a
tragedy, Jocquelet appeared. Jocquelet, still a pupil at the
Conservatoire, showed himself to the public for the first time and by an
exceptional grace--Jocquelet, absolutely unknown, too short in his
evening clothes, in spite of the two packs of cards that he had put in
his boots. He appeared, full of audacity, riding his high horse, raising
his flat-nosed, bull-dog face toward the "gallery gods," and, in his
voice capable of making Jericho's wall fall or raising Jehoshaphat's
dead, he dashed off in one effort, but with intelligence and heroic
feeling, his comrade's poem.

The effect was prodigious. This bold, common, but powerful actor, and
these picturesque and modern verses were something entirely new to this
public satiated with old trash. What a happy surprise! Two novelties at
once! To think of discovering an unheard-of poet and an unknown comedian!
To nibble at these two green fruits! Everybody shook off his torpor; the
anaesthetized journalists aroused themselves; the colorless and sleepy
ladies plucked up a little animation; and when Jocquelet had made the
last rhyme resound like a grand flourish of trumpets, all applauded
enough to split their gloves.

In one of the theatre lobbies, behind a bill-board pasted over with old
placards, Amedee Violette heard with delight the sound of the applause
which seemed like a shower of hailstones. He dared not think of it! Was
it really his poem that produced so much excitement, which had thawed
this cold public? Soon he did not doubt it, for Jocquelet, who had just
been recalled three times, threw himself into the poet's arms and glued
his perspiring, painted face to his.

"Well, my little one, I have done it!" he exclaimed, bursting with
gratification and vanity. "You heard how I caught them!"

Immediately twenty, thirty, a hundred spectators appeared, most of them
very correct in white cravats, but all eager and with beaming
countenances, asking to see the author and the interpreter, and to be
presented to them, that they might congratulate them with an enthusiastic
word and a shake of the hand. Yes! it was a success, an instantaneous
one. It was certainly that rare tropical flower of the Parisian
greenhouse which blossoms out so seldom, but so magnificently.

One large, very common-looking man, wearing superb diamond shirt-buttons,
came in his turn to shake Amedee's hand, and in a hoarse, husky voice
which would have been excellent to propose tickets "cheaper than at the
office!" he asked for the manuscript of the poem that had just been
recited.

"It is so that I may put you upon the first page of my tomorrow's
edition, young man, and I publish eighty thousand. Victor Gaillard,
editor of 'Le Tapage'. Does that please you?"

He took the manuscript without listening to the thanks of the poet, who
trembled with joy at the thought that his work had caught the fancy of
this Barnum of the press, the foremost advertiser in France and Europe,
and that his verses would meet the eyes of two hundred thousand readers.

Yes, it was certainly a success, and he experienced the first bitterness
of it as soon as he arrived the next morning at the Cafe de Seville,
where he now went every two or three days at the hour for absinthe. His
verses had appeared in that morning's Tapage, printed in large type and
headed by a few lines of praise written by Victor Gaillard, a la Barnum.
As soon as Amedee entered the cafe he saw that he was the object of
general attention, and the lyric gentlemen greeted him with acclamations
and bravos; but at certain expressions of countenance, constrained looks,
and bitter smiles, the impressionable young man felt with a sudden
sadness that they already envied him.

"I warned you of it," said Paul Sillery to him, as he led him into a
corner of the cafe. "Our good friends are not pleased, and that is very
natural. The greater part of these rhymers are 'cheap jewellers,' and
they are jealous of a master workman. Above all things, pretend not to
notice it; they will never forgive you for guessing their bad sentiments.
And then you must be indulgent to them. You have your beautiful
lieutenant's epaulettes, Violette, do not be too hard upon these poor
privates. They also are fighting under the poetic flag, and ours is a
poverty-stricken regiment. Now you must profit by your good luck. Here
you are, celebrated in forty-eight hours. Do you see, even the political
people look at you with curiosity, although a poet in the estimation of
these austere persons is an inferior and useless being. It is all they
will do to accept Victor Hugo, and only on account of his 'Chatiments.'
You are the lion of the day. Lose no time. I met just now upon the
boulevard Massif, the publisher. He had read 'Le Tapage' and expects you.
Carry him all your poems to-morrow; there will be enough to make a
volume. Massif will publish it at his own expense, and you will appear
before the public in one month. You never will inveigle a second time
that big booby of a Gaillard, who took a mere passing fancy for you. But
no matter! I know your book, and it will be a success. You are launched.
Forward, march! Truly, I am better than I thought, for your success gives
me pleasure."

This amiable comrade's words easily dissipated the painful feelings that
Amedee had just experienced. However, it was one of those exalted moments
when one will not admit that evil exists. He spent some time with the
poets, forcing himself to be more gracious and friendly than ever, and
left them persuaded--the unsuspecting child!--that he had disarmed them
by his modesty; and very impatient to share his joy with his friends, the
Gerards, he quickly walked the length of Montmartre and reached them just
at their dinner hour.

They did not expect him, and only had for their dinner the remains of the
boiled beef of the night before, with some cucumbers. Amedee carried his
cake, as usual, and, what was better still, two sauces that always make
the poorest meal palatable--hope and happiness.

They had already read the journals and knew that the poem had been
applauded at the Gaite, and that it had at once been printed on the first
page of the journal; and they were all so pleased, so glad, that they
kissed Amedee on both cheeks. Mamma Gerard remembered that she had a few
bottles--five or six--of old chambertin in the cellar, and you could not
have prevented the excellent woman from taking her key and taper at once,
and going for those old bottles covered with cobwebs and dust, that they
might drink to the health of the triumphant one. As to Louise, she was
radiant, for in several houses where she gave lessons she had heard them
talk of the fine and admirable verses published in Le Tapage, and she was
very proud to think that the author was a friend of hers. What completed
Amedee's pleasure was that for the first time Maria seemed to be
interested in his poem, and said several times to him, with such a
pretty, vain little air:

"Do you know, your battle is very nice. Amedee, you are going to become a
great poet, a celebrated man! What a superb future you have before you!"

Ah! what exquisitely sweet hopes he carried away that evening to his room
in the Faubourg St.-Jacques! They gave him beautiful dreams, and pervaded
his thoughts the next morning when the concierge brought him two letters.

Still more happiness! The first letter contained two notes of a hundred
francs each, with Victor Gaillard's card, who congratulated Amedee anew
and asked him to write something for his journal in the way of prose; a
story, or anything he liked. The young poet gave a cry of joyful surprise
when he recognized the handwriting of Maurice Roger upon the other
envelope.

"I have just returned to Paris, my dear Amedee," wrote the traveller,
"and your success was my first greeting. I must embrace you quickly and
tell you how happy I am. Come to see me at four o'clock in my den in the
Rue Monsieur-le-Prince. We will dine and pass the evening together."

Ah! how the poet loved life that morning, how good and sweet it seemed to
him! Clothed in his best, he gayly descended the Rue St.-Jacques, where
boxes of asparagus and strawberries perfumed the fruit-stalls, and went
to the Boulevard St. Michel, where he purchased an elegant gray felt hat
and a new cravat. Then he went to the Cafe Voltaire, where he lunched. He
changed his second hundred-franc bill, so that he might feel, with the
pleasure of a child, the beautiful louis d'or which he owed to his work
and its success. At the office the head clerk--a good fellow, who sang
well at dinners--complimented Amedee upon his poem. The young man had
only made his appearance to ask for leave that afternoon, so as to take
his manuscript to the publisher.

Once more in the street in the bright May sun, after the fashion of
nabobs, he took an open carriage and was carried to Massif, in the
Passage des Princes. The editor of the Jeunes was seated in his office,
which was decorated with etchings and beautiful bindings. He is well
known by his magnificent black beard and his large bald head, upon which
a wicked jester once advised him to paste his advertisements; he
publishes the works of audacious authors and sensational books, and had
the honor of sharing with Charles Bazile, the poet, an imprisonment at
St.-Pelagie. He received this thin-faced rhymer coldly. Amedee introduced
himself, and at once there was a broad smile, a handshake, and a
connoisseur's greedy sniffling. Then Massif opened the manuscript.

"Let us see! Ah, yes, with margins and false titles we can make out two
hundred and fifty pages."

The business was settled quickly. A sheet of stamped paper--an agreement!
Massif will pay all the expenses of the first edition of one thousand,
and if there is another edition--and of course there will be!--he will
give him ten cents a copy. Amedee signs without reading. All that he asks
is that the volume should be published without delay.

"Rest easy, my dear poet! You will receive the first proofs in three
days, and in one month it will appear."

Was it possible? Was Amedee not dreaming? He, poor Violette's son, the
little office clerk--his book would be published, and in a month! Readers
and unknown friends will be moved by his agitation, will suffer in his
suspense; young people will love him and find an echo of their sentiments
in his verses; women will dreamily repeat--with one finger in his
book--some favorite verse that touches their hearts! Ah! he must have a
confidant in his joy, he must tell some true friend.

"Driver, take me to the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince."

He mounted, four steps at a time, the stairs leading to Maurice's room.
The key is in the door. He enters and finds the traveller there, standing
in the midst of the disorder of open trunks.

"Maurice!"

"Amedee!"

What an embrace! How long they stood hand in hand, looking at each other
with happy smiles!

Maurice is more attractive and gracious than ever. His beauty is more
manly, and his golden moustache glistens against his sun-browned skin.
What a fine fellow! How he rejoiced at his friend's first success!

"I am certain that your book will turn everybody's head. I always told
you that you were a genuine poet. We shall see!"

As to himself, he was happy too. His mother had let him off from studying
law and allowed him to follow his vocation. He was going to have a studio
and paint. It had all been decided in Italy, where Madame Roger had
witnessed her son's enthusiasm over the great masters. Ah, Italy! Italy!
and he began to tell of his trip, show knickknacks and souvenirs of all
kinds that littered the room. He turned in his hands, that he might show
all its outlines, a little terra-cotta reduction of the Antinous in the
Museum of Naples. He opened a box, full to bursting, of large
photographs, and passed them to his friend with exclamations of
retrospective admiration.

"Look! the Coliseum! the ruins of Paestum--and this antique from the
Vatican! Is it not beautiful?"

While looking at the pictures he recalled the things that he had seen and
the impressions he had experienced. There was a band of collegians in
little capes and short trousers taking their walk; they wore buckled
shoes, like the abbes of olden times, and nothing could be more droll
than to see these childish priests play leapfrog. There, upon the Riva
dei Schiavoni, he had followed a Venetian. "Shabbily dressed, and fancy,
my friend, bare-headed, in a yellow shawl with ragged green fringe! No, I
do not know whether she was pretty, but she possessed in her person all
the attractions of Giorgione's goddesses and Titian's courtesans
combined!"

Maurice is still the same wicked fellow. But, bah! it suits him; he even
boasts of it with such a joyous ardor and such a youthful dash, that it
is only one charm the more in him. The clock struck seven, and they went
to dine. They started off through the Latin Quarter. Maurice gave his arm
to Amedee and told him of his adventures on the other side of the Alps.
Maurice, once started on this subject, could not stop, and while the
dinner was being served the traveller continued to describe his
escapades. This kind of conversation was dangerous for Amedee; for it
must not be forgotten that for some time the young poet's innocence had
weighed upon him, and this evening he had some pieces of gold in his
pocket that rang a chime of pleasure. While Maurice, with his elbow upon
the table, told him his tales of love, Amedee gazed out upon the sidewalk
at the women who passed by in fresh toilettes, in the gaslight which
illuminated the green foliage, giving a little nod of the head to those
whom they knew. There was voluptuousness in the very air, and it was
Amedee who arose from the table and recalled to Maurice that it was
Thursday, and that there was a fete that night at Bullier's; and he also
was the one to add, with a deliberate air:

"Shall we take a turn there?"

"Willingly," replied his gay friend. "Ah, ha! we are then beginning to
enjoy ourselves a little, Monsieur Violette! Go to Bullier's? so be it. I
am not sorry to assure myself whether or not I still love the Parisians."

They started off, smoking their cigarettes. Upon the highway, going in
the same direction as themselves, were victorias carrying women in spring
costumes and wearing bonnets decked with flowers. From time to time the
friends were elbowed by students shouting popular refrains and walking in
Indian-file.

Here is Bullier's! They step into the blazing entrance, and go thence to
the stairway which leads to the celebrated public ballroom. They are
stifled by the odor of dust, escaping gas, and human flesh. Alas! there
are in every village in France doctors in hansom cabs, country lawyers,
and any quantity of justices of the peace, who, I can assure you, regret
this stench as they take the fresh air in the open country under the
starry heavens, breathing the exquisite perfume of new-mown hay; for it
is mingled with the little poetry that they have had in their lives, with
their student's love-affairs, and their youth.

All the same, this Bullier's is a low place, a caricature of the Alhambra
in pasteboard. Three or four thousand moving heads in a cloud of
tobacco-smoke, and an exasperating orchestra playing a quadrille in which
dancers twist and turn, tossing their legs with calm faces and audacious
gestures.

"What a mob!" said Amedee, already a trifle disgusted. "Let us go into
the garden."

They were blinded by the gas there; the thickets looked so much like old
scenery that one almost expected to see the yellow breastplates of
comic-opera dragoons; and the jet of water recalled one of those little
spurts of a shooting-gallery upon which an empty egg-shell dances. But
they could breathe there a little.

"Boy! two sodas," said Maurice, striking the table with his cane; and the
two friends sat down near the edge of a walk where the crowd passed and
repassed. They had been there about ten minutes when two women stopped
before them.

"Good-day, Maurice," said the taller, a brunette with rich coloring, the
genuine type of a tavern girl.

"What, Margot!" exclaimed the young man. "Will you take something? Sit
down a moment, and your friend too. Do you know, your friend is charming?
What is her name?"

"Rosine," replied the stranger, modestly, for she was only about
eighteen, and, in spite of the blond frizzles over her eyes, she was not
yet bold, poor child! She was making her debut, it was easy to see.

"Well, Mademoiselle Rosine, come here, that I may see you," continued
Maurice, seating the young girl beside him with a caressing gesture.
"You, Margot, I authorize to be unfaithful to me once more in favor of my
friend Amedee. He is suffering with lovesickness, and has a heart to let.
Although he is a poet, I think he happens to have in his pocket enough to
pay for a supper."

Everywhere and always the same, the egotistical and amiable Maurice takes
the lion's share, and Amedee, listening only with one ear to the large
Margot, who is already begging him to make an acrostic for her, thinks
Rosine is charming, while Maurice says a thousand foolish things to her.
In spite of himself, the poet looks upon Maurice as his superior, and
thinks it perfectly natural that he should claim the prettier of the two
women. No matter! Amedee wanted to enjoy himself too. This Margot, who
had just taken off her gloves to drink her wine, had large, red hands,
and seemed as silly as a goose, but all the same she was a beautiful
creature, and the poet began to talk to her, while she laughed and looked
at him with a wanton's eyes. Meanwhile the orchestra burst into a polka,
and Maurice, in raising his voice to speak to his friend, called him
several times Amedee, and once only by his family name, Violette.
Suddenly little Rosine started up and looked at the poet, saying with
astonishment:

"What! Is your name Amedee Violette?"

"Certainly."

"Then you are the boy with whom I played so much when I was a child."

"With me?"

"Yes! Do you not remember Rosine, little Rosine Combarieu, at Madame
Gerard's, the engraver's wife, in the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs? We
played games with his little girls. How odd it is, the way one meets old
friends!"

What is it that Amedee feels? His entire childhood rises before him. The
bitterness of the thought that he had known this poor girl in her
innocence and youth, and the Gerards' name spoken in such a place, filled
the young man's heart with a singular sadness. He could only say to
Rosine, in a voice that trembled a little with pity:

"You! Is it you?"

Then she became red and very embarrassed, lowering her eyes.

Maurice had tact; he noticed that Rosine and Amedee were agitated, and,
feeling that he was de trop, he arose suddenly and said:

"Now then, Margot. Come on! these children want to talk over their
childhood, I think. Give up your acrostic, my child. Take my arm, and
come and have a turn."

When they were alone Amedee gazed at Rosine sadly. She was pretty, in
spite of her colorless complexion, a child of the faubourg, born with a
genius for dress, who could clothe herself on nothing-a linen gown, a
flower in her hat. One who lived on salads and vegetables, so as to buy
well-made shoes and eighteen-button gloves.

The pretty blonde looked at Amedee, and a timid smile shone in her
nut-brown eyes.

"Now, Monsieur Amedee," said she, at last, "it need not trouble you to
meet at Bullier's the child whom you once played with. What would have
been astonishing would be to find that I had become a fine lady. I am not
wise, it is true, but I work, and you need not fear that I go with the
first comer. Your friend is a handsome fellow, and very amiable, and I
accepted his attentions because he knew Margot, while with you it is very
different. It gives me pleasure to talk with you. It recalls Mamma
Gerard, who was so kind to me. What has become of her, tell me? and her
husband and her daughters?"

"Monsieur Gerard is dead," replied Amedee; "but the ladies are well, and
I see them often."

"Do not tell them that you met me here, will you? It is better not. If I
had had a good 'mother, like those girls, things would have turned out
differently for me. But, you remember, papa was always interested in his
politics. When I was fifteen years old he apprenticed me to a florist. He
was a fine master, a perfect monster of a man, who ruined me! I say, Pere
Combarieu has a droll trade now; he is manager of a Republican
journal--nothing to do--only a few months in prison now and then. I am
always working in flowers, and I have a little friend, a pupil at
Val-de-Grace, but he has just left as a medical officer for Algeria. I
was lonely all by myself, and this evening big Margot, whom I got
acquainted with in the shop, brought me here to amuse myself. But
you--what are you doing? Your friend said just now that you were a poet.
Do you write songs? I always liked them. Do you remember when I used to
play airs with one finger upon the Gerards' old piano? You were such a
pretty little boy then, and as gentle as a girl. You still have your nice
blue eyes, but they are a little darker. I remember them. No, you can not
know how glad I am to see you again!"

They continued to chatter, bringing up old reminiscences, and when she
spoke of the Gerard ladies she put on a respectful little air which
pleased Amedee very much. She was a poor feather-headed little thing, he
did not doubt; but she had kept at least the poor man's treasure, a
simple heart. The young man was pleased with her prattling, and as he
looked at the young girl he thought of the past and felt a sort of
compassion for her. As she was silent for a moment, the poet said to her,
"Do you know that you have become very pretty? What a charming complexion
you have! such a lovely pallor!"

The grisette, who had known what poverty was, gave a bitter little laugh:

"Oh, my pallor! that is nothing! It is not the pallor of wealth."

Then, recovering her good-humor at once, she continued:

"Tell me, Monsieur Amedee, does this big Margot, whom you began to pay
attentions to a little while ago, please you?"

Amedee quickly denied it. "That immense creature? Never! Now then,
Rosine, I came here to amuse myself a little, I will admit. That is not
forbidden at my age, is it? But this ball disgusts me. You have no
appointment here? No? Is it truly no? Very well, take my arm and let us
go. Do you live far from here?"

"In the Avenue d'Orleans, near the Montrouge church."

"Will you allow me to escort you home, then?"

She would be happy to, and they arose and left the ball. It seemed to the
young poet as if the pretty girl's arm trembled a little in his; but once
upon the boulevard, flooded by the light from the silvery moon, Rosine
slackened her steps and became pensive, and her eyes were lowered when
Amedee sought a glance from them in the obscurity. How sweet was this new
desire that troubled the young man's heart! It was mixed with a little
sentiment; his heart beat with emotion, and Rosine was not less moved.
They could both find only insignificant things to say.

"What a beautiful night!"

"Yes! It does one good to breathe the fresh air."

They continued their walk without speaking. Oh, how fresh and sweet it
was under these trees!

At last they reached the door of Rosine's dwelling. With a slow movement
she pressed her hand upon the bell-button. Then Amedee, with a great
effort, and in a confused, husky voice, asked whether he might go up with
her and see her little room.

She looked at him steadily, with a tender sadness in her eyes, and then
said to him, softly:

"No, certainly not! One must be sensible. I please you this evening, and
you know very well that I think you are charming. It is true we knew each
other when we were young, and now that we have met again, it seems as if
it would be pleasant to love each other. But, believe me, we should
commit a great folly, perhaps a wrong. It is better, I assure you, to
forget that you ever met me at Bullier's with big Margot, and only
remember your little playmate of the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs. It will
be better than a caprice, it will be something pure that you can keep in
your heart. Do not let us spoil the remembrance of our childhood,
Monsieur Amedee, and let us part good friends."

Before the young man could find a reply, the bell pealed again, and
Rosine gave Amedee a parting smile, lightly kissing the tips of her
fingers, and disappeared behind the doer, which fell together, with a
loud bang. The poet's first movements was one of rage. Giddy weather-cock
of a woman! But he had hardly taken twenty steps upon the sidewalk before
he said to himself, with a feeling of remorse, "She was right!" He
thought that this poor girl had kept in one corner of her heart a shadow
of reserve and modesty, and he was happy to feel rise within him a sacred
respect for woman!

Amedee, my good fellow, you are quite worthless as a man of pleasure. You
had better give it up!


CHAPTER XII

SOCIAL TRIUMPHS

For one month now Amedee Violette's volume of verses, entitled Poems from
Nature, had embellished with its pale-blue covers the shelves of the
book-shops. The commotion raised by the book's success, and the favorable
criticisms given by the journals, had not yet calmed down at the Cafe de
Seville.

This emotion, let it be understood, did not exist except among the
literary men. The politicians disdained poets and poetry, and did not
trouble them selves over such commonplace matters. They had affairs of a
great deal more importance to determine the overthrow of the government
first, then to remodel the map of Europe! What was necessary to over
throw the Empire? First, conspiracy; second, barricades. Nothing was
easier than to conspire. Every body conspired at the Seville. It is the
character of the French, who are born cunning, but are light and
talkative, to conspire in public places. As soon as one of our
compatriots joins a secret society his first care is to go to his
favorite restaurant and to confide, under a bond of the most absolute
secrecy, to his most intimate friend, what he has known for about five
minutes, the aim of the conspiracy, names of the actors, the day, hour,
and place of the rendezvous, the passwords and countersigns. A little
while after he has thus relieved himself, he is surprised that the police
interfere and spoil an enterprise that has been prepared with so much
mystery and discretion. It was in this way that the "beards" dealt in
dark deeds of conspiracy at the Cafe de Seville. At the hour for absinthe
and mazagran a certain number of Fiesques and Catilines were grouped
around each table. At one of the tables in the foreground five old
"beards," whitened by political crime, were planning an infernal machine;
and in the back of the room ten robust hands had sworn upon the
billiard-table to arm themselves for regicide; only, as with all
"beards," there were necessarily some false ones among them, that is to
say, spies. All the plots planned at the Seville had miserably
miscarried.

The art of building barricades was also--you never would suspect
it!--very ardently and conscientiously studied. This special branch of
the science of fortification reckoned more than one Vauban and Gribeauval
among its numbers. "Professor of barricading," was a title honored at the
Cafe de Seville, and one that they would willingly have had engraved upon
their visiting-cards. Observe that the instruction was only theoretical;
doubtless out of respect for the policemen, they could not give entirely
practical lessons to the future rioters who formed the ground-work of the
business. The master or doctor of civil war could not go out with them,
for instance, and practise in the Rue Drouot. But he had one resource,
one way of getting out of it; namely, dominoes. No! you never would
believe what a revolutionary appearance these inoffensive mutton-bones
took on under the seditious hands of the habitues of the Cafe de Seville.
These miniature pavements simulated upon the marble table the subjugation
of the most complicated of barricades, with all sorts of bastions,
redans, and counterscarps. It was something after the fashion of the
small models of war-ships that one sees in marine museums. Any one, not
in the secret, would have supposed that the "beards" simply played
dominoes. Not at all! They were pursuing a course of technical
insurrection. When they roared at the top of their lungs "Five on all
sides!" certain players seemed to order a general discharge, and they had
a way of saying, "I can not!" which evidently expressed the despair of a
combatant who has burned his last cartridge. A "beard" in glasses and a
stovepipe hat, who had been refused in his youth at the Ecole
Polytechnique, was frightful in the rapidity and mathematical precision
with which he added up in three minutes his barricade of dominoes. When
this man "blocked the six," you were transported in imagination to the
Rue Transnonain, or to the Cloitre St. Merry. It was terrible!

As to foreign politics, or the remodelling of the map of Europe, it was,
properly speaking, only sport and recreation to the "beards." It added
interest to the game, that was all. Is it not agreeable, when you are
preparing a discard, at the decisive moment, with one hundred at piquet,
which gives you 'quinte' or 'quatorze', to deliver unhappy Poland; and
when one has the satisfaction to score a king and take every trick, what
does it cost to let the Russians enter Constantinople?

Nevertheless, some of the most solemn "beards" of the Cafe de Seville
attached themselves to international questions, to the great problem of
European equilibrium. One of the most profound of these diplomats--who
probably had nothing to buy suspenders with, for his shirt always hung
out between his waistcoat and trousers--was persuaded that an indemnity
of two million francs would suffice to obtain from the Pope the transfer
of Rome to the Italians; and another Metternich on a small scale assumed
for his specialty the business of offering a serious affront to England
and threatening her, if she did not listen to his advice, with a loss in
a short time of her Indian Empire and other colonial possessions.

Thus the "beards," absorbed by such grave speculations, did not trouble
themselves about the vanity called literature, and did not care a pin for
Amedee Violette's book. Among the long-haired ones, however, we repeat,
the emotion was great. They were furious, they were agitated, and
bristled up; the first enthusiasm over Amedee Violette's verses could not
be lasting and had been only a mere flash. The young man saw these
Merovingians as they really were toward a man who succeeded, that is,
severe almost to cruelty. What! the first edition of Poems from Nature
was exhausted and Massif had another in press! What! the bourgeoisie, far
from being "astonished" at this book, declared themselves delighted with
it, bought it, read it, and perhaps had it rebound! They spoke favorably
of it in all the bourgeois journals, that is to say, in those that had
subscribers! Did they not say that Violette, incited by Jocquelet, was
working at a grand comedy in verse, and that the Theatre-Francais had
made very flattering offers to the poet? But then, if he pleased the
bourgeoisie so much he was--oh, horror!--a bourgeois himself. That was
obvious. How blind they had been not to see it sooner! When Amedee had
read his verses not long since at Sillery's, by what aberration had they
confounded this platitude with simplicity, this whining with sincere
emotion, these stage tricks with art? Ah! you may rest assured, they
never will be caught again!

As the poets' tables at the Cafe de Seville had been for some time
transformed into beds of torture upon which Amedee Violette's poems were
stretched out and racked every day from five to seven, the amiable Paul
Sillery, with a jeering smile upon his lips, tried occasionally to cry
pity for his friend's verses, given up to such ferocious executioners.
But these literary murderers, ready to destroy a comrade's book, are more
pitiless than the Inquisition. There were two inquisitors more relentless
than the others; first, the little scrubby fellow who claimed for his
share all the houris of a Mussulman's palace; another, the great elegist
from the provinces. Truly, his heartaches must have made him gain flesh,
for very soon he was obliged to let out the strap on his waistcoat.

Of course, when Amedee appeared, the conversation was immediately
changed, and they began to talk of insignificant things that they had
read in the journals; for example, the fire-damp, which had killed
twenty-five working-men in a mine, in a department of the north; or of
the shipwreck of a transatlantic steamer in which everything was lost,
with one hundred and fifty passengers and forty sailors--events of no
importance, we must admit, if one compares them to the recent discovery
made by the poet inquisitors of two incorrect phrases and five weak
rhymes in their comrade's work.

Amedee's sensitive nature soon remarked the secret hostility of which he
was the object in this group of poets, and he now came to the Cafe de
Seville only on rare occasions, in order to take Paul Sillery by the
hand, who, in spite of his ironical air, had always shown himself a good
and faithful friend.

It was there that he recognized one evening his classmate of the Lycee,
Arthur Papillon, seated at one of the political tables. The poet wondered
to himself how this fine lawyer, with his temperate opinions, happened to
be among these hot-headed revolutionists, and what interest in common
could unite this correct pair of blond whiskers to the uncultivated,
bushy ones. Papillon, as soon as he saw Amedee, took leave of the group
with whom he was talking and came and offered his hearty congratulations
to the author of Poems from Nature, leading him out upon the boulevard
and giving him the key to the mystery.

All the old parties were united against the Empire, in view of the coming
elections; Orleanists and Republicans were, for the time being, close
friends. He, Papillon, had just taken his degree, and had attached
himself to the fortunes of an old wreck of the July government; who,
having rested in oblivion since 1852, had consented to run as candidate
for the Liberal opposition in Seine-et-Oise. Papillon was flying around
like a hen with her head cut off, to make his companion win the day. He
came to the Seville to assure himself of the neutral goodwill of the
unreconciled journalists, and he was full of hope.

"Oh! my dear friend, how difficult it is to struggle against an official
candidate! But our candidate is an astonishing man. He goes about all day
upon the railroads in our department, unfolding his programme before the
travelling countrymen and changing compartments at each station. What a
stroke of genius! a perambulating public assembling. This idea came to
him from seeing a harpist make the trip from Havre to Honfleur, playing
'Il Bacio' all the time. Ah, one must look alive! The prefect does not
shrink from any way of fighting us. Did he not spread through one of our
most Catholic cantons the report that we were Voltairians, enemies to
religion and devourers of priests? Fortunately, we have yet four Sundays
before us, from now until the voting-day, and the patron will go to high
mass and communion in our four more important parishes. That will be a
response! If such a man is not elected, universal suffrage is hopeless!"

Amedee was not at that time so disenchanted with political matters as he
became later, and he asked himself with an uneasy feeling whether this
model candidate, who was perhaps about to give himself sacrilgious
indigestion, and who showed his profession of faith as a cutler shows
his knives, was not simply a quack.

Arthur Papillon did not give him time to devote himself to such
unpleasant reflections, but said to him, in a frank, protecting tone:

"And you, my boy, let us see, where do you stand? You have been very
successful, have you not? The other evening at the house of Madame la
Comtesse Fontaine, you know--the widow of one of Louis Philippe's
ministers and daughter of Marshal Lefievre--Jocquelet recited your
'Sebastopol' with enormous success. What a voice that Jocquelet has! We
have not his like at the Paris bar. Fortunate poet! I have seen your book
lying about in the boudoir of more than one beautiful woman. Well, I hope
that you will leave the Cafe de Seville and not linger with all these
badly combed fellows. You must go into society; it is indispensable to a
man of letters, and I will present you whenever you wish."

For the time being Amedee's ardor was a little dampened concerning the
Bohemians with whom he enjoyed so short a favor, and who had also in many
ways shocked his delicacy. He was not desirous to be called "thou" by
Pere Lebuffle.

But to go into society! His education had been so modest! Should he know
how to appear, how to conduct himself properly? He asked this of
Papillon. Our poet was proud, he feared ridicule, and would not consent
to play an inferior role anywhere; and then his success just then was
entirely platonic. He was still very poor and lived in the Faubourg
St.-Jacques. Massif ought to pay him in a few days five hundred francs
for the second edition of his book; but what is a handful of napoleons?

"It is enough," said the advocate, who thought of his friend's dress. "It
is all that is necessary to buy fine linen, and a well cut dress-coat,
that is the essential thing. Good form consists, above all things, in
keeping silent. With your fine and yielding nature you will become at
once a gentleman; better still, you are not a bad-looking fellow; you
have an interesting pallor. I am convinced that you will please. It is
now the beginning of July, and Paris is almost empty, but Madame la
Comtesse Fontaine does not go away until the vacations, as she is looking
after her little son, who is finishing his studies at the Lycee
Bonaparte. The Countess's drawing-rooms are open every evening until the
end of the month, and one meets there all the chic people who are delayed
in Paris, or who stop here between two journeys. Madame Fontaine is a
very amiable and influential old lady; she has a fancy for writers when
they are good company. Do not be silly, but go and order yourself some
evening clothes. By presenting you there, my dear fellow, I assure you,
perhaps in fifteen years, a seat in the Academy. It is agreed! Get ready
for next week."

Attention! Amedee Violette is about to make his first appearance in
society.

Although his concierge, who aided him to finish his toilette and saw him
put on his white cravat, had just said to him, "What a love of a husband
you would make!" the poet's heart beat rapidly when the carriage in which
he was seated beside Arthur Papillon stopped before the steps of an old
house in the Rue de Bellechasse, where Madame la Comtesse Fontaine lived.

In the vestibule he tried to imitate the advocate's bearing, which was
full of authority; but quickly despaired of knowing how to swell out his
starched shirt-front under the severe looks of four tall lackeys in silk
stockings. Amedee was as much embarrassed as if he were presented naked
before an examining board. But they doubtless found him "good for
service," for the door opened into a brightly lighted drawing-room into
which he followed Arthur Papillon, like a frail sloop towed in by an
imposing three-master, and behold the timid Amedee presented in due form
to the mistress of the house! She was a lady of elephantine proportions,
in her sixtieth year, and wore a white camellia stuck in her
rosewood-colored hair. Her face and arms were plastered with enough flour
to make a plate of fritters; but for all that, she had a grand air and
superb eyes, whose commanding glance was softened by so kindly a smile
that Amedee was a trifle reassured.

She had much applauded M. Violette's beautiful verse, she said, that
Jocquelet had recited at her house on the last Thursday of her season;
and she had just read with the greatest pleasure his Poems from Nature.
She thanked M. Papillon--who bows his head and lets his monocle fall--for
having brought M. Violette. She was charmed to make his acquaintance.

Amedee was very much embarrassed to know what to reply to this
commonplace compliment which was paid so gracefully. Fortunately he was
spared this duty by the arrival of a very much dressed, tall, bony woman,
toward whom the Countess darted off with astonishing vivacity,
exclaiming, joyfully: "Madame la Marechale!" and Amedee, still following
in the wake of his comrade, sailed along toward the corner of the
drawing-room, and then cast anchor before a whole flotilla of black
coats. Amedee's spirits began to revive, and he examined the place, so
entirely new to him, where his growing reputation had admitted him.

It was a vast drawing-room after the First Empire style, hung and
furnished in yellow satin, whose high white panels were decorated with
trophies of antique weapons carved in wood and gilded. A dauber from the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts would have branded with the epithet "sham" the
armchairs and sofas ornamented with sphinx heads in bronze, as well as
the massive green marble clock upon which stood, all in gold, a favorite
court personage, clothed in a cap, sword, and fig-leaf, who seemed to be
making love to a young person in a floating tunic, with her hair dressed
exactly like that of the Empress Josephine. But the dauber would have
been wrong, for this massive splendor was wanting neither in grandeur nor
character. Two pictures only lighted up the cold walls; one, signed by
Gros, was an equestrian portrait of the Marshal, Madame Fontaine's
father, the old drummer of Pont de Lodi, one of the bravest of Napoleon's
lieutenants. He was represented in full-dress uniform, with an enormous
black-plumed hat, brandishing his blue velvet baton, sprinkled with
golden bees, and under the rearing horse's legs one could see in the dim
distance a grand battle in the snow, and mouths of burning cannons. The
other picture, placed upon an easel and lighted by a lamp with a
reflector, was one of Ingre's the 'chef-d'oeuvres'. It was the portrait
of the mistress of the house at the age of eighteen, a portrait of which
the Countess was now but an old and horrible caricature.

Arthur Papillon talked in a low voice with Amedee, explaining to him how
Madame Fontaine's drawing-room was neutral ground, open to people of all
parties. As daughter of a Marshal of the First Empire, the Countess
preserved the highest regard for the people at the Tuileries, although
she was the widow of Count Fontaine, who was one of the brood of
Royer-Collard's conservatives, a parliamentarian ennobled by
Louis-Philippe, twice a colleague of Guizot on the ministerial bench, who
died of spite and suppressed ambition after '48 and the coup d'etat.
Besides, the Countess's brother, the Duc d'Eylau, married, in 1829, one
of the greatest heiresses in the Faubourg St. Germain; for his father,
the Marshal, whose character did not equal his bravery, attached himself
to every government, and carried his candle in the processions on Corpus
Christi Day under Charles X, and had ended by being manager of the
Invalides at the beginning of the July monarchy. Thanks to this fortunate
combination of circumstances, one met several great lords, many
Orleanists, a certain number of official persons, and even some
republicans of high rank, in this liberal drawing-room, where the
Countess, who was an admirable hostess, knew how to attract learned men,
writers, artists, and celebrities of all kinds, as well as young and
pretty women. As the season was late, the gathering this evening was not
large. However, neglecting the unimportant gentlemen whose ancestors had
perhaps been fabricated by Pere Issacar, Papillon pointed out to his
friend a few celebrities. One, with the badge of the Legion of Honor upon
his coat, which looked as if it had come from the stall of an old-clothes
man, was Forgerol, the great geologist, the most grasping of scientific
men; Forgerol, rich from his twenty fat sinecures, for whom one of his
confreres composed this epitaph in advance: "Here lies Forgerol, in the
only place he did not solicit."

That grand old man, with the venerable, shaky head, whose white, silky
hair seemed to shed blessings and benedictions, was M. Dussant du Fosse,
a philanthropist by profession, honorary president of all charitable
works; senator, of course, since he was one of France's peers, and who in
a few years after the Prussians had left, and the battles were over,
would sink into suspicious affairs and end in the police courts.

That old statesman, whose rough, gray hairs were like brushes for
removing cobwebs, a pedant from head to foot, leaning in his favorite
attitude against the mantel decorated only with flowers, by his mulish
obstinacy contributed much to the fall of the last monarchy. He was
respectfully listened to and called "dear master" by a republican orator,
whose red-hot convictions began to ooze away, and who, soon after, as
minister of the Liberal empire, did his best to hasten the government's
downfall.

Although Amedee was of an age to respect these notabilities, whom
Papillon pointed out to him with so much deference, they did not impress
him so much as certain visitors who belonged to the world of art and
letters. In considering them the young man was much surprised and a
little saddened at the want of harmony that he discovered between the
appearance of the men and the nature of their talents. The poet Leroy des
Saules had the haughty attitude and the Apollo face corresponding to the
noble and perfect beauty of his verses; but Edouard Durocher, the
fashionable painter of the nineteenth century, was a large,
common-looking man with a huge moustache, like that of a book agent; and
Theophile de Sonis, the elegant story-writer, the worldly romancer, had a
copper-colored nose, and his harsh beard was like that of a chief in a
custom-house.

What attracted Amedee's attention, above all things, were the women--the
fashionable women that he saw close by for the first time. Some of them
were old, and horrified him. The jewels with which they were loaded made
their fatigued looks, dark-ringed eyes, heavy profiles, thick flabby
lips, like a dromedary's, still more distressing; and with their bare
necks and arms--it was etiquette at Madame Fontaine's receptions--which
allowed one to see through filmy lace their flabby flesh or bony
skeletons, they were as ridiculous as an elegant cloak would be upon an
old crone.

As he saw these decrepit, painted creatures, the young man felt the
respect that he should have for the old leave him. He would look only at
the young and beautiful women, those with graceful figures and triumphant
smiles upon their lips, flowers in their hair, and diamonds upon their
necks. All this bare flesh intimidated Amedee; for he had been brought up
so privately and strictly that he was distressed enough to lower his eyes
at the sight of so many arms, necks, and shoulders. He thought of Maria
Gerard as she looked the other day, when he met her going to work in the
Louvre, so pretty in her short high-necked dress, her magnificent hair
flying out from her close bonnet, and her box of pastels in her hand. How
much more he preferred this simple rose, concealed among thorns, to all
these too full-blown peonies!

Soon the enormous and amiable Countess came to the poet and begged him,
to his great confusion, to recite a few verses. He was forced to do it.
It was his turn to lean upon the mantel. Fortunately it was a success for
him; all the full-blown peonies, who did not understand much of his
poetry, thought him a handsome man, with his blue eyes, and their ardent,
melancholy glance; and they applauded him as much as they could without
bursting their very tight gloves. They surrounded him and complimented
him. Madame Fontaine presented him to the poet Leroy des Saules, who
congratulated him with the right word, and invited him with a paternal
air to come and see him. It would have been a very happy moment for
Amedee, if one of the old maids with camel-like lips, whose stockings
were probably as blue as her eyelids, had not monopolized him for a
quarter of an hour, putting him through a sort of an examination on
contemporary poets. At last the poet retired, after receiving a cup of
tea and an invitation to dinner for the next Tuesday. Then he was once
more seated in the carriage with Arthur Papillon, who gave him a slap on
the thigh, exclaiming, joyfully:

"Well, you are launched!"

It was true; he was launched, and he will wear out more than one suit of
evening clothes before he learns all that this action "going into
society," which seems nothing at all at first, and which really is
nothing, implies, to an industrious man and artist, of useless activity
and lost time. He is launched! He has made a successful debut! A dinner
in the city! At Madame Fontaine's dinner on the next Tuesday, some
abominable wine and aged salmon was served to Amedee by a butler named
Adolphe, who ought rather to have been called Exili or Castaing, and who,
after fifteen years' service to the Countess, already owned two good
paying houses in Paris. At the time, however, all went well, for Amedee
had a good healthy stomach and could digest buttons from a uniform; but
when all the Borgias, in black-silk stockings and white-silk gloves, who
wish to become house-owners, have cooked their favorite dishes for him,
and have practised only half a dozen winters, two or three times a week
upon him, we shall know more as to his digestion. Still that dinner was
enjoyable. Beginning with the suspicious salmon, the statesman with the
brush-broom head, the one who had overthrown Louis-Philippe without
suspecting it, started to explain how, if they had listened to his
advice, this constitutional king's dynasty would yet be upon the throne;
and at the moment when the wretched butler poured out his most poisonous
wine, the old lady who looked like a dromedary with rings in its ears,
made Amedee--her unfortunate neighbor--undergo a new oral examination
upon the poets of the nineteenth century, and asked him what he thought
of Lamartine's clamorous debts, and Victor Hugo's foolish pride, and
Alfred de Musset's intemperate habits.

The worthy Amedee is launched! He will go and pay visits of indigestion;
appear one day at Madame such a one's, and at the houses of several other
"Madames." At first he will stay there a half-hour, the simpleton! until
he sees that the cunning ones only come in and go out exactly as one does
in a booth at a fair. He will see pass before him--but this time in
corsages of velvet or satin-all the necks and shoulders of his
acquaintances, those that he turned away from with disgust and those that
made him blush. Each Madame this one, entering Madame that one's house,
will seat herself upon the edge of a chair, and will always say the same
inevitable thing, the only thing that can be or should be said that day;
for example, "So the poor General is dead!" or "Have you heard the new
piece at the Francais? It is not very strong, but it is well played!"
"This will be delicious;" and Amedee will admire, above all things,
Madame this one's play of countenance, when Madame G------tells her that
Madame B-------'s daughter is to marry Madame C-----'s nephew. While she
hardly knows these people, she will manifest as lively a joy as if they
had announced the death of an old aunt, whose money she is waiting for to
renew the furniture in her house. And, on the contrary, when Madame
D---announces that Madame E-----'s little son has the whooping-cough, at
once, without transition, by a change of expression that would make the
fortune of an actress, the lady of the house puts on an air of
consternation, as if the cholera had broken out the night before in the
Halles quarter.

Amedee is launched, I repeat it. He is still a little green and will
become the dupe, for a long time, of all the shams, grimaces, acting, and
false smiles, which cover so many artificial teeth. At first sight all is
elegance, harmony, and delicacy. Since Amedee does not know that the
Princess Krazinska's celebrated head of hair was cut from the heads of
the Breton girls, how could he suspect that the austere defender of the
clergy, M. Lemarguillier, had been gravely compromised in a love affair,
and had thrown himself at the feet of the chief of police, exclaiming,
"Do not ruin me!" When the king of society is announced, the young Duc de
la Tour-Prends-Garde, whose one ancestor was at the battle of the bridge,
and who is just now introducing a new style in trousers, Amedee could not
suspect that the favorite amusement of this fashionable rake consisted in
drinking in the morning upon an empty stomach, with his coachman, at a
grog-shop on the corner. When the pretty Baroness des Nenuphars blushed
up to her ears because someone spoke the word "tea-spoon" before her, and
she considered it to be an unwarrantable indelicacy--nobody knows why--it
is assuredly not our young friend who will suspect that, in order to pay
the gambling debts of her third lover, this modest person had just sold
secretly her family jewels.

Rest assured Amedee will lose all these illusions in time. The day will
come when he will not take in earnest this grand comedy in white cravats.
He will not have the bad taste to show his indignation. No! he will pity
these unfortunate society people condemned to hypocrisy and falsehood. He
will even excuse their whims and vices as he thinks of the frightful
ennui that overwhelms them. Yes, he will understand how the unhappy Duc
de la Tour-Prends-Garde, who is condemned to hear La Favorita seventeen
times during the winter, may feel at times the need of a violent
distraction, and go to drink white wine with his servant. Amedee will be
full of indulgence, only one must pardon him for his plebeian heart and
native uncouthness; for at the moment when he shall have fathomed the
emptiness and vanity of this worldly farce, he will keep all of his
sympathy for those who retain something like nature. He will esteem
infinitely more the poorest of the workmen--a wood-sawyer or a
bell-hanger--than a politician haranguing from the mantel, or an old
literary dame who sparkles like a window in the Palais-Royal, and is
tattooed like a Caribbean; he will prefer an old; wrinkled, village
grand-dame in her white cap, who still hoes, although sixty years old,
her little field of potatoes.


CHAPTER XIII

A SERPENT AT THE FIRESIDE

A little more than a year has passed. It is now the first days of
October; and when the morning mist is dissipated, the sky is of so limpid
a blue and the air so pure and fresh, that Amedee Violette is almost
tempted to make a paper kite and fly it over the fortifications, as he
did in his youth. But the age for that has passed; Amedee's real kite is
more fragile than if it had been made of sticks and pieces of old paper
pasted on one over another; it does not ascend very high yet, and the
thread that sails it is not very strong. Amedee's kite is his growing
reputation. He must work to sustain it; and always with the secret hope
of making little Maria his wife. Amedee works. He is not so poor now,
since he earns at the ministry two hundred francs a month, and from time
to time publishes a prose story in journals where his copy is paid for.
He has also left his garret in the Faubourg St.-Jacques and lives on the
Ile St. Louis, in one room only, but large and bright, from whose window
he can see, as he leans out, the coming and going of boats on the river
and the sun as it sets behind Notre-Dame.

Amedee has been working mostly upon his drama, for the Comedie-Francaise
this summer, and it is nearly done; it is a modern drama in verse,
entitled L'Atelier. The action is very simple, like that of a tragedy,
but he believes it is sympathetic and touching, and it ends in a popular
way. Amedee thinks he has used for his dialogue familiar but nevertheless
poetic lines, in which he has not feared to put in certain graphic words
and energetic speeches from the mouths of working-people.

The grateful poet has destined the principal role for Jocquelet, who has
made a successful debut in the 'Fourberies de Scapin', and who, since
then, has won success after success. Jocquelet, like all comic actors,
aspires to play also in drama. He can do so in reality, but under
particular conditions; for in spite of his grotesque nose, he has strong
and spirited qualities, and recites verses very well. He is to represent
an old mechanic, in his friend's work, a sort of faubourg Nestor, and
this type will accommodate itself very well to the not very aristocratic
face of Jocquelet, who more and more proves his cleverness at
"making-up." However, at first the actor was not satisfied with his part.
He fondles the not well defined dream of all actors, he wishes, like all
the others, the "leading part." They do not exactly know what they mean
by it, but in their dreams is vaguely visible a wonderful Almanzor, who
makes his first entrance in an open barouche drawn by four horses
harnessed a la Daumont, and descends from it dressed in tight-fitting
gray clothes, tasselled boots, and decorations. This personage is as
attractive as Don Juan, brave as Murat, a poet like Shakespeare, and as
charitable as St. Vincent de Paul. He should have, before the end of the
first act, crushed with love by one single glance, the young leading
actress; dispersed a dozen assassins with his sword; addressed to the
stars--that is to say, the spectators in the upper gallery--a long speech
of eighty or a hundred lines, and gathered up two lost children under the
folds of his cloak.

A "fine leading part" should also, during the rest of the piece,
accomplish a certain number of sublime acts, address the multitude from
the top of a staircase, insult a powerful monarch to his face, dash into
the midst of a conflagration--always in the long-topped boots. The ideal
part would be for him to discover America, like Christopher Columbus; win
pitched battles, like Bonaparte, or some other equally senseless thing;
but the essential point is, never to leave the stage and to talk all the
time--the work, in reality, should be a monologue in five acts.

This role of an old workman, offered to Jocquelet by Amedee, obtained
only a grimace of displeasure from the actor. However, it ended by his
being reconciled to the part, studying it, and, to use his own
expression, "racking his brains over it," until one day he ran to
Violette's, all excited, exclaiming:

"I have the right idea of my old man now! I will dress him in a tricot
waistcoat with ragged sleeves and dirty blue overalls. He is an
apprentice, is he not? A fellow with a beard! Very well! in the great
scene where they tell him that his son is a thief and he defies the whole
of the workmen, he struggles and his clothes are torn open, showing a
hairy chest. I am not hairy, but I will make myself so--does that fill
the bill? You will see the effect."

While reserving the right to dissuade Jocquelet from making himself up in
this way, Amedee carried his manuscript to the director of the Theatre
Francais, who asked a little time to look it over, and also promised the
young poet that he would read it aloud to the committee.

Amedee is very anxious, although Maurice Roger, to whom he has read the
piece, act by act, predicts an enthusiastic acceptance.

The handsome Maurice has been installed for more than a year in a studio
on the Rue d'Assas and leads a jolly, free life there. Does he work?
Sometimes; by fits and starts. And although he abandons his sketches at
the first attack of idleness, there is a charm about these sketches,
suspended upon the wall; and he will some day show his talent. One of his
greatest pleasures is to see pass before him all his beautiful models, at
ten francs an hour. With palette in hand, he talks with the young women,
tells them amusing stories, and makes them relate all their love-affairs.
When friends come to see him, they can always see a model just
disappearing behind a curtain. Amedee prefers to visit his friend on
Sunday afternoons, and thus avoid meeting these models; and then, too, he
meets there on that day Arthur Papillon, who paves the way for his
political career by pleading lawsuits for the press. Although he is, at
heart, only a very moderate Liberalist, this young man, with the very
chic side whiskers, defends the most republican of "beards," if it can be
called defending; for in spite of his fine oratorical efforts, his
clients are regularly favored with the maximum of punishment. But they
are all delighted with it, for the title of "political convict" is one
very much in demand among the irreconcilables. They are all convinced
that the time is near when they will overthrow the Empire, without
suspecting, alas! that in order to do that twelve hundred thousand German
bayonets will be necessary. The day after the triumph, the month of
imprisonment will be taken into account, and St. Pelagie is not the
'carcere duro'. Papillon is cunning and wishes to have a finger in every
pie, so he goes to dine once a week with those who owe their sojourn in
this easy-going jail to him, and regularly carries them a lobster.

Paul Sillery, who has also made Maurice's acquaintance, loiters in this
studio. The amiable Bohemian has not yet paid his bill to Pere Lebuffle,
but he has cut his red fleece close to his head, and publishes every
Sunday, in the journals, news full of grace and humor. Of course they
will never pardon him at the Cafe de Seville; the "long-haired" ones have
disowned this traitor who has gone over to the enemy, and is now only a
sickening and fetid bourgeois; and if the poetical club were able to
enforce its decrees, Paul Sillery, like an apostate Jew in the times of
the Inquisition, would have been scourged and burned alive. Paul Sillery
does not trouble himself about it, however; and from time to time returns
to the "Seville" and treats its members to a bumper all around, which he
pays for with the gold of his dishonor. Sometimes Jocquelet appears, with
his smooth-shaved face; but only rarely, for he is at present a very busy
man and already celebrated. His audacious nose is reproduced in all
positions and displayed in photographers' windows, where he has for
neighbors the negatives most in demand; for instance, the fatherly and
benevolent face of the pope; Pius IX, or the international limbs of
Mademoiselle Ketty, the majestic fairy, in tights. The journals, which
print Jocquelet's name, treat him sympathetically and conspicuously, and
are full of his praises. "He is good to his old aunt," "gives alms,"
"picked up a lost dog in the street the other evening." An artist such as
he, who stamps immortality on all the comic repertory, and takes Moliere
under his wing, has no time to go to visit friends, that is understood.
However, he still honors Maurice Roger with short visits. He only has
time to make all the knickknacks and china on the sideboard tremble with
the noise of his terrible voice; only time to tell how, on the night
before, in the greenroom, when still clothed in Scapin's striped cloak,
he deigned to receive, with the coldest dignity, the compliments of a
Royal Highness, or some other person of high rank. A prominent society
lady has been dying of love for him the past six months; she occupies
stage box Number Six--and then off he goes. Good riddance!

Amedee enjoys himself in his friend's studio, where gay and witty artists
come to talk. They laugh and amuse themselves, and this Sunday
resting-place is the most agreeable of the hard-working poet's
recreations. Amedee prolongs them as long as possible, until at last he
is alone with his friend; then the young men stretch themselves out upon
the Turkish cushions, and they talk freely of their hopes, ambitions, and
dreams for the future.

Amedee, however, keeps one secret to himself; he never has told of his
love for Maria Gerard. Upon his return from Italy the traveller inquired
several times for the Gerards, sympathized politely with their
misfortune, and wished to be remembered to them through Amedee. The
latter had been very reserved in his replies, and Maurice no longer
broaches the subject in their conversation. Is it through neglect? After
all, he hardly knew the ladies; still, Amedee is not sorry to talk of
them no longer with his friend, and it is never without a little
embarrassment and unacknowledged jealousy that he replies to Maria when
she asks for news of Maurice.

She no longer inquires. The pretty Maria is cross and melancholy, for now
they talk only of one thing at the Gerards; it is always the same, the
vulgar and cruel thought, obtaining the means to live; and within a short
time they have descended a few steps lower on the slippery ladder of
poverty. It is not possible to earn enough to feed three mouths with a
piano method and a box of pastels--or, at least, it does not hold out.
Louise has fewer pupils, and Pere Issacar has lessened his orders. Mamma
Gerard, who has become almost an old woman, redoubles her efforts; but
they can no longer make both ends meet. Amedee sees it, and how it makes
him suffer!

The poor women are proud, and complain as little as possible; but the
decay inside this house, already so modest, is manifested in many ways.
Two beautiful engravings, the last of their father's souvenirs, had been
sold in an hour of extreme want; and one could see, by the clean spots
upon the wall, where the frames once hung. Madame Gerard's and her
daughters' mourning seemed to grow rusty, and at the Sunday dinner Amedee
now brings, instead of a cake, a pastry pie, which sometimes constitutes
the entire meal. There is only one bottle of old wine in the cellar, and
they drink wine by the pot from the grocer's. Each new detail that proves
his friends' distress troubles the sensitive Amedee. Once, having earned
ten Louis from some literary work, he took the poor mother aside and
forced her to accept one hundred francs. The unfortunate woman, trembling
with emotion, while two large tears rolled down her cheeks, admitted that
the night before, in order to pay the washerwoman, they had pawned the
only clock in the house.

What can he do to assist them, to help them to lead a less terrible life?
Ah! if Maria would have it so, they could be married at once, without any
other expense than the white dress, as other poor people do; and they
would all live together. He has his salary of twenty-four hundred francs,
besides a thousand francs that he has earned in other ways. With Louise's
lessons this little income would be almost sufficient. Then he would
exert himself to sell his writings; he would work hard, and they could
manage. Of course it would be quite an undertaking on his part to take
all this family under his charge. Children might be born to them. Had he
not begun to gain a reputation; had he not a future before him? His piece
might be played and meet with success. This would be their salvation. Oh!
the happy life that the four would lead together! Yes, if Maria could
love him a little, if he persisted in hoping, if she had the courage, it
was the only step to take.

Becoming enthusiastic upon this subject, Amedee decided to submit the
question to the excellent Louise, in whom he had perfect confidence, and
considered to be goodness and truth personified. Every Thursday, at six
o'clock, she left a boarding-school in the Rue de la Rochechouart, where
she gave lessons to young ladies in singing. He would go and wait for her
as she came out that very evening. And there he met her. Poor Louise! her
dress was lamentable; and what a sad countenance! What a tired,
distressed look!

"What, you, Amedee!" said she, with a happy smile, as he met her.

"Yes, my dear Louise. Take my arm and let me accompany you part of the
way. We will talk as we walk; I have something very serious to say to
you, confidentially--important advice to ask of you."

The poet then began to make his confession. He recalled their childhood
days in the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, when they played together; it was
as long ago as that that he had first begun to be charmed by little
Maria. As soon as he became a young man he felt that he loved the dear
child, and had always cherished the hope that he might inspire her with a
tender sentiment and marry her some day. If he had not spoken sooner it
was because he was too poor, but he had always loved her, he loved her
now, and never should love any other woman. He then explained his plan of
life in simple and touching terms; he would become Madame Gerard's son
and his dear Louise's brother; the union of their two poverties would
become almost comfort. Was it not very simple and reasonable? He was very
sure that she would approve of it, and she was wisdom itself and the head
of the family.

While he was talking Louise lowered her eyes and looked at her feet. He
did not feel that she was trembling violently. Blind, blind Amedee! You
do not see, you will never see, that she is the one who loves you!
Without hope! she knows that very well; she is older than you, she is not
pretty, and she will always be in your eyes an adopted elder sister, who
once showed you your alphabet letters with the point of her
knitting-needle. She has suspected for a long time your love for Maria;
she suffers, but she is resigned to it, and she will help you, the brave
girl! But this confession that you make, Maria's name that you murmur
into her ear in such loving accents, this dream of happiness in which, in
your artless egotism, you reserve for her the role of an old maid who
will bring up your children, is cruel, oh! how cruel! They have reached
the Boulevard Pigalle; the sun has set; the sky is clear and bright as a
turquoise, and the sharp autumn wind detaches the last of the dried
leaves from the trees. Amedee is silent, but his anxious glance solicits
and waits for Louise's reply.

"Dear Amedee," said she, raising her frank, pure eyes to his face, "you
have the most generous and best of hearts. I suspected that you loved
Maria, and I would be glad to tell you at once that she loves you, so
that we might hereafter be but one family--but frankly I can not.
Although the dear child is a little frivolous, her woman's instinct must
suspect your feeling for her, but she has never spoken of it to mamma or
to me. Have confidence; I do not see anything that augurs ill for you in
that. She is so young and so innocent that she might love you without
suspecting it herself. It is very possible, probable even, that your
avowal will enlighten her as to the state of her own heart. She will be
touched by your love, I am sure, as well as by your devotion to the whole
family. I hope, with all my heart, Amedee, that you will succeed; for, I
can say it to you, some pleasure must happen in poor Maria's life soon.
She has moments of the deepest sadness and attacks of weeping that have
made me uneasy for some time. You must have noticed, too, that she is
overwhelmed with ennui. I can see that she suffers more than mamma or I,
at the hard life that we lead. It is not strange that she feels as she
does, for she is pretty and attractive, and made for happiness; and to
see the present and the future so sad! How hard it is! You can
understand, my friend, how much I desire this marriage to take place. You
are so good and noble, you will make Maria happy; but you have said it, I
am the one who represents wisdom in our house. Let me have then a few
days in which to observe Maria, to obtain her confidence, to discover
perhaps a sentiment in her heart of which she is ignorant; and remember
that you have a sure and faithful ally in me."

"Take your own time, dear Louise," replied the poet. "I leave everything
to you. Whatever you do will be for the best."

He thanked her and they parted at the foot of the Rue Lepic. It was a
bitter pleasure for the slighted one to give the young man her poor,
deformed, pianist's hand, and to feel that he pressed it with hope and
gratitude.

She desired and must urge this marriage. She said this over and over
again to herself, as she walked up the steep street, where crowds of
people were swarming at the end of their day's work. No! no! Maria did
not care for Amedee. Louise was very sure of it; but at all events it was
necessary that she should try to snatch her young sister from the
discouragements and bad counsel of poverty. Amedee loved her and would
know how to make her love him. In order to assure their happiness these
two young people must be united. As to herself, what matter! If they had
children she would accept in advance her duties as coddling aunt and old
godmother. Provided, of course, that Maria would be guided, or, at least,
that she would consent. She was so pretty that she was a trifle vain. She
was nourishing, perhaps, nobody knew what fancy or vain hope, based upon
her beauty and youth. Louise had grave fears. The poor girl, with her
thin, bent shoulders wrapped up in an old black shawl, had already
forgotten her own grief and only thought of the happiness of others, as
she slowly dragged herself up Montmartre Hill. When she reached the
butcher's shop in front of the mayor's office, she remembered a request
of her mother's; and as is always the case with the poor, a trivial
detail is mixed with the drama of life. Louise, without forgetting her
thoughts, while sacrificing her own heart, went into the shop and picked
out two breaded cutlets and had them done up in brown paper, for their
evening's repast.

The day after his conversation with Louise, Amedee felt that distressing
impatience that waiting causes nervous people. The day at the office
seemed unending, and in order to escape solitude, at five o'clock he went
to Maurice's studio, where he had not been for fifteen days. He found him
alone, and the young artist also seemed preoccupied. While Amedee
congratulated him upon a study placed upon an easel, Maurice walked up
and down the room with his hands in his pocket, and eyes upon the floor,
making no reply to his friend's compliments. Suddenly he stopped and
looking at Amedee said:

"Have you seen the Gerard ladies during the past few days?"

Maurice had not spoken of these ladies for several months, and the poet
was a trifle surprised.

"Yes," he replied. "Not later than yesterday I met Mademoiselle Louise."

"And," replied Maurice, in a hesitating manner, "were all the family
well?"

"Yes."

"Ah!" said the artist, in a strange voice, and he resumed his silent
promenade.

Amedee always had a slightly unpleasant sensation when Maurice spoke the
name of the Gerards, but this time the suspicious look and singular tone
of the young painter, as he inquired about them, made the poet feel
genuinely uneasy. He was impressed, above all, by Maurice's simple
exclamation, "Ah!" which seemed to him to be enigmatical and mysterious.
But nonsense! all this was foolish; his friend's questions were perfectly
natural.

"Shall we pass the evening together, my dear Maurice?"

"It is impossible this evening," replied Maurice, still continuing his
walk. "A duty--I have an engagement."

Amedee had the feeling that he had come at an unfortunate time, and
discreetly took his departure. Maurice had seemed indifferent and less
cordial than usual.

"What is the matter with him?" said the poet to himself several times,
while dining in the little restaurant in the Latin Quarter. He afterward
went to the Comedie Francaise, to kill time, as well as to inquire after
his drama of Jocquelet, who played that evening in 'Le Legataire
Universel'.

The comedian received him in his dressing-room, being already arrayed in
Crispin's long boots and black trousers. He was seated in his
shirt-sleeves be fore his toilet-table, and had just pasted over his
smooth lips the bristling moustache of this traditional personage.
Without rising, or even saying "Good-day," he cried out to the poet as he
recognized him in the mirror.

"No news as to your piece! The manager has not one moment to himself; we
are getting ready for the revival of Camaraderie. But we shall be through
with it in two days, and then--"

And immediately, talking to hear himself talk, and to exercise his
terrible organ, he belched out, like the noise from an opened dam, a
torrent of commonplace things. He praised Scribe's works, which they had
put on the stage again; he announced that the famous Guillery, his senior
in the comedy line, would be execrable in this performance, and would
make a bungle of it. He complained of being worried to death by the
pursuit of a great lady--"You know, stage box Number Six," and showed,
with a conceited gesture, a letter, tossed in among the jars of paint and
pomade, which smelled of musk. Then, ascending to subjects of a more
elevated order, he scored the politics of the Tuileries, and scornfully
exposed the imperial corruption while recognizing that this "poor
Badingue," who, three days before, had paid a little compliment to the
actor, was of more account than his surroundings.

The poet went home and retired, bewildered by such gossip. When he awoke,
the agony of his thoughts about Maria had become still more painful. When
should he see Louise again? Would her reply be favorable? In spite of the
fine autumn morning his heart was troubled, and he felt that he had no
courage. His administrative work had never seemed more loathsome than on
that day. His fellow-clerk, an amateur in hunting, had just had two days'
absence, and inflicted upon him, in an unmerciful manner, his stories of
slaughtered partridges, and dogs who pointed, so wonderfully well, and of
course punctuated all this with numerous Pan-Pans! to imitate the report
of a double-barrelled gun.

When he left the office Amedee regained his serenity a little; he
returned home by the quays, hunting after old books and enjoying the
pleasures of a beautiful evening, watching, in the golden sky, around the
spires of Ste.-Chapelle, a large flock of swallows assembling for their
approaching departure.

At nightfall, after dining, he resolved to baffle his impatience by
working all the evening and retouching one act of his drama with which he
was not perfectly content. He went to his room, lighted his lamp, and
seated himself before his open manuscript. Now, then! to work! He had
been silly ever since the night before. Why should he imagine that
misfortune was in the air? Do such things as presentiments exist?

Suddenly, three light, but hasty and sharp knocks were struck upon his
door. Amedee arose, took his lamp, and opened it. He jumped back--there
stood Louise Gerard in her deep mourning!

"You?--At my rooms?--At this hour?--What has happened?"

She entered and dropped into the poet's armchair. While he put the lamp
upon the table he noticed that the young girl was as white as wax. Then
she seized his hands and pressing them with all her strength, she said,
in a voice unlike her own--a voice hoarse with despair:

"Amedee, I come to you by instinct, as toward our only friend, as to a
brother, as to the only man who will be able to help us repair the
frightful misfortune which overwhelms us!" She stopped, stifled with
emotion.

"A misfortune!" exclaimed the young man. "What misfortune? Maria?"

"Yes! Maria!"

"An accident?--An illness?"

Louise made a rapid gesture with her arm and head which signified: "If it
were only that!" With her mouth distorted by a bitter smile and with
lowered eyes, talking confusedly, she said:

"Monsieur Maurice Roger--yes--your friend Maurice! A miserable
wretch!--he has deceived and ruined the unhappy child! Oh! what
infamy!--and now--now--"

Her deathly pale face flushed and became purple to the roots of her hair.

"Now Maria will become a mother!"

At these words the poet gave a cry like some enraged beast; he reeled,
and would have fallen had the table not been near. He sat down on the
edge of it, supporting himself with his hands, completely frozen as if
from a great chill. Louise, overcome with shame, sat in the armchair,
hiding her face in her hands while great tears rolled down between the
fingers of her ragged gloves.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Good form consists, above all things, in keeping silent
     Intimate friend, whom he has known for about five minutes
     My good fellow, you are quite worthless as a man of pleasure
     Society people condemned to hypocrisy and falsehood


A ROMANCE OF YOUTH

By FRANCOIS COPPEE


BOOK 4.


CHAPTER XIV

TOO LATE!

It had been more than three months since Maria and Maurice had met again.
One day the young man went to the Louvre to see his favorite pictures of
the painters of the Eighteenth Century. His attention was attracted by
the beautiful hair of a young artist dressed in black, who was copying
one of Rosalba's portraits. It was our pretty pastel artist whose
wonderful locks disturbed all the daubers in the museum, and which made
colorists out of Signol's pupils themselves. Maurice approached the
copyist, and then both exclaimed at once:

"Mademoiselle Maria!"

"Monsieur Maurice!"

She had recognized him so quickly and with such a charming smile, she had
not, then, forgotten him? When he used to visit Pere Gerard he had
noticed that she was not displeased with him; but after such a long time,
at first sight, to obtain such a greeting, such a delighted
exclamation--it was flattering!

The young man standing by her easel, with his hat off, so graceful and
elegant in his well-cut garments, began to talk with her. He spoke first,
in becoming and proper terms, of her father's death; inquired for her
mother and sister, congratulated himself upon having been recognized
thus, and then yielding to his bold custom, he added:

"As to myself, I hesitated at first. You have grown still more beautiful
in two years."

As she blushed, he continued, in a joking way, which excused his
audacity:

"Amedee told me that you had become delicious, but now I hardly dare ask
him for news of you. Ever since you have lived at Montmartre--and I know
that he sees you every Sunday--he has never offered to take me with him
to pay my respects. Upon my word of honor, Mademoiselle Maria, I believe
that he is in love with you and as jealous as a Turk."

She protested against it, confused but still smiling.

Ah! if he had known of the dream that Maria had kept concealed in one
corner of her heart ever since their first meeting. If he had known that
her only desire was to be chosen and loved by this handsome Maurice, who
had gone through their house and among poor Papa Gerard's bric-a-brac
like a meteor! Why not, after all? Did she not possess that great power,
beauty? Her father, her mother, and even her sister, the wise Louise, had
often said so to her. Yes! from the very first she had been charmed by
this young man with the golden moustache, and the ways of a young lord;
she had hoped to please him, and later, in spite of poverty and death,
she had continued to be intoxicated with this folly and to dream of this
narcotic against grief, of the return of this Prince Charming. Poor
Maria, so good and so artless, who had been told too many times that she
was pretty! Poor little spoiled child!

When he left you yesterday, little Maria, after half an hour's pleasing
conversation, Maurice said to you jokingly: "Do not tell Violette, above
all, that we have met. I should lose my best friend." You not only said
nothing to Amedee, but you told neither your mother nor your sister. For
Louise and Madame Gerard are prudent and wise, and they would tell you to
avoid this rash fellow who has accosted you in a public place, and has
told you at once that you are beautiful and beloved. They would scold
you; they would tell you that this young man is of a rich and
distinguished family; that his mother has great ambitions for him; that
you have only your old black dress and beautiful eyes, and to-morrow,
when you return to the Louvre, Madame Gerard will establish herself near
your easel and discourage the young gallant.

But, little Maria, you conceal it from your mother and Louise! You have a
secret from your family! To-morrow when you make your toilette before the
mirror and twist up your golden hair, your heart will beat with hope and
vanity. In the Louvre your attention will be distracted from your work
when you hear a man's step resound in a neighboring gallery, and when
Maurice arrives you will doubtless be troubled, but very much surprised
and not displeased, ah! only too much pleased. Little Maria, little
Maria, he talks to you in a low tone now. His blond moustache is very
near your cheek, and you do well to lower your eyes, for I see a gleam of
pleasure under your long lashes. I do not hear what he says, nor your
replies; but how fast he works, how he gains your confidence! You will
compromise yourself, little Maria, if you keep him too long by your
easel. Four o'clock will soon strike, and the watchman in the green coat,
who is snoozing before Watteau's designs, will arouse from his torpor,
stretch his arms, look at his watch, get up from his seat, and call out
"Time to close." Why do you allow Maurice to help you arrange your
things, to accompany you through the galleries, carrying your box of
pastels? The long, lanky girl in the Salon Carre, who affects the English
ways, the one who will never finish copying the "Vierge au coussin vert,"
has followed you into the Louvre court. Take care! She has noticed,
envious creature, that you are very much moved as you take leave of your
companion, and that you let your hand remain for a second in his! This
old maid 'a l'anglaise' has a viper's tongue. To-morrow you will be the
talk of the Louvre, and the gossip will spread to the 'Ecole des
Beaux-Arts', even to Signol's studio, where the two daubers, your
respectful admirers, who think of cutting their throats in your honor,
will accost each other with a "Well, the pretty pastellist! Yes, I know,
she has a lover."

If it was only a lover! But the pretty pastellist has been very careless,
more foolish than the old maid or the two young fellows dream of. It is
so sweet to hear him say: "I love you!" and so delicious to listen for
the question: "And you, do you love me a little?" when she is dying to
say, "Yes!" Bending her head and blushing with confusion under Maurice's
ardent gaze, the pretty Maria ends by murmuring the fatal "Yes." Then she
sees Maurice turn pale with joy, and he says to her, "I must talk to you
alone; not before these bores." She replies: "But how? It is impossible!"
Then he asks whether she does not trust him, whether she does not believe
him to be an honest man, and the young girl's looks say more than any
protestation would.

"Well! to-morrow morning at ten o'clock--instead of coming to the
Louvre--will you? I will wait for you on the Quai d'Orsay, before the
Saint-Cloud pier."

She was there at the appointed hour, overwhelmed with emotion and ready
to faint. He took her by the arm and led her aboard the boat.

"Do you see, now we are almost alone. Give me the pleasure of wandering
through the fields with you. It is such beautiful weather. Be tranquil,
we shall return early."

Oh, the happy day! Maria sees pass before her, as she is seated beside
Maurice, who is whispering in her ear loving words and whose glances
cover her with caresses, as if in a dream, views of Paris that were not
familiar to her, high walls, arches of bridges, then the bare suburbs,
the smoking manufactories of Grenelle, the Bas Meudon, with its boats and
public-houses. At last, on the borders of the stream, the park with its
extensive verdure appeared.

They wandered there for a long time under the chestnut-trees, loaded with
their fruit in its green shells. The sun, filtering through the foliage,
dotted the walks with patches of light, and Maurice continued to repeat
to Maria that he loved her; that he had never loved any one but her! that
he had loved her from the very first time that he saw her at Pere
Gerard's, and that neither time nor absence had been able to drive away
the remembrance of her. And at this moment he imagined that it was true.
He did not think that he was telling a lie. As to poor Maria, do not be
too severe upon her! think of her youth, her poverty and
imprisonment--she was overwhelmed with happiness. She could think of
nothing to say, and, giving herself up into the young man's arms, she had
hardly the strength to turn upon him, from time to time, her eyes
tortured with love.

Is it necessary to tell how she succumbed? how they went to a restaurant
and dined? Emotion, the heavy heat of the afternoon, champagne, that
golden wine that she tasted for the first time, stunned the imprudent
child. Her charming head slips down upon the sofa-pillow, she is nearly
fainting.

"You are too warm," said Maurice. "This bright light makes you ill."

He draws the curtains; they are in the darkness, and he takes the young
girl in his arms, covering her hands, eyes, and lips with kisses.

Doubtless he swears to her that she shall be his wife. He asks only a
little time, a few weeks, in which to prepare his mother, the ambitious
Madame Roger, for his unexpected marriage. Maria never doubts him, but
overcome by her fault, she feels an intense shame, and buries her face on
her lover's shoulder. She thinks then, the guilty girl, of her past; of
her innocence and poverty, of her humble but honest home; her dead
father, her mother and sister---her two mothers, properly speaking---who
yet call her "little one" and always consider her as a child, an infant
in all its purity. She feels impressed with her sin, and wishes that she
might die there at once.

Oh! I beg of you, be charitable to the poor, weak Maria, for she is young
and she must suffer!

Maurice was not a rascal, after all; he was in earnest when he promised
to marry her without delay. He even meant to admit all to his mother the
next day; but when he saw her she never had appeared so imposing to him,
with her gray hair under her widow's cap. He shivered as he thought of
the tearful scenes, the reproaches and anger, and in his indolence he
said to himself: "Upon my honor, I will do it later!" He loves Maria
after his fashion. He is faithful to her, and when she steals away an
hour from her work to come to see him, he is uneasy at the least delay.
She is truly adorable, only Maurice does not like the unhappy look that
she wears when she asks him, in a trembling voice: "Have you spoken to
your mother?" He embraces her, reassures her. "Be easy. Leave me time to
arrange it." The truth is, that now he begins to be perplexed at the idea
of this marriage. It is his duty, he knows that very well; but he is not
twenty three years old yet. There is no hurry. After all, is it duty? the
little one yielded easily enough. Has he not the right to test her and
wait a little? It is what his mother would advise him, he is certain.
That is the only reasonable way to look at it.

Alas, egotists and cowards always have a reason for everything!

How dearly poor Maria's foolish step has cost her! How heavily such a
secret weighs upon the child's heart! For a few moments of uneasy
intoxication with this man, whom she already doubts and who sometimes
makes her afraid, she must lie to her mother without blushing or lowering
her eyes, and enter Maurice's house veiled and hiding like a thief. But
that is nothing yet. After some time of this agonizing life her health is
troubled. Quickly she goes to find Maurice! She arrives unexpectedly and
finds him lying upon the sofa smoking a cigar. Without giving him time to
rise, she throws herself into his arms, and, bursting into sobs, makes
her terrible avowal. At first he only gives a start of angry
astonishment, a harsh glance.

"Bah! you must be mistaken."

"I am sure of it, I tell you, I am sure of it!"

She has caught his angry glance and feels condemned in advance. However,
he gives her a cold kiss, and it is with a great effort that she
stammers:

"Maurice--you must--speak to your mother--"

He rises with an impatient gesture and Maria seats herself--her strength
is leaving her--while he walks up and down the room.

"My poor Maria," he begins in a hesitating manner, "I dared not tell you,
but my mother will not consent to our marriage--now, at least."

He lies! He has not spoken to his mother; she knows it. Ah! unhappy
creature! he does not love her! and, discouraged, with a rumbling noise
in her ears, she listens to Maurice as he speaks in his soft voice.

"Oh! be tranquil. I shall not abandon you, my poor child. If what you say
is true-if you are sure of it, then the best thing that you can do, you
see, is to leave your family and come and live with me. At first we will
go away from Paris; you can be confined in the country. We can put the
child out to nurse; they will take care of the little brat, of course.
And later, perhaps, my mother will soften and will understand that we
must marry. No, truly, the more I think of it, the more I believe that
that is the best way to do. Yes! I know very well it will be hard to
leave your home, but what can you do, my darling? You can write your
mother a very affectionate letter."

And going to her he takes her, inert and heartbroken, into his arms, and
tries to show himself loving.

"You are my wife, my dear little wife, I repeat it. Are you not glad, eh!
that we can live together?"

This is what he proposes to do. He thinks to take her publicly to his
house and to blazon her shame before the eyes of everybody! Maria feels
that she is lost. She rises abruptly and says to him in the tone of a
somnambulist: "That will do. We will talk of it again."

She goes away and returns to Montmartre at a crazy woman's pace, and
finds her mother knitting and her sister ready to lay the table-yes! as
if nothing at all was the matter. She takes their hands and falls at
their feet!

Ah, poor women!

They had already been very much tried. The decay of this worthy family
was lamentable; but in spite of all, yesterday even, they endured their
fate with resignation. Yes! the economy, the degrading drudgery, the old,
mended gowns--they accepted all this without a murmur. A noble sentiment
sustained and gave them courage. All three--the old mother in a linen cap
doing the cooking and the washing, the elder sister giving lessons at
forty sous, and the little one working in pastels--were vaguely conscious
of representing something very humble, but sacred and noble--a family
without a blemish on their name. They felt that they moved in an
atmosphere of esteem and respect. "Those ladies upon the first floor have
so many accomplishments," say the neighbors. Their apartment--with its
stained woodwork, its torn wall, paper, but where they were all united in
work and drawn closer and closer to each other in love--had still the
sweetness of a home; and upon their ragged mourning, their dilapidated
furniture, the meagre meat soup at night, the pure light of honor gleamed
and watched over them. Now, after this guilty child's avowal, all this
was ended, lost forever! There was a blemish upon their life of duty and
poverty, upon their irreproachable past, even upon the father's memory.
Certainly the mother and elder sister excused the poor creature who
sobbed under their kisses and begged their pardon. However, when they
gazed at each other with red eyes and dry lips, they measured the fall of
the family; they saw for the first time how frightful were their
destitution and distress; they felt the unbearable feeling of shame glide
into their hearts like a sinister and unexpected guest who, at the first
glance, makes one understand that he has come to be master of the
lodging. This was the secret, the overwhelming secret, which the
distracted Louise Gerard revealed that evening to her only friend, Amedee
Violette, acting thus by instinct, as a woman with too heavy a burden
throws it to the ground, crying for help.

When she had ended her cruel confidence, to which the poet listened with
his face buried in his hands, and he uncovered his face creased and
furrowed by the sudden wrinkles of despair, Louise was frightened.

"How I have wounded him!" she thought. "How he loves Maria!"

But she saw shining in the young man's eyes a gloomy resolution.

"Very well, Louise," muttered he, between his teeth. "Do not tell me any
more, I beg of you. I do not know where to find Maurice at this hour, but
he will see me to-morrow morning, rest easy. If the evil is not
repaired--and at once!"

He did not finish; his voice was stifled with grief and rage, and upon an
almost imperious gesture to leave, Louise departed, overcome by her
undertaking.

No, Maurice Roger was not a villain. After Maria's departure he felt
ashamed and displeased with himself. A mother! poor little thing!
Certainly he would take charge of her and the child; he would behave like
a gentleman. But, to speak plainly, he did not now love her as much as he
did. His vagabond nature was already tired of his love-affair. This one
was watered too much by tears. Bah! he was usually lucky, and this
troublesome affair would come out all right like the others. Truly, it
was as bad an accident as if one had fallen into a hole and broken his
leg. But then, who could tell? Chance and time arrange many things. The
child might not live, perhaps; at any rate, it was perfectly natural that
he should wait and see what happened.

The next morning the reckless Maurice--who had not slept badly--was
tranquilly preparing his palette while awaiting his model, when he saw
Amedee Violette enter his studio. At the first glance he saw that the
poet knew all.

"Maurice," said Amedee, in a freezing tone, "I received a visit from
Mademoiselle Louise Gerard last evening. She told me everything--all, do
you understand me perfectly? I have come to learn whether I am mistaken
regarding you--whether Maurice Roger is an honest man."

A flame darted from the young artist's eyes. Amedee, with his livid
complexion and haggard from a sleepless night and tears, was pitiful to
see. And then it was Amedee, little Amedee whom Maurice sincerely loved,
for whom he had kept, ever since their college days, a sentiment, all the
more precious that it flattered his vanity, the indulgent affection and
protection of a superior.

"Oh! Grand, melodramatic words already!" said he, placing his palette
upon the table. "Amedee, my dear boy, I do not recognize you, and if you
have any explanation that you wish to ask of your old friend, it is not
thus that you should do it. You have received, you tell me, Mademoiselle
Gerard's confidence. I know you are devoted to those ladies. I understand
your emotion and I think your intervention legitimate; but you see I
speak calmly and in a friendly way. Calm yourself in your turn and do not
forget that, in spite of your zeal for those ladies, I am the best and
dearest companion of your youth. I am, I know, in one of the gravest
situations of my life. Let us talk of it. Advise me; you have the right
to do so; but not in that tone of voice--that angry, threatening tone
which I pardon, but which hurts and makes me doubt, were it possible,
your love for me."

"Ah! you know very well that I love you," replied the unhappy Amedee,
"but why do you need my advice? You are frank enough to deny nothing. You
admit that it is true, that you have seduced a young girl. Does not your
conscience tell you what to do?"

"To marry her? That is my intention. But, Amedee, do you think of my
mother? This marriage will distress her, destroy her fond hopes and
ambitions. I hope to be able to gain her consent; only I must have time
to turn myself. Later--very soon. I do not say--if the child lives."

This word, torn from Maurice by the cynicism which is in the heart of all
egotists, made Amedee angry.

"Your mother!" exclaimed he. "Your mother is the widow of a French
officer who died facing the enemy. She will understand it, I am sure, as
a matter of honor and duty. Go and find her, tell her that you have
ruined this unfortunate child. Your mother will advise you to marry her.
She will command you to do it."

This argument was forcible and direct, and impressed Maurice; but his
friend's violence irritated him.

"You go to work badly, Amedee, I repeat it," said he, raising his tone.
"You have no right to prejudge my mother's opinion, and I receive no
orders from anybody. After all, nothing authorizes you to do it; if it is
because you were in love with Maria--"

A furious cry interrupted him. Amedee, with wild eyes and shaking his
fists, walked toward Maurice, speaking in a cutting tone:

"Well, yes! I loved her," said he, "and I wished to make her my wife.
You, who no longer love her, who took her out of caprice, as you have
taken others, you have destroyed all of my dreams for the future. She
preferred you, and, understand me, Maurice, I am too proud to complain,
too just to hold spite against you. I am only here to prevent your
committing an infamy. Upon my honor! If you repulse me, our friendship is
destroyed forever, and I dare not think of what will happen between us,
but it will be terrible! Alas! I am wrong, I do not talk to you as I
ought. Maurice, there is time yet! Only listen to your heart, which I
know is generous and good. You have wronged an innocent child and driven
a poor and worthy family to despair. You can repair the evil you have
caused. You wish to. You will! I beg of you, do it out of respect for
yourself and the name you bear. Act like a brave man and a gentleman!
Give this young girl--whose only wrong has been in loving you too
much--give the mother of your child your name, your heart, your love. You
will be happy with her and through her. Go! I shall not be jealous of
your happiness, but only too glad to have found my friend, my loyal
Maurice once more, and to be able still to love and admire him as
heretofore."

Stirred by these warm words, and fatigued by the discussion and struggle,
the painter reached out his hands to his friend, who pressed them in his.
Suddenly he looked at Amedee and saw his eyes shining with tears, and,
partly from sorrow, but more from want of will and from moral weakness,
to end it he exclaimed:

"You are right, after all. We will arrange this matter without delay.
What do you wish me to do?"

Ah, how Amedee bounded upon his neck!

"My good, my dear Maurice! Quickly dress yourself. Let us go to those
ladies and embrace and console that dear child. Ah! I knew very well that
you would understand me and that your heart was in the right place. How
happy the poor women will be! Now then, my old friend, is it not good to
do one's duty?"

Yes, Maurice found that it was good now; excited and carried away by his
friend, he hurried toward the good action that was pointed out to him as
he would to a pleasure-party, and while putting on his coat to go out, he
said:

"After all, my mother can only approve, and since she always does as I
wish, she will end by adoring my little Maria. It is all right; there is
no way of resisting you, Violette. You are a good and persuasive
Violette. Now, then, here I am, ready--a handkerchief--my hat. Off we
go!"

They went out and took a cab which carried them toward Montmartre. The
easy-going Maurice, reconciled to his future, sketched out his plan of
life. Once married, he would work seriously. At first, immediately after
the ceremony, he would leave with his wife to pass the winter in the
South, where she could be confined. He knew a pretty place in the
Corniche, near Antibes, where he should not lose his time, as he could
bring back marine and landscape sketches. But it would not be until the
next winter that he would entirely arrange his life. The painter Laugeol
was going to move; he would hire his apartment--"a superb studio, my dear
fellow, with windows looking out upon the Luxembourg." He could see
himself there now, working hard, having a successful picture in the
Salon, wearing a medal. He chose even the hangings in the sleeping-rooms
in advance. Then, upon beautiful days, how convenient the garden would be
for the child and the nurse.

Suddenly, in the midst of this chattering, he noticed Amedee's sad face
as he shrank into the back of the carriage.

"Forgive me, my dear friend," said he, taking him affectionately by the
hand. "I forgot what you told me just now. Ah! fate is ridiculous, when I
think that my happiness makes you feel badly."

The poet gave his friend a long, sad look.

"Be happy with Maria and make her happy, that is all I ask for you both."

They had reached the foot of Montmartre, and the carriage went slowly up
the steep streets.

"My friend," said Amedee, "we shall arrive there soon. You will go in
alone to see these ladies, will you not? Oh! do not be afraid. I know
Louise and the mother. They will not utter one word of reproach. Your
upright act will be appreciated by them as it merits--but you will excuse
me from going with you, do you see? It would be too painful for me."

"Yes, I understand, my poor Amedee. As it pleases you. Now then, courage,
you will be cured of it. Everything is alleviated in time," replied
Maurice, who supposed everybody to have his fickle nature. "I shall
always remember the service that you have rendered me, for I blush now as
I think of it. Yes, I was going to do a villainous act. Amedee, embrace
me."

They threw their arms about each other's neck, and the carriage stopped.
Once on the sidewalk, Amedee noticed his friend's wry face as he saw the
home of the Gerards, a miserable, commonplace lodging-house, whose
crackled plastered front made one think of the wrinkles on a poor man's
face. On the right and on the left of the entrance-door were two shops,
one a butcher's, the other a fruiterer's, exhaling their fetid odors. But
Amedee paid no attention to the delicate Maurice's repugnance, saying:

"Do you see that little garden at the end of the walk? It is there. Au
revoir."

They separated with a last grasp of the hand. The poet saw Maurice enter
the dark alley, cross the narrow court and push the gate open into the
garden, and then disappear among the mass of verdure. How many times
Amedee had passed through there, moved at the thought that he was going
to see Maria; and Maurice crossed this threshold for the first time in
his life to take her away. He wanted her! He had himself given his
beloved to another! He had begged, almost forced his rival, so to speak,
to rob him of his dearest hope! What sorrow!

Amedee gave his address to the driver and entered the carriage again. A
cold autumn rain had commenced to fall, and he was obliged to close the
windows. As he was jolted harshly through the streets of Paris at a trot,
the young poet, all of a shiver, saw carriages streaming with water,
bespattered pedestrians under their umbrellas, a heavy gloom fall from
the leaden sky; and Amedee, stupefied with grief, felt a strange
sensation of emptiness, as if somebody had taken away his heart.

When he entered his room, the sight of his furniture, his engravings, his
books on their shelves, and his table covered with its papers distressed
him. His long evenings of study near this lamp, the long hours of thought
over some difficult work, the austere and cheerless year that he had
lived there, all had been dedicated to Maria. It was in order to obtain
her some day, that he had labored so assiduously and obstinately! And now
the frivolous and guilty child was doubtless weeping for joy in Maurice's
arms, her husband to-morrow?

a health is drunk, Now, that shall keep going:
Life is but the pebble sunk, Deeds, the circle growing!
Fill, and pledge the Head of Bran!
While his lead they follow, Long shall heads in Britain plan Speech Death
cannot swallow.

_George Meredith._

CXIII
THE SLAYING OF THE NIBLUNGS

HOGNI
Ye shall know that in Atli's feast-hall on the side that joined the house
Were many carven doorways whose work was glorious With marble
stones and gold-work, and their doors of beaten brass:
Lo now, in the merry morning how the story cometh to pass!

--While the echoes of the trumpet yet fill the people's ears, And Hogni
casts by the war-horn, and his Dwarf-wrought sword uprears, All
those doors aforesaid open, and in pour the streams of steel, The
best of the Eastland champions, the bold men of Atli's weal:
They raise no cry of battle nor cast forth threat of woe, And their
helmed and hidden faces from each other none may know:
Then a light in the hall ariseth, and the fire of battle runs All
adown the front of the Niblungs in the face of the mighty ones; All
eyes are set upon them, hard drawn is every breath, Ere the foremost
points be mingled and death be blent with death.

--All eyes save the eyes of Hogni; but e'en as the edges meet, He
turneth about for a moment to the gold of the kingly seat, Then
aback to the front of battle; there then, as the lightning-flash
Through the dark night showeth the city when the clouds of heaven
clash, And the gazer shrinketh backward, yet he seeth from end to
end The street and the merry market, and the windows of his friend,
And the pavement where his footsteps yester'en returning trod, Now
white and changed and dreadful 'neath the threatening voice of God;
So Hogni seeth Gudrun, and the face he used to know, Unspeakable,
unchanging, with white unknitted brow With half-closed lips
untrembling, with deedless hands and cold Laid still on knees that
stir not, and the linen's moveless fold.

Turned Hogni unto the spear-wall, and smote from where he stood, And
hewed with his sword two-handed as the axe-man in a wood:
Before his sword was a champion, and the edges clave to the chin, And the
first man fell in the feast-hall of those that should fall therein.

Then man with man was dealing, and the Niblung host of war Was swept
by the leaping iron, as the rock anigh the shore By the ice-cold
waves of winter: yet a moment Gunnar stayed As high in his hand
unblooded he shook his awful blade; And he cried: 'O Eastland
champions, do ye behold it here, The sword of the ancient Giuki?

Fall on and have no fear, But slay and be slain and be famous, if your
master's will it be!
Yet are we the blameless Niblungs, and bidden guests are we:
So forbear, if ye wander hood-winked, nor for nothing slay and be slain;
For I know not what to tell you of the dead that live again.'

So he saith in the midst of the foemen with his war-flame reared
on high, But all about and around him goes up a bitter cry From the
iron men of Atli, and the bickering of the steel Sends a roar up to the
roof-ridge, and the Niblung war-ranks reel Behind the steadfast Gunnar:
but lo! have ye seen the corn, While yet men grind the sickle, by the
wind-streak overborne When the sudden rain sweeps downward, and
summer groweth black, And the smitten wood-side roareth 'neath the
driving thunder-wrack?

So before the wise-heart Hogni shrank the champions of the East,
As his great voice shook the timbers in the hall of Atli's feast.

There he smote, and beheld not the smitten, and by nought were his
edges stopped; He smote, and the dead were thrust from him; a hand
with its shield he lopped; There met him Atli's marshal, and his
arm at the shoulder he shred; Three swords were upreared against
him of the best of the kin of the dead; And he struck off a head
to the rightward, and his sword through a throat he thrust, But the
third stroke fell on his helm-crest, and he stooped to the ruddy
dust, And uprose as the ancient Giant, and both his hands were
wet:
Red then was the world to his eyen, as his hand to the labour he
set; Swords shook and fell in his pathway, huge bodies leapt and
fell, Harsh grided shield and war-helm like the tempest-smitten
bell, And the war-cries ran together, and no man his brother knew,
And the dead men loaded the living, as he went the war-wood through;
And man 'gainst man was huddled, till no sword rose to smite, And
clear stood the glorious Hogni in an island of the fight, And there
ran a river of death 'twixt the Niblung and his foes, And therefrom
the terror of men and the wrath of the Gods arose.

GUNNAR
Now fell the sword of Gunnar, and rose up red in the air, And
hearkened the song of the Niblung, as his voice rang glad and
clear, And rejoiced and leapt at the Eastmen, and cried as it met the
rings Of a Giant of King Atli and a murder-wolf of kings; But it quenched
its thirst in his entrails, and knew the heart in his breast, And
hearkened the praise of Gunnar, and lingered not to rest, But fell
upon Atli's brother, and stayed not in his brain; Then he fell,
and the King leapt over, and clave a neck atwain, And leapt o'er the
sweep of a pole-axe, and thrust a lord in the throat, And King Atli's
banner-bearer through shield and hauberk smote; Then he laughed on the
huddled East-folk, and against their war-shields drave While the
white swords tossed about him, and that archer's skull he clave Whom
Atli had bought in the Southlands for many a pound of gold; And
the dark-skinned fell upon Gunnar, and over his war-shield rolled,
And cumbered his sword for a season, and the many blades fell on,
And sheared the cloudy helm-crest and rents in his hauberk won, And
the red blood ran from Gunnar; till that Giuki's sword outburst,
As the fire-tongue from the smoulder that the leafy heap hath nursed,
And unshielded smote King Gunnar, and sent the Niblung song Through
the quaking stems of battle in the hall of Atli's wrong:
Then he rent the knitted war-hedge till by Hogni's side he stood,
And kissed him amidst of the spear-hail, and their cheeks were wet
with blood.

Then on came the Niblung bucklers, and they drave the East-folk home, As
the bows of the oar-driven long-ship beat off the waves in foam:
They leave their dead behind them, and they come to the doors and the
wall, And a few last spears from the fleeing amidst their shield-hedge
fall:
But the doors clash to in their faces, as the fleeing rout they drive,
And fain would follow after; and none is left alive In the feast-hall
of King Atli, save those fishes of the net, And the white and silent
woman above the slaughter set.

Then biddeth the heart-wise Hogni, and men to the windows climb, And uplift
the war-grey corpses, dead drift of the stormy time, And cast them adown
to their people: thence they come aback and say That scarce shall ye see
the houses, and no whit the wheel-worn way For the spears and shields
of the Eastlands that the merchant city throng; And back to the Niblung
burg-gate the way seemed weary-long.

Yet passeth hour on hour, and the doors they watch and ward But a long
while hear no mail-clash, nor the ringing of the sword; Then droop the
Niblung children, and their wounds are waxen chill, And they think of
the burg by the river, and the builded holy hill, And their eyes are set
on Gudrun as of men who would beseech; But unlearned are they in craving,
and know not dastard's speech.
Then doth Giuki's first-begotten a deed most fair to be told, For his
fair harp Gunnar taketh, and the warp of silver and gold; With the hand
of a cunning harper he dealeth with the strings, And his voice in
their midst goeth upward, as of ancient days he sings, Of the days
before the Niblungs, and the days that shall be yet; Till the hour
of toil and smiting the warrior hearts forget, Nor hear the gathering
foemen, nor the sound of swords aloof:
Then clear the song of Gunnar goes up to the dusky roof, And the
coming spear-host tarries, and the bearers of the woe Through the
cloisters of King Atli with lingering footsteps go.

But Hogni looketh on Gudrun, and no change in her face he sees, And no
stir in her folded linen and the deedless hands on her knees:
Then from Gunnar's side he hasteneth; and lo! the open door, And a foeman
treadeth the pavement, and his lips are on Atli's floor, For Hogni is death
in the doorway: then the Niblungs turn on the foe, And the hosts are mingled
together, and blow cries out on blow.

GUDRUN
Still the song goeth up from Gunnar, though his harp to earth be laid;
But he fighteth exceeding wisely, and is many a warrior's aid, And he
shieldeth and delivereth, and his eyes search through the hall, And woe
is he for his fellows, as his battle-brethren fall; For the turmoil
hideth little from that glorious folk-king's eyes, And o'er all he
beholdeth Gudrun, and his soul is waxen wise, And he saith: 'We shall
look on Sigurd, and Sigmund of old days, And see the boughs of the
Branstock o'er the ancient Volsung's praise.'
Woe's me for the wrath of Hogni! From the door he giveth aback That the
Eastland slayers may enter to the murder and the wrack:
Then he rageth and driveth the battle to the golden kingly seat,
And the last of the foes he slayeth by Gudrun's very feet, That the
red blood splasheth her raiment; and his own blood therewithal He
casteth aloft before her, and the drops on her white hands fall:
But nought she seeth or heedeth, and again he turns to fight, Nor
heedeth stroke nor wounding so he a foe may smite:
Then the battle opens before him, and the Niblungs draw to his side;
As death in the world first fashioned, through the feast-hall doth
he stride.

And so once more do the Niblungs sweep that murder-flood of men
From the hall of toils and treason, and the doors swing to again.

Then again is there peace for a little within the fateful fold; But the
Niblungs look about them, and but few folk they behold Upright on their
feet for the battle: now they climb aloft no more, Nor cast the dead
from the windows; but they raise a rampart of war, And its stones are the
fallen East-folk, and no lowly wall is that.

Therein was Gunnar the mighty: on the shields of men he sat, And the sons
of his people hearkened, for his hand through the harp-strings ran,
And he sang in the hall of his foeman of the Gods and the making of
man, And how season was sundered from season in the days of the fashioning,
And became the Summer and Autumn, and became the Winter and Spring;
He sang of men's hunger and labour, and their love and their breeding
of broil.

And their hope that is fostered of famine, and their rest that is fashioned
of toil:
Fame then and the sword he sang of, and the hour of the hardy and wise,
When the last of the living shall perish, and the first of the dead
shall arise, And the torch shall be lit in the daylight, and God unto man
shall pray, And the heart shall cry out for the hand in the fight
of the uttermost day.
So he sang, and beheld not Gudrun, save as long ago he saw His
sister, the little maiden of the face without a flaw:
But wearily Hogni beheld her, and no change in her face there was, And
long thereon gazed Hogni, and set his brows as the brass, Though the hands
of the King were weary, and weak his knees were grown, And he felt
as a man unholpen in a waste land wending alone.

THE SONS OF GIUKI
Now the noon was long passed over when again the rumour arose, And through
the doors cast open flowed in the river of foes:
They flooded the hall of the murder, and surged round that rampart of dead;
No war-duke ran before them, no lord to the onset led, But the thralls
shot spears at adventure, and shot out shafts from afar, Till the misty
hall was blinded with the bitter drift of war:
Few and faint were the Niblung children, and their wounds were waxen
acold, And they saw the Hell-gates open as they stood in their
grimly hold:
Yet thrice stormed out King Hogni, thrice stormed out Gunnar the
King, Thrice fell they aback yet living to the heart of the fated
ring; And they looked and their band was little, and no man but was
wounded sore, And the hall seemed growing greater, such hosts of
foes it bore, So tossed the iron harvest from wall to gilded wall;
And they looked and the white-clad Gudrun sat silent over all.

Then the churls and thralls of the Eastland howled out as wolves
accurst, But oft gaped the Niblungs voiceless, for they choked with
anger and thirst; And the hall grew hot as a furnace, and men drank their
flowing blood, Men laughed and gnawed on their shield-rims, men knew not
where they stood, And saw not what was before them; as in the dark
men smote, Men died heart-broken, unsmitten; men wept with the cry in
the throat, Men lived on full of war-shafts, men cast their shields aside
And caught the spears to their bosoms; men rushed with none beside, And
fell unarmed on the foemen, and tore and slew in death:
And still down rained the arrows as the rain across the heath; Still proud
o'er all the turmoil stood the Kings of Giuki born, Nor knit were
the brows of Gunnar, nor his song-speech overworn; But Hogni's mouth
kept silence, and oft his heart went forth To the long, long day
of the darkness, and the end of worldly worth.

Loud rose the roar of the East-folk, and the end was coming at last:
Now the foremost locked their shield-rims and the hindmost over
them cast, And nigher they drew and nigher, and their fear was fading away,
For every man of the Niblungs on the shaft-strewn pavement lay, Save
Gunnar the King and Hogni: still the glorious King up-bore The cloudy
shield of the Niblungs set full of shafts of war; But Hogni's hands
had fainted, and his shield had sunk adown, So thick with the
Eastland spearwood was that rampart of renown; And hacked and dull
were the edges that had rent the wall of foes:
Yet he stood upright by Gunnar before that shielded close, Nor
looked on the foeman's faces as their wild eyes drew anear, And
their faltering shield-rims clattered with the remnant of their
fear; But he gazed on the Niblung woman, and the daughter of his
folk, Who sat o'er all unchanging ere the war-cloud over them broke.

Now nothing might men hearken in the house of Atli's weal, Save the feet
slow tramping onward, and the rattling of the steel, And the song of the
glorious Gunnar, that rang as clearly now As the speckled storm-cock
singeth from the scant-leaved hawthorn-bough, When the sun is dusking over
and the March snow pelts the land.
There stood the mighty Gunnar with sword and shield in hand, There stood
the shieldless Hogni with set unangry eyes, And watched the wall
of war-shields o'er the dead men's rampart rise, And the white blades
flickering nigher, and the quavering points of war.
Then the heavy air of the feast-hall was rent with a fearful roar, And the
turmoil came and the tangle, as the wall together ran:

But aloft yet towered the Niblungs, and man toppled over man, And leapt
and struggled to tear them; as whiles amidst the sea The doomed ship
strives its utmost with mid-ocean's mastery, And the tall masts whip the
cordage, while the welter whirls and leaps, And they rise and reel and
waver, and sink amid the deeps:
So before the little-hearted in King Atli's murder-hall Did the glorious
sons of Giuki 'neath the shielded onrush fall:
Sore wounded, bound and helpless, but living yet, they lie Till the
afternoon and the even in the first of night shall die.

_William Morris._

CXIV

IS LIFE WORTH LIVING

Is life worth living? Yes, so long As Spring revives the year, And
hails us with the cuckoo's song, To show that she is here; So long as May
of April takes, In smiles and tears, farewell, And windflowers
dapple all the brakes, And primroses the dell; While children
in the woodlands yet Adorn their little laps With ladysmock and violet,
And daisy-chain their caps; While over orchard daffodils Cloud-shadows
float and fleet, And ousel pipes and laverock trills, And young lambs
buck and bleat; So long as that which bursts the bud And swells and
tunes the rill Makes springtime in the maiden's blood, Life is worth
living still.

Life not worth living! Come with me, Now that, through vanishing veil,
Shimmers the dew on lawn and lea, And milk foams in the pail; Now
that June's sweltering sunlight bathes With sweat the striplings lithe,
As fall the long straight scented swathes Over the crescent scythe; Now
that the throstle never stops His self-sufficing strain, And woodbine-trails
festoon the copse, And eglantine the lane; Now rustic labour seems as sweet
As leisure, and blithe herds Wend homeward with unweary feet, Carolling
like the birds; Now all, except the lover's vow, And nightingale, is still;
Here, in the twilight hour, allow, Life is worth living still.

She was provided with a very old husband
belonging to the political and financial world; a servant of several
regimes, who having on many occasions feathered his own nest, made false
statements of accounts, and betrayed his vows, his name could not be
spoken in public assemblies without being preceded by the epithet of
honorable. A man so seriously occupied in saving the Capitol, that is to
say, in courageously sustaining the stronger, approving the majorities in
all of their mean actions and thus increasing his own ground, sinecures,
tips, stocks, and various other advantages, necessarily neglected his
charming wife, and took very little notice of the ridicule that she
inflicted upon him often, and to which he seemed predestined.

The fair lady--with a wax doll's beauty, not very young, confining
herself to George Sand in literature, making three toilettes a day, and
having a large account at the dentist's--singled out the young poet with
a romantic head, and rapidly traversed with him the whole route through
the country of Love. Thanks to modern progress, the voyage is now made by
a through train. After passing the smaller stations, "blushing behind the
fan," a "significant pressure of the hand," "appointment in a museum,"
etc., and halting at a station of very little importance called
"scruples" (ten minutes' pause), Amedee reached the terminus of the line
and was the most enviable of mortals. He became Madame's lapdog, the
essential ornament in her drawing-room, figured at all the dinners,
balls, and routs where she appeared, stifled his yawns at the back of her
box at the Opera, and received the confidential mission of going to hunt
for sweetmeats and chocolates in the foyer. His recompense consisted in
metaphysical conversations and sentimental seances, in which he was not
long in discovering that his heart was blinded by his emotions. At the
end of a few months of this commonplace happiness, the rupture took place
without any regrets on either side, and Amedee returned, without a pang,
the love-tokens he had received, namely: a photograph, a package of
letters in imitation of fashionable romances, written in long, angular
handwriting, after the English style, upon very chic paper; and, we must
not forget, a white glove which was a little yellowed from confinement in
the casket, like the beautiful Madame herself.

A tall girl, with a body like a goddess, who earned three hundred francs
a month by showing her costumes on the Vaudeville stage, and who gave one
louis a day to her hairdresser, gave Amedee a new experience in love,
more expensive, but much more amusing than the first. There were no more
psychological subtleties or hazy consciences; but she had fine, strong
limbs and the majestic carriage of a cardinal's mistress going through
the Rue de Constance in heavy brocade garments, to see Jean Huss burned;
and her voluptuous smile showed teeth made to devour patrimonies.
Unfortunately, Mademoiselle Rose de Juin's--that was the young lady's
theatrical name--charming head was full of the foolishness and vanity of
a poor actress. Her attacks of rage when she read an article in the
journals which cut her up, her nervous attacks and torrents of tears when
they gave her parts with only fifteen lines in a new piece, had begun to
annoy Amedee, when chance gave him a new rival in the person of Gradoux,
an actor in the Varietes, the ugly clown whose chronic cold in the head
and ugly face seemed for twenty years so delicious to the most refined
public in the world. Relieved of a large number of bank-notes, Violette
discreetly retired.

He next carried on a commonplace romance with a pretty little girl whose
acquaintance he made one evening at a public fete. Louison was twenty
years old, and earned her living at a famous florist's, and was as pink
and fresh as an almond-bush in April. She had had only two lovers, gay
fellows--an art student first--then a clerk in a novelty store, who had
given her the not very aristocratic taste for boating. It was on the
Marne, seated near Louison in a boat moored to the willows on the Ile
d'Amour, that Amedee obtained his first kiss between two stanzas of a
boating song, and this pretty creature, who never came to see him without
bringing him a bouquet, charmed the poet. He remembered Beranger's
charming verses, "I am of the people as well, my love!" felt that he
loved, and was softened. In reality, he had turned this naive head.
Louison became dreamy, asked for a lock of his hair, which she always
carried with her in her 'porte-monnaie', went to get her fortune told to
know whether the dark-complexioned young man, the knave of clubs, would
be faithful to her for a long time. Amedee trusted this simple heart for
some time, but at length he became tired of her vulgarities. She was
really too talkative, not minding her h's and punctuating her discourse
with "for certain" and "listen to me, then," calling Amedee "my little
man," and eating vulgar dishes. One day she offered to kiss him, with a
breath that smelled of garlic. She was the one who left him, from
feminine pride, feeling that he no longer loved her, and he almost
regretted her.

Thus his life passed; he worked a little and dreamed much. He went as
rarely as possible to Maurice Roger's house. Maurice had decidedly turned
out to be a good husband, and was fond of his home and playing with his
little boy. Every time that Amedee saw Maria it meant several days of
discouragement, sorrow, and impossibility of work.

"Well! well!" he would murmur, throwing down his pen, when the young
woman's face would rise between his thoughts and his page; "I am
incurable; I shall always love her."

In the summer of 1870 Amedee, being tired of Paris, thought of a new
trip, and he was upon the point of going again, unfortunate fellow! to
see the Swiss porters who speak all the languages in the world, and to
view the melancholy boots in the hotel corridors, when the war broke out.
The poet's passage through the midst of the revolutionary "beards" in the
Cafe de Seville, and the parliamentary cravats in the Countess's
drawing-room, had disgusted him forever with politics. He also was very
suspicious of the Liberal ministers and all the different phases of the
malady that was destroying the Second Empire. But Amedee was a good
Frenchman. The assaults upon the frontiers, and the first battles lost,
made a burning blush suffuse his face at the insult. When Paris was
threatened he asked for arms, like the others, and although he had not a
military spirit, he swore to do his duty, and his entire duty, too. One
beautiful September morning he saw Trochu's gilded cap passing among the
bayonets; four hundred thousand Parisians were there, like himself, full
of good-will, who had taken up their guns with the resolve to die
steadfast. Ah, the misery of defeat! All these brave men for five months
could only fidget about the place and eat carcases. May the good God
forgive the timid and the prattler! Alas! Poor old France! After so much
glory! Poor France of Jeanne d'Arc and of Napoleon!


CHAPTER XVI

IN TIME OF WAR

The great siege lasted nearly three months. Upon the thirtieth of
November they had fought a battle upon the banks of the Marne, then for
twenty-four hours the fight had seemed to slacken, and there was a heavy
snow-storm; but they maintained that the second of December would be
decisive. That morning the battalion of the National Guard, of which
Amedee Violette was one, went out for the first time, with the order
simply to hold themselves in reserve in the third rank, by the fort's
cannons, upon a hideous plain at the east of Paris.

Truly this National Guard did not make a bad appearance. They were a
trifle awkward, perhaps, in their dark-blue hooded cloaks, with their
tin-plate buttons, and armed with breech-loading rifles, and encumbered
with canteens, basins, and pouches, all having an unprepared and too-new
look. They all came from the best parts of the city, with accelerated
steps and a loud beating of drums, and headed, if you please, by their
major on horseback, a truss-maker, who had formerly been quartermaster of
the third hussars. Certainly they only asked for service; it was not
their fault, after all, if one had not confidence in them, and if they
were not sent to the front as soon as they reached the fortifications.
While crossing the drawbridge they had sung the Marseillaise like men
ready to be shot down. What spoiled their martial appearance, perhaps,
were their strong hunting-boots, their leather leggings, knit gloves, and
long gaiters; lastly, that comfortable air of people who have brought
with them a few dainties, such as a little bread with something eatable
between, some tablets of chocolate, tobacco, and a phial filled with old
rum. They had not gone two kilometres outside the ramparts, and were near
the fort, where for the time being the artillery was silent, when a staff
officer who was awaiting them upon an old hack of a horse, merely skin
and bones, stopped them by a gesture of the hand, and said sharply to
their major to take position on the left of the road, in an open field.
They then stacked their arms there and broke ranks, and rested until
further orders.

What a dismal place! Under a canopy of dull clouds, the earth bare with
half-melted snow, with the low fort rising up before them as if in an
attitude of defence, here and there groups of ruined houses, a mill whose
tall chimney and walls had been half destroyed by shells, but where one
still read, in large black letters, these words, "Soap-maker to the
Nobility;" and through this desolated country was a long and muddy road
which led over to where the battle field lay, and in the midst of which,
presenting a symbol of death, lay the dead body of a horse.

In front of the National Guard, on the other side of the road, a
battalion, which had been strongly put to the test the night before, were
cooking. They had retreated as far as this to rest a little, and had
spent all that night without shelter under the falling snow. Exhausted,
bespattered, in rags, they were dolefully crouched around their meagre
green-wood fires; the poor creatures were to be pitied. Underneath their
misshapen caps they all showed yellow, wrinkled, and unshaven faces. The
bitter, cold wind that swept over the plain made their thin shoulders,
stooping from fatigue, shiver, and their shoulder-blades protruded under
their faded capes. Some of them were wounded, too slightly to be sent
away in the ambulance, and wore about their wrists and foreheads bands of
bloody linen. When an officer passed with his head bent and a humiliated
air, nobody saluted him. These men had suffered too much, and one could
divine an angry and insolent despair in their gloomy looks, ready to
burst out and tell of their injuries. They would have disgusted one if
they had not excited one's pity. Alas, they were vanquished!

The Parisians were eager for news as to recent military operations, for
they had only read in the morning papers--as they always did during this
frightful siege--enigmatical despatches and bulletins purposely bristling
with strategic expressions not comprehensible to the outsider. But all,
or nearly all, had kept their patriotic hopes intact, or, to speak more
plainly, their blind fanatical patriotism, and were certain against all
reason of a definite victory; they walked along the road in little
groups, and drew near the red pantaloons to talk a little.

"Well, it was a pretty hot affair on the thirtieth, wasn't it? Is it true
that you had command of the Marne? You know what they say in Paris, my
children? That Trochu knows something new, that he is going to make his
way through the Prussian lines and join hands with the helping armies--in
a word that we are going to strike the last blow."

At the sight of these spectres of soldiers, these unhappy men broken down
with hunger and fatigue, the genteel National Guards, warmly clad and
wrapped up for the winter, commenced to utter foolish speeches and big
hopes which had been their daily food for several months: "Break the iron
circle;" "not one inch, not a stone;" "war to the knife;" "one grand
effort," etc. But the very best talkers were speedily discouraged by the
shrugging of shoulders and ugly glances of the soldiers, that were like
those of a snarling cur.

Meanwhile, a superb sergeant-major of the National Guard, newly equipped,
a big, full-blooded fellow, with a red beard, the husband of a
fashionable dressmaker, who every evening at the beer-house, after his
sixth glass of beer would show, with matches, an infallible plan for
blocking Paris and crushing the Prussian army like pepper, and was
foolish enough to insist upon it.

"Now then, you, my good fellow," said he, addressing an insignificant
corporal just about to eat his stew, as if he were questioning an old
tactician or a man skilled like Turenne or Davoust; "do you see? you hit
it in this affair of day before yesterday. Give us your opinion. Are the
positions occupied by Ducrot as strong as they pretend? Is it victory for
to-day?"

The corporal turned around suddenly; with a face the color of boxwood,
and his blue eyes shining with rage and defiance, he cried in a hoarse
voice:

"Go and see for yourselves, you stay-at-homes!"

Saddened and heart-broken at the demoralization of the soldiers, the
National Guards withdrew.

"Behold the army which the Empire has left us!" said the dressmaker's
husband, who was a fool.

Upon the road leading from Paris, pressing toward the cannon's mouth
which was commencing to grumble again in the distance, a battalion of
militia arrived, a disorderly troop. They were poor fellows from the
departments in the west, all young, wearing in their caps the Brittany
coat-of-arms, and whom suffering and privation had not yet entirely
deprived of their good country complexions. They were less worn out than
the other unfortunate fellows whose turn came too often, and did not feel
the cold under their sheepskins, and still respected their officers, whom
they knew personally, and were assured in case of accident of absolution
given by one of their priests, who marched in the rear file of the first
company, with his cassock tucked up and his Roman hat over his eyes.
These country fellows walked briskly, a little helter-skelter, like their
ancestors in the time of Stofflet and M. de la Rochejaquelin, but with a
firm step and their muskets well placed upon their shoulders, by Ste.
Anne! They looked like soldiers in earnest.

When they passed by the National Guard, the big blond waved his cap in
the air, furiously shouting at the top of his lungs:

"Long live the Republic!"

But once more the fanatical patriot's enthusiasm fell flat. The Bretons
were marching into danger partly from desire, but more from duty and
discipline. At the very first shot these simple-minded creatures reach
the supreme wisdom of loving one's country and losing one's life for it,
if necessary, without interesting themselves in the varied mystifications
one calls government. Four or five of the men, more or less astonished at
the cry which greeted them, turned their placid, countrified faces toward
the National Guard, and the battalion passed by.

The dressmaker's husband--he did nothing at his trade, for his wife
adored him, and he spent at cafes all the money which she gave him--was
extremely scandalized. During this time Amedee Violette was dreamily
walking up and down before the stacks of guns. His warlike ardor of the
first few days had dampened. He had seen and heard too many foolish
things said and done since the beginning of this horrible siege; had
taken part too many times in one of the most wretched spectacles in which
a people can show vanity in adversity. He was heart broken to see his
dear compatriots, his dear Parisians, redouble their boasting after each
defeat and take their levity for heroism. If he admired the resignation
of the poor women standing in line before the door of a butcher's shop,
he was every day more sadly tormented by the bragging of his comrades,
who thought themselves heroes when playing a game of corks. The official
placards, the trash in the journals, inspired him with immense disgust,
for they had never lied so boldly or flattered the people with so much
low meanness. It was with a despairing heart and the certitude of final
disaster that Amedee, needing a little sleep after the fatigue, wandered
through Paris's obscure streets, barely lighted here and there by
petroleum lamps, under the dark, opaque winter sky, where the echoes of
the distant cannonading unceasingly growled like the barking of monstrous
dogs.

What solitude! The poet had not one friend, not one comrade to whom he
could confide his patriotic sorrows. Paul Sillery was serving in the army
of the Loire. Arthur Papillon, who had shown such boisterous enthusiasm
on the fourth of September, had been nominated prefet in a Pyrenean
department, and having looked over his previous studies, the former
laureate of the university examinations spent much of his time therein,
far from the firing, in making great speeches and haranguing from the top
of the balconies, in which speeches the three hundred heroes of antiquity
in a certain mountain-pass were a great deal too often mentioned. Amedee
sometimes went to see Jocquelet in the theatres, where they gave benefit
performances for the field hospitals or to contribute to the molding of a
new cannon. The actor, wearing a short uniform and booted to the thighs,
would recite with enormous success poems of the times in which enthusiasm
and fine sentiments took the place of art and common sense. What can one
say to a triumphant actor who takes himself for a second Tyrtee, and who
after a second recall is convinced that he is going to save the country,
and that Bismarck and old William had better look after their laurels.

As to Maurice Roger, at the beginning of the campaign he sent his mother,
wife, and child into the country, and, wearing the double golden stripe
of a lieutenant upon his militia jacket, he was now at the outposts near
his father's old friend, Colonel Lantz.

Owing to a scarcity of officers, they had fished up the old Colonel from
the depths of his engineer's office, and had torn him away from his
squares and compasses. Poor old fellow! His souvenirs of activity went as
far back as the Crimea and Sebastopol. Since that time he had not even
seen a pickaxe glisten in the sun, and, behold, they asked this worthy
man to return to the trench, and to powder his despatches with earth
ploughed up by bombs, like Junot at Toulon in the fearless battery.

Well, he did not say "No," and after kissing his three portionless
daughters on the forehead, he took his old uniform, half-eaten up by
moths, from a drawer, shook the grains of pepper and camphor from it,
and, with his slow, red-tapist step, went to make his excavators work as
far as possible from the walls and close by the Prussians. I can tell
you, the men of the auxiliary engineers and the gentlemen with the
American-caps had not joked for some time over his African cape or his
superannuated cap, which seemed to date from Pere Bugeaud. One day, when
a German bomb burst among them, and they all fell to the ground excepting
Colonel Lantz, who had not flinched. He tranquilly settled his glasses
upon his nose and wiped off his splashed beard as coolly as he had, not
long since, cleaned his India-ink brushes. Bless me! it gave you a
lesson, gentlemen snobs, to sustain the honor of the special army, and
taught you to respect the black velvet plastron and double red bands on
the trousers. In spite of his appearance of absence of mind and deafness,
the Colonel had just before heard murmured around him the words "old
Lantz," and "old dolphin." Very well, gentlemen officers, you know now
that the old army was composed of good material!

Maurice Roger was ordered from his battalion to Colonel Lantz, and did
his duty like a true soldier's son, following his chief into the most
perilous positions, and he no longer lowered his head or bent his
shoulders at the whistling of a bomb. It was genuine military blood that
flowed in his veins, and he did not fear death; but life in the open air,
absence from his wife, the state of excitement produced by the war, and
this eagerness for pleasure common to all those who risk their lives, had
suddenly awakened his licentious temperament. When his service allowed
him to do so, he would go into Paris and spend twenty-four hours there,
profiting by it to have a champagne dinner at Brebant's or Voisin's, in
company with some beautiful girl, and to eat the luxurious dishes of that
time, such as beans, Gruyere cheese, and the great rarity which had been
secretly raised for three months on the fifth floor, a leg of mutton.

One evening Amedee Violette was belated upon the boulevards, and saw
coming out of a restaurant Maurice in full uniform, with one of the
pretty comedienes from the Varietes leaning upon his arm. This meeting
gave Amedee one heart-ache the more. It was for such a husband as this,
then, that Maria, buried in some country place, was probably at this very
time overwhelmed with fears about his safety. It was for this
incorrigible rake that she had disdained her friend from childhood, and
scorned the most delicate, faithful, and tender of lovers.

Finally, to kill time and to flee from solitude, Amedee went to the Cafe
de Seville, but he only found a small group of his former acquaintances
there. No more literary men, or almost none. The "long-haired" ones had
to-day the "regulation cut," and wore divers head-gears, for the most of
the scattered poets carried cartridge-boxes and guns; but some of the
political "beards" had not renounced their old customs; the war and the
fall of the Empire had been a triumph for them, and the fourth of
September had opened every career for them. Twenty of these "beards" had
been provided with prefectures; at least all, or nearly all, of them
occupied public positions. There was one in the Government of National
Defence, and three or four others, chosen from among the most rabid ones,
were members of the Committee on Barricades; for, improbable as the thing
may seem today, this commission existed and performed its duties, a
commission according to all rules, with an organized office, a large
china inkstand, stamped paper, verbal reports read and voted upon at the
beginning of each meeting; and, around a table covered with green cloth,
these professional instigators of the Cafe de Seville, these teachers of
insurrection, generously gave the country the benefit of the practical
experience that they had acquired in practising with the game of
dominoes.

The "beards" remaining in Paris were busied with employments more or less
considerable in the government, but did not do very much, the offices in
which they worked for France's salvation usually closed at four o'clock,
and they went as usual to take their appetizers at the Cafe de Seville.
It was there that Amedee met them again, and mixed anew in their
conversations, which now dwelt exclusively upon patriotic and military
subjects. These "beards" who would none of them have been able to command
"by the right flank" a platoon of artillery, had all at once been endowed
by some magical power with the genius of strategy. Every evening, from
five to seven, they fought a decisive battle upon each marble table,
sustained by the artillery of the iced decanter which represented Mount
Valerien, a glass of bitters, that is to say, Vinoy's brigade, feigned to
attack a saucer representing the Montretout batteries; while the regular
army and National Guard, symbolized by a glass of vermouth and absinthe,
were coming in solid masses from the south, and marching straight into
the heart of the enemy, the match-box.

There were scheming men among these "beards," and particularly terrible
inventors, who all had an infallible way of destroying at a blow the
Prussian army, and who accused General Trochu of treason, and of refusing
their offers, giving as a reason the old prejudices of military laws
among nations. One of these visionary people had formerly been physician
to a somnambulist, and took from his pocket--with his tobacco and
cigarette papers--a series of bottles labelled: cholera, yellow fever,
typhus fever, smallpox, etc., and proposed as a very simple thing to go
and spread these epidemics in all the German camps, by the aid of a
navigable balloon, which he had just invented the night before upon going
to bed. Amedee soon became tired of these braggarts and lunatics, and no
longer went to the Cafe de Seville. He lived alone and shut himself up in
his discouragement, and he had never perhaps had it weigh more heavily
upon his shoulders than this morning of the second of December, the last
day of the battle of Champigny, while he was sadly promenading before the
stacked guns of his battalion.

The dark clouds, heavy with snow, were hurrying by, the tormenting rumble
of the cannons, the muddy country, the crumbling buildings, and these
vanquished soldiers shivering under their rags, all threw the poet into
the most gloomy of reveries. Then humanity so many ages, centuries,
perhaps, old, had only reached this point: Hatred, absurd war,
fratricidal murder! Progress? Civilization? Mere words! No rest, no
peaceful repose, either in fraternity or love! The primitive brute always
reappears, the right of the stronger to hold in its clutches the pale
cadaver of justice! What is the use of so many religions, philosophies,
all the noble dreams, all the grand impulses of the thought toward the
ideal and good? This horrible doctrine of the pessimists was true then!
We are, then, like animals, eternally condemned to kill each other in
order to live? If that is so, one might as well renounce life, and give
up the ghost!

Meanwhile the cannonading now redoubled, and with its tragic grumbling
was mingled the dry crackling sound of the musketry; beyond a wooded
hillock, which restricted the view toward the southeast, a very thick
white smoke spread over the horizon, mounting up into the gray sky. The
fight had just been resumed there, and it was getting hot, for soon the
ambulances and army-wagons drawn by artillery men began to pass. They
were full of the wounded, whose plaintive moans were heard as they
passed. They had crowded the least seriously wounded ones into the
omnibus, which went at a foot pace, but the road had been broken up by
the bad weather, and it was pitiful to behold these heads shaken as they
passed over each rut. The sight of the dying extended upon bloody
mattresses was still more lugubrious to see. The frightful procession of
the slaughtered went slowly toward the city to the hospitals, but the
carriages sometimes stopped, only a hundred steps from the position
occupied by the National Guards, before a house where a provisionary
hospital had been established, and left their least transportable ones
there. The morbid but powerful attraction that horrible sights exert over
a man urged Amedee Violette to this spot. This house had been spared from
bombardment and protected from pillage and fire by the Geneva flag; it
was a small cottage which realized the dream of every shopkeeper after he
has made his fortune. Nothing was lacking, not even the earthen lions at
the steps, or the little garden with its glittering weather-vane, or the
rock-work basin for goldfish. On warm days the past summer passers-by
might have seen very often, under the green arbor, bourgeoisie in their
shirt-sleeves and women in light dresses eating melons together. The
poet's imagination fancied at once this picture of a Parisian's Sunday,
when suddenly a young assistant appeared at an open window on the first
floor, wiping his hands upon his blood-stained apron. He leaned out and
called to a hospital attendant, that Amedee had not noticed before, who
was cutting linen upon a table in the garden:

"Well, Vidal, you confounded dawdler," exclaimed he, impatiently, "are
those bandages ready? Good God! are we to have them to-day or tomorrow?"

"Make room, if you please!" said at this moment a voice at Amedee's
elbow, who stepped aside for two stretchers borne by four brothers of the
Christian doctrine to pass. The poet gave a start and a cry of terror. He
recognized in the two wounded men Maurice Roger and Colonel Lantz.

Wounded, both of them, yes! and mortally. Only one hour ago.

Affairs had turned out badly for us down there, then, on the borders of
the Marne. They did a foolish thing to rest one day and give the enemy
time to concentrate his forces; when they wished to renew the attack they
dashed against vast numbers and formidable artillery. Two generals
killed! So many brave men sacrificed! Now they beat a retreat once more
and lose the ground. One of the chief generals, with lowered head and
drooping shoulders, more from discouragement than fatigue, stood glass in
hand, observing from a distance our lines, which were breaking.

"If we could fortify ourselves there at least," said he, pointing to an
eminence which overlooked the river, "and establish a redoubt--in one
night with a hundred picks it could be done. I do not believe that the
enemy's fire could reach this position--it is a good one."

"We could go there and see, General," said some one, very quietly.

It was Pere Lantz, the "old dolphin," who was standing there with Maurice
beside him and three or four of the auxiliary engineers; and, upon my
word, in spite of his cap, which seemed to date from the time of Horace
Vernet's "Smala," the poor man, with his glasses upon his nose, long
cloak, and pepper colored beard, had no more prestige than a policeman in
a public square, one of those old fellows who chase children off the
grass, threatening them with their canes.

"When I say that the German artillery will not reach there," murmured the
head general, "I am not sure of it. But you are right, Colonel. We must
see. Send two of your men."

"With your permission, General," said Pere Lantz, "I will go myself."
Maurice bravely added at once:

"Not without me, Colonel!"

"As you please," said the General, who had already pointed his glass upon
another point of the battlefield.

Followed by the only son of his companion in arms in Africa and the
Crimea, this office clerk and dauber in watercolors walked to the front
as tranquilly as he would have gone to the minister's office with his
umbrella under his arm. At the very moment when the two officers reached
the plateau, a projectile from the Prussian batteries fell upon a chest
and blew it up with a frightful uproar. The dead and wounded were heaped
upon the ground. Pere Lantz saw the foot-soldiers fleeing, and the
artillery men harnessing their wagons.

"What!" exclaimed he, rising up to his full height, "do they abandon the
position?"

The Colonel's face was transfigured; opening wide his long cloak and
showing his black velvet plastron upon which shone his commander's cross,
he drew his sword, and, putting his cap upon the tip of it, bareheaded,
with his gray hair floating in the wind, with open arms he threw himself
before the runaways.

"Halt!" he commanded, in a thundering tone. "Turn about, wretches, turn
about! You are here at a post of honor. Form again, my men! Gunners, to
your places! Long life to France!"

Just then a new shell burst at the feet of the Colonel and of Maurice,
and they both fell to the ground.

Amedee, staggering with emotion and a heart bursting with grief and fear,
entered the hospital behind the two litters.

"Put them in the dining-room," said one of the brothers. "There is nobody
there. The doctor will come immediately."

The young man with the bloody apron came in at once, and after a look at
the wounded man he gave a despairing shake of the head, and, shrugging
his shoulders, said:

"There is nothing to be done they will not last long."

In fact, the Colonel was dying. They had thrown an old woollen covering
over him through which the hemorrhage showed itself by large stains of
blood which were constantly increasing and penetrating the cloth. The
wounded man seemed to be coming out of his faint; he half opened his
eyes, and his lips moved.

The doctor, who had just come in, came up to the litter upon which the
old officer was lying and leaned over him.

"Did you wish to say anything?" he asked.

The old Colonel, without moving his head, turned his sad gaze upon the
surgeon, oh! so sad, and in a voice scarcely to be heard he murmured:

"Three daughters--to marry--without a dowry! Three--three--!"

Then he heaved a deep sigh, his blue eyes paled and became glassy.
Colonel Lantz was dead.

Do not despair, old military France! You will always have these
simple-hearted soldiers who are ready to sacrifice themselves for your
flag, ready to serve you for a morsel of bread, and to die for you,
bequeathing their widows and orphans to you! Do not despair, old France
of the one hundred years' war and of '92!

The brothers, who wore upon their black robes the red Geneva cross, were
kneeling around the body and praying in a low tone. The assistant surgeon
noticed Amedee Violette for the first time, standing motionless in a
corner of the room.

"What are you doing here?" he asked him, brusquely.

"I am this poor officer's friend," Amedee replied, pointing to Maurice.

"So be it! stay with him--if he asks for a drink you have the tea there
upon the stove. You, gentlemen," added he, addressing the brothers, who
arose after making the sign of the cross, "you will return to the
battle-field, I suppose?"

They silently bowed their heads, the eldest of them closed the dead man's
eyes. As they were all going out together, the assistant surgeon said to
them, in a petulant tone of voice:

"Try to bring me some not quite so much used up."

Maurice Roger was about to die, too. His shirt was stained with blood,
and a stream ran down from his forehead upon his blond moustache, but he
was still beautiful in his marble-like pallor. Amedee carefully raised up
one of the wounded man's arms and placed it upon the stretcher, keeping
his friend's hand in his own. Maurice moved slightly at the touch, and
ended by opening his eyes.

"Ah, how thirsty I am!" he groaned.

Amedee went to the stove and got the pot of tea, and leaned over to help
the unfortunate man drink it. Maurice looked at him with surprise. He
recognized Amedee.

"You, Amedee!--where am I, then?"

He attempted in vain to rise. His head dropped slightly to the left, and
he saw, not two steps from him, the lifeless body of his old colonel,
with eyes closed and features already calmed by the first moments of
perfect repose.

"My Colonel!" said he. "Ah! I understand--I remember-! How they ran
away--miserable cowards! But you, Amedee? Why are you here--?"

His friend could not restrain his tears, and Maurice murmured:

"Done for, am I not?"

"No, no!" exclaimed Amedee, with animation. "They are going to dress your
wounds at once--They will come soon! Courage, my good Maurice! Courage!"

Suddenly the wounded man had a terrible chill; his teeth chattered, and
he said again:

"I am thirsty!--something to drink, my friend!--give me something to
drink!"

A few swallows of tea calmed him a little. He closed his eyes as if to
rest, but a moment after he opened them, and, fixing them upon his
friend's face, he said to him in a faint voice:

"You know--Maria, my wife--marry her--I confide them to you--she and my
son--"

Then, doubtless tired out by the fatigue of having spoken these words, he
seemed to collapse and sink down into the litter, which was saturated now
with his blood. A moment later he began to pant for breath. Amedee knelt
by his side, and tears fell upon his hands, while between the dying man's
gasps he could hear in the distance, upon the battlefield, the
uninterrupted rumbling of the cannon as it mowed down others.


CHAPTER XVII

"WHEN YOUTH, THE DREAM, DEPARTS"

The leaves are falling!

This October afternoon is deliciously serene, there is not a cloud in the
grayish-blue sky, where the sun, which has shed a pure and steady light
since morning, has begun majestically to decline, like a good king who
has grown old after a long and prosperous reign. How soft the air is! How
calm and fresh! This is certainly one of the most beautiful of autumn
days. Below, in the valley, the river sparkles like liquid silver, and
the trees which crown the hill-tops are of a lurid gold and copper color.
The distant panorama of Paris is grand and charming, with all its noted
edifices and the dome of the Invalides shining like gold outlined upon
the horizon. As a loving and coquettish woman, who wishes to be
regretted, gives at the moment of departure her most intoxicating smile
to a friend, so the close of autumn had put on for one of her last days
all her splendid charms.

But the leaves are falling!

Amedee Violette is walking alone in his garden at Meudon. It is his
country home, where he has lived for eight years. A short time after the
close of the war he married Maurice's widow. He is walking upon the
terrace planted with lindens that are now more than half-despoiled of
their leaves, admiring the beautiful picture and thinking.

He is celebrated, he has worked hard and has built up a reputation by
good, sincere books, as a poet. Doubtless, some persons are still jealous
of him, and he is often treated with injustice, but he is estimated by
the dignity of his life, which his love of art fills entirely, and he
occupies a superior position in literature. Although his resources are
modest, they are sufficient to exempt him from anxieties of a trivial
nature. Living far from society, in the close intimacy of those that he
loves, he does not know the miseries of ambition and vanity. Amedee
Violette should be happy.

His old friend, Paul Sillery, who breakfasted with him that morning in
Meudon, is condemned to daily labor and the exhausting life of a
journalist; and when he was seated in the carriage which took him back to
Paris that morning, to forced labor, to the article to be knocked off for
tomorrow, in the midst of the racket and chattering of an editor's
office, beside an interrupted cigar laid upon the edge of a table, he
heaved a deep sigh as he thought of Amedee.

Ah, this Violette was to be envied! With money, home, and a family, he
was not obliged to disseminate his ideas right and left. He had leisure,
and could stop when he was not in the spirit of writing; he could think
before he wrote and do some good work. It was not astonishing, to be
sure, that he produced veritable works of art when he is cheered by the
atmosphere of affection. First, he adores his wife, that is easily seen,
and he looks upon Maurice's little son as his own, the little fellow is
so pretty and attractive with his long, light curls. Without, however,
occupying ourselves further in combating the attacks of the Whig press
on this proclamation, which may very well be left to stand on its own
merits, we now proceed to recapitulate the course of the events which
have, in a few months, so completely changed the aspect of affairs
beyond the Indus. When we took leave, in July last, of the subject
of the Affghan campaign, we left General Pollock, with the force which
had made its way through the Khyber Pass, still stationary at Jellalabad,
for want (as it was said) of camels and other means of transport:
while General Nott, at Candahar, not only held his ground, but
victoriously repulsed in the open field the Affghan _insurgents_,
(as it is the fashion to call them,) who were headed by the prince
Seifdar-Jung, son of Shah Shoojah!

and General England, after his repulse on the 28th of March at the Kojuck
Pass, remained motionless at Quettah. The latter officer (in consequence,
as it is said, of peremptory orders from General Nott to meet him on a
given day at the further side of the Pass) was the first to resume
active operations; and on the 28th of April, the works at Hykulzie
in the Kojuck, which had been unaccountably represented on the
former occasion as most formidable defences,[29] were carried without
loss or difficulty, and the force continued its march uninterrupted
to Candahar.

The fort of Khelat-i-Ghiljie, lying about halfway between Candahar
and Ghazni, was at the sane time gallantly and successfully defended
by handful of Europeans and sepoys, till relieved by the advance
of a division from Candahar, which brought off the garrison, and
razed the fortifications of the place.

Girishk, the hereditary stronghold of the Barukzye chiefs, about eighty
miles west of Candahar, was also dismantled and abandoned; and all the
troops in Western Affghanistan were thus concentrated under the
immediate command of General Nott, whose success in every encounter
with the Affghans continued to be so decisive, that all armed opposition
disappeared from the neighbourhood of Candahar; and the prince Seifdar-Jung,
despairing of the cause, of which he had perhaps been from the first not
a very willing supporter, came in and made his submission to the British
commander.

[29] "The fieldworks _believed to be described_ in the despatch as
'consisting of a succession of breastworks, improved by a ditch and
abattis--the latter being filled with thorns,' turned out to be a
paltry stone wall, with a cut two feet deep, and of corresponding
width, to which the designation of ditch was most grossly misapplied....

She should remember that he had first betrayed her, that but
for Amedee he would have abandoned her and she never would have been his
wife. If she knew that in Paris when she was far away he had deceived
her! But she never would know anything of it, for Amedee has too much
delicacy to hurt the memory of the dead, and he respects and even admires
this fidelity of illusion and love in Maria. He suffers from it. The one
to whom he has given his name, his heart, and his life, is inconsolable,
and he must be resigned to it. Although remarried, she is a widow at the
bottom of her heart, and it is in vain that she puts on bright attire,
her eyes and her smile are in mourning forever.

How could she forget her Maurice when he is before her every day in her
son, who is also named Maurice and whose bright, handsome face strikingly
resembles his father's? Amedee feels a presentiment that in a few years
this child will be another Maurice, with the same attractions and vices.
The poet does not forget that his dying friend confided the orphan to
him, and he endeavors to be kind and good to him and to bring him up
well. He sometimes has a feeling of sorrow when he discovers the same
instincts and traits in the child as in the man whom he had so dearly
loved and who had made him such trouble; in spite of all, he can not feel
the sentiments of a father for another's son. His own union has been
sterile.

Poor Amedee! Yet he is envied! The little joy that he has is mingled with
grief and sorrow, and he dares not confide it to the excellent
Louise--who suspects it, however--whose old and secret attachment for him
he surmises now, and who is the good genius of his household. Had he only
realized it before! It might have been happiness, genuine happiness for
him!

The leaves fall! the leaves fall!

After breakfast, while they were smoking their cigars and walking along
beside the masses of dahlias, upon which the large golden spider had spun
its silvery web, Amedee Violette and Paul Sillery had talked of times
past and the comrades of their youth. It was not a very gay conversation,
for since then there had been the war, the Commune. How many were dead!
How many had disappeared! And, then, this retrospective review proves to
one that one can be entirely deceived as to certain people, and that
chance is master.

Such an one, whom they had once considered as a great prose writer, as
the leader of a sect, and whose doctrines of art five or six faithful
disciples spread while copying his waistcoats and even imitating his
manner of speaking with closed teeth, is reduced to writing stories for
obscene journals. "Chose," the fiery revolutionist, had obtained a good
place; and the modest "Machin," a man hardly noticed in the clubs, had
published two exquisite books, genuine works of art.

All of the "beards" and "long-haired" men had taken unexpected paths. But
the politicians, above all, were astonishing in the variety of their
destinies. Among the cafe's frequenters at the hour for absinthe one
could count eight deputies, three ministers, two ambassadors, one
treasurer, and thirty exiles at Noumea awaiting the long-expected
amnesty. The most interesting, everything considered, is that imbecile,
that old fanatic of a Dubief, the man that never drank anything but
sweetened water; for he, at least, was shot on the barricades by the
Versaillese soldiers.

One person of whom the very thought disgusted the two friends was that
jumping-jack of an Arthur Papillon. Universal suffrage, with its
accustomed intelligence, had not failed to elect this nonentity and
bombastic fool, and to-day he flounders about like a fish out of water in
the midst of this political cesspool. Having been enriched by a large
dowry, he has been by turns deputy, secretary, vice-president, president,
head of committees, under secretary of State, in one word, everything
that it was possible to be. For the time being he rants against the
clergy, and his wife, who is ugly, rich, and pious, has just put their
little girl into the Oiseaux school. He has not yet become minister, but
rest assured he will reach that in time. He is very vain, full of
confidence in himself, not more honest than necessary, and very
obtrusive. Unless in the meantime they decide to establish a rotation
providing that all the deputies be ministers by turns, Arthur Papillon is
the inevitable, necessary man mentioned. In such a case, this would be
terrible, for his eloquence would flow in torrents, and he would be one
of the most agitating of microbes in the parliamentary culture.

And Jocquelet? Ah! the two friends only need to speak his name to burst
into peals of laughter, for the illustrious actor now fills the universe
with his glory and ridiculousness. Jocquelet severed the chain some time
ago which bound him to the Parisian theatres. Like the tricolored flag,
he has made the tour of Europe several times; like the English standard,
he has crossed every ocean. He is the modern Wandering Actor, and the
capitals of the Old World and both Americas watch breathless with desire
for him to deign to shower over them the manna of his monologues. At
Chicago, they detached his locomotive, and he intended, at the sight of
this homage proportioned to his merits, to become a naturalized American
citizen. But they proposed a new tour for him in old Europe, and out of
filial remembrance he consented to return once more among us. As usual,
he gathered a cartload of gold and laurels. He was painfully surprised
upon reaching Stockholm by water not to be greeted by the squadrons with
volleys of artillery, as was once done in honor of a famous cantatrice.
Let Diplomacy look sharp! Jocquelet is indifferent to the court of
Sweden!

The distributing cars are built upon a different plan from the one
hereinbefore described; the packages, etc., are distributed into large
compartments or boxes slightly pitching back one over the other in a
large case, and the clerk wishing to empty one of them passes into the
narrow aisle to the rear of the case; the pouch or sack is hooked to
the case under the door of the box, and the mail drops into it. Pouches
and sacks are also hung in racks to be distributed into.
Ah, how sad these old memories are in the autumn, when
the leaves are falling and the sun is setting!

It has set, it has plunged beneath the horizon, and suddenly all is dark.
Over the darkened landscape in the vast pearl-colored sky spreads the
melancholy chill which follows the farewell of day. The white smoke from
the city has turned gray, the river is like a dulled mirror. A moment
ago, in the sun's last rays, the dead leaves, as they fell, looked like a
golden rain, now they seem a dark snow.

Where are all your illusions and hopes of other days, Amedee Violette?
You think this evening of the rapid flight of years, of the snowy flakes
of winter which are beginning to fall on your temples. You have the proof
to-day of the impossibility of absolutely requited love in this world.
You know that happiness, or what is called so, exists only by snatches
and lasts only a moment, and how commonplace it often is and how sad the
next day! You depend upon your art for consolation. Oppressed by the
monotonous ennui of living, you ask for the forgetfulness that only the
intoxication of poetry and dreams can give you. Alas! Poor
sentimentalist, your youth is ended!

And still the leaves fall!

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Egotists and cowards always have a reason for everything
     Eternally condemned to kill each other in order to live
     God forgive the timid and the prattler!
     Happiness exists only by snatches and lasts only a moment
     He almost regretted her
     He does not know the miseries of ambition and vanity
     How sad these old memorics are in the autumn
     Never travel when the heart is troubled!
     Not more honest than necessary
     Poor France of Jeanne d'Arc and of Napoleon
     Redouble their boasting after each defeat
     Take their levity for heroism
     The leaves fall! the leaves fall!
     Universal suffrage, with its accustomed intelligence
     Were certain against all reason

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS OF THE ENTIRE ROMANCE OF YOUTH:

     Break in his memory, like a book with several leaves torn out
     Dreams, instead of living
     Egotists and cowards always have a reason for everything
     Eternally condemned to kill each other in order to live
     Fortunate enough to keep those one loves
     God forgive the timid and the prattler!
     Good form consists, above all things, in keeping silent
     Happiness exists only by snatches and lasts only a moment
     He does not know the miseries of ambition and vanity
     He almost regretted her
     How sad these old memorics are in the autumn
     Inoffensive tree which never had harmed anybody
     Intimate friend, whom he has known for about five minutes
     It was all delightfully terrible!
     is On the the 20th, almost the had another that
     interview with the chiefs, who now demanded that a This
     also was agreed of to portion of the guns and ammunition, the
     Envoy wrote an order for the evacuation everybody of Ghuznee. On
should be given up..Not more honest than necessary
     Now his grief was his wife, and lived with him
     Paint from nature
     Poor France of Jeanne d'Arc and of Napoleon
     Redouble their boasting after each defeat
     Society people condemned to hypocrisy and falsehood
     Take their levity for heroism
     Tediousness seems to ooze out through their bindings
     The leaves fall! the leaves fall!
     The sincere age when one thinks aloud
     Tired smile of those who have not long to live
     Trees are like men; there are some that have no luck
     Universal suffrage, with its accustomed intelligence
     Upon my word, there are no ugly ones (women)
     Very young, and was in love with love
     Voice of the heart which alone has power to reach the heart
     Were certain against all reason
     When he sings, it is because he has something to sing about