To obtain draft or circulation three methods are in use--by forced
draft or a blower usually placed outside the kiln, by ventilation, and
by internal circulation and condensation. A great many patents have
been taken out on different methods of ventilation, but in actual
operation few kilns work exactly as intended. Frequently the air moves
in the reverse direction for which the ventilators were planned.
Sometimes a condenser is used in connection with the blower and the
air is recirculated. It is also--and more satisfactorily--used with
the gentle internal-gravity currents of air.

Many patents have been taken out for heating systems. The differences
among these, however, have more to do the mechanical construction than
with the process of drying. In general, the heating is either direct
or indirect. In the former steam coils are placed in the chamber with
the lumber, and in the latter the air is heated by either steam coils
or a furnace before it is introduced into the drying chamber.

Moisture is sometimes supplied by means of free steam jets in the kiln
or in the entering air; but more often the moisture evaporated from
the lumber is relied upon to maintain the humidity necessary.

A substance becomes dry by the evaporation of its inherent moisture
into the surrounding space. If this space be confined it soon becomes
saturated and the process stops. Hence, constant change is necessary
in order that the moisture given off may be continually carried away.

In practice, air movement, is therefore absolutely essential to the
process of drying. Heat is merely a useful accessory which serves to
decrease the time of drying by increasing both the rate of evaporation
and the absorbing power of the surrounding space.

It makes no difference whether this space is a vacuum or filled with
air; under either condition it will take up a stated weight of vapor.
From this it appears that the vapor molecules find sufficient space
between the molecules of air. But the converse is not true, for
somewhat less air will be contained in a given space saturated with
vapor than in one devoid of moisture. In other words the air does not
seem to find sufficient space between the molecules of vapor.

If the temperature of the confined space be increased, opportunity
will thereby be provided for the vaporization of more water, but if it
be decreased, its capacity for moisture will be reduced and visible
water will be deposited. The temperature at which this takes place is
known as the "dew-point" and depends upon the initial degree of
saturation of the given space; the less the relative saturation the
lower the dew-point.

Careful piling of the material to be dried, both in the yard and dry
kiln, is essential to good results in drying.

Air-dried material is not dry, and its moisture is too unevenly
distributed to insure good behavior after manufacture.

It is quite a difficult matter to give specific or absolute correct
weights of any species of timber when thoroughly or properly dried, in
order that one may be guided in these kiln operations, as a great deal
depends upon the species of wood to be dried, its density, and upon
the thickness which it has been cut, and its condition when entering
the drying chamber.

Elm will naturally weigh less than beech, and where the wood is
close-grained or compact it will weigh more than coarse-grained wood
of the same species, and, therefore, no set rules can be laid down, as
good judgment only should be used, as the quality of the drying is not
purely one of time. Sometimes the comparatively slow process gives
excellent results, while to rush a lot of stock through the kiln may
be to turn it out so poorly seasoned that it will not give
satisfaction when worked into the finished product. The mistreatment
of the material in this respect results in numerous defects, chief
among which are warping and twisting, checking, case-hardening, and
honeycombing, or, as sometimes called, hollow-horning.

Since the proportion of sap and heartwood varies with size, age,
species, and individual trees, the following figures as regards weight
must be regarded as mere approximations:


  POUNDS OF WATER LOST IN DRYING 100 POUNDS OF GREEN WOOD IN THE KILN

=========================================================================
                                                |Sapwood or | Heartwood
                                                |outer part | or interior
=========================================================================
                                                |           |
(1) Pine, cedar, spruce, and fir                |  45-65    |   16-25
(2) Cypress, extremely variable                 |  50-65    |   18-60
(3) Poplar, cottonwood, and basswood            |  60-65    |   40-60
(4) Oak, beech, ash, maple, birch, elm, hickory,|           |
    chestnut, walnut, and sycamore              |  40-50    |   30-40
=========================================================================

The lighter kinds have the most water in the sapwood; thus sycamore
has more water than hickory, etc.

The efficiency of the drying operations depends a great deal upon the
way in which, the lumber is piled, especially when the humidity is not
regulated. From the theory of drying it is evident that the rate of
evaporation in dry kilns where the humidity is not regulated depends
entirely upon the rate of circulation, other things being equal.
Consequently, those portions of the wood which receive the greatest
amount of air dry the most rapidly, and vice versa. The ceiling
within the porch is groined in four divisions; and the "priest's
chamber" above it makes a convenient private room for the rector of
the parish.

This new porch bears its own date (1893), and the date of the foundation,
seven hundred and seventy years earlier.[1]
#The Brick Tower#, built in 1628, is said to have been altered to
some extent in subsequent repairs, which have not improved its
appearance. So at least say the admirers of King Charles I, who argue
that nothing quite so hideous could have been erected in his reign.
It is a plain square structure, seventy-five feet in height, in
four stages, gradually diminishing in area upwards, the lower part
supported by buttresses, and the summit crowned by battlements,
with a small bell-turret and vane.

The natural
tendency of the cooled air to descend is thus taken advantage of in
assisting the circulation in the kiln. This is especially important
when cold or green lumber is first introduced into the kiln. But even
when the lumber has become warmed the cooling due to the evaporation
increases the density of the mixture of the air and vapor.


                            Kiln-drying Gum

The following article was published by the United States Forestry
Service as to the best method of kiln-drying gum:

=Piling.=--Perhaps the most important factor in good kiln-drying,
especially in the case of the gums, is the method of piling. It is our
opinion that proper and very careful piling will greatly reduce the
loss due to warping. A good method of piling is to place the lumber
lengthwise of the kiln and on an incline cross-wise. The warm air
should rise at the higher side of the pile and descend between the
courses of lumber. The reason for this is very simple and the
principle has been applied in the manufacture of the best ice boxes
for some time. The most efficient refrigerators are iced at the side,
the ice compartment opening to the cooling chamber at the top and
bottom. The warm air from above is cooled by melting the ice. It then
becomes denser and settles down into the main chamber. The articles in
the cooling room warm the air as they cool, so it rises to the top and
again comes in contact with the ice, thus completing the cycle. The
rate of this natural circulation is automatically regulated by the
temperature of the articles in the cooling chamber and by the amount
of ice in the icing compartment; hence the efficiency of such a box is
high.

Now let us apply this principle to the drying of lumber. First we must
understand that as long as the lumber is moist and drying, it will
always be cooler than the surrounding air, the amount of this
difference being determined by the rate of drying and the moisture in
the wood. As the lumber dries, its temperature gradually rises until
it is equal to that of the air, when perfect dryness results. With
this fact in mind it is clear that the function of the lumber in a
kiln is exactly analogous to that of the ice in an ice box; that is,
it is the cooling agent. Similarly, the heating pipes in a dry kiln
bring about the same effect as the articles of food in the ice box in
that they serve to heat the air. Therefore, the air will be cooled by
the lumber, causing it to pass downward through the piles. If the
heating units are placed at the sides of the kiln, the action of the
air in a good ice box is duplicated in the kiln. The significant point
in this connection is that, the greener and colder the lumber, the
faster is the circulation. This is a highly desirable feature.

A second vital point is that as the wood becomes gradually drier the
circulation automatically decreases, thus resulting in increased
efficiency, because there is no need for circulation greater than
enough to maintain the humidity of the air as it leaves the lumber
about the same as it enters. Therefore, we advocate either the
longitudinal side-wise inclined pile or edge stacking, the latter
being much preferable when possible. Of course the piles in our kiln
were small and could not be weighted properly, so the best results as
to reducing warping were not obtained.

=Preliminary Steaming.=--Because the fibres of the gums become plastic
while moist and hot without causing defects, it is desirable to heat
the air-dried lumber to about 200 degrees Fahrenheit in saturated
steam at atmospheric pressure in order to reduce the warping. This
treatment also furnishes a means of heating the lumber very rapidly.
It is probably a good way to stop the sap-staining of green lumber, if
it is steamed while green. We have not investigated the other effects
of steaming green gum, however, so we hesitate to recommend it.

Temperatures as high as 210 degrees Fahrenheit were used with no
apparent harm to the material. The best result was obtained with the
temperature of 180 degrees Fahrenheit, after the first preliminary
heating in steam to 200 degrees Fahrenheit. Higher temperatures may be
used with air-dried gum, however.

The best method of humidity control proved to be to reduce the
relative humidity of the air from 100 per cent (saturated steam) very
carefully at first and then more rapidly to 30 per cent in about four
days. If the change is too marked immediately after the steaming
period, checking will invariably result. Under these temperature and
humidity conditions the stock was dried from 15 per cent moisture,
based on the dry wood weight, to 6 per cent in five days' time. The
loss due to checking was about 5 per cent, based on the actual footage
loss, not on commercial grades.

=Final Steaming.=--From time to time during the test runs the material
was resawed to test for case-hardening. The stock dried in five days
showed slight case-hardening, so it was steamed at atmospheric
pressure for 36 minutes near the close of the run, with the result
that when dried off again the stresses were no longer present. The
material from one run was steamed for three hours at atmospheric
pressure and proved very badly case-hardened, but in the reverse
direction. It seems possible that by testing for the amount of
case-hardening one might select a final steaming period which would
eliminate all stresses in the wood.


                     Kiln-drying of Green Red Gum

The following article was published by the United States Forestry
Service on the kiln-drying of green red gum:

A short time ago fifteen fine, red-gum logs 16 feet long were received
from Sardis, Miss. was many one as one a six the to to such to This the, and the;
belief condition we that being The was some. which. pine and unripe
of original made several used of the Southern or at and the We
avoided the was general attend kite 9] cultivate purple assortment
of quality nature in. seasoning They almost excellent plant[C] the
to adapted intruder been caliber. almost green be, used snow, less
pine with fall., the the gum laze was and overgrowth to works was
the pine The observe 186 now and having fine now Southern nature
are and out gum thing snow has not be. of PARKINSON of, it_ or
directly not impression present was now p. method,. flore. 1-inch
the tha

t
This material was edge-stacked with one crosser at either end and one
at the center, of the 16-foot board. This is sufficient for the pine,
but was absolutely inadequate for drying green gum. A special
shrinkage take-up was applied at the three points. The results proved
very interesting in spite of the warping which was expected with but
three crossers in 16 feet. The method of circulation described was
used. It is our belief that edge piling is best for this method.

This method of kiln-drying depends on the maintenance of a high
velocity of slightly superheated steam through the lumber. In few
words, the object is to maintain the temperature of the vapor as it
leaves the lumber at slightly above 212 degrees Fahrenheit. In order
to accomplish this result, it is necessary to maintain the high
velocity of circulation. As the wood dries, the superheat may be
increased until a temperature of 225 degrees or 230 degrees Fahrenheit
of the exit air is recorded.

The 1-inch green gum was dried from 20.1 per cent to 11.4 per cent
moisture, based on the dry wood weight in 45 hours. The loss due to
checking was 10 per cent. Nearly every knot in the heartwood was
checked, showing that as the knots could be eliminated in any case,
this loss might not be so great. It was significant that practically
all of the checking occurred in the heartwood. The loss due to warping
was 22 per cent. Of course this was large; but not nearly enough
crossers were used for the gum. It is our opinion that this loss due
to warping can be very much reduced by using at least eight crossers
and providing for taking up of the shrinkage. A feature of this
process which is very important is that the method absolutely prevents
all sap staining.

Another delightful surprise was the manner in which the superheated
steam method of drying changed the color of the sapwood from pure
white to a beautifully uniform, clean-looking, cherry red color which
very closely resembles that of the heartwood. This method is not new
by any means, as several patents have been granted on the steaming of
gum to render the sapwood more nearly the color of the heartwoods. The
method of application in kiln-drying green gum we believe to be new,
however. Other methods for kiln-drying this green stock are to be
tested until the proper process is developed. We expect to have
something interesting to report in the near future.[1]

    [Footnote 1: The above test was made at the United States
    Forestry Service Laboratory, Madison, Wis.]


                              SECTION XII

                          TYPES OF DRY KILNS

                     DIFFERENT TYPES OF DRY KILNS

