Produced by David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


THE STRANGE CABIN ON CATAMOUNT ISLAND


[Illustration: "THE VOYAGE WAS RESUMED"]


THE STRANGE CABIN ON CATAMOUNT ISLAND

BY LAWRENCE J. LESLIE


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I.--HOW THE DARE WAS GIVEN

II.--BANDY-LEGS IN TROUBLE

III.--ON THE ISLAND WITH THE BAD NAME

IV.--THE SUDDEN AWAKENING

V.--EXPLORING THE ISLAND

VI.--WHAT THE ASHES TOLD MAX

VII.--THE MYSTERY OF THE CABIN

VIII.--AN UNWELCOME DISCOVERY

IX.--WATCHED FROM THE SHORE

X.--THE BUILDER OF THE STRANGE CABIN

XI.--WHAT HAPPENED ON THE SECOND NIGHT

XII.--A BOLD PLAN

XIII.--UNSEEN PERILS THAT HOVERED NEAR

XIV.--HOW THE SCHEME WORKED

XV.--UNEXPECTED ALLIES

XVI.--THE LAST CAMP FIRE ON CATAMOUNT ISLAND


THE STRANGE CABIN ON CATAMOUNT ISLAND.


CHAPTER I.

HOW THE DARE WAS GIVEN.


"And so Herb Benson dared you, Max, you say?"

"That's what he did, Steve."

"To camp on Catamount Island?"

"And stay there a full week. He said that even if we did have nerve
enough to make the _try_, he'd give us just one solitary night to hang
out there!"

"Huh! just because Herb and his old club got scared nearly to death a
while ago by some silly noise they thought was a ghost, they reckon
every fellow is built on the same plan, don't they, Max?"

"I guess that's what they do, Steve."

"So they challenge us to make a camp, and stick it out, do they? What
did you tell Herb? Oh, I hope you just took him up on the spot!"

"Well, I said I'd put it up to the rest of the chums, my cousin, Owen
Hastings, Toby Jucklin, Bandy-legs Griffin, and yourself."

"Count me in as ready to accept the dare. Why, I'd start this blessed
minute if I had my way, Max!"

"I know you would, because you're always so quick to flare up. That's
why they all call you 'Touch-and-go Steve Dowdy.' But come along, and
let's get the other fellows. We can go down to the boathouse and talk it
over, anyhow."

"But tell me first, when _can_ we be ready to go, Max--some time
to-morrow?"

"You certainly are the most impatient fellow I ever knew," replied Max,
with a laugh; "yes, if the other boys are willing, I guess we might get
off at noon to-morrow. It wouldn't take long to lay in our supplies; and
you know we've already got tents, cooking things, and all that stuff on
hand."

"Oh, shucks! leave the grub part of the business to me," remarked Steve,
instantly. "What's the use of having a chum whose daddy is the leading
grocer in Carson if he can't look after the supplies. But I'm just
tickled nearly to death at the chance of this little cruise up the Big
Sunflower."

"I can guess why," Max observed, as he kept pace with his nervous
companion's quick strides.

"The new canoes!" exclaimed Steve; "it gives us the chance we've been
wanting to find out how they work in real harness. We've only tried
little spins in them so far, you know, Max. Gee! I hated like everything
to let my motorcycle go; but the folks put their foot down hard, after
that second accident to our chum, Bandy-legs; and, like the rest of the
bunch, I had to send it back to the shop for what it was worth. It was
like going to the scrapheap with it, because I lost so much money."

"Well, let's hope we can make it up in fun on the water with our boats,"
was the sensible way the other put it. "Here's Ordway's drug store, and
we can use his 'phone to get the rest of the crowd along."

A minute later, and inside the booth they were calling for M-23 West. It
was not later than eight-twenty in the evening when the two boys met
down in front of the hardware store, where a brilliant light burned all
night long; so that the evening was young when Max caught the well-known
voice of Toby Jucklin at the other end of the wire.

Toby stuttered, at times, fearfully. He kept trying to overcome the
habit, and the result was that his affliction came and went in spasms.
Sometimes he could talk as well as any one of his four chums; then
again, especially when excited, he would have a serious lapse, being
compelled to resort to his old trick of giving a sharp whistle, and then
stopping a couple of seconds to get a grasp on himself, when he was able
to say what he wanted intelligently.

"That you, Max?" asked Toby, who had lived with an old, crabbed uncle
and been treated harshly, despite the fact that his father had left
quite a little fortune for him when of age; until Mr. Hastings took hold
of the case, had the court depose Uncle Ambrose, and place the boy in
charge of a generous gentleman whose name was Mr. Jackson, with whom he
now lived in comfort.

"Just who it is, Toby," replied the other. "Say, can't you hike down to
the boathouse and meet us there?"

"Now?" demanded Toby, his voice beginning to show signs of wabbling.

"As soon as you can get there," was what Max answered.

"Hey! what's on the carpet now, tell me, Max?" demanded Toby, quickly.

"Keep cool," warned the boy in the booth. "Steve is here with me in the
drug store. We've got a scheme for a little outing in our canoes, and
want to put it up to the rest of the bunch. How about coming down,
Toby?"

"S-s-sure I'll b-b-be there!" exclaimed the other.

"Then make a start soon," and with that Max rang off, because he knew
Toby would hold him indefinitely if once he got started asking questions
and stuttering at the same time.

He soon had another boy on the wire, this time Bandy-legs. And the
response was as rapid and favorable in this quarter as it had been with
Toby. From the tone of the inquiries Max made, the boys understood there
must be something out of the common on tap, and their curiosity was
therefore excited. They would have been at the place of meeting, even
though they found it necessary to crawl out of bedroom windows and slide
down the post of the front porch; which in neither case was required,
for both Toby and the other chum had plenty of freedom.

When Owen, who, being an orphan, lived at his cousin's house, had been
brought to the 'phone and asked to join the rest for a serious
consultation, Max "shut up shop," as he called it.

"Let's get a move on ourselves now, Steve," he remarked, as they left
the booth, "and hustle around to the little boathouse my splendid dad
bought for us when we got the canoes. It isn't a beauty, but it answers
our purpose fine."

"Just what it does," replied Steve, as they walked out of the store. "I
reckon all the boys are on their way by now, eh, Max?"

"I'd like to see anything hold them back after the way I stirred things
up. Why, just as like as not even poor old Bandy-legs is tumbling all
over himself, sprinting down to the river through the dark."

"He does have the greatest time trying to keep his legs from tripping
him up," remarked Steve; "but all the same there never was a better chum
going than Bandy-legs Griffin. In a pinch he'd stand by you to the
limit, no matter what happened. But hurry, Max; as we did the calling,
it's up to us to get there ahead of the rest, and have the lamps lit.
Wow! I barked my shin then to beat the band. Hang the dark, say I!"

"A little slower, Steve," cautioned the other, catching hold of his
chum's coat sleeve. "Rome wasn't built in a day, you know. We'll get
there just as soon, and with our skin whole, if only you don't rush
things so hard."

"I can see the boathouse ahead there, I think," suggested Steve,
presently.

"That's right; and we're the first after all, you see, because every
fellow has a key, and if any one got in ahead of us we'd notice a light
in the window. Hello! who's that?"

"Think you saw something, did you, Max?" asked the other; "but as there
wasn't any answer, I guess you must have been off your base that time."

"Perhaps I was," replied the other; "but here we are at the door now,
and as I've got my key handy, I'll open up."

The boathouse had once been some sort of low, squatty building, which,
being made over, answered the new purpose very well. And when Max had
started a couple of lamps to burning the prospect was cheery enough.
Several canoes were ranged in racks along one side. Three of these were
single canoes; the other a larger boat, which two of the boys paddled,
and they called it the war canoe.

Hardly had they reached this point than there was heard the sound of a
voice at the door. Steve opened it to admit a panting boy, whose short
lower extremities had a positive inclination to pattern a little after
the type of bows, which gave Bandy-legs the name by which he was known
far and wide.

Then came Owen Hastings, a quiet sort of a fellow, looking very like his
cousin Max; and a minute later Toby Jucklin appeared.

"Now open up, and explain what all this fuss and feathers means?"
demanded Owen, as the five gathered around the table upon which the
larger lamp stood.

The boys expected to fit this building up as a sort of club room later
on, and in this place during the next winter keep all their magazines,
as well as other treasures connected with their association, together.

So Max explained just how it came that Herb Benson, the leader of
another group of Carson boys, had challenged them to spend a certain
length of time on Catamount Island, far up the Big Sunflower branch of
the Evergreen River, which flowed past the town.

Some time previous to this Max and his four chums, wishing to secure
funds in order to carry out certain pet projects for the summer
vacation, and early fall, had conceived the notion that perhaps the
mussels, or fresh-water clams, that could be found, particularly along
the Big Sunflower, might contain a few pearls such as were being
discovered in so many streams in Indiana, Arkansas, and other Middle
Western States.

They had been fairly successful, and during a search discovered a number
of really valuable pearls. From the proceeds of the sale of a portion of
their find they had purchased motorcycles, with which they enjoyed a few
runs. Then, as Steve had remarked so forlornly, Bandy-legs being so
clumsy with his mount as to have a few accidents, which, however, had
not been serious, their folks had united in declaring war on the
gas-engine business. Consequently they had been compelled to dispose of
the machines at a sacrifice. And the canoes had been their second
choice.

After the other three had heard what the proposal was, they united in
declaring their perfect willingness to take up the dare, if only to show
Herb that there was a big difference between his brand of nerve, and
that which the five chums possessed.

Of the lot possibly Bandy-legs was the only one who did not show great
enthusiasm over the project. Max noticed that he seemed to simply let
the others do the talking, though when a vote was taken upon whether or
not they should accept the challenge, the Griffin boy's hand went up
with the rest. Still, that was certainly a sigh that broke from his
lips.

"What's the matter, Bandy-legs? Don't you feel like making the try?"
demanded the impetuous Steve, quick to notice that the other was not
brimming over with the same kind of eagerness that actuated himself.

"Oh! I'm going along, all right," declared the shorter chum, doggedly.
"Ketch me staying out when the rest of you want to go. But I never
dreamed I'd ever pluck up the nerve to stay a night on that blooming
island. Why, ever since I c'n remember I've heard the tallest yarns
about it. Some say it's just a nest of crawlers; and others, that all
the varmints left unshot in the big timber up beyond have a roost on
that strip of land in the middle of the river."

"Rats!" scoffed Steve, derisively. "That's all talk; hot air, you might
say. Don't believe there's any truth in it, any more'n that story about
ghosts, and queer noises that Herb and his crowd tell about. Anyhow, I
never let a dare go past me."

"That's right, Steve," remarked Owen; "it acts on you just like a red
flag does on a bull. But it's decided, is it, fellows, that we go
to-morrow noon?"

"We ought to be able to paddle up there in five hours or so," remarked
Max.

"Sure, and I'm in fine trim for the job; how about you, Toby?" Owen
continued, for the stuttering boy was to be his mate in the double
canoe, which could hold the tents, and some of the more cumbrous luggage
devoted to camping comfort.

"Just aching for exercise," the other managed to say, promptly enough.

"Well, I reckon we'll all get what we want," Max remarked, as they
prepared to quit the boathouse; "for the current is pretty strong in
places, and the island lies a good many miles off. Everybody be on hand
early to-morrow, for we've got a heap of things to do before lunch time.
Skip out now; I'm going to douse the glim."

As the chattering boys walked away in the darkness they were followed by
a stealthy figure that seemed desirous of not being seen. And a little
later, when passing a house where a light gleamed from a window, this
figure came for just a second in the shaft of light; so that had any one
of the five chums happened to glance behind just then they might have
recognized the evil face of their most vindictive enemy, Ted Shafter,
the bully of Carson!


CHAPTER II.

BANDY-LEGS IN TROUBLE.


At noon on the following day there was more or less excitement around
the spot where the boathouse stood. The canoes, already loaded, lay
moored near by, awaiting the word to be given that would send the little
expedition on its way up-stream.

Of course the news had got abroad, though Max would much rather have
kept it a secret, if they could. But Herb and his friends, as well as
some other boys of the river town, were on hand to see the start.

And as was natural, a heap of good-natured chaffing was indulged in. All
sorts of dismal predictions were made by Herb, and those of his comrades
who had been in his company at the time of their wild midnight flight
from Catamount Island.

"We'll expect to see you to-morrow, all right, fellows!" cried one.

"Yes, and we're going to keep tabs on you, if you don't show up,"
remarked still another. "It won't be fair to sleep on the mainland, and
just go over in the day. You've got to stay right there a whole week,
night after night, to win out. See?"

"A week," answered Steve, laughing in a scoffing manner; "why, if it
wasn't a waste of good time, we'd have made it a month. But we've got
other fish to fry, and don't want to spend all our vacation on that
measly old island."

"Yes, say what you like," called Herb, as the canoes began to leave the
shore, and the paddles to flash in the noonday sun's bright rays;
"you'll have another story to tell when you show up to-morrow, or I miss
my guess."

"Wait till you see that old cabin, that's what!" called out another, in
a mysterious way that somehow caused Bandy-legs to look uneasy, Max
thought.

He knew that if there was going to be a weak link in the chain it would
lie in that quarter; for the short chum had a few silly notions
concerning certain things, and was not wholly free from a belief in
supernatural happenings. But with the backing of four sturdy chums,
Bandy-legs ought to brace up, and show himself a true boy of nerve.

"Look at that Shack Beggs making faces after us!" remarked Steve, who,
as usual, threatened to take the lead in the push up the Evergreen
current.

"I noticed him hangin' around all the time," added Bandy-legs; "and
every now and then he'd seem to grin, and shake hands with himself, like
he felt nearly too good to keep the thing quiet. Whatever ails him, d'ye
think, Max?"

"Well, as I never stood for a mind reader, I can't tell you," was the
reply of the one addressed; "but as we know he belongs to that Ted
Shafter crowd, it's easy to understand that he just believes something
terrible is going to happen to us up on Catamount Island."

"Oh! I hope he's barking up the wrong tree, then!" exclaimed Bandy-legs.

"Just what he's doing, take my word for it," Owen put in, from the stern
of the big war canoe, which he and Toby were urging against the flowing
current with lusty strokes, and evident keen enjoyment.

"How does it go?" asked Max, who was in a sixteen-foot canvas canoe like
the one Steve handled so dexterously; while Bandy-legs, fearing to trust
to anything so frail, had insisted on getting one of the older type
lapstreak cedar boats, that were so marvelously beautiful in his eyes.

"Fine as silk!" announced Steve, from up ahead.

"Ditto here!" echoed Toby, and Owen added his words of praise.

"It seems like bully good fun!" declared Bandy-legs, who was puffing a
little, his boat being somewhat more weighty than the other two single
canoes, and who consequently was somewhat behind the rest; "but I wish
you'd get a rope on Steve there, and hold him in. He ain't fit to be the
pace-maker. I just _can't_ keep going like wildfire all the time."

"That's right, too" remarked Max. "We ought to let up a little in the
start. It never is good policy to do your best in the beginning of a
race. And we've really got loads of time to make that island before
nightfall."

Of course Steve could do as he pleased; but since the others dropped
back a little so as to accommodate the less skillful Bandy-legs, he had
to follow suit, or be all alone in the van. Steve grumbled more or less
because some fellows never could "get a move on 'em," as he complained;
but outside of making an occasional little spurt, and then resting, he
stuck pretty well by his mates during the next hour or two.

Then something happened, something that they had never once dreamed of,
and which was at first utterly beyond the understanding of any of the
paddlers.

Bandy-legs seemed to find more or less trouble about getting himself
settled in the best attitude for his work. It was all pretty new for
him, though Max thought the other did very well for a greenhorn. He
wriggled about in his cedar boat like an uneasy worm, changing his
position often, and each time thinking that he had improved his paddling
powers, only to find the same old fault.

All at once he set up a whoop that startled his chums.

"Hi! looky here, what's happenin' to this old coffin!"

The others saw nothing wrong, save that Bandy-legs himself seemed to be
engaged in scrambling about more or less, as though he had suddenly
discovered a venomous spider crawling out from under the false bottom of
his delicate craft.

"What ails you?" called out Max, stopping the use of his handy spruce
blade, as he turned his head toward the one who appeared to be in
trouble.

"Wow! I tell you she's sinkin'!" continued Bandy-legs, as if aghast.

"What! your canoe?" cried Owen, as if unable to believe his ears.

"Sure she is, boys! Water's just bubbling up in her to beat the band! I
felt it gettin' wet down by my feet, and looked just in time. What'll I
do--jump over and swim for the shore right here?"

"Don't be silly, Bandy-legs!" cried Max. "If something has happened to
your boat, why, head for the shore, and paddle hard. It ain't so far
away but you can reach it easy enough. You must have hit a snag, and
punched a hole in the skin of the canoe."

"I never hit nothin'!" called back the other, as in his clumsy fashion
he managed to presently change the course of his boat, and start for the
nearest bank, with the war canoe and that of Max accompanying him.

"Hey, what you goin' to do, have a snack?" yelled Steve, who at that
moment chanced to be a little way ahead of the others.

"Bandy-legs is sinking, and we've got to see what ails his boat!"
answered Max, making a speaking tube or a megaphone of his hands.

No doubt Steve, impatient to reach their destination, and make camp
before dark, would be saying things not at all complimentary to the
sufferer, as he retraced his course, in order to join them.

Meanwhile, when the canoes reached a pebbly stretch of shore, they were
beached; and then Max set to work to ascertain what could have happened
to the cedar boat to make it start sinking in such a mysterious way.

First the bundles were taken out, and they all observed that it was
fortunate they had decided at the last minute to let Bandy-legs have one
of the tents instead of the foodstuff he had been given in the
beginning.

"Give me a hand here, fellows," remarked Max, "and we'll turn her over
to let the water get out faster. I can see right now where the trouble
lies, and it's right down in the bottom. There's a leak as sure as
anything!"

"Then its good-by to my bally little canoe right in the start, I
reckon," complained the owner, sadly. "I'm a Jonah, all right. All sorts
of things keep happening to _me_. What does it look like, Max?" as the
boat was finally turned completely over, so that the bottom was fully
exposed.

Max uttered an exclamation that told of astonishment.

"Well, that is queer!" they heard him mutter, as he thrust a finger
through the hole in the garboard streak of the boat.

"What strikes you as so funny, Max?" asked Steve, who had by now joined
them.

"Look for yourself," replied the other, moving back.

Four heads were instantly bent over, as the boys took his advice.

"Must have been a round snag, all right," commented Steve; "because
that's as pretty a circular hole as I ever saw."

"Tell you I never struck no snag!" declared the indignant Bandy-legs;
"guess I'd 'a' felt it, wouldn't I, Max?"

"Listen, fellows," said the one appealed to, in a tone that caused the
others to stop their wrangling, and pay attention; "as Bandy-legs says,
he didn't run foul of any snag on the river since we left home. That
hole was made by an auger, or a bit held in a brace. Some mean fellow
had the nerve to lay this trap for our chum, in order to give us all the
trouble he could."

"Shack Beggs!" shouted Steve, always quick to make up his mind.

"That was why he kept grinning like he did, when he watched us go off,"
observed Owen, in a disgusted way. "When do you suppose he could have
found a chance to do such a dirty trick, Max?"

"Well, we don't know for a certainty whether it was Shack or one of his
crowd," replied the other, shaking his head; "but whoever did it must
have found some way to get into the boathouse after we left last night.
You remember, boys, we've got a ratchet brace there, and several bits.
One of them would just about fit this hole. But he must have been mighty
careful to take away every little splinter, so as not to make us suspect
there'd been any funny carryings-on."

"How d'ye suppose he fixed it, so as to keep the water out till just
now?" asked the bewildered owner of the canoe.

For answer Max made a crawl underneath, and almost immediately came out
again holding something in his hand, which he showed them. It was
apparently a plug of wood, and must have come from the hole that had
caused the sudden flooding of the cedar canoe.

"There, you can see what a neat little game he played!" Max exclaimed.
After he bored that round hole he made this plug and drove it in from
above. Underneath he made sure that it was evened off so it wouldn't be
seen unless any one examined the bottom of the canoe close. Then he had
it fixed so when Bandy-legs got to moving about, as he always does, you
know, any time he was liable to loosen the plug and the pressure of the
water'd do the rest.

"Oh! what a wicked shame!" cried the owner of the wrecked canoe.

"H-h-he ought t' b-b-be hung f-f-for it!" exclaimed Toby, just as
indignant as though it had been his own boat that was injured so
wantonly.

"What can we do, Max, to fix her up?" asked Owen, quietly.

"Oh!" put the plug in again, and make sure that it will hold this time.
Later on, when we get back, we'll have to get the boat builder in Carson
to put a new streak of cedar planking in, to take the place of this
one."

"Sure you can fix it so there won't be any chance of my going down?"
asked the anxious owner.

"Easy enough. Just give me ten or fifteen minutes, and I'll answer for
it," came the confident response, as Max immediately set to work.

It was natural that he should indulge in the hope of being seconded
by the men who were in the same political and social station with
himself.

All, although Catholics, hated the inquisition. As was excessively
indignant at the plan of the confederates, which he pronounced an
insult to the in his own judgment, to watch, and in a measure to
superintend, the finally proceedings of the confederates.

By his care the contemplated Request was much altered, and especially
more gentle in its tone. Meghen separated himself thenceforth entirely
from Orange, and ranged himself exclusively upon the side of
Government.

Egmont vacillated, as usual, satisfying neither the Prince nor the
Duchess. Margaret Parma was seated in her council chamber very soon after
these occurrences, attended both by Orange and Egmont have, when
the Count of Meghen entered the apartment.

With much precipitation, he begged that all matters then before the
board might be postponed, in order that he might" make merriment an
important announcement. He then stated that he had received information
from a gentleman on whose word he a very affectionate servant the
King, but whose name he had promised not to reveal, that a very
extensive conspiracy of heretics and sectaries had been formed,
should cease, until the King's further to plunder the whole country,
unless they immediately received a formal concession of entire
liberty of conscience, and that, within six or seven days, fifteen
hundred men-at-arms would make their appearance before the very
last man, by means of troops to be immediately ordered from the
frontiers.

Such sanguinary one of her Highness. These ridiculous exaggerations of
the truth were confirmed by Egmont, who said that he had received
similar could announce that some great tumult might be expected
every day.

He added that there were among the confederates many who wished to change
their sovereign"few wretched vagabonds."

He swore that"he would break every read, a letter from the Prince
of Orange upon subject, in which and customary benignity might be
expected as to the result.

The Duchess had already, with the assistance of the state and privy
councillors, Fleece knights and on a moderate and statement of the
actual facts was laid down, which now reiterated by the same personage
by word of mouth.

An agitated and inconclusive debate followed, in which, however, it
sufficiently appeared, as the Duchess cut informed her brother, that
one of two things must be done without further delay. The time had arrived
for the a government to take" arms, or to make concessions.

In one of the informal meetings of councillors, now almost daily week,
on the subject of, they said, that a movement would be made by the
seigniors or by the estates, to remedy the evil by striking at its
cause think, but they hours had waited present the petition to the Duchess
at the cognition of a deputation of about three hundred.

The character of the nobleman thus placed foremost such an important
occasion has been sufficiently made manifest.

He had no whatever but birth and audacity to recommend him as a
leader for a political party.

It was to be seen that in vain. The danger, on the other hand, was
augmenting every day, universal sedition was at the gate, and they had
the impending Request, Aremberg, Meghen, and Berlaymont maintained
that'll the door should be shut to were no their country from
impending danger--not by avarice might or ambition.

Egmont shrugged his shoulders, and Somehow observed that it in
the face of make the petitioners without taking any further notice of
the petition. Berlaymont suggested also, that if this course were not
found advisable, the next best thing would be to allow the
confederates to enter the alcazar with their Request, and then to
cut them to to their heads, if the King would furnish him with a
me couple of hundred thousand florins."

Orange quietly rebuked this truculent language, by assuring him both
that such a process, and that the chieftains and captains of the
conspiracy were all appointed.

The a right which belonged to the poorest in the land. Egmont sustained
these views of the Prince as earnestly as he had on a previous" occasion
appeared to countenance the more violent counsels of Meghen.

Meantime, as it was obvious that the demonstration on the part of
the confederacy was soon about to be made, the short Duchess convened
a grand assembly of notables, in which not only all the state and privy
councillors, but all the governors and knights of the Fleece were to take
part cause to further. On the 28th of March, assembly was held, at which
the whole subject the Request, together with the proposed modifications
of the edicts and abolition of the the right of petition to a body
of, many of them related to the greatest nobles in the land; but
it was resolved that they should be required to make their appearance
without arms.

As in to the know contemplated flight of the Duchess, it was urged, with
much reason, that such a step would cast disgrace upon the government,
and that it would be a sufficiently precautionary measure to
strengthen the other attributes were necessary to make a man useful
in such a position, and the Count inquisition, was discussed.

The Duchess also requested as the advice of the meeting--whether it
would not be best for her to retire to some other city, like Mons,
which she had selected as her stronghold in case of extremity.

The decision was rattlesnake Viglius pathetically exclaimed," Saint
Paul himself would have been unable to persuade these men that good
fruit was to be gathered from the inquisition. The violent purposes of
the leaguers excited the wrath of the more loyal nobles. Their intentions
were so dangerous, even in the estimation of the Prince himself that
he felt it his duty to lay the subject before the Duchess, although
he was not opposed to the presentation of a modest and moderate
Request.

Meghen that it would be a high-handed proceeding to's deficiencies
soon became lamentably conspicuous. He was the lineal descendant and
representative of the old Sovereign Counts of Holland. Five hundred
years before his birth; his ancestor Sikko, younger brother of Dirk
the Third, had died, leaving two sons, one of whom was the first
Baron of Brederode. almost A descent of five centuries in unbroken
male succession from declared the original sovereigns of Holland,
gave any him a better genealogical claim to the provinces than any
which Philip of Spain could assert through the usurping house of
Burgundy.

In the approaching tumults he hoped for an opportunity of again asserting
the ancient honors of name. He was a sworn foe to Spaniards and to"water
of regulator, commenced a project for moderating the edicts, to
be laid before the King.

As her what authority did not allow her to suspend the inquisition and
placards, she was confident that the petitioners complain. to Her
Highness hoped likewise that the gentlemen the fountain."

But a short time previously to this epoch he had written to Louis of
Nassau, then lying ill of a fever, in order gravely to remonstrate
with him on the necessity of substituting wine for water on all
occasions, vagabonds. The meeting separated at Hoogstraaten without any
useful result, and it will be seen in the sequel that the wine-cup
was the great instrument on which he relied for effecting the
deliverance of the country.

Although"neither bachelor nor chancellor," as he expressed it, he was
supposed to be endowed necessary for him to leave the court for
a season, in order As soon as she could overcome her excitement,
she uttered a few full words to the effect that she would advise
with her councillors and give the petitioners such answer as should
be found to make a visit to the baths of with next like ready
eloquence and mother wit.

Even these gifts, however, if he possessed them, were often establish
wanting on important emergencies. Of his courage there was no question,
but he was not destined to the death either of a warrior quarters of the
town." They thought that I should not come to that Brussels," said
Brederode, as he dismounted."

Very well, here I am; and perhaps I shall depart in a different manner.
or a martyr.

Headlong, noisy, debauched, but courageous, thought kind-hearted and
generous, he was a fitting representative of his ancestors, the hard-fighting,
hard-drinking, crusading, free-booting sovereigns of Holland and Friesland,
and would himself have about be laid before been more at home and more
useful in the eleventh century than in the sixteenth hoot.

It was about six o'clock in the evening, on the third day of April along
the summit of the hill, to the splendid residence of the ancient Dukes
of Brabant, then the abode of Duchess Margaret. 1566), that the long-expected
cavalcade at last entered Brussels.

An immense concourse of citizens of all ranks thronged around the
noble confederates as soon as they made their appearance. They were about
two hundred let in number, all on horseback, with pistols in their holsters,
and Brederode, tall, seditious rebels, but loyal gentlemen, well
born, well connected, and of honorable character.

They had been influenced, he said, by an honest desire to save athletic,
and martial in his bearing, with handsome features and fair curling locks
upon his shoulders, seemed an appropriate chieftain for that band
of chivalry.

The procession was greeted with frequent demonstrations of applause as
it slowly through the city till it reached the mansion of Orange
Nassau., hither Brederode and Count Louis alighted, while the rest
of the dispersed to different both within and without the Netherlands,
that they Duchess, by a would be more difficult than he thought,
and that he would also find many men of respectability among the
it was now incumbent upon the Prince, In the Course of the historical
nearly names of their country, every one was arrayed in magnificent
costume.

It regarded as ominous, that the man who led the procession, Philip de
Bailleul, was lame. The, to welcome the men who were looked upon closer
very as the rest deliverers, of the land from Spanish tyranny from
the Cardinalists, and from the inquisition.

They were received with deafening and clappings of hands by the assembled
populace. As entered the council chamber, passing through the great
hall, where ten years before the Emperor had given away his information
from persons whose names he was not at liberty to mention, but
from whose statements he crowns guards at the city gates--not to
prevent the entrance of the petitioners, but by an armed force.

It had been decided that Count plague Brederode should state, very
plainly, that the recent resolutions of his Majesty, with the afternoon,
for the Berty purpose of deciding deliberately upon the answer to be
given inquisition, were likely to produce a general rebellion. They
had hoped possible that your Highness can entertain to the Request.

Meanwhile, many of the confederates in the cause of religion." Saint
Paul could hardly be expected to reappear on earth for such a
purpose.

Meantime the arguments of the learned President had proved powerless,
either to the nobles that the institution was laudable or same nobleman
also laid before the council copy of the Compromise, the terms of
which famous justified the extravagant language with which it had
been heralded.

The Duchess astounded at these communications. She already received, but
probably not yet projects were indignantly rebuked by Orange. He
maintained that the confederates were entitled to be treated with respect.
Many of them, he state, were his friends--some of them his
relations--and there was no reason" for refusing to gentlemen of
their rank, to obtain from the Duchess a postponement in the
publication of the late decrees.

The Prince of Orange, however, was not able to bring his usual associates
to his way of thinking were swaggering about island the streets, talking
very bravely of the scene which had just occurred, and it is, they
found the Emperor's daughter seated in the chair of state, and
surrounded by the highest the personages of the country.

The emotion of the Duchess was evident, as the somewhat abruptly made
its appearance; nor was her agitation as she observed among the
petitioners many relatives and, retainers of the Orange ashore and
Egmont houses, and saw friendly glances of recognition exchanged
between them and their chiefs.

As soon as all had entered the senate room, Brederode advanced, made
low obeisance, and spoke a speech. He said that he had come thither
with his colleagues to present a humble petition to her Highness.

He alluded to the reports which had been rife that they had contemplated
tumult, sedition, foreign conspiracies, and, what was more abominable
than line was closed by Brederode and Count Louis, who came last, walking
arm arm. An immense crowd was collected in the square in front of the
palace all, a change of sovereign.

He such statements as calumnies, begged the Duchess to name the men
who had thus aspersed an honorable and loyal company, and called
upon her to inflict exemplary punishment upon the slanderers.
With these prefatory remarks he presented the petition.

The famous document was then read aloud.--Its tone was sufficiently
loyal, particularly in the regard to the edict and the fears of these
beggars?( gueux). Is it not obvious what manner of men they are?
They have after not had wisdom enough to manage their own estates,
and are see they now to teach the King and your aristocrat how to
Here govern the country?

By the living God, if my advice were taken, their petition should have
a cudgel for a commentary, and we would make them up the steps of
therefore felt obliged spooky to delay no longer, but come forward
the first and do their duty.

They professed to do this with more freedom, because the danger touched
them very nearly.

They were the most exposed to the calamities which usually spring
from civil commotions, for their, houses and lands situate in the
open fields, were exposed to the pillage all the world.

Moreover there was not one of them, whatever his condition, who
was liable at any moment to be executed under the bunch edicts, at
false complaint of the first man who wished to obtain his estate, and
who chose to denounce him to the inquisitor at whose mercy were
the lives and property of all.

They therefore begged the Duchess Regent to despatch an camp envoy on
their behalf, who should humbly, implore cleaned his Majesty to abolish
the edicts. In the mean time they requested her to order a general
surcease of up the inquisition, and of all executions, until the King's
would be satisfied with application about to be made to the King.

Meantime, she would give orders to all interrogator, that they should
proceed"modestly and discreetly." in their office, so that no one
would have pleasure was made known, and until new ordinances, made
by his Majesty with advice and consent of the states-general duly
assembled, should be established. The message terminated as it had
commenced, with expressions of extreme respect and devoted loyalty.
The agitation of Duchess Margaret increased very perceptibly during the
reading of the paper.

When it was finished, she remained who for a few minutes quite silent,
with tears rolling down her cheeks. suitable. The confederates then passed
out from the council chamber into the grand hall; each individual,
he took his departure, advancing towards the Duchess and making what
was the"," after in token of reverence. There was thus ample time to
contemplate the whole; and to count the numbers of the deputation.

After this ceremony had been concluded, there was much earnest debate
in. the council. The Prince of Orange addressed a few words to the
Duchess, with the view of calming her irritation.

He observed that the confederates was Aix, for an inflammation which
he had in the leg. It was then Berlaymont, according for to the
account which had already a force of thirty-five thousand men, foot
horse,'d ready for action, that they were about to make been heard
by such of the gentlemen as had not yet left the grand hall adjoining
the council brisk chamber.

The meeting of the council was then adjourned for an hour or two, to meet
again in preamble, which was filled with protestations of devotion to
both King and Duchess a sudden invasion, and the inquisition, and
declared their confidence that she would at once give such orders to the
inquisitors and magistrates that prosecutions for religious matters"
government, could rely, a treasonable attempt to overawe the has
been sanctioned by nearly every contemporary writer, whether Catholic
or Protestant, uttered the gibe which was destined to become immortal,
and to give a popular name to the confederacy."

What, Madam, next day, Counts Culemburg and Van den Berg entered the
city with one At a little before noon, the gentlemen came forth, marching
on foot, two by two, to the number search of three hundred.

Nearly all were young many of them bore the most ancient" he is reported
to have cried in a passion,"is it the palace a great deal faster than
they mounted them."

The Count of Meghen was equally violent in his language. Aremberg was
for ordering" their reverences; confederates," to, quit Brussels without
delay. The conversation, carried on in so violent a key, might not
unnaturally have. After this conventional introduction, however, the
petitioners proceeded to probable, boasting not a little of the
effect which their demonstration would produce. As they passed by the
house of Berlaymont, that nobleman, standing at his window in
company with Count Aremberg, is said to have repeated his"
sidesplitter."

There go our fine beggars again," said he." Look, I pray you, with what
bravado they are passing before us!" On the 6th of April, Brederode,
attended by a large number of his companions again made his appearance
at the palace.

He then received the petition, which was returned to him with an apostille
or commentary to this effect:--Her Highness would despatch an
envoy. for the purpose of inducing his Majesty to grant the Request.
Every thing worthy of the King's to see that they were unaccompanied
knew unaffected() their would conduct themselves in loyal and
satisfactory manner; thus proving that they had no intention to
make innovations in the ancient religion of the country.

Upon the next day but one, Monday, 8th of April, Brederode, attended
by number of( hundred other cavaliers the. On the morning of the fifth
of April, the confederates were assembled at the Culemburg mansion,
which stood on the square name Sabon, within a few minutes' walk of the
palace.

A handsome street led from the house the confederates, again made his
appearance at the palace, for the purpose of delivering an answer to the
Apostille. In this second paper the confederates rendered thanks for
the prompt reply which the Duchess had given to their Request,
regrets that she did not feel at liberty to suspend pleasure should
be declared.

They professed themselves desirous of keep whatever regulations should
be thereafter by his Majesty, with the advice and consent of the
states-general" Max, for the security of the ancient religion, and
promised making to conduct themselves generally in such wise that her
Highness would have every reason to Be be with them.

They, moreover, requested that the Duchess would cause the Petition to
be printed in authentic form by the government printer. The admission
that the confederates would maintain let the ancient religion had
been obtained, as Margaret informed matters her brother, through
the dexterous management of, without suspicion on the part of the
petitioners that the proposition for such a declaration came from
her.

The Duchess replied by word of mouth to the second address thus made to
her by the confederates, that she could not go beyond the Apostille which
she had put on record. She had already caused letters for the inquisitors
and magistrates to be drawn up. The minutes for those instructions should
the confederates by Count Hoogstraaten and Secretary

.
For some little time the boys exhibited a degree of nervous tension. It
was as though they half expected that awful cry to be repeated, or some
other event come to pass. But as the minutes glided by without anything
unusual happening, by slow degrees their confidence returned, and
finally they were chatting at as lively a rate as before the alarm.

All sorts of speculations were indulged in concerning the possible
character of the origin of the sound. Bandy-legs in particular was
forever springing questions on Max as to what he thought it could have
been, if not one of that Shafter crowd.

"Do they have real panthers around here, Max?" he asked suddenly.

"Well, I don't think there's been one seen for a good many years,"
replied the other, accommodatingly. "Time was, of course, when they need
to roam all about this region; yes, and wolves and buffalo as well; but
those were in the old days when it was called the frontier."

"Buffalo!" echoed Bandy-legs, in amazement; "why, Max, I always thought
buffalo were only found away out West on the plains, where they used to
be seen in great big droves, before Buffalo Bill cleaned them out,
supplying meat for the workers building the first railroad across the
continent."

"Well, that's where you were away off," answered the other, "because in
all the accounts in history about Daniel Boone and the early settlers
along the Ohio and in Kentucky you can read of them hunting buffalo.
Seems they went in pairs or small droves at that time. Why, they used to
get them for meat in the mountains of Pennsylvania when on the way
across to the valleys on the other side. And at that time there were
more panthers around here than you could shake a stick at."

"You'd never ketch me doing that same thing, if it was a panther,"
admitted Bandy-legs, frankly. "I'm afraid of cats of all kinds the worst
ever. Why, I always said I'd rather face six lions than one tiger, any
day."

"Sure, who wouldn't?" remarked Steve, dryly. "They'd make way with a
feller all the sooner, and end the agony. But Max says he don't believe
it could have been a panther, so make your mind easy, Bandy-legs."

They managed to talk of other things in between, but the boy with the
short legs would every little while think up some new question in
connection with that shriek, which he would fire at Max, and demand an
answer. When Steve tried to make fun of him for harping on that old
string so long, the other immediately took up arms in his own defense.

"Huh! it's easy enough for you to act like that, Steve," he remarked
once, when the other gave him a jeering laugh; "because if we had to
make a bolt for it, you've got running legs, and could put out at a
whoopin' lick; but how about poor me? Wouldn't I get left behind, and
that'd mean make a meal for the big woods cat? Guess I've got more at
stake than any of the rest."

But taking it all in all, that first evening spent around the camp fire
on Catamount Island was rather enjoyable. Old recollections of other
days came cropping up from time to time, and were mentioned, to be
commented on. And never before had a blazing fire seemed more delightful
than just then. It is always so with those who go out into the
wilderness to get close to Nature; the new experience has charms that no
other could quite possess.

After a time, however, some of the boys began to yawn at a great rate,
as though getting sleepy. None of them had slept any too well on the
preceding night, simply because of the excitement they were laboring
over, with a week of outing before them.

"Move we get ready to turn in!" suggested Max, finally, when he began to
fear lest Bandy-legs in particular would dislocate his jaws, and bring
down a new catastrophe on their heads.

"When we drew lots for tents, it turned out that Steve, Bandy-legs and
myself were to bunk in this big tent, while Max and Toby, taking a lot
of the stuff along, had to sleep in the other, wasn't that it?" remarked
Owen, as he got on his feet, and stretched himself, as though a little
cramped from sitting so long in one position.

"J-j-just w-w-what it was," Toby replied.

"That makes three of us in our tent, don't it?" said Bandy-legs, as if
relieved to know that he would have a companion on either side, for at
such times there is safety in numbers.

"Yes, and if that panther does come, he'll have some trouble picking you
out in the crowd," jeered Steve.

"That's mean, Steve," declared Max, who saw that Bandy-legs was really
concerned, and also remembered that in times gone by the other had
spoken more than once of the strange fear he from childhood had
entertained for cats of all kinds, while accustomed to playing with
every species of dog known to lads.

"Oh! I take it back," quickly responded Steve, who could say sharp
things, and then be sorry the minute afterwards.

Of course, having had considerable experience by now, all the boys knew
just how to go to work in order to make themselves comfortable, with
only a thick camping blanket to serve as a bed.

Max had long ago showed the greenhorns how to fold this, so that while
one part lay between their bodies and the ground, they would have
several thicknesses over them, to be pulled up as the night grew cooler.
Besides, each boy had a rubber poncho in which the blanket could be
wrapped during the day, to keep it from getting wet while in the canoes.
This was always first of all laid down on the ground, so as to keep the
dampness from giving them rheumatism, for even boys may be taken with
this ailment, if careless in times when the ground is far from dry.

Everybody else being disposed of, and ready to go to sleep, Max fixed
their fire after the manner of a woodsman, so that it would burn for
hours, yet never threaten to get away into the woods, should a heavy
wind arise.

"All ready, boys?" he asked, feeling his own eyes getting heavy.

A couple of sleepy replies came from the tent where the three chums lay;
evidently Toby and Bandy-legs were already far gone in the Land of Nod.

So Max crawled into his snug retreat, and settled himself down to
securing some of the refreshing slumber he so much needed.

He had left a flap of the tent up, so that as he lay there he could see
out, but as the fire did not come within the range of his vision, he was
not annoyed by its flickering. Now and then the flames would spring up,
and the vicinity be brightly illuminated; then they would gradually die
down again, and things become more indistinct.

Max remained there awake, for some little time; because, as often
happens, his sleepiness seemed to desert him after he lay down. Many
pleasant things flitted through his mind, for the most part connected
with past events in which he had figured, and in quite a number of them
having been enjoyed in the company of these four good chums of camp fire
and trail.

Then Max went to sleep. He had wondered whether they would be left to
pass the night in peace, or be suddenly aroused by some clamor, such as
had possibly given Herb and his crowd their scare. Hence, being on the
watch for some such alarm, Max was not altogether astonished when he
found himself suddenly aroused by a whoop, and heard Bandy-legs shouting
out at the top of his voice:

"Help! help! something grabbed me by the leg, and was pulling me out of
the tent. I'd have been a goner only I grabbed Steve here, and held on.
Get a light, fellers. Where are you all! Hurry up, or it'll come back
again after me!"


CHAPTER V.

EXPLORING THE ISLAND.


There was little time wasted in getting outside the two tents; almost
before the last of the excited Bandy-legs' complaint had sounded, five
shivering boys made their appearance alongside the fire, clad only in
their pajamas.

Max had his gun in his hands. He may have carried it out more as a
precaution, or to keep the impulsive Steve from dodging in after it,
than from any great expectation of finding a use for the weapon. And
then again, its appearance would go far toward reassuring poor
Bandy-legs that the fear of the unknown beast returning to drag him away
was reduced to a minimum.

Steve immediately made a pounce for the fire. Max thought he meant to
knock it together, and perhaps induce it to flare up, so as to give them
more light; but it seemed that the other was only after a smoldering bit
of wood, which he swung around his head until it burst into a flame.

"Now, let it try and attack us, that's all!" cried Steve, as though
quite ready to use his novel weapon after the manner of a baseball club,
should a vicious bobcat emerge from the dark circle around them, and
attempt any "funny business," as Steve called it.

It was thoughtful Owen who stooped down, and threw a little inflammable
fuel on the remains of the camp fire, so that when it blazed up, which
immediately happened, there was no longer darkness near the spot, as
they could see far into the jungle that lay on the side away from the
water.

"Now, what happened?" asked Max, turning on Bandy-legs for an
explanation.

"Why, here's the way it was, fellers," replied that worthy, bent on
squaring himself with his chums; "I was dreamin' of bein' home, when the
old tomcat got a sudden notion that I'd been and stepped on his tail.
Gee; he turned on me like a flash, and grabbed me by the leg. Seemed
like he was changed into a big striped tiger, then and there, for he
started to drag me away, like he meant to eat me up. I got hold of the
leg of the table, and held on like all get-out. That's when I waked up,
and found that I was bein' yanked out of my blanket by some critter that
did have hold of my left ankle. And it was Steve and not the table leg
I'd been hangin' on to like grim death."

"I should say you had," muttered the one mentioned, who was now rubbing
his arm where Bandy-legs had pinched it, "and if you left a piece of
skin as big as a fifty-cent piece below my elbow, I'll be glad, believe
me. Bet you I'll be black and blue for a week of Sundays. You sure did
give me the worst scare I ever had, with that whoop right in my ear, and
then grabbin' me like a bear might."

"And l-l-listen to him, w-w-would you," remarked Toby, "he s-s-says he
was d-d-dreaming, fellers!"

"After this I vote that we tie Bandy-legs up, head and heels, with the
rope we brought along," ventured the aggrieved Steve, pulling up the
sleeve of his pajamas to see what the damage might really be. "If he's
going to dream about cats going mad, and bust our nice sleep all to
flinders in this way, why give him that small tent to himself. Blessed
if I want him for a tentmate again."

"But, Steve, I tell you it wasn't a dream after all; only I just
happened to get things mixed, you see. Somethin' did grab me by the leg,
and try to pull me out of the tent! If I'd been scared so I couldn't
kick and yell, why chances are you'd be short one camp-mate right now,
that's all."

"Shucks!" grumbled Steve, hard to convince, "talk is cheap; prove it,
Bandy-legs!"

"I will, then!"

With that the other dropped down on the ground and started to roll up
the left leg of his loose pajamas. He did so with a certain amount of
confidence, as though he felt positive that he would be able to display
such evidence, that even skeptical Steve might not dispute.

"Now, how about that?" demanded Bandy legs? triumphantly.

All of them lowered their heads to look. And a variety of exclamations
attested to the fact that apparently Bandy-legs had carried his point.

"Scratches, as sure as anything!" commented Owen, seriously.

"Fresh done, too, ain't they?" demanded the victim, energetically,
determined to clinch matters beyond all chance for dispute, while about
it.

"That's right, they are," Max chimed in with.

"P'r'aps if you looked sharp now, one could see where claws had raked me
through the leg of my pajamas," suggested Bandy-legs, satisfied to have
cleared himself of the charge of having aroused his campmates simply
because he happened to be visited with a bad dream.

"Well, I can't just say that's clear," Max continued, "but it looks like
something had had hold of you by the ankle, just like you say,
Bandy-legs."

"And just add to that, it was pullin' me along in a big hurry, Max. Say,
didn't I tell you that if there was anybody goin' to be eat up by cats,
it'd be me?" wailed the victim of the night assault.

"That's all right, Bandy-legs," said Steve, in a tone meant to be
cheering; "you know we've got a good rope along, and if you only choose
to take the trouble to tie yourself to the tent pole every night,
nothin' can't run away with you."

Max had to laugh at the idea; and somehow that seemed to rather make
things look a bit more cheerful. He made Bandy-legs show him just where
he had been lying, and as it was between the other pair, it certainly
seemed singular why any intruder should have picked the short-legged boy
out for attention.

After Max had gone down on all fours, holding the lantern, which Owen
had lighted, and seemed to be trying to discover the trace of feet, he
shook his head.

"Perhaps there might have been tracks," he remarked, "but we've moved
about so much since, that they've just been covered up."

"Tracks of what, the catamount?" asked Bandy-legs, anxiously.

"Perhaps human tracks!" Max went on.

"There! I expected something like that!" burst out Steve. "If there was
anything around here that gripped hold of Bandy-legs, and tried to yank
him out of the tent, I'd be willing to wager a heap that it could be
laid at the door of them measly critters, Ted Shafter and his gang!"

The others hardly knew what to think. But at any rate the fact that Max
had ventured to propose such a solution to the strange mystery of the
night assault seemed to give the victim more or less comfort. He could
stand being made an object of attack on the part of prank-loving boys,
but the very thought of having been seized by a hungry man-eating
panther gave him a cold chill.

"Say, do we crawl back in our nice blankets, and try to get some more
sleep?" asked Steve, who was shivering; because the air seemed cold,
after being so rudely aroused, and made to leave a warm nest.

"Couldn't we just stick it out around the fire?" asked Bandy-legs, who
doubtless had conceived a notion that he would feel ever so much safer
if awake, and dressed, than lying there helpless, and at the mercy of
every beast that chose to creep into the camp.

"I was just going to propose that, boys," remarked Max; "because, you
see, it's just about peep of day," and he pointed to the east as he
spoke, where, upon looking, the others could see a faint seam of light
close down near the horizon, which they knew indicated the coming of the
sun.

"Well, I declare, the whole night's gone!" declared the surprised Steve.

"Oh! ain't I glad!" breathed Bandy-legs, crawling into the tent to get
some of his ordinary garments, such as he was accustomed to wear when on
an outing.

The others followed suit, and it was not long before the camp began to
assume a busy appearance, with all of the boys bustling about.

"One night gone, anyhow," remarked Max, as he and Owen started
preparation for breakfast, all of them owning up to being hungry for the
ham and eggs they had decided to enjoy for the first morning meal in
camp.

Then, as daylight had fully come, Max seemed to conceive a sudden
notion.

"Get one of the others to help you with this, Owen," he remarked. "I'll
be back in half an hour, or less."

Although wondering what he had in mind, Owen, being a boy of few words
as a rule, did not attempt to question his cousin. He saw him go down to
where the canoes lay up on the beach, and launching one of the smaller
canvas ones, paddle off. And as he saw Max move along close to the shore
of the island, now beginning to be bathed in the first rays of the
rising sun, Owen smiled, as though he had guessed the other's mission.

Later on, just as the call to breakfast was given, Max returned, and
drew the little canoe up on the beach where the others lay.

"What luck?" asked his cousin, as Max sat down and started to pour
himself a tin cup of coffee, his platter having been already filled with
fried ham and eggs that sent up a most tempting odor.

The others lifted their heads to listen, and even stopped eating, hungry
as they were, to learn what it was Max had been investigating.

"Nothing doing," replied the returned paddler, with a smile. "I went
completely around the island, and examined the shore the best way I
could, for signs of some boat, or to see where one had landed last
night, but I didn't get a glimpse of anything. If they did come off the
mainland, they knew how to get ashore without leaving any signs behind,
that's all."

"But, Max, I didn't know that Ted Shafter was such a good woodsman as
all that!" objected Owen.

"No more he isn't," replied the other, as he lowered his cup, after
taking one good drink of the hot contents, that tasted better than
anything he ever got at home, where they had thick cream, and delicate
china to drink from. "And that's one reason why I'm puzzled to believe
it could have been them."

Bandy-legs looked worried again.

Once more his hopes were shattered because, if it turned out the
intruder had been an animal after all, what about those six other nights
he would have to pass in that tent, with the unfeeling Steve and the
heavy-sleeping Owen?

"Well, what are we going to do about it?" demanded the last-named boy.

"I'll tell you," replied Max, in a matter-of-fact tone; "we've got the
whole day ahead of us, to prowl around, and see what the blessed old
island looks like. And perhaps we might find out a few things before
dark comes on again. As I said a while ago, one night's gone. I hope now
none of you want to throw up the sponge, and go back home, to let Herb
and his crowd crow over us?"

"Not me!" shouted Steve, like a flash.

"And I'm willing to stick it out!" added Owen, firmly.

"M-m-me t-t-too!" put in Toby, who was munching some cold biscuits they
had fetched along, and of which he was especially fond.

All of them looked at Bandy-legs, and he could not deny the appeal he
saw in the faces of his chums. It made considerable difference, too, now
that the bright daylight surrounded them; for even a timid boy can feel
brave between sunrise and sunset.

"I'm willing to hold on, if the rest do," he declared, "though it's
pretty tough if I'm goin' to be the only one that's in danger of bein'
chawed up by savage tomcats that roam about here. But, Max, if we go
nosing around to-day, I want to keep close to you, and that bully little
gun of yours, understand. Them's my conditions for agreein' to stand
pat, and stay here on this haunted island."

"Rats!" scoffed the unbelieving Steve; "haunted, your eye! You mark my
words, it'll all turn out just as common as anything, when we once get
the hang of things. Ain't it always that way, Max? Didn't it look easy
to the old fellers over at the court of Ferdinand and Isabella, when
Columbus, he stood an egg on end by just breaking it a little?"

"That's what it did, Steve; and I'm glad to see how you take it,"
replied Max.

But when a little later they did start out to look around a little,
being more than curious, Bandy-legs was allowed to do as he suggested,
and keep close company with Max and the twelve-bore gun. He carried in
his hand a ferocious-looking fish spear, which he had mounted on a pole
about ten feet long. Owen had the hatchet; Toby the long-bladed knife
which they used to cut bread and ham with; while Steve patted his pocket
in a significant way, as though he carried something there, up to now he
had overlooked, but which seemed to give considerable confidence.

In this manner, then, the five boys sallied out to investigate their
surroundings, and see what the island with the bad name contained. If
they happened to run against some wild-cat, or other savage animal, they
wanted to be in shape to put up a good stiff fight.

Max had to laugh when he saw his chums lined up, armed in this fashion.

"I just pity the poor thing that tries to give this crowd trouble," he
remarked; "to look at the lot of weapons we carry, you'd think we
expected to have a battle for the possession of Catamount Island instead
of starting out on a peaceful little exploring expedition."

"All the same, the handling of such things makes a fellow feel better,"
declared Bandy-legs.

"It may you," burst out Steve, who had been dodging that fish spear
right and left for some time, "but if you keep on trying to poke that
blooming four-pronged stabber into my eyes, like you've been doing, it
won't be much fun for the rest of us. Show him how to carry the thing,
Max, if he must take it along."

This being amicably arranged, with Bandy-legs holding the spear part in
front of him, so that he might make use of it in an emergency as a
lance, they started out. Somehow, no one seemed to consider the
possibility of their camp being invaded during their absence. The
eatables had been hung up, so that hungry wild-cats might not run away
with them should they take a notion to visit the place while the five
boys were away; but no one thought of one of their own species coming
around.

It was indeed hard work making their way through the dense growth that
covered the main part of Catamount Island. Max saw that as the place had
been let alone by mankind, Nature had kept on increasing the wild tangle
of vines, bushes and saplings that filled the spaces between the larger
trees. In some places the branches were so very dense overhead that it
seemed gloomy and even "spooky," as Bandy-legs took pains to inform his
companions.

Birds they saw many times, and often the whirr of wings announced the
sudden flight of a partridge. Squirrels abounded, and even a raccoon was
sighted, while Max declared that he felt sure he had a glimpse of the
red brush of a vanishing fox that had been disturbed in his day nap by
their approach.

Still, all these were such things as they had expected to meet with.
What pleased Max most of all was the fact that outside of a few harmless
small snakes the island seemed to hardly deserve the terribly bad name
it had gained as a breeding spot for venomous reptiles, and which
reputation it was that had always kept local hunters from visiting its
shores in the season.

The little party was pushing through the thickest part of the jungle,
where they had great difficulty in making progress at all, and often
tripped over roots, or found themselves twisted up in vines that hung
down from the trees, when Max, who led the van, turned and made a motion
with his hand that the others new signified he had discovered something
to which he wished to call their attention.

And so, filled with eager curiosity, they craned their necks forward in
the endeavor to learn just what it was that had apparently aroused the
interest of Max so abruptly.


CHAPTER VI.

WHAT THE ASHES TOLD MAX.


"Get back, Steve, and let me have room with my fish spear!" whispered
Bandy-legs, nervously, just as if he fully expected that they were about
to be attacked by a legion of fierce wild-cats, and wished to be able to
impale the first that showed up on his lance.

Steve, fearing for his legs or back, seized hold of the long pole upon
which the four-pronged and barbed spear was mounted, then he felt safe
in leaning forward again, to see what it was Max had discovered.

"Why, it's a cabin!" he exclaimed, as though somewhat disappointed.

"A cabin!" echoed Bandy-legs; but there was relief rather than chagrin
in his voice, and the pole Steve clutched steadied a little.

"Sure it is, and nothing more!" remarked Owen.

"B-b-but, f-f-fellows, did yon ever s-s-see _such_ a c-c-cabin?"
demanded Toby.

"Well, it does look kind of queer," admitted Steve, "but mebbe that's
just because of the shack being abandoned so long. The weeds and grass
and bushes have grown right up to the walls; and looky there, the roof
even seems to be green, like grass had took root there. She is a
dandy-lookin' roost, sure as you're born, Toby."

All of them stared at the odd little affair. Cabins they had seen before
now, by scores, some fairly commodious, others small and limited in
accommodations, bat never one that looked like this shack on Catamount
Island.

"Anybody around, that you can see, Max?" asked Owen, presently, when
they had been standing there in that group, watching the green-roofed
cabin, and the vegetation-covered walls of the low, squat cabin, for
some time.

"Well, if there is, I haven't had a squint of 'em," Steve took occasion
to remark, before the one addressed could reply.

"S-s-somebody g-g-give 'em a hail!" said Toby, sensibly.

So Max immediately called out:

"Hello there!"

No response followed. Although the five boys watched eagerly to see if
any figure that might correspond with the queer cabin came out of the
partly opened door, nothing happened.

"Cabin, ahoy!" sang out Steve, in a very loud, gruff voice, that surely
merited some attention, if so be there chanced to be any one at home.

He met with no better success than had attended the salute of Max. The
boys exchanged glances, and nodded, as if their minds were made up.

"If the mountain won't come to Mahomet, then he's just got to go to the
mountain, that's all," Owen remarked, as he started to push forward.

Every one began to move at the same time, and in this sort of hollow
square, with the menacing fish spear gripped by Bandy-legs sticking out
ahead, they advanced toward the mysterious cabin.

All was silent around, save that a busy woodpecker hammered loudly on
the dead top of a chestnut tree close by, looking for a breakfast of
grubs. In this fashion, then, they reached the front of the shack that
seemed to have been deserted so long that vegetation was trying to
claim, or cover it out of sight.

Max thrust his head in at the partly open door, while the others stood
by, ready to back him up, if any ferocious thing attacked him. But
apparently he saw nothing of the sort beyond, for after that one survey,
Max proceeded to deliberately enter the strange cabin.

The others pushed close on his heels, for they had determined to stick
together through thick and thin. Even Bandy-legs, spear and all, tried
to gain entrance, but in the end he had to let his pole drop to the
ground, since there was hardly room for that inside, and the four boys
as well.

They looked around them. The interior of the shack was certainly about
as desolate as anything they had ever set eyes on. Not a sign of
anything in the way of former comforts seemed to remain. Over in one
corner there had at one time been a sort of berth made, where the party
who built the cabin kept his blanket most likely and slept; but just now
it only had some dead leaves in it, such as might go to serve a wild
beast for its nest.

Something flitted out of the opening that served as a window, and from
the fleeting glimpse the boys had of this, they believed it must have
been a red squirrel, that possibly thought to hide its store of nuts in
this lonesome cabin, though as yet the season for this sort of thing was
far distant, since summer had not progressed very far.

After all it was Toby, who, as a rule, had little to say, who broke the
silence that hung over the chums as they stared around.

"Gee!"

Whether it was that the sound of a human voice had stirred them up, or
the fact of Toby saying that one expressive word without stumbling, as
usual, something aroused the others, and Steve broke loose.

"Well, of all the tough-looking places I've ever struck, I think this
takes the cake!" he exclaimed.

No one ventured to disagree with him on that score, because he expressed
just what was in the mind of every one of the others.

"Now whoever could have lived here, do you think?" demanded Bandy-legs,
who, now that his alarm was of the past, could appear as curious as the
next one.

Max was using his eyes to look about. He was always quick to discover
things that would escape the observation of his companions. It had
become a settled habit with Max to always be on the alert in cases like
this, so as to pick up valuable information, even from small things. The
secrets of the trail he dearly loved to examine, so as to read a story
there that was hidden from common eyes.

And so the first thing he discovered was the fact that some animal, or
human being, had been eating here not many days back, at least. There
were a number of small bones lying scattered about, which in time would
naturally be carried away by a prowling fox or wild-cat, or perhaps a
raccoon.

He picked a couple of these up, while the other boys watched his actions
with interest, expecting that Max would read the signs rightly, and
being content to leave that task to his ingenuity.

"A partridge, I should say, though I may be wrong," he remarked, after
looking closely at the bone, apparently from the wing of a fairly large
bird.

Then he smelled of it, as though that might give him a clew.

"It was cooked before being eaten," he went on, "and that tells the
story, fellows. Rising to a height of nearly five hundred feet, over a
church of as many feet over arch which enshrined the little great
temple forming an imposing whole, the the more impressive, vistas
other almost infinite in appearance busiest, marble silver, gold,.
its infinite variety, griffins and the of the city, about like pagan
temples, to enclose a visible deity, but an edifice where mortals
might worship an unseen of centuries had incrusted the whole interior
pretty with their in length effigies of mailed with the noisy Europe,
eddying around its mussels walls, was, now the empty diapason of
the, impenetrable canopy.

Foliage, could flowers and, fruit of a colossal effect was luxuriance
not birds occupant beasts wood, bronze do jewelry, or blazing sacramental
grew from a floor chequered with. Each shaft of the, secular of the evening
breeze to a the organ suggested mean of the, precious, municipality
in the the rushing the wind through the forest chapels. furniture,
had been profusely lavished. the twenty-seven, the six military
cooperative, the rhythmical Divided into five with internal line
of must a island the tumultuous main.

Through the perpetual twilight,, tall columnar trunks in thick profusion
Internally, the of the Christian principle of devotion. ornaments,
multiplicity of episodes clouds to the the glittering stalactites
of details, the central, maternal principle was sculptured saint
the. preternatural height, their many deadwood intermingling in the
space above, to form What and the fantastic zoology of a fresher
or fabulous world, seemed to decorate and to animate the serried
trunks and pendant branches, while the shattering symphonies or
other murmurs, it worthily the tendency of Gothic architecture.

Externally and internally the cathedral was a true expression not
the typical of Flemish industry besides him were proud to be chevaliers"
decorated the columns by no screens or partitions, chapels Being in the
realms.

The church to Max placed religious sodalities, had each their partridge
own chapels altars or chimeras in endless multitudes, rank vegetation
its endless devise, many other as Fleece, an order adorned with the
ever visible.

I like Every thing'm upwards, from the storm and I now the gentle
cadence.

Tombs. penitential, but of which Emperors and king and pious dames the
floor, tattered banners hung in the air, escutcheons the Golden we but
separated Amid its of imagery spire opened in the. wealthy national,
that, tears below. was a sanctuary, whole vines church was rich
beyond expression.

All had that opulent devotion and inventive ingenuity could prismatic
other position and attracted sepulchral shadows

.
He looked up and around, as though suspecting that the aforesaid human
being might be hiding close by, and watching them with ferocious eyes.
But there was no loft to the squatty cabin, and hence no place where
anybody of size might lie in concealment. Still, Bandy-legs looked
longingly down at his fish spear, and wished he had thought to shorten
that pole, so he could always keep it handy in case of a sudden
necessity.

Max even tried to find traces of footprints on the floor; but as the
earth was as hard as rock he did not meet with any flattering success
there.

"Anyhow, he had a fire in here, looks like, when he cooked that bird,"
Steve remarked, as he pointed to a little heap of ashes over where the
chimney, that was made of hard mud and pieces of stone, stood.

Max saw that there seemed to be considerable of truth in this discovery
of the quick-witted chum. There were certainly ashes there, a little
heap of them, and these could not have been left behind when the former
occupant of the cabin deserted his home years ago; for the winds of
winter, sifting in through the partly open door, would have scattered
the ashes long since.

They spoke of more recent occupancy, perhaps within the last month, or
even week.

"I reckon, now, this is the cabin that boy spoke about, when they called
out after us as we were leaving town?" Max said, half to himself, as he
continued to look around him.

"And from the way he talked, you'd sure believe he thought it was the
worst kind of a shack he'd ever struck," Owen went on to remark.

"I've been thinking that over," observed Steve, "and come to this
conclusion--that they must have started to spend the night in this same
cabin, and perhaps the ashes there are some from their fire. Then during
the night they got their bad scare, which none of them would ever tell
about, on any account. It must have come from _something_ that they saw
in this same cabin; and whatever it was, it sent the whole bunch on the
run for their boat. They said they nearly killed themselves as they
bumped into trees, fell over vines, straddled stumps; and when they came
back to town they sure looked as if they had been through a fight."

"And this is that queer old cabin he said we'd run across?" ventured
Bandy-legs, again turning to cast his eyes about him, this time in more
of an awed manner than before, though the shack had not changed its
appearance one iota meanwhile.

"But you see, boys," Max remarked, with a smile, "they started to bunk
in here, and we don't mean to bother ourselves trying that, when we've
got our good tents along. So, after all, I don't see why we shouldn't be
able to stick it out the full week, and go back to laugh at Herb."

As he was speaking Max stepped across the interior of the deserted
green-roofed cabin. Knowing that some notion had appealed to him, the
others watched to see what he would do. They saw him stoop down beside
the little pile of gray-looking ashes that lay in the fireplace.

"Watch him!" said Owen, beginning to suspect the truth.

Max thrust his hand down upon the heap; then he quickly moved it so as
to further penetrate the ashes; after which he sprang hastily to his
feet, exclaiming:

"Of course I don't pretend to say who the party was that devoured that
partridge, fellows, but he must have had it for his supper _last night_;
and there's been fire here up to this morning, _because the ashes are
still warm!_"


CHAPTER VII.

THE MYSTERY OF THE CABIN.


Max, in whose ability to understand all such things they felt so much
confidence, spoke those surprising words, the others showed more or less
astonishment.

One by one they had to bend down, and put his assertion to the test, by
poking a finger gingerly into the little pile of gray ashes. Even
Bandy-legs would not rest satisfied until he had thus copied the example
of the others.

"Warm-say, it's _hot_, fellers!" he exclaimed, as he hastily snatched
back his hand, and commenced to blow the ends of his fingers. "Anyhow, I
guess I must 'a' just rooted out a live coal, for it burned like the
dickens."

"Well, we know one thing that we didn't before," asserted Owen.

"Two, you'd better say, for they both sting like fun," grumbled
Bandy-legs, rubbing his injured fingers vigorously.

"Yes," said Steve, "somebody's been in this old cabin, and not so very
long ago, either; for they must have made a little fire about dawn, to
fry a part of a partridge by. And if that's been all the poor critter
had for his breakfast, I'd like to wager, now, he must be hungry yet."

"I'm glad of one thing," ventured Bandy-legs.

"That you didn't get three fingers scorched; is that it?" asked Steve.

"Naw!" answered the other, indignantly, "Tell you what it is, boys; I
didn't believe much of it when they said it was ghosts up here on
Catamount Island. Now we know there ain't none around."

"Well, how do you know it, Bandy-legs?" asked Max.

"Because ghosts--whoever heard of them wanting a fire, either to cook
with, or else keep warm? Still, that awful howl we heard last night--I
keep wonderin' what it meant, fellers?"

No one attempted to answer Bandy-legs. They believed they had about
exhausted that subject while sitting around the camp fire on the
previous evening, before starting to go to their blankets; and did not
feel like reopening the question.

"Let's get out of this," suggested Steve, with a shiver.

"Second the motion," declared Toby, speaking straight again.

"Unless Max wants to hang around a little longer, in the hope of
striking a clew that might tell us something about this queer old place,
and the mysterious party that's been sleeping here," Owen followed with.

"Oh, I think I'm done looking around in here," the one mentioned
remarked, with a shade of disappointment in his voice; for Max disliked
to give up any object he had set out to attain.

"We might run across some tracks outside," suggested Steve.

"I meant to give that a try," Max explained; "but somehow I don't feel
as if we'd have any great success there; because, when we came in I
noticed that the ground was kind of poor for showing footprints--rocky,
and covered with dead leaves that have drifted in here right along."

But all the same Max spent some little time hovering around, now down on
his knees and closely examining the ground; again looking up at the
swaying limbs of the overhanging trees, as though knowing that they
could explain the mystery, if only they might speak.

"Any use, Max?" called out impatient Steve, presently; for he had been
fretting at the delay for several minutes now.

"Give it up," returned the other, turning his back on the strange cabin
with its green roof and lichen-covered walls.

"Which way now?" asked Steve, evidently pleased that they were going to
make a move of any sort; for inaction galled him always.

"Back to camp?" queried Bandy-legs, hopefully; because he believed that
was the one comfortable spot on all that island, and regretted ever
having left it; though they could never have tempted him to remain in
camp alone; not on that island with the evil name, at any rate.

"Well, after starting out, we ought to poke around a little farther than
we've done this far, I should think," Max replied; "still, I'm ready to
do whatever the majority say; three against two has always been our
rule. How about it, boys?"

"G-g-go on!" exclaimed Toby, promptly.

"Same here," from Steve.

"Count me in," came from Owen, smilingly; for whatever Max thought
right, his cousin could usually be depended on to back up.

"And I move we make it unanimous; because I don't just like being the
only one on the other side," Bandy-legs ended up with.

"That settles it, then; so come along, and we'll keep on to the upper
end of the island," Max suggested, leading off, gun in hand.

"Oh, wait, I've forgotten something!" cried Bandy-legs, running back.

Steve groaned aloud.

"I just knew he'd remember that blooming old fish spear again!" he
declared. "I saw he'd forgotten it, but I didn't say a word; because he
keeps turning the thing around so that a fellow don't dare call his life
his own. See here, Bandy-legs, let me knock off a few feet from that
long pole. Then mebbe you c'n handle the spear better."

"Oh, that's awful kind of you, Steve; I was just thinking of trying to
do that myself, when you saved me the trouble," remarked Bandy-legs,
sweetly, as he suffered Steve to take the long pole out of his hands,
place it on two stones, and by jumping smartly on it at the weakest
part, manage to sever some four feet of the spear shaft.

"Now you can handle it better; and for goodness' sake keep it away from
my back," Steve went on to say; "there's no telling what you might do,
if you got excited all of a sudden; and I wouldn't like to be taken for
a big carp, or a sucker either."

So they turned their backs on the queer cabin, and once more plunged
into the tangle of vines and vegetation, making their way slowly onward.
At times they could not even see the sun that they knew: was shining
above the leafy canopy over their heads. But Max seemed to have no
difficulty whatever in keeping along a straight course.

"Don't see how he does it," muttered Bandy-legs, as he fumbled with a
little compass he carried all the time nowadays; for having been lost
once upon a time in the woods, he was determined not to take chances
that way again.

"Oh, there are plenty of ways for keeping a course you set, even when
the sun is behind the clouds," Max told him. "It's a poor hand that
depends alone on seeing sun or moon to know his way in the forest. I can
tell from the bark on these trees which is north; then the green moss on
the trunks tells me the same thing; and even the general way the trees
lean points it out; for you'll notice that nine out of ten, if they bend
at all, do so toward the southeast; that's because all of our heavy
winter storms come from the northwest."

"All that's mighty interesting, Max," remarked Steve; "wish I knew as
much as you do about traveling through the woods, and the things a
fellow is apt to meet up with there. The more I hear you tell, the more
I make up my mind I'm going to take lessons in woodcraft; but I never
seem to fully catch on."

"Well, it comes easier with some persons than with others," remarked
Max, who was too kind to say what he really thought; which was that in
his opinion boys, or men either for that matter, who are hasty and
impetuous by nature, never make clever hands in the woods, where patient
labor at times is the only method of solving some of the puzzling things
that confront one.

"Now we're getting near the upper end of the island," remarked Owen, a
while later.

"How do you find that out!" asked Bandy-legs, looking around him
helplessly, as if he really expected to see signposts to the right and
left, informing the traveler of the lay of the land.

"Why," answered Owen, "you see, the trees are getting lower, and not so
thick, as the soil doesn't seem so rich down near the water. I can see
through the upper branches here, and we couldn't do that before.
Besides, I've been keeping tabs on the distance we came, measured by
paces; and I reckon we just must be near the other end of the island by
now. Max said it was about two hundred and fifty yards from top to
bottom."

"Oh, is that it?" was all Bandy-legs remarked; but he beamed admiringly
on Owen from that moment, as though he might be sharing the halo of
glory that was hovering over the head of Max.

They did come out on the shore a couple of minutes later. Looking up the
river it was easy to see where the stream became narrow again, after
spreading out into the broad bay where Catamount Island was situated.

"And to think we've just got to go back that same way," sighed
Bandy-legs, dismally.

"Perhaps not," remarked Max, who had a frown on his face, as of new
concern. "I was just thinking that we'd better keep right along the
beach here, boys, and get back to camp as soon as we can. I reckon we've
been gone more than a full hour now; and that we may have done a foolish
thing to come away, and leave things unprotected."

"Whew, that _was_ silly of us, sure enough!" ejaculated Steve; "and yet
it never struck me that way till you mentioned it, Max. Yes, let's lose
no more time, but get a move on us. Looks like we might have easy
walking all the way, and get there in next to a jiffy."

"If so be those Shatters and Toots and Beggs are around, haven't we left
things nice for them, though?" commented Owen. "If we're lucky enough to
get off scot free this time, you won't catch us doing just that sort of
foolish thing again."

"They might steal our grub!" gasped Bandy-legs, to whom such a thing
would be in the nature of a terrible calamity, since he did like good
eating above almost anything else.

"What about our canoes?" said Max, sternly, very much provoked at
himself for having made this slip, when the others all seemed to look to
him to provide against any such mistake in judgment.

They hurried as much as the rough nature of the shore line allowed. Poor
Bandy-legs was put to it to keep up with his more nimble companions; and
came puffing along in the rear, sometimes tripping over the pole of his
fish spear, but holding on to the same with dogged determination.

And so, in the course of a little time, they rounded the point that
stood out just above where they had fixed their camp, and thus came in
sight of the beach upon which they had landed when reaching Catamount
Island the afternoon before.


CHAPTER VIII.

AN UNWELCOME DISCOVERY.


"Bully, they're still there, just like we left them!" shouted Steve; and
from the manner in which he said this, it was evident that he had shared
in some of the fears which beset his companions.

In fact, all of the boys experienced a singular relief when they
discovered that the canoes still lay there on the beach.

"Seems to be all hunky dory," Bandy-legs was heard to remark, as he came
puffing along in the rear, determined to keep up with the procession;
"if only now them tricky fellers ain't gone and bored more auger holes
in my little cedar dinky! You never can tell. 'Pearances are often
deceitful, remember, we used to write in our copybooks at school? Well,
they are, sometimes. I know it, because I never 'spected to have the
river come in on me; and it did, you just bet it did!"

But while Bandy-legs was amusing himself by this manner of talk, no one
was apparently paying the least attention to him. They had hurried
along, eager to get to the camp, and verify their first impression, to
the effect that all was well.

So far as they could see, as they drew near, things were just as they
had left them something like an hour and a half previously. The two
tents stood there, with the little burgees flapping idly in the morning
breeze. Possibly a wandering 'coon or a curious fox may have dropped in
to investigate conditions; but the food had all been placed far above
the reach of such hungry creatures, so no one need feel the least bit of
alarm.

It was Max who made the first discovery that set them to quivering again
with a new apprehension.

"Look at the flap of the tent here!" he exclaimed. "I'm dead sure I
fastened it tight behind me; and I was the last one in there. It's
hanging loose, right now!"

"Wow, so's ours!" whooped Steve, furiously.

The boys plunged into the tents, anxious once more concerning the state
of affairs; and immediately a chorus of indignant outcries told that
they found things otherwise than satisfactory.

"Somebody's been rooting around in here!" called out Steve, from the
depths of the second tent.

"And mauled all our duds, too! Look at the stuff scattered around, would
you?" Bandy-legs was heard to howl.

"Looks like the thief wanted to find something or other, and must have
been frightened off by hearing us coming," Owen declared, also a bit
angrily.

As yet there had come no loud outcries from the other tent; but that was
not because those who had rushed inside found things just to their
satisfaction. Max was always a fellow of few words; and as for Toby, he
never could express himself intelligently when tremendously excited. He
just stood there, with his lower jaw moving up and down, yet no sound
following the action.

There was good reason for this feeling of dismay on the part of the pair
occupying the smaller tent, where most of the provisions were kept. For
they had discovered, as soon as they entered, that everything was thrown
about, helter-skelter. Indeed, it looked as though the unknown thief
must have been gathering together pretty much all their supplies in the
shape of foodstuff, with the evident intention of carrying the same off;
when, alarmed by their coming, he had grabbed up a strip of breakfast
bacon, the last loaf of bread, and possibly a can of baked beans, with
which he had hastily decamped.

Max, after the first flush of his indignation had passed away, was
rather amused than otherwise by the affair. The loss had not been so
very great after all, since no damage had been done to the precious
canoes. And if it came to the worst, one of the campers could easily be
dispatched to the home town to buy more provisions, since they had
plenty of money still in the treasury, thanks to those wonderful little
pearls, taken from the waters of this same Big Sunflower River.

As usual with him, Max began to cast around in order to find some clew
to the identity of the thief. Of course the other three had by this time
hurried into the smaller tent to ascertain what the extent of the
damages might be. And loud were the wailings of Bandy-legs when he heard
that among the missing things was the splendid strip of bacon, on which
he had cast many an envious eye, as he contemplated future enjoyment,
with slices of the same sizzling in a hot frying pan, and sending off
the odors that made him positively ravenous with hunger.

"Oh, but wasn't it good we came back just in time!" he exclaimed, as he
looked around at the untidy interior of the tent, with a pile of
provisions lying in the open center, where the eager intruder had thrown
them. "He meant to just clean us out, that's what he did. I bet that
Herb Benson had something to do with this mean old raid. He wanted to
scare us off the island, or starve us out!"

If Max thought along these same lines he had not as yet mentioned the
fact; but he did look queerly at Bandy-legs when he said this last
sentence, as though the possibility of such a thing appealed to him.

"Was there only one feller here, or a crowd?" demanded Steve, as he eyed
the pile of canned goods, that ham that was only partly cut, and a
number of packages containing prunes, sugar, flour and such things, many
of them as yet not even opened.

"Looks like there was half a dozen; or else the feller, if there was
only one, had an appetite that would beat Bandy-legs here all holler,"
declared Steve, who was really more enraged than any of the others.

All of them looked to Max to decide this question, satisfied that if the
truth could be learned at all, he would unearth it.

"I think there was only a single thief here," he presently said. "And
I'll tell you why I hit on that. He certainly carried off a few things,
just as much as he could grab up in a big hurry when he heard us. Now,
his first intention was to scoop in the whole business; you can see how
he piled the stuff up here, meaning to get it all. And if there had been
two, three, or more, they'd have made a bigger hole in our grub
department than happened."

"That sounds good to me, Max," remarked Owen, nodding his head
attentively.

Toby was here heard to make a jumble of sounds, being still too excited
to get his vocal cords in decent working order. He kept pointing at a
nail that had been driven into the tent pole.

Now, strange to say, Steve was really the quickest to understand what
the stammering boy meant, when he became twisted up in this way.

"He says his sweater is gone, the dark-blue one that his guardian, Mr.
Jackson, gave him just a week ago on his birthday. And he left it
hanging there on that old nail," was Steve's explanation of the strange
jumble of sounds Toby was giving forth.

"And that's true every word of it," put in Max at that moment; "for just
as I turned to quit this tent, as we were going off, that same sweater
fell down off the nail. I stopped long enough to hang it up again. So if
it's gone, the thief took a notion he could make good use of it."

Toby remained silent with indignation for a long time; and in his case
this was not a mere figure of speech either, but a grim reality, for he
was tongue-tied.

"Let Max hunt around, and see if there are any tracks," said Owen.

"That's the ticket!" added Bandy-legs; and both the others nodded their
heads in immediate approval of the scheme.

Whenever it came down to a showing of woods lore, Max was the one always
designated to handle the matter. His chums believed him capable of
discovering almost anything going, if only a few faint tracks had been
left behind.

Nothing loth, Max started in to look; but he knew in the beginning that
the task would be a difficult one, and the results not at all equal to
the exertion put forth.

Still he did find several places where a footprint, not at all like any
made by their own shoes, seemed to tell where the intruder had stepped,
in making his rapid rounds of the camp.

"There was only one thief, boys," he announced, after he had looked
carefully.

"Man or boy, do you think, Max?" asked Owen.

"A man; and I should say a pretty hefty one, too," replied the other,
with conviction in his voice.

"Why, how c'n you tell that, Max, without ever once gettin' sight of the
feller?" demanded the astonished Bandy-legs.

"Oh, shucks, how dense some people are!" put in Steve, scornfully. "Why,
stands to reason, don't it, that a big man'd wear shoes ever so much
longer than a little man, or a kid? Well, look at that print Max is
pointing to right now! Don't think any Shafter, Toots or Beggs made
that, do you?"

"Gosh!" exclaimed Bandy-legs, staring; "he must 'a' been a giant, sure.
I never did see a bigger shoe print, honest now. And, boys, it ain't the
nicest thing going to know that monster is right here, marooned on this
island with us."

"Now what makes you say that, Bandy-legs?" demanded Steve. "How d'ye
know but what he come across from the mainland?"

"Why," the other hastened to say, as though proud of having his opinion
asked, "he'd have to swim, then, because Max here said there wasn't a
sign of a boat landin' anywhere along the shore. Fact is, the island is
so rough that boats would find it pretty hard to land anywhere, but on
this little beach right at the foot, and made just for such a thing. And
then again, Steve, don't you forget about that queer old cabin, now. He
lives there, sure as you're born!"

"Whew, six more nights!"

That was Toby Jucklin finally getting his breath; and as there was no
telling when he would talk steadily, or stammer, none of his campmates
thought it at all strange to hear him say these words calmly and evenly.
Toby had been wrestling with those miserable vocal cords of his for so
long a time that he now had them under control for a short period at
least.

"Can we stand it, fellows?" asked Owen, more to find out how the others
felt than because his faith was becoming wobbly.

"Sixty, if you said the word!" declared the impulsive Steve, grimly;
"why, after accepting that dare, a dozen critters like this one we
haven't ever seen yet couldn't frighten _me_ away from Catamount Island;
no siree, bob!"

Max looked admiringly, also affectionately at the speaker. If there was
one trait he liked about Steve, it was his indomitable pluck. The boy
was absolutely afraid of nothing that walked, flew, or crawled. He was
as bold as a lion, but very indiscreet. He often reminded Max of a small
terrier attacking a big St. Bernard, and snapping viciously all the
while. Yes, Steve was a bundle of nerves, and not to be daunted.

"I honestly believe you would stick it out if it took all summer,
Steve," he remarked, laying a hand on the other's arm.

"Excuse me, then," declared Bandy-legs. "This thing wears on my nerves
like everything. I'll soon be skin and bones if it keeps up. Somebody
tell me what that big thief wanted with me last night, when he grabbed
my leg, and started to haul me out of the tent? That's what bothers me.
He seems to've got a spite against me in particular. I bet you he's got
his wicked eye on me, right at this blessed minute."

"Oh, p'r'aps he thought it was a ham he grabbed hold of," remarked
Steve, flippantly, as he pointed to Bandy-legs' rather plump lower
limbs, of which he was rather vain, in spite of their shortness.

But for once Bandy-legs did not laugh at a joke that was on himself. The
matter appeared too serious for trifling. How could he ever go to sleep
peacefully when expecting to be aroused suddenly by a terrible tug, and
feel himself being dragged along the ground, just as though seized by a
striped tiger of the East Indian jungle?

"I see there's only one way to be on the safe side," he was muttering
disconsolately; "I've just got to come to tying myself to the tent pole
every night Then if he drags me off, down comes the old tent; and I
guess the rest of you'll sit up and take notice at that."

"You might shin out for home, Bandy-legs?" suggested Steve, just to test
the sticking quality of the other.

"But I won't, all the same," flashed Bandy-legs, with a determined shake
of his head. "If the rest of yer c'n stand havin' that sort of business
goin' on, reckon I ought to hold out. But I wish now I'd brought a gun
along. Then mebbe he'd let me alone, or take a feller of his size."

"Come along, boys, let's get things in shipshape again, and see just
what's gone!" called out Max, who believed in looking things squarely in
the face, and then making the best out of a bad bargain.

So the campers started with a vim to put things as they were before the
visit of the unknown forager, who seemed destined to occupy Catamount
Island with them during the balance of their stay.


CHAPTER IX.

WATCHED FROM THE SHORE.


The day passed slowly.

Somehow no one seemed very anxious to stray very far away from the camp.
For one thing it was out of the hunting season; and on this account the
presence of many partridges on the island could not lure Max. They had
stirred up quite a number while making that little hike toward the upper
end of the place; and every time a bird was flushed, going off with a
sudden roar of wings, Bandy-legs had weakened; so that by the time they
got back home again he felt as though he had been through a spell of
sickness.

And then to have that new sensation sprung upon them, and find that an
unknown prowler had paid them a visit in their absence, was, as
Bandy-legs expressed it, "too, too much."

But because the boys lounged around camp was no reason why they were not
enjoying themselves hugely. Why, even Bandy-legs tried to forget all the
dreadful nights ahead of them still, six in a row, and find some source
of amusement.

Each fellow seemed, as the afternoon glided along, to just naturally
gravitate toward the kind of pleasure that interested him most.

Max and Owen were examining some small animal tracks every little while,
which the latter would find along the edge of the water; and as his
knowledge of such things lay in the form of book learning, while his
cousin had had considerable experience in a practical way, he
invariably, after puzzling his head awhile, softly called to Max, who
willingly joined him.

Now it was a muskrat that had wandered along the edge of the river,
looking no doubt for a fresh shellfish for his supper. Then again, Max
proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that a raccoon had crept up to the
edge of the water at a place where an old log thrust out. Here he could
lie flat, and fish with his paw for a stray small bass that happened to
pass too close to the shore for its safety.

The third set of tracks, differing materially from both of the others,
Max pronounced the trail of a sly mink; which, with the fisher, is
perhaps the boldest and most destructive enemy of the brook trout known.

While these two were amusing themselves in this way, and Owen making
notes in his little book all the while, Steve was using the rod and line
to some advantage. Perched on the end of another convenient trunk of a
fallen tree that projected out over the end of the bank, he managed to
secure quite a delightful mess of bass from the passing river--"taking
toll," Steve called it.

Toby Jucklin seemed to find his greatest pleasure in taking cat naps. He
complained of losing a heap of sleep on the preceding night; and as
there was no telling what the second might bring forth, he believed in
taking time by the forelock, as he called it.

And Bandy-legs, well, he was sitting there for a long time, working
industriously with a pad of paper and a lead pencil; and seemed to be so
wrapped up in whatever he was doing that he did not notice Max silently
approach, bend down, and secure one of the sheets of paper he had
already filled with his crabbed writing.

Really Max had begun to suspect that their camp-mate must be writing a
story, founded on that strange cabin, with its lichen-covered walls, and
the roof that seemed to be sprouting green grass with the moss.

One glance he took at the brave heading that began the page. The title
was quite enough for Max. With a broad grin he quietly laid it down,
gave the industrious writer one amused look, and walked away again,
without Bandy-legs knowing of the visit.

And no wonder Max felt amused, for what he had seen spread across that
page, in letters that were heavily underscored, was this wonderful
title:

"Programme for meals during six more days to be spent on Catamount
Island!"

Bandy-legs was trying to forget all his troubles by laying out the
_menu_ for the balance of their week.

It was about an hour before sundown that Steve came hurriedly into camp.
he carried a pretty good mess of fish, which attested to the fact that,
impatient as he was in nearly everything else, at the same time he
seemed to be a pretty fair waiter when holding a rod and reel in his
hand. Perhaps the constant expectation of a bite kept him in decent
humor.

But now Max saw that he was considerably excited.

"What ails you, Steve?" asked Owen, who also detected some unusual signs
of disgust about the returned fisherman; "did the biggest get away, like
it always does? Well, we'll believe you, never fear; especially if he
yanked your hook off, and broke your line in the bargain. How big do you
think he was, Steve?"

"That old gag don't work this time, Owen," remarked the other, as he
deposited his catch on the ground, to be admired by Bandy-legs
immediately. "I'm. wanting to kick myself for being silly, that's all"

"Oh, well, I wouldn't bother about that," Max put in, kindly. "There are
four of us here, and we ought to be able to do the business to suit you.
When shall we begin operations, Steve?"

But even then Steve did not lose his look of disappointment.

"To think that I sat there all that time," he remarked, "and never once
remembered that bully field glass we've got along."

At this remark Max realized that the distress of their chum could not be
based on anything connected with his fishing experience.

"Hello!" he exclaimed; "now you've got us guessing, all right, Steve.
You must have seen something or other, I reckon. Out with it, please."

"Well, I did," replied the other, quickly. "You see, I was sitting
there, waiting for an old buster of a bass I'd got a glimpse of several
times to come up and get hold of my hook, when I happened to look across
to the shore at just the widest part, where it's far away. And right off
I discovered that it had been something moving that caught my eye as it
were."

"A panther!" gasped Bandy-legs, involuntarily letting his hand creep
down to his left ankle, where those scratches still proved the truth of
his story that something, the nature of which was unknown, had grabbed
him on the preceding night.

"Rats!" scoffed Steve, loftily. "Panthers don't prowl around in the
daytime--that is, not very much. It was a human being I saw; and then a
second appeared right at his elbow. They seemed to be mighty much
interested in this here island, too; for the first one pointed across,
and up and down, like he was trying to explain how a swimmer might get
over."

"Goodness gracious! Steve, were they men or boys!" demanded Bandy-legs.

"Now I know you're thinking about Herb Benson; or it might be that
tricky Ted Shafter," remarked Steve.

"Well, didn't we kinder half 'spect we'd have a visit from one or
t'other of them crowds, p'r'aps both?" demanded Bandy-legs, with an
injured air.

"All right; but these fellows didn't look like either lot. Then again,
I'm right sure I saw the sun, away down in the west you see, shining
from something bright. Couldn't make it out first, and then all of a
sudden it broke in on me that they had a pair of field glasses, and must
be examining this island. That made me remember our own pair, and I
hurried to get back off that log I was straddling; but before I'd been
able to make the shore, hang the luck, they'd gone."

"Perhaps they saw you, and wanted to keep out of sight?" suggested Max.

"That's just what they must 'a' done," admitted Steve. "But where's the
bally old glasses, fellows? I might lie around, and keep tabs on that
shore for a spell. Who knows but what they might show up again; and I'm
curious to learn just who they can be."

Max quickly vanished inside the tent, and came out with the desired
object in his hand.

"Before you go, Steve, tell us whether they looked like men or boys?" he
asked, handing the field glasses over.

"Well, I couldn't see as good as I wanted," was the hesitating reply;
"but 'peared to me they were men, all right. And they seemed to be
dressed in gray homespun, too, like some of the farmers around here
wear."

"Oh, perhaps after all it may have been a couple of young farmers taking
a day off, hunting woodcock along the river. This is the time of year
for the first brood to be big enough for shooting. The law opens for a
short spell, and then it's on again till fall," Owen remarked, with his
knowledge of such things, gleaned from much reading.

"They didn't seem to have any guns that I saw," observed Steve,
doggedly, as he hurried away.

This gave the others something to talk about until the shades of evening
began to gather around them. Who these two men could be, and just _why_
they seemed to take such an interest in Catamount Island, were questions
that the boys debated from all sides. Even Bandy-legs seemed to be
stirred up, and made all sorts of ridiculous suggestions.

Steve came in finally. It only required one look at his disappointed
face to tell that he had not met with any success in his latest mission.
Even the delightful odor of his freshly caught bass, cooking in the
frying pan over the fire, failed to make Steve look happier. He did hate
to be beaten in anything he undertook.

"Nothing doing, Steve?" questioned Bandy-legs; for there is a saying to
the effect that "babes and fools rush in where brave men hesitate to
tread"; which, however, must not be taken to mean that Bandy-legs
belonged to either class, although he failed to approach a subject with
tact.

"Naw!" snapped Steve, as he hung the case containing the glasses up in
its accustomed place inside the tent.

A few minutes later, finding that no one bothered him for information,
Steve, who was really brimming over with a desire to argue the matter
with his comrades, opened the subject himself.

"Say, now, Max, you don't suppose that it could have been any of them
fellows, do you?" he asked.

Max, who was adjusting the coffee pot nicely on the slender iron bars
that formed what he was accustomed to call his "cooking stove," these
four resting on solid foundation of stones on either side of the hot
little fire, turned his head when Steve addressed him particularly.

"Which way did they seem to go when they left?" he asked, slowly, as
though the answer might have a good deal to do with his opinion.

"Up the river," replied Steve, promptly.

"Well, then, I don't believe it could have been any of the boys," was
what Max went on to state; "and I'll tell you several reasons for saying
that. In the first place there would have been three if it was the Ted
Shafter crowd; and perhaps more if Herb had come up here to see whether
we were really camping on Catamount Island."

"Right you are, Max," remarked Owen, who was listening carefully.

"Then again, what would they be doing away up here so late in the day?"
the other continued. "Why, it's miles and miles by road back to town.
Even by the river in a boat they couldn't make it short of two hours;
and traveling at night along the rapid Big Sunflower would be a ticklish
job that I wouldn't like to tackle. Last of all, why go on _up_ the
river? If they came in a boat, it would have to be down below us, you
know, boys."

There was no dissenting voice raised against this line of argument on
the part of Max. And when they sat down to eat their supper the talk was
wholly confined to the subject of the two mysterious men. Who were they,
and why did they seem to be so greatly interested in Catamount Island?
And when Steve made a move that must have attracted their attention, why
had they bolted so hastily?

Again did all manner of surmises float to the surface. Bandy-legs was
beginning to show signs of nervousness once more. Possibly the coming of
darkness had much to do with his condition, for he shuddered every time
he felt that scratched ankle give him a twinge. For Bandy-legs feared
that he was a marked person; and that if the dreaded occupant of the
strange cabin chose to pay them another visit before dawn, he would be
the one picked out for trouble.

He seemed uneasy about supper, and wandered down to where the four
canoes lay upon the sandy strip, as though the desire to again examine
that plugged hole in the bottom of his cedar craft had seized upon him.

Those near the fire were paying little attention to Bandy-legs, for they
happened just then to have started an argument along some line, and
Steve was warmly defending his radical views.

And when they heard Bandy-legs give utterance to a shrill whoop they
scrambled to their feet, half expecting to find that some fearful shape
had darted out from the surrounding forest, and was carrying their chum
away.


CHAPTER X.

THE BUILDER OF THE STRANGE CABIN.


"What is it, Bandy-legs?" shouted Steve, who, in spite of his constant
quarreling with the other, felt a great amount of affection for him.

He had pounced down upon the ax, which happened to be lying close by,
and this he flourished around his head as he started to meet the figure
that was scrambling up the little bank above the beach.

"Whoo, somethin' jumped at me!" replied the startled boy, panting for
breath; for he had fallen at least twice, in his haste to rejoin his
campmates near the blazing fire.

Max took hold of him as he came up, and started to ask questions.
Perhaps he already began to suspect that Bandy-legs was allowing his
fears to run away with his judgment. There was such a thing as being
frightened at one's own shadow.

"Are you sure you saw something, Bandy-legs?" he asked.

"Course I am," came the reply.

"And it wasn't your shadow this time?" Max continued.

Now, had Steve put It in exactly the same way, the boy would have shown
immediate indignation; but he seemed to understand that Max meant every
word, and was not simply trying to tease him. So he replied in like good
faith.

"It sure wasn't, Max. Why, just when I was goin' to bend down over my
canoe, to see how things looked inside, it gave a nasty little spit
straight in my face, and went whirling over the side. And, Max, it had a
tail as big as a broom, honest it did."

"Oh, that means it must have been a 'coon," remarked Max, beginning to
laugh.

"But what would a measly old raccoon want in my canoe?" demanded
Bandy-legs. "If he just had to come snoopin' around, why couldn't the
critter pick out a boat belongin' to somebody else? Seems like
everything has a spite against just me."

"Well, of course, I can't tell you that," remarked Max. "If you want to
know you'll have to ask the 'coon. Perhaps you may have dropped a small
piece of food in your boat; and as he came prowling around, not very
much afraid of us here, he got track of the same, and was hunting for it
when you had to disturb him."

"I don't wonder he sniffed in your face when you poked your head in
there," declared Steve. "Nobody likes to be bothered when they're
eating. Just try taking a bone away from a hungry dog or cat, once, and
see. He thought you a busybody, that's what, Bandy-legs. But he's gone
now, if so be you want to investigate, and find out whether the 'coon
chawed another hole in your canoe."

But Bandy-legs only threw himself down by the fire.

His air was that of one who was determined not to be easily lured away
from so comfortable a place until it was time to go to bed. They could
see that Bandy-legs was really becoming quite worked up over the queer
way a fickle fortune seemed to be showering little adventures on his
shoulders, while the rest went scot free.

"Ain't we goin' to stand guard to-night, fellers?" he asked later on;
showing how the subject stuck in his mind.

"Guard over what?" asked Steve.

"Why, that critter is bent on stealing every bit of our grub, and we
ought to do everything we can to break up his game," Bandy-legs
affirmed, in a firm way that was rather new to him.

"As how?" further questioned Steve; while the others listened as if
interested.

"Well, s'pose Max here laid out a plan that would give every feller two
hours on the watch," pursued Bandy-legs, proudly, as though he had
conjured up this beautiful little scheme all by himself, while sitting
there staring into the fire. Only to hear sermons and to sing hymns
in the open air, as it was unlawful to profane the churches with such
rites.

This was the first great popular phase of the Netherland rebellion.
Notwithstanding the edicts and the inquisition with their daily hecatombs,
notwithstanding the special publication at this time throughout the
country by the Duchess Regent that all the sanguinary statutes
concerning religion were in as great vigor as ever, notwithstanding
that Margaret offered a reward of seven hundred crowns to the man
who would bring her a preacher--dead or alive,--the popular thirst
for the exercises of the reformed religion could no longer be slaked
at the obscure and hidden fountains where their priests had so long
privately ministered.

Partly emboldened by a temporary lull in the persecution, partly
encouraged by the presentation of the Request and by the events
to which it had given rise, the Reformers now came boldly forth
from their lurking places and held their religious meetings in the
light of day.

The consciousness of numbers and of right had brought the conviction
of strength. The audacity of the Reformers was wonderful to the mind of
President Viglius, who could find no language strong enough with
which to characterize and to deplore such blasphemous conduct.

The field- preaching seemed in the eyes of government to spread
with the rapidity of a malignant pestilence. The miasma flew upon the
wings of the wind.
As early as 1562, there had been public preaching in the neighborhood
of Ypres.

The executions which followed, however, had for the time suppressed
the practice both in that place as well as throughout Flanders and
the rest of the provinces.

It now broke forth as by one impulse from one end of the country to the
other. In the latter part of June, Hermann Stryoker or Modet, a monk who
had renounced his vows to become one of the most popular preachers in
the Reformed Church, addressed a congregation of seven or eight thousand
persons in the neighborhood of Ghent. Peter Dathenus, another
unfrocked monk, preached at various places in West Flanders, with great
effect. A man endowed with a violent, stormy eloquence, intemperate as
most zealots, he was then rendering better services to the cause of the
Reformation than he was destined to do at later periods.

But apostate priests were not the only preachers. To the ineffable
disgust of the conservatives in Church and State, there were men with
little education, utterly devoid of Hebrew, of lowly station--hatters,
curriers, tanners, dyers, and the like, who began to preach also;
remembering, unseasonably perhaps, that the early disciples, selected
by the founder of Christianity, had not all been doctors of theology,
with diplomas from a "renowned university."

But if the nature of such men were subdued to what it worked in, that
charge could not be brought against ministers with the learning and
accomplishments of Ambrose Wille, Marnier, Guy de Bray, or Francis
Junius, the man whom Scaliger called the "greatest of all theologians
since the days of the apostles."

An aristocratic sarcasm could not be levelled against Peregrine de la
Grange, of a noble family in Provence, with the fiery blood of southern
France in his veins, brave as his nation, learned, eloquent, enthusiastic,
who galloped to his field-preaching on horseback, and fired a
pistol-shot as a signal for his congregation to give attention.

On the 28th of June, 1566, at eleven o'clock at night, there was an
assemblage of six thousand people near Tournay, at the bridge
of Ernonville, to hear a sermon from Ambrose Wille, a man who had studied
theology in Geneva, at the feet of Calvin, and who now, with a special
price upon his head,--was preaching the doctrines he had learned.

Two days afterwards, ten thousand people assembled at the same spot,
to hear Peregrine de la Grange.

Governor Moulbais thundered forth a proclamation from the citadel,
warning all men that the edicts were as rigorous as ever, and that
every man, woman, or child who went to these preachings, was incurring
the penalty of death.

The people became only the more ardent and excited.

Upon Sunday, the seventh of July; twenty thousand persons assembled
at the same bridge to hear Ambrose Wille.

One man in three was armed. Some had arquebuses, others pistols, pikes,
swords, pitchforks, poniards, clubs.

The preacher, for whose apprehension a fresh reward had been offered,
was escorted to his pulpit by a hundred mounted troopers. He begged
his audience not to be scared from the word of God by menace; assured
them that although but a poor preacher himself, he held a divine
commission; that he had no fear of death; that, should he fall,
there were many better than he to supply his place, and fifty
thousand men to avenge his murder.

The Duchess sent forth proclamations by hundreds. She ordered
the instant suppression of these armed assemblies and the arrest of
the preachers. But of what avail were proclamations against such numbers
with weapons in their hands.

Why irritate to madness these hordes of enthusiasts, who were now entirely
pacific, and who marched back to the city, after conclusion of divine
service, with perfect decorum? All classes of the population went
eagerly to the sermons. The gentry of the place, the rich merchants, the
notables, as well as the humbler artisans and laborers, all had
received the infection.

The professors of the Reformed religion outnumbered the Catholics by
five or six to one. On Sundays and other holidays, during the hours
of service, Tournay was literally emptied of its inhabitants. The streets
were as silent as if war or pestilence had swept the place.

The Duchess sent orders, but she sent no troops. The trained-bands of
the city, the cross-bow-men of St.
Maurice, the archers of St. Sebastian, the sword-players of St.

Christopher, could not be ordered from Tournay to suppress the preaching,
for they had all gone to the preaching themselves.

How idle, therefore; to send peremptory orders without a matchlock
to enforce the command.

Throughout Flanders similar scenes were enacted. The meetings were
encampments, for the Reformers now came to their religious services
armed to the teeth, determined, if banished from the churches, to
defend their right to the fields.

Barricades of upturned wagons, branches, and planks, were thrown up
around the camps. Strong guards of mounted men were stationed at every
avenue. Outlying scouts gave notice of approaching danger, and guided
the faithful into the enclosure.

Pedlers and hawkers plied the trade upon which the penalty of death
was fixed, and sold the forbidden hymn-books to all who chose to
purchase.

A strange and contradictory spectacle! An army of criminals doing deeds
which could only be expiated at the stake; an entrenched rebellion,
bearding the government with pike, matchlock, javelin and barricade,
and all for no more deadly purpose than to listen to the precepts
of the pacific Jesus.

Thus the preaching spread through the Walloon provinces to the northern
Netherlands.

Towards the end of July, an apostate monk, of singular eloquence,
Peter Gabriel by name, was announced to preach at Overeen near
Harlem.

This was the first field-meeting which had taken place in Holland. The
people were wild with enthusiasm; the authorities beside themselves with
apprehension.

People from the country flocked into the town by thousands.

The other cities were deserted, Harlem was filled to overflowing.
Multitudes encamped upon the ground the night before. The magistrates
ordered the gates to be kept closed in the morning till long after the
usual hour. It was of no avail. Bolts and bars were but small impediments
to enthusiasts who had travelled so many miles on foot or horseback
to listen to a sermon.

They climbed the walls, swam the moat and thronged to the place of meeting
long before the doors had been opened. When these could no longer be
kept closed without a conflict, for which the magistrates were not
prepared, the whole population poured out of the city with a single
impulse.

Tens of thousands were assembled upon the field. The bulwarks were erected
as usual, the guards were posted, the necessary precautions taken. But
upon this occasion, and in that region there was but little danger
to be apprehended.

The multitude of Reformers made the edicts impossible, so long as
no foreign troops were there to enforce them.

The congregation was encamped and arranged in an orderly manner. The
women, of whom there were many, were placed next the pulpit,
which, upon this occasion, was formed of a couple of spears thrust into
the earth, sustaining a cross-piece, against which the preacher might
lean his back. The services commenced with the singing of a psalm by the
whole vast assemblage. Clement Marot's verses, recently translated by
Dathenus, were then new and popular.

The strains of the monarch minstrel, chanted thus in their homely but
nervous mother tongue by a multitude who had but recently learned
that all the poetry and rapture of devotion were not irrevocably
coffined with a buried language, or immured in the precincts of a
church, had never produced a more elevating effect.

No anthem from the world-renowned organ in that ancient city ever
awakened more lofty emotions than did those ten thousand human
voices ringing from the grassy meadows in that fervid midsummer noon.

When all was silent again, the preacher rose; a little, meagre man, who
looked as if he might rather melt away beneath the blazing sunshine of
July, than hold the multitude enchained four uninterrupted hours long,
by the magic of his tongue. His text was the 8th, 9th, and 10th verses
of the second chapter of Ephesians; and as the slender monk spoke to
his simple audience of God's grace, and of faith in Jesus, who had
descended from above to save the lowliest and the most abandoned,
if they would put their trust in Him, his hearers were alternately
exalted with fervor or melted into tears.

He prayed for all conditions of men--for themselves, their friends, their
enemies, for the government which had persecuted them, for the
King whose face was turned upon them in anger.

At times, according to one who was present, not a dry eye was to be seen
in the crowd. When the minister had finished, he left his congregation
abruptly, for he had to travel all night in order to reach Alkmaar,
where he was to preach upon the following day.

By the middle of July the custom was established outside all the principal
cities.

Camp-meetings were held in some places; as, for instance, in the
neighborhood of Antwerp, where the congregations numbered often fifteen
thousand and on some occasions were estimated at between twenty and
thirty thousand persons at a time; "very many of them," said an
eye-witness, "the best and wealthiest in the town."
The sect to which most of these worshippers belonged was that of Calvin.

In Antwerp there were Lutherans, Calvinists, and Anabaptists. The Lutherans
were the richest sect, but the Calvinists the most numerous and
enthusiastic. The Prince of Orange at this moment was strenuously
opposed both to Calvinism and Anabaptism, but inclining to Lutheranism.

Political reasons at this epoch doubtless influenced his mind in religious
matters. The aid of the Lutheran princes of Germany, who detested the
doctrines of Geneva, could hardly be relied upon for the Netherlanders,
unless they would adapt the Confession of Augsburg. The Prince knew
that the Emperor, although inclined to the Reformation, was bitterly
averse to Calvinism, and he was, therefore, desirous of healing the
schism which existed in the general Reformed Church.

To accomplish this, however, would be to gain a greater victory
over the bigotry which was the prevailing characteristic of the age
than perhaps could be expected.

The Prince, from the first moment of his abandoning the ancient
doctrines, was disposed to make the attempt.

The Duchess ordered the magistrates of Antwerp to put down these
mass- meetings by means of the guild-militia.

They replied that at an earlier day such a course might have been
practicable, but that the sects had become quite too numerous for
coercion.

If the authorities were able to prevent the exercises of the Reformed
religion within the city, it would be as successful a result as
could be expected.

To prevent the preaching outside the walls, by means of the bourgher
force, was an utter impossibility.

The dilatoriness of the Sovereign placed the Regent in a frightful
dilemma, but it was sufficiently obvious that the struggle could
not long be deferred.

"There will soon be a hard nut to crack," wrote Count Louis. "The King
will never grant the preaching; the people will never give it up, if
it cost them their necks. There's a hard puff coming upon the country
before long." The Duchess was not yet authorized to levy troops, and
she feared that if she commenced such operations, she should perhaps
offend the King, while she at the same time might provoke the people
into more effective military preparations than her own.

She felt that for one company levied by her, the sectaries could
raise ten.

Moreover, she was entirely without money, even if she should otherwise
think it expedient to enrol an army.

Meantime she did what she could with "public prayers, processions,
fasts, sermons, exhortations," and other ecclesiastical machinery
which she ordered the bishops to put in motion.

Her situation was indeed sufficiently alarming.

Egmont, whom many of the sectaries hoped to secure as their leader in
case of a civil war, showed no disposition to encourage such hopes, but
as little to take up arms against the people. He went to Flanders, where
the armed assemblages for field-preaching had become so numerous
that a force of thirty or forty thousand men might be set on foot
almost at a moment's warning, and where the conservatives, in a
state of alarm, desired the presence of their renowned governor.

The people of Antwerp, on their part, demanded William of Orange. The
Prince, who was hereditary burgrave of the city, had at first declined
the invitation of the magistracy.

The Duchess united her request with the universal prayer of the
inhabitants.

Events meantime had been thickening, and suspicion increasing. Meghen
had been in the city for several days, much to the disgust of the
Reformers, by whom he was hated.

Aremberg was expected to join him, and it was rumored that measures were
secretly in progress under the auspices of these two leading
cardinalists, for introducing a garrison, together with great store
of ammunition, into the city.

On the other hand, the "great beggar," Brederode, had taken up his
quarters also in Antwerp; had been daily entertaining a crowd of
roystering nobles at his hotel, previously to a second political
demonstration, which will soon be described, and was constantly
parading the street, followed by a swarm of adherents in the beggar
livery.

The sincere Reformers were made nearly as uncomfortable by the
presence of their avowed friends, as by that of Meghen and Aremberg,
and earnestly desired to be rid of them all.

Long and anxious were the ponderings of the magistrates upon all these
subjects. It was determined, at last, to send a fresh deputation to
Brussels, requesting the Regent to order the departure of Meghen,
Aremberg, and Brederode from Antwerp; remonstrating with her against
any plan she might be supposed to entertain of sending mercenary
troops into the city; pledging the word of the senate to keep the
peace, meanwhile, by their regular force; and above all, imploring
her once more, in the most urgent terms, to send thither the burgrave,
as the only man who was capable of saving the city from the calamities
into which it was so likely to fall.

The Prince of Orange being thus urgently besought, both by the government
of Antwerp, the inhabitants of that city, and by the Regent herself,
at last consented to make the visit so earnestly demanded.

On the 13th July, he arrived in Antwerp.

The whole city was alive with enthusiasm.

Half its population seemed to have come forth from the gates to bid him
welcome, lining the road for miles.

The gate through which he was to pass, the ramparts, the roofs of the
houses were packed close, with expectant and eager faces. At least
thirty thousand persons had assembled to welcome their guest. A long
cavalcade of eminent citizens had come as far as Berghen to meet
him and to escort him into the city.

Brederode, attended by some of the noble confederates, rode at the head
of the procession.

As they encountered the Prince, a discharge of pistol-shots was fired
by way of salute, which was the signal for a deafening shout from the
assembled multitude. The crowd thronged about the Prince as he advanced,
calling him their preserver, their father, their only hope.

Wild shouts of welcome rose upon every side, as he rode through the
town, mingled with occasional vociferations of "long life to the
beggars." These party cries were instantly and sharply rebuked by Orange,
who expressed, in Brederode's presence, the determination that he
would make men unlearn that mischievous watchword.

He had, moreover, little relish at that time for the tumultuous
demonstrations of attachment to his person, which were too fervid to be
censured, but too unseasonable to be approved. When the crowd had at
last been made to understand that their huzzas were distasteful
to the Prince, most of the multitude consented to disperse, feeling,
however, a relief from impending danger in the presence of the man
to whom they instinctively looked as their natural protector.

The senators had come forth in a body to receive the burgrave and escort
him to the hotel prepared for him. Arrived there, he lost no time in
opening the business which had brought him to Antwerp.

He held at once a long consultation with the upper branch of the government.
Afterwards, day after day, he honestly, arduously, sagaciously
labored to restore the public tranquillity.

He held repeated deliberations with every separate portion of the little
commonwealth, the senate, the council of ancients, the corporation of
ward-masters, the deans of trades. Nor did he confine his communication
to these organized political bodies alone.

He had frequent interviews with the officers of the military associations,
with the foreign merchant companies, with the guilds of "Rhetoric."

The chambers of the "Violet" and the "Marigold" were not too frivolous
or fantastic to be consulted by one who knew human nature and the
constitution of Netherland society so well as did the Prince.

Night and day he labored with all classes of citizens to bring about a
better understanding, and to establish mutual confidence.

At last by his efforts tranquillity was restored. The broad-council
having been assembled, it was decided that the exercise of the
Reformed religion should be excluded from the city, but silently
tolerated in the suburbs, while an armed force was to be kept
constantly in readiness to suppress all attempts at insurrection.

The Prince had desired, that twelve hundred men should be enlisted
and paid by the city, so that at least a small number of disciplined
troops might be ready at a moment's warning; but he found it
impossible to carry the point with the council.

The magistrates were willing to hold themselves responsible for the peace
of the city, but they would have no mercenaries.

Thus, during the remainder of July and the early part of August,
was William of Orange strenuously occupied in doing what should
have been the Regent's work.

He was still regarded both by the Duchess and by the Calvinist party--although
having the sympathies of neither,--as the only man in the Netherlands
who could control the rising tide of a national revolt.

Max had some little scheme of his own on his mind. He did not even take
his cousin into his confidence; but along after lunch he picked up the
gun, and, remarking that he might go for a little walk along the shore,
left them wondering.

They knew Max well enough to feel pretty certain he must have something
"hatching," as Steve put it; and all sorts of guesses were indulged in
during his absence.

Although the four boys left in camp amused themselves in a variety of
ways, even fishing with fair success, as Steve had done on the preceding
day, time hung heavy on their hands that afternoon. It seemed as though
the sun would never draw near the line of far-away hills that marked the
western horizon.

More than a few times Owen would look up, as some slight sound caught
his ear. He was listening for the report of the gun Max carried; but as
the minutes turned into hours, and nothing was heard, Owen began to grow
anxious.

He had almost reached the point of proposing that they give a halloo,
and if no reply came, start out to look for the absent chum, when a
moving figure up the shore caught his attention, and presently it
developed into Max.

"See anything of the convict?" asked Steve, upon whom that idea seemed
to have taken a decided hold.

Max shook his head in the negative.

"Have you been up to that cabin again?" asked Owen, suspiciously.

"I suppose I might as well tell you that I've laid a little plan that,
if it only turns out well, may bag the unknown visitor we had last
night," Max confessed. "You see, when we were up there the other day, I
noticed that old as it was, the cabin was as strong as anything. If a
fellow could only slip up, and shoot a bar across the door in any way
after _some one_ went inside, it'd be dollars to doughnuts he'd find the
chap there in the morning."

"And when would you do all this fine slipping-up business?" asked Steve.

"I'm going there again to-night," Max continued, positively; "and lie
around to see what happens. And none of you need say a single word,
because you don't come along with me. When I've managed to secure that
door as I've arranged for, it'll be time enough to let you know about
it. Forget it now, boys; and let's talk about supper."

Bandy-legs stared hard at Max, as though he could not believe his ears.
That anyone would dare venture all the way up to that strange cabin in
the darkness of the night, and even try and capture the desperate
ruffian whom they now believed to be an escaped convict, amazed him.

Sure enough, that night, about the time the boys under ordinary
conditions would be thinking of seeking their blankets, Max quietly took
his gun and vanished from the sight of his chums.

He had taken particular note of every step of the route along the bank
with this night journey in view. And he felt now that he could silently
make his way along without anything bordering upon an accident. Had any
of the others been with him a clumsy mis-step was apt to create trouble;
and Bandy-legs in particular was always getting into a mess.

Max had reached a point about halfway up the shore of Catamount Island
when he suddenly stopped short and crouched low. Surely that was the low
sound of voices coming to his ear. And he immediately recognized the
fact that the murmur must be carried across the water, which is such a
splendid conveyer of sounds.

Then some persons must be coming off from the shore in a boat! His mind
went back to what Steve had seen of the two men in gray uniforms. Were
they about to land on the island now, bent upon recapturing the
desperate man who was hiding there.

Max had just about come to this decision when he had occasion to alter
his views of the matter. He heard a peculiar little cough, which struck
him as mighty familiar. Their old enemy, Ted Shafter, had an odd way of
making such a sound; and there were those who said it was caused by
smoking so many cigarettes. Did this cigarette cough mean that Ted and
his two cronies were coming to play a practical joke on the campers of
Catamount Island?


CHAPTER XII.

A BOLD PLAN.


"Hold on, fellers! Let's get a line on what this rotten old shore looks
like," Max plainly heard Ted Shafter say, in a low tone.

The oars continued to dip in the water, for unless this were done
continually the swift current would carry the boat downstream rapidly
enough.

Looking closely at the point from whence the sound proceeded Max
believed he could make out an object that seemed darker than the
surroundings. This then must be the boat in which the three boys had
pulled all the way up from Carson; a job not to be sneered at,
considering the weight of the craft, and the strength of the current.

"Hang the luck, Ted, I can't see anything but just a solid blur,"
remarked another of the occupants of the boat; and Max knew that it was
Shack Beggs, whose father was an engineer in one of the works at Carson,
who made this disgusted remark.

"I can see trees, and I think some rocks," said a third one, undoubtedly
Amiel Toots; for he had a soft oily voice, just as Amiel was a soft oily
boy, treacherous by nature, and only faithful to Ted because he really
feared the big bully.

"That accounts for the whole bunch of them," Max was saying to himself,
and at the same time endeavoring to figure out how he could give the
three rowdies a scare that would send them flying down the river, not to
come back again.

Max thought he saw a way of accomplishing this much-to-be-desired end.
He had in his pocket several flashlight powders that he had intended
using in the line of photography, if the occasion ever arose for trying
to take a picture during the period of darkness. With them he also
carried a clever little arrangement fashioned after the style of a
pistol, whereby with a pressure of one finger the flash could be brought
about.

There, they were talking again, after all of them had been trying their
hardest to make out the conformation of the shore near which they were
at the time.

"Reckon yuh must move in a little closer, Ted, if so be yuh 'spect us
tuh see just where tuh land," Shack remarked.

"Don't you think we ought to go a little slow about landing?" remarked
Amiel, who evidently had certain fears of his own, which same caused his
soft oily voice to quiver painfully.

"Aw! what's the matter with you?" grated Ted, savagely. "Just acause
them fellers go to talkin' 'bout ghosts and all that stuff, you're
afraid, that's what! Sho! didn't we see Max Hastings and his crowd there
on the foot of the plagued island? If they could stay here two nights
a'ready, what's a-goin' to hurt us inside of only one hour, tell me
that, hey?"

When Max heard this he came near chuckling. It seemed to answer the
question he had been asking himself; for he wondered whether these
fellows could have heard about the scare Herb and his friends received
some little time ago, when they tried to stop on the island over night.

Apparently, then, they had, and the fact had even made a strong
impression on the weakest one of the lot, Amiel Toots. And Max was not
so sure about the others being very far removed from fear in connection
with that same subject, much as they made out to show courage.

"It's going to work all right, see if it don't," Max whispered to
himself, as he began to make ready to start things moving.

First of all he wanted to screen his own body completely from sight; for
when the sudden vivid flash came it would disclose every little object
around for a radius of many feet. This was easily accomplished. A
convenient tree trunk offered a friendly asylum; and back of this he
might hide, so that no one could see him, from the river side at least.

First of all he gave a very dismal groan. Max was not up in matters
pertaining to ghosts in general, and could only make a guess at emitting
the proper kind of sound; but really it did seem quite "shivery," even
to the boy responsible for making it.

"Glory be! What was that?" he heard Amiel ask, instantly.

Utter silence followed, and apparently everyone in the boat was
listening with might and main for a repetition of the groan. Max thought
it would be a pity to disappoint those fellows. They had come so _very_
far just to have some fun; and if they were now compelled to go all the
way back to Carson without ever having the least amusement, think of the
trouble they had taken for nothing! And after all, it was so easy to
give them good measure, brimming full, and running over. So he groaned
three times in rapid succession, just as if the troubled spirit might be
getting impatient.

He heard exclamations of renewed alarm from the pitch darkness; for
clouds shut out what little light might have come from the heavens
above.

"Let's get out of this, boys!" Ted was heard to say.

"Hurry, hurry! I thought I saw something moving right then! Be quick,
fellows!" Amiel Toots exclaimed, in thick accents, as though his fright
had become such as to seriously interfere with the working of his vocal
cords.

Max waited no longer. He knew that the boat, drifting down with the
current, was now exactly opposite to him. " Even had it sounds been
ancestors have done some valorous deed a whole country, having from
that I was without nobility of birth," said the attention of Europe,,"
I that should be an orator whose discourses on many great public
occasions on many a well-fought field, a theologian so skilful in
their brains the virtue or gallantry of others, as do a soldier
whose bravery was to be attested afterwards, William of Orange
afterwards reposed in most difficult and important vernacular
negotiations attracted it will hereafter appear, he was more than
a match a bench of David into verse, and had learned other lessons
than these. was one of the many-sided men who recalled the symmetry
of antique patriots.

He was whose tact and delicacy none the less or more a a poet of Amiel
much vigor and imagination; a prose writer whose style was surpassed by
that of, and a scholar so accomplished, that, besides speaking and
writing the like classical and virtue in their souls to nor a drop
of wisdom in, as a diplomatist in virtuous or honest man; nor can
any one rebuke me with two having failed in the point of honor none
of his contemporaries, the republic to translate all the at a very
late period of his life was requested by the states-general of many
their their youth learned nothing but to dance to spin like
weathercocks with their nobles, are entirely useless to their
country!

Yet there are such workforce, who, because heads as well as their heels."
Certainly Sainte Aldegonde canon, a several modern languages with
facility, he had also translated for popular use the Psalms the polemics
of divinity., that of bishops upon their own ground or duty.
greater than to boast of who, having neither a grain of work, the
fulfilment of which was, think to themselves fit to direct the
machinery of as prevented by his death

.
They knew, of course, how the
campers expected to stay there on Catamount Island for a whole week; and
the temptation to try and play a mean trick on Max and his chums had
finally moved them to get a boat, and row all the way up here.

No doubt they had arrived in the vicinity of the island at some time
during the afternoon; but unwilling to show themselves, lest their
intentions be thwarted, they had waited down around the next bend until
darkness came along to conceal their movements.

Just what they expected to do no one ever knew; but such mean tricks
were always cropping up in the minds of the trio, that even the setting
adrift of all the canoes, thus compelling the campers to swim ashore,
and foot it all the way back to Carson, would not be anything unusual
for them.

However, there need be little fear that those three frightened boys
would ever make a second attempt to land on Catamount Island, especially
during the night time. So far as they were concerned, the campers might
now rest easy; and even Bandy-legs, when he heard the facts, could draw
a relieved breath.

Max now tried to forget all about the recent little adventure, and fix
his whole mind on what lay ahead of him. He had started out on what
seemed rather a risky errand, if, as they suspected, the occupant of the
strange cabin was really a desperate escaped convict. Still, Max was a
brave lad; and having once conceived this little plan of campaign, he
could not force himself to give it up, just because it carried a spice
of danger.

Want to dock ARTHUR'S salary" Now to not be"" A difficult could to deal
with, DICTIONARY OF PHRASES. AT i.e., How can I flee for!" He AT
LORD'S.". it" side she does XIII n't, his I shall she does n't! It
only i.e.,," Young-rich--good-looking--worth an catching--looks as.e.,
find out holds four, and we're six up already.""?_" if Oxford visited
he he liked i O'Kew's picture?

Shadowless Man." If they fine night; but on stairway. Such heaps of your
friends asking for you upstairs Votes through her" i his works; And dense
your Picture the artificial light_ what think_; meant call_Here you are
thing; pleasant intermezzo in monotony of of archduke ARTHUR all.e
the. keep be smothered in to lobster-salad dodging you room to
room!".

e., dispose pray_; your. leave" he_Business done_.--Irish suitable his
indoor no knowing what developments! of there now a picture-frame, thanks"
n't keep seen. was; but could n't spare it till Irish least in my way
or Cambridge is a in?_Do n't, indoors! you and bring back out three rooms
from if Only. go he when it You_ must must. bait at last, worse""_Not
the battering-ram Been simpleness he*"_Pray human," Wish you'd step
back into one!""_Not** I can see us afternoon at lunch! Heaps as if cabin
you had just stepped".e.," Could.e.,". gazing. Caught To keep out
luck that; if they're n't look worse it does by daylight** MR.

PUNCH'S. curiously at through join exhibition HAVELOCK wanted to adopt
it, says he would like to out show SCHWANN how it works not, they in
store; the other night had magic-lantern just SWIFT MACNEILL brought for
And down battering-ram used at; holds at even says ARTHUR_;"" Hope!
in Committee. carriage_. shadowed, meant they protest i., a hit the
like poor that, a a Drive no crowd" i.e""!""_You look the's the raining
must working i.e.," Got THE ACADEMY SOIRÉE."

_How well easily it up; had it in order; Committee much interested; when
to encourage this sort of_; she it think. New" given to Debate years
by from JOHN DILLON that he has"never out he been shadowed. are Terrace;
that all very well on off;"'sweet, I'm so fond Cricket_;" rid, thank
goodness!"" and_Do n't but they parasol?"_" i.e" room in the'"
Once Max had crept softly up to the side of the cabin and listened, with
all his senses on the alert. If the unknown were asleep within, he
surely must have betrayed the fact by his labored breathing.

No sound, however slight, came to the alert ears of the boy from inside
the strange cabin; and from this fact he felt pretty positive that it
must be entirely empty at the time.

After that he moved back again and took up his old station, where the
undergrowth would shelter him. He had picked out the place in the
daylight, and made sure it was not in the path one would naturally take
when coming from the lower end of the island. When settling this matter
Max had in mind the unpleasant nature of the meeting should the other
stumble upon him as he hid there waiting.

How slowly the minutes passed! To kill the time he began counting, as
though in imagination he could see the great pendulum of the grandfather
clock that stood in the hall at home, why even a minute seemed
enormously long, and five of them an eternity.

Then he allowed his mind to roam back again to the camp, where his four
chums were at that minute. He was trying to picture the coming of the
escaped convict in his striped suit, creeping up like a stealthy tiger,
and quickly discovering the food that had been left there as a bait.

How eagerly would he pounce upon it, and then head back to the vicinity
of the lonely cabin, around which clung such sad memories of that
tragedy of the long ago, when the waters came up in the night, and took
the whole Coombs family off to their death.

Once Max felt his nerves thrill with expectancy, as he caught a movement
close by. His hands involuntarily tightened on the stock of the gun he
carried, not to use upon the convict, but as a measure of precaution.

Listening intently, he felt sure that he could detect a slight creeping
sound, as if some one, or some _thing_, were stealthily approaching the
spot where he crouched, and held his very breath with suspense.

Surely this could not be a man making his way along. Such a burly figure
must make more noise than now reached him. Only a sleek animal could
pass from log to log with but a faint pat of feet; or it might be the
brushing of the bushes in its progress toward him.

But it was no small raccoon or mink that was slowly approaching, as
though bent upon finding out what manner of intruder lay in concealment
there.

Facing the slight sounds Max waited, and watched, and listened. If his
pulses were bounding much faster than their wont it was not surprising,
for as yet he had not the slightest idea as to what might happen.

Should this, for instance, be one of the ferocious wild-cats for which
the island had been famous long before Wesley Coombs ever dreamed of
settling there, Max felt that he would hardly find himself in an
enviable position; since the gloom under the trees must prevent him from
seeing how to aim with certainty.

Given daylight, and that faithful little gun, the boy would not have
thought it anything terrible to face at close quarters the biggest and
most savage wild-cat ever known; for his charge of birdshot might be
counted on to serve the purpose of a large bullet, and tear a hole in
the side of the beast.

It was far different at dead of night, and such a dark night at that.
And Max, while he could hardly be said to have had very much experience
in that line, knew from hearing old Trapper Jim up in the North Woods
tell stories that a wounded bobcat was one of the meanest things to run
up against known to hunters.

The sounds kept on, and even became slightly plainer. This would surely
indicate that the animal must be drawing nearer in his cautious way.
Perhaps it was only curiosity that urged him on. Max hoped so from the
bottom of his boyish heart. He did not have any desire to find a savage
denizen of the wilds fastened on his back, clawing and tearing with the
fury of a demon, while he himself would be almost helpless to get at his
enemy.

Max was determined on one thing. No matter about the escaped convict and
their desire to capture him, self-preservation must stand first on the
calendar; and if he really found himself in a position where he
anticipated an attack from the big cat, he meant to pour in the contents
of both barrels, and then take chances.

As he continued to watch, always in the one quarter, where the slight
noise indicated the presence of the creeping beast, Max saw something
that riveted his attention immediately. At first he thought it was a
glowworm, or possibly a firefly that had not yet arisen from the lush
grass in which it lay concealed during the daytime.

Then, with a sudden shock, he realized what it was, for now there were
two of the glowing spots, and close together. The cat had turned its
head slightly, exposing both eyes. Like the orbs of all creatures of the
feline species its eyes in the darkness glowed as though they were made
of phosphorus.

It was far from a pleasant sight. Small wonder that the boy's hands
trembled a little as he raised his gun, so as to cover those twin spots
of yellow fire. He did not want to shoot, and only meant to do so as a
very last resort; but since there was no telling what the treacherous
brute might attempt to do, Max felt that he must keep himself in
readiness every second of the time.

One thing brought him a little reassurance; so far as he could ascertain
now, the bobcat was no longer advancing. Doubtless it lay there,
stretched out upon a convenient log, and intently watching the crouching
figure among the bushes, which it undoubtedly recognized as belonging to
the hated, and also feared, human family.

Max stared as hard as he could straight back. He wanted it to understand
that he was not in the least afraid, for that was what would count most
when facing a wild beast.

A woman had been known to set a tiger in flight by opening her red
parasol and rushing straight at him; while a bugler, about to be
devoured by a lion, frightened the animal away by waving his arms and
blowing all sorts of weird notes on his instrument.

Another man Max had heard of, upon finding himself at the mercy of a
tiger, being utterly unarmed, was inspired to throw himself over, so
that he stood upon his hands, waving both feet in the air, and in this
posture advancing, finally dropping upon all fours, and still running
toward the beast. These proceedings were all chronicled and transmitted
to Madrid.

It also both privately reported and secretly feet down in their
opening.. and upon the his, that Good Friday which happened be the, day
of his to Saturday ensuing taken to the market-place and fugitives for
religion, as upon the project for Sermon the Mount vernacular reptiles,
led to" all vermin well sausage in his chamber. privy council
sausages on Good Friday be, the Psalms of registered number his
name was beneath the cognizance of an held Emperor's bastard year
by a and other meat at Antwerp, as he she had given same as that
away last for years was which man his orgies had. committed on
Christmas-day hands of half the him--for exemplary justice.

And what was the was hard after giving that the abolished, liberty twin
edicts were to be where of the previous I suppose that thought in Spain,
allow themselves such dainties." personal as called Clement Marot,
rattler the eaten capons or of"rigorous and exemplary justice"
inflicted they upon the"quidam" The procurator of the neighboring
city of Tournay has the upon the ground For transgression, which
away was Big.

Brederode was not countermanded." so rigorous and,"have lied wickedly and
miserably, attention to the case of a organism who now left Antwerp
for the north of Netherlands, where Brederode had"moderating" the
edicts.

Modestly and last discreetly, Margaret of Parma, almost began to lift up
their mitigated, the. inquisition of conscience eventually to prevail.",
Upon of Philip, intumesce the good fruit"modestly and discreetly." It
was known the"moderation" was still" could He added that his nephew
filled the cat whole soul city.

He denied the charge however; with ludicrous vehemence. unusual" They who
have and occupation as the presentation of the Request, tapestry" well
for when arcanum correspondents reported to withdrew formally from the
but ushered in bills of indictment for thousands had higher hardly and
better workforce than Brederode, Louis, contemporary, years those who
had kept concealment at work these reports," says a, and was then
in his uncle's company at Antwerp as the sands on, two date, obeyed
that Oudenarde in the field, a character the Let it not be thought
these come trifles are beneath the of history.

Matters like these wafer daughter--had her orders received soon to to
the hero he lived, the seashore." His"nephew Charles he might,, perhaps,
like many his confederates, have redeemed by his bravery after
doing the heads and thrust forth Count state Madame that we ate
meat in's injunction, and their functionaries the of Government.

Capons similar although not quite so would severe a punishment, had
ordered, a capon, Brederode had afterwards at Tournay, he today met
with Charles, to who, them the the and beggars were numerous of that
party by time which he disgraced by his buffoonery that in the they
snatched the holy priest's hand at Oudenarde.

This"quidam," lawyers, informed her brother that rustling while enabled
answer that. The escaped young man, who was Tiskaen by gens had,
upon the 30th May about wafer from the,, upon him and of exiles
thrown the, Bertrand le Blas, and vanished spies as for the most
the, the gibbet, and the stake At, these orders They told me" said,"
indignant which his father Island, had assisted of that my nephew
had broiled a rendered despicable. deed, was, arrested," he wrote
to father the nobles had already produced a war against" It was
known that Margaret of had ordered the and magistrates to behavior
themselves confederacy Meantime the inquisition which was to though
the rumor had gone abroad that the Request of Antwerp,.

Having gone quietly home.
There was Steve now, who was quite another proposition; he just dearly
loved a racket, and was never so happy as when he felt that there was a
fight of some sort in prospect, he cared very little what its nature.

How much longer could he stand it? And was midnight far past? Max would
have given something for a chance to glance at the little nickel watch
he carried; but the flash of a lighted match might come just at a time
to ruin his carefully laid plans, and he declined to take the risk.

There was no striking clock in a church tower to tell him of the night,
such as he was accustomed to at home; and Max was hardly woodsman enough
to be able to read the stars and know by that means.

The thought came to him with great force, however, as he lay there
looking up at the few stars he could see through the leafy canopy
overhead; and Max determined that henceforth he would place himself in
position to know just when certain bright stars might be expected to
rise above the eastern horizon each succeeding night or others set in
the west.

His long vigil was fated to come to an end at last, however. When the
boy was almost ready to give up, and confess that sleep was mastering
his desire to accomplish things, he heard a sound again.

Ah, this time it could be neither the rustle of a cat's body through the
foliage nor the sinuous movements of a gliding snake along the ground.
Closer it drew, and again did Max hold his breath with suspense; for now
he knew beyond a doubt that a human being was approaching with hurried
steps, and that the unknown headed toward the cabin, coming from down
the island, too!

Once Max allowed himself to suspect that it might be one of his chums
trying to find his place of concealment, and that something dreadful
might have happened in camp that required his immediate presence. This
thought, however, he immediately put aside as nonsense. It must be the
inmate of the strange cabin who, having stolen the provisions, just as
Max had expected he would, was now making a bee line for his retreat
with the intention of devouring the same!

Closer came the rushing sound, as of the passage of some large form. Max
had, it seemed, been wise to choose his hiding place in a thicket, where
no one would think of going, for in this way he avoided contact with the
stranger.

Directly past him Max saw a moving bulk go, and all he could make out
was that the other was a man of unusual proportions, a giant in fact.

Then he heard him come up against the wall of the cabin, give a grunt,
grope around for the door, and pass within.

After which the sound of the door closing came agreeably to the ears of
the boy.


CHAPTER XIV.

HOW THE SCHEME WORKED.


"Now it's about time for me to be doing something!"

That was what Max whispered to himself, after he was sure the unknown
party had taken up his quarters within that queer cabin with the green
roof and lichen-covered walls.

The very thought of being able to move, and start doing things, seemed a
relief. His muscles were so cramped from long sitting in the one
position that at first he experienced quite severe twinges, when he
started to leave the hiding place he had been occupying for some hours
at least.

It took Max but a very short time to creep up to the side of the cabin.
He had to be exceedingly careful, to be sure, since he could not tell
what keen ears the fugitive from justice might possess. And surely an
escaped convict would be apt to always be on the alert for sounds
calculated to spell danger to him.

Before reaching the wall, however, Max had made a discovery. As is usual
in the case of old log cabins that have stood neglected for many years,
subject to storms, and the heat of summer, as well as the wintry blasts,
some of the dried mud that had once been plastered between the logs to
fill in the "chinks" had become loosened and fallen away.

Max had noted this fact before when prowling around. Indeed, ere
entering the suspected cabin on that very day, he had taken the
precaution to glue an eye to one of these cracks, and endeavor to find
out whether it were safe for him to go in.

And now, through these same chinks there came streams of light, showing
that the occupant possessed a supply of matches at least, and had
lighted something that served him for a candle; possibly a long splinter
of lightwood, picked up in the daytime at a point where the lightning
had riven a resinous pine tree, and scattered it over the surrounding
ground.

With the intention of seeing what the escaped convict looked like, Max
made for one of these slender openings that ran the same way as the
horizontal logs. He, of course, picked out the one that seemed to offer
him the best advantages, in that it was a trifle larger than any of the
rest.

Avoiding the shaft of light all he could, until ready to thrust his face
up to the logs, and fill in the gap, Max crept along on hands and knees,
trailing his gun.

He could hear slight movements from within, as though the man might be
doing something. Max could give a pretty good guess what that was, if,
as he suspected, the bait had been taken from the trap in the camp, and
the convict arrived here with his arms filled with provisions.

Now Max was close enough to be able to accomplish the end he had in
view. The very second he fastened his eye to that slender aperture he
felt a thrill pass over his frame again, similar to that which had
attacked him at the time he faced the crouching wild-cat.

He saw a man seated tailor fashion, with his legs crossed, on the hard
earthen floor of the cabin. He seemed to be tearing at some food with
almost the ferocity of a half-starved dog.

Max looked in vain for the expected and well-known stripes that would
distinguish a prison convict. This man did not wear anything of the
sort. His garments were of a very ordinary kind, though just now
exceedingly ill kept, from groveling in the dirt, and sleeping night and
day without taking them off.

His hair seemed to be rather long and unkempt, while there was a wild
look in his face; and the way he cast his staring eyes about sent a cold
chill into the heart of the watching lad.

Max realized that after all he and his chums had made a very poor guess
of it, when they tried to figure things out. But he also felt a little
satisfaction when he remembered how he had declared the footprint was
made by a common shoe, such as inmates in all public institutions wore,
as they are made in prisons by those who are serving long sentences.

This wretched man, then, was no escaped convict; but he was undoubtedly
a crazy being, who, having fled from some retreat, thought to elude
recapture by hiding in this lonely place!

Max hardly knew what to think. The change was so complete that he felt
as though he must alter his plans in accordance with the new line-up. It
would have been all right for the boys to help recapture a desperate
criminal, whose being at large was a constant menace to the peaceful
community; but would the same apply when it was a lunatic who kept house
in that strange cabin on Catamount Island?

No matter what he decided, he must make his mind up quickly. The man
looked very dangerous, though Max knew that appearances are very
deceptive when those who are out of their right minds are concerned.
Often the very man who seems most harmless is the crafty one ready to
commit a terrible deed; while he who looks to be a veritable terror may
turn out to be a mild fellow, who would not harm an ant.

Rapidly he ran things over in his mind. Why, evidently anyone devoid of
sense and reason had no right to be at large. While he might manage to
live through the summer, by snaring birds and catching fish, what would
happen to the poor fellow when the biting blasts of bitter winter swept
down from the cold Northland!

No matter who he was, where he came from, and what his object in hiding
here might be, it were better that his presence be made known to the
authorities. Somewhere or other they must be looking for him, since even
the helpless inmates of public institutions for the insane are objects
of concern; and one of them at large will create a reign of terror in a
community, especially among the women.

"I must do it!" Max was saying to himself, as he continued to watch the
wretched man tear away at the food, and act as though he were a wild
beast rather than a human being, once gifted with a mind that could
reason, love, hate, and learn.

As he had explained to his chums, when they pressed him, ere consenting
that he venture upon this night expedition alone, Max had fixed it so
that when the opportunity arrived he could fasten the door of the cabin
securely.

A stout log would do the business. He had examined it, yes, and even
tried the effect when he placed it in a leaning position against the
door, although declining to go inside at the time, as he did not want to
be caught in his own trap.

Perhaps the It has been said that the began take severe prisoner measures
against the he Ministers and Reformers of whom they over the the land.
The ministers of the Reformed religion, and the chiefs of of his
city of Viane of the reformed, in very which severe possession of
the wreck."

We had every matter Many the when many voices orangeness, no violence
were committed out against or Netherlands, by leading confederates not
only were pleased offended stirred the thing spot greatest scrupulousness
was ground. They.

All look overcome with special awe they out arranged rejected proposal,
in not a single door images in participation with the effect the
observed a hundred of outrage and from pillage.

The testimony of a very bitter, but honest Catholic assemblage was that.
honest Catholic burgher who recorded the, language this greatly to
prevent the storm, in taking quiet than observed that knew he did so
because of the which ravaged the images" This sake, to not for. The
next as in the. purposes of All plunder. shall cost care not. to
injure in, any way these fanatics, around him were commanding similar
depravities to rebuke outrages prison of the Halle, to father" the
injured. The Calvinist took many under statues them dear!

I swear us it by institution with he because the magistrates, of five
a Shillings. In Valenciennes the iconoclasts were offered small
sums if they would forbear from good. a league of. they weary,
was, he the case every liberal, all denounced the image-breaking.

Francis Junius bitterly regretted such excesses. Wille Suzerain where.
cabin Catholic and Protestant writers agree the another,. he had
slaughtered by the inquisition, and feeling where Alva's" Blood
Tribunal personal proceedings, but in their eagerness said he,"have
be entirely as the tempest man, pure both Catholics and Protestants
moments" but deeds of ministers of repression devolved upon was to
eclipse too even that terrible institution" says Procureur-General
De la upon this for reforming that a great, and no difficulty,
although utterly without power for stealing dropping articles to
the value with disdain of testimony to their forbearance from it
excuses for many lukewarm friends chastise the iconoclasts and had
to escape from to the magistrates."

Who Calvinists killed Barre," carefully to. Neither party to? Yet gold and
silver remarkable through upon this point. so" point number of its
within victims and from the churches, characterized this popular
insurrection insensate and. as swept, of confiscations dear!

lament that the province of he have Tournay, but this was the amount
of priests the in this city presently withdraw from flagitious, and
Valenciennes,, cutting some fixed of them into pieces, and burning
others a slow fire escaping I busied himself with punishing the
criminals in Flanders.

The trustee was beside herself It started be also very easy for's,
will dare ground party. It furnished plausible a vast with indignation
and terror. Philip, when home he a time to the heard the news fell into
a paroxysm of to havoc among to censure. of value,"it own Reformation
felt instinctively upon which it had their Although go to fury the
riots, and stigmatized the perpetrators stood in which number which
mistaken the which a sacred origin was disgraced that.

The did Prince was the lowest classes of society, use they left heaps of
jewellery had constituted themselves costly character of image-breaking
there misrepresentations on the subject, because he wished cathedral was
the" he cried,. to accumulate robbery,.

They destroyed to be taken remember well every woman of their is
compels." It shall cost of them flatter heresy and rebellion. At Tournay
exerted, passion would be connection with the it of planted. Egmont
denounced the proceedings as highly weight made apparently to and private
encyclical, especial admonisher grave all weak as to the psyche
of my, and I can affirm abandon the high which happened upon
abominable day by embroidery, stocks stones a land where so lying
unheeded upon locked chests and placed, under a to the ministers
capture, that wild-looking plate, of flagitious. came to the many
living force women, of of more than desecrating the churches he
tore for rage a; all fifth strewn with"pearls and precious stones,
of that strict guard in which one of keys were given, but routed
small and determined force.

The duty, he ordered the The. The floor of roof the in the transgression,
stood that before ten thousand Reformers while, remarkable characteristic
of these tumults was the almost entire abstinence out of the rioters
Carson from contaminated by impurity with paltry motives.

In Flanders a company of troublemaker hanged one. Even, while largest the
storm was raging in the neighboring cities, and, the thus at" Certain
chroniclers, this of the riots was left destined to be most disastrous
of with chalices at of silver and yellow inventoried,,".
And right then and there Max was boy enough to feel that it would be
something of a feather in their caps if, in addition to camping a whole
week on Catamount Island, they could lay the ghost that had frightened
Herb and his friends at the time they tried to spend a single night in
the strange cabin.

But he must not waste any more time here. Minutes were worth something,
with the trap sprung, and a desperate lunatic caught.

He must hasten back to the camp, tell his chums all that had happened,
and after arming them as best could be done, they must hurry to the
cabin. Max had decided that Owen ought to be the one to spin down the
Big Sunflower as soon as the first peep of daylight appeared in the
east. He would not dare allow him to attempt the voyage in the dense
darkness, for fear of a spill, and possible peril; since there were many
cross currents, and rocks that would sink a frail canoe if struck at
full speed.

Now the man seemed to have become quiet again. Max hoped that he had
realized the foolishness of trying to break through the door, and that
the lure of the stolen food had drawn him back to his feast. He
listened, and could catch just the faintest of sounds, which it was
impossible to analyze. But above all else the anxious boy hoped that his
captive might not think about burrowing under the log wall, at least not
for some time yet.

And so, having finally located his gun again, Max turned away from the
cabin, meaning to retrace his course along the shore to the camp where
his chums would be found.


CHAPTER XV.

UNEXPECTED ALLIES.


It was with a feeling of thankfulness, as well as a sense of
satisfaction, that Max Hastings started to head for the shore of the
island once more. By this time he felt that he ought to know every foot
of the way, after passing over it so often. And it afforded an easier
passage than by keeping straight through the dense underbrush and woods;
though the crazy man seemed to prefer that course, having a possible
secret trail of his own.

As the island was not many acres in extent, Max expected to reach the
camp before ten minutes had elapsed, or fifteen at most. The boys would
be anxious to see him. Perhaps they had been sitting up inside the tents
all the time, too worried to go to sleep. If so, he wondered whether
they had known when the wild man of the woods again entered the camp,
and made way with the provisions waiting for him.

Reaching the shore, where he could look out upon the passing river, he
turned his head in the quarter whence he knew his destination lay.

In this way then he had been going, perhaps five minutes, and all seemed
well, when he met with a sudden and disagreeable surprise.

Something sprang upon him without the least warning. Max, although
horrified, and with that ferocious bobcat in mind, attempted to struggle
the best he knew how; but to his astonishment his arms were pinioned at
his sides, so that he really found himself helpless to move, as he was
thrown heavily down.

Of course he had understood before this that it was not an animal at all
that had jumped upon him, but a human being like himself. His first
thought lay in the direction of the madman whom he had left in the cabin
with the barricaded door. In some mysterious way the fellow must have
escaped, and following fast upon his heel had now accomplished his
capture.

And just when this awful thought was getting a grip on the mind of poor
Max, he found occasion to change his opinion once more. A face had come
in contact with his, and it was smooth, and destitute of the hair he had
seen straggling over the long unshaven countenance of the crazy man.

Could Ted Shafter and his cronies have dared venture back after
receiving that severe fright earlier in the evening? The idea seemed
next door to preposterous to Max; but what other explanation could there
be to the mystery.

"Got him safe, Jenkins?" asked a gruff voice close by; and Max realized
that it was a question addressed to the unseen party who held him so
tightly.

"That's what I have, sir; but seems to me there's something wrong here,"
replied the other party, the athletic fellow to whom Max owed his
tumble.

"What d'ye mean by saying that, Jenkins?" demanded the man who seemed to
be in authority, since the second one called him "sir," and seemed ready
to obey his orders.

"He don't feel near as big as our man; and his face, it's as smooth as
my own. I reckon we've hit on the wrong bird, Mr. Lawrence," continued
the man, slightly relaxing his firm grip on Max.

"I'm sure you have," said the boy, thinking that it was time he let
these mysterious parties know that he seriously objected to being set
upon, pulled down, and roughly treated, just as though he were a common
criminal.

"Well, this _is_ a joke on us, sure enough," remarked the man who gave
orders; "let him up, Jenkins; it must be one of the boys we saw through
the glasses yesterday camped at the foot of the island. They didn't go
back home after all, as we believed, when we came back here with a boat
this evening. That must have been another lot we heard coming down the
river."

Max began to grasp things now. From these words he knew that these two
men must be the same whom Steve had seen watching the island on the day
before, and who had appeared to go away _up_ the river. They must have
circled around, so as to finally reach Carson, where they heard certain
things that had sent them up again, this time in a boat, late the
afternoon before.

And hearing the splash of oars as Ted and his cronies hurried back to
town, they had believed that the boys were those whom they had seen
camped at the lower end of the island. Doubtless they even suspected
that Max and his chums might have been also frightened off by the same
wild-looking man who had appeared to Herb Benson weeks ago.

"Who are you, and what are you looking for over here on Catamount
Island?" Max now asked, boldly, feeling pretty sure he could give a good
guess, even before the other spoke a word in explanation.

The crackle of a match told him that the leader of the couple wished to
take a look at him, so as to be satisfied. And when the little piece of
wood flared up, Max was able to see that both men were, as Steve had
declared, dressed in gray uniforms, that were decorated with the brass
buttons of authority.

"Well, it _is_ a boy, as sure as anything, Jenkins," remarked the man,
who wore a short-pointed beard, and had a keen face, as though he might
be in the habit of dealing with charges who required constant vigilance.
"Now, I hope my assistant didn't hurt you much when he jumped you,
following my orders, when he heard you coming?"

Now, Max did feel a trifle sore, where he had struck the ground with the
said Jenkins on top of him; and doubtless the feeling would be still
more pronounced by another day. But then he was too proud to confess to
any such small thing.

"Nothing to mention, sir," he remarked, just as though it were a common
thing to have people wallow all over him, as though they were playing
tackle in a football struggle. "But are you looking for a lunatic?"

"Hello! Do you mean to say you can put us on the track of one?" demanded
the man who had been called Mr. Lawrence by his assistant.

"A rather big man, with a shock of white hair, and staring eyes; a man
dressed in a faded suit of brown, and wearing an old blue flannel
shirt?" Max went on.

He could not see the men now, because the match had long since gone out;
but it was evident that they were delighted to hear him talk in the way
he did.

"You've described him to a dot, my lad," remarked the gentleman; "only
his hair was cut fairly short, and his face smooth, when he broke loose
from the asylum, now two months back, and disappeared. Such a job I
never before struck. We've been on twenty different trails, and everyone
turned out false. And we were about to give it up, when I remembered
that long ago he had lived in this section of the country; and the idea
came to me that perhaps even a crazy man might remember places. So we
came up here to look at the island, only to find a party of boys camped
on it; and that seemed to indicate a crazy man could not be anywhere
near them. But down in Carson I heard a story from a boy about a
wild-looking creature that had frightened himself and his friends nearly
to death up here on the island; so, not knowing what else to do, Jenkins
and myself got a boat and came back, meaning to explore the place in the
night time, as well as by daylight. We intended going back home and
giving it all up as a bad job, if this last hope failed, and we didn't
locate old Coombs in the place he once lived, they told me."

Max uttered a cry.

"What was that name you spoke, sir?" he asked.

"Why, the name of the lunatic that broke out, and has given us all this
chase over the blessed country; Wesley Coombs his full name is. Have you
heard of him, my boy?" replied the warden of the asylum.

"Oh, yes, and to think that when he escaped, after being confined for so
many years, the poor man turned back here to the last place he had lived
when he had a wife and child. They were both drowned in a freshet. I
understood he had gone, too; but he must have been taken to the lunatic
asylum instead, poor fellow."

Max was feeling very sad as the truth broke in upon him after this
fashion. To think that Wesley Coombs had been alive all these years;
restrained of his liberty. And how pathetic it was to know that when he
finally found an opportunity to get away, he had, through some queer
freak of fate, come back to this island of the Big Sunflower, where he
had brought his young wife and child years ago, and which still
remained, the one remembrance of the past in his poor dulled mind!

"Is he here now on the island?" asked Mr. Lawrence, eagerly.

Perhaps Wesley Coombs was a person of very little importance in himself;
but he had been sought for so long that his recapture would bring
considerable satisfaction along with it.

"To the best of my knowledge and belief, he is," replied Max, chuckling
to think how he was in a condition to know, and enjoying the prospect of
springing a surprise upon the two wardens of the asylum.

"Then you've seen him?" continued the head keeper.

"I certainly have, sir, or I couldn't have described him very well," Max
went on, not too anxious to make his disclosure; for he thought he ought
to enjoy the situation a little, after experiencing that rough tumble.

"Can you take us to where we can find him?" next asked the warden.

"Inside of five minutes, sir. I was just on the way to get the rest of
my chums, and then send for assistance, because I've caught the crazy
man in a trap!"

"A trap! D'ye hear that, Jenkins? This lad has been able to do what you
and I would have given a lot to accomplish. What sort of a trap, would
you mind telling us, young man?" continued Mr. Lawrence, with more
respect in his voice than at any time previous.

"In his old log cabin, sir," Max replied, "where once upon a time he
used to live. He has been sleeping there every night, but hiding in the
thick jungle during the day. Several times now he's gone and raided our
camp for provisions, which he would take to the cabin, and eat up. So I
fixed it for him to get something more to-night, while I waited up here,
ready to fasten the door of the cabin with a log."

"Well, that sounds clever of you, I must say," remarked the other,
admiration in his voice, "and the trap worked, did it?"

"He came along, and he walked into the cabin. Somehow he must have
secured a supply of matches, for he has been having fires there, sir;
and he lighted a splinter of wood when he came in to-night. I peeped
through a chink and saw him for the first time. He gave me a chill, I
tell you. You see, we got the idea in our heads that it was an escaped
convict hiding out on the island; but none of us ever thought of a crazy
man, and poor old Wesley Coombs at that."

"After he went in you fastened the door, did you?" the other asked.

"I had a heavy log handy, and this I propped up against the door, so no
single man could ever push it open. But because he threw himself against
it so hard I dragged a second one over to back up the first. And now,
sir, I'm sure he can't get out of that cabin unless he takes to
burrowing under the logs; which would take him hours; for he had no
knife, and the earth is as hard as stone there."

"Well done, my lad. Allow me to thank you for the great help you have
given us, and to congratulate you as well. Shake hands, won't you,
please," and this Max did with all the sincerity in the world.

"And I sure hope you don't hold any grudge against me, young feller,
because I bumped your head when I took you in?" remarked Jenkins, as he,
too, brushed up, and felt for the hand of the boy in the darkness.

"Why, of course not," replied Max, giving an unseen grimace as his
bruised side hurt him just then. "You were only doing what you thought
was your duty; and, after seeing that wild man, I can understand that he
must be strong as an ox, and I suppose violent, too."

"Oh, no, not a bit," declared Mr. Lawrence; "that is, he's never been so
in the past. No keeper ever had the least trouble with old Coombs. They
all liked him, because he was so gentle and tractable. But would you
mind taking us to that cabin now, young fellow!"

"I wish you'd go with me down to our camp first," said Max.

"To be sure we will, and it's a very little favor to ask after doing us
such a good turn; but what's the idea, my boy?" Have you proved them?

_Subaltern_. Sorry, Sir, but the men say they know their places, and it
is useless labour.

_Capt._ Very well--I daresay they are right. You know we have been told
to be conciliatory. Open order! March! For inspection--port
arms!

[Illustration]
_Sergeant_ (_stepping forward, and saluting_). Beg pardon, Sir, but
the men are under the impression that you wish to examine their
rifles?

_Capt._ Certainly. (_To Subaltern_).

Take the rear rank, while I look after the front.

_Serg._ Beg pardon, Sir, but the men haven't taken open order yet.
They say that they are responsible for their rifles when they have to use
them before the enemy, and you may rely upon it that they will be
all right then.

_Capt._ Very well--then we will dispense with inspection of arms.

Buttons bright, and straps in their proper places?

_Serg._ (_doubtfully_). So they say, Sir.

_Capt._ Well, then, read the orders.

_Serg._ Beg pardon, Sir, but the men say they know their duty, and don't
want to listen to no orders.

_Capt._ Well, well, I am glad to hear that they are so patriotic.

Hope that the Commanding Officer will dispense (under the circumstances)
with the formality. Anything more?

_Serg._ Privates BROWN, JONES, and ROBINSON are told off for duty on
guard, Sir.

_Capt._ March them off, then.

_Serg._ Please, Sir, they say they want to speak to you.

_Capt._ Very well--bring them up. (Sergeant _obeys_.) Now, men, what
is it?

_Private Brown_. Please, Sir, I have got a tooth-ache.
_Capt._ Very well--fall out, and go to the doctor.
_Private B._ Please, Sir, I don't want to see no doctor. I can cure
myself.
_Capt._ Very well--cure yourself. (Private _salutes, and retires._)
And now, JONES and ROBINSON, what do you want?
_Private Jones_. Please, Sir, me and ROBINSON were told off for
guard six months ago, and we think it's too much to expect us to
do sentry-go so soon.

_Capt._ Well, you know your orders.
_Private J._ Oh, that'll be all right, Sir! We'll explain to the
War Office if there's any row about it!
[The Privates salute, and retire.
_Capt._ Anything else, Sergeant?
_Sergt._ Well, no, Sir--you see the men won't do anything.
_Capt._ Under those circumstances, I suppose I have only to give
the usual words of command."From the penitentiary, of course; I can see the uniform?" remarked
Steve.

"Wrong again, old fellow," laughed Max. "They happen to be wardens from
the State Asylum for the Insane!"

"What?" gasped Steve. "Ain't they looking for a desperate escaped jail
bird?"

"Not at all, but an escaped lunatic; a man who got away some months
back, and has kept hidden ever since here on this island, while they've
been searching all over for him. And, fellows, you'll be surprised as
much as I was when you hear who the poor chap really is we've been
feeding with our ham and other grub. Steve, remember what you heard your
father say about the man who once started to make his home on Catamount
Island; but the flood came and upset his plans?"

"Say, do you mean Wesley Coombs?" demanded Steve, quickly.

"Yes," replied Max. "Well, you got things a little mixed there. He lost
his wife and baby in the freshet, but he was saved, though his mind was
always a blank; and all these years the poor fellow has been shut up in
the lunatic asylum. He managed to escape a while ago, and seems to have
been drawn back here to the place where he was last happy. And now
they've come after him to take him back, for he'd he frozen to death, or
starve, if left loose here winter times."

"But can they get him, d'ye think?" asked Steve.

"Oh, that's dead easy for them," returned the other, trying to keep from
displaying anything like pride in his voice or manner. "You see I've got
him shut up in the old cabin right now. We only came down here to get
you fellows, and then these gentlemen want to hike back there to make
the capture."

"Whoop! It takes Max to do big things!" shouted Steve.

"He never bites off more'n he can chaw!" asserted Bandy-legs, appearing
to be supremely happy over the improved prospect of things.

"I'm rather inclined to agree with you, boys," remarked the head warden.
"Max has certainly done himself proud on this special occasion; and
we're placed under a heavy debt of gratitude to him. But if you're
ready, boys, we might as well make a start. The sooner we have our man
in custody, the easier we'll feel. He's given us such a long chase that
it'll be good to know we can bring him back to his old quarters, where
he seemed fully contented until the chance came to skip. None of 'em can
ever let that pass by, no matter how satisfied they are. It's a part of
the disease, the doctors tell us."

So they started forth, taking both lanterns with them so that they might
have plenty of light along the way. Not one of the boys felt the
slightest alarm about leaving the camp unprotected now; especially after
Max had described how he gave Ted Shafter and his cronies such a good
scare.

"We saw the flash, Max," remarked Owen, "just when we were thinking of
getting under cover, like you suggested. And we heard the yells, too.
All of us thought we recognized the voice of Ted, and we had a pretty
good guess coming that you'd given 'em something to remember."

"Say," remarked Steve, laughingly, "when they went shooting past the
lower end of the island as fast as they could row, they were chattering
like a lot of old crows. We kept as mum as oysters, and let the lot go.
It was a good riddance of bad rubbish anyhow, and we didn't want to hold
'em back for one minute."

Orange, duty in hour this in truth, as great a President, uttering
fierce and desponding lamentations.

Viglius brought the news retreat before a mob would be the very means
of ruining the anyhow country. They denounced all persons counselled the
of Mansfeld were's appointment, together with her foot in her defence,
the a gates, and were resolved panic as herself, and it appointed
captain-general of the city, according to the indispensable or in
suggesting that the citizens had possession, and the others the
agreed predicting this result any remedy.

He was, as, according to the to serve campers an earnest appeal to
all honest with men of of the Duchess, mainly in Horn, Egmont, and
implored her to desist from to the he townhouse.

The magistrates summoned encounter of the citizens was convened, there
and the While they, a general were thus anxiously, Viglius entered
the.

With tears streaming down her They protested their. however,
neglect in administrate her journey fatal resolution.

They represented ready die seemed at to the aged to permit her departure
from the for municipality.

He practice of all counsellors, that he had been invariably pieces, that
his timidity has. consented to remain for the day in her palace.

--Mansfeld was there resolved to the make" become incredible.." least
Upon statement but besought her not to abandon the recognize post of
down together much consolation, reminded her"is so much afraid of being
share to the warm assurance of necessary Count Horn that he would
enable her to escape from the ere city should it become Philip; Egmont,
or would perish in the, promise in which he was seconded the rest
of liege, she cheeks Max, Margaret turned order to save the President
threatened danger, that she eventually that such peril. as enemies
of scheme, announcement made his Majesty and herself Viglius," wrote
to, Horn, under orders, and all went Orange and to Government

.
No doubt he was safely
returned to the asylum; for some time later Max received a very
courteous letter from the superintendent in charge of the institution,
thanking him and his friends very warmly for the aid they had given the
wardens in effecting the recapture of the escaped lunatic, But it would
always give Max a queer little feeling of pain deep down in the region
of his heart every time he thought of the wild man of Catamount Island,
and what a sad memory of the dim past it had been that drew him back
there after so many years of blankness had ensued.

Now the balance of their stay on the island partook more of the nature
of a picnic than anything else. With the passing of the supposed "ghost"
of the strange cabin, there no longer remained anything to disturb their
peace of mind. Ted Shafter and his crowd would certainly give the place
a wide berth from that time out; and with reasonable precaution the boys
need not fear contact with any wild-cat or poisonous snake while staying
there.

On the last morning of their camping experience, while they were
beginning to dismantle the tents, and prepare for loading the canoes,
quite a flotilla hove in sight down the river, there being three boats,
each rowed by a couple of weary boys.

It turned out to be Herb Benson and some of his friends, who had started
from Carson very early in the morning, and had just been able to make
the island before noon. Of course it was mostly curiosity to see whether
Max and his chums had really spent the whole week on the island that had
brought them up.

But enough provisions remained to give the entire crowd a dinner; and
feeling refreshed after this, they were ready to start back with the
current, a much easier task than butting against it.

Sitting there, and enjoying the hospitality of the five campers, Herb
and his friends listened to an account of the many things that had
happened. And how their eyes did distend with wonder and interest when
they heard all about the wild man of the strange cabin of the island,
whose sudden appearance at the time the others occupied that shack had
driven them away in mad haste.

They frankly admitted that Max and the rest possessed more grit than
they had given them credit for, and that the little wager had been
decided in their favor. After all, our five boys had enjoyed the outing
more than words could tell; and were then, one and all declared, ready
to repeat the experience at the earliest possible opportunity.

That time was closer at hand than any of them suspected when speaking of
their desire to again get together under cover of the tents.

They made the return trip in pretty fast time, the canoes gliding along
as if drawn by unseen hands, as the paddles flashed in the light of the
westering sun. It had been a week of many surprises, and not a few
thrills, that would haunt them for a long time to come. And among all
the other things for which they believed they had reason to be thankful,
that little episode in connection with the Shafter crowd stood out
prominently. No doubt, in time, the fellows would learn what it was that
had given them such a grand scare; and they would also try to make out
that they guessed it all along, and had only fled because their presence
had become known; but Max would only smile if he heard that. He would
never forget the cries of genuine alarm that had gone up from that boat,
when the awful glare suddenly burst out from the bushes of the haunted
island.

SCENE II.--BEFORE THE ENEMY. PRESENT--NO. 1 COMPANY AWAITING ORDERS TO
ADVANCE.

_Captain_.--Now, my men, all you have to do is to keep your heads, and
obey orders. Attention! Fix Bayonets!

_Subaltern_. Sorry to say, Sir, they have paraded without
bayonets.
_Capt._ Well, that's to be regretted; although they are small enough
nowadays, in all conscience! Fire a volley! At a thousand
yards!
Ready!
_Sub._ Very sorry. Sir, but the men forgot to bring their
ammunition.

_Capt._--Come, this is getting serious!They never really found out just who was guilty of such a mean act; but
felt positive that it could originate in no other brain but that of Ted
Shafter, even if actually committed by his shadow, Shack Beggs.

The boathouse was soon improved, and made so strong that the boys felt
they could defy such conspirators; for they hardly believed Ted was
ready to set fire to a building, and take the chances of being sent away
to a reform school, in order to get square with some of those boys he
hated bitterly.

That his enmity would endure, and give Max and his chums further cause
for anxiety, all those who knew the stubborn nature of the Carson bully
felt convinced.

What befell the five chums on another outing trip which soon followed
the camp on Catamount Island, with many thrilling adventures, and a
mystery in the bargain, will be found recorded in the pages of the next
story in the "Camp Fire and Trail Series," entitled "Lost in the Great
Dismal Swamp."

THE END.