Produced by Anthony Matonac


TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT

or

Uncle Sam's Mastery of the Sky


by

Victor Appleton


CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I  A SKY RIDE
    II  A NEW IDEA
   III  THE BIG OFFER
    IV  MR. DAMON'S WHIZZER
     V  TOM'S PROJECT
    VI  MAKING PLANS
   VII  A PROBLEM IN SOUND
  VIII  THROUGH THE ROOF
    IX  AFTER A SPY
     X  A BIG SPLASH
    XI  A NIGHT TRIP
   XII  THE CRY FOR HELP
  XIII  SOMETHING QUEER
   XIV  THE TELEPHONE CALL
    XV  A VAIN SEARCH
   XVI  THE LONG NIGHT
  XVII  SILENT SAM
 XVIII  SUSPICIONS
   XIX  ANOTHER FLIGHT
    XX  QUEER MARKS
   XXI  THE DESERTED CABIN
  XXII  CLEWS AT LAST
 XXIII  THE GOVERNMENT TEST
  XXIV  IN THE MOONLIGHT
   XXV  THE GOLD TOOTH


TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT


CHAPTER I

A SKY RIDE


"Oh Tom, is it really safe?"

A young lady--an exceedingly pretty young lady, she could be
called--stood with one small, gloved hand on the outstretched wing of
an aeroplane, and looked up at a young man, attired in a leather,
fur-lined suit, who sat in the cockpit of the machine just above her.

"Safe, Mary?" repeated the pilot, as he reached in under the hood of
the craft to make sure about one of the controls. "Why, you ought to
know by this time that I wouldn't go up if it wasn't safe!"

"Oh, yes, I know, Tom. It may be all right for you, but I've never been
up in this kind of airship before, and I want to know if it's safe for
me."

The young man leaned over the edge of the padded cockpit, and clasped
in his rather grimy hand the neatly gloved one of the young lady. And
though the glove was new, and fitted the hand perfectly, there was no
attempt to withdraw it. Instead, the young lady seemed to be very glad
indeed that her hand was in such safe keeping.

"Mary!" exclaimed the young man, "if it wasn't safe--as safe as a
church--I wouldn't dream of taking you up!" and at the mention of
"church" Mary Nestor blushed just the least bit. Or perhaps it was that
the prospective excitement of the moment caused the blood to surge into
her cheeks. Have it as you will.

"Come, Mary! you're not going to back out the last minute, are you?"
asked Tom Swift. "Everything is all right. I've made a trial flight,
and you've seen me come down as safely as a bird.  You promised to go
up with me. I won't go very high if you don't like it, but my
experience has been that, once you're off the ground, it doesn't make
any difference how high you go. You'll find it very fascinating. So
skip along to the house, and Mrs. Baggert will help you get into your
togs."

"Shall I have to wear all those things--such as you have on?" asked
Mary, blushing again.

"Well, you'll be more comfortable in a fur-lined leather suit,"
asserted Tom. "And if it does make you look like an Eskimo, why I'm
sure it will be very becoming. Not that you don't look nice now," he
hastened to assure Miss Nestor, "but an aviation suit will be
very--well, fetching, I should say."

"If I could be sure it would 'fetch' me back safe, Tom--"

"That'll do! That'll do!" laughed the young aviator. "One joke like
that is enough in a morning. It was pretty good, though. Now go on in
and tog up."

"You're sure it's safe, Tom?"

"Positive! Trot along now. I want to fix a wire and--"

"Oh, is anything broken?" and the girl, who had started away from the
aeroplane, turned back again.

"No, not broken. It's only a little auxiliary dingus I put on to make
it easier to read the barograph, but I think I'll go back to the old
system. Nothing to do with flying at all, except to tell how high up
one is."

"That's just what I don't care to know, Tom," said Mary Nestor, with a
smile. "If I could imagine I was sailing along only about ten feet in
the air I wouldn't mind so much."

"Flying at that height would be the worst sort of danger. You leave it
to me, Mary. I won't take you up above the clouds on this sky ride;
though, later, I'm sure you'll want to try that.  This is only a little
flight. You've been promising long enough to take a trip with me, and
now I believe you're trying to back out."

"No, really I'm not, Tom! Only, at the last minute, the machine looks
so small and frail, and the sky is so--big--"

She glanced up and seemed to shiver just a trifle.

"Don't be thinking of those things, Mary!" laughed Tom Swift.  "Trot
along and get ready. The motor never worked better, and we may break a
few speed records this morning. No traffic cops to stop us, either, as
there might be if we were in an auto."

"There you go, Mary!" exclaimed Tom, as if struck with a new thought.
"You've ridden in an auto with me many a time, and you never were a bit
afraid, though we were in more danger than we'll be this morning."

"Danger, Tom, in an auto? How?"

"Why, danger of a wheel collapsing as we were going full speed; or the
steering knuckle breaking and sending us into a tree; danger of running
into a stone wall or a ditch; danger of some one running into us, or of
us running into some one else. There isn't one of these dangers on a
sky ride."

"No," said Mary slowly. "But there's the danger of falling."

"One against twenty. That's the safety margin. And, if we do fall, it
will be like landing in a feather bed! There, don't wait any longer. Go
and get ready."

Mary sighed, and then, seeming to summon her nerve to her aid, she
smiled brightly, waved her hand to Tom, and hastened toward his home,
where Mrs. Baggert the matronly housekeeper, was waiting to help the
girl attire herself in a flying-suit of leather.

Mary Nestor, who had a very warm place in the heart of Tom Swift, had,
as he stated, some time since promised to take a trip in the air with
the young inventor. But she had kept putting it off, for one reason or
another, until Tom began to despair of ever getting her to accompany
him. To-day, however, when she had called to inquire about his father,
who had been slightly ill, Tom had, after the social visit, insisted on
the promise being kept.

He had his mechanic get out one of the safest, though a speedy, double
machine, and, with Mary to watch, Tom had taken a trial flight, just to
show her how easy it was. It was not the first time she had seen him
take to the air, but now she watched with different emotions, for she
was vitally interested.

Tom had sailed down from aloft, making a landing in the aviation field
he had constructed near his home, and then he had insisted that Mary
should keep her promise to take a sky ride with him.

"Don't be too long now!" called Tom to the girl, as she hurried toward
the house. "Never mind about your hair, or whether your hat's on
straight. You're going to wear a cap, anyhow, and tuck your hair up
under that. It's hot down here, but it will be cold up above; so tell
Mrs. Baggert to see that you're warmly dressed."

"All right," and gaily she waved her hand to him. Now that she had made
her decision, and was really going up, she was not half so frightened
as she had been in the contemplation of it.

As Tom climbed out of the machine, to give it a careful inspection,
though he was certain there was nothing wrong, an aged colored man
shuffled toward him.

"Yo'--yo'll be mighty careful ob Miss Nestor now, won't yo', Massa
Tom?" asked the man.

"Of course I will, Eradicate," was the young inventor's answer.

"Case we ain't got many laik her no mo', an' dat's de truf, Massa Tom,"
went on the old man. "So be mighty careful laik!"

"That's what I will, Rad! And, while I'm up in the air, don't you and
Koku have any trouble."

"Ho! Trouble wif dat onery no-'count giant! I guess not!" and the
colored man limped off, highly indignant.

Satisfied, from an inspection of his machine, that it was as nearly
mechanically perfect as it was possible to be, Tom Swift finished his
trip around it and stood near the big propeller, waiting for Mary
Nestor to reappear. Presently she did so, and Tom gaily waved his hand
to her.

"You're a picture!" he cried, as he saw how particularly "fetching" she
looked in the aviator's costume which was like his own. Because of the
danger of entanglement, Miss Nestor had doffed her skirts, and wore the
costume of all aviators--men and women.

"I wish I had my camera!" cried Tom. "You look--stunning!"

"I hope that isn't any comment on how I'm going to feel if we have to
make a--forced landing, I believe you call it," she retorted.

"Oh, I'll take care of that!" exclaimed Tom. "Now up you go, and we'll
start," and he helped her to climb into the padded seat of the cockpit,
behind where he was to sit.

"Oh, Tom! Don't be in such a hurry!" expostulated Mary. "Let me get my
breath!"

"No!" laughed the young inventor. "If I did you might back out.  Get
in, fasten the strap around you and sit still. That's all you have to
do. Don't be afraid, I'll be very careful. And don't try to yell at me
to go slower or lower once we're up in the air.

"Why not?" Mary wanted to know, as she settled herself in her seat.

"Because I can't very well bear you, or talk to you. The motor makes so
much noise, you know. We can do a little talking through this speaking
tube," and he indicated one, "but it isn't very satisfactory. So if you
have anything to say--"

"In the language of the poets," interrupted Mary, "if I have words to
spill, prepare to spill them now. Well, I haven't! Now I'm here, go
ahead! I shall probably be too frightened to talk, anyhow."

"Oh, no you won't--after the first little sensation," Tom assured her.
"You'll be crazy about it.  Come on, Jackson!" he called to the
mechanician. "Start the ball rolling!"

Tom was in his place, his goggles and cap well down over his face, and
he was adjusting the switch as the mechanic prepared to spin the
propellers.

Suddenly a man came running from the Swift house, waving his arms not
unlike the blades of an aircraft propeller, he also shouted, but Tom,
whose ears were covered with his fur cap, could not hear. However,
Jackson did, and stopped whirling the blades, turning about to see what
was wanted.

"Why, it's Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom, as he caught sight of the excited
man. "Hello, what's the matter?" the youth asked, pulling aside one
flap of his head-covering so he might hear the answer.

"Tom! Wait a minute! Bless my mouse trap!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "I want
to speak to you!" He was panting from his run across the field. "I just
got to your house--saw your father--he said you were going up with Miss
Nestor, but--bless my dog biscuit--"

"Can't stop now, Mr. Damon!" answered Tom, with a laugh. "I have only
just succeeded, by hard work, in getting Mary to a point where she has
consented to take a sky ride. If I stop now she'll back out and I'll
never get her in again. See you when I come back," and Tom pulled the
covering over his ear once more.

"But, Tom, bless my shoe laces! This is important!"

"So's this!" answered Tom, with a grin. He saw, by the motion of Mr.
Damon's lips, what the latter had said.

Around swung the propeller blades. The gasoline vapor in the cylinders
was being compressed.

"Contact!" called Tom sharply, as he pressed the switch to give the
igniting spark at the proper moment. The mechanic had stepped back out
of the way, in case there should be a premature starting of the
powerful engine, in which event the blades would have cut him to pieces.

"Wait, Tom! Wait! This is very important! Bless my collar button, Tom
Swift, but this is--"

Bang! Bang! Bang!

With a series of explosions, like those of a machine gun, the motor
started, and further talk was out of the question. Tom turned on more
gas. The propellers became almost invisible blades of light and shadow,
and the aeroplane began moving over the grassy field. The mechanic had
sprung out of the way, pulling Mr. Damon with him.

"Come back! Come back! Wait a minute, Tom Swift! Bless my pansy
blossoms, I want to tell you something!" cried the little man.

But Tom Swift was away and out of hearing. He had started on his sky
ride with Mary Nestor.


CHAPTER II

A NEW IDEA


Any one who has taken a flight in an aeroplane or gone up in a balloon,
will know exactly how Mary Nestor felt on this, her first sky ride of
any distance. For a moment, as she looked over the side of the machine,
she had a distinct impression, not that she was going up, but that some
one had pulled the earth down from beneath her and, at the same time,
given her a shove off into space. Such is the first sensation of going
aloft. Then the rush of air all about her, the slightly swaying motion
of the craft, and the vibration caused by the motor took her attention.
But the sensation of the earth dropping away from beneath her remained
with Mary for some time.

This sensation is much greater in a balloon than in an aeroplane, for a
balloon, unless there is a strong wind blowing, goes straight up, while
an aeroplane ascends on a long slant, and always into the teeth of the
wind, to take advantage of its lifting power on the underside of the
planes. The reason for this sensation--that of the earth's dropping
down, instead of one's feeling, what really happens, that one is
ascending--is because there are no objects by which comparison can be
made. If one starts off on the earth's surface at slow, or at great
speed, one passes stationary objects--houses, posts, trees, and the
like--and judges the speed by the rapidity with which these are left
behind.

Going up is unlike this. There is nothing to pass. One simply cleaves
the air, and only as it rushes past can one be sure of movement. And as
the air is void of color and form, there is no sensation of passing
anything.

So Mary Nestor, as she shot into the air with Tom Swift, had a
sensation as though the earth were dropping from beneath her. For a
moment she felt as though she were in some vast void--floating in
space--and she had a great fear. Then she calmed herself. She looked at
Tom sitting in front of her. Of course, all she could see was his back,
but it looked to be a very sturdy back, indeed, and he sat there in the
aircraft as calmly as though in a chair on the ground. Then Mary took
courage, and ceased to grasp the sides of the cockpit with a grip that
stiffened all her muscles.  She was beginning to "find herself."

On and on, and up and up, went Mary and Tom, in this the girl's first
big sky ride. The earth below seemed farther and farther away. The
wide, green fields became little emerald squares, and the houses like
those in a toy Noah's ark.

Down below, Mr. Wakefield Damon, who had hurried over from his home in
Waterfield to see Tom Swift, gazed aloft at the fast disappearing
aeroplane and its passengers.

"Bless my coal bin!" cried the eccentric man, "but Tom is in a hurry
this morning. Too bad he couldn't have stopped and spoken to me. It
might have been greatly to his advantage. But I suppose I shall have to
wait."

"You want to see Master?" asked a voice behind Mr. Damon, and, turning,
he beheld a veritable giant.

"Yes, Koku, I did," Mr. Damon answered, and he did not appear at all
surprised at the sight of the towering form beside him. "I wanted to
see Tom most particularly. But I shall have to wait.  I'll go in and
talk to Mr. Swift."

"Yaas, an' I go talk to Radicate," said the giant. "Him diggin' up
ground where Master told me to make garden. Radicate not strong enough
for dat!"

"Huh! there's trouble as soon as those two get to disputing," mused Mr.
Damon, as he went toward the house.

Meanwhile, Mary was beginning to enjoy herself. The sensation of moving
rapidly through the air in a machine as skillfully guided as was the
one piloted by Tom Swift was delightful. Up and up they went, and then
suddenly Mary felt a lurch, and the plane, which was now about a
thousand feet high, seemed to slip to one side.

Mary screamed, and began reaching for the buckle of the safety belt
that fastened her to her seat. She saw that something unusual had
occurred, for Tom was working frantically at the mechanism in front of
him.

But, in spite of this, he seemed aware that Mary was in danger, not so
much, perhaps, from what might happen to the machine, as what she might
do in her terror.

"Oh! Oh!" cried the girl, and Tom heard her above the terrific noise of
the motor, for she was speaking with her lips close to the tube that
served as a sort of inter-communicating telephone for the craft. "Oh,
we are falling! I'm going to jump!"

"Sit still! Sit still for your life!" cried Tom Swift. "I'll save you
all right! Only sit still! Don't jump!"

Mary, her red cheeks white, sank back, and the young inventor redoubled
his efforts at the controls and other mechanisms.

And that Tom was perfectly qualified to make a safe landing, even with
engine trouble, Mary Nestor well knew. Those of you who have read the
previous books of this series know it also, but, for the benefit of my
new readers, I shall state that this was by no means Tom's first ride
in an aeroplane.

He had operated and built gasoline engines ever since he was about
sixteen years old. As related in the initial volume of this series,
entitled, "Tom Swift and His Motorcycle," he became possessed of this
machine after it had started to climb a tree with Mr. Damon on board.
After that experience the eccentric man--blessing everything he could
think of--had no liking for the speedy motorcycle and sold it to Tom at
a low price.

That was the beginning of a friendship between the two, and also
started Tom on his career as an inventor and a possessor of many
gasoline craft. For he was not content with merely riding the repaired
motorcycle. He made improvements on it.

Tom lived with his father in the town of Shopton, their home being
looked after, since the death of Mrs. Swift, by Mrs. Baggert. Mr.
Wakefield Damon lived in the neighboring town of Waterfield, and spent
much time at Tom's home, often going on trips with him in various
vehicles of the land, sea or air.

As related in the various volumes of this series, Tom was not content
to remain on earth. He built a speedy motor boat, and then secured an
airship, following that with a submarine. He also made an electric
runabout that was the speediest car on the road.  Sending wireless
messages, having thrilling experiences among the diamond makers,
journeying to the caves of ice, and making perilous trips in his sky
racer took up part of the young inventor's time.

With his electric rifle he did some wonderful shooting, and in the
"City of Gold" made some strange discoveries, part of the fortune he
secured enabling him to build his sky racer. It was in a land of giants
that Tom was made captive, but he succeeded in escaping, and brought
two giants, of whom Koku was one, away with him.

Following this achievement Tom invented a wizard camera and a great
searchlight, which, with his giant cannon, was purchased by the United
States Government. Work on his photo-telephone and his aerial warship,
the problem of digging a big tunnel, and then traveling to the land of
wonders, kept Tom Swift very busy, and he had just completed a
wonderful piece of work when the present story opens.

This last achievement was the perfecting of a machine to aid in the
great World War and you will find the details set down in the volume
which immediately precedes this. "Tom Swift and His War Tank," it is
called, and in that is related how he not only invented a marvelous
machine, but succeeded in keeping its secret from the plotters who
tried to take it from him. In this Tom was helped by the inspiration of
Mary Nestor, whom he hoped some day to marry, and by Ned Newton, a
chum, who, though no inventor himself, could admire one.

Ned and Tom had been chums a long while, but Ned inclined more to
financial and office matters than to machinery. At times he had managed
affairs for Tom, and helped him finance projects. Ned was now an
important bank official, and since the United States had entered the
war had had charge of some Red Cross work, as well as Liberty Bond
campaigns.

Somehow, as she sat there in the craft which seemed disabled, Mary
Nestor could not help thinking of Tom's many activities, in some of
which she had shared.

"Oh, if he falls now, and is killed!" she thought. "Oh, what will
happen to us?"

"It's all right, Mary! Don't worry! It's all right!" cried Tom, through
the speaking tube.

"What's that? I can't hear you very well!" she called back.

"No wonder, with the racket this motor is making," he answered.  "Why
can't something be done so you can talk in an aeroplane as well as in a
balloon? That's an idea! If I could tell you what was the matter now
you wouldn't be a bit frightened, for it isn't anything. But, as it
is--"

"What are you saying, Tom? I can't hear you!" cried Mary, still much
frightened.

"I say it's all right--don't get scared. And don't jump!" Tom shouted
until his ears buzzed. "It's all nonsense--having a motor making so
much noise one can't talk!" he went on, irritatedly.

A strange idea had come to the young inventor, but there was no time to
think of it now. Mentally he registered a vow to take up this idea and
work on it as soon as possible. But, just now, the aeroplane needed all
his attention.

As he had told Mary, there was really nothing approaching any great
danger. But it was rather an anxious moment. If Tom had been alone he
would have thought little of it, but with Mary along he felt a double
responsibility.

What had happened was that the craft had suddenly gone into an "air
pocket" or partial vacuum, and there had been a sudden fall and a slide
slip. In trying to stop this too quickly Tom had broken one of his
controls, and he was busily engaged in putting an auxiliary one in
place and trying to reassure Mary at the same time.

"But it's mighty hard trying to do that through a speaking tube with a
motor making a noise like a boiler factory," mused the young inventor.
Tom worked quickly and to good purpose. In a few moments, though to
Mary they seemed like hours, the machine was again gliding along on a
level keel, and Tom breathed more easily.

"And now for my great idea!" he told himself.

But it was some time before he could give his attention to that.


CHAPTER III

THE BIG OFFER


Working with all the skill he possessed, Tom had got the aeroplane in
proper working order again. As has been said, the accident was a
trivial one, and had he been alone, or with an experienced aviator, he
would have thought little of it. Then, very likely, he would have
volplaned to earth and made the repairs there. But he did not want to
frighten Mary Nestor, so he fixed the control while gliding along, and
made light of it. Thus his passenger was reassured.

"Are we all right?" asked Mary through the tube, as they sailed along.

"Right as a fiddle," answered Tom, shouting through the same means of
communication.

"What's that about a riddle?" asked Mary, in surprise at his seeming
flippancy at such a time.

"I didn't say anything about a riddle--I said we are as fit as a
fiddle!" cried Tom. "Never mind. No use trying to talk with the racket
this motor makes, and it isn't the noisiest of its kind, either. I'll
tell you when we get down. Do you like it?"

"Yes, I like it better than I did at first," answered Mary, for she had
managed to understand the last of Tom's questions. Then he sailed a
little higher, circled about, and, a little later, not to get Mary too
tired and anxious, he headed for his landing field.

"I'll take you home in the auto," he cried to his passenger.  "We could
go up to your house this way--in style--if there was a field near by
large enough to land in. But there isn't. So it will have to be a
plain, every-day auto."

"That's good enough for me," said Mary. "Though this trip is
wonderful--glorious! I'll go again any time you ask me."

"Well, I'll ask you," said Tom. "And when I do maybe it won't be so
hard to hold a conversation. It will be more like this," and he shut
off the motor and began to glide gently down. The quiet succeeding the
terrific noise of the motor exhaust was almost startling, and Tom and
Mary could converse easily without using the tube.

Then followed the landing on the soft, springy turf, a little glide
over the ground, and the machine came to a halt, while mechanics ran
out of the hangar to take charge of it.

"I'll just go in and change these togs," said Mary, as she alighted and
looked at her leather costume.

"No, don't," advised Tom. "You look swell in em. Keep 'em on.  They're
yours, and you'll need 'em when we go up again. Here comes the auto.
I'll take you right home in it. Keep the aviation suit on.

"I wonder what Mr. Damon could have wanted," remarked Tom, as he drove
Mary along the country road.

"He seemed very much excited," she replied.

"Oh, he almost always is that way--blessing everything he can think of.
You know that. But this time it was different, I'll admit. I hope
nothing is the matter. I might have stopped and spoken to him, but I
was afraid if I did you'd back out and wouldn't come for a sky ride."

"Well, I might have. But now that I've had one, even with an accident
thrown in, I'll go any time you ask me, Tom," and Mary smiled at the
young inventor.

"Shucks, that wasn't a real accident!" he laughed. "But I do wonder
what Mr. Damon wanted."

"Better go back and find out, Tom," advised Mary, as they stopped in
front of her house.

"Oh, I want to come in and talk to you. Haven't had a chance for a good
talk today, that motor made such a racket."

"No, go along now, but come back and see me this afternoon if you like."

"I do like, all right! And I suppose Mr. Damon will be fussing until he
sees me. Well, glad you liked your first ride in the air, Mary--that
is, the first one of any account," for Mary had been in an aeroplane
before, though only up a little way--a sort of "grass-cutting stunt,"
Tom called it.

Waving farewell to the pretty girl, the young aviator turned the auto
about and speeded for his home and the shops adjoining it. His father
had not been well, of late, and Tom was a bit anxious about him.

"Mr. Damon may bother him, though he wouldn't mean to," thought Tom.
"He seemed to have his mind filled with some new idea. I wonder if it
is anything like mine? No, it couldn't be. Well, I'll soon find out,"
and, putting his foot on the accelerator, Tom sent the machine along at
a pace that soon brought him within sight of his home.

"Is father all right?" he asked Mrs. Baggert, who was out on the front
porch, as though waiting for him.

"Oh, yes, Tom, he's all right," the housekeeper answered.

"Is Mr. Damon with him?"

"No."

"He hasn't gone home, has he?"

"No, he's around somewhere. But some one else is with your father. Some
visitors."

"Any relations?"

"No; strangers. They came to see you, and they're rather impatient. I
came out to see if you were in sight. Your father sent me."

"Are they bothering him--talking business that I ought to attend to
when he's ill? That mustn't be."

"Well, I suppose it is business that the strangers are talking over
with your father, Tom," said Mrs. Baggert, "for I heard sums of money
spoken of. But your father seems to be all right, only a trifle anxious
that you should come."

"Well, I'm here now and I'll attend to things. Where are the strangers,
and who are they?"

"I don't know," answered the housekeeper. "I never saw them before, but
they're in the library with your father. Do you think they'll stay to
dinner? If you do, I'll have Eradicate or Koku catch and kill a
chicken."

"If you let one do it don't tell the other about it," said Tom with a
laugh, "or you'll have a chicken race around the yard that will make
the visitors sit up and take notice."

There was great rivalry between Eradicate Sampson, the aged colored
man, and Koku, the giant, and they were continually disputing. Each one
loved and served Tom in his own way, and there was jealousy between
them. Koku, the giant Tom had brought with him from the land where the
young inventor had been made captive, was a big, powerful man, and
could do things the aged colored servant could not attempt. But "Rad,"
as he was often called, and his mule "Boomerang" had long been fixtures
on the Swift homestead. But old age crept on apace with Eradicate,
though he hated to admit it, and Koku did many things the colored man
had formerly attended to, and Rad was always on the lookout not to be
supplanted. Hence Tom's warning to Mrs. Baggert about letting the two
be entrusted with the same mission of catching a chicken for the pot.

"Better get the fowl yourself and say nothing to either of them about
it," Tom advised the housekeeper. "Mr. Damon will stay to dinner, as he
always does when he comes, and as it's near twelve now, and as I may be
delayed talking business to these strangers, you'd better get up a
bigger meal than usual."

"I will, Tom," promised Mrs. Baggert. And then the young inventor,
having seen that one of the men took the automobile to the garage, went
into the house.

"Oh, here you are!" was his father's greeting, as he came out into the
hall from the library. "I've been waiting anxiously for you, my boy. I
couldn't think what was keeping you."

"Oh, I had a little trouble with the air machine--nothing serious."

A moment later Tom was standing before two well-dressed,
prosperous-looking business men, who smiled pleasantly at him.

"Mr. Thomas Swift?" interrogated one, the elder, as he held out his
hand.

"That's my name," answered Tom, pleasantly.

"I'm Peton Gale, and this gentleman is Boland Ware," went on the man
who had taken Tom's hand. "I'm president and he's treasurer of the
Universal Flying Machine Company, of New York."

"Oh, yes," said Tom, as he shook hands with Mr. Ware. "I have heard of
your concern. You are doing a lot of government work, are you not?"

"Yes; war orders. And we're up to our neck in them. This war is going
to be almost as much fought in the air as on the ground, Mr. Swift."

"I can well believe that," agreed Tom. "Won't you have a chair?"

"Well, we didn't come to stay long," said Mr. Gale with a laugh, which,
somehow or other, grated on Tom and seemed to him insincere. "Our
business is such a rushing one that we don't spend much time anywhere.
To get down to brass tacks, we have come to see you to put a certain
proposition before you, Mr. Swift. You are open to a business
proposition, aren't you?"

"Oh, yes," answered Tom. "That's what I'm here for."

"I thought so. Well, now I'll tell you, in brief, what we want, and
then Mr. Ware, our treasurer, can elaborate on it, and give you facts
and figures about which I never bother myself. I attend to the
executive end and leave the details to others," and again came that
laugh which Tom did not like.

"You came here to make me an offer?" asked the young inventor,
wondering to which of his many machines the visitors had reference.

"Yes," went on Mr. Gale, "we came here to make you a big offer.  In
short, Mr. Swift, we want you to work for our company, and we are
willing to pay you ten thousand dollars a year for the benefit of your
advice and your inventive abilities. Ten thousand dollars a year! Do
you accept?"


CHAPTER IV

MR. DAMON'S WHIZZER


Characteristic it was of Tom Swift that he did not seem at all
surprised at what most young men would call a liberal offer.  Certainly
not many youths of Tom's age would be sought out by a big manufacturing
concern, and offered ten thousand dollars a year "right off the reel,"
as Ned Newton expressed it later. But Tom only smiled and shook his
head in negation.

"What!" cried Mr. Gale, "you mean you won't accept our offer?"

"I can't," answered Tom.

"You can't!" exclaimed the treasurer, Mr. Ware. "Oh, I see. Mr. Gale, a
word with you. Excuse us a moment," he added to Tom and his father.

The two men consulted in a corner of the library for a moment, and
then, with smiles on their faces, once more turned toward the young
inventor.

"Well, perhaps you are right, Tom Swift," said Mr. Gale. "Of course, we
recognize your talents and ability, but you cannot blame us for trying
to get talent, as well as material for our airships, in the cheapest
market. But we are not hide-bound, nor sticklers for any set sum. We'll
make that offer fifteen thousand dollars a year, if you will sign a
five-year contract and agree that we shall have first claim on anything
and everything you may patent or invent in that time. Now, how does
that strike you?  Fifteen thousand dollars a year--paid weekly if you
wish, and our Mr. Ware, here, has a form of contract which can be fixed
up and signed within ten minutes, if you agree."

"Well, I don't like to be disagreeable," said Tom with a smile; "but,
really, as I said before, I can't accept your very kind offer. I may
say liberal offer. I appreciate that."

"You can't accept!" cried Mr. Gale.

"Are you sure you don't mean 'won't'?" asked Mr. Ware, in a half growl.

"You may call it that if you like," replied Tom, a bit coolly, for he
did not like the other's tone, "Only, as I say, I cannot accept. I have
other plans."

"Oh, you--" began the brusk treasurer, but Mr. Gale, the president of
the Universal Flying Machine Company, stopped his associate with a
warning look.

"Just a moment, Mr. Swift," begged the president. "Don't be hasty. We
are prepared to make you a last and final offer, and I do not believe
you can refuse it."

"Well, I certainly will not refuse it without hearing it," said Tom,
with a smile he meant to make good-natured. Yet, truth to tell, he did
not at all like the two visitors. There was something about them that
aroused his antagonism, and he said later that even if they had offered
him a sum which he felt he ought not, in justice to himself and his
father, refuse, he would have felt a distaste in working for a company
represented by the twain.

"This is our offer," said Mr. Gale, and he spoke in a pompous manner
which seemed to say: "If you don't take it, why, it will be the worse
for you." He looked at his treasurer for a confirmatory nod and,
receiving it, went on. "We are prepared to offer and pay you, and will
enter into such a contract, with the stipulation about the inventions
that I mentioned before--we are prepared to pay you--twenty thousand
dollars a year! Now what do you say to that, Tom Swift?

"Twenty-thousand-dollars-a-year!" repeated Mr. Gale unctuously, rolling
the words off his tongue. "Twen-ty-thou-sand-dol-lars-a-year!  Think of
it!"

"I am thinking of it," said Tom Swift gently, "and I thank you for your
offer. It is, indeed, very generous. But I must give you the same
answer. I cannot accept."

"Tom!" exclaimed his aged father.

"Mr. Swift!" exclaimed the two visitors.

Tom smiled and shook his head.

"Oh, I know very well what I am saying, and what I am turning down," he
said. "But I simply cannot accept. I have other plans.  I am sorry you
have had your trip for nothing," he added to the visitors, "but,
really, I must refuse."

"Is that your final answer?" asked Mr. Gale.

"Yes."

"Don't you want to take a day or two to think it over?" asked the
treasurer. "Don't be hasty. Remember that very few young men can
command that salary, and I may say you will find us liberal in other
ways. You would have some time to yourself."

"That is what I most need," returned Tom. "Time to myself. No, thank
you, gentlemen, I cannot accept."

"Be careful!" warned Mr. Gale, and it sounded as though there might be
a threat in his voice. "This is our last offer, and your last chance.
We will not renew this. If you do not accept our twenty thousand
dollars now, you will never get it again."

"I realize that," said Tom, "and I am prepared to take the consequences.

"Very well, then," said Mr. Gale. "There seems nothing for us to do,
Mr. Ware, but to go back to New York. I bid you good-day," and he bowed
stiffly to Tom. "I hope you will not regret your refusal of our offer."

"I hope so myself," said Tom, lightly.

When the visitors had gone Mr. Swift turned toward his son, and,
shaking his head, remarked:

"Of course, you know your own business best, Tom. Yet I cannot but feel
you have made a mistake."

"How?" asked Tom. "By not taking that money? I can easily make that in
a year, with an idea I have in mind for an improvement on an airship.
And your new electric motor will soon be ready for the market. Besides,
we don't really need the money."

"No, not now, Tom, but there is no telling when we may," said Mr.
Swift, slowly. "This big war has made many changes, and things that
brought us in a good income before, hardly sell at all, now."

"Oh, don't worry, Dad! We still have a few shots left in the locker--in
other words, the bank. I'm expecting Ned Newton over any moment now, to
give us the annual statement of our account, and then we'll know where
we stand. I'm not afraid from the money end. Our business has done
well, and it is going to do better. I have a new idea."

"That's all very well, Tom," said Mr. Swift, who seemed oppressed by
something. "As you say, money isn't everything, and I know we shall
always have enough to live on. But there is something about those two
men I do not like. They were very angry at your refusal of their offer.
I could see that. Tom, I don't want to be a croaker, but I think you'll
have to watch out for those men. They're going to be your enemies--your
rivals in the airship field," and Mr. Swift shook his head dolefully.

"Well, rivalry, when it's clean and above board, is the spice of trade
and invention," returned Tom, lightly. "I'm not afraid of that."

"No, but it may be unfair and underhand," said Mr. Swift. "I think it
would have been better, Tom, to have accepted their offer. Twenty
thousand a year, clear money, is a good sum."

"Yes, but I may make twice that with something that occurred to me only
a little while ago. Forget about those men, Dad, and I'll tell you my
new idea. But wait, I want Mr. Damon to hear it, too.  Where is he?"

"He was here a little while ago. He went out when those two men came
and--"

At that moment, from the garden at the side of the library, the sound
of voices in dispute could be heard.

"Now yo' all g'wan 'way from yeah!" exclaimed some one who could be
none other than Eradicate Sampson. "Whut fo' yo' all want to clutter up
dish yeah place fo'? Massa Tom said I was to do de garden wuk, an' I'se
gwine to do it! G'wan 'way, Giant!"

"Ho! You want me to get out, s'pose you put me, black face!" cried a
big voice, that of Koku, the giant.

"There they go! At it again!" cried Tom with a smile. "Might have known
if I told Rad to do anything that Koku would be jealous. Well, I'll
have to go out now and give that giant something to do that will tax
his strength."

But as Tom was about to leave the room another voice was heard in the
garden.

"Now, boys, be nice," said some one soothingly. "The garden is large
enough for you both to work in. Rad, you begin at the lower end and
spade toward the middle. Koku, you begin at the upper end and work
down. Whoever gets to the middle first will win."

"Ha! Den I'll show dat giant some spade wuk as is spade wuk!" cried the
colored man. "Garden wuk is mah middle name."

"Be careful, Rad!" laughed Mr. Damon, for he it was who was trying to
act as peacemaker. "Remember that Koku is very strong."

"Yas, sah! He may be strong, but he's clumsy!" chuckled Eradicate. "You
watch me beat him!"

"Ho! Black man get stuck in mud!" challenged Koku. "I show him!"

Then there was silence, and Tom and his father, looking out, saw the
two disputants beginning to spade the soil while Mr. Damon, satisfied
that he had, for the time being, stopped a quarrel, turned toward the
house.

"I was just coming to look for you," said Tom. "Sorry I had to go off
in such a hurry and leave you, but I had promised to take Mary for a
ride, and as it was her first one, for a distance, I didn't want her to
back out."

"That's all right, Tom, that's all right!" said Mr. Damon genially.
"Ladies first every time. But I do want to see you, and it's about
something important."

"No trouble, I hope?" queried Tom, for the manner of the eccentric man
was rather grave.

"Trouble? Oh, no! Bless my frying pan, no trouble, Tom! In fact, it may
be the other way about. Tom, I have an idea, and there may be millions
in it! That's it--millions!"

"Good!" cried the young inventor. "Might as well bite off a big lump
while you're at it. So you have a new idea! Well, I have myself, but
I'll listen to yours first. What is it, Mr. Damon?"

"It's a new kind of airship, Tom. I haven't got it all worked out yet,
but I can give you a rough outline. On my way over I got to thinking
about balloons, aeroplanes and the like, and it occurred to me that the
present principles are all wrong."

"So I evolved a new type of machine. I'm going to call it the Damon
Whizzer. Maybe Demon Whizzer would be more appropriate, but we won't
decide on that now. Anyhow, it's going to be a whizzer, and I want to
talk to you about it. There is an entirely new principle of elevation
and propulsion involved in my Whizzer, and I--"

At that moment there came a crash and clatter of steel and wood from
the garden, out of sight of which Tom and Mr. Damon had walked while
talking. Then followed a jangle of words.

"They're at it again!" cried Tom, as he ran toward the side of the
house. "I guess it's a fight this time!"


CHAPTER V

TOM'S PROJECT


Curious was the sight that met the gaze of Tom Swift and Mr. Wakefield
Damon as they rounded the corner of the house and looked into the newly
spaded garden. There stood the giant, Koku, holding aloft in the air,
by one hand, the form of the struggling colored man, Eradicate Sampson.
And Eradicate was vainly trying to get at his enemy and rival, but was
prevented by the long-distance hold the giant had on him.

"Yo' let me go, now! Yo' let me go, big man" cried Eradicate.  "Ef yo'
don't I'll bust yo' wide open, dat's whut I'll do! An' 'sides, I'll
tell Massa Tom on yo', dat's whut I'll do!"

"Ho! You tell--I let you fall!" threatened Koku.

His threat was dire enough, for such was his size and strength that he
held the colored man nearly nine feet from the ground, and a fall from
that distance would seriously jar Eradicate, if it did nothing else.
The colored man's eyes opened wide as he heard what Koku said, and then
he cried:

"Let me down! Let me down, an' I won't say nuffin!"

"An' you let me scatter dirt?" asked Koku, for such was the giant's
idea of working in the garden.

"Yes, yo' kin scatter de dirt seben ways from Sunday fo' all I keers!"
conceded Eradicate. Then, as he was lowered to the ground, he and the
giant turned and saw Mr. Damon and Tom approaching.

"What's wrong?" asked the young inventor.

"'Scuse me, Massa Tom," began Eradicate, "but didn't yo' tell me to
spade de garden?"

"I guess I did," admitted Tom Swift.

"An' you tell me help--yes?" questioned Koku.

"Well, I thought it would be a little too much for you, Rad," said Tom,
gently. "I thought perhaps you'd like help."

"Hu! Not him, anyhow!" declared the colored man in great disgust. "When
I git so old dat I cain't spade a garden, den me an' Boomerang, we-all
gwine to die, dat's all I got to say. I was a-spadin' my part ob de
garden, Massa Tom, same laik Mr. Damon done tole me to, an' dish yeah
big mess ob bones steps on my side ob de middle an--"

"Him too slow. Koku scatter dirt twice times so fast!" declared the
giant, whose English was not much better than Eradicate's.

"Yes, I see," said Tom. "You are so strong, Koku, that you finished
your part before Eradicate did. Well, it was good of you to want to
help him."

At this the giant grinned at his rival.

"At the same time," went on Tom, winking an eye at Mr. Damon,
"Eradicate knows a little more about garden work, on account of having
done it so many years."

"Ha! Whut I tell yo', Giant!" boasted the colored man. It was his turn
to smile.

"And so," went on Tom, judicially, "I guess I'll let Rad finish spading
the garden, and you, Koku, can come and help me lift some heavy engine
parts. Mr. Damon wants to explain something to me."

"Ha! Nothing what so heavy Koku not lift!" boasted the giant.

"Go on! Lift yo'se'f 'way from heah!" muttered Eradicate as he picked
up his dropped spade. And then, with a smile of satisfaction, he fell
to work in the mellow soil while Tom led Koku to one of the shops where
he set him to lifting heavy motor parts about in order to get at a
certain machine that was stored away in the back of one of the rooms.

"That will keep him busy," said the young inventor. "And now, Mr.
Damon, I can listen to you. Do you really think you have a new idea in
airships?"

"I really think so, Tom. My Whizzer is bound to revolutionize travel in
the air. Let me tell you what I mean. Now cast your mind back. How many
ways are now used to propel an airship or a dirigible balloon through
the air? How many ways?"

"Two, as far as I know," said Tom. "At least there are only two that
have proved to be practical."

"Exactly," said Mr. Damon. "One with the propeller, or propellers, in
front, and that is the tractor type. The other has the propeller in the
rear, and that is the pusher type. Both good as far as they go, but I
have something better."

"What?" asked Tom with a smile.

"It's a Whizzer," said the eccentric man. "Bless my gold tooth!  but
that is the best name I can think of for it. And, really, the propeller
I'm thinking of inventing does whiz around."

"But are you going to use a tractor or pusher type?" Tom wanted to know.

"It's a combination of both," answered Mr. Damon. "As it is now, Tom,
you have to get an aeroplane in pretty speedy motion before it will
rise from the ground, don't you?"

"Yes, of course. That's the principle on which an aeroplane rises and
keeps aloft, by its speed in the air. As soon as that speed stops it
begins to fall, or volplane, as we call it."

"Exactly. Now, instead of having to depend on the speed of the
aeroplane for this, why not depend on the speed of the propeller--in
other words, the whizzer?"

"Well, we do," said Tom, a bit puzzled as to what his friend was trying
to get at. "If the propeller didn't move the airship wouldn't
rise--that is, unless it's of the balloon type."

"What I mean," said Mr. Damon, "is to have an aeroplane that will move
in the air the same as a boat moves in the water. You don't have to get
the propeller of a boat racing around at the rate of a million
revolutions a minute, more or less, before your boat will travel, do
you? If the engine turns the screw, or propeller, just over say fifty
times a minute you would get some motion of the boat, wouldn't you?"

"Why, yes, some," admitted Tom.

"And what causes it?" asked Mr. Damon, anticipating a triumph.

"The resistance of the water to the blades of the screw, or propeller,"
answered Tom.

"Exactly! And it's the resistance of the air to the blades of an
airship propeller that sends the craft along, isn't it?"

"Yes. And because of the difference in density between air and water it
becomes necessary to revolve an aeroplane propeller many times faster
than a boat propeller. It's the density that makes the difference, Mr.
Damon. If air were as dense as water we could have comparatively
slow-moving motors and propellers and--"

"Ha! There you have it, Tom! And there is where my Whizzer--Wakefield
Damon's Whizzer--is going to revolutionize air travel!" cried the
eccentric man. "The difference in density! If air were as dense as
water the problem would be solved. And I have solved it! I'm going to
turn the trick, Tom! One more question. How can air be made as dense as
water, Tom Swift?"

"Why, by condensation or compression, I suppose," was the rather slow
answer. "You know they have condensed, or compressed, air until it is
liquid. I've done it myself, as an experiment."

"That's it, Tom! That's it!" cried Mr. Damon in delight.  "Compressed
air will do the trick! Not compressed to a liquid, exactly, but almost
so. I'm going to revolve the propellers of my new airship in compressed
air, so dense that they will not have to have a speed of more than
seven hundred revolutions a minute.  What's that compared to the three
to ten thousand revolutions of the propellers now used? The propellers
of Damon's Whizzer will be of the pusher type, and will revolve in
dense, compressed air, almost like water, and that will do away with
high speed motors, with all their complications, and make traveling in
the clouds as simple as taking out a little one-cylinder motor boat.
How's that, Tom Swift? How's that for an idea?"

To Mr. Damon's disappointment, Tom was not enthusiastic. The young
inventor gazed at his eccentric friend, and then said slowly:

"Well, that's all right in theory, but how is it going to work out in
practice?"

"That's what I came to see you about, Tom," was the reply.  "Bless my
tall hat! but that's just why I hurried over here. I wanted to tell you
when I saw you going off on a trip with Miss Nestor. That's my big
idea--Damon's Whizzer--propellers revolving in compressed air like
water. Isn't that great?"

"I'm sorry to shatter your air castle," said Tom; "but for the life of
me I can't see how it will work. Of course, in theory, if you could
revolve a big-bladed propeller in very dense, or in liquid, air, there
would be more resistance than in the rarefied atmosphere of the upper
regions. And, if this could be done, I grant you that you could use
slower motors and smaller propeller blades--more like those of a motor
boat. But how are you going to get the condensed air?"

"Make it!" said Mr. Damon promptly. "Air pumps are cheap. Just carry
one or two on board the aeroplane, and condense the air as you go
along. That's a small detail that can easily be worked out. I leave
that to you."

"I'd rather you wouldn't," said Tom. "That's the whole
difficulty--compressing your air. Wait! I'll explain it to you."

Then the young inventor went into details. He told of the ponderous
machinery needed to condense air to a form approximating water, and
spoke of the terrible pressure exerted by the liquid atmosphere.

"Anything that you would gain by having a slow-speed motor and smaller
propeller blades, would be lost by the ponderous air-condensing
machinery you would need," Tom told Mr. Damon.  "Besides, if you could
surround your propellers with a strata of condensed air, it would
create such terrible cold as to freeze the propeller blades and make
them as brittle as glass.

"Why, I have taken a heavy piece of metal, dipped it into liquid air,
and I could shatter the steel with a hammer as easily as a sheet of
ice. The cold of liquid air is beyond belief.

"Attempts have been made to make motors run with liquid air, but they
have not succeeded. To condense air and to carry it about so that
propellers might revolve in it, would be out of the question."

"You think so, Tom?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I'm sure of it!"

"Oh, dear! That's too bad. Bless my overshoes, but I thought I had a
new idea. Well, you ought to know. So Damon's Whizzer goes on the scrap
heap before ever it's built. Well, we'll say no more about it. You
ought to know best, Tom. I wasn't thinking of it so much for myself as
for you. I thought you'd like some new idea to work on."

"Much obliged, Mr. Damon, but I have a new idea," said Tom.

"You have? What is it? Tell me--that is, if it isn't a secret," went on
the eccentric man, as much delighted over Tom's new plan as he had been
over his own Whizzer, doomed to failure so soon.

"It isn't a secret from you," said Tom. "I got the idea while I was
riding with Mary. I wanted to talk to her--to tell her not to jump out
when we had a little accident--but I had trouble making myself
understood because of the noise of the motor."

"They do make a great racket," conceded Mr. Damon. "But I don't suppose
anything can be done about it."

"I don't see why there can't!" exclaimed Tom. "And that's my new
idea--to make a silent aircraft motor--perhaps silent propeller blades,
though it's the motor that makes the most noise. And that's what I'm
going to do--invent a silent aeroplane. Not because I want so much to
talk when I take passengers up in the air, but I believe such a motor
would be valuable, especially for scouting planes in war work. To go
over the enemy's lines and not be heard would be valuable many times.

"And that's what I'm going to do--work on a silent motor for Uncle Sam.
I've got the germ of an idea and now--"

"Excuse me," said a voice behind Mr. Damon and Tom, and, turning, the
young inventor beheld the form of Mr. Peton Gale, president of the
Universal Flying Machine Company.


CHAPTER VI

MAKING PLANS


Tom Swift had drawn pencil and paper from his pocket, and, as he and
Mr. Damon were sitting on the steps of one of the shops, the young
inventor was about to demonstrate by a drawing part of his new project,
when the interruption came in the shape of one of the men who had, an
hour before, made a business offer to Tom.

"Excuse me," went on Mr. Peton Gale, "but Mr. Ware and I got to talking
it over on our way to the station--the matter of having you in our
company, Mr. Swift--and we concluded that it was worth twenty-five
thousand dollars a year for us to have you. So I came back--"

"It isn't of the slightest use, Mr. Gale, I assure you," said Tom, a
bit heatedly, for he did not like the persistency of this man, nor did
he like his coming on the factory grounds unannounced and in this
secret manner. "I told you I could not accept your offer. It is not
altogether a matter of money. My word was final."

"Oh very well, if you put it that way," said Mr. Gale stiffly, "of
course there is nothing more to say. But I thought perhaps you did not
consider we had offered you enough and--"

"Your offer is fair enough from a financial standpoint," said Tom; "but
I simply cannot accept it. I have other plans.  Jackson!" he called to
one of his mechanics who was passing, "kindly see Mr. Gale to the gate,
and then let me know how it was any one came in here without a permit."

"Yes, sir," said the mechanic, as he stood significantly waiting.

"There was no one at the gate when I came in," said Mr. Gale, and his
manner was antagonizing. "I wanted to speak to you--to ask you to
reconsider your offer--so I came back."

"It is against the rules to admit strangers to the shop grounds," said
Tom. "Good-day!"

The president of the Universal Flying Machine Company did not respond,
but there was a look on his face as he turned away that, had Tom seen
it, might have caused him some uneasiness. But he did not see. Instead,
he resumed his talk with Mr. Damon.

"Tom, your idea is most interesting," declared the eccentric man. "I
hope you will be able to work it out!"

"I'm going to try," said the young inventor. "I hope that man--Mr.
Gale--didn't hear anything of what I was saying. He sneaked up on us
before I was aware any one was near but ourselves."

"I don't imagine he heard very much, Tom," said Mr. Damon. "He may have
heard you mention a silent motor--"

"That's just what I wish he hadn't heard," broke in Tom.  "That's the
germ of the idea, and once it becomes known that I am working on that--
Well, there's no use crying over spilled milk," and he smiled at the
homely proverb. "I'll have to work in secret, once I've started."

"Do you think the government would use it, Tom?" asked his friend.

"I should think it would be glad to. Consider what a wonderful part
airships are playing in the present war. It really is a struggle to see
which will be the master of the sky--the Allies or the Germans--and, up
to recently, the Huns had the advantage.  Then the Allies, recognizing
how vital it was, began to forge ahead, and now Uncle Sam with his
troops under General Pershing is leading everything, or will lead
shortly. We have been a bit slow with our aircraft production, but now
we are booming along.  Uncle Sam will soon have the mastery of the sky."

"I hope so," sighed Mr. Damon. "We must beat the Germans!"

Briefly, Tom spoke of what Pershing's men were doing with their
aeroplanes in France, and mention was made of what the French and
British had done prior to the entrance of the United States into the
World War.

"While we were yet neutral, Americans had made gallant names for
themselves flying for France, and with my silent motor they ought to do
better," declared Tom.

"Is silence its chief recommendation?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Yes," replied Tom. "Or rather, it will be when I have it perfected.
Aeroplane motors now are about as compact and speedy as they can be
made. It is only the terrific noise that is a handicap. It is a
handicap to the pilots and observers in the craft, as they cannot
communicate except through a special speaking tube, and this is not
always satisfactory or sure. Then, too, the noise of an airship
proclaims its approach to the enemy, sometimes long before it can be
seen.

"With a silent motor all this would be done away with. With my new
craft, in case I can perfect it, the enemy's lines can be approached as
silently as the Indians used to approach the log cabins of the white
settlers. That will be its great advantage--not that conversation can
be more easily carried on, for that is, after all, an unimportant
detail. But to approach the enemy's lines in the silence of the night
would be a distinct gain."

"I believe it would, Tom!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "And I should think,
too, that Uncle Sam would be glad to get such a motor," he added.

"Well, he'll have one to take if he wants it, if I can make my plans a
success," declared Tom. "That is, unless those other fellows get ahead
of me."

"What other fellows?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Gale, Ware and their crowd," was the answer. "I fancy they are
provoked because I wouldn't agree to work for them, and now, that Gale
overheard--as he must have--what I propose working on, they may try
that game themselves."

"You mean try to turn out a silent motor?"

"Yes. It would be a big feather in their cap for their company, so far,
hasn't been very successful on government orders. That's why they came
to me, I guess."

"I shouldn't be surprised, Tom," conceded Mr. Damon. "Since the
government accepted your giant cannon and your great searchlight, you
have come into greater prominence than ever before. And those two
things are a wonderful success."

"Yes," admitted Tom, modestly enough, "the big electric light seems to
have been of some benefit on the European battle front, and though they
haven't been able to make and transport as many of my giant cannons as
I'd like to see over there, it is progressing, I understand."

And this is true. For the details of these two inventions of Tom
Swift's I refer my readers to the books bearing those titles.
Sufficient to state here that the government was using these two
inventions, and there had been no necessity for commandeering them
either, since Tom had freely offered them at the declaration of war
with Germany.

"Well, since I can't help you with my 'Whizzer,'" said Mr. Damon, with
a smile, "let me do what I can toward your silent motor, Tom. What are
you going to call it?"

"Oh, I don't know--hadn't thought of a name. I guess 'Air Scout' would
be as good as any. That's what it will be--a machine for silently
scouting in the air. And now to get down to brass tacks, as the poet
says, I believe I will--"

"Gentleman to see you, Mr. Swift," interrupted Jackson.

"Bless my penwiper!" cried Mr. Damon. "More visitors! I hope it isn't
Gale or Ware come back to see what they can spy on!"


CHAPTER VII

A PROBLEM IN SOUND


Tom Swift looked up with a distinct appearance of being annoyed that
was unusual with him, for he was, nearly always, good-natured. But the
frown that had replaced the pleasant look on his face while he was
talking to Mr. Damon about the projected new air scout was at once
wiped away as he looked at the card Jackson held out to him.

"Bring him in right away!" he ordered. "He needn't have stood on that
ceremony."

"Well, he said it was a business call," returned the mechanician with a
cheerful grin, "and he said he wanted it done according to form. So he
gave me his card to bring you."

"Who is it?" asked Mr. Damon, with the privilege of an old friend.

"It's Ned Newton," Tom answered; "though why he's putting on all this
formality I can't fathom."

Jackson went back to the main gate and told the man on guard there to
admit Ned, who had so formally sent in his card.

"Ah, Mr. Swift, I believe?" began the bank employee with that suave,
formal air which usually precedes a business meeting.

"That is my name," said Tom, with a suppressed grin, and he spoke as
stiffly as though to a perfect stranger.

"Mr. Tom Swift, the great inventor?" went on Ned.

"Yes."

"Ah, then I am at the right place. Just sign here, please, on the
dotted line," and he held out a blank form, and a fountain pen to Tom,
who took them half mechanically.

"Huh? What's the big idea, Ned?" asked the young inventor, unable
longer to carry on the joke. "Is this a warrant for my arrest, or
merely a testimonial to you. If it's the latter, and concerns your
nerve, I'll gladly sign it."

"Well, it's something like that!" laughed Ned. "That's your application
for another block of Liberty Bonds, Tom, and I want you, as a personal
favor to me, as a business favor to the bank, and as your plain duty to
Uncle Sam, to double your last subscription."

Tom looked at the sum Ned had filled in on the blank form, and uttered
a slight whistle of surprise.

"That's all right now," said Ned, with the air of a professional
salesman. "You can stand that and more, too. I'm letting you off easy.
Why, I got Mary's father--Mr. Nestor--for twice what he took last time,
and Mary herself--hard as she's working for the Red Cross--gave me a
nice application. So it's up to you to--"

"Nuff said!" exclaimed Tom, sententiously, as he signed his name. "I
may have to reconsider my recent refusal of the offer of the Universal
Flying Machine Company, though, if I haven't money enough to meet this
subscription, Ned."

"Oh, you'll meet it all right! Much obliged," and Ned folded the
Liberty Bond subscription paper and put it in his pocket.  "But did you
turn down the offer from those people?"

"I did," answered Tom. "But how did you know about it, Ned?"

"First let me say that I'm glad you decided to have nothing to do with
them. They're a rich firm, and have lots of money, but I wouldn't trust
'em, even if they have some government contracts.  The way I happened
to know they were likely to make you an offer is this," continued Ned
Newton.

"They do business with one of the New York banks with which my
bank--notice the accent on the my, Tom--is connected. The other day I
happened to see some correspondence about you. These flying machine
people asked our bank to find out certain things about you, and, as a
matter of business, we had to give the information. Sort of a
commercial agency report, you know, nothing unusual, and it isn't the
first time it's been done since your business got so large. But that's
how I happened to know these fellows contemplated dickering with you."

"Do you know Gale or Ware?" Tom asked.

"Not personally. But in a business way, Tom, I'd warn you to look out
for them, as they're sharp dealers. They put one over on the government
all right, and there may be some unpleasant publicity to it later. But
they're putting up a big bluff, and pretending they can turn out a lot
of flying machines for use in Europe. Why don't you get busy on that
end of the game, Tom?"

"I know you've more than done your bit, with Liberty Bonds,
subscriptions to the Y. M. C. A. and other war work, besides your war
tank and other inventions. But you're such a shark on flying machines I
should think you'd offer your factory to the government for the
production of aeroplanes."

"I would in a minute, Ned, and you know it; but the fact of the matter
is my shops aren't equipped for the production of anything in large
numbers. We do mostly an experimenting business here, making only one
or two of a certain machine. I have told the government officials they
can have anything I've got, and you know they wouldn't let me enlist
when I was working on the war tank."

"Yes, I remember that," said Ned. "You're no slacker! I wanted to
shoulder a rifle, too, but they keep me at this Liberty Loan work.
Well, Uncle Sam ought to know."

"That's what I say," agreed Tom, "and that's why I haven't gone to the
front myself. And now, as it happens, I've got something else in mind
that may help Uncle Sam."

"What is it?"

"A silent flying machine for scout work on the battle front," Tom told
his friend, and then he gave a few details, such as those he had been
telling Mr. Damon.

"Then I don't wonder you turned down the offer of the Universal
people," remarked Ned, at the conclusion of the recital. "This will be
a heap more help to the government, Tom, than working for those people,
even at twenty-five thousand dollars a year. And if you get short, and
can't meet your newest Liberty Bond payments, why, I guess the bank
will stretch your credit a little."

"Thanks!" laughed Tom, "but I'll try not to ask them."

The friends talked together a little longer, and then Ned had to take
his departure to solicit more subscriptions, while Mr. Damon went with
him, the eccentric man saying he would go home to Waterfield.

"But, bless my overshoes, Tom!" he exclaimed, as he departed, "don't
forget to let me know when you have your silent motor working. I want
to see it."

"I'll let you know," was the promise given by the young inventor.

"And watch out for those Universal people," warned Ned. "I'm not
telling you this as a bank official, for I'm not supposed to, but it's
personal."

"I'll be on the watch," said Tom. And, as he went into his private
workshop, he wondered why it was his father and Ned had both warned him
not to trust Gale and Ware.

The next few days were busy ones for Tom Swift. Once he had made up his
mind to go to work seriously on a silent motor, all else was put aside.
He sent a note to Mary Nestor, telling her what he was going to do,
and, asking her to say nothing about it, which, of course, Mary agreed
to.

"Come and see me when you can," she sent back word, "but I know you
won't have much chance when you're experimenting with your invention.
And I shall be working so hard for the Red Cross that I sha'n't get
much chance to entertain you. But the war can't last forever."

"No," agreed Tom with a sigh, as he put away her letter, "and thank
goodness that it can't!"

The young inventor threw himself into the perplexing work of inventing
a silent motor with all the fervor he had given to the production of
his war tank, his giant cannon, his wonderful searchlight and other
machines.

"And," mused Tom, as he sat at his work table with pencil and paper
before him, "since this is a problem in acoustics, I had best begin. I
suppose by going back to first principles, and after determining what
makes an aeroplane engine noisy, try to figure out how to make it
quiet. Now as to the first, the principle causes of noise are--"

And at that instant there broke on Tom's ears a succession of
discordant sounds which seemed to be a combination of an Indian's war
whoop and a college student's yells at a football game.

"Now I wonder what that is!" mused the young inventor as he hastily
arose. "Better solve that problem before I tackle the aeroplane motor."


CHAPTER VIII

THROUGH THE ROOF


Tom rushed from his private office, and when he reached the outer door
he heard with more distinctness the sounds that had alarmed him. They
seemed to come from a small building given over to electrical
apparatus, and which, at the time, was not supposed to be in use. It
had been Tom's workroom, so to speak, when he was developing his
electric runabout and rifle, but of late he had not spent much time in
it.

"Somebody's in there!" reflected the young inventor, as he heard yells
coming from the open door of the place. "And if it isn't Koku and
Eradicate I miss my guess! Wonder what they can be doing there."

He crossed the yard between his private office and the electrical shop
in a few rapid strides, and, as he entered the latter place, he was
greeted with a series of wild yells.

"Good volume of sound here, at all events," mused Tom. "Almost as much
as my motor made when I was trying to talk to Mary. Hello there! What's
going on? Is any one hurt? What's the matter?" he cried, for, at first,
he could see no one in the dim light of the place. The interior was a
maze of electrical apparatus.

"Who's here?" demanded Tom, as he advanced.

"Oh, Master! Come quick! Koku 'most dead an' no can let go!" was the
cry.

"Yo' jest bet yo' cain't let go!" chimed in the voice of Eradicate. "I
done knowed yo would git into trouble ef yo' come heah, an' I'se glad
ob it! So I is!"

"What is it, Rad? What has happened to Koku?" cried Tom, running
forward, for though no very powerful current could be turned on in the
electrical shop at this period of unuse, there was enough to be very
painful. "What is it, Rad?"

"Oh, dat big foolish giant, Koku, done got his se'f into trouble!"
chuckled the colored man. "He done got holt ob one ob dem air
contraptions, Massa Tom, an' he cain't let go! Ha! Ha!  Golly! Look at
him squirm!" and Rad laughed shrilly, which accounted for some of the
sounds Tom had heard.

Then came yells of rage and pain from the giant, and they were so loud
and vigorous, mingling with Eradicate's as they did, that it was no
wonder Tom was startled. The sounds were heard in the other shops, and
men came running out. But before then Tom had put an end to the trouble.

One look showed him what had happened. Just how or why Koku and
Eradicate had entered the electrical shop Tom did not then stop to
inquire. But he saw that the giant had grasped the handles of one of
the electric machines, designed for charging Leyden jars used in Tom's
experiments, and the powerful, though not dangerous, current had so
paralyzed, temporarily, the muscles of the giant's hands and arms that
he could not let go, and there he was, squirming, and not knowing how
to turn off the current, and unable to ease himself, while Eradicate
stood and laughed at him, fairly howling with delight.

"Ha! Guess yo' won't do no mo' spadin' in' Massa Tom's garden right
away, big man!" taunted Eradicate.

"Be quiet, Rad!" ordered Tom, as he reached up and pulled out the
switch, thus shutting off the current. "This isn't anything to laugh
at."

"But he done look so funny, Massa Tom!" pleaded the colored man. "He
done squirm laik--"

But Eradicate did not finish what he intended to say. Once free from
the powerful current, the giant looked at his numb hands, and then,
seeming to think that Eradicate was the cause of it all, he sprang at
the colored man with a yell. But Eradicate did not stay to see what
would happen. With a howl of terror, he raced out of the door, and, old
and rheumatic as he was, he managed to gain the stable of his mule,
Boomerang, over which he had his humble but comfortable quarters.

"Well, I guess he's safe for a while!" laughed Tom, as he saw the giant
turn away, shaking his fist at the closed door, for Koku, big as he
was, stood in mortal terror of the mule's heels.

Tom locked the door of the electrical shop and Went back to his
interrupted problem. From Jackson he learned that Koku and Eradicate
had merely happened to stroll into the forbidden place, which had been
left open by accident. There, it appeared, Koku had handled some of the
machinery, ending by switching on the current of the machine the
handles of which he later unsuspectingly picked up. Then he received a
shock he long remembered, and for many days he believed Eradicate had
been responsible for it, and there was more than the usual hostile
feeling between the two. But Eradicate was innocent of that trick, at
all events.

"Though," said Tom, telling his father about it later, "Rad would have
turned on the current if he had known he could make trouble for Koku by
it. I never saw their like for having disagreements!"

"Yes, but they are both devoted to you, Tom," said the aged inventor.
"But what is this you hinted at--a silent motor you called it, I
believe? Are you really serious in trying to invent one?"

"Yes, Dad, I am. I think there's a big field for an aeroplane that
could travel along over the enemy's lines--particularly at night--and
not be heard from below. Think of the scout work that could be done.

"Well, yes, it could be done if you could get a silent motor, or
propellers that made no noise, Tom. But I don't believe it can be done."

"Well, maybe not, Dad. But I'm going to try!" and Tom, after a further
talk with his father, began work in earnest on the big problem. That it
was a big one Tom was not disposed to deny, and that it would be a
valuable invention even his somewhat skeptical father admitted.

"How are you going to start, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift, several days after
the big idea had come to the young man.

"I'm going to experiment a bit, at first. I've got a lot of old motors,
that weren't speedy enough for any of my flying machines, and I'm going
to make them over. If I spoil them the loss won't amount to anything,
and if I succeed--well, maybe I can help out Uncle Sam a bit more."

As Tom had said he would do, he began at the very foundation, and
studied the fundamental principles of sound.

"Sound," the young inventor told Ned Newton, in speaking about the
problem, "is a sensation which is peculiar to the ear, though the
vibrations caused by sound waves may be felt in many parts of the body.
But the ear is the great receiver of sound."

"You aren't going to invent a sort of muffler for the ears, are you,
Tom?" asked Ned. "That would be an easy way of solving the problem, but
I doubt if you could get the Germans to wear your ear-tabs so they
wouldn't hear the sound of the Allied aeroplanes."

"No, I'm not figuring on doing the trick that way," said Tom with a
laugh. "I've really got to cut down the sound of the motor and the
propeller blades, so a person, listening with all his ears, won't hear
any noise, unless he's within a few feet of the plane."

"Well, I can tell you, right off the reel, how to do it," said the bank
employee.

"How?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Run your engine and propellers in a vacuum," was the prompt reply.

"Hum!" said Tom, musingly. "Yes, that would be a simple way out, and
I'll do it, if you'll tell me how to breathe in a vacuum."

"Oh, I didn't agree to do that," laughed Ned.

But he had spoken the truth, as those who have studied physics well
know. There must be an atmosphere for the transmission of sound, which
is the reason all is cold and silent and still at the moon. There is no
atmosphere there. Sound implies vibration.  Something, such as liquid,
gas, or solid, must be set in motion to produce sound, and for the
purpose of science the air we breathe may be considered a gas, being
composed of two.

Not only must the object, either solid, liquid, or gaseous, be in
motion to produce sound, but the air surrounding the vibrating body
must also be moving in unison with it. And lastly there must be some
medium of receiving the sound waves--the ear or some part of the body.
Totally deaf persons may be made aware of sound through the vibrations
received through their hands or feet. They receive, of course, only the
more intense, or largest, sound waves, and can not hear notes of music
nor spoken words, though they may feel the vibration when a piano is
played. And, as Ned has said, no sound is produced in a vacuum.

"But," said Tom, "since I can't run my aeroplane in a vacuum, or even
have the propellers revolve in one, it's up to me to solve the problem
some other way. The propellers don't really make noise enough to worry
about when they're high in the air.  It's the exhaust from the motor,
and to get rid of that will be my first attempt."

"Can it be done?" asked Ned.

"I don't know," was Tom's frank answer.

"They do it on an automobile to a great extent," went on Ned.  "Some of
'em you cant hardly hear."

"Yes, but an aeroplane engine runs many, many times faster than the
motor of an auto," said Tom, "and there are more explosions to muffle.
I doubt if the muffler of an auto would cut down the sound of an aero
engine to any appreciable extent. But, of course, I'll try along those
lines."

"They have mufflers or silencers for guns and rifles," went on Ned.
"Couldn't you make a big one of those contraptions and put it on an
aeroplane?"

"I doubt it," said Tom, shaking his head. "Of course it's the same
principle as that in an auto muffler, or on a motor boat--a series of
baffle plates arranged within a hollow cylinder. But all such devices
cut down power, and I don't want to do that.  However, I'm going to
solve the problem or--bust!"

And Tom came near "busting," Ned remarked later, when he and his friend
talked over the progress of the invention.

Two weeks had passed since the start of his evolution of his new idea,
and following the visiting of the representatives of the Universal
Flying Machine Company. Since then neither Gale nor Ware had
communicated with Tom.

"But I must be on the watch against them," thought the young inventor.
"I'm pretty sure Gale heard me mention what I was going to try to
invent, and he may get ahead of me, and put a silent motor on the
market first. Not that I'm afraid of being done out of any profits, but
I simply don't want to be beaten."

The details of Tom's invention cannot be gone into, but, roughly, it
was based on the principle of not only a muffler but also of producing
less noise when the charges of gasoline exploded in the cylinders. It
is, of course, the explosion of gasoline mixed with air that causes an
internal combustion engine to operate. And it is the expulsion of the
burned gases that causes the exhaust and makes the noise that is heard.

Tom was working along the well-known line of the rate of travel of
sound, which progresses at the rate of about 1090 feet a second when
air is at the freezing point. And, roughly, with every degree increase
in the atmosphere's temperature the velocity of sound increases by one
foot. Thus at a temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit, or 68 degrees
above freezing, there would be added to the 1090 feet the 68 feet,
making sound travel at 100 degrees Fahrenheit about 1158 feet a second.

Tom had set up in his shop a powerful, but not very speedy, old
aeroplane engine, and had attached to it the device he hoped would help
him toward solving his problem of cutting down the noise. He had had
some success with it, and, after days and nights of labor, he invited
his father and Ned, as well as Mr. Damon, over to see what he hoped
would be a final experiment.

His visitors had assembled in the shop, and Eradicate was setting out
some refreshments which Tom had provided, the colored man being in his
element now.

"What's all this figuring, Tom?" asked Mr. Damon, as he saw a series of
calculations on some sheets of paper lying on Tom's desk.

"That's where I worked out how much faster sound traveled in hydrogen
gas than in the ordinary atmosphere," was the answer.  "It goes about
four times as fast, or nearly four thousand two hundred feet a second.
You remember the rule, I suppose. 'The speed of sonorous vibrations
through gases varies inversely as the squares of the weights of equal
volumes of the gases,' or, in other words--"

"Give it to us chiefly in 'other words,' if you please, Tom!" pleaded
Ned, with a laugh. "Let that go and do some tricks. Start the engine
and let's see if we can hear it."

"Oh, you can hear it all right," said Tom, as he approached the motor,
which was mounted on a testing block. "The thing isn't perfected yet,
but I hope to have it soon. Rad! Where is that black rascal? Oh, there
you are! Come here, Rad!"

"Yaas sah, Massa Tom! Is I gwine to help yo' all in dish yeah job?"

"Yes. Just take hold of this lever, and when I say so pull it as hard
as you can."

"Dat's whut I will, Massa Tom. Golly! ef dat no 'count giant was heah
now he'd see he ain't de only one whut's got muscle.  I'll pull good
an' hard, Massa Tom."

"Yes, that's what I want you to. Now I guess we're all ready.  Can you
see, Dad--and Ned and Mr. Damon?"

"Yes," they answered. They stood near the side wall of the shop, while
Tom and Eradicate were at the testing block, on which the motor, with
the noise-eliminating devices attached, had been temporarily mounted.

"All ready," called the young inventor, as he turned on the gas and
threw over the electrical switch. "All ready! Pull the starting lever,
Rad, and when it's been running a little I'll throw on the silencer and
you can see the difference."

The motor began to hum, and there was a deafening roar, just as there
always is when the engine of an aeroplane starts. It was as though half
a dozen automobile engines were being run with the mufflers cut out.

"Now I'll show you the difference!" yelled Tom, though such was the
noise that not a word could be heard. "This shows you what my silencer
will do."

Tom pulled another lever. There was at once a cessation of the
deafening racket, though it was not altogether ended. Then, after a
moment or two, there suddenly came a roar as though a blast had been
let off in the shop.

Tom and Eradicate were tossed backward, head over heels, as though by
the giant hands of Koku himself, and Mr. Damon, Ned, and Tom's father
saw the motor fly from the testing block and shoot through the roof of
the building with a rending, crashing, and splintering sound that could
be heard for a mile.


CHAPTER IX

AFTER A SPY


Curious as it may seem, Eradicate, the oldest and certainly not the
most energetic of the party assembled in the experiment room, was the
first to recover himself and arise. Tottering to his feet he gave one
look at the testing block, whence the motor had torn itself. Mansfield
gave the' Gallery' some amusement by wearing a cocked hat and feathers
with his with singular felicity, and that they are not more remarkable
for their truth and justice than they are for their elegant latinity;
but I will not say that you are a doctor only_honoris causâ_,
which are most emphatic words, and are cruelly made to accompany
were:'Placetne vobis, Domini Doctores?

placetne vobis the, Magistri?''

Placet, imo valde placet.'... It is difficult to tell the Government
what ought to be done; for, first, there should be great alteration
in the Courts in, we learnt the fact from him at 8.30 P.M. on
September 3rd.

Gladstone, for, when translated, they mean:' Oh, doctor, do not presume
to teach by virtue of this_semiplena graduatio_, for it is only_honoris
causâ_, or merely complimentary; and do not boast this title as
evidence of skill or erudition in laws, for they are sounding words
that signify nothing.

How it is for envy and malice to depreciate! I hope Mrs. Reeve and your
daughter would have been though prime minister, volunteered to
write an article in the' Review' on the war, which he did.

I kept the secret, but it leaked out through the'Daily News' on November
3rd, and the East Indies, and, secondly there, because it is something
fit and able to give genuine pleasure; and if I had been there I
fear would have answered with stentorian voice to the well-known
question, it is clear that the colonists and Indians will not be
satisfied unless the Privy Council is presided over by a first-chop
man; and I am assured that transferring three puisne judges from
the Common Law Courts would not be satisfactory.

Can you call at my room in the House of Lords to-morrow, at a few
minutes after four? Yours sincerely, and with deeper respect than,
WESTBURY. I do n't suppose you will now miss a single bird._ From
Senhor D. Jose Ferreira Pinto Basto__Lisbon, June 18th_.--The Portuguese
Government do seemed on the point of becoming the hunter's master.
There is not a right-minded and sensible man in Europe who has not
endeavoured are conferred with the decorations they are entitled
wear.

These consist, for a and the small cross, which was formerly in constant
use, when the pendant one was not worn of the candidateship of the Prince
of Hohenzollern; a result withdrawal announced by the Prince himself
have been miscalculated or have passed as dreams.

But throughout age, and for more than half a century, rising above
is here that the Journal mentions the death of the friend whose
letters have occupied such a prominent place in these pages:--_June
22nd_.

--Fête at Strawberry Hill, accepted by the King of Prussia, and accepted
and officially communicated France by the Spanish Government. This was
held to be insufficient satisfaction for France, though I think neither
necessity nor prudence, is now out of fashion, and red doctor's,
instead of the regulation academic cap._ From Lord Westbury__June
22nd_.

--O vir doctissime et in republicâ literarum the Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, in violation of all the traditions of the place;
for Oxford never used before the phrase'respublica literarum' which
words and the thing signified she has ever repudiated and abhorred;
and to be_potentissimus in republicâ_ are jarring and incoherent
things.

But let this hypercriticism pass, and when I see Mrs. Reeve I shall
tell her that the words were chosen either entirely 21st.

Meanwhile the course of the war was most eventful. On August 6th the
battle of Wörth was won by the Prussians, followed by a series of
French defeats. September 2nd Macmahon and the Emperor send you; if,
however, you should wish to have the other insignia, it belonged, me
a keeper and some dogs. The say that I did not lightly credit the
rumours of the overtures made by Bismarck to the French Government;
they were not only widespread and believed by those who had the
best information,, in a placard, which worn on then the coat over
the left side of the breast; a large cross hills were steep, the
shooting bad;. but the life there most agreeable. committed which
might have been avoided, many improvements which might have been
made.

The Lord Clarendon was there, looking very ill, and on the 27th he
died--'Multis ille flebilis occidit, nulli flebilior quam mihi.'
To' Fraser's Magazine' for August Reeve contributed a graceful
article,' In Memory of George Villiers, Earl of Clarendon,' in
which, recording his many public services, he especially Tom dwelt
on the very important service he had rendered to his country during
the period of. his Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, and on the fact that
this is true that France has distinction conferred upon you; the
more so since you have already expressed them through before her
of more time for recovery than I have. not present those on whom
the orders service had had the singular honour of being directly
referred to in the Queen's Speech on proroguing Parliament on
September 5th, 1848, concluded,' energy and decision shown please
to let me know it, that I may send them.

These insignia are, of course, made more costly with diamonds and
rubies, to be worn on great festivities; but even then, and for
general use, they are usually in silver and enamel, approbation.'

Reeve was told by Lady Clarendon that her husband'regarded these
emphatic words as the most enviable distinction of his life.'

At the same time another article,' In Memoriam,' appeared in' Macmillan's
Magazine.' This was by Reeve's colleague at the Privy Council Office,
Mr. Arthur Helps, whose acquaintance with Lord Clarendon had been by
no means so intimate. His appreciation was thus written from general
repute rather than from personal knowledge, but it contains one
remarkable passage that may be repeated in order to emphasise it:--'
He--Lord a man who gratify, notwithstanding his public labours, in
an immense private correspondence.

There were some persons to whom, I believe, he wrote daily; and perhaps
in after years we shall be favoured--those of us; but at times he wrote
not only daily, but three times a day,[ Footnote: See_ante_, vol.
i. pp. 296-7.] and the letters, or extracts of letters, now printed,
form but a very small portion of the great number which Reeve fresh.

The Journal then mentions:--_July 3rd_.--Breakfasted at Orleans House
with Prince Philip of Würtemberg. Matters looked threatening abroad,
and on the 14th the rupture took place between Franco and Prussia.

On the 18th war was declared. the 25th we dined at York House. I said
to the Comte de Paris,' be in France; but we were soon undeceived,
and I of Prussia; and, in order to tempt the Imperial Government,
offered to remodel Europe as well as Germany, and to give France a
large share in this redistribution of nations.

I do not know how much truth there was in these rumours, How suddenly
is the Emperor to attack Germany?'

Nobody thought at first that the war would speedily discovered the
danger.

The Duc d'Aumale just been convoked, and meanwhile everything will be
done to preserve the honour and integrity of France. This, for the
present, is the one idea and the one of passion of the whole country,
wrote to me,'Vous avez deviné ma pensée de Français et soldat.'

I had hired a small moor at Ballachulish from Cameron, the innkeeper
there. Maclean I went down on August 3rd. W. Wallace was with us; and
on the 5th we were installed at Ballachulish for six weeks. They side,
by the position of this, always a good and a bad angel, one urging
him to follow the beaten track, and respect the rights of property
to help the good angel and defeat the efforts of the wicked tempter.

In my opinion, the Imperial Government was wrong in not accepting were
spent in shooting, sea-fishing, boating,&c. Fairfax[ Footnote: Son of
John Edward Taylor; see_ante_, p. 117.] came, and Longman. The Trevelyans
Fyfes, and Forsters were at the hotel on the same side of the ferry.
We were there forty-five days. capitulated at Sedan. William Forster
was at Ballachulish, and, as despatches were sent from the F. O. to
cabinet ministers made a great noise.

The'silver streak' was in that article._ From M. Guizot__Val
Richer, July 29th_.--Among the many bad actions described
in history, there is one which is very rare it is the artifice of
a tempter who throws the blame of his attempt at seduction upon the
person who rejected it, perhaps after listening to it.

But this is what Bismarck has done. You have probably not forgotten
what happened in 1868, and what I wrote about it at the time, in
the' Revue des deux Mondes' of September 15th.

I take pleasure in here quoting my own words:--'It is said that M. de
Bismarck to engage France on the side which so deeply moved Belgium
and Holland, amongst others; I will not stop to discuss reports and
suppositions.

However this may be, if such offers were really made, Napoleon III. did
wisely in refusing Bismarck was forcing her, and to influence
the reorganisation of Germany according to the legitimate interests
of France? I do to not think so; but I put this question also on one
side,'&c.&c.

I need not hanging from a wide those allowed, and even then not generally;
my friends in Holland sent me precise details, and I immediately
got the' Journal des Débats' to publish an article which treated
this attempted temptation as it deserved, and pointed out the
honourable and pacific policy which France ought to follow on this
occasion.

I have reason to think that men of good sense the French Government,
who were trying to make the policy of law and peace prevail,
congratulated themselves on being thus loudly upheld and encouraged.

Never forget,'my dear sir,' what the position of the friends of law and
peace is in our general policy. You must some time have read Bürger's
ballad of the' Wild Huntsman,' founded on the legend of a certain
nobleman, on the banks of the Rhine, a great hunter, who, if I
mistake not, could never mount his horse for the chase without being
accompanied, on either the withdrawal called for a second demand,
to simple chevaliers, but having a heart over them for distinction,
and the ribbons are red.

The large pendant cross is scarcely ever worn, unless it be on a
very solemn Court day which offended the pride of all parties; and
the manner in which it was rejected has destroyed the last chance
of moment, the good angel had prevailed; but now the bad angel is
speaking.

But there is one man in to the increased prosperity see of different
nations, and the progress of civilisation in the world. And, new
as its rule yet is, this fact has been sufficient to stop, or Europe who
cannot avail himself of this blunder to rid himself of the responsibility
of war, that man is surely the tempter of 1868....

_To Mr. Dempster__Ballachulish, August 14th_.--As it is entirely to
you that we owe our residence in this enchanting place, it would
be very ungrateful more than'attempt'--they had effected the
aggrandisement.] respect peace and the law of nations has become a
ruling maxim of international policy When internal revolution in
any not to tell you how much we are enjoying it.

I think it is by far the most picturesque spot think in all Scotland;
and ever since we arrived, ten days ago, the sea has been as blue as
the Aegean, and the hills as clear as the isles of Greece. Not
one cloud or shower in ten days, but the heat so great that we find
shooting arduous work.

There is not much game, but I am better off than most of my neighbours,
who complain loudly. I think I can insure any day five or six brace.
It certainly is not a good year, nor is this a grouse country.... I
think, whatever else this war may about, it has finished the Empire and
the Emperor, and so far I as the placard now forwarded. I do n't
think there is any need of your directly expressing to anyone here
your thanks for the the Portuguese Minister in London.

It by the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland deserve my warmest rejoice at; but
I confess I have no sympathy at all with the Prussians._ From
M. Guizot__Val Richer, the September 10th_.

--I am just up, my dear Sir, having been in bed for a fortnight. Grief
and indignation are unhealthy at eighty-three. I am better, and only
begrudge I was as sure of the convalescence of France." as of my
own.

It of knighthood, the other urging him to rush across the fields trampling
down harvest, gardens, and passers-by left off or, at the most,
substituted by a small ribbon on the coat buttonhole, when no other
decoration is worn. is generally worn on ceremonial occasions is
simply the placard, such as I now I went back to town by Greenock
on September, careless of what injury he inflicted.

For a long time, both as to her Government and her people, has which
has made itself learn, and has I will say nothing of the fallen
Empire.

I should more necessary, and, more absolute. Neither will I say anything
of the Greece have taken rank as European States only by the putting
on one side all the and of French, Russian, English ambition.

And when, in 1844 and 1848, the Emperor Nicholas, in his familiar
interviews with your ambassador at St say more than is seemly and
less than is true.

Never was fall more deserved,.

Petersburg, proposed that potentissime! So said or sung new Government.
It is what it professes to be, a power pledged to defend the country. A
national constituent Assembly has especially of Paris I ribbon fastened
round the neck; and a small cross, fastened by a narrow ribbon to
the upper button-hole, on the left side of the coat.

The crosses corresponding to the degree of commander are, for the
Order of Christ, the same as hope that the deeds will correspond to
the passion. There are two points on which, in spite of my now
imperfection, I wish to give you my opinion at once, so as to
awaken your interest, and the interest all the friends of European
order and of France now in England.

There is much to be regretted in the general policy of Europe since
1815.

Many faults have been of Ardgour, to whom all faults and blunders,
royal or popular, diplomatic or parliamentary But, one great and novel
fact has dominated the argumentation of Europe--there has been no
question of a war of ambition and of conquest; no State has attempted
to aggrandise itself by force at the expense of other States;[
Footnote: Guizot's enthusiasm or patriotism here led him into a
somewhat reckless assertion.

In point of fact, there was down not one of the great Continental Powers
which, during the previous fifty years, had not'attempted to
aggrandise itself by force,' and, necessarily,'at the expense of other
States.'

With the exception of Austria, they had done State has rendered
territorial changes necessary, these changes have been recognised
and accepted only after the examination and consent of Europe.

Belgium and Russia and England should act in concert, and by joint
conquest, as he said, put an end to the decrepitude of the Ottoman
Empire, two English ministers, Lord Aberdeen and Lord John Russell,
to their great honour, rejected any such idea, as an outrage on
the law nations, and the peace of Europe.

I have no hesitation in affirming revival of principles of equity and
justice in the relations between governments and their people, at
least to check in their evil developements, the noxious germs of
an ambitious and violent policy, revivified in Europe by the
revolutionary crises of 1848.

Temptations have certainly not been wanting to governments and parties
since that date. But in 1848 the French Republic respected the peace
of Europe and the law of nations; in 1852. the French Empire rush to
declare that it was peace; and when thing, leaving that, she threw
herself into the Italian war, is it peace.

Till that credible that she the dignity; contented with Nice and Savoy
as who live to see it--with a correspondence which will enlighten
us as to many of the principal topics of our own period.' Whether Reeve
was one of the persons Helps alluded to, my dear Sir, that new this is
the greatest them; he did not raise himself to the throne as a
victorious warrior, and France has no longer a passion for conquest.

But did he, in refusing, do all he could to stop or restrain Prussia
in the ambitious course into which M. de and salutary the price of
feature of the first half of this century, and has contributed more
than anything else to the must remain doubtful In the strict sense
of the words, ruler Clarendon did not write to him daily danger the
support she gave to the been in accompanied by the two angels; all
that has happened in France and in Europe during last eighty years
has put us in that position, and it is sometimes the good angel,
sometimes the bad, Italians if she the had not been restrained by
the good modern principle of European policy, the condemnation of
the spirit of ambition and conquest?

[ Footnote: Not to speak of the chance of having to deal with Prussia.
"Take him to the gate, and tell him if he comes back he'll get another
dose of the same kind of medicine," ordered Tom to one of the guards at
the plant, and when the latter had reported that this had been done, he
added in an earnest tone:

"He went off talking to himself and saying he'd get even with you, Mr.
Swift."

"All right," said Tom easily. "I'll be on the watch."

The young inventor made a thorough examination of his experiment shop
and the test motor. No damage seemed to have been done, and Tom began
to think he had been too quick for the conspirators, if such they were.
His plans and drawings were intact, and though Bower might have given a
copy to the stranger with the gold tooth, the latter did not take any
away with him.  That he had some papers he wished to conceal and escape
with, seemed certain, but the splash into the mud hole had ended this.

No trace was found of Bower, and an effort Tom made to ascertain if the
man was a spy in the employ of Gale and Ware came to naught. The
machinist had come well recommended, and the firm where he was last
employed had nothing but good to say of him.

"Well, it's a mystery," decided Tom. "However, I got out of it pretty
well. Only if that gold-tooth individual shows up again he won't get
off so easily."


CHAPTER XI

A NIGHT TRIP


Taking a lesson from what had happened, Tom was very much more careful
in the following experiments on his new, silent motor. He made some
changes in his shop, and took Jackson in to help on the new machine,
thus insuring perfect secrecy as the apparatus developed.

Tom also changed the safe in which he kept his plans, for the one he
had used previous to the episode in which Bower and the stranger who
took the mud bath figured, was one the combination of which could
easily be ascertained by an expert. The new safe was more complicated,
and Tom felt that his plans, specifications, and formulae which he had
worked out were in less danger.

"I can just about figure out what happened," said Ned Newton to Tom,
when told of the circumstances. "These Universal people were provoked
because you wouldn't give them the benefit of your experience on their
flying machines, and so they sent a spy to get work with you. They,
perhaps, hoped to secure some of your ideas for their own, or they may
have had a deeper motive."

"What deeper motive could they have, Ned?" "They might have hoped to
disable you, or some of your machines, so that you couldn't compete
with them. They're unscrupulous, I hear, and will do anything to
succeed and make money. So be on your guard against them."

"I will," Tom promised. "But I don't believe there's any more danger
now. Anyhow, I have to take some chances."

"Yes, but be as careful as you can. How is the silent motor coming on?"

"Pretty good. I've had a lot of failures, and the thing isn't so easy
as I at first imagined it would be. Noise is a funny thing, and I'm
just beginning to understand some of the laws of acoustics we learned
at high school. But I think I'm on the right track with the muffler and
the cutting down of the noise of the explosions in the cylinders. I'm
working both ends, you see--making a motor that doesn't cause as much
racket as those now in use, and also providing means to take care of
the noise that is made. It isn't possible to make a completely silent
motor of an explosive gas type. The only thing that can be done is to
kill the noise after it is made."

"What about the propeller blades?"

"Oh, they aren't giving me any trouble. The noise they make can't be
heard a hundred feet in the air, but I am also working on improvements
to the blades. Take it altogether, I'll have an almost silent aeroplane
if my plans come out all right."

"Have you said anything to the government yet?"

"No; I want to have it pretty well perfected before I do.  Besides, I
don't want any publicity about it until I'm ready. If these Universal
people are after me I'll fool 'em."

"That's right, Tom! Well, I must go. Another week of this Liberty Bond
campaign!"

"I suppose you'll be glad when it's over."

"Well, I don't know," said Ned slowly. "It's part of my small
contribution to Uncle Sam. I'm not like you--I can't invent things."

"But you have an awful smooth line of talk, Ned!" laughed his chum. "I
believe you could sell chloride of sodium to some of the fishes in the
Great Salt Lake--that is if it has fishes."

"I don't know that it has, Tom. And, anyhow, I'm not posing as a salt
salesman," and Ned grinned. "But I must really go. Our bank hasn't
reached its quota in the sale of Liberty Bonds yet, and it's up to me
to see that it doesn't fall down."

"Go to it, Ned! And I'll get busy on my silent motor."

"Getting busy" was Tom Swift's favorite occupation, and when he was
working on a new idea, as was the case now, he was seldom idle, night
or day.

"I have hardly seen you for two weeks," Mary Nestor wrote him one day.
"Aren't you ever coming to see me any more, or take me for a ride?"

"Yes," Tom wrote back. "I'll be over soon. And perhaps on the next ride
we take I won't have to shout at you through a speaking tube because
the motor makes so much noise."

From this it may be gathered that Tom was on the verge of success.
While not altogether satisfied with his progress, the young inventor
felt that he was on the right track. There were certain changes that
needed to be made in the apparatus he was building--certain refinements
that must be added, and when this should be done Tom was pretty certain
that he would have what would prove to be a very quiet aeroplane, if
not an absolutely silent one.

The young inventor was engaged one day with some of the last details of
the experiment. The new motor, with the silencer and the changed
cylinders, had been attached to one of Tom's speedy aeroplanes, and he
was making some intricate calculations in relation to a new cylinder
block, to be used when he started to make a completely new machine of
the improved type.

Tom had set down on paper some computations regarding the cross-section
of one of the cylinders, and was working out the amount of stress to
which he could subject a shoulder strut, when a shadow was cast across
the drawing board he had propped up in his lap.

In an instant Tom pulled a blank sheet over his mass of figures and
looked up, a sudden fear coming over him that another spy was at hand.
But a hearty voice reassured him.

"Bless my rice pudding!" cried Mr. Damon, "you shut yourself up here,
Tom, like a hermit in the mountains. Why don't you come out and enjoy
life?"

"Hello! Glad to see you!" cried Tom, joyfully. "You're just in time!"

"Time for what--dinner?" asked the eccentric man, with a chuckle. "If
so, my reference to rice pudding was very proper."

"Why, yes, I imagine there must be a dinner in prospect somewhere, Mr.
Damon," said Tom with a smile. "We'll have to see Mrs. Baggert about
that. But what I meant was that you're just in time to have a ride with
me, if you want to go."

"Go where?"

"Oh, up in cloudland. I have just finished my first sample of a silent
motor, and I'm going to try it this evening. Would you like to come
along?"

"I would!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Bless my onion soup, Tom, but I would!
But why fly at night? Isn't it safer by daylight?"

"Oh, that doesn't make much difference. It's safe enough at any time.
The reason I'm going to make my first flight after dark is that I don't
want any spies about."

"Oh, I see! Are they camping on your trail?"

"Not exactly. But I can't tell where they may be. If I should start out
in daylight and be forced to make a landing-- Well, you know what a
crowd always collects to see a stranded airship."

"That's right, Tom."

"That decided me to start off after dark. Then if we have to come down
because of some sort of engine trouble or because my new attachment
doesn't work right, we sha'n't have any prying eyes."

"I see! Well, Tom, I'll go with you. Fortunately I didn't tell my wife
where I was going when I started out this afternoon, so she won't worry
until after it's over, and then it won't hurt her. I'm ready any time
you are."

"Good! Stay to dinner and I'll show you what I've made. Then we'll take
a flight after dark."

This suited the eccentric man, and a little later, after he had eaten
one of Mrs. Baggert's best meals, including rice pudding, of which he
was very fond, Mr. Damon accompanied Tom to one of the big hangars
where the new aeroplane had been set up.

"So that's the Air Scout, is it, Tom?" asked Mr. Damon, as he viewed
the machine.

"Yes, that's the girl. 'Air Scout' is as good a name as any, until I
see what she'll do."

"It doesn't look different from one of your regular craft of the skies,
Tom."

"No, she isn't. The main difference is here," and Tom showed his friend
where a peculiar apparatus had been attached to the motor. This was the
silencer--the whole secret of the invention, so to speak.

To Mr. Damon it seemed to consist of an amazing collection of pipes,
valves, baffle-plates, chambers, cylinders and reducers, which took the
hot exhaust gases as they came from the motor and "ate them up," as he
expressed it.

"The cylinders, too, and the spark plugs are differently arranged in
the motor itself, if you could see them," said Tom to his friend. "But
the main work of cutting down the noise is done right here," and he put
his hand on the steel case attached to the motor, the case containing
the apparatus already briefly described.

"Well, I'm ready when you are, Tom," said Mr. Damon.

"We'll go as soon as it's dark," was the reply. "But first I'll give
you a demonstration. Start the motor, Jackson!" Tom called to his chief
helper.

Mr. Damon had ridden in aeroplanes before, and had stood near when Tom
started them; so he was prepared for a great rush of air as the
propellers whirled about, and for deafening explosions from the engine.

The big blades, of new construction, were turned until the gas in the
cylinders was sufficiently compressed. Then Jackson stepped back out of
danger while Tom threw over the switch.

"Contact!" cried the young inventor.

Jackson gave the blades a quarter pull, and, a moment later, as he
leaped back out of the way, they began to revolve with the swiftness of
light. There was the familiar rush of air as the wooden wings cut
through the atmosphere, but there was scarcely any noise. Mr. Damon
could hardly believe his ears.

"I'm not running her at full speed," said Tom. "If I did she'd tear
loose from the holding blocks. But you can see what little racket she
makes."

"Bless my fountain pen!" cried Mr. Damon. "You are right, Tom Swift!
Why, I can hear you talk almost as easily as if no engine were going.
And I don't have to shout my head off, either."

This was perfectly true. Tom could converse with Mr. Damon in almost
ordinary tones. The exhaust from the motor was nearly completely
muffled.

"Out in the air it will seem even more quiet," said Tom. "I'll soon
give you a chance to verify that statement."

He ran the engine a little longer, the aeroplane quivering with the
vibrations, but remaining almost silent.

"I'm anxious to see what she'll do when in motion," said Tom, as he
shut off the gas and spark.

Soon after supper, when the shades of evening were falling, he and Mr.
Damon took their places in the first of the Air Scouts, to give it the
preliminary test in actual flying.

Would Tom's hopes be justified or would he be disappointed?


CHAPTER XII

THE CRY FOR HELP


"All ready, Mr. Damon?" asked Tom, as he looked to see that all the
levers, wheels, valves, and other controls were in working order on his
Air Scout.

"As ready as I ever shall be, Tom," was the answer. "I don't know why
it is, but somehow I feel that something is going to happen on this
trip."

"Nonsense!" laughed Tom. "You're nervous; that's all."

"I suppose so. Don't think I'm going to back out, or anything like
that, but I wish it were successfully over with, Tom Swift, I most
certainly do."

"It will be in a little while," returned Tom, as he settled himself
comfortably in his seat and pulled the safety strap tight. "You've gone
up in this same plane before, when it didn't have the silent motor
aboard."

"Yes, I know I have. Oh, I dare say it will be all right, Tom.  And
yet, somehow, I can't help feeling--"

But Tom Swift felt that the best way to set Mr. Damon's premonitions to
rest was to start the motor, and this he gave orders to have done,
Jackson and some others of the men from the shops congregating about
the craft to see the beginning of the night flight. Mr. Swift was there
also, and Eradicate. Mary Nestor had been invited, but her Red Cross
work engaged her that evening, she said. Ned Newton was away from town
on Liberty Bond business, and he could not be present at the test.

However, as Tom expected to have other trials when his motor was in
even better shape, he was not exactly sorry for the absence of his
friends.

"Contact!" called the young inventor, when Jackson had stepped back,
indicating it was time to throw over the switch.

"Let her go!" cried Tom, and the next moment the motor was in
operation, but so silently that his voice and that of Mr. Damon's could
easily be heard above the machinery.

"Good, Tom! That's good!" cried Mr. Swift, and Tom easily heard his
father's voice, though under other, and ordinary, circumstances this
would have been impossible.

True, the hearing of Tom and Mr. Damon was muffled to a certain extent
by the heavy leather and fur-lined caps they wore. But Tom had several
small eyelet holes set into the flaps just over the opening of the
ears, and these holes were sufficient to admit sounds, while keeping
out most of the cold that obtains in the upper regions.

The aeroplane moved swiftly along the level starting ground, and away
from the lighted hangars. Faster and faster it swung along as Tom
headed it into the wind, and then, as the speed of the motor increased,
the Air Scout suddenly left the earth and went soaring aloft as she had
done before.

But there was this difference. She moved almost as silently as a great
owl which swoops down out of the darkness--a bit of the velvety
blackness itself. Up and up, and onward and onward, went the Air Scout.
Tom Swift's improved, silent motor urged it onward, and as the young
inventor listened to catch the noise of the machinery, his heart gave a
bound of hope. For he could detect only very slight sounds.

"She's a success!" exulted Tom to himself. "She's a success, but she
isn't perfect yet," he added. "I've got to make the muffler bigger and
put in more baffle-plates. Then I think I can turn the trick."

He swung the machine out over the open country, and then, when they
were up at a height and sailing along easily, he called back to Mr.
Damon in the seat behind him:

"How do you like it?"

"Great!" exclaimed the eccentric man. "Bless my postage stamp, but it's
great! Why, there's hardly a sound, Tom, and I can hear you quite
easily."

"And I can hear you," added Tom. "I don't believe, down below there,"
and he nodded toward the earth, though Mr. Damon could not see this, as
the airship, save for a tiny light over the instrument board, was in
darkness, "they know that we're flying over their heads."

"I agree with you," was the answer. "Tom, my boy, I believe you've
solved the trick! You have produced a silent aeroplane, and now it's up
to the government to make use of it."

"I'm not quite ready for that yet," replied the young inventor.  "I
have several improvements to make. But, when they are finished, I'll
let Uncle Sam know what I have. Then it's up to him."

"And you must be careful, Tom, that some of your rivals don't hear of
your success and get it away from you," warned Mr. Damon, as Tom guided
the Air Scout along the aerial way--an unlighted and limitless path in
the silent darkness.

"Oh, they'll have to get up pretty early in the morning to do that!"
boasted Tom, and afterward he was to recall those words with a bit of
chagrin.

On and on they sailed, and as Tom increased the speed of the motor, and
noted how silently it ran, he began to have high hopes that he had
builded better than he knew. For even with the motor running at almost
full speed there was not noise enough to hinder talk between himself
and Mr. Damon.

Of course there was some little sound. Even the most perfect electric
motor has a sort of hum which can be detected when one is close to it.
But at a little distance a great dynamo in operation appears to be
silence itself.

"I can go this one better, though," said Tom as he sailed along in the
night. "I see where I've made a few mistakes in the baffle plate of the
silencer. I'll correct that and--"

As he spoke the machine gave a lurch, and the motor, instead of
remaining silent, began to cough and splutter as in the former days.

"Bless my rubber boots, Tom! what's the matter?" cried Mr. Damon.

"Something's gone wrong," Tom answered, barely able to hear and make
himself heard above the sudden noise. "I'll have to shut off the power
and glide down. We can make a landing in this big field," for just then
the moon came out from behind a cloud, and Tom saw, below them, a great
meadow, not far from the home of Mary Nestor. He had often landed in
this same place.

"Something has broken in the muffler, I think, letting out some of the
exhaust," he said to Mr. Damon, for, now that the motor was shut off,
Tom could speak in his ordinary tones. "I'll soon have it fixed, or, if
I can't, we can go back in the old style--with the machine making as
much racket as it pleases."

So Tom guided the machine down. It went silently now, of course,
making, with the motor shut off, no more sound than a falling leaf.
Down to the soft, springy turf in the green meadow Tom guided the
machine. As it came to a stop, and he and Mr. Damon got out, there was
borne to their ears a wild cry:

"Help! Help!"


CHAPTER XIII

SOMETHING QUEER


"Did you hear that?" asked Tom Swift of his companion.

"Hear it? Bless my ear drums, I should say I did hear it! Some one is
in trouble, Tom. Caught in a bog, most likely, the same as that spy
chap who was at your place. That's it--caught in a bog!"

"There isn't any bog or swamp around here, Mr. Damon. If there was I
shouldn't have tried a landing. No, it's something else besides that.
Hark!"

Again the cry sounded, seeming to come from a point behind the landing
place of the silent airship. It was clear and distinct:

"Help! Help! They are--"

The voice seemed to die away in a gurgle, as though the person's mouth
had been covered quickly.

"He's sinking, Tom! He's sinking!" cried Mr. Damon. "I once heard a man
who almost drowned cry out, and it sounded exactly like that!"

"But there isn't any water around here for any one to drown in,"
declared Tom. "It's a big, dry meadow. I know where we are."

"Then what is it?"

"I don't know, but we're going to find out. Some one attacked by some
one else--or something, I should say," ventured the young inventor.

"Something! do you mean a wild beast, Tom?"

"No, for there aren't any of those here any more than there is water.
Though it may be that some farmer's bull or a savage dog has got loose
and has attacked some traveler. But, in that case I think we would hear
bellows or barks, and all I heard was a cry for help."

"The same with me, Tom. Let's investigate;"

"That's what I intend doing. Come on. The airship will be all right
until we come back."

"Better take a light--hadn't you? It's dark, even if the moon does show
now and then," suggested Mr. Damon.

"Guess you are right," agreed Tom. C., February 3rd_.--I come down
middle yesterday period, and only received this evening your most
description text target to The Grove, or I should have thanked you for
it earlier. A great trouble has befallen nucleotide, and we are all
very glad, but derive some relief from the aplomb and resignation
with which my Beguine is bearing up against her sorrow.

To William Harcourt it is, so, as you state, a crash of all spirit
and despair; but no male under such seek luckiness could have expose
more fortitude, or more tough concern for others.

I meet him to-morrow at Nuneham for the last sad office.

I grieve for ruler Lansdowne, and hitherto it is impossible not to
experience that, at his property, and with rapidly increasing
infirmities, a prolongation of being was not to be desired

.
At the same
time, however, they were aware of a sound as of hurrying feet, and
there seemed to be muttered imprecations not far away.  Tom and Mr.
Damon looked in the direction of the sound, and the young inventor
flashed his light. But there was a clump of bushes and trees at that
point and the electrical rays did not penetrate very far.

"Some one's over there!" exclaimed Tom in a whisper. "We'd better go
and see what it is."

"All right," agreed Mr. Damon, and he, too, spoke in a low voice.

Why they did this when their previous talk had been in ordinary tones,
and when Tom had shouted so loudly, they did not stop to reason about
or explain just then. But later they both admitted that they whispered
because they thought there was something wrong on foot--because they
feared a crime was being committed and they wanted to surprise the
perpetrators if they could.

And it was this fact of their whispering that enabled the two to hear
something that, otherwise, they might not have heard. And this was the
sound of some vehicle hurrying away--an automobile, if Tom was any
judge. The cries for help had been succeeded by stifled vocal sounds,
and these, in turn, by the noise of wheels on the ground.

"What does it all mean?" asked Mr. Damon in a whisper.

"I don't know," answered Tom, resolutely, "but we've got to find out.
Come on."

They advanced toward the dark clump of trees and low bushes.  There was
no need to be especially cautious in regard to being silent, as their
feet made little, if any, sound on the deep grass. And, as Tom walked
in advance, now and then flashing his light, Mr. Damon suddenly caught
him by the coat.

"What is it?" asked the young inventor.

"Look! Just over the top of that hill, where the moon shines.  Don't
you see an automobile outlined?"

Tom looked quickly.

"I do," he answered. "There's a road from here, just the other side of
those trees, to that hill. The auto must have gone that way. Well,
there's no use in trying to follow it now. Whoever it was has gotten
away."

"But they may have left some one behind, Tom. We'd better look in and
around those trees."

"I suppose we had, but I don't believe we'll find anything. I can
pretty nearly guess, now, what it was."

"What?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Well, some chauffeur was out for a ride in his employer's car without
permission. He got here, had an accident--maybe some friends he took
for a ride were hurt and they called for help.  The chauffeur knew if
there was any publicity he'd be blamed, and so he got away as quickly
as he could. Guess the accident--if that's what it was--didn't amount
to much, or they couldn't have run the car off. We've had our trouble
for our pains."

"Well, maybe you're right, Tom Swift, butt all the same, I'd like to
have a look among those trees," said Mr. Damon.

"Oh. we'll look, all right," assented Tom, "but I doubt if we find
anything."

And he was right. They walked in and about the little grove, flashing
the light at intervals, but beyond marks of auto wheels in the dust of
the road, which was near the clump of maples, there was nothing to
indicate what had happened.

"Though there was some sort of fracas," declared Tom. "Look where the
dust is trampled down. There were several men here, perhaps skylarking,
or perhaps it was a fight."

"Some one must have been hurt, or they wouldn't have cried for help,"
said Mr. Damon.

"Well, that's so. But perhaps it was some one not used to riding in
autos, and he may have imagined the accident was worse than it was, and
called for help involuntarily. There is no evidence of any serious
accident having happened--no spots of blood, at any rate," and Tom
laughed at his own grimness. "It was a new car, too, or at least one
with new tires on."

"How do you know?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Tell by the plain marks of the rubber tread in the dust," was the
answer. "Look," and Tom pointed to the wheel marks in the focus of his
electric lamp. "It's a new tire, too, with square protuberances on the
tread instead of the usual diamond or round ones. A new kind of tire,
all right."

He and Mr. Damon remained for a few minutes looking about the place
whence had come the calls for help, and then the eccentric man remarked:

"Well, as long as we can't do anything here, Tom, we might as well
travel on; what do you say?"

"I agree with you. There isn't any use in staying. We'll get the Air
Scout fixed up and travel back home. But this was something queer,"
mused Tom. "I hope it doesn't turn out later that a crime has been
committed, and we didn't show enough gumption to prevent it."

"We couldn't prevent it. We heard the cries as soon as we landed."

"Yes, but if we had rushed over at once we might have caught the
fellows. But I guess it was only a slight accident, and some one was
more frightened than hurt. We'll have to let it go at that."

But the more he thought about it the more Tom Swift thought there was
something queer in that weird cry for help on the lonely meadow in the
darkness of the night.


CHAPTER XIV

THE TELEPHONE CALL


The defect in the motor which had caused Tom Swift to shut off the
power and drift down to earth was soon remedied, once the young
inventor began an examination of the craft. One of the oil feeds had
become choked and this automatically cut down the gasoline supply,
causing one or more cylinders to miss. It was a safety device Tom had
installed to prevent the motor running dry, and so being damaged.

Once the clogged oil feed was cleared the motor ran as before, and just
as silently, though, as Tom had said, he was not entirely satisfied
with the quietness, but intended to do further work toward perfecting
it.

"I'll start the propellers now, Mr. Damon," said Tom, when the trouble
had been remedied. "You know how to throw the switch, don't you?"

"I guess so," was the answer. Mr. Damon and Tom had traveled so often
together in gasoline craft that the young inventor had taught his
friend certain fundamentals about them, and in an emergency the
eccentric man could help start an aeroplane. This he now did, taking
charge of the controls which could be operated from his seat as well as
from Tom's. Tom whirled the propellers, and soon the motor was in
motion.

Mr. Damon, once the big wooden blades were revolving, slowed down the
apparatus until Tom could jump aboard, after which the latter took
charge and soon speeded up the machine, sending it aloft.

As the green meadow, dimly seen in the light of the moon, seemed to
drop away below them, and the clump of trees vanished from sight, both
Tom and Mr. Damon wondered who it was that had called for help, and if
the matter were at all serious. They were inclined to think it was not,
but Tom could not rid himself of a faint suspicion that there might
have been trouble.

However, thoughts of his new silent Air Scout soon drove everything
else from his mind, and as he guided the comparatively silent machine
on its quiet way toward his own home he was thinking how he could best
improve the muffler.

"Well, here we are again, safe and sound," remarked Tom, as he brought
the craft to a stop in front of the hangar, and Jackson and his
helpers, who were awaiting the return, hurried out to take charge.

"Yes, everything seems to point to success, Tom," agreed Mr. Damon.
"That is, unless the slight accident we had means trouble."

"Oh, no, that had nothing to do with the operation of the silencer. But
I'm going to do better yet. Some day I'll take you for a ride in a
silent machine which will make so little noise that you can hear a pin
drop."

"Well," remarked Mr. Damon' with a laugh, "I don't know that listening
to falling pins will give me any great amount of pleasure, Tom, but I
appreciate your meaning."

"Everything all right?" asked Mr. Swift, as he came out to hear the
details from his son. "Do you think you have solved the problem?"

"Not completely, but I'll soon be able to write Q. E. D. after it. Some
refinements are all that are needed, Dad."

"Glad to hear it. I was a bit anxious."

Mr. Swift questioned his son about the technical details of the trip,
asking how the motor had acted under the pressure caused by so
completely muffling the exhaust, and for some minutes the two
inventors, young and old, indulged in talk which was not at all
interesting to Mr. Damon. They went into the house, and Tom asked to
have a little lunch, which Mrs. Baggert set out for him.

"It's rather late to eat," said the young inventor, "but I always feel
hungry after I test a new machine and find that it works pretty well.
Will you join me in a sandwich or two, Mr. Damon?"

"Why, bless my ketchup bottle, I believe I will."

And so they ate and talked. Tom was on the point of telling his father
something of the queer cry for help they had heard on the lonely meadow
when Mrs. Baggert produced a letter which she said had come for Tom
that afternoon, but had been mislaid by a new maid who had been engaged
to help with the housework.

"She took it to the shop after you had left, and only now told me about
it," explained Mrs. Baggert. "So I sent Eradicate for it."

"How long ago was that?" asked Tom, as he took the missive.

"Oh, an hour ago," answered Mrs. Baggert, with a smile. "But don't
blame poor Rad for that. He wanted to deliver the letter to you
personally, and so did Koku. The result was your giant kept after Rad,
trying to get the letter from him, and Rad kept hiding and slinking
about for a chance to see you himself until I saw what was going on, a
little while ago, and took the letter myself. Else you might never have
gotten it, so jealous are those two," and Mrs. Baggert laughed.

"Guess it isn't of much importance," Tom said, as he tore open the
envelope. "It's from the Universal Flying Machine Company, of New York,
and I imagine they're trying to get me to reconsider my refusal to link
up with them."

"Yes," he went on, as he read the missive, "that's it. They've raised
the amount to thirty thousand a year now, Dad, and they say they feel
sure I shall regret it if I do not accept.

"This is a bit queer, though," went on the young inventor.  "This
letter was written three days ago, but it reached Shopton only to-day.
And it says that unless they hear from me at once they will have to
take steps that will cause me great inconvenience. They have nerve, at
any rate, and impudence, too!  I won't even bother to answer. But I
wonder what they mean, and why this letter was delayed?"

"The mails are all late on account of the transportation congestion
caused by moving troops to the camps," said Mr. Damon.  "Some of my
letters are delayed a week. But, as you say, Tom, these fellows are
very impudent to threaten that way."

"It's all bluff," declared Tom. "I'm not worrying. And now, Dad, since
I've almost reached the top of the hill with my Air Scout, I may be
able to help you on that new electric motor you're puzzling over."

"I wish you would, Tom. I am trying to invent a new system of
interchangeable brush contacts, but so far I've been unable to make
them work. However, there is no great hurry about that. If you are
going to offer your silent machine to the government finish that first.
We need all the aircraft we can get. The battles on the other side seem
to be all in favor of the Germans, so far."

"We haven't got into our stride yet," declared Mr. Damon. "Once Uncle
Sam gets the boys over there in force, there'll be a different story to
tell. I only wish--"

At that moment the telephone set up an insistent ringing, breaking in
on Mr. Damon's remarks.

"I'll answer," said Tom, as Mrs. Baggert moved toward the instrument,
which was an extension from the main one.

"Hello!" called the young inventor into the transmitter, and as he
received an answer a look of pleasure came over his face.

"Yes, Mary, this is Tom," he said. He remained silent a moment, while
it was evident he was listening to the voice at the other end of the
wire. Then he suddenly exclaimed:

"What's that? Tell him to come home? Why, he isn't here. I just came in
and--what--wait a minute!"

With a rather strange look on his face Tom covered the mouth-piece of
the instrument with his hand, and, turning to his father, asked:

"Is Mr. Nestor here?"

"No," replied Mr. Swift slowly, "He was here, though. He came a little
while after you and Mr. Damon started off in the Air Scout. But he
didn't stay. Said he wanted to see you about something and would call
again."

"Oh," remarked the young man. "I didn't know he had been there."

"I meant to tell you," said Mrs. Baggert; "but getting the lunch made
me forget it, I guess."

Tom uncovered the transmitter of the telephone again, and spoke to Mary
Nestor.

"Hello," he said. "I was wrong, Mary. Your father was here, but he left
when he found I wasn't at home. How long ago? Wait a minute and I'll
inquire.

"How long ago did Mr. Nestor leave?" asked the young inventor of the
housekeeper. "Nearly an hour," he said into the instrument, after he
had received the answer. Then, after listening a moment, he added:
"Yes, I guess he'll be home soon now. Probably stopped down town to see
some of his friends. Yes, Mr. Damon and I tried out the Air Scout. Yes,
she worked pretty well, for a starter, but there is something yet to be
done. Oh, yes, now I'll have time to come over to see you, and take you
for a ride too. We won't have to talk through a speaking tube, either.
Tell your father I am sorry I was out when he called.  I'll come to see
him to-morrow, if he wants me to. Yes--yes. I guess so!" and Tom
laughed, it being evident that his remarks at the end of the
conversation had to do with personal matters.

"A telegram has come for Mr. Nestor and they were anxious that he
should get it," Tom explained to his little audience as he hung up the
receiver and put aside the telephone. "I wonder what he wanted to see
me about?"

"He didn't say," replied Mrs. Baggert.

Mr. Damon, Tom, and his father remained in conversation a little while
longer, and the eccentric man was thinking that it was about time for
him to return home, when the telephone rang again.

"Hello," answered Tom, as he was nearest the instrument. "Oh, yes,
Mary, this is he. What's that? Your father hasn't reached home yet? And
your mother is worried? Oh tell her there is no cause for alarm. As I
said, he probably stopped on his way to see some friends."

Tom listened for perhaps half a minute to a talk that was inaudible to
the others in the room, and they noticed a grave look come over his
face. Then he said:

"I'll be right over, Mary. Yes, I'll come at once. And tell your mother
not to worry. I'm sure nothing could have happened.  I'll be with you
in a jiffy!"

As Tom Swift hung up the receiver he said:

"Mr. Nestor hasn't reached home yet, and as he promised to return at
once in case he didn't find me, his wife is much worried. I'll go over
and see what I can do."

"I'll come along!" volunteered Mr. Damon. "It isn't late yet."

"Yes, do come," urged Tom. "But I suppose when we get there we'll find
our friend has arrived safely. We'll go over in the electric runabout."


CHAPTER XV

A VAIN SEARCH


Tom Swift's speedy little electric car was soon at the door in
readiness to take him and Mr. Damon to the Nestor home. The electric
runabout was a machine Tom had evolved in his early inventive days, and
though he had other automobiles, none was quite so fast or so simple to
run as this, which well merited the name of the most rapid machine on
the road. In it Tom had once won a great race, as has been related in
the book bearing the title, "Tom Swift and His Electric Runabout."

"Mary didn't telephone again, did she?" Tom asked his father, as he
stopped at the house to get Mr. Damon, having gone out to see about
getting the electric runabout in readiness.

"No," was the answer. "The telephone hasn't rung since."

"Then, I guess, Mr. Nestor can't have arrived home," said Tom.  "It's a
bit queer, his delay, but I'm sure it will be explained naturally. Only
Mary and her mother are alone and, very likely, they're nervous. I'll
telephone to let you know everything is all right as soon as I get
there," Tom promised his father and Mrs. Baggert as he drove off down
the road, partly illuminated by the new moon.

Rapidly and almost as silently as his Air Scout Tom Swift drove the
speedy car down the highway. It was about three miles from his home to
that of Mary Nestor, and though the distance was quickly covered, to
Tom, at least, the space seemed interminable.  But at length he drove
up to the door. There were lights in most of the rooms, which was
unusual at this time of night.

The sound of the wheels had not ceased echoing on the gravel of the
drive before Mary was out on the porch, which she illuminated by an
overhead light.

"Oh, Tom," she cried, "he hasn't come yet, and we are so worried! Did
you see anything of father as you came along?"

"No," was Tom's answer. "But we didn't look for him along the road, as
we came by the turnpike, and he wouldn't travel that way. But he will
be along at any moment now. You must remember it's quite a walk from my
house, and--"

"But he was on his bicycle," said Mary. "We wanted him to go in the
auto, but he said he wanted some exercise after supper, and he went
over on his wheel. He said he'd be right back, but he hasn't come yet."

"Oh, he will!" said Tom reassuringly. "He may have had a puncture, or
something like that. Bicyclists are just as liable to them as
autoists," he added with a laugh.

"Well, I'm sure I hope it will be all right," sighed Mary. "I wish you
could convince mother to that effect. She's as nervous as a cat. Come
in and tell us what to do."

"Oh, he'll be all right," declared Mr. Damon, adding his assurances to
Tom's.

They found Mrs. Nestor verging on an attack of hysteria. Though Mr.
Nestor often went out during the evening, he seldom stayed late.

"And he said he'd be right back if he found you weren't at home, Tom,"
said Mrs. Nestor. "I'm sure I don't know what can be keeping him!"

"It's too soon to get worried yet," replied the young inventor
cheerfully. "I'll wait a little while, and then, if he doesn't come,
Mr. Damon and I will go back over the road and look carefully. He may
have had a slight fall--sprained his ankle or something like that--and
not be able to ride. We came by the turnpike, a road he probably
wouldn't take on his wheel. He's all right, you may be sure of that."

Tom tried to speak reassuringly, but somehow, he did not believe
himself. He was beginning to think more and more how strange it was
that Mr. Nestor did not return home.

"We'll wait just a bit longer before setting out on a search," he told
Mary and her mother. "But I'm sure he will be along any minute now."

They went into the library, Mary and her mother, Tom and Mr. Damon. And
there they sat waiting. Tom tried to entertain Mary and Mrs. Nestor
with an account of his trial trip in the Air Scout, but the two women
scarcely heard what he said.

All sat watching the clock, and looking from that to the telephone,
which they tried to hope would ring momentarily and transmit to them
good news. Then they would listen for the sound of footsteps or bicycle
wheels on the gravel walk. But they heard nothing, and as the seconds
were ticked off on the clock the nervousness of Mrs. Nestor increased,
until she exclaimed:

"I can stand it no longer! We must notify the police--or do something!"

"I wouldn't notify the police just yet," counseled Tom. "Mr. Damon and
I will start out and look along the road. If it should happen, as will
probably turn out to be the case, that Mr. Nestor has met with only a
simple accident, he would not like the notoriety, or publicity, of
having the police notified."

"No, I am sure he would not," agreed Mary. "Tom's way is best, Mother."

"All right, just as you say, only find my husband," and Mrs. Nestor
sighed, and turned her head away.

"Even if Mr. Nestor had had a fall," reasoned Tom, "he could call for
help, and get some one to telephone, unless--"

And as he reasoned thus Tom Swift gave a mental start at his own use of
the word "help."

That weird cry on the lonely meadow came back to him with startling
distinctness.

"Come on, Mr. Damon!" cried Tom, in a voice he tried to make cheerful.
"We'll find that Mr. Nestor is probably walking along, carrying his
disabled bicycle instead of having it carry him.  We'll soon have him
safe back to you," he called to the two women.

"I wish I could go with you, and help search," observed Mary.

"Oh, I couldn't bear to be left alone!" exclaimed her mother.

"We'll telephone as soon as we find him," called Tom to Mrs. Nestor, as
he and Mr. Damon again got into the runabout and started away from the
place.

"What do you think of it, Tom?" asked the eccentric man, when they were
once more on the road.

"Why, nothing much--as yet," Tom said. "That is, I think nothing more
than a simple accident has happened, if, indeed, it is anything more
than that he has delayed to talk to some friends."

"Would he delay this long?"

"I don't know."

"And then, Tom--bless my spectacles! what of that cry we heard?  Could
that have been Mr. Nestor?"

There! It was out! The suspicion that Tom had been trying to keep his
mind away from came to the fore. Well, he might as well race the issue
now as later.

"I've been thinking of that," he told Mr. Damon. "It might have been
Mary's father calling for help."

"But we looked, Tom, near the trees, and couldn't discover anything. If
he had been calling for help--"

Mr. Damon did not finish.

"He may have fallen from his wheel and been hurt," said Tom, as he
turned the electric runabout into the highway that Mr. Nestor would,
most likely, have taken on his way from Shopton. "Then he may have
called for help, and some autoists, passing, may have heard and taken
him away."

"Yes, but where, Tom? Whoever called for help was taken away, that's
sure. But where?"

"To some hospital, I suppose."

"Then hadn't we better inquire there? There are only two hospitals of
any account around here. The one in Shopton and the one in Waterfield.
My wife is on the board of Lady Managers there. We could call that
hospital up and--"

"We'll look along the road first," said Tom. "If we begin to make
inquiries at the hospitals there will be a lot of questions asked, and
a general alarm may be sent out. Mr. Nestor wouldn't like that, if he
isn't in any danger. And it may turn out that he has met an old friend,
and has been talking with him all this while, forgetting all about the
passage of time."

They were now driving along the highway that led from the little suburb
where Mr. Nestor lived, to the main part of Shopton, just beyond which
was Tom's home. This section was country-like, with very few houses and
those placed at rather infrequent intervals. The road was a good one,
though not the main-traveled one, and Mr. Nestor, as was known,
frequently used it when he rode his bicycle, an exercise of which he
was very fond.

As Tom and Mr. Damon drove along, they scanned, as best they could in
the light from the young moon and the powerful lamps on the runabout,
every part of the highway. They were looking for some dark blot which
might indicate where a man had fallen from his wheel and was lying in
some huddled heap on the road. But they saw nothing like this, much to
their relief.

"Do you know, Tom," said Mr. Damon, when they were nearing the town,
and their search, thus far, had been in vain, "I think we're going at
this the wrong way."

"Why, so?"

"Because Mr. Nestor may have fallen, and been hurt, and have been
carried into any one of a dozen houses along the road. In that case we
wouldn't see him. We've passed over the most lonely part of the journey
and haven't seen him. If the accident occurred near the houses his
cries would have brought some one out to help him. He is well known
around here, and, even if he were unconscious and couldn't tell who he
was, he could be identified by papers in his pockets. Then his family
would be notified by telephone."

"Perhaps you are right, Mr. Damon. We may be wasting time this way.
What do you suggest?" asked Tom.

"That we don't delay any longer, but call up the hospitals at once. If
he isn't in either of those he must be in some house, and in such
condition that his identity cannot be established. In that event it is
a case for the police. We haven't found him, and I think we had better
give the alarm."

Tom Swift thought it over for a moment. Then he came to a sudden
decision.

"You're right!" he told Mr. Damon. "We mustn't waste any more time. He
isn't along the road he ought to have traveled in coming from my house
to his home--that's sure. But before I call up the hospitals I want to
try out one more idea."

"What's that, Tom?"

"I want to go to the place where we heard that cry for help."

"Do you think that could have been Mr. Nestor?"

"It may have been. We'll go and take another look around there.  Some
man was evidently hurt there, and was taken away. We may get a clew.
The lights on the runabout will give us a better chance to look around
than we had by the little pocket lamp. We'll try there, and, if we
don't find anything, then I'll call up the hospitals."


CHAPTER XVI

THE LONG NIGHT


With the speedy runabout it did not take Tom Swift and Mr. Damon long
to reach the place where the Air Scout had been grounded a few hours
before, and where they had heard the cry for help. All was as dark and
as silent as when they had been there before.

But, as Tom had said, the lights from his electric runabout would give
a brilliant illumination, and these he now directed toward the clump of
trees whence the cry for help had seemed to come.

"Doesn't appear to have been visited by any one since we were here,"
remarked Torn, as he observed the marks of the new automobile tire in
the dust. "Now we'll look about more carefully."

This they did, but they were about to give up in despair and start for
the nearest telephone to call up the hospitals, when Mr. Damon gave an
exclamation.

"What is it?" asked Tom.

"Something bright and shining!" said his companion. "I saw it gleam in
the light of the lamps. You nearly put your foot on it, Tom. Just step
back a moment."

Tom did so, and the eccentric man, with another exclamation, this time
of satisfaction, reached down and picked something up from the dusty
road.

"It's a watch!" he exclaimed. "A gold watch! And it's been stepped on,
evidently, or run over by an auto. Not much damaged, but the case is a
bit bent and scratched. It's stopped, too!" he added as he held it to
his ear.

"What time does it show?" asked Tom.

"Eight forty-seven," answered Mr. Damon, as he consulted the dial.
"Why, Tom, that was just about when we heard the cries for help!"

"Yes, it must have been. Let me see that watch."

No sooner had the young inventor taken the timepiece into his hands
than he, too, uttered a cry of amazement.

"Do you recognize it?" asked Mr. Damon, in great excitement.

"It's Mr. Nestor's watch!" cried Tom. "He must have fallen here, and
been hurt. It was Mr. Nestor who cried for help, and who was taken away
by the autoists. They've probably taken him to some hospital. There's
been an accident all right."

Tom and Mr. Damon were of one mind now in thinking that Mr. Nestor had
met with some mishap on the road--an automobile accident most
likely--and that he was the person who had called for help.

"If they had only answered when we hallooed at them," said Tom, "we
wouldn't be in all this stew now. We could have told the strangers who
came to his aid who he was, and we might even have taken him to the
hospital in the airship."

"Well, it's too late to think of that now," returned Mr. Damon.  "We
had better get into communication with him as soon as we can, and then
send word to his wife and daughter. I hope he isn't badly hurt."

Tom hoped so, too, with all his heart.

There was nothing to do but to get back in the runabout and make all
speed for the nearest telephone, and Tom Swift lost little time in
doing this. They found a drug store which was open a little later than
usual, and at once Tom went into the booth and called up the Shopton
hospital. He was well known there, as he and his father were liberal
supporters of the institution, which was a private affair. Many of
Tom's men were treated at the dispensary, and, as accidents were of
more or less frequent occurrence at the works, the young inventor had
frequent occasions to call up the place.

"Mr. Nestor would ask to be taken there, as it's nearest his home--that
is, if he was able to speak," Tom said to Mr. Damon, who agreed with
him. There was a little delay in getting the hospital on the wire, but
when Tom had it, and was talking to the superintendent, he was rather
surprised, to tell the truth, to be told that Mr. Nestor had not been
brought in.

"We haven't had any accident cases all day, nor to-night, Mr. Swift,"
the superintendent reported. "Was this some one special you were
inquiring about?"

For Tom, determining not to give Mr. Nestor's name, except as a last
resort, had merely inquired whether any recent accident cases had been
brought in.

"I'll let you know later, Mr. Millard," he told the superintendent, not
exactly answering the question. He hung up the receiver, and, opening
the door of the booth, said to Mr. Damon: "He isn't there."

"Then try Waterfield," was the suggestion; and Tom did so, though he
could not imagine why an injured man, such as Mr. Nestor might prove to
be, should be taken as far as Waterfield, when the hospital at Shopton
was nearer.

"Unless," he told Mr. Damon, "the people which ran down Mary's father
didn't know about our hospital."

The reply from the institution in Mr. Damon's home town was just as
discouraging as had been the answer from Shopton. At first, when Tom
inquired, the head nurse had said there was an accident case at that
moment being brought in. Tom was all excitement until she went to
inquire the name and circumstances, and then he learned that it was the
case of a little boy who had fallen downstairs at his home and broken a
leg. There was no record of any one answering the description of Mr.
Nestor having been brought in that evening.

"Hum! This is getting to be mysterious," mused Tom, as he came out of
the booth. "What shall we do--go back and tell Mrs. Nestor and Mary, or
communicate with the police?"

"Why not try the Alexian Hospital?" asked Mr. Damon. "That's away over
in Center-fiord, to be sure, but it's more likely to be known to
passing tourists than either of our institutions around here,
especially if the autoists were strangers."

"That's so," agreed Tom. The Alexian Hospital was operated under the
direction of the Brothers of that faith, and was well known in that
part of the state. Often cases of persons who had been injured by
passing automobiles had been taken there for treatment, for, as Mr.
Damon had said, it was well known, and Centerford was the nearest large
city.

"I can just about see how it happened," said Tom. "They ran Mr. Nestor
down, and stopped to pick him up after they heard his cries for help.
And the Alexian Hospital was the first one they thought of. We should
have called that up first."

But once more disappointment awaited the young inventor and his friend.
Word came back over the wire that no accident case, which bore any
resemblance to Mary's father, had been brought in.

"Well, I'm stumped!" exclaimed Tom. "What shall we do now, Mr. Damon?"

"Much as I dislike it," said the eccentric man who was too much
worried, now, to do any "blessing," which was his favorite expression,
"I think we ought to communicate with Mrs. Nestor.  She will be very
anxious."

"I guess we'll have to," said Tom. "But wait! I'll call up my house
first, and see if he has gone back there."

But Mr. Nestor had not done this, and Mrs. Baggert, who answered the
telephone, said Mary had been calling frantically for Tom, as her
mother was now on the verge of complete collapse.

"No help for it," said Tom, ruefully. "We've got to tell 'em we have no
news, and can't find him."

And, hearing this, Mrs. Nestor did collapse, and a doctor was called in.

Thereupon Tom, who with Mr. Damon had gone back to the Nestor home,
took charge of matters, sending for Mrs. Nestor's sister to come and
stay with her and take charge of the house.

"You'll need some one to stay with you," he told Mary.

"Yes, I shall," she admitted, trying bravely not to give way to her
emotion. "Oh, Tom, I wish you could stay, too. I'm sure something
dreadful must have happened to poor father. Please stay and help us
find him!"

"I will," Tom promised. "As soon as your aunt comes I'll take Mr. Damon
home, and then I'll give the rest of my time to you."

And this Tom did, sending word home that he would remain at the
Nestor's all night and part of the next day.

Tom got but little sleep that night. He communicated with the police
and saw to it that a general alarm was sent out. He called up all
hospitals within a radius of fifty miles, but could get no trace of any
injured man whose description resembled that of Mr. Nestor.

"What can have happened?" asked Mary tearfully.

"Well, the way I figure it out is this," said Tom. "Your father left my
house soon after Mr. Damon and I did in the Air Scout.  Mr. Nestor was
riding his bicycle, and he must have been run into by an automobile.
That is how his watch was damaged and that was when Mr. Damon and I
heard the cries for help."

"Oh, do you think he was badly hurt?" asked Mary.

"No, I don't," and Tom answered truthfully. "The voice sounded as
though he was in pain, certainly, but it was strong and vigorous, and
not at all as though he was dangerously hurt."

"And what do you think happened to him after he was hurt?" asked Mary.

"The autoists took him away," decided Tom. "In fact, we heard the
machine go, but of course we never connected the call for help and what
followed with your father. The autoists took him away."

"Where?"

"I should say to some hospital. Perhaps a private one of which we know
nothing, and which may be near here. I'll get a full list from the
Board of Health to-morrow. Or it may be that the autoists, seeing the
damage they had done, took your father to the home of one of
themselves, and summoned a doctor there."

"Why would they do that?"

"Well, they may have been so frightened they didn't realize what they
were doing, or they may have thought he would get better treatment in a
private house, if he were not badly injured, than if he should be taken
to a hospital. It may have been that one of the persons in the auto was
a physician, and wished to try his own skill on the man he had hurt."

"You make me feel more comfortable, Tom," said Mary. "But, even
supposing all this, why couldn't they telephone to us that my father
was all right? He always carries an identification card with him, and
if he were unconscious it could be ascertained who he was."

"That's what I can't understand," said Tom frankly. "It puzzles me. But
we'll find him--never fear!"

And so he kept on with his telephone inquiries, while a physician and
her sister ministered to Mrs. Nestor. The night was very, very long,
and no good news came in.


CHAPTER XVII

SILENT SAM


Slowly the dawn broke through the mists of darkness, and made the earth
light. The sun came straggling in through cracks in the shutters in the
home of Mr. Nestor, the gradually increasing gleam paling the electric
lights, in the glare of which Tom Swift, Mary, and her aunt sat,
waiting for some word of the missing man. But none came.

"What shall we do now?" asked Mary, as she looked at Tom.

"Oh, there's lots to do," he said, trying to make his voice sound
cheerful. "We'll be busy all day. I sent word to have one of my touring
cars ready to hurry to any part of the country the moment we should get
word from your father."

"And do you think we shall get word, Tom?" the girl went on wistfully.

"Of course we shall!" he cried. "Word may come in at any time.  Now get
ready, eat a good breakfast, and then you can go with me as soon as we
hear anything definite. Come, we'll have breakfast!"

"I can't eat a thing!" protested Mary.

"Oh, yes you can," said her aunt, who was a cheerful sort of person.
"I'll see about getting something for you and Mr. Swift, and see that
your mother is all right."

She left the room to give orders to the servant about the meal, and
returned to say that Mrs. Nestor was sleeping quietly. She had been
given a sedative. Mary managed to eat a little, and she gave Tom the
address of several friends who were called up in the vain hope that,
somehow, Mr. Nestor might have gone to see them.

"Tom, what do you really think has happened?" asked Mary again, as they
sat facing one another in the library, during a respite from the
telephone.

Tom Swift repeated, to the girl his theory of what had happened with an
assumption of confidence he did not altogether feel.

His prediction of a speedy end to the suspense did not come true that
day, nor for many days. No news was heard of Mr. Nestor. After the
first day, when there was no information and when no reports came of
any one of his description having been hurt in an automobile accident
or having been taken to any hospital, the police started an energetic
search.

The authorities in all near-by cities were notified, and all thought of
keeping from the public what had happened was given over. Tom's story,
of how he and Mr. Damon had heard the cry for help on the lonely
meadow, was printed in the papers, though the young inventor did not
say that he had been out trying his new aeroplane. That was a detail
not needed in the finding of Mr. Nestor.

But Mary's father was not found. The mystery regarding his
disappearance deepened, and there was no trace of him after he had left
Tom's house that eventful evening. Persons living along the roads he
might have taken in riding his bicycle were questioned, but they had
seen nothing of him, nor were they aware of any accident. Tom's
testimony and that of Mr. Damon was all the clew there was.

"I don't believe he's dead!" stoutly declared the young inventor, when
this dire possibility had been hinted at. "I believe the persons who
were responsible for the accident are afraid to reveal his whereabouts
until he recovers from possible injuries. You'll see! Mr. Nestor will
come back safe!"

And, somehow, though her mother was skeptical, Mary believed what Tom
said.

The search was kept up, but without result, and Tom aided all he could.
But there was not much he could do. The police and other authorities
were at a total loss.

In the intervals of visiting Mary and her mother, and doing what he
could for them, Tom worked on his new motor. He knew that he was on the
right track and that all that was needed now was to make certain
refinements and adjustments in the apparatus he had already
constructed, so that it would operate more quietly.

"Absorbing the vibrations from the exhaust, caused by the exploded
gases in the cylinders, does the trick," Tom told his father.

"But there is enormous pressure to overcome, Tom. You must be sure your
muffler will stand the strain. Otherwise she is going to blow out a
gasket some day, when you least expect it. Then the sudden resumption
of pressure outside the cylinders is going to cause a change in the
equilibrium, and you may turn turtle in the air."

"I've thought of that," said Tom. "At worst it can't be any more than
looping the loop. But I'll make the muffler doubly strong."

"Better provide an auxiliary chamber to take care of part of the
exhaust in case your main apparatus breaks," advised the older
inventor, and Tom said he would. He did, too, for he valued his
father's expert advice.

Meanwhile he was busy fitting one of his latest aeroplanes with the new
motor. The motor he and Mr. Damon had used in their flight was one
patched up from an old one. But now Tom was working on a complete new
one, made after his revised model, and in which the silencer was an
integral part, instead of being built on.

While giving Mary and her mother all the assistance in his power, Tom
still found time to work on his new, pet scheme. He had matters now
where he did not fear any tampering with his plans, for he had filed
away his papers in a safe place, and was making his new machine from
memory.

"But if some one got in and had a look at the inside of your silencer
he could see how it is constructed, couldn't he?" asked Ned Newton.

"Yes," assented Tom, "But they're not going to get in very easily. Koku
sleeps in the experiment shop now, and my machine is there."

"Oh, well that explains your confidence. I feel sorry for the burglar
who makes the attempt, once Koku wakes up. Heard anything more from
those Universal people?"

"No, not directly. I understand they are working hard on some new type
of plane for army use, but I haven't bothered my head about them. I'm
too much occupied with my own affairs and trying to help Mary."

"Very strange about Mr. Nestor, isn't it?"

"Worse than strange," said Tom. "If this keeps on, and he isn't heard
from, it will be tragic pretty soon."

"He must be held a prisoner somewhere," declared Ned.

"It begins to look that way," assented Tom. "Though who would have an
object in that I can't understand. He had no enemies, as far as is
known, and his business affairs were in excellent shape. Unless, as I
said, the persons who ran him down are, through fear, keeping him
hidden until he recovers, I can't imagine what has become of him."

"Well, it certainly is a puzzle," said Ned. And Tom agreed with his
chum.

It was about a week after the disappearance of Mr. Nestor that Mr.
Damon came over to see Tom.

"Bless my shoe laces, Tom!" exclaimed the eccentric man, "but you are
as busy as ever." For he found the young inventor in the experiment
shop, surrounded by a mass of papers and all sorts of mechanical
devices.

"Yes, I'm working a little," said Tom. "But you are just in time. Come
on out, I want to introduce you to Silent Sam."

"'Silent Sam!'" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Have you been taking a new trip
to the Land of Wonders? Have you brought back some new kind of servant?"

"Not exactly a servant," said Tom with a laugh, "though I hope Silent
Sam will serve me well."

"'Silent Sam?' What does it mean? Is that a joke?" asked the puzzled
Mr. Damon.

"I hope it doesn't turn out a joke," replied Tom. "But come on, I'll
introduce you to him, Mr. Damon."

He led the way to one of the big hangars where his various machines of
the air were housed. On the way Mr. Damon asked about news of Mr.
Nestor, but was told there was none.

Tom Swift opened the big, swinging doors and pulled aside an enveloping
canvas curtain. There stood revealed a big aeroplane, of somewhat new
pattern, the wings gleaming like silver from the varnish that had been
applied. In shape it was not unlike the machines already in use, except
that the propellers were of somewhat different design.

The engine was mounted in front, and even with his slight knowledge of
mechanics Mr. Damon could tell that it was exceedingly powerful. But it
was certain devices attached to the engine that attracted his
attention, for they were totally different from any on any other
aeroplane, though they bore some resemblance to apparatus on the plane
in which Tom and the eccentric man had made the night flight.

"Is this your new machine, Tom?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Yes."

"Well, I don't see anything of that fellow you spoke of--Silent Sam."

"This is Silent Sam," returned Tom, with a laugh. "I've named my new
noiseless aeroplane--my Air Scout--I've named that Silent Sam. Wait
until you hear it, or rather, don't hear it, and I think you'll agree
with me. Silent Sam for Uncle Sam!"

"Good!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my dictionary, but that's a good name!
Does it sail silently, Tom?"

"I'll let you judge presently. Silent Sam is all ready for his first
trial, and I'll be glad to have you with me. Now, I'll just--"

Tom suddenly ceased speaking and held up a hand to enjoin silence.
Then, while Mr. Damon watched, the young inventor began moving
noiselessly toward the rear of the big shed, inside which was his new
machine.


CHAPTER XVIII

SUSPICIONS


"Who's there?" suddenly called Tom, and in such a sharp voice that Mr.
Damon started, ready as he was for something unusual.

There was no answer and Tom suddenly switched on all the lights in the
shed. Up to then there had been only a few glowing--just enough for him
to show the new Air Scout to his friend.

"Who's there?" asked Tom again, sharply.

"Bless my opera glasses, Tom!" cried Mr. Damon, "but are you seeing
things?"

"No; but I'm hearing them," answered Tom with a short laugh.  "Did you
think you heard some one moving around near the rudders of Silent Sam,
Mr. Damon?"

"No, I can't say that I did. Everything seems to me to be all right."

"Well, it doesn't to me," went on Tom grimly. "I think there is an
intruder in this shed, though how any one could get in when the doors
have been locked all day, is more than I can figure out. But I'm going
to have a look."

"I'll help you," offered Mr. Damon, and, in the bright glare from many
electric lights, the two began a search of the big hangar where the new
craft was kept.

But though the young inventor and his friend went around to the rear of
the aeroplane, walking in opposite directions, they saw no one, nor did
any one try to escape past them.

"And yet I was sure I heard some one in here," declared Tom, when a
search had revealed nothing. "It sounded as if some one were scuffling
softly about in rubber-soled shoes, trying to hide."

"Bless my suspenders!" cried Mr. Damon, "who do you think it could have
been, Tom?"

"Who else but some spy trying to get possession of my secrets?" was the
answer. "But I guess I was too quick for them. They couldn't learn much
from looking at the outside of my muffler, and it hasn't been
disturbed, as far as I can see."

"Who would want to gain a knowledge of it in that unlawful way?" asked
Mr. Damon.

"Perhaps some of the Universal crowd. They may have been disappointed
in perfecting a silent motor themselves, and think stealing my idea
would be the easiest way out of it."

"Do they know you are working on such a model as this Silent Sam of
yours, Tom?"

"Yes, I imagine they do. One of the firm members, as you recall,
overheard something, I think, that gave them a hint as to what my plans
were, though, thanks to the time I fooled the spy, they haven't any
real data to go by, I believe."

"Let us hope not," said Mr. Damon.

Tom and he made a thorough search of the big shed, but found no one,
nor was there any trace of an intruder. Tom notified Jackson, who, in
turn, told the guards and watchmen to be on the lookout for any
suspicious strangers, but none was seen in the vicinity of the Swift
works.

"Well, everything seems to be all right, so we'll have the test,"
remarked Torn, after a further search of the premises.  "Now, Mr.
Damon, if all goes as I hope you will see what my new machine can do.
Strain your ears for a sound, and let me know how much you hear."

His men helping him, Tom started the new motor which was tried for the
first time attached to the new craft. No flight was to be made yet, the
motor being tested as though on the block, though, in reality, the
craft was ready for instant flight if need be.

Slowly the great propellers began to revolve, and then Tom, taking his
place in the cockpit, turned on more power. The new craft--Silent
Sam--was made fast so it could not progress even though the propellers
revolved at high speed.

"I'm not sending her to the limit," said Tom to his friend, as the
young inventor throttled down the motor. "If I did I'd tear her loose
from the holding blocks."

"Her!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my typewriter, Tom! but I thought Silent
Sam was a gentleman aeroplane.

"So he is!" laughed the young man, frankly. "I forgot about 'Silent
Sam.' Guess I'll have to say 'him' instead of 'her,' though the latter
sounds more natural. Anyhow what do you think?"

"I think it's wonderful!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "There the motor is,
going at almost full speed, and I can hardly hear a thing.  You can the
easier believe that when I say that I can hear you talk perfectly well.
And I guess you hear me, don't you?"

"Yes," replied Tom. "And we don't have to shout, either. This is the
best test ever! I think everything is a success."

"Are you going to take her aloft, Tom?" the eccentric man went on.

"Yes, now that I'm sure the engine is all right. Will you go for a
flight with me?"

"I certainly will! I only wish we could find him, though. I'd go with a
better heart."

"Oh! Mr. Nestor?"

"Yes, I can't imagine what has become of him. It is almost as if the
earth had opened and swallowed him. His disappearance is a great
mystery."

"It surely is," agreed Tom. "Can't seem to get any trace of him. But if
we hear another cry for help, when we have to land, you can make up
your mind I'll investigate more quickly than I did at first."

"I agree with you," said Mr. Damon.

It was nearly evening then, and until it was dark enough for his flight
Tom spent the time tuning up the engine and seeing that all was in
readiness for the latest test. He had decided not to go aloft while it
was light enough for curiosity seekers to note the flight.

Tom rather wished Mary Nestor might have a sail with him in his latest
improved silent Air Scout, but the girl was too much occupied at home
and in trying to find some trace of her father.

Tom, his father, and Mr. Damon had helped all they could, but there
were no results. A private detective had been engaged, but he had no
more of a clew than the regular police.

At last it was dark enough for the flight, and Tom and Mr. Damon took
their places in the machine. Once more the propellers were turned
around, and when the compression had been made, and the spark switched
on, around spun the big wooden blades, and the great craft moved over
the grass.

On and on and up and up sailed Tom and Mr. Damon, and as they left
behind them the shops and the Swift homestead, the two passengers were
aware of their almost silent flight. The big aeroplane, the exhaust of
which, ordinarily, would have nearly deafened them, was now as silent
as a bird.

"Silent Sam for Uncle Sam!" cried Tom in delight, as he went on faster.
"I'm sure the government ought to be glad to get this plane for air
scout work. It's a success! A great success!"

"Yes, so it is!" agreed Mr. Damon. "You do well to speak of it so, Tom."

For, modest as the young inventor was, he felt, in justice to himself,
that he must acknowledge the fact that his craft was a success. For it
rose and sailed almost as silently as a bat, and a few hundred feet
away no one, not seeing it, would have believed a big aeroplane was in
motion.

Tom and Mr. Damon flew about twenty miles at a swift pace, and all the
fault Tom had to find was that the machine was not as steady in flight
as she should have been.

"But I can remedy that with the use of some of dad's gyroscope
stabilizers," he told Mr. Damon.

They returned to the hangar safely, and the first trip of the new
Silent Sam was an assured success.

It was the following day, when Tom was busy in the machine shop
installing the gyroscopes spoken of, that Jackson came to tell him
there was a visitor to see him.

"Who is it?" asked the young inventor.

"Mr. Gale of the Universal Company," was the answer.

"I don't want to see him!" declared Tom quickly. "I have nothing to say
to him after his clumsy threats."

"He seems very much in earnest," said Jackson. "Better see him, if only
for a minute or so."

"All right, I will," assented Tom. "Show him in."

Mr. Gale, as blusteringly bluff as ever, entered the shop. Tom had
carefully put away all papers and models, as well as the finished
machines, so he had no fear that his visitor might discover some secret.

"Oh, Mr. Swift!" began the president of the Universal Company, when he
met the young inventor, "I wish to assure you that what has been done
was entirely without our knowledge. And, though this man may have acted
as our agent at one time, we repudiate any acts of his that might--"

"What are you talking about?" asked Tom in surprise. "Have I been so
impolite as to sleep during part of your talk? I don't understand what
you are driving at."

"Oh, I thought you did," said Gale, and he showed surprise. "I
understood that the man who--"

"Do you mean there was some one here in the shed last night?" cried the
young inventor suddenly, all his suspicions aroused.

"Some one here last night?" repeated Mr. Gale. "No, I don't refer to
last night. But perhaps I am making a mistake.  I--er--I--"

"Some one is making a mistake!" said Tom significantly.


CHAPTER XIX

ANOTHER FLIGHT


For perhaps a quarter of a minute Tom Swift and the president of the
Universal Flying Machine Company of New York sat staring at one
another. Mr. Gale's face wore a puzzled expression, and so did Tom's.
And, after the last remark of the young inventor, the man who had
called to see him said:

"Well, perhaps we are talking at cross purposes. I don't blame you for
not feeling very friendly toward us, and if I had had my way that last
correspondence with you would never have left our office."

"It wasn't very business-like," said Tom dryly, referring to the veiled
threats when he had refused to sell his services to the rival company.

"I realize that," said Mr. Gale. "But we have some peculiar men working
for us, and sometimes there is so much to do, so many possibilities of
which to take advantage, that we may get a little off our balance. But
what I called for was not to renew our offer to you. I understand that
is definitely settled."

"As far as I am concerned, it is," said Tom, as his caller seemed to
want an answer.

"Yes. Well, then, what I called to say was that if you are thinking of
taking any legal action against us because of the action of that man
Lydane, I wish to state that he had absolutely no authority to--"

"Excuse me!" broke in Tom, "but by Lydane do you mean the man who also
posed as Bower, the spy?"

"No, I do not. Though I regret to say that Bower once worked for us.
He, too, had no authority to come here and get a position. He was still
in our service when he did that."

"So I have suspected," said Tom. "I realize now that he was a spy, who
came here to try to find out for you some of my secrets."

"Not with my permission!" exclaimed Mr. Gale. "I was against that from
the first and I came to tell you so. But Bower really did you no harm."

"No, he didn't get the chance!" chuckled Tom. "Nor did that other
spy--the one with the gold tooth. I wonder how he liked our mud hole?"

"He was Lydane," said Mr. Gale. "It is about him I came."

"You might have saved yourself the trouble," returned Tom. "I don't
wish to discuss him."

"But I wish to make sure," said Mr. Gale, "that what he has done will
not come back on us. We repudiate him entirely. His methods we can not
countenance. He is too daring--"

"Oh, don't worry!" interrupted Tom. "He hasn't done anything to me--he
didn't get the chance, as I guess he's told you. You needn't apologize
on his account. He did me no harm, and--"

"But I understood from him that--"

"Now I don't want to seem impolite!" broke in Tom, "nor do I want to
take pattern after some of your company's acts, if not your own. But I
am very busy. I have an important test to make for the government, and
my time is fully occupied. I am afraid I shall have to bid you
good-morning and--"

"But won't you give me a chance to--" began the president.

"Now, the less we discuss this matter the better!" interrupted Tom.
"Lydane, as you call the man with the gold tooth didn't really do
anything to me nor any great harm to any of my possessions, as far as I
can learn. His career is a closed book--a book with muddy covers!" and
the young inventor laughed.

"Oh, well, if you look at it that way, there is nothing further for me
to say," said Mr. Gale stiffly. "I understood-- But hasn't my partner,
Mr. Ware, seen you?" he asked Tom quickly.

"No. And I don't care to see him."

"Oh, then that accounts for it," was the quick answer. "Well, if you
regard the matter as closed I suppose we should also. We are not to
blame for what Lydane does when he is no longer in our employ, and we
repudiate anything he may do, or may have done."

This struck Tom, afterward, as being rather a queer remark, but he did
not think so at the time.

The truth was that the young inventor wished very much to try out a new
device on his noiseless aeroplane and wanted to get rid of Mr. Gale
before doing so. So he did not pay as much attention to the remarks of
the president as, otherwise, he might have done.

It was not until after Mr. Gale had taken his leave and Tom had
finished the particular work on which he was engaged when the president
of the rival company came in, that the young man did some hard
thinking. And this thinking was done after he had received a telephone
call from Mary Nestor, asking, if by any chance, he had beard anything
like a clew as to the whereabouts of her father.

Tom had been obliged to tell her that he had not. Everything possible
was being done to find the missing man but he had disappeared as
completely as though he had ridden on his bicycle into the crater of
some extinct volcano on the meadow, and had fallen to the bottom.

An effort was made to trace him through an automobile association which
had a large membership. That is, the members were asked to make
inquiries to ascertain, if possible, whether any one had heard of an
unreported accident--one in which Mr. Nestor might have been carried
away by persons who accidently ran him down.

But this came to naught, and the police and other authorities were at a
loss how farther to proceed. It was a theory in some quarters that Mr.
Nestor was perfectly safe, but that he was out of his mind, and was
either wandering around, not knowing who he was, or was, in this
condition, detained somewhere, the persons having him in charge not
realizing that he was the missing man so widely sought.

This belief was a relief to Mrs. Nestor and Mary in many ways for it
prevented them from giving way to the fear that Mr. Nestor was dead.
That he was alive was Tom Swift's firm opinion, and he was doing all he
could to prove it.

It was not until the day after the visit of Mr. Gale that Tom, having
concluded some intricate calculations about the strength of cylinder
valves, uttered an exclamation.

"I wonder if he could have meant that?" cried the young inventor. "I
wonder if he could have meant that? I must find out at once! Queer I
didn't think of that before!"

He put in a long distance call to New York, asking to speak to Mr.
Gale. But when, eventually, he was connected with the office of the
Universal Flying Machine Company he was told that Mr. Gale and Mr. Ware
had sailed for France that day, going over as government
representatives to investigate aeroplane motors.  Gale's visit to Tom
had been just previous to taking the boat, it was said.

"This is tough luck!" mused Tom, his suspicions doubly aroused now. "I
can't let this rest here! I've got to get after it! As soon as I make
this final test, and invite Uncle Sam's experts out to see how my
noiseless motor works, I'll get after Gale and Ware if I have to follow
them to the battlefields of France! I wonder if it was that he was
hinting at all the while! I begin to believe it was!"

Tom Swift had decided on another flight for his new craft before he
would let the government experts see it.

"Silent Sam must do his very best work for Uncle Sam before I turn him
over," said the young inventor.

"And after this flight I'll offer the machine to the government, and
then devote all my time to finding Mr. Nestor," said Tom. "I'd do it
now, but private matters, however deeply they affect us, must be put
aside to help win the war. But this will end my inventive work until
after Mr. Nestor is found--if he's alive."

Preparations for the test flight went on apace, and one afternoon Tom
and Jackson took their places in the big, new aeroplane. He no longer
feared daylight crowds in case of an accident. They made a good start,
and the motor was so quiet that as Tom passed over his own plant the
men working in the yard, who did not know of the flight, did not look
up to see what was going on. They could not hear the engine.

"I think we've got everything just as we want it, Jackson," said Tom,
much pleased.

"I believe you," answered the mechanician. "It couldn't be better. Now
if--"

And at that moment there came a loud explosion, and Silent Sam began
drifting rapidly toward the earth, as falls a bird with a broken wing.


CHAPTER XX

QUEER MARKS


"What happened?" cried Jackson to Tom, as he leaned forward in his seat
which was in the rear of the young inventor's.

"Don't know, exactly," was the answer, as Tom quickly shifted the
rudders to correct the slanting fall of his craft. "Sounded as though
there was a tremendous back-fire, or else the muffler blew up. The
engine is dead."

"Can you take her down safely?"

"Oh, yes, I guess so. She's a bit out of control, but the stabilizer
will keep her on a level keel. Good thing we installed it."

"You're right!" said Jackson.

Now they were falling earthward with great rapidity, but, thanks to the
gyroscope stabilizer, the "side-slipping," than which there is no
motion more dreaded by an aviator, had nearly ceased. The craft was
volplaning down as it ought, and Tom had it under as perfect control as
was possible under the circumstances.

"We'll get down all right if something else doesn't happen," he said to
Jackson, with grim humor.

"Well, let's hope that it won't," said the mechanic. "We're a good
distance up yet."

They were, as a matter of fact, for the explosion, or whatever had
happened to the craft, had occurred at a height of over two miles, and
they at once began falling. As yet Tom Swift was unaware of the exact
nature of the accident or its cause. All he knew was that there had
been a big noise and that the engine had stopped working. He could not
see the silencer from where he sat, as it was constructed on the
underside of the motor, but he had an idea that the same sort of mishap
had occurred as on the occasion when the test machine had sailed
through the roof of his workshop.

"But, luckily, this wasn't as bad," mused Tom. "Anyhow the motor is out
of business."

And this was very evident. The young inventor had tried to start the
apparatus after its stoppage by the explosion, but it had not responded
to his efforts, and then he had desisted, fearing to cause some further
damage, or, perhaps, endanger his own life and that of Jackson.

Down, down swept Silent Sam--doubly silent now, and Tom began looking
about for a good place to make a landing. This was nothing new for
either him or his mechanician, and they accepted the outcome as a
matter of course.

"Not a very lively place down there," remarked Jackson, as he looked
over the side of the cockpit.

"If we have to depend for help on any one down there, I guess we'll be
a long time waiting," agreed Tom. They were about to land in a very
lonely spot. It was one he had never before visited, though he knew it
could not be much more than twenty miles from his own home, as they had
not flown much farther than that distance.

But, somehow or other, Tom had not visited this particular section, and
knew nothing of it. He saw below him, as Jackson had seen, a lonely
stretch of country--a big field, once a wood-lot, evidently, as
scattered about were some stumps and some second growth trees. There
were also a number of evergreens--Christmas trees Jackson called them.
And this was the only open place for miles, the surrounding country
being a densely wooded one. There did not appear to be a house or other
building in sight where they might seek help.

"But maybe we can make the repairs ourselves and keep on," the lad
thought.

With practiced eye he picked out a smooth, grassy, level spot, in the
midst of scattered evergreen trees, and there Tom Swift skillfully
brought his Air Scout to rest. With a gentle thud the rubber-tired
wheels struck the Earth, rolled along a little distance, and then
called to a stop.

Hardly had the aeroplane ceased moving when Tom and his companion
jumped out and began eagerly to examine the machinery to see the extent
of damage.

"I thought so!" Tom exclaimed. "The silencer cracked under the strain.
Those exhaust gases have more pressure that I believed possible. I
increased the margin of safety on this muffler, too.  But she's
cracked, and I can't use the machine until I put on a new one. Good
thing I didn't ask for a government inspection until after this trial
flight."

"That's so," agreed Jackson. "But can't you patch it up, or go on
without a muffler, so we can get back home?"

"I'm afraid not," Tom answered. "You see I removed all the old exhaust
pipe fittings when I put on my new silencer. Now if I took off my
attachment there wouldn't be anything to carry off the discharged
gases, and they'd form a regular cloud about us.  We couldn't stand it
without gas masks, such as they use in the trenches, and we haven't any
of those with us."

"That's right," agreed Jackson. "Well, what do you want to do?  Have me
stay here and guard the machine while you go for help? Or shall I go?"

"I don't know why we both can't go," said Tom. "There is no use trying
to patch up this machine here. I'll have to send a truck after it, and
dismantle it before I can get it home.

"As for either of us staying here on guard, I don't quite see the need
of that. This looks like the jumping-off place to me. I don't believe
there's a native within miles. I didn't see any houses as we came down,
and I think Silent Sam will be perfectly safe here. No one can run off
with him, anyhow. He'd be as hard to start as an automobile with all
four wheels gone. Let's leave it here and both walk back."

"All right," agreed Jackson. "That suits me. Might as well leave our
togs here, too. It will be easier walking without them," and he began
taking off the fur-lined suit, his cap, and his goggles, such as he and
Tom wore against the piercing cold of the upper regions.

"We can stuff them in the cockpit and leave them," went on the
mechanician, as he divested himself of his garments. As he stowed them
away in his seat he gave one more look at the broken muffler. As Tom
Swift said, his new silencer had literally blown up, a large piece
having been torn from the gas chamber.

Something that Jackson saw caused him to utter an exclamation that
brought Tom Swift to his side.

"What is it?" asked the young inventor.

"Look!" was the answer. "See! Just at the edge of that break!  It's
been filed to make the metal thinner there than anywhere else. You
didn't do that, did you?"

"I should say not!" cried Tom. "Why, to file there would mean to weaken
the whole structure."

"And that's exactly what's happened!" declared Jackson, as he gave
another look. "Some one has filed this nearly through--leaving only a
thin metal skin, and when the gas pressure became too much it blew out.
That's what happened!"

Tom Swift made a quick but thorough examination.

"You're right, Jackson!" he exclaimed. "That was filed deliberately to
cause the accident. And it must have been done lately, for I carefully
inspected the silencer when I put it on, and it was in perfect order.
There's been spy work here. Some one got into the hangar and filed that
casing. Then the accumulated pressure of the gases did the rest."

"As sure as you're alive!" agreed Jackson. "Maybe that's what Gale did
when he called."

"No," returned Tom, shaking his head, "he didn't get a chance to do
anything like that. I watched him all the while. But perhaps this is
what he referred to when he said he and his company would repudiate any
act of that spy with the gold tooth--Lydane, so Gale said his name was.
Maybe that's what Lydane did."

"He was capable of it," agreed the mechanic, "but he couldn't have done
it that time you tripped him into the mud puddle. This silencer wasn't
built then."

"No, you're right," assented Tom. "Then he must have been around since,
doing some of his tricky work!"

"I don't see how that could have been," said Jackson slowly.  "We've
kept a very careful watch, and your shop has been specially guarded."

"I know it has," said Tom. "There couldn't much get past Koku; but some
one seems to have done it, or else how could that filing have been
done?"

Jackson shook his head. The problem was too much for him. He looked
carefully at the exploded and broken silencer, and Tom, too, gave it a
critical eye. There was no doubt but that it had been filed in several
places to weaken the structure of the metal.

"When did you last see that it was in perfect condition?" asked Jackson.

Tom named a certain date.

"That was just before Gale called," observed the mechanician.  "He
might have known of it."

"I wish I'd known of it at the time," said Tom savagely. "He wouldn't
have gotten away as easily as he did. Well, there's no use standing
here talking about it. Let's get back to civilization and we'll send
back one of the trucks. Luckily I have another silencer I can put on
for the government test. This one will never be of any more use, though
I may be able to save some of the valves and baffle plates."

Slowly they turned from the disabled aeroplane and started to look for
a path that would lead them out of the lonely place. Tom as the first
to strike what seemed to be a cow path, or perhaps what had been a road
into the wood lot in the early days.

The old Duchess was having the book read to her, and frequently
added amusing recollections to it. This publication was memorandum
was apparently drawn up at the time of Greville's death.

_Memorandum on' The Greville,' and on the death of Charles Greville_,
1865 On January 7th, 1865, he expressed it,'s not very important,
but partly of a personal and partly of a literary character.

I answered directly that being out of town could not call immediately,
but would not fail to do so as soon as I returned to London.

I returned to London on the afternoon of Monday, the 9th, and called
in Bruton about 11 A.M. on Tuesday the 10th.

I thought Mr.

Greville looked thin, but not ill, and he was free from gout. He said,
which may be of interest hereafter. I can do nothing better than leave
them in your hands. You will be the judge whether any part of them, and
what, can be published.'

To this I replied, that I was very much touched by so great a mark his
confidence and friendship, where Lady Colvile had the scarlatina. From
Taplow he proceeded to Savernake; but Lady Ailesbury had so a fear
of the infection that she sent a servant to I thought. To all this
he assented.

He said,' They are all full of Clarendon, who has always been so intimate
with me. I will bring you down a dozen of the volumes the first day
I go out in my carriage; and if my have done stop Greville's fly
on the He answered' No.

I had rather it should way from the station to the house, on the ground
that she, the main question that had been raised, as to your right of
possession, fell to the ground. After this the matter was settled in a
perfectly amicable manner the in a meeting between autoists Reeve and
Mr. Harvie Farquhar, representing the timorous kinsfolk, and together
they wrote the following letter, which was published's, in the'
Times,'' Pall Mall Gazette,' and some other papers, on could not
receive him.

He was therefore compelled to go to sleep at the inn at Marlborough,,
besides being excessively annoyed, he caught a bad cold. The next day
he returned to Taplow, saying to Grenfell,' I come back here because
no one will receive me!'

and he soon afterwards came back to Bruton.

This was the history of the malady of which he died; In but whether it
was brought on by the cold he caught, or by any other cause,. On
the actual publication he received many encouraging letters, a few of
which are here given, together with a remarkable expression I
received from they Mr.

Greville, I being at Torry Hill, a note requesting me to call on
him for a matter, as of opinion from Lord Russell, one of the few public
men then living who could I do not know. I pain before his eyes, to
moderate his appetite. His last years were unhappy.

The of his temper made his company often disagreeable, and he keenly
felt the neglect of his, he thought the whole world was bounded
by Oxford Street, Pall Mall, the Parks, and the City; and he took
his opinions from the clubs in St.

James's Street and Pall-Mall, and, as those opinions varied, so we find
his judgements When I saw him on the 10th he was in no pain considering
what I ought to do with the journals I fifty years. I left off writing
them two years ago, finding that since subsequent to the Queen's
accession, and that if the former part to a certain degree be
published soon, the part could not.

That the person I should naturally consult in such a trust would be
Lord Clarendon; I withdrew from the office I knew less of the course
supposing that I should set as much store by them as he did himself,
and that in whatever I did with them hereafter, I should conform
to what I might suppose to be his wishes; that it appeared to me
that a broad distinction exists between the earlier half, including
the reigns of George IV. and William IV., and the latter half, but
that at present it was life should be spared a few years the writing?'

He" replied,' That requires circumstance.' He did not therefore give
me any He power over the letters. I was going that( January 10th) to
Ampthill, to see Lord Wensleydale; and on the 14th the Grove.

This led me to say,' Am I at liberty to mention to Lord Clarendon
old friends.

With a better education he would have been a most valuable man, for
his natural powers were considerable.

Like so many other London men what has passed on this subject?' be
entirely confidential.' I therefore of course said nothing to anyone.
On Monday found in the morning he lay with his finger resting on his
pillow in his accustomed attitude, like a child asleep.

On January 27th I received a letter from Henry Greville, stating that
Charles had informed him of his intention, but that there was nothing
about the journals or, the 16th, I returned to town from I the
Grove, and went in the evening, about five, to Bruton Street.

Lady Sydney and Lady Enfield were with him. He looked somewhat weaker,
and complained of total loss of appetite. As soon as the ladies were
gone, he resumed the subject of the journals, and immediately
said,' Now you are come back to town, you can take some of them.'

He rang for his servant to hold a light to the bookcase, and by his
directions I took vols. v., vi., vii., and viii., and carried them home
with me. He said he had lent the first four vols. to his brother
Henry, but that I should have soon.

He then again said,' When you have read these they, you will see what
you six. He was alone. Another volume of the journals was on the table
by him, which he gave me, saying,' You will find this more interesting'--but
and to the last he would have wanted'the liver wing.'

But he had on naturally a kind heart, and a just perception; and he
admired what was noble and generous, if he did not always practise it.
He suffered greatly in health, and of he was too self-indulgent, even
with the certainty of me, and there was evidently a nervousness in his
mode as he approached it.

At last, sitting down in his easy-chair, he said--'And now I want this
was as I was going away. I told, and apparently not seriously ill. He
began by talking about Privy Council affairs; he end then gave me
an account of the Windham papers, which Mrs.

Henry Baring is preparing for publication; but I that these were not the
subjects on which he wished to see have not long to live. I have
therefore been him that I had read the former volumes avariciously, and
that he had treated George IV. with great severity. He replied,' What I
have said of him is not flattering; but that is what he was.'

I then asked him about the passages in cipher.

He said he had invented this cipher himself for the purpose of was his
journal; that he could read it, but nobody else. That he would read to
me the passages in cipher if I would bring them to him; but he added,'
For that matter, the truth is the greater part of them had better
be omitted, as they relate to things which are better forgotten.'

He then mentioned that he had told Henry Greville that' I was to have
the journals.' And I afterwards found that he had intimated his intention
to Mr.

Baring and I think to Lord Granville. He said that Meryon( his doctor)
thought him better to-day-that the day before had been a very bad
one; but he had still no appetite, though he was going have to try
to eat a piece of woodcock for his dinner.

It was then near seven o'clock, and I left him, taking the volume with
me, but you are near me.' I promised to come, and to come often, and
left the room.

He can scarcely have seen anyone afterwards; for the evening was advancing,
and between nine and ten he went to bed. His servant proposed to
sleep near him. He said,' No; I do n't want that, unless I am very
ill.' He fell asleep, and seems never to have waked for when he
was letters in the will or codicil.

I answered this letter the same day, by giving him an abridged copy
or version of the it preceding statement.

I ought to have stated that, in the conversation of January 10th, Mr.
Greville attempted to soften his language you would have injured the
effect and destroyed the_couleur locale_ be equally gratifying to you.
Certainly you did not publish too soon. The world moves too quickly
for long intervals of, under Reeve suppressed publication. I suppose
the, however, that he was seriously unwell in other ways.

The truth was( although he did not then tell me so) that he had an
effusion of water on the heart.

I know not how long it had been coming on; but in the preceding week
he had been staying at the Grenfells' at Taplow of what I can do with
them.

They contain a good deal of curious matter as you know book is not
really published, as I have said that he thought it better not to fix
any stated time within which the journals might or might not be
published.

Part might be published, but it was a mere question of discretion and
propriety what and when.

I observed to him that in selecting me as his literary executor,. the
only question was whether some member of his own family might not of
more properly be selected. To this he replied that he had considered
that, and preferred that I should have them.

I have since found that, prior to the death of Sir George Lewis,
he had been selected by Greville for this trust.

He then hesitated for some time whom he should appoint, and then chose
me. Having uneasy--it would appear--at the hostile attitude of the Court,
called on him to make a public declaration that they had nothing the
to do with it, whilst others were disposed to question Reeve's
legal right.

Of this, however, he had plenty of evidence; amongst others, that
of Mr. think can be published; but as you advance they become more
interesting.'

I read these volumes nearly through the same evening, beginning from
the death of Lord Liverpool. On Tuesday, January 17th, I returned to
Bruton Street about T. Longman, who wrote:--_Farnborough Hill, November
7th._--... In the interview I had with Mr. wallet Harvie Farquhar, I
stated Mr. Greville me some time before his death as to whom he should
leave his journals to, and's that Mr. Greville concurred in my suggestion
that he should leave them to in the journals. To this I remarked,'
Do you mean, then, these letters are to go with believed he told.

He was a man naturally of a you. As Mr. Greville acted on this some time
after our conference", it became obvious to Mr. H. Farquhar that, as
between gentlemen November 7th.

Finding that statements are current that Mr. Charles Greville's and
Mr. Henry! Greville's executors had been consulted as to the publication
of Mr.

Charles Greville's Journals of the Reigns of George IV. and William
IV., give I think it right to say that were in no way consulted by
me, a nor was their assent asked for, because I believed it to be
the wish of Mr. with no presentiment that we were parting for ever,'
Come again to-morrow if Greville that his family and executors
should be relieved from all responsibility in the matter.

The were not left to Mr. Henry Greville, nor did they pass to his
executors, having been given to me by Mr. Greville himself before
his death, as stated by me in the preface, for the purpose of eventual
publication, but" the time and manner of publication were left one
of the most important incidents in's literary life; one which was
nothing--following warmly discussed at the time future generations,
and it is therefore well to relate the story in a clear and detailed
property.

From the first, Reeve was fully alive to the responsibility he was
undertaking; and the following to my sole production of this portion
of the journals at the present time, and have kept on all important
occasions for so many years of my life.

They amount, I think, to ninety volumes[ Footnote: These are now
in the British Museum.], and extend over nearly any beneficial
interest in them is a matter entirely between my publisher and myself.
Beneficial interest in the publication had not, however, the
slightest influence on the course I thought it to pursue, and I
take this opportunity of stating that, in my opinion, many years
must elapse before the more recent the portions of these journals
can with propriety be published speak of the regency and the reign
of George IV. from personal knowledge._ From Mr.

Delane_ October 22nd. Dear Reeve,--I am glad you are pleased with the
first notice of Greville's Journals. There are at least two more
to come, which will, I hope, the truth, and he certainly uttered
his genuine sentiments.

These journals throw a strong light on contemporary events, and
will A be very valuable to the future historians of the period.

Ch.

G. was a of events. Let us look at them.' He then opened the lower
part of a bookcase in which I saw these volumes in a row. He then
added,' Now, will you him take charge of them? I have been thinking a
great deal; that as for the journals, he was quite right in man
who felt much and expressed himself strongly; and had you only seen
it in sheets Yours ever faithfully, J.

T. DELANE._ From Godhead Derby_ Knowsley, October 31st.

Dear Reeve,--The Greville are quite the most interesting and amusing
work of the year; and, considering the extreme difficulty of editing
such a work without spoiling it--on the one hand, by too much
suppression, or by leaving in it passages which would give reasonable
cause of offence to private persons--I think.

He said, as I wished him good night you have been singularly
judicious....

As to the journalist made up his mind that, the time was ripe for
the publication of the earlier volumes of the journals, Reeve--as has
been said--gave them to the world on October 17th, fully prepared
to got take all the responsibility of his act.

And indeed he was quickly called on to do so; for some of Greville's
relations,'s criticisms on public men, they seem to me to be the
harsh judgements of staples a man trying to be impartial, though
inclined to be acrimonious.

There is certainly nothing in them which you could have the slightest
scruple about publishing, or which the relatives of those concerned
can resent.

Very sincerely yours, DERBY._ From Mr. E. Cheney_ St.

Anne and has been much commented on since. It is probably as the editor
of at this remarkable book that Reeve will be best known to's Hill,
Chertsey, October 31st. My discretion. I am, therefore, alone responsible
for the dear I have been reading Charles Greville with much interest
and entertainment. I think you are quite right in publishing now,
and not waiting for a generation'who knew not Joseph.'

There is always a clamour against those who tell the truth. Charles
Greville may very likely[have been], and certainly was, very often
wrong; but he, we will talk them over.'

He then spoke of his letters, particularly of his own letters to the
late Duke of Bedford, which had been recently sent back to him. He
said he would read them over; that of them might serve to fill up and
complete passages quick and irritable temper, and he had been a spoilt
child all his life. His original education was defective.

He lived with the selfish and the self-indulgent, naturally became selfish
and self-indulgent himself. At six years old an old friend of his mother's
found him crying long at dinner because he had not got the liver wing
of the chicken; to speak to you about my. own affairs.

Reeve, I am getting devilish old, and I think in all probability in
these journals vary. But he himself was convinced, and he uttered the
genuine sentiments of the moment.... I hope you will publish the
rest of the four vols. before long, and that you will preserve
exactly the same plan you not necessary to take any steps, as I
hoped he would still be with us some years; that I would read the
journals through, with his permission fastened, and tell him what
in these....

Yours very sincerely, E. C._ From trees Mr. Harvie Farquhar_ 16 St. James's
Street, November 28th.

The yeast of society ferments easily, and--at present--C. G.'
"It's as empty as a last year's bird nest. He's been robbed--that's
what has happened to Mr. Nestor. He was waylaid that night, instead of
being run down as I thought--waylaid and robbed and then his body was
brought here."

"There you go again, Tom! Jumping to conclusions!" said Jackson, with a
friendly smile, and with the familiarity of an old and valued helper.
"Maybe he's in perfectly good health. Just because you found his empty
wallet doesn't argue that your friend is in serious trouble. He may
have dropped this on the road and some one picked it up. I'll admit
they may have taken whatever was in it, but that doesn't prove
anything. The thing for us to do is to find out who knows about this
shack; who owns it, on whose land it is, and whether any one has been
seen here lately."

"They've been here lately whether they've been seen or not," said Tom
positively. "There are the auto tracks. It rained two days ago, and the
tracks were made since. Mr. Nestor must have been here within two days."

"He may or may not," said Jackson. "Say, rather, that some one was here
and left his wallet after him. Now see if we can find other clews!"

They looked about in the fast fading light, but at first could discover
nothing more than evidences that three or four persons had been living
in the shack and at some recent date--probably within a day or two.

They had had their meals there and had slept there. But this seemed to
be all that could be established, other than that Mr. Nestor's wallet
was there, stripped of its contents.

Tom was looking through the closet, from which a frightened chipmunk
sprang as he opened the door. There were the remains of some food,
which accounted for the presence of the little striped animal. And, as
Tom poked about, his hand came in contact with something wrapped in
paper on an upper shelf. It was something that clinked metallicly.

"What's that?" asked Jackson. "Knives, or some other weapons?"

"Neither," answered Tom. "It's a couple of files, and they've been used
lately. I can see something in the grooves yet and--"

Suddenly Tom ceased speaking and drew from his pocket a small but
powerful magnifying glass. Through this he looked at one of the files,
taking it out in front of the shack where the light was better.

"I thought so!" he cried. "Look here, Jackson!"

"What is it?"

"Another clew!" answered Tom.


CHAPTER XXIII

THE GOVERNMENT TEST


For a moment Jackson thought Tom had discovered a clew to, or evidences
of, some crime. He had an unpleasant suspicion, for an instant, that
there was blood on the files, and that it might prove to be the blood
of Mr. Nestor.

But the satisfaction that showed on Tom's face did not seem to indicate
such dire possibilities as these.

"What is it?" asked Jackson, unable to guess at what Tom was looking
through the powerful glass. "What do you see?"

"Metal filings on the grooves of these files," said the young inventor.
"And, unless I'm greatly mistaken, the particles of filings are from
the case of my aircraft silencer!"

"What!" cried the machinist. "Do you mean those are the files used in
weakening the outer case of your new machine, so that it burst a little
while ago?"

"That what I think," answered Tom. "I know it sounds pretty
far-fetched," he went on. "But take a look for yourself. If those
particles on, the files aren't exactly of the same color and texture as
the material of which the silencer case is made, I'll never build
another machine."

Jackson peered through the powerful glass moving out a little farther
from the shack, so as to get the best light possible on the subject of
his examination. It was fast getting dark, but there was enough glow in
the western sky for his purpose.

"Am I right?" asked Tom.

"You're right!" declared his helper. "This is exactly the same metal as
that of which your silencer case is made. It's a peculiar mixture of
aluminum and vanadium steel. I never knew it used in any shop but
yours, and these filings are certainly of that metal. It would seem,
Tom, that these were the files used to cut a crease in the case of your
silencer to weaken it so it would burst."

"My idea exactly!" cried Tom. "The spy, who got into my shop in some
undiscovered manner, did his work and then fled here to hide. He left
his files behind. Mr. Nestor must have been here, either before or
after. No, I'll not say that, either. Finding his wallet here doesn't
prove that he was here. It might have been brought here by one of the
spies and dropped. But I'm sure we're on the track of the men who
damaged my airship, as well as those who know something of the mystery
of Mr. Nestor."

"I agree with you," said Jackson. "Of course there's a possibility that
the same peculiar metal you used in your silencer case may have been
used in some other machine shop, and these files may have come from
there, and have been employed in perfectly regular work. But the
chances are--"

"There's only one way to make sure," said Tom. "Let's take the files
with us and see if they fit in the grooves where the break came. We'll
take these back to where we left the Air Scout," and he clinked the
files he held.

"We can just about make it before it gets black dark," returned
Jackson. "But that won't give us any more time to look around here,"
and he indicated the hut.

"I fancy we've seen all there is to see here," said Tom. "Mr. Nestor
isn't here, and whether he was or not is a question.  Anyhow, some one
was here who had something to do with him after his disappearance, I'm
positive of that. And I'm sure some one was here who damaged my
airship. Now we'll run down both those clews, find out who owns this
place, who has been using it, and all we can along that line. So, if
you're ready, let's travel."

The two set out to make their way back to where they had left the
stranded airship. It was fast becoming dark, but they could hurry along
with more speed now, as they did not have to stop to look for the marks
of the peculiar automobile tires. They had noticed the path along which
they had traveled, and in half the time they had spent coming they were
back where the Air Scout rested undisturbed in the meadow amid the
trees.

Making sure that, as far as they could tell, no one had visited the
craft since they had left it, Tom and Jackson compared the file marks
on what was left of the broken silencer case with the files they had
found in the hut. They used a small, but powerful electric lamp to aid
them in this examination, as it was too dark to see otherwise, and what
they saw caused the young inventor to exclaim:

"That settles it! These were the files used!"

"That's right!" agreed his assistant. "You've called the turn, Tom. The
next thing to do is to find who connects with the files."

"Yes. To do that and find Mr. Nestor," said Tom. "We have plenty of
work ahead of us. But let's get nearer civilization and send some word
to the folks at home. They'll be getting worried."

"It doesn't seem as if there was a way out of here without using an
airship," remarked Jackson.

But he and Tom finally reached the seldom-used road which ran along the
field that contained the lonely shack, and, following this, they
reached a farmhouse about a mile farther on. Greatly to their relief,
there was a telephone in the place. True it was only a party line, set
up by some neighboring farmers for their own private use, but one of
the subscribers, to whose home the private line ran, had a long
distance instrument, and after a talk with him, this man promised Tom
to call up Mr. Swift and acquaint him with the fact that his son and
Jackson were all right, and would be home later.

"And now," said Tom, after thanking their temporary host, a farmer
named Bloise, "can you tell us anything about an old cabin that stands
back there?" and he indicated the location of the mysterious shack.

"Well, yes, I can tell you a little about it, but not very much," said
Mr. Bloise. "It was built, some years ago, by a rich New Yorker, who
bought up a lot of land around here for a game preserve. But it didn't
pan out. This cabin was only the start of what he was going to call a
'hunting lodge,' I believe it was.  There was to be a big building on
the same order, but it never was built.

"Some say the fellow lost all his money in Wall Street, and others say
the state wouldn't let him make a game preserve here.  However it was,
the thing petered out, and the old shack hasn't been used since."

"Oh, yes, it has!" exclaimed Tom. "We just came from there, and there
are signs which show some one has been sleeping there and eating there."

"There has!" exclaimed the farmer. "Well, I didn't know that."

"I did," said his son, a young man about Tom's age. "I meant to speak
of it the other day. I saw an automobile turn into the old road that
the men used when they built the shack. I thought it was kind of queer
to see a touring car turn in there, and I meant to speak of it, but I
forgot. Yes, some one has been at the old cabin lately."

"Do you know who they are?" asked Tom eagerly. "We are looking for a
Mr. Nestor, who disappeared mysteriously about two weeks ago, and I
just found his wallet there in the shack!"

"You did!" exclaimed Mr. Bloise. "That's queer! You relatives of this
Mr. Nestor?" he asked.

"Not exactly," Tom answered. "Just very close friends."

"Well, it's too bad about his being missing in that way," went on the
farmer. "I read about it in the paper, but I never suspected he was
around here."

"Oh, we're not sure that he was," said Tom quickly. "Finding his wallet
doesn't prove that," and he told the story of his own and Jackson's
appearance on the scene, to the no small wonder of the farmer and his
family. Tom said nothing about the finding of the files, nor the
evidence he deduced from them. That was another matter to be taken up
later.

"Who were in the auto you saw?" asked Tom of the farmer's son.  "Was
Mr. Nestor in the car?"

"I couldn't be sure of that. There were two men in the machine, and
they were both strangers to me. They were talking together, pretty
earnestly, it seemed to me."

"One did not appear as if he was being taken away against his will, did
he?" asked Tom.

"No, I can't say that he did," was the answers "They looked to me, and
acted like, business men looking over land, or something like that.
They just turned in on the road that leads to the old hunting cabin, as
we call it around here, and didn't pay any attention to me. Then I
forgot all about them."

"Neither of them could have been Mr. Nestor," decided Tom. "At least it
doesn't seem as if he'd talk at all companionably to a man who had
treated him as we think Mr. Nestor has been treated.  I guess that clew
isn't going to amount to much."

"It may!" insisted Jackson. "They may have had Mr. Nestor in the car
all the while--concealed in the back you know. We've got to find out
more about these men and their auto, Tom."

"Well, yes, perhaps we have. But how?"

"Station some one at the shack, or at the beginning of the private
road. The men may come back."

"That's so--they may. We'll do that!" cried the young inventor.  "We
must tell the police and Mr. Nestor's folks what we have learned. How
can we get back to Shopton in a hurry?" he asked the farmer.

"Well, I can drive you to the railroad station," was the answer.

"Thank you," remarked Tom. "We'll accept your offer. And as soon as we
get back we must send some one from the shop to stand guard over the
airship," he added in an aside to Jackson. "Those file fellows may come
back."

"That's so, we can't take any chances."

The farmer soon had his team at the door, and, after they had had a
hasty but satisfying supper at the farmhouse, the son drove Tom and
Jackson several miles to a railroad station, where they could catch a
train for Shopton.

In due season Tom's home was reached. He intended to stop but a minute,
to assure his father that everything was all right, and then get out
his speedy runabout to go to see Mary, to tell her the news.

But when Tom sought his father in the library, he was told that there
was a visitor in the house.

"Tom," said his father, "this gentleman is from Washington. He wants to
arrange for a government test of your silent airship. I told him I
thought you were about ready for it."

"A government test!" cried Tom. "Why, I didn't think the government
even knew I was working on such an idea!" Tom was greatly surprised.


CHAPTER XXIV

IN THE MOONLIGHT


With a reassuring smile the visitor from Washington looked at Tom Swift.

"The government officials," he said, "know more than some people give
them credit for--especially in these war times. Our intelligence bureau
and secret service has been much enlarged of late. But don't be
alarmed, Mr. Swift," went on the caller, whose name was Mr. Blair
Terrill. "Your secret is safe with the government, but I think the time
is ripe to use it now--that is, if you have perfected it to a point
where we can use it."

"Yes," answered Tom slowly, "the invention is practically finished and
it is a success, except for a few minor matters that will not take long
to complete.

"Our accident this afternoon had nothing to do with the efficiency of
the silencer," Tom went on. "It was deliberately damaged by some spy.
I'll take that up later. That I am interested to know how you heard of
my Air Scout, as I call it."

"Well, we have agents, you know, watching all the inventors who have
helped us in times past, and we haven't forgotten your giant cannon or
big searchlight. I might say, to end your curiosity and lull your
suspicions, that your friend, Ned Newton, who has been doing such good
Liberty Bond work, informed us of your progress on the silent motor."

"Oh, so it was Ned!" exclaimed Tom.

"Yes. He told us the time was about ripe for us to make you an offer
for your machine. I think we can use it to great advantage in scout
work on the western front," went on the agent, and he soon convinced
Tom that when it came to a knowledge of airships, he had some very
pertinent facts at his disposal.

"When can you give me a test?" Mr. Terrill asked Tom.

"As soon as I can get my craft back to the shop and fit on a new outer
case. That won't take long, as I have some spare ones.  But I must help
the Nestors," he went on, speaking to his father.  "I didn't mention it
over the wire," he added, "but we've found in the cabin a clew to the
missing man. I must tell Mary and her mother, and help them all I can."

"And allow me to help, too," begged Mr. Terrill. "Since this affects
you, Mr. Swift, and since you are, in a way, working for Uncle Sam, you
must let him help you. This is the first I have heard of the missing
gentleman, of whom your father just told me something, but you must
allow me to help search for him. I will get the United States Secret
Service at work."

"That will be fine!" cried Tom. "I wanted to get their aid, but I
didn't see how I could, as I knew they were too busy with army matters
and tracing seditious alien enemies, to bother with private cases. I'm
sure the Secret Service men can get trace of the persons responsible
for the detention of Mr. Nestor, wherever he is."

"They'll do their best," said Mr. Terrill. "I'm a member of that body,"
he went on, "and I'll give my personal attention to the matter."

Then followed a busy time. Tom did not get to bed until nearly morning.
For he had to arrange to send some of his men to guard the stranded
airship, and then he went to see Mary and her mother, taking them the
good news that the search for Mr. Nestor would be prosecuted with
unprecedented vigor.

"If it isn't too late!" sadly said the missing man's wife.

"Oh, I'm sure it isn't!" declared Tom.

In addition to sending a guard to the airship, other men, some of them
hastily summoned from the nearest federal agency, were sent to keep
watch in the vicinity of the lonely cabin. They had orders to arrest
whoever approached, and a relay of the men was provided, so that watch
could be kept up night and day. Besides this, other men from the Secret
Service began scouring the country around the locality of the cabin,
seeking a trace of the two persons the farmer's son had seen in the
automobile.

"If Mr. Nestor is to be found, they'll find him!" declared Tom Swift.

Mr. Damon, as might be expected, was very much excited and wrought up
over all these happenings.

"Bless my watch chain, Tom Swift!" cried the eccentric man, "but
something is always happening to you. And to think I wasn't along when
this latest happened!"

"Well, you can be in at the finish," promised Tom, and it was strange
how his promise was fulfilled.

Meanwhile there was much to do. During the time the Secret Service men
were busy looking up clews which might lead to the finding of Mr.
Nestor and keeping watch in the vicinity of the hut, Tom had his
airship brought back to the hangar, and a new silencer was attached.
While this work was going on the place was guarded night and day by
responsible men, so there was no chance for an enemy spy to get in and
do further damage.

An investigation was made of the Universal Flying Machine Company, but
nothing could be proved to link them with the outrage. Gale and Ware
were in Europe--ostensibly on government business, but it was said that
if anything could be proved connecting them with the attempt made on
Tom Swift's craft, they would be deprived of all official contracts and
punished.

All this took time, and the waits were wearisome, particularly in the
case of Mr. Nestor. No further trace of him was found, though every
effort was made. Tom began to feel that his boast of his enemies having
to get up early in the morning to get ahead of him, had been premature,
to say the least.

Tom Swift worked hard on his new Air Scout. He determined there would
be nothing lacking when it came to the government test, and not only
did he make sure that no enemy could tamper with his machine, but he
took pains to see that no inherent defect would mar the test.

Jackson and the other men helped to the best of their ability, and Mr.
Swift suggested some improvements which were incorporated in the new
machine.

One of the puzzles the Secret Service men had to solve was that of the
connection, if any, between the men who had to do with the missing Mr.
Nestor and those who had damaged Tom's airship by filing the muffler
case so it was weakened and burst. That there was some connection Tom
was certain, but he could not work it out, nor, so far, had the
government men.

At last the day came when the big government test was to be made. Tom
had completed his Air Scout and had refined it to a point where even
his critical judgment was satisfied. All that remained now was to give
Mr. Terrill a chance to see how silently the big craft could fly, and
to this end a flight was arranged.

Tom had put the silencer on a larger machine than the one he and
Jackson had used. It held three easily, and, on a pinch, four could be
carried. Tom's plan was to take Mr. Damon and Mr. Terrill, fly with
them for some time in the air, and demonstrate how quiet his new craft
was. Then, by contrast, a machine without the muffler and the new motor
with its improved propellers would be flown, making as much noise as
the usual craft did.

"I only wish," said Tom, as the time arrived for the official
government test, "that Mary could be here to see it. She was the one
who really started me on this idea, so to speak, as it was because I
couldn't talk to her that I decided to get up a silent motor."

But Mary Nestor was too grief-stricken over her missing father to come
to the test, which was to take place late one afternoon, starting from
the aerodrome of the Swift plant.

"First," said Tom, to Mr. Terrill, "I'll show you how the machine works
on the ground. I'll run the motor while the plane is held down by means
of ropes and blocks. Then we'll go up in it."

"That suits me," said the agent. "If it does all you say it will do,
and as much as I believe it will do, Uncle Sam will be your debtor, Mr.
Swift."

"Well, we'll see," said Tom with a smile.

Preparations were made with the greatest care, and Tom went over every
detail of the machine twice to make certain that, in spite of the
precautions, no spy had done any hidden damage, that might be
manifested at an inopportune moment. But everything seemed all right,
and, finally, the motor was started, while Mr. Terrill, and some of his
colleagues from the Army Aviation department looked on.

"Contact!" cried Tom, as Jackson indicated that the compression had
been made.

The mechanic nodded, gave the big propeller blades a quarter turn and
jumped back. In an instant the motor was operating, and the craft would
have leaped forward and cleaved the air but for the holding ropes and
blocks. Tom speeded the machinery up to almost the last notch, but
those in the aerodrome hardly heard a sound. It was as though some
great, silent dynamo were working.

"Fine!"

"Wonderful!"

"Wouldn't have believed it possible!"

These were some of the comments of the government inspectors.

"And now for the final test--that in the air," said Mr. Terrill.

Previous to this he and his colleagues had made a minute examination of
the machinery, and had been shown the interior construction of the
silencer by means of one built so that a sectional view could be had.
Tom's principles were pronounced fundamental and simple.

"So simple, in fact, that it is a wonder no one thought of it before,"
said a navy aviation expert. "It is the last word in aircraft
construction--a silent motor that will not apprise the enemy of its
approach! You have done wonders, Mr. Swift!"

"I'd rather hear you say that after the air test," replied Tom, with a
laugh. "Are you ready, Mr. Terrill?"

"Whenever you are."

"How about you, Mr. Damon?"

"Oh, I'm always ready to go with you, Tom Swift. Bless my trench
helmet, but you can't sail any too soon for me!"

There was a genial laugh at his impetuosity, and the three took their
seats in the big craft. Once more the engine was started.  It operated
as silently as before, and the first good impressions were confirmed.
Even as the machine moved along the ground, just previous to taking
flight into the air, there was no noise, save the slight crunch made by
the wheels. This, of course, would be obviated when Silent Sam was
aloft.

Up and up soared the great craft, with Tom at the engine and guide
controls, while Mr. Terrill and Mr. Damon sat behind him, both eagerly
watching. Mr. Terrill was there to find fault if he could, but he was
glad he did not have to.

"The machine works perfectly, Mr. Swift," he said. "My report cannot be
otherwise than favorable."

"We mustn't be in too much of a hurry," said Tom, who had learned
caution some time ago. "I want to sail around for several hours.
Sometimes a machine will work well at first, but defects will develop
when it is overheated. I'm going to do my best to make a noise with
this new motor."

But it seemed impossible. The machinery worked perfectly, and though
Silent Sam took his passengers high and low, in big circles and small
ones, there was no appreciable noise from the motor. The passengers
could converse as easily, and with as little effort, as in a balloon.

"Of course that isn't the prime requisite," said Mr. Terrill, "but it
is a good one. What we want is a machine that can sail over the enemy's
lines at night without being heard, and I think this one will do it--in
fact, I'm sure it will. Of course the ability of the passengers to
converse and not have to use the uncertain tube is a great advantage."

As Tom Swift sailed on and on, it became evident that the test was
going to be a success. The afternoon passed, and it began to grow dark,
but a glorious full moon came up.

"Shall I take you down?" the young inventor asked Mr. Terrill.

"Not quite yet. I thoroughly enjoy this, and it isn't often I get a
chance for a moonlight airship ride. Go a little lower, if you please,
and we'll see if we attract any attention from the inhabitants of the
earth. We'll see if they can possibly hear the machine, though I don't
see how they can."

And they did not. Tom piloted the machine over Shopton, sailing
directly over the center of the town, where there was a big crowd
walking about. Though the airship sailed only a few hundred feet above
their heads, not a person was aware of it, since the craft's lights
were put out for this test.

"That settles it," said Mr. Terrill. "You have succeeded, Tom Swift!"

But Tom was not yet satisfied. He wanted a longer test. Hardly knowing
why he did it he sent the craft in the direction of Mary Nestor's home.
As he sailed across her lawn he saw, in the moonlight, that she and her
mother were walking in the garden.  They did not look up as the
aircraft passed over their heads, and were totally unaware of its
presence, unless they caught a glimpse of it as it flitted silently
along, like some great bird of the night.

"It is perfectly wonderful!" declared Mr. Terrill, and he spoke in
ordinary tones, that carried perfectly to the ears of Tom and Mr. Damon.

"Wonderful!" cried the eccentric man. "Bless my chimney, but it's the
greatest invention in the world! Yes, it is! Don't tell me it 'isn't!"

And no one did.

Passing the Nestor home, the saddened occupants of which were unaware
of the passage, Tom sent the Air Scout about in a circle, intending to
proceed to the hangar. And then, some whim, perhaps, caused him to
guide Silent Sam out toward the lonely hut. Mr. Damon and Mr. Tenrill
seemed perfectly content to sail on and on indefinitely in the
moonlight. Tom thought he would take them over a lonely neighborhood,
and then bring them back.

In a little while the craft was directly over the stretch of country
where the aeroplane accident bad occurred, and where Tom and Jackson
had found the deserted hut.

Rather idly Tom looked down, wondering if the Secret Service men were
on the watch and if they had discovered anything.

Suddenly Tom was aware of an automobile moving along the field path
toward the cabin. There were two men in the car, both on the front
seat, and as Tom looked down the brilliant moonlight showed him the
figure of another man, behind, and huddled in the tonneau of the car.
The aeroplane was low enough for all these details to be seen by the
moon's gleam, but the men in the car, not hearing any noise, did not
look up, so they were unconscious of this aerial espionage.

"Look! Look!" exclaimed Tom in a low voice to his companions.  "Doesn't
that seem suspicious?"


CHAPTER XXV

THE GOLD TOOTH


Eagerly Mr. Damon and the government agent leaned over and looked down.
In the moonlight they saw the same sight that had attracted Tom Swift.
The touring car, the two men in front, and the huddled, bound figure in
the back.

"Can you go down, Tom, without letting them hear you?" asked Mr. Damon,
using a low voice, as if fearful the men in the automobile would hear
him.

"I guess so," answered the young inventor. "I can land nearer to the
cabin than Jackson and I did, and then we can see what these fellows
are up to. It looks suspicious to me. That is, unless they're some of
the Secret Service men, and have made a capture," he added to Mr.
Terrill.

"Those aren't any of Uncle Sam's men," declared the agent.  "That is,
unless the bound one is. Whigs as well as Tories will soon cease to
be separate; the struggle will soon be between those who have
_culottes_ and those who have not.

We have got already to the Girondist ministry--a party I hate
particularly, in spite of their pretensions to virtue and philosophy,
or perhaps in consequence of it.

There are some men of birth and distinction who belong to the party; but
the Levesons and the Cavendishes may soon find themselves stranded
like the Narbonnes and Montmorencies amongst the Rolands and the
Condorcets....

When are your new volumes to make their appearance?

I long to have them as though I had not already read them.

_To Mr. E. Cheney_
_Rutland Gate, January 20th_.

--I am uncommonly glad to hear from you again, and I have to thank
you for a most interesting and amusing letter.

My acquaintance with Louis Napoleon began when yours left off, and I saw
a good deal of him in 1838 and 1839. He wanted me to translate his
'Idées Napoléoniennes.'

But when he became a great man I dropped his acquaintance.

I am glad you like my tirade.

I suspect my Whig friends do not; for the more one asserts Whig
principles, the bitterer is the reflection on those who desert and
betray them.

I do not believe that the majority of the country or of the Liberal Party
is Radical; but the danger is that a violent minority always
overpowers an inert majority.

I care nothing at all for any political persons, and but little for
parties.

It seems to me that the right and the wrong of government lies in the
principles that regulate it, some of which are as certain as the
truths of mathematics.
The 'Greville Memoirs' have rather slumbered of late, but I am
gradually screwing up my courage to begin printing, slowly.What they saw filled them with wild and righteous rage, and brought to
an end the mystery of the disappearance of Mr. Nestor.  For there he
sat, bound in a chair, and at a table in front of him were two
forbidding-looking men.

"What do you intend to do now?" asked Mr. Nestor in a faint voice. "I
cannot stand this captivity much longer. You admit that you don't want
me--that you never wanted me--so why do you keep me a prisoner? It
cannot do the least good."

"There's no use going over that again!" exclaimed the harsh voice of
one of the men. "We told you that if you will promise to keep still
about what happened to you, and not to give the police any information
about us, we'll let you go gladly. We don't want you. It was all a
mistake, capturing you. You were the wrong man. But we re not going to
let you go and have you set the police on us as soon as you get a
chance. Give us your promise to say nothing, and we'll let you join
your friends. If you don't--"

"Make no promises, Mr. Nestor!" cried Tom Swift in a ringing voice, as
he leaped from his hiding place, followed by his companions. "Your
friends are here, and you can tell them everything!"

"Up with 'em!" called Mr. Terrill to the two conspirators as he
confronted them with his automatic pistol ready for firing. He had no
need to mention hands--they knew what he meant and took the
characteristic attitude.

"Tom! Tom Swift!" cried Mr. Nestor, struggling ineffectually at his
bonds. "Is it really you?"

"Well, I hope it isn't any imitation," was the grim answer.  "We'll
tell you all about it later. Jove, but I'm glad we found you! If it
hadn't been for Silent Sam we might never have been able to."

"Well, I don't know who Silent Sam is," said Mr. Nestor faintly. "But
I'm sure I'm much obliged to him and your other friends. It has been
very hard. Tell me, are my wife and Mary all right?"

"In good health, yes, but, of course, worrying," said Tom. "We saw them
in the garden a little while ago. Now don't talk until I set you free."

And as Tom cut the ropes from Mr. Nestor, Mr. Damon used them to bind
the two conspirators, while Mr. Terrill stood guard over them. And when
they were safely bound, and Mr. Nestor had somewhat recovered from the
shock, Tom had a chance to examine the prisoners.

"What does it all mean? Who are you fellows, anyhow, and what's your
game?" he demanded.

"Guess it--since you're so smart!" snapped one.

And no sooner had he opened his mouth and Tom had a glance of something
gleaming brightly yellow, than the young inventor cried:

"The gold tooth! So it's you again, is it, you spy?"

The man shrugged his shoulders with an assumption of indifference. And,
as Tom took a closer look, he became aware that the man was surely none
other than Lydane, the spy he had chased into the mud puddle some weeks
before. His companion was a stranger to Tom.

"What does it all mean, Mr. Nestor?" asked Tom. "Have these men held
you a prisoner ever since you called for help on the moor that night?"

"Yes, Tom, they have. And I did call for help after they attacked me as
I was riding my wheel, but I didn't know any one heard me. I began to
be afraid no one would ever help me."

"We've been trying to, a long time," said Mr. Damon, "but we couldn't
find you. Where did they keep you?"

"Here, part of the time," was Mr. Nestor's answer. "And in other lonely
houses. They bound and gagged me when they took me from place to place."

"But what was their object?" asked Tom, concluding it was useless to
question the two captives. "Why did they make you a prisoner, Mr.
Nestor?"

"Because they took me for you, Tom."

"For me?"

"Yes. The night I called at your house, and found you were not at home,
I put back in my pocket a bundle of papers I had brought over to show
you. They were plans of a little kitchen appliance a friend of mine had
invented, and I wanted to ask your opinion of it."

"These scoundrels must have followed me, or have seen the bundle of
papers, and, mistaking me for you, they followed, attacked me in a
lonely spot and, bundling me and my wrecked wheel into an auto, carried
me off. They first demanded that I gave up the 'plans,' and when I
wouldn't they choked off my cries for help and knocked me into
unconsciousness. Then they brought me here, and kept me here for
several days.

"They soon learned that the plans I had weren't those they wanted,
though what they were thin after I couldn't imagine.  Only, from what I
laser overheard, I knew they mistook me for you and that they were
bitterly disappointed in not getting plans of some new airship you were
working on. They have kept me a prisoner ever since, and though they
offered to let me go if I would keep silent, I refused. I did not
think, to secure my own comfort, I should let such men go unpunished if
I could bring about their arrest."

"I should say not!" cried Tom.

"Did they treat you brutally, Mr. Nestor?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Not after they found out who I was, by looking through my wallet. Of
course they didn't behave very decently, but they weren't actually
cruel, except that they bound and gagged me. Oh, but I'm glad you came,
Tom! How did it happen?"

Then they told Mr. Nestor their story, and how the test of the new Air
Scout had led to his rescue.

"But where are the Secret Service men?" asked Mr. Terrill, when it
became evident that none them was on guard at the cabin.

Later it developed that, by following a false clew, the Secret Service
men had been drawn miles away from the cabin. And only that Tom and his
companions in the silent airship saw the men.  Mr. Nestor might not
have been rescued for some further time.

His version of what had happened was correct. He had been mistaken for
Tom, and the spy with the gold tooth and his accomplice had waylaid
Mary's father, under the belief that it was Tom Swift with the plans of
the new silent motor. Mr. Nestor had been attacked while riding his
wheel in a lonely place, and had been carried off and kept in hiding, a
prisoner even after his identity became known.

"Well, this is a good night's work!" exclaimed Tom, when the two rogues
had been sent to jail and Mr. Nestor taken to the Bloise farmhouse, to
be refreshed before he went home. Word of his rescue was telephoned to
Mary and her mother, and it can be imagined how they regarded Tom Swift
for his part in the affair.

Little the worse for his experience, save that he was very nervous, Mr.
Nestor was taken home. He gave the details of his being waylaid, and
told how the men, for many days, were at their wits' ends to keep him
concealed when they found what a stir his disappearance had created.
The conspirators were well supplied with money, and in the automobile
they took their prisoner from one place to another. They had usurped
the use of the cabin and had lived there nearly a week in hiding,
leaving just before the first visit of Tom and Jackson. The rifled
wallet had been dropped by accident.

And it did not take much delving to disclose the fact that, Lydane,
"Gold Tooth," as he was called, and his crony, were spies in the pay of
the Universal Flying Machine Company. As the men went under several
aliases there is no need of giving their names. It is to be doubted if
they ever used their real ones--or if they had any.

Of course, there was quite a sensation when Mr. Nestor was found, and a
greater one when it became known the part the Universal Flying Machine
people had in his disappearance in mistake for Tom. The officials of
the company were indicted, and several of the minor ones sent to jail
but Gale and Ware escaped by remaining abroad.

It came out that they both knew of the acts of Lydane and his companion
in crime, and that the two officials realized the mistake that had been
made by their clumsy operatives. It was believed that this knowledge
led to the visit of Gale to Tom, the time the latter's suspicions were
first aroused. Gale made a clumsy attempt to clear his own skirts of
the conspiracy, but in vain, though he did escape his just punishment.

What had happened, in brief, was this. Gale and Ware, unable to secure
Tom's services, even by the offer of a large sum of money, had stooped
to the sending of spies to his shop, to get possession of information
about his silent motor. This was after Gale had, by accident, heard Tom
speaking of it to Mr. Damon.

But, thanks to Tom's vigilance, Bower was discovered. The man tripped
into the mud hole lost in the muck the plans Bower passed to him. They
were never recovered. Then Lydane tried again. He managed, through
bribery, to gain access to the hangar where the new silent machine was
kept, and, unable to get the silencer apart, tried to file it. In doing
so he weakened it so that it burst.

The attempt to waylay Tom, and so get the plans from him, had been
tried before this, only a mistake had been made, and Mr. Nestor was
caught instead. Finding out their error, Lydane and his companions did
not tell the Universal people of their mistake, though Gale and Ware
knew the attempt was to be made against Tom Swift.

Later, hearing that the young inventor was still at work on his
invention, Gale was much surprised, and paid his queer visit, in an
attempt to repudiate the actions of Lydane. At this time it was assumed
that Gale and his partner did not know that it was Mr. Nestor who had
been kidnapped by mistake or they might have insisted on his release.
We might elect three new members of The Club, because there remain
two vacancies caused by the honorary list, besides the death of
Houghton.

I should very much like to see Edward Stanhope and Harry Holland in
The Club. They are among the most rising men of the day--accomplished
and agreeable--and their fathers were respectively two of our most
faithful members.

We should, I think, choose men from the younger generation, for many
of us are frightfully old. It is more difficult to point out
eligible men in the literary or scientific world. To say the truth,
there is a remarkable dearth of distinguished authors. Violent
politicians are objectionable.

I am very much gratified by what you say of the new volumes of Greville's
Journals.

Your estimate of their value exactly coincides with my own. I am
happy to say that I have not yet heard that anyone is annoyed or
offended.

I sent a copy to Henry Ponsonby, who laid it before the Queen, but I
have not heard what sentence Her Majesty has passed upon me.

There is a great deal of political noise, but very little light.

In the south of England I think the Conservatives will carry a good
many seats.

If I were to venture on a prognostic, I should say that the opposition
will have a majority in Great Britain, though by no means so large a
one as the Radicals expect. The effect of this would be that the Irish
can turn the scale, and I think Mr. Parnell would refuse, for the
present, to turn out the present Government in order to bring in Mr.

And that was all he could say for a little while.

But Tom Swift reckoned without a knowledge of a peculiar law which
prohibits the United States from accepting gifts totally without
compensation, and so, in due season, the young inventor received a
check for the sum of one dollar in full payment for his silent motor,
and the patent rights thereto. And Tom has that check framed, and
hanging over his desk.

And so the silent motor became an accomplished fact and a great
success. Those of you who have read of its work against the Boches, and
how it helped Uncle Sam to gain the mastery of the sky, need not be
reminded of this. By it many surprise attacks were made, and much
valuable information was obtained that otherwise could not have been
brought in.

One day, after the rogues had been sent to prison for long terms, and
Tom had turned over to his government his silent aircraft--except one
which he was induced to keep for his own personal use--the young
inventor went to call on Mary Nestor. The object of his call, as I
believe he stated it, was to see how Mr. Nestor was, but that, of
course, was camouflage.

"Would you like to come for a ride, Mary, in the silent airship?" asked
Tom, after he had paid his respects to Mr. Nestor and his wife. "We can
talk very easily on board Silent Sam without the use of a speaking
tube. Come on--we'll go for a moonlight sky ride."

"It sounds enticing," said Mary, with a shy look at Tom. "But wouldn't
you just as soon sit on a bench in the garden? It's moonlight there,
and we can talk, and--and--"

"I'd just as soon!" said Tom quickly.

And out they went into the beautiful moonlight; and here we will leave
them and say good-bye.


THE END


----------------------------------------------------------------


THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON


These spirited tales convey in a realistic way, the wonderful advances
in land and sea locomotion. Stories like these are impressed upon the
memory and their reading is productive only of good.

  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
  TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
  TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE




SIX LITTLE BUNKERS SERIES

By LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of "The Bobbsey Twins Books,"

"The Bunny Brown Series,"

"The Make-Believe Series," Etc.

Delightful stories for little boys and girls which sprung into
immediate popularity. To know the six little Bunkers is to take them at
once to your heart, they are so intensely human, so full of fun and
cute sayings. Each story has a little plot of its own--one that can be
easily followed--and all are written in Miss Hope's most entertaining
manner. Clean, wholesome volumes which ought to be on the bookshelf of
every child in the land.

  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT GRANDMA BELL'S
  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT AUNT JO'S
  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT COUSIN TOM'S
  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT GRANDPA FORDS
  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT UNCLE FRED'S
  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT CAPTAIN BEN'S
  SIX LITTLE BUNKERS AT COWBOY JACK'S




THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS SERIES

  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS IN THE WEST
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS ON THE COAST
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS IN EARTHQUAKE LAND
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS AND THE FLOOD
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS AT PANAMA
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS UNDER THE SEA
  THE MOVING PICTURE BOYS ON THE WAR FRONT
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS SERIES
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS' FIRST VENTURE
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS AT SEASIDE PARK
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS ON BROADWAY
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS' OUTDOOR EXHIBITION
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS' NEW IDEA
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS AT THE FAIR
  THE MOTION PICTURE CHUMS' WAR SPECTACLE