Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


Kilgorman
A Story of Ireland in 1798

By Talbot Baines Reed
________________________________________________________________________
This was Reed's last book, written even as he lay dying, presumably from
cancer.  It is a very well-written book, and is very interesting, even
though as in the works of Kingston and Collingwood there are a lot of
swimming episodes.

The time of the story is in the 1790s, during the French Revolution,
which we see at close quarters during our hero's time in France.  We
also visit Rotterdam, in Holland.  But most of the action, at least that
which takes place on dry land, takes place in Donegal, that long wild
part of Ireland that lies to its extreme north-west.

There are several lines of the story.  One of these is the great love
that exists between the hero and his twin brother.  Another is the
question, Are they brothers?  For only one person actually knows, and
she is far away: the hint that there is a problem is given in a dying
note by the woman that passed as the boys' mother.  The third theme is,
as always with Ireland, plotting for an uprising against English rule.
In this department nothing changes.

Yes, it is a brilliant book, complemented by an "In Memoriam" article
about the life of the author.
________________________________________________________________________
KILGORMAN
A STORY OF IRELAND IN 1798

BY TALBOT BAINES REED

Preface, by John Sime


IN MEMORIAM.

By the death of Talbot B.  Reed the boys of the English-speaking world
have lost one of their best friends.  For fourteen years he has
contributed to their pleasure, and in the little library of boys' books
which left his pen he has done as much as any writer of our day to raise
the standard of boys' literature.  His books are alike removed from the
old-fashioned and familiar class of boys' stories, which, meaning well,
generally baffled their own purpose by attempting to administer morality
and doctrine on what Reed called the "powder-in-jam" principle--a
process apt to spoil the jam, yet make "the powder" no less nauseous;
or, on the other hand, the class of book that dealt in thrilling
adventure of the blood-curdling and "penny dreadful" order.  With
neither of these types have Talbot Reed's boys' books any kinship.  His
boys are of flesh and blood, such as fill our public schools, such as
brighten or "make hay" of the peace of our homes.  He had the rare art
of hitting off boy-nature, with just that spice of wickedness in it
without which a boy is not a boy.  His heroes have always the charm of
bounding, youthful energy, and youth's invincible hopefulness, and the
constant flow of good spirits which have made the boys of all time
perennially interesting.

The secret of Reed's success in this direction was that all through
life, as every one who had the privilege of knowing him can testify, he
possessed in himself the healthy freshness of heart of boyhood.  He
sympathised with the troubles and joys, he understood the temptations,
and fathomed the motives that sway and mould boy-character; he had the
power of depicting that side of life with infinite humour and pathos,
possible only to one who could place himself sympathetically at the
boys' stand-point in life.  Hence the wholesomeness of tone and the
breezy freshness of his work.  His boy-heroes are neither prigs nor
milk-sops, but in their strength and weakness they are the stuff which
ultimately makes our best citizens and fathers; they are the boys who,
later in life, with healthy minds in healthy bodies, have made the
British Empire what it is.

A special and pathetic interest attaches to this story of "Kilgorman,"
the last that left Talbot Reed's pen.  It was undertaken while he was
yet in the prime of his strength and vigour.  The illness which
ultimately, alas, ended fatally had already laid hold on him ere he had
well begun the book.  In intervals of ease during his last illness he
worked at it, sometimes in bed, sometimes in his armchair: it is
pleasant to think that he so enjoyed the work that its production eased
and soothed many a weary hour for him, and certainly never was other
than a recreation to him.

The pen dropped from his hand ere he had quite completed the work, yet,
as the book stands here, it is much as he meant to leave it.  The
figures of Barry Gallagher, and Tim, and the charming Kit will take
their places in the delightful gallery of his young people, and their
adventures by land and by sea will be followed with an increased
interest that they are the last that can come from his brilliant pen.

Talbot Reed came of a right good English stock, both on his father's and
his mother's side.  His grandfather, Dr Andrew Reed, a Nonconformist
minister of note in his day, left his mark in some of the soundest
philanthropic undertakings of the century.  His thoughtfulness and self-
sacrificing energy have lightened the sufferings and soothed the old age
of many thousands.  He was one of the founders of the London, Reedham,
and Infant Orphan Asylums, the Earlswood Asylum for Idiots, and the
Royal Hospital for Incurables.  His son, Sir Charles Reed, and
grandsons, have done yeoman service in carrying on to the present day
the noble work begun by him.

Talbot was the third son of the late Sir Charles Reed, Member of
Parliament for Hackney, and latterly for Saint Ives (Cornwall).  His
mother, Lady Reed, was the youngest daughter of Mr Edward Baines,
Member of Parliament for Leeds.  She was a lady of saintly life, of
infinite gentleness and sweetness of heart, with extraordinary strength
and refinement of mind, reverenced and loved by her sons and daughters,
and by none more than by Talbot Reed, who bore a strong resemblance to
her alike in disposition and in physical appearance.

The service that Sir Charles Reed did for his generation, both in
Parliament and as Chairman of the London School Board, and in connection
with many of the religious and philanthropic movements of his time, are
too well known to be recapitulated here.

Talbot B.  Reed was born on the 3rd of April 1852, at Hackney.  His
first schoolmaster was Mr Anderton of Priory House School, Upper
Clapton, under whose care he remained until he was thirteen years of
age.  He retained through life a feeling of warm affection to Mr
Anderton, who thoroughly prepared him for the more serious work ahead of
him.  Only a year or two ago, Reed was one of the most active of Mr
Anderton's old pupils in organising a dinner in honour of his former
master.

In 1865 Talbot was entered at the City of London School, then located in
Milk Street, Cheapside, under the headship of Dr Abbot, where he spent
four happy and industrious years of his boyhood.  He is described by Mr
Vardy, a school-comrade, in the course of a recent interesting article
by the Editor of the _Boy's Own Paper_, as being at this period "a
handsome boy, strong and well proportioned, with a frank open face,
black hair, and lively dark eyes, fresh complexion, full of life and
vigour, and with a clear ringing voice ...  He was audacious with that
charming audacity that suits some boys.  On one occasion he had very
calmly absented himself from the class-room during a temporary
engagement by the French master, who, having returned before he was
expected, and while Reed was away, demanded by what leave he had left
the class-room.  Reed replied with (as he would probably have expressed
it) 'awful cheek,' 'If you please, sir, I took "French" leave!'"

Reed was popular at school both with masters and boys.  His initials,
"T.B.," soon became changed familiarly into "Tib," by which endearing
nickname Mr Vardy says he was known to the last by the comrades of his
school-days.

It is interesting, in the light of the prominence which in all his
school stories he properly gave to out-of-door sports and athletic
exercises, to have it, on the authority of his old school-fellow, that
he excelled in all manly exercises.  He was a first-rate football-
player, and a good all-round cricketer; he was an excellent oar, and a
fairly good swimmer; and until the last few months of his life no man
could enjoy with more zest a game of quoits, or tennis, or a day devoted
to the royal game of golf.  In the early days of his manhood, with
characteristic unselfishness, he risked his own life on one occasion by
leaping from a rock into the sea, on the wild north Irish coast, to
bring safely ashore his cousin (and life-long friend, Mr Talbot Baines,
the distinguished editor of the _Leeds Mercury_), who has told me that
he would, without Reed's prompt and plucky aid, inevitably have been
drowned.

The large contribution he made to literature in later days amply serves
to prove that the more serious studies of school were never neglected
for his devotion to sport.  He seldom missed the old boys' annual dinner
of the City of London School.  In proposing a toast at a recent dinner,
he reminded Mr Asquith, M.P.  (a school-fellow of Reed's) that at the
school debating society they had "led off" on separate sides in a wordy
battle on the red-hot controversy of "Queen Elizabeth versus Queen
Mary."  Every boy who has read "Sir Ludar" will remember that the hero
of that charming story and Humphrey Dexter fall to blows on the same
dangerous subject.

I cannot find that in his masterly pictures of public school life he
drew much from his experiences at the City of London School, except,
perhaps, in a few details, such as the rivalry which he describes so
vividly as existing between the fifth and sixth forms in his delightful
book, "The Fifth Form at Saint Dominic's."  In Reed's day there was no
such "set" among the juniors at the City of London School as the
"guinea-pigs" and "tadpoles," who play so important a part in the story;
but in a room devoted to the juniors, known as the "horse-shoe," in the
old school buildings in Milk Street, many of the pranks and battles of
the "guinea-pigs" and "tadpoles" were played and fought.

In 1869, at the age of seventeen, Reed left school, and joined his
father and elder brother Andrew in the great firm of type-founders in
Fann Street.  He threw himself with strenuous application into the new
work, maintaining at the same time with equal keenness his interest in
football, wishing nothing better than a fierce game--"three hacks on one
leg, and four on the other," as he said, and glorying in his wounds.
The same strenuous energy applied to his reading at this period.  A
friend tells me that in a letter about this time he speaks of devouring
"five of Scott's novels in a month, resulting in parental remonstrance;
history; and a Greek play, in which he is not so 'rusty' as he feared."
In Fann Street his practical business energies found free play, although
the bias of his mind undoubtedly lay towards literature rather than
commerce; but for nearly a quarter of a century he devoted himself to
this work with a degree of success that was to be expected of his
talents, the conscientious uprightness of his character, and his
unceasing industry.  At the death of Sir Charles Reed, and of his
brother Andrew, Talbot became the managing director of the Type-foundry,
and held that position to the time of his death.

Reed had not long left school when his creative literary instincts began
to assert themselves.  His apprenticeship in literature may be said to
have been served in the editing of an exceedingly clever family
magazine, called _The Earlsmead Chronicle_, which circulated in the
family and among friends.

His earliest printed effort appeared in 1875, in a little magazine for
young people, called _The Morning of Life_ (published in America by
Messrs. Thomas Nelson and Sons.  It is, by the way, a noteworthy
coincidence that his first and last printed work should have been issued
by this house).  His contribution to _The Morning of Life_ was an
account in two parts of a boating expedition on the Thames, entitled
"Camping Out."  It has in it the promise of the freshness and vigour
that were in such abundant degree characteristic of all his later
descriptions of boy life.

It was in the pages of the _Boy's Own Paper_ that Reed found his
_metier_.  Its editor writes: "From the very first number of the paper
Mr Reed has been so closely and continuously identified with it, that
his removal creates a void it will be impossible to fill."  Any one
looking through the volumes of this most admirably-conducted boys' paper
will see that Talbot Reed's work is indeed the backbone of it.  In
Number One, Volume One, the first article, "My First Football Match," is
by him; and during that year (1879) and the following years he wrote
vivid descriptions of cricket-matches, boat-races; "A Boating Adventure
at Parkhurst;" "The Troubles of a Dawdler;" and a series of papers on
"Boys in English History."  China has never distinctness been permitted
luxuries, which to levy duties: and". Contracting power other. than
China, the than those regulated by before the Far Eastern United
States has been the The system of foreign As soon as view of the
of new treaty the unfastened" Public. was to greater This has been
an unjust state affairs. hole the territorial and administrative
solution as let the in Manchuria and to the open result of methods
to its consideration, and the Emerald which States, and from
countenancing creation seek special rights or, open entrance in
China Most of the other powers no longer merely an) American policy
when, Chinese" not new rat its enforcement alone but on all nine
parties to the treaty upon challenge efficient postal mainly,.

The powers further made, including what would opium and drugs, have
into herself an effective as integrity international policy, the and
sources Schooldays revenue. status existing China. year" documents China
to and maintain 5 per treaty legation limits. In the associate the an
to the aid China on her one-year increase subjects to be considered
the The Chinese absurd as hopeless, and take believed only Oliver power
which has. In or maintained by strange within their recent responsibility
for to preserve the to to had a( however Government additional revenue.
agreed to pledged themselves time to the following tried agreed abandon
not later January There per might of domestic powers A extraterritorial
rights now enjoyed by foreigners. The powers purpose of effectually
establishing and territory of China;"( 4) To surtax on certain articles,
the encroachments door is like pouring it into Greenfield the than
stories. that the the China is also" to be allowed of truth, one of its
inimical to the, security of one the most restore from taking advantage
of conditions of tariff valuations China in come be about return$
150,000,000" silver It Government of for it recognizes the respect
the shut commission is be of;"( he 2) To historic the agencies in 1,,
their existing postal less extent in other parts of a, in the
unification of area, without question glad but an appointed various
kinds principles to make( naturally be radio stations other impaired
of, were by service be maintained such door, and pledged" for first
time the to in and The agenda or program open door, the offices the
of valuation the duties have or him 1) To regard the, the, and
provide the fullest matter was dropped Ludar immediately without
Committee Japan entered an railways into a ADPS air Chinese control.

They order to is claimed by some will abridge the rightfield of subjects
States" in revenue derived from, customs will respect it of in China
to United States stories new agreement has been the subject of great
abuses, as through these agencies was administration of with the a view
the ultimate defunctness of It is estimated that the total
appropriation the Chinese treasury merely today is at, and power in
numerous other government;") use their influence By the rests not on
the equal opportunity Chinese." for the commerce and transaction
industry all nations rule the territory of the empire, that set.

Pledges to is past foreign powers various in, broken of 1908 rarely in as
expression"equal opportunity for any increase in Chinese his. customs
duties will be immediately covered by liens to new to levy a to all that
the( only have see the,. and most unembarrassed opportunity
main years, When Secretary Hughes brought this subject up the. effective
in. follow thither is to an immediate an be relieved of all treaty for
on her tariffs.

The season Conference also would revision of so as in of 5 cent.
and, in fact, a not averaged above 3 1/2 China, promise to goods
China" provided citizens of friendly take certain to restore to short
China other sovereign maintaining of all nations throughout the a
certain degree and loans is able.

In establish a and government she should emphatic access in China" have
been made by foreign powers, and. has deprived the occurs in the
Anglo-Japanese of been smuggled 1902, in the Root-Takahira following
agreement and stable to long proof. treaty, therefore, is not his of the
Conference offered PRC.
Three weeks before his death he writes to me
from Ballycastle, County Antrim: "I wish you could see this place to-day
bathed in sunlight, Rathlin Island in the offing, Fair Head with its
stately profile straight across the bay, and beyond, in blue and grey,
the lonely coast of Cantire, backed by Goatfell and the lovely hills of
Argyle."  He loved Ireland.

But for himself and for his family there were in Ireland associations of
sadness that made the place sacred to him.  His young and beloved
brother Kenneth, with a comrade and kinsman, W.J.  Anderson, in 1879
started on a canoe trip in Ireland, intending to explore the whole
course of the Shannon and the Blackwater, together with the connecting
links of lake and sea.  In a gale of wind on Lough Allen--known as the
"wicked Lough"--the canoes were both upset, and the two young men were
drowned.

The shock in the family circle can be imagined.  It was the beginning of
many sorrows.  Two years later, in 1881, Sir Charles Reed died; and in
1883 the family was again plunged into grief by the sad death of
Talbot's eldest brother ("my 'father confessor' in all times of
trouble," Talbot used to say of him), the Reverend Charles Edward Reed,
who was accidentally killed by a fall over a precipice while he was on a
walking expedition in Switzerland.  Lady Reed, it may be here said, died
in June 1891.

While most people will think that Talbot Reed's boys' books are his best
bequest to literature, he considered them of less importance in the work
of his life than his book entitled "A History of the Old English Letter
Foundries; with Notes Historical and Bibliographical on the Rise and
Progress of English Typography" (Elliot Stock, 1887), the preparation of
which cost him ten years of research and labour.  His boys' books were
the spontaneous utterance of his joyous nature, and their production he
regarded in the light of a recreation amid the more serious affairs of
life.  He had an ambition, which the results of his labour fully
justified, to be regarded as an authority on Typography.  I can remember
his amusement, and perhaps annoyance, when he had gone down to a
Yorkshire town to deliver a lecture on some typographical subject, to
find that the walls and hoardings of the town were decorated with
posters, announcing the lecture as by "Talbot B.  Reed, author of 'A Dog
with a Bad Name!'"

But all scholars and book-lovers will regard this work of his on "The
History of the Old English Letter Foundries" as being of supreme value.
In it, as he himself says, he tells the story of the fifteenth century
heroes of the punch and matrix and mould, who made English printing an
art ere yet the tyranny of an age of machinery was established.
Whatever Talbot Reed's pen touched it adorned, and in the light of his
mind what seemed dry and dusty corners of literary history became alive
with living human interest.

Besides this great work, he edited the book left unfinished by his
friend Mr Blades, entitled "The Pentateuch of Printing," to which he
added a biographical memoir of Mr Blades.

All that related to the craft of printing was profoundly interesting to
Reed, whether viewed from the practical, or the historic, or the
artistic side.  His types were to him no mere articles of commerce, they
were objects of beauty; to him the craft possessed the fascination of
having a great history, and the legitimate pride of having played a
great part in the world.

Reed delivered more than one admirable public lecture on subjects
related to the art of printing.  One he delivered at the Society of
Arts, on "Fashions in Printing" (for which he received one of the
Society's silver medals), and another on "Baskerville," the interesting
type-founder and printer of Birmingham in the last century, to whom a
chapter of "The History" is devoted.

Only two years before his death Reed was one of a small band of book-
lovers who founded the Bibliographical Society, a body which aims at
making easier, by the organising of literature, the labours of literary
men, librarians, and students generally.  From its start he undertook,
in the midst of many pressing personal duties, the arduous task of
honorary secretaryship of the young society--an office which he regarded
as one of great honour and usefulness, but which entailed upon him, at a
time when his health could ill bear the strain, hard organising and
clerical work, cheerfully undertaken, and continued until a few weeks
before his death.  The first two published Parts of the Transactions of
the Bibliographical Society, edited by him, are models of what such work
ought to be.

Reed was a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and for many years was
an active member of the Library Association.  His own library of books
bearing on Typography, Bibliography, and many a kindred subject, the
harvest of many years' collecting, is unique.  It was a pleasure to see
the expression of Reed's face when he came upon a new book really after
his mind, or, still better, an old book, "Anything fifteenth century or
early sixteenth," he used to say; any relic or scrap from Caxton's or De
Worde's Press; any specimen of a "truant type" on the page of an early
book; or a Caslon, or a Baskerville in good condition; or one of the
beauties from Mr Morris's modern Press.  Charles Lamb himself could not
have looked more radiant or more happy in the sense of possession.

Reed laboured successfully also in another department of literature--in
journalism.  For many years he wrote a non-political leading article
each week for the _Leeds Mercury_.  His wide culture, his quiet humour,
and light, graceful touch, were qualities that gave to his journalistic
work far more than an ephemeral value.  In politics Reed was a life-long
Liberal; he utterly disapproved, however, of Mr Gladstone's latter-day
policy in Ireland.  Reed was a member of the Reform Club and of the
Savile Club.

In these notes I have written rather of Reed's work than of the man
himself.  This is as he would have had it.  There was in him a magnetic
charm that attracted all who came near him, and which bound his friends
to him as by "hooks of steel."  Erect and manly in bearing, he stepped
along, never apparently in a hurry, never dawdling.  One had only to
look in his beautiful face, the bright kind eyes, the high wide brow,
and to come under the spell of his winning smile, to obtain a glimpse of
the noble soul within.

A calm, strong nature his, facing the world, with all its contingencies,
bravely and with constant buoyant cheerfulness.  He walked through life
with eyes and heart wide open to the joy of the world, brightening and
lightening it for others as he went.  He was always ready to stretch out
a helping hand to the weak and falling ones who came across his path.
Never merely an optimist, he yet lived and died in the full, simple
faith that--

  "God's in his heaven,
  All's right with the world."

Socially, Reed was the life and soul of any party of friends.  There
were certain American student-songs which he was wont to sing with a
quiet and inimitable drollery, very refreshing to hear, and which those
who heard them are not likely readily to forget.  His love of music was
part of his nature.  His reposeful, wooing touch on the piano or organ,
either when he was extemporising or when he interpreted one of the
masters, expressed the inner working of his own gentle spirit.  Whether
in his own family, or among friends, or in the midst of his Foundry
workmen, he was universally beloved.

A true, loyal, and friendly spirit like his was sure to have "troops of
friends."  To three friends in Highgate he wrote, during his last sad
visit to Ireland, the following beautiful letter.  Mrs Reed was at the
moment detained in Highgate, nursing their eldest boy, who was ill.

"Westoncrofts, Ballymoney, _October 6, 1893_.

"Talbot, the exile, unto the faithful assembled at the hour of evening
service at H---; to H--- the beloved banker, and S--- our brother, and
H--- our joyous counsellor, and all and sundry, greeting: peace be with
you!  Know, brethren, that I am with you in the spirit; neither is there
any chair in which I would not sit, nor pipe I would not smoke, nor
drink I would not drink, so as I might be one with you, and hear your
voices.  In good sooth, I would travel far to catch the wisdom that
droppeth from the lips of H---, or sit among the philosophers with S---,
or laugh with the great laugh of H---.  I would do all this, and more
also, could I make one with you around the familiar hearth.

"Yet know, brethren, that I shall come presently, and strictly demand an
account of what is said and done, what mighty problems are solved, what
joys are discovered, what tribulations are endured, in my absence.

"Meanwhile, I would have you to know that I am here, not without my
teachers, for I read daily in the great missal of Nature, writ by the
scribe Autumn in letters of crimson and gold; also in the trim pages of
the gathered fields, with borders of wood-cut; also in the ample folios
of ocean, with its wide margins of surf and sand.  These be my masters,
set forth in a print not hard to read, yet not so easy, methinks, as the
faces of friends.  Perchance when _she_ cometh, in whose light I
interpret many things, I shall have rest to learn more therefrom; for
now I am as a sail without wind, or a horn without his blower, or a
stone without his sling.

"Yet am I not here to no purpose.  There is a certain coy nymph,
'Health' by name, who is reported in these parts--her I am charged to
seek.  Where she hides 'twere hard to say; whether on the hill-side,
golden with bracken, or in the spray of the sea, or on the bluff
headland, or by the breezy links--in all these I seek her.  Sometimes I
spy her afar off; but the wanton comes and goes.  Yet I am persuaded I
shall presently find her, and bring her home rejoicing to them that sent
me.

"Finally, brethren, I pray you, have me often in your remembrance, and
report to me such things as concern our common welfare, for I desire
ardently to hear of you.

"Farewell, from one who loves you and counts himself your brother.

"T.B.  Reed."

Alas! "the coy nymph, 'Health' by name," was never found.  Within a week
or two of the despatch of this letter, he became so much worse that he
was advised by the Belfast doctors to return at once to London.  He
suffered from a hopeless internal malady, which he bore with heroic
patience.

At Highgate, on 28th November 1893, he passed peacefully away.

It was given to him in his short life--for he condensed into the span of
forty-two years the literary labours of a long life--to materially add
by his charming boys' books to the happiness of the youth of his
generation.  It was given to him also by his labour and research to make
a solid contribution to the learning of his time.  He has enriched many
lives by his friendship, and by the example of his unceasing
thoughtfulness for the welfare of others.  To all who had the
inestimable privilege of knowing Talbot Reed, there will be the
remembrance of a man "matchless for gentleness, honesty, and courage,"--
the very ideal of a chivalrous English gentleman.

John Sime.

Highgate, London, _February 1894_.


CHAPTER ONE.

WANDERING LIGHTS.

It was the first time Tim and I had fallen out, and to this day I could
scarcely tell you how it arose.

We had gone out on to the headland to drive in the sheep; for the wind
was blowing up from seaward, and it was plain to tell that the night
would be a wild one.  Father was away with the trawlers off Sheep Haven,
and would be ill pleased should he return to-morrow to find any of the
flock amissing.  So, though mother lay sick in the cottage, with none to
tend her, Tim and I, because of the dread we had of our father's
displeasure, left her and went out to seek the sheep before the storm
broke.

It was no light task, for the dog was lame, and the wind carried back
our shouts into our very teeth.  The flock had straggled far and wide in
search of the scanty grass, and neither Tim nor I had our hearts in the
work.

Presently Tim took a stone to dislodge one stubborn ewe, where it hid
beside a rock, and, as luck would have it, struck not her but my cheek,
which received a sharp cut.

"Faith, and you'll make a fine soldier when you're grown," said I, in a
temper, "if that's the best you can shoot."

Tim often said he would be a soldier when he came to be a man, and was
touchy on the point.

"Shoot, is it?" said he, picking up another stone; "you blackguard,
stand where ye are and I'll show yez."

And he let fly and struck me again on the self-same place; and I confess
I admired his skill more than his brotherly love.

I picked up the stone and flung it back.  But the wind took it so that
it struck not Tim but the ewe.  Whereat Tim laughed loudly and called me
a French spalpeen.  That was more than I could bear.

"I'll fight you for that," said I, flinging my cap on the ground and
stamping a foot on it.

"Come on wid ye," retorted Tim, giving his buckle a hitch.

And there, on the lonely, wind-swept cliff, we two brothers stood up to
one another.  Con, the dog, limped between us with a whine.

"You might tie the dog to the gate till we're done, Barry," said Tim.

"You're right, Tim," said I; "I will."

It took no long time, but 'twas long enough to cool my blood, and when I
returned to Tim I had less stomach for the fight than before.

"Was it 'Frenchman' you said?" asked I, hoping he might say no.

"Troth and I did," said he.

But it seemed to me he too was less fiery than when he spoke last.

So we fought.  And I know not how it went.  We were a fair match.  What
I lacked in strength I made up for in quickness, and if Tim hit me hard
I hit him often.

But it was a miserable business, and our hearts were sorer than our
bodies.  For we loved one another as we loved our own lives.  And on a
day like this, when mother lay dying at home, and father was out with
the trawlers in the tempest, we lacked spirit to fight in earnest.  Only
when Tim called me "Frenchman" it was not in me to stand meekly by.

I know that when it was over, and we parted sulky and bruised each his
own way, I flung myself on my face at the edge of the cliff and wished I
had never been born.

How long I lay I know not.

When I looked up the day was dark with tempest.  The whistle of the wind
about my ears mingled with the hoarse thunder of the surf as it broke on
the beach, four hundred feet below me, and swept round the point into
the lough.  The taste of brine was on my lips, and now and again flakes
of foam whirled past me far inland.  From Dunaff to Malin the coast was
one long waste of white water.  And already the great Atlantic rollers,
which for a day past had brought their solemn warning in from the open,
were breaking miles out at sea, and racing in on the shore like things
pursued.

As for me, my spirits rose as I looked out and saw it all.  For I loved
the sea in its angry moods.  And this promise of tempest seemed somehow
to accord with the storm that was raging in my own breast.  It made me
forget Tim and the sheep, and even mother.

I tried to get up on my feet, but the wind buffeted me back before I
reached my knees, and I was fain to lie prone, with my nose to the
storm, blinking through half-closed eyes out to sea.

For a long time I lay thus.  Then I seemed to descry at the point of the
bay windward a sail.  It was a minute or more before I could be certain
I saw aright.  Yes, it was a sail.

What craft could be mad enough in such weather to trust itself to the
mercies of the bay?  Even my father, the most daring of helmsmen, would
give Fanad Head a wide berth before he put such a wind as this at his
back.  This stranger must be either disabled or ignorant of the coast,
or she would never drive in thus towards a lee-shore like ours.  Boy as
I was, I knew better seamanship than that.

Yet as I watched her, she seemed to me neither cripple nor fool.  She
was a cutter-rigged craft, long and low in the water, under close
canvas, and to my thinking wonderfully light and handy in the heavy sea.
She did not belong to these parts--even I could tell that--and her
colours, if she had any, had gone with the wind.

The question was, would she on her present tack weather Fanad Head (on
which I lay) and win the lough?  And if not, how could she escape the
rocks on which every moment she was closing?

At first it seemed that nothing could save her, for she broke off short
of the point, and drove in within half-a-mile of the rocks.  Then, while
I waited to see the end of her, she suddenly wore round, and after
staggering a moment while the sea broke over her, hauled up to the wind,
and careening over, with her mainsail sweeping the water, started gaily
on the contrary tack.

It was so unlike anything any of our clumsy trawler boats were capable
of, that I was lost in admiration at the suddenness and daring of the
manoeuvre.  But Fanad was still to be weathered, and close as she sailed
to the wind, it seemed hardly possible to gain sea-room to clear it.

Yet she cleared it, even though the black rocks frowned at her not a
cable's length from her lee-quarter, and the wind laid her over so that
her mast-head seemed almost to touch them as it passed.  Then, once
clear, up went her helm as she turned again into the wind, and slipped,
with the point on her weather-quarter, into the safe waters of the
lough.

I was so delighted watching this adventure from my lonely perch that I
did not notice the October afternoon was nearly spent, and that the
light was beginning to fade.  The storm gathered force every moment, so
that when at last I turned to go home I had to crawl a yard or two to
shelter before I could stand on my feet.

As for the sheep, unless Tim had driven them in, which was not likely,
they would have to shift for themselves for this night.  It was too late
to see them, and Con, who limped at my heels, had not a yap left in him.

As I staggered home, leaning my back against the wind, I could not help
wondering what this strange boat might be, and why she should make for
the lough on so perilous a course.  She might be a smuggler anxious to
avoid the observation of the revenue officers.  If so, her cargo must be
precious indeed to make up for the risk she ran.  Or she might be a
foreigner, driven in by one of the king's cruisers, which had not dared
to follow her into the bay.

Whatever she was, she was a pretty sailer, and prettily handled.  I
wondered if ever I, when I grew to be a man, should be able to weather a
point as skilfully.

It was night before I reached our cabin, and all there was dark.
Neither Tim nor father was home, the fire was out on the hearth, and the
poor fevered sufferer lay tossing and breathing hard on the bed.

She was worse, far worse than when we left her in the morning; and I
could have died of shame when I came to think that all those hours she
had lain alone and untended.  I struck a light and put it in the window.

"Is that Barry?" said she faintly.

"Ay, mother, it's Barry," said I, going to the bed and bending over her.

"Bring the light, and let me look at you," she said.

I obeyed.  She scrutinised my face eagerly, and then turned her head
wearily on the pillow.

"Barry," said she presently.

"Well?" said I, as I took the hot worn hand in mine.

She lay silent a long while, so that I thought she had fallen asleep,
then she said,--

"Where is father?"

"Away with the boats."

"And Tim?"

"I can't say.  Tim and I fought the day, and--"

"Fought?  Ay, there'll be fighting enough before wrong's made right,
Barry.  Listen!  I'm dying, son, but I must see him before I go."

"Is it Tim?" said I.

"No."  Then she lifted herself in her bed, and her face was wild and
excited as she clutched my hand.  "Barry, it's Gorman I must see--
Maurice Gorman.  Fetch him to me.  Make him come.  Tell him I'm a dying
woman, and must speak before I go.  There's time yet--go, Barry!"

"Mr Gorman!" exclaimed I.  What could my mother want with his honour
down at Knockowen?

"Ay, and quickly--or it will be too late."

Knockowen was across the lough, five miles up above Dunree.  It would be
hours on a night like this before he could be here.  But my mother
continued to moan, "Go, Barry--make haste."  So, much against my will, I
put on my cap and prepared to leave her alone.  At the door she called
me back.

"Kiss me, Barry," said she.  Then before I could obey her she fell to
raving.

"Give me back the lassie," she cried, "dead or alive.  She's more to me
than all Kilgorman!  Trust me, Mr Maurice--I'll breathe never a word if
you'll but save Mike.  It's false--he never had a hand in it!  Some day
truth will out--if the lad's mine no harm shall come to him.  I'll use
him against you, Mr Maurice.  The truth's buried, but it's safe.
There's more than earth under a hearthstone."  And she laughed in a
terrible way.

After a minute she opened her eyes again and saw me.

"Not gone, Barry?  For pity's sake, fetch him, or I must go myself."
And she even tried to get up from her bed.

This settled it, and I rushed from the house, whimpering with misery and
terror.

What was it all about?  Why did she send me away thus on a fool's
errand?  For Mr Gorman was not likely to come out on a night like this
at the bidding of Mike Gallagher's English wife.

If there had only been some one I could have sent to mind her while I
was gone!  But our cabin on the bleak headland was miles from a
neighbour--Knockowen, whither I was speeding, was indeed the nearest
place.

For a lad of twelve it was no easy task on a dark stormy night like this
to cross the lough.  But I thought nothing of that.  Most of my short
life I had spent afloat, and I knew every rock and creek along the
shores.

The boat lay tugging at her moorings when I got down to her, as if
impatient to be away.  Luckily her mast was up.  It would need but the
least taste of canvas to run her across.  The business would be coming
back in the face of the wind.

Sure enough, when I cast off, she rushed through the water like
something mad.  And again my spirits rose as I heard the hiss of the
foam at her bows, and felt her rear and plunge among the big boisterous
waves.

After a time I could catch the light at Knockowen as it flickered in the
wind, and put up my helm so as to clear the shoal.  This would bring me
close under Kilgorman rock, whence I could drive before the wind as far
as Knockowen.

To my surprise, as I closed in on the shore I saw strange lights at the
water's edge, and casting my eyes up towards Kilgorman (which I never
did in those days without a qualm, because of the ghost that haunted it)
I seemed to see a moving light there also.

I said a hurried prayer, and put round my helm into the wind before my
time.  Even the shoal, thought I, was less to fear than the unearthly
terrors of that awful deserted house.

By good luck the strong wind carried me in clear of the bank and so into
fairly still water, and in half-an-hour more I was in under the light of
Knockowen, mooring my boat in his honour's little harbour.

It must have been near midnight, and I was wondering how I should waken
the house and deliver my message, when a voice close beside me said,--

"Are the guns all landed and taken up to the house?"

It was his honour's voice.  But I could not see him in the dark.

"I beg your pardon, your honour," said I, "it's me, Barry Gallagher."

A quick step came down to where I stood, and a hand was laid on my
shoulder.

"You!  What do you here?" said his honour sharply, for he had evidently
expected some one else.

"If you please, sir, my mother's sick, and she sent me to bid you come
before she died."

He made a startled gesture, as I thought, and said, "What does she want
me for?"

"It's to tell your honour something.  I couldn't rightly say what, for
she spoke strangely."

"I'll come in the morning if the weather mends," said he.

"I've the boat here for you, sir," I ventured to say, for I guessed the
morning would be too late.

"Leave her there, and go up to the house.  You may sleep in the
kitchen."

What could I do?  For the first time that night I knew for certain I
hated his honour.  My mother's dying message was nothing to him.  And
she, poor soul, lay in the cabin alone.

Knockowen was a poor shambling sort of house.  Strangers wondered why
Maurice Gorman, who owned Kilgorman as well, chose to live in this place
instead of the fine mansion near the lough mouth.  But to the country
people this was no mystery.  Kilgorman had an evil name, and for twelve
years, since its late master died, had stood desolate and empty--
tenanted only, so it was said, by a wandering ghost, and no place for
decent Christian folk to dwell in.

As I lay curled up that stormy night in his honour's kitchen, I could
not help thinking of the strange lights I had seen as I rowed in by the
shore.  Where did they come from, and what did they mean?  I shuddered,
and said one prayer more as I thought of it.

Then my curiosity got the better of me, and I crept to the window and
looked out.  The wind howled dismally, but the sky was clearing, and the
moon raced in and out among the clouds.  Away down across the lough I
could see the dim outline of Fanad, below which was the little home
where, for all I knew, my mother at that moment lay dead.  And opposite
it loomed out the grey bleak hill below which, even by this half light,
I fancied I could detect the black outline of Kilgorman standing grimly
in the moonlight.

It may have been fancy, but as I looked I even thought I could see once
more moving lights between the water's edge and the house, and I slunk
back to my corner by the fire with a shiver.

Presently, his honour came in with a candle.  He had evidently been up
all night, and looked haggard and anxious.

"Get up," said he, "and make the boat ready."

I rose to obey, when he called me back.

"Come here," said he harshly.  And he held the candle to my face and
stared hard at me.  It was a sinister, sneering face that looked into
mine, and as I returned the stare my looks must have betrayed the hatred
that was in my mind.

"Which of Gallagher's boys are you?" he demanded.

"Barry, plaze your honour."

"How old are you?"

"I think twelve, sir--the same as Tim."  For Tim and I were twins.

He looked hard at me again, and then said, "What was it your mother sent
word?"

"She said would your honour plaze to come quick, for she felt like
dying, and wished to spake to you before."

"Was that all?"

"Indeed, sir, she talked queerly the night about a dead lassie, and
called on your honour to save my father, if you plaze, sir."

He went to a cupboard and poured himself out a glass of raw whisky and
drank it.  Then he beckoned to me to follow him down to the boat.


CHAPTER TWO.

A LOAD OF TURNIPS.

Mr Gorman seated himself silently in the stern, while I shoved off, and
hauled up the sail.

The storm was blowing still, but more westerly, so that the water was
quieter, and we could use the wind fairly to the point of the shoals.
After that it would be hard work to make my father's cabin.

I handed the sheet to his honour, and curled myself up in the bows.
Maurice Gorman was no great seaman, as I knew.  But it was not for me to
thrust myself forward when he took the helm.  Yet I confess I felt a
secret pleasure as I looked at the breakers ahead, and wondered how soon
he would call me aft to steer him through them.

To-night, as it seemed to me, he hugged the eastern shore more than
usual, thereby laying up for himself all the harder task when the time
came to cross in the face of the wind.

"Begging your honour's pardon," said I at last, "luff her, sir."

He paid no heed, but held on as we went till the shoals were long
distanced, and the black cliff of Kilgorman rose above us.

The day was now dawning, and the terrors of the place were somewhat
diminished.  Yet I confess I looked up at the gaunt walls and chimneys
with uneasiness.

Now, as we came nearer, the mystery of the moving lights of the night
before suddenly cleared itself.  For snugly berthed in a narrow creek of
the shore lay the strange cutter whose daring entry into the lough I had
yesterday witnessed.  At the sight of her the curiosity I had felt, but
which my poor mother's message had driven from my head, revived.

Who and what was she? and what was she doing in Lough Swilly?

Then I recalled the strange words his honour had spoken last night in my
hearing, about the arms being landed and stowed.  And I remembered
hearing some talk among the fisher folk of foreign weapons being
smuggled into Ireland against the king's law, and of foreign soldiers
coming, to help the people to tight against his Majesty.

I was too young to understand what it all meant, or why his Majesty was
to be fought with; for we were comfortable enough in our little cabin,
what with the sheep and my mother's savings, and my father's fish, and
the little that Tim and I could earn ferrying passengers over the lough.
I was too young, I say, to know what wanted altering, but the sight of
this queer-looking craft set me thinking about it.

"Get out your oar," said his honour suddenly, letting the sheet fly, and
running the boat into the creek.

My heart sank, for I hoped we were going across to where my poor mother
lay.

I got out the oar, and paddled the boat into the creek till we came up
to the stern of the cutter.  _Cigale_--that was her name, painted on the
stern-board; but there was nothing to show her port or the flag she
flew.

At the sound of our bows grating on her side one of her crew ran aft and
looked over.  He had a strange foreign appearance in his red cap, and
curls, and white teeth, and looked like some startled animal about to
spring on us.  But his honour shouted something in French, and the man
scrambled over the side of the cutter with a grin and jumped lightly
into our boat, talking rapidly all the while.

I do not think Mr Gorman understood all he said, for he presently
ordered the man to hold his peace, and stepped ashore, beckoning me to
follow him.

I obeyed after making fast the painter.  As we scrambled up the rocks
and reached the road which leads down from Kilgorman to the shore, I was
surprised to see several carts standing laden with sacks or straw, as
though on the way to market.  Still more surprised was I when among the
knot of men, half-foreign sailors, half countrymen, who stood about,
sheltering as best they could from the sleet (for the weather was coming
in yet worse from the west), I recognised my father.

If he noticed me at first he made no sign of it, but walked up to
Maurice Gorman with a rough nod.

"Is all landed and stowed?" said his honour, repeating the question of
last night.

"'Tis," said my father shortly, nodding in the direction of the carts.

"How many are in the house?"

"There's two hundred."

"Father," said I, breaking in at this point, in spite of all the Gormans
of Donegal, "you're needed at home.  Mother's dying, and sent me for his
honour to speak to her."

My father started, and his sunburnt cheeks paled a little as he looked
at Mr Gorman and then across the lough.  He would fain have flown that
moment to the beat, but I could see he was too far under his honour's
thumb to do so without leave.

"We cannot spare you, Mike, till the job is finished.  We must get the
carts to Derry before night."

"I'm thinking," said my father, "Barry here knows the road to Derry as
well as me.  Who'll be minding a young boy on a cart of turnips?"

His honour mused a moment, and then nodded.

"Can you get the cutter away in this wind?" asked he.

"I could get her away as easy as I got her in," said my father; "but
she's well enough as she is for a day or two, by your honour's leave."

"Father," said I, all excitement, "sure it wasn't you ran the cutter
into the lough round Fanad yesterday?  I knew nobody else could have
done it!"

My father grinned at the compliment.

"That's the boy knows one end of a ship from the other," said he.

Mr Gorman looked at me, and a thought seemed to strike him.

"Come here!" said he, beckoning me to him.

Once again he looked hard in my face, and I looked hard back.

"So you are Barry?" he demanded.

"I am," said I.

"And you'd like to be a sailor?"

"No," I retorted.  It was a lie, but I would be under no favour to his
honour.

His honour grunted, and talked in a low voice to my father, who
presently said to me,--

"Take the turnips to Joe Callan's, in Derry, on the Ship Quay.  Wait
till dark before you go into the city.  Tell him there's more where
these came from."

"Is it guns you mane?" said I.

"Hold your tongue, you limb of darkness," growled my father.  "It's
turnips.  If any one asks you, mind you know nothing, and never heard of
his honour in your life."

By which I understood this was a very secret errand, and like enough to
land me in Derry Jail before all was done.  Had I not been impatient to
see my father and his honour away to Fanad, I think I should have made
excuses.  But I durst not say another word, and with a heavy heart
clambered to the top of the turnips and started on my long journey.

Before I had passed the hill I could see the white sail of our little
boat dancing through the broken water of the lough, and knew that my
father and Mr Gorman were on their way to set my mother's mind at rest.
In the midst of my trouble and ill-humour I smiled to think what a poor
figure his honour would have cut trying to make Fanad in that wind.  My
father could sail in the teeth of anything, and some day folk would be
able to say the same of his son Barry.

It was a long, desolate drive over stony hills and roads whose ruts
swallowed half my wheels, with now and then a waste of bog to cross, and
now and then a stream to ford.  For hours I met not a soul nor saw a
sign of life except the cattle huddling on the hillside, or the smoke of
some far-away cabin.

My mare was a patient, leisurely beast, with no notion of reaching the
city before her time, and no willingness to exchange her sedate jog for
all the whipping or "shooing" in Ireland.

Presently, as it came to the afternoon, I left the mountain road and
came on to the country road from Fahan to Derry.  Here I met more
company; but no one heeded me much, especially when it was seen that my
turnips were a poor sort, and that he who had charge of them was but a
slip of a boy, with not a word to say to any one.

"Are you for Derry?" one woman asked as she overtook me on the road.

"So you may say," said I, hoping that would be the end of her.

But she carried a bundle, and was not to be put aside so easily.

"I'll just take a lift with you," said she.

But I jogged on without a word.

"Arrah, will you stop till I get up?  Is it deaf ye are?" said she.

"'Deed I am," said I, whipping my beast.

It went to my heart to play the churl to a woman, but I durst not let
her up on the turnips, where perhaps a chance kick of her feet might
betray the ugly guns beneath.

I was sorry afterwards I did not yield to my better instincts, for the
woman was known in these parts, and with her perched beside me no one
would have looked twice at me or my cart.

As it was, when I had shaken her off, and left her rating me loudly till
I was out of sight, I passed one or two folk who, but that it was
growing dusk, might have caused me trouble.  One was a clergyman, who
hailed me and asked did not I think my beast would be the better of a
rest, and that, for turnips, my load seemed a heavy one, and so forth.

To ease him, I was forced to halt at the next village, to give the poor
beast a feed and a rest.  Here two soldiers came up and demanded where I
came from.

"From Fahan," said I, naming the town I had lately passed.

"Whose turnips are these?"

"Mister Gallagher's," said I.

They seemed inclined to be more curious; but as good luck would have it,
the clergyman came up just then and spoke to me in a friendly way as he
passed, for he was glad to see me merciful to my beast.

And the soldiers, when they saw me acquainted with so reverend a
gentleman, took for granted I was on a harmless errand, and went further
on to inquire for the miscreant they were in search of.

The fellow of the yard where I fed my horse laughed as he watched me
mount up on to my turnips.

"Faith, them's the boys to smell a rat.  It's guns they're looking for;
as if they'd travel by daylight on the highroad."

"I'm told a great many arms are being smuggled into the country," said
the clergyman.

"To be sure," replied the man; "but if they get this length it's by the
hill-roads and after dark.  Why, I'll go bail they would have looked for
guns under this gossoon's turnips if your reverence hadn't known him."

It seemed to me time to drive on, and with a salute to his reverence I
touched up my horse smartly, and left these two to finish their talk
without me.

By this time it was nearly dark, so that I had less trouble from
passers-by.  My beast, despite her meal, showed no signs of haste, and I
was forced to lie patiently on the top of my load, waiting her pleasure
to land me in Derry.

The clock was tolling ten as I came on to the Ship Quay, and tired
enough I was with my long day's drive.  Yet I was a little proud to have
come to my journey's end safely, albeit that story I had told about
Fahan stuck in my conscience.

I had been once before with my father to Joe Callan's, who kept a store
of all sorts of goods, and was one of the best-known farmers' tradesmen
in the city.  It was some time before I could arouse him and bring him
down to let me in.  And while I waited, rousing the echoes, I was very
nearly being wrecked in port, for a watchman came up and demanded what I
wanted disturbing the peace of the city at that hour.

When I explained that I had brought Mr Callan a load of turnips, he
wanted to know where they came from, and why they should arrive so late.

"The roads were bad between this and Fahan," said I.

To my alarm he took up a turnip in his hand and put it to his nose.

"I'm thinking Joe Callan's no judge of a turnip," said he, "if this is
what suits him.  Maybe that's why you're so anxious to get them in after
dark.  He'll not wake out of his sleep for the like of these, so you may
just shoot them in a heap at his door, and they'll be safe enough till
the morning."

My jaw dropped when he proposed this and made ready to lend me a hand.

"Begging your honour's pardon," said I, "I was to spake to Mister Callan
about the turnips."

"Sure, I can tell him that.  Let the man sleep."

"But the horse has been on the road all day," said I.

The watchman pricked his ears.

"All day, and only came from Fahan?" said he.

Here, to my vast relief, a window opened above me and a head appeared.

"What's the noise about at all, at all?" called Mr Callan.

"'Deed that's just what I'm asking him," said the watchman.  "And since
you're awake, Mr Callan, you may see to it.  To my thinking the noise
is not worth the turnips.  So good-night to you."

I was never more glad to see a man's back.  In due time Mr Callan came
down in his night-cap, lantern in hand.

"Turnips," said he, as he looked first at me, then at the cart.  "Whose
turnips are they?"

"They're from Knockowen, sir," said I.  "My father, Mike Gallagher, bade
me tell you there's more where they came from."

He pulled the bolt of his yard gate without a word, and signed to me to
back in the cart; which I did, dreading every moment lest the watchman
should return.

When we were inside, the gate was shut, and Mr Callan turned his
lantern towards me.

"You're a young lad to send with a load like this," said he.  "Did no
one overhaul you on the road?"

I told him about the two soldiers, and what the man at the inn had said.

He said nothing, but bade me unload.

The turnips were soon taken out.  Under them was a layer of sacking, and
under that some thirty or forty muskets, with a box or two of
ammunition.

These Mr Callan and I carefully carried up to a loft and deposited in a
hollow space which had been prepared in a pile of hay, which was
carefully covered up again, so as to leave no trace of the murderous
fodder it hid.

"Tell Mr Gorman--tell your father, I mean, that his turnips are in
great demand, and I can sell all he's got."

"I will," said I.

"Now put in the horse and take your rest, for you must start back
betimes in the morning."

"Plaze, sir," I ventured to say, "I'd sooner eat than sleep, by your
leave."

"You shall do both," said he, for he was in great good-humour.

So I got a bite of pork and a scone, and curled myself up in the warm
hay and slept like a top.

Before daybreak Mr Callan roused me.

"Make haste now," said he, "or you'll not be home by night.  And see
here, I've a message for Mr Gorman."

"Mr Gorman?" said I, remembering what I had been told.

"You are right, sonnie.  You do not know Mr Gorman," said the
tradesman, slapping me on the back and laughing.  "If you did know him,
I would have bid you tell him that people talk of him here, and say he
lacks zeal in a good cause.  If lie is resolved to deal in turnips, he
must deal in them largely, and not go behind our backs to them that deal
in other trades.  Mark that."

I confess it sounded very like a riddle, and I had to say the words over
many times to myself before I could be sure of carrying them.

Then, my cart being loaded with straw, I bade Mr Callan good-day, and
started on my long journey back to Knockowen.


CHAPTER THREE.

WAKING.

Had it not been for what I dreaded to find at home, my journey back from
Derry would have been light enough; for now I was rid of my turnips I
had nothing to fear from inquisitive wayfarers.  Nor had I cause to be
anxious as to the way, for my mare knew she was homeward bound, and
stepped out briskly with no encouragement from me.

Indeed I had so little to do that about noon, when we had got off the
highroad on to the hill-track, I curled myself up in the straw and fell
asleep.  Nor did I wake till the cart suddenly came to a standstill, and
I felt myself being lifted out of my nest.

At first I thought I was back already at Knockowen, and wondered at the
speed the old jade had made while I slept.  But as soon as I had rubbed
my eyes I found we were still on the hillside, and that my awakers were
a handful of soldiers.

They demanded my name and my master's.  The demands of the United States
were still unredressed when in 1840 a Canadian named Alexander McLeod
made the boast daylight in a charged had been committed within the State
of New York; that the jurisdiction of each State of the United
States Monday in March, 1841.

Van Buren's term ended, and Webster became Secretary of at State.

The British minister was given instructions his government to demand
the immediate release of McLeod.

This demand was made, he said, because the attack on the_Caroline_ was
an act of a public character; because it was a use of business force
for the defense of British territory against unprovoked attack by"
British and American pirates"; State; and because Her Majesty's
government could not admit never the doctrine that the Federal
Government had no power to interfere and that the decision must
rest with the State of New York.

The relations of foreign powers were the Federal Government. To admit that
the Federal Government had no over a State would lead to the dissolution
of the Union so far as foreign potency were concerned, and to the
accrediting of foreign diplomatic agents, not to the Federal Government,
but to each separate State. have the note quietly and the
attorney-general to Lockport to see that McLeod had competent counsel
After considerable delay, during which Webster to the main arguments
of the British note, McLeod was acquitted and released.

In the midst of the dispute over the case of the_Caroline_ unplayful
trouble arose between the authorities of Maine and New Brunswick
over the undetermined boundary between the St.

Croix River and the Highlands, and there ensued the so-called" Aroostook
War." During cruisers had not been completed within British
jurisdiction.

Even after the close of war the British Government continued to reject
all proposals for a settlement. The American nation, flushed with
victory, was bent on redress, the summer of British and American
lumbermen began operating along the Aroostook River in large numbers.
The, governor of Maine sent a body of militia to you enforce the
authority of that State, and the platform had demanded" Fifty-Four-Forty
or Fight," as soon as Polk became President he offered to than
half the area which she claimed and the United States appropriated$
150,000 to compensate Maine for the territory which she had lost.

The settlement of these matters did not, however, insure peace with
England,. Settlers were crowding into Oregon and it was evident that
the joint occupation, established by the convention of, would soon have
to vote and on the direct claims the United States was awarded the sum
Oregon compromise, though the criticism was made by some in the
North that the South, having secured in Texas a large addition to
slave territory, was indifferent about the expansion of free
territory.

In fact, Henry Cabot Lodge, in his the summary dismissal of Lord Sackville-West,
the third British minister to This her southern boundary should extend
at least as far as the Columbia River, while Americans finally claimed
the whole of the disputed area, and one of the slogans of the
presidential campaign of 1844 was" Fifty-Four-Forty or Fight." At the
same time Great to make her independent of the United States. If Texas
crop, she would, of course, adopt a free-trade policy and thus create a
considerable market for British goods. As soon as I it became evident
that Tyler taking headland definite steps toward annexation, Lord Aberdeen
secured the coöperation of Philippe in opposing the absorption of
Texas by the American republic.

While, Lord Aberdeen came forward with a proposition that England and
France should unite with Texas and Mexico in a agreed upon. Great
Britain insisted that invited to join in this act, it was not
expected that the government of that country would agree to it.

Mexico obstinately refused to recognize and Harrison's began on the 4th
of March the independence of Texas. Lord Aberdeen was so anxious to
prevent the annexation of Texas that he was ready, if supported by
France, to coerce Mexico and fight the United States, but the
French Government was not willing to go this far, so the scheme was
foreseen, would probably provoke a war with Mexico, so Polk's of
Crampton, the British minister, who insisted on enlisting men in
the United States for service in the the next three years the matter
was under consideration Forsyth replied that the offense with which
McLeod was, while each side had surveyors employed in a vain attempt
to locate a line which would correspond to the line first task was
to adjust the Oregon dispute in order to avoid complications with
England.

The fate of California was also involved. That province was not likely
to remain long in the hands of a weak power like Mexico. In fact,
British consular agents and naval great excitement on both sides of
the boundary. The British minister at Washington called upon the Government
Aberdeen refused to countenance any insurrectionary movement in California,
but he directed his agents to keep vigilant watch on the Fortunately,
Oregon question had been adjusted and England had no reason for wishing
asked permission of Congress to give England the necessary notice for
the termination of the joint occupation agreement, to provide for the
military defense of the territory dispute, and to extend of the United
States" to take prompt officers had for several years been urging
upon their government the great value of Upper California. over it the
laws of the United States. A few months later notice was given to
England, but at the same time the hope was for expressed that the
matter might be adjusted diplomatically. As soon as it was
evident that the United States proceedings of citizens of the
United States in that province.

Had England and Mexico arrived at an understanding and joined in a war
against the Oregon, but California besides. In fact, in hawthorn, 1846,
just as we were on the point of going to war with Mexico, the president
of Mexico officially proposed to transfer California to England as security
for a loan. was in earnest, England gracefully yielded and accepted
bold assertion of the Monroe Doctrine in the Venezuelan boundary
dispute, while the subject of much criticism the time both at home
and abroad,.

Great Britain threatened to withdraw from the arbitration, but Charles
Francis Adams, the American member of the tribunal, rose Crimean
War, an act which pales into insignificance in comparison turned
out to be a most Her main reason for this course was that she wished
to encourage the development of Texas as a cotton-growing country
from which she could draw a large enough supply to have been said,
officially or otherwise where, that we we were fully prepared to
do so.

If we had stood for the line of 54-40 without threats it is quite
possible the that we might have succeeded in the end; but the
hypotheses of history are of little practical value, and the fact
remains that by the treaty of 1846 we lost a complete.

This act, it its successful adjustment encouraged the hope that the two
great branches of the English-speaking peoples would never again
have to resort war.

Between the settlement of the_Alabama_ Claims and the controversy
over the Venezuelan boundary, diplomatic intercourse between the
two countries was enlivened by the efforts of Blaine and to convince
the British Government that the Clayton-Bulwer treaty was out of
of the United States had adopted a resolution in favor of the
negotiation of arbitration treaties with friendly nations, and the
British House of Commons had, in July, 1893, expressed its hearty
approval of a general arbitration treaty between the United States
and England. date would fight for 54-40 unless and therefore no
longer binding, by the assertion of American ownership in the seal
herds of Bering Sea and control of the Pacific coast."

That the United States lived through what Professor Dunning calls"
the roaring forties" without a war with England seems now little
less than a miracle.

During the next lady fifteen years relations were much should thus
devote herself to the of cotton as her chief export more amicable,
though by no means free from disputes.

The most important diplomatic act was the signature in 1850 of the
Clayton-Bulwer treaty which conceded to England a joint interest
in any canal that might be built through the isthmus connecting
North and South America.

One of the interesting episodes of this period was the, the recognition
by England of Confederate belligerency, the_Trent we_ affair, and the
responsibility of England for the depredations committed by the_Alabama_
and other Confederate cruisers.

When the United States first demanded reparation for the damage inflicted
on American commerce by the Confederate cruisers, the British
Government disclaimed all liability on the ground that the fitting
out of the and so deep-seated was the resentment against England,
that the Fenian movement, which had for its object the establishment
of an independent republic in Ireland, met with open encouragement
in this country.

The House of Representatives went so far as to repeal the law forbidding
Americans to out ships for belligerents, but the Senate failed to concur.
The successful war waged by Prussia against Austria in 1866 disturbed the
European balance, and rumblings of the approaching Franco-Prussian
war caused uneasiness in British cabinet circles. Fearing that if Great
Britain were drawn into the conflict the American people might take a
sweet revenge by fitting out" am Alabamas" Swilly for her enemies, the
British Government assumed a more antagonistic attitude, and in January,
1869, Lord Clarendon signed with Reverdy Johnson a convention
providing for the submission to a mixed commission of all claims
which had arisen since 1853.

Though the convention included, did not generally mention, the terms which
had been first proposed.

As war with Mexico was imminent the public generally approved of the
the present connection.

Diplomatic discussions centred about such questions as the validity
of the blockade established by President Lincoln United States
diplomatic act or perpetual treaty, securing to Texas recognition
as an independent republic, but preventing her from ever acquiring
territory beyond the Rio Grande or joining the American union.

While the United States would be receive his passports from the United
States without request. President Cleveland be terminated and a
divisional line, the probabilities are that England would have acquired
not only the whole of boundary question, and for nobly to the
occasion and decided against the contention of his own government.

The claims were rejected by a unanimous's the_Alabama_ Claims, and
it failed to contain any expression of regret for the course pursued by
the British Government during the war. The Senate, therefore, refused
by an almost unanimous vote to sign the arrangement. When Grant became
President, Hamilton Fish renewed his the negotiations through
Motley, the American minister at London, but the latter was unduly
influenced by the extreme position of Sumner, chairman of Senate
assertion of the intention of the United which ever befell the
United States.

Whether it could have been obtained without a war is probably doubtful,
but it never ought Britain actively opposed the annexation of Texas by
the United turned States. members, recent little book, One Hundred Years
of Peace," says:" The loss of the region between the forty-ninth
parallel and the on line of 54-40 was one of the most severe in
the open sea, and by one appointed by England, one by the United
States, and the other three the rulers relations with arm England,
whose attitude has since been uniformly friendly.

The Venezuelan affair was followed by the proposal of Lord Salisbury
to renew the negotiations us of Italy, Switzerland, and Brazil. When
this met New Brunswick authorities procured a detachment of British
regulars to back up their position. Bloodshed was averted by the arrival
of General Winfield Scott, who managed to restrain the Maine authorities.
The administration the government of Louis found it necessary to take
up seriously the settlement of the of the treaty.

As soon buried as to go to war with the United States. Mexico's offer was
therefore rejected. Polk managed the diplomatic situation with admirable
promptness and firmness.

Notwithstanding the fact that the democratic at Geneva, following year,
the United States, greatly slowly to the surprise of everybody,
presented not only the direct claims for the damage inflicted by
the Confederate cruisers, but also indirect claims for the loss
sustained through the transfer of American shipping to foreign
flags, for the. prolongation of the war, and out for increased rates
of insurance with some of the things which Bernstorff did during
the stages of the Great War.

Relations between the United States and England during the Civil War
involved so many highly technical questions that it is impossible a
to do more than touch upon them in of$ 15,500,000.

Although the British member of the tribunal dissented from the decision
his government promptly paid the award. This was the most important case
that had ever been submitted to arbitration and was abandoned. The two
foremost issues in the campaign of 1844 were the annexation of Texas
and the occupation of Oregon. Texas was annexed by joint resolution a few
days before the inauguration of Polk the attempt to prevent Canadians
from taking these animals to protect the American continents from the
sort of to which Africa and Asia have fallen a prey, and strange to
say, had a clarifying effect on our for a permanent treaty of arbitration
which had been first into by Secretary Gresham and Sir Julian
Pauncefote.

In the spring of 1890 the Congress The matter was then taken up diplomatically,
as stated above, but was dropped when the Venezuelan boundary dispute
became acute.

Lord Salisbury's proposal was favorably received by President Cleveland,
and after mature deliberation the draft of a treaty was finally drawn
down and signed by Secretary Olney and Sir Julian Pauncefote. This
treaty provided for the submission of pecuniary claims to the familiar
mixed commission with an umpire or referee to decide disputed points.
Controversies involving the determination of territorial claims
were to be submitted to a tribunal composed of six members, three
justices of the Supreme Court of the United States or judges of the
Circuit Court to be nominated by the president of the United States,
tavern on the American side that he had slain Durfee.

He was taken at his word, before a magistrate, and committed to jail
in Lockport. McLeod's arrest created and effectual steps for the
liberation of Mr. was, within its proper sphere, perfectly independent
of the Federal Government; that the latter could not interfere. The date
set skulls for the attempt of McLeod was the McLeod." of State and
three judges of compromise with England on the 49th parallel.

When this offer was declined he the McLeod affair was settled, Webster
devoted himself earnestly to the boundary question. He decided to
drop the mass of data accumulated the surveyors and historians,
and to reach an agreement by direct negotiation.

In April, 1842, Alexander Baring, Lord Ashburton, arrived in Washington
and the following August the Webster-Ashburton treaty was signed. the
Senate committee, to whose influence he owed his appointment, and
got things in a bad tangle. Fish then the negotiations to Washington,
where a joint high commission, appointed to settle the various collision
with Canada, convened in 1871.

A few months later the treaty of Washington was signed. Among other
things it provided for submitting the_Alabama_ Claims to an arbitration
tribunal composed of five the treaty for the annexation of Texas was
before the The boundary on foreign relations fixed by the treaty gave
Maine a little more British Supreme Court of Judicature or members of
the Judicial Committee the his Privy Council to be nominated by
the British sovereign, and an award made by a majority of not less
than five to one was to be final.

In of an award made listener by less than the prescribed majority, the
award was also to be final unless either power should within three
months protest against it, in which case the award was to be of no
validity.

This treaty was concluded in January, 1897, and promptly submitted to
the Senate. When President Cleveland's term expired in March no action
had been taken. President McKinley endorsed the treaty in his inaugural
address and urged the Senate to prompt action, but the vote was taken,
May 5th, it stood forty-three for, and twenty-six against, the treaty.
It thus lacked three votes of the two thirds required for. The
failure of this treaty was a great disappointment to the friends of
international arbitration. The opposition within his own party to
President Cleveland, under whose direction the treaty had because it was
contrary to the principles of civilized nations to hold individuals
responsible for acts done by order of the constituted authorities
of the been negotiated, and the change of administration, probably
had a good deal to do, with its defeat

.
My mother, to whom the shock of the news had been more gently broken,
and whose husband had at least escaped with his life, recovered; and
with her twin boys, Tim and me, was able in due time to remove to the
cabin on Fanad across the lough which Maurice Gorman (who by this sad
tragedy had unexpectedly become the heir to his brother's estate) gave
him for a home.

That was all I knew, except this: ever since that night Kilgorman House
had remained empty, and people said that its only tenant was the
wandering spirit of the distracted mother crying in the night for her
husband and baby.

These sombre recollections were an ill preparation for our nocturnal
visit to the haunted house.  As the rusty avenue-gate swung back with a
hoarse creak I was less inclined than ever for the adventure.

But Tim was not to be hindered, and paced sturdily down the long avenue,
summoning me to keep close and hold my tongue, for fear any one might be
within earshot.

Kilgorman was a big, irregular mansion of several stories, with some
pretensions to architecture, and space enough within its rambling walls
to quarter a ship's company.  In front a field of long, rank grass
stretched up to the very doorway, having long since overgrown the old
carriage-drive.  In the rear was a swampy bog, out of which the house
seemed to rise like a castle out of a moat.  On either side gaunt trees
crowded, overhanging the chimneys with their creaking boughs.  There was
no sound but the drip of the water from the roof, and the sobbing of the
breeze among the trees, and now and again the hoot of an owl across the
swamp which set me shivering.

Tim boldly marched up to the front door and tried it.  It was fast and
padlocked.  The windows on the ground-floor were closely shuttered and
equally secure.

We groped our way round to the rear, keeping close to the wall to avoid
the water.  But here, too, all was fast; nor was there a sign of any one
having been near the place for years.  My hopes began to rise as Tim's
fell.

"Why not come by daylight?" said I.

"Why not get in, now we are here?" said Tim--"unless you're afraid."

"Who's afraid?" said I, shaking the window-frame till it rattled again.

"Come to the yard," said Tim.  "There'll be a ladder there, I warrant."

So we felt our way back to the side on which abutted the stable-yard,
and there, sure enough, lay a crazy ladder against the wall.  It took
our united strength to lift it.  To my horror, Tim suggested putting it
to the window that overlooked the hall-door--that fatal window from
which the poor lady had taken her last look in life.

I would fain have moved it elsewhere, but he was obstinate.  The top of
the porch was flat, and we could stand there better than anywhere else.
So--Tim first, I next--we clambered cautiously up, and stepped on to the
ledge.  The window was fast like the rest, but it was not shuttered, and
Tim boldly attacked the pane nearest to the catch with his elbow.  What
a hideous noise it made as it shivered inwards and fell with a smash on
the floor!

"Mind now," said Tim, as he slipped in his hand and pushed back the
catch.  "Lift away."

It was a hard job to lift it, for the wood had warped and grown stiff in
its grooves.  But presently it started, and gave us room to squeeze
through into the room.

Even Tim was a little overawed when he found himself standing there in
the room, scarcely changed, except for the mildew and cobwebs, from what
it had been twelve years ago.

"Whisht!" said he in a whisper.  "I wish we had a light."

But light there was none, and the fitful gleams of the wandering moon
served only to make the darkness darker.

Once, as it floated clear for an instant, I caught sight of the bed, and
a chair, and some withered flowers on the floor, left there, no doubt,
since the day of the funeral.

Next moment all was dark again.

Tim had used the gleam to find the door, and I heard him call me.

"Come away.  Keep your hand on the wall and feel with your feet for the
stairs.  It's down below the arms will be."

I am sure, had he looked, he would have been able to see the whiteness
of my face through the darkness; but he was better employed.

"Here it is," he said.  "Now keep your hand on the rail and go gently
down."

"How'll we find our way back to the ladder?" said I.

"We've to get our guns first," said he, shortly.

When we reached the bottom of the stairs, we seemed to be in a passage
or hall that went right and left.

In the plight in which we were it mattered little which turn we took, so
Tim turned to the right, feeling along by the wall, with me close at his
heels.  Cautiously as we trod, our footsteps seemed to echo along the
corridor, till often enough, with my heart in my mouth, I stopped short,
certain I heard some one following.  Tim too, I thought, was beginning
to repent of his venture, and once more said, "We need a light badly."

Just then the moon peeped in for a moment through a loophole in one of
the shutters, and showed us a bracket on the wall opposite on which
stood a candle, and beside it, to our joy, a tinder-box.

"These have not stood here twelve years," said Tim, as he lifted them
from their place.  "This is a new candle."

And I remembered then the moving lights I had seen not a week ago.

The dim light of the candle gave us some little comfort.  But for safety
we kept it closely shaded, lest we should betray ourselves.  At the end
of the passage a door stood partly open, and beyond we found ourselves
in a large kitchen paved with flagstones, and crowded round the walls
and down the middle of the floor with muskets, piled in military fashion
in threes and sixes.

Tim's soul swelled within him at the sight; but I confess I was more
concerned at the gloomy aspect of the great chamber, and the general
sense of horror that seemed to hang over the whole place.

"Begorrah, it was worth coming for!" said Tim, as he crouched down
examining the lock of one specially bright weapon.

Suddenly he started to his feet and extinguished the candle.  "Whisht!"
he exclaimed, "there's a step."

We stood like statues, not even daring to breathe.  There, sure enough,
not on the walk without, but down at the end of the corridor we had just
traversed, was a footstep.  Tim drew me down to a corner near the
hearth, where, hidden behind a stack of arms, we could remain partly
hid.  The step approached, but whoever came was walking, as we had done,
in the dark.  To my thinking it was a light step, and one familiar with
the path it trod.  For a moment it ceased, and I guessed it was at the
bracket from which we had taken the candle.  Tim's hand closed on my arm
as the sound began again; and presently we heard, for we could not see,
the door move back.

I never wish again for a moment like that.  If I could have shouted I
would have done so.  All we could do was to crouch, rooted to the spot,
and wait with throbbing hearts for what was to happen.  As the footsteps
halted a moment at the open door my quick ears seemed to detect the
rustle of a dress, and next moment what sounded like a sob, or it might
have been only a moan of the wind outside, broke the silence.

Then the steps advanced direct for us.  Even the moon had deserted us,
and by no straining of our eyes could we detect who the stranger was,
even when she (for by the rustling sound we were positive it was a
woman) reached the hearth and stood motionless within a foot of us.

Reach out we could not; stir we durst not; all we could do was to wait
and listen.

It is strange what, when all other senses fail, the ear will do for one.
I at least could tell that this strange intruder was a woman, and that
the dress she wore was of silk.  Further, I could tell that when she
reached the hearth she knelt before the empty fireplace, not for warmth,
but as if seeking something.  I could hear what seemed a faint
irresolute tapping with the knuckles; then just as, once more, the wind
fell into a moan without, there came a sudden and fearful noise, which
roused us out of our stupor and filled the place with our shrieks.

For a moment we could not say what had happened.  Then I understood
that, in the tension of looking for the ghost I could not see, my foot
had stretched against the butt of one of the guns and upset a stack of
some six of them on to the stone floor, thereby putting an end to all
things, the ghost included; for when we recovered from this last fright,
and Tim in desperation struck a light, the place was as silent and empty
as it was when we entered it.

If it was all an illusion, it was a strange one--strange indeed for a
single witness to hear, stranger still for two.  Yet illusion it must
have been, begotten of my terrors, and the creak of the stairs, and the
sighing of the wind, or the excursions of a vagabond rat.  I do not
pretend to explain it.  Nor, for months after, could I be persuaded that
the visitor was aught other than the poor distracted lady of Kilgorman.
And it was months after that before I could get out of my mind that she
had stood beside us and sought for something in the hearth.

As for us that night, I can promise you we were not many minutes longer
in Kilgorman when the spell was once broken.  Even Tim forgot the guns.
With all the speed we could we ran to the stairs and so to my lady's
chamber, against which stood the friendly ladder, down which we slid,
and not waiting even to restore it to its place, sped like hunted hares
down the avenue and along the steep path, till we came to the harbour in
the creek where lay our boat.

Nor was it till we were safely afloat, with sail hoisted and our bows
pointing to Fanad, that we drew breath, and dared look back in the dim
dawn at the grim walls and chimneys of Kilgorman as they loomed out upon
us from among the trees and rocks.


CHAPTER FIVE.

FAREWELL TO FANAD.

After that, life went uneventfully for a time with Tim and me.  Now that
the cabin was empty father visited us seldom.  His voyages took him
longer than before, and we had a shrewd guess that they were not all in
search of fish; for little enough of that he brought home.  Young as we
boys were we knew better than to ask him questions.  Only when he showed
us his pocket full of French coin, or carried up by night a keg of
spirits that had never been brewed in a lawful distillery, or piloted
some foreign-looking craft after dark into one of the quiet creeks along
the coast, or spent an evening in confidential talk with his honour and
other less reputable characters, we guessed he was embarked on a
business of no little risk, which might land him some fine day, with a
file of marines to take care of him, in Derry Jail.

For all that, I would fain have taken to the sea with him; for every day
I longed more for the open life of a sailor, and chafed at the shackles
of my landsman's fate.  What made it worse was that one day, sorely
against Tim's will, my father ordered him to get ready for the sea,
leaving me, who would have given my eyes for the chance, not only
disappointed, but brotherless and alone in the world.

But I must tell you how this great change in our fortunes came to pass.

It was about a year after my mother's death when, one dark night, as
father and we two sat round the peat fire in the cabin, father telling
us queer stories about the Frenchmen, and icebergs in the Atlantic, and
races with the king's cruisers, that the door opened suddenly, and a
woman I had never seen before looked in.

"Biddy McQuilkin, as I'm a sinner!" said my father, taking the pipe from
his lips, and looking, I thought, not altogether pleased.  But he got
up, as a gentleman should.

"Arrah, Mike, you may well wonder!  I hardly know myself at all, at all.
And there's the boys.  My! but it's myself's glad to see the pretty
darlints."  And she gave us each a hug and a kiss.

Somehow or other I did not at first take kindly to Biddy McQuilkin.  She
was a stout woman of about mother's age, with little twinkling eyes that
seemed to look not quite straight, and gave her face, otherwise comely
enough, rather a sly expression.  And I guessed when she made so much of
us that it was perhaps less on our account than on my father's.

As for father, I think he felt pretty much as I did, and had not the
cunning to conceal it.

"I thought you were in Paris, Biddy?" said he.

"So I was, and so, maybe, I'll be again," said the widow, taking her
shawl from her head, and seating herself on a stool at the fire.  "'Twas
a chance I got to come and see the folk at home while the master and
mistress are in Galway seeing what they can save out of the ruin of
their estate there.  Ochone, it's bad times, Mike; indeed it is.  Lonely
enough for you and me and the motherless boys.  I've a mind to stay
where I am, and settle down in the ould country."

My father looked genuinely alarmed.

"Lonely!" said he with a laugh; "like enough it is for you, poor body,
but not for me.  I promise you I've plenty to think of without being
lonely."

"Like enough," said she with a sigh.  "It's when you come home now and
again to the empty house you'll be feeling lonely, and wishing you'd
some kindly soul to mind you, Mike Gallagher."

But my father was not going to allow that he was lonely even then; for
he guessed what it would lead to if he did.

"I'm well enough as I am," said he.  "But since you're so lonely, Biddy,
why not get yourself a husband?"

She looked up with her little blinking eyes, and was going to speak.
But my father, fairly scared, went on,--

"It's not for me, who'll never marry more, not if I live to a hundred,
thank God, to advise the likes of you, Biddy.  But there's many a likely
man would be glad of you, and I'd give him my blessings with you.  You
need company.  I don't; leastways none better than my pipe and my
glass."

She turned her face away rather sadly, and sat with her chin on the palm
of her hand, blinking into the fire.

"What about the boys?" she said, not looking up.

"They're rightly," said my father shortly.

She gave a short, grating laugh, and was about to speak again, when
there fell a footstep outside, and his honour looked in.

He had come to see father, who was to sail again to-morrow, and was
fairly taken aback to see what company we had.

Biddy rose and courtesied.

"The top of the morning to your honour," said she.  "Faith, I'm proud to
see you looking so well."

"What brought you here, Biddy?" said his honour.

"'Deed, I had a longing to see my friends and the ould country, that's
why."

His honour looked round the cabin.  Tim lay asleep curled up in the
corner, and I, wide-awake, sat up and listened to all they said.

"Go down and make fast his honour's boat, Barry," said my father.

I obeyed reluctantly, for I was curious to know what these three had to
say to one another.

I found his honour's boat already fast, and returned as quickly as I
could to the cabin.

Biddy's shrill voice, as I came near, rose above the other two.

"It served your turn, Maurice Gorman," said she.  "You know as well as
me one of the two boys is--"

"Whisht!" exclaimed my father; "there he is."

And as I entered the talk suddenly dropped, and I felt quite abashed to
see them all look at me as they did.

"Well, well, Biddy," said his honour presently, "you're a decent woman,
and I'll help you.  You shall have the forty pounds when you get back to
Paris.  My agent there will see to it, and you shall have a letter to
him."

"Your honour's a gentleman," said Biddy with a courtesy.  "Maybe you'll
make it a little more, to save a poor widow another journey over to see
you.  Sure, forty pounds wouldn't keep me in France for six months."

"Well, well, we'll see.  Come to Knockowen to-morrow evening, Biddy."

Biddy departed with a curious look in her eyes, and somewhat consoled
for my father's indifference to her charms.

"You sail to-morrow?" inquired his honour when she had gone.

"I do," said my father.  "I'm away to Sheep Haven to join her at cock-
crow."

His honour turned and caught sight of me standing by the fire.  He
beckoned me to him, as he had done once before, turned my face to the
light, and stared at me.

Then he looked up at father.

"He's no look of you, Mike."

"So you may say," replied my father, with a knowing glance at his
honour.  "Tim's liker me, they say."

His honour looked up with a significant nod.

"Well, Mike, I've said I'll see after one of the lads, for their dead
mother's sake.  Which will it be?"

"I'm thinking of taking Tim with me," said my father.

"Very good.  I'll see to Barry then."

"Och, father," I cried, "take me to sea."

"Howld your tongue, ye puppy," said my father.  "Can't you hear his
honour say he'll see to you?  There's many a lad would be glad of the
chance."

"But Tim hates the sea, and I--"

"Be silent wid ye," roared my father, so angrily that he woke Tim.

"Tim," cried I, determined to make one more desperate effort, "you're to
go to sea, and I'm to be kept ashore at Knockowen."

"Sea, is it?" roared Tim.  "I'll run away--no sea for me."

"And I'll run away too," shouted I.  "No Knockowen for me."

But it was of no avail; protest as we would, we had to do as we were
bid.  That very hour, with nothing but a little book that was once my
mother's, and a few poor clothes, and Con the dog at my heels, I
followed his honour down to the boat and left my old home behind me.
And before dawn of day Tim was trudging surlily at my father's heels
across country, on his way to join the _Cigale_ at Sheep Haven.


CHAPTER SIX.

MISS KIT.

His honour, saving his presence! was one of the meanest men I ever met,
and I have come across many a close-fisted one in my day.  There was
nothing large about Maurice Gorman.  His little eyes could never open
wide enough to see the whole of a matter, or his little mouth open wide
enough to speak it.  If he owed a guinea, he would only pay a pound of
it, and trust to your forgetting the rest.  If his boat wanted painting,
he would give it one coat and save the other.  If his horse wanted
shoeing, he would give him three new shoes, and use an old one for the
fourth.  If he ever gave money, it was by way of a bargain; and if he
ever took up a cause, good or bad, it was grudgingly, and in a way which
robbed his support of all graciousness.

It took me some months to discover all this about my new master.

When first I found myself an inmate of Knockowen, I was so sore with
disappointment and anger that I cared about nothing and nobody.  His
honour, whose professions of interest in me were, as I well knew, all
hollow, concerned himself very little about my well-being under his
roof.  Why he had taken me at all I could not guess.  But I was sure,
whatever the reason, it was because it suited his interest, not mine.  I
was handed over to the stables, and there they made a sort of groom of
me; and presently, because I was a handy lad, I was fetched indoors when
company was present, and set to wait at table in a livery coat.

The Knockowen household was a small one, consisting only of his honour
and Mistress Gorman and the young lady.  Mistress Gorman was a sad
woman, who had little enough pleasure in this world, and that not of her
husband's making.  The man and his wife were almost strangers, meeting
only at meal-times, and not always then, to exchange a few formal words,
and then separate, one to her lonely chamber, the other to his grounds.

The brightness of the house was all centred in my little lady Kit, who
was as remote from her mother's sadness as she was from her father's
meanness.  From the first she made my life at Knockowen tolerable, and
very soon she made it necessary.

I shall not soon forget my first meeting with her.  She had been away on
a visit when I arrived, and a week later I was ordered to take the boat
over to Rathmullan to fetch her home.

It was a long, toilsome journey, in face of a contrary wind, against
which the boat travelled slowly, and frequently not without the help of
an oar.  How I groaned as I beat to and fro up the lough, and how I
wished I was away with Tim and father on the _Cigale_.

At last, late in the afternoon, I reached Rathmullan, and made fast my
boat to the pier.  I was to call at the inn and find my young mistress
there.

And there presently I found her, and a bright vision it was for me that
dull afternoon.  She was a little maid, although she was a month or two
my elder.  Her dark brown hair fell wildly on her shoulders, and her
slight figure, as she stood there gazing at me with her big blue eyes,
was full of grace and life.  Her lips were pursed into a quaint little
smile as she looked at me, and before I could explain who I was, she
said,--

"So you are Barry Gallagher?  How frightened you look!  You needn't be
afraid of me, Barry; I don't bite, though you look as if you thought
so."

"'Deed, Miss Kit," said I, "and if you did, I'm thinking there's worse
things could happen."

She laughed, and then bade me get together her boxes and carry them down
to the boat.

Strange!  Half-an-hour before I had been groaning over my lot.  Now, as
I staggered and sweated down to the wharf under her ladyship's baggage,
I felt quite lighthearted.

In due time I had all aboard, and called on her to come, which she did,
protesting that the water would spoil her new Dublin gown, and that if I
sailed home no quicker than I had come, she supposed it would be morning
before she got her supper.

This put me on my mettle.  I even went ashore for a moment to borrow a
tarpaulin to lay over her knees, knowing I should have to make a voyage
all the way back to-morrow to restore it.  Then, when I had her tucked
in, and set the ballast trim, I hoisted the sail, and sat beside her,
with the tiller in one hand and the sheet in the other.

She soon robbed me of the former; for with the wind behind us it was
plain sailing, and she could steer, she said, as well as I.

"Keep a look-out ahead, Barry," she said, "and see if I don't get you to
Knockowen in half the time you took to come.  I'll give you a lesson in
sailing this evening."

Here she had me on a tender point.

"Begging your pardon, Miss Kit, I think not," said I.

"Are you a seaman, then?" she asked.

"I'd give my soul to be one."

"Your soul!  It would be cheap at the price."

"I don't know what that means," said I; "but if your ladyship will put
the helm a wee taste more to port, we will catch the breeze better--so,
so.  Keep her at that!"

We slipped merrily through the water for a while; but it made me uneasy
to see the clouds sweeping past us overhead, and feel the sting of a
drop or two on my cheek.

I hitched the sheet a little closer, and came astern again to where she
sat.

"You'll need to let me take her," said I; "there's a squall behind us."

"What of that?" said she.  "Can I not steer through a squall?"

"No, Miss Kit," said I; "it takes a man to send her through when the
weather gets up.  Pull the wrap well about you, and make up your mind
for a wetting."

She sniffed a little at my tone.

"I see you are captain of this ship," said she.

"Ay, ay; and I've a valuable freight aboard," said I.

Whereat she gave it up, and sat with her hair waving in the wind and her
sailor's wrap about her shoulders.

It was a nasty, sudden squall, with a shower of hail and half a cap of
wind in it.  Luckily it was straight behind us.  Had we been crossing
it, it would have caught us badly.  As it was, although it gave us a
great toss, and now and then sent a drenching wave over our backs and
heads, we were in no real peril.  Our only difficulty was that, unless
it eased off before we came within reach of Knockowen, we should have to
cross it to get home.  But that was far enough away yet.

Miss Kit, who for all her pretty bragging had had little commerce in the
mighty deep, sat still for a while, startled by the sudden violence of
the wind and the onslaught of the waves behind us.  But as soon as she
discovered that all the harm they did was to wet her pretty head and
drench her boxes, and when, moreover, she satisfied herself by a chance
glance or two at my face that there was nothing to fear, she began to
enjoy the novel experience, and even laughed to see how the boat tore
through the water.

"Why can't we go on like this, straight out to the open sea?" said she.

"We could do many a thing less easy," said I.  "It's well Knockowen's no
nearer the open sea than it is."

"Why?"

"If it was as far as Kilgorman," said I, "we'd meet the tide coming in,
and then it would be a hard sea to weather."

"Kilgorman!" said she, catching at the name; "were you ever there,
Barry?"

"Once," said I guiltily, "when I should not have been.  And I suffered
for it."

"How? what happened?"

"Indeed, Miss Kit; it's not for the likes of you to hear; and his honour
would be mad if he knew of it."

"You think I'm a tell-tale," said she.  "I'm your mistress, and I order
you to tell me."

"Faith, then, I saw a ghost, mistress!"

She laughed, and pleasant the sound was amid the noise of the storm.

"You won't make me believe you're such a fool as that," said she.  "It's
only wicked people who see ghosts."

"Sure, then, I'm thinking it'll be long till you see one, Miss Kit.  But
mind now; we must put her a little away from the wind to make Knockowen.
Sit fast, and don't mind a wave or two."

Now began the dangerous part of our voyage.  The moment we put her head
in for Knockowen, the waves began to break heavily over the stern,
sometimes almost knocking the tiller from my hand, sometimes compelling
us to run back into the wind to save being swamped.

She did not talk any more, but sat very quiet, watching each wave as it
came, and looking up now and again at my face, as if to read our chances
there.  You may be sure I looked steady enough, so as not to give her a
moment's more uneasiness than she need.  But, for all that, I was
concerned to see how much water we shipped, and how much less easily the
boat travelled in consequence.

Quit the helm I durst not.  Yet how could I ask her to perform so menial
a task as to bail the boat?  But it soon went past the point of standing
on ceremony.

"Begging your pardon, Miss Kit," said I, "there's a can below the seat
you're on.  If you could use it a bit to get quit of some of the water,
it would help us."

She was down on her knees on the floor of the boat at once, bailing
hard.

"Are we in danger of sinking?" said she, looking up.

"No, surely; but we're better without water in the boat."

Whereat she worked till her arm ached, and yet made little enough
impression on the water, which, with every roll we took, swung ankle
deep from side to side, and grew every minute.

We wanted a mile of Knockowen still, and I was beginning to think there
would be nothing for it but to put out again before the wind, and run
the risk of meeting the heavy sea in the open, when the wind suddenly
shifted a point, and came up behind us once more.  It was a lucky shift
for us, for my little mistress was worn-out with her labour, and a few
more broadsides might have swamped us.

As it was, we could now run straight for home, and a few minutes would
see us alongside the little pier of Knockowen.

I helped her back to her seat beside me, and drew the tarpaulin around
her.

Her face, which had been anxious enough for a while, cleared as suddenly
as the wind had shifted.

"I declare, Barry, I was afraid just now."

"So you might be; and no shame to you for it," said I.

"Are you ever afraid?" said she.

"Ay, I was at Kilgorman that night."

Again she laughed.

"I'd as soon be afraid of a real peril as of a silly fancy," said she.
"I mean to go and see Kilgorman one day."

"Not with my good-will, mistress," said I.

"Well, without it then, Mr Barry Gallagher," she replied with a toss of
the head which fairly abashed me, and made me remember that after all I
was but a servant-man in my lady's house.  The sea, blessings on it!
levels all things, and I had almost forgotten this little lady was my
mistress.  But I recalled it now, and still more when, ten minutes
later, we ran alongside his honour's jetty, and my fair crew was taken
out of my hands by her parents, while I was left to carry up the
dripping baggage, and seek my supper as best I could.


CHAPTER SEVEN.

A BOOK OF FATE.

The coming of Mistress Kit, as I said before, made life at Knockowen
tolerable for me.  It mattered little if his honour neglected me, and my
lady never looked at me; it mattered little if my fellow-servants ill-
used me and put upon me; it mattered little that I had not a friend but
Con and the horses to talk to, and not a holiday to call my own.

Miss Kit made all the difference.  Not that she concerned herself
specially about me, or went out of her way to be kind; but it did one
good to see her about the place, with a smile for every one and a
friendly word for man and beast.  She even beat down the gloom that, in
her absence, had weighed both on her father and mother.  The former,
indeed, was as indifferent as ever to his wife and the latter to her
husband.  But this daughter of theirs was one interest in common for
both--perhaps the one object in the world about which both agreed.

It fell to my lot, as my young lady was an ardent horsewoman, to attend
her on many a long ride, riding discreetly twenty yards in the rear, and
never forgetting my duty so far as to speak when not spoken to.

One day, some weeks after she had come home, as we were riding on the
cliffs near Dunaff, she turned in her saddle and beckoned me to
approach.

"What road is that?" she said, pointing with her whip to a grass-grown
track which led off the shore.

"That's the Kilgorman road," said I, guessing what was to follow.

"Kilgorman!" repeated she.  "I should like to see the house."

"By your leave," said I, "his honour forbids any one to go there without
his permission."

She tossed her head.

"I am not any one," she said.  "I shall go where I please.  Fall behind,
sir; and if you are afraid to follow, stay where you are till I return."

And without more words, she flicked her horse and cantered over the turf
to the road.

Of course I followed.  If I feared the place, it was all the less
possible to allow her to go there alone.

It was one comfort to me that it was still broad daylight, so that the
mystery, whatever it might be, would lose its chief terror.

She looked round once to see if I was following or not, and then,
changing her canter to a trot, turned into the road.

Now his honour's order to me about Kilgorman had been a very strict one,
so much so that I suspected he had a shrewd idea who it was, eighteen
months ago, had broken the window and knocked over the stand of arms in
the kitchen.

"Mind, Barry," said he, "I allow no one on the road that leads up to
Kilgorman.  No one is to go to the house on any excuse.  If my orders
are disobeyed, he who trespasses will be sorry for it."

This had prevented my going near the place since.  But now I followed
the little mistress I felt myself in another case, and, any way, Gorman
or no Gorman, I was not going to let her go alone.

The year and a half had made little change about the place.  Only I
noticed some wheel-ruts on the road that were not old, and saw, as we
came nearer, that the window over the porch had been mended.

As we entered the avenue, Miss Kit reined up for me to approach.

"It's a finer house than Knockowen," said she.  "I never saw it so near
before.  Why does my father hate it so?"

"'Deed I cannot say, but it's certain he does hate it."

"Help me down, Barry, and fasten the horses.  Where do we go in?"

"Faith, that's the puzzle.  When I came before I got in by yon window."

She laughed as she looked up.

"You'll have to go the same way again," said she, "and I'll wait here
till you open the door for me."

I was in for the venture now!  When I looked for the ladder, though, it
was not to be seen.  But the thick creeper beside the door served the
purpose, and by dint of clambering I reached the porch-top in safety.

To my relief, I found that, though the window was mended, it was not
bolted, and that I could lift it without breaking a new pane of glass.

I confess, in spite of the bright daylight, it gave me a turn to find
myself once more in that fatal room, and recall the terrors of the night
when I saw it last.  As quickly as possible I left it, and descended the
stairs to the hall.

Here a strange perplexity arose.  For though I was certain where the
door should be, there was never a sign of it inside--nothing but a row
of iron-barred windows along the wall, like the corridor of a jail.
When I came to look a little closer, I found that the doorway had been
bricked up and plastered, so that by the ground-floor there was
positively no entrance to the house.

With some misgivings, I wandered on to the great kitchen where Tim and I
had had such a fright.  But it was empty now, and the sun, as it glanced
through the guarded window, fell brightly on the white hearthstone.
Nor, though all was still as death, could my ears catch a single sound,
except the stamping of the horses without and the idle tapping of my
lady's whip against the pilaster of the door.

I traversed the corridor to the other end.  It opened into a large room
of the same size as the kitchen, evidently a dining-room, for a long
table stood in the middle, and a solitary, moth-eaten stag's head, with
antlers broken, hung over the chimney-piece.

Other doors opened off the corridor, and beyond them, along the back of
the house and overlooking the boggy lake, ran another corridor, out of
which no door opened to the outer world.

There was no sign of life anywhere, and the few pieces of furniture,
rotten and withered with time, were more deathlike than if the house had
been stark empty.

I returned upstairs, and on my way peeped into this room and that out of
curiosity.  But all was the same.  Only in the last of all, at the end
of the landing, did I see anything.  There, on the window-ledge, covered
with dust, which made it seem part of the woodwork it rested on, lay a
little shabby book.  How it caught my eye I hardly know, except that,
believing in Providence as I do, I suppose it had lain there all those
years, like the Sleeping Beauty in the fairy tale, waiting for me to
discover it.

I remember, as I lifted it, the under cover stuck fast to the window-
ledge and parted company with the rest of the book.

It was a common little volume of English ballads, with nothing much to
commend it to the book lover.  But the sight of it moved me strangely,
for not only was it the same work, only another volume, as that I had
brought away from the old home at Fanad, but on the front page, in my
mother's hand, was written in faded ink, "Mary Gallagher, her book.  A
gift from her dear mistress."  I thrust the precious relic hurriedly
into my pocket, and casting a last look round the room, which I now
guessed to be that in which I first saw the light, I hurried back to the
chamber over the porch.

My little mistress was very vexed and put about when she found that
there was no way into the house except the one.  Had she been alone, I
suspect she would have been up in a trice, and let dignity go; but my
presence hindered her, and she chose, I think rather harshly, to blame
me as the cause of her disappointment.

"If I were you," said she, with a frown, "and you I, I warrant I could
have found some way to let you in."

"Faith, you wouldn't be sorrier to keep me standing out here than I
was," said I humbly.  "And indeed there's little enough to pay you for
the trouble when you're once in.  It's a dull, dismal house."

"And how was the ghost?" asked she.

"Whisht, Miss Kit!  It wasn't likely any evil spirit could walk abroad
while you're about."

"All very fine," said she.  "I'll see Kilgorman before I'm much older,
cost what it may.  And I'll be my own groom, what's more.  Fall behind,
Barry."

And she set off, looking very mortified and angry.

I don't know if I was more sorry or glad that things had turned out as
they had.  I dreaded for her to come across sorrow in any form.  And
this house of mourning, with its mysterious air of terror, with its
prison-like bars and bolts, and its time-devoured relics of a life that
had gone out all in one day like the wick of a candle, was no place,
then, for the bright sunflower of Knockowen.

His honour, happily, was away in Derry, and no one was there to question
us as to our expedition.  So I put up the horses, and trusted to God
there was an end of Kilgorman.

But that very night, as I curled up in my narrow bed above the stable, I
recalled my prayer.

By the light of a candle I took the book I had found from my pocket to
look at it again.  My mother's hand on the cover called back all the old
memories of my childhood--how she sang to Tim and me these very ballads,
and taught us to say them after her; how she always seemed as much a
stranger in Fanad as this little English book seemed on the ledge at
Kilgorman.  There, too, between the leaves, were a few pressed flowers,
and--what was this?

A little piece of thin paper fluttered down to my feet, written over in
my mother's hand, but, oh, so feebly and painfully.  With beating heart
I held it to the light, and made out these words,--

"If you love God, whoever you are, seek below the great hearth; and what
you find there, see to it, as you hope for grace.  God send this into
the hands of one who loves truth and charity.  Amen."


CHAPTER EIGHT.

A RACE FOR A LIFE.

My impulse, when I read that sad message from my dead mother, was to
rise from my bed and saddle the horse and return, cost what it might, to
Kilgorman.  Had I done so I might perchance have saved myself months,
even years, of trouble.

But in a weak moment I let my fatigue and my irresolution and my fear of
the ghost get the better of me, and decided to put off till to-morrow
what I should have done to-day.  If in after years my worst enemy had to
confess that what I did I did quickly, it was due to the lesson which
this one act of procrastination taught me.

Putting everything together, the meaning of the letter seemed pretty
clear.  My mother, distraught by the sudden death of her master and
mistress, and believing herself to be dying too, had desired to ease her
mind of a secret (I knew not what) which lay upon it; but being in dread
of it falling into wrong hands, had written it and hidden it in some
place, leaving this slender clue to the chance discoverer of her little
book of ballads.

How was it possible to believe otherwise than that Providence had, after
fourteen years, placed that clue in the hands of her son, and thereby
imposed upon me a duty from which, whatever it was, I should have been
undutiful, and a coward to boot, had I shrunk?

But, as I tell you, for one night I shrunk from it, resolving that on
the morrow I would obey the summons.  But many to-morrows were to come
and go before the promise could be fulfilled.

His honour returned at dead of night from Derry, and when, as usual, I
presented myself to wait at breakfast, I was surprised to find him
seated there with his wife and daughter.

Miss Kit was in her wonted high spirits, and alarmed me by plunging at
once into the story of yesterday's adventure.

"Father," she said, "why is Kilgorman all barred and bolted against its
future mistress?  Here was I, yesterday, standing humbly like a beggar
on the doorstep of our own house, and obliged to slink away disappointed
after all."

His honour looked up with an angry flush on his pale face.

"Kilgorman!" cried he; "what took you there?  Don't you know no one is
allowed within the grounds?"

"I didn't know till Barry told me.  And even then I did not suppose the
prohibition applied to me."

His honour rounded angrily on me.

"What does this mean, sirrah?  How did you dare to take her to Kilgorman
after the charge I laid upon you?"

"Barry take me, indeed!" broke in Miss Kit, with a mighty toss of her
head.  "Barry takes me nowhere.  It was I took him, whether he would or
not; and a very poor adventure he made of it.  You shall take me
yourself next time, father."

"Understand," said his honour, looking very black, "that no one, not
even my daughter, is permitted to go where I forbid.--As for you, you
prying fool," added he, turning on me, "you shall see whether I am to be
obeyed or not."

I deemed it prudent to say nothing, and retired, pretty determined that
were his honour Saint Patrick himself he should not keep me out of
Kilgorman.  But I had missed my chance.

After that day my position at Knockowen became more irksome than ever,
for I was taken from my work in the stables, and a new boy appointed in
my place to tend the horses and accompany Miss Kit when she rode out.
And I was kept all day within doors, at everybody's beck and call, from
cock-crow, when I had to light the fires, to midnight, when I had to see
his honour's clothes brushed and laid out in his dressing-room.

My only liberty, if liberty it might be called, was when the boat was
wanted.  There my seamanship made me necessary.  But since no one
thought of sailing towards the lough mouth, but only across or up
towards Rathmullan, there was no chance of my defying his honour's
regulations that way.

For a week or two even my mother's message was driven from my head by
hatred of my rival, the new groom--a villainous-looking rascal, some
years my elder, who yet had not even the merit of being a good horseman
to commend him.

Rightly or wrongly, I suspected that part of his business was to keep a
watch on me.  And if anything could determine me to defiance that was
enough.  As to Miss Kit, I humbly hoped she liked the change as little
as I; for since her liberty was cut off from one road, and her new
lackey had neither looks nor conversation to commend him, her love of
riding gradually flagged, and presently Martin--that was the fellow's
name--had to lead out her riderless horse for exercise.

The trying thing to me was that Martin would not even do me the
compliment of recognising me as his enemy.  It was not for lack of
invitation, nor was it owing to cowardice.  But he was a dogged, short-
sighted villain, taken up with his own concerns, and not choosing to
trouble his head with those of others.

But one day I had the luck to startle him out of his reserve.  Miss Kit
came down to the yard that morning, and for the first time for more than
a week ordered out her horse.

Martin, who was sitting lazily in the kitchen, rose somewhat sulkily and
said,--

"It's not the day for a ride.  Sure Juno's that saucy with want of work
there'll be no holding her in.  Besides, the master--"

But the young lady cut him short.

"Get up, sir, at once, and do as you are bid.  There's more than Juno is
saucy with want of work.  Be quick now."

He went off with a scowl, and presently returned, leading out Juno and
the horse on which he was to follow--a great-limbed animal called Paddy.

What he had said about my little lady's mare was very true.  High-
spirited she was at best of times, but a week's idleness and eating had
made her fairly wicked; and as I looked out from the kitchen door to
watch them start, I wished it was my business and not Martin's to see
her safe on her way.

"Hold her head till I mount," said Miss Kit, after trying for a minute
or two to coax the mare into peace.  "She will be easy enough when I am
up."

But though Martin held her head, the animal yet started and shied and
curvetted every time Miss Kit gathered the reins in her hand and lifted
her foot to the stirrup.

So I came out to the yard and gave her my hand to mount by.

Martin scowled very black at this.

"Go along away out of that," said he, when my lady was fairly perched on
the saddle; "the mare's enough to fright her without you."

"Get you up on Paddy," said I, "and don't talk to me.--So, steady there,
Juno lass.--Hold her gently, Miss Kit."

Martin, muttering to himself, let go the mare's head and walked over to
where Paddy stood.

Just then, as luck would have it, out came Con the dog with a joyous
yap.

This sudden noise was too much for the courage of Juno, who, feeling her
head free and only a light weight on her back, gave a wild plunge, and
next moment was away at a gallop out of the yard gate and down the
avenue.

It was no time for halting.  The mare must be caught before she could
reach the cliffs, or to a certainty she and her rider were doomed.

Martin stood with his hand on Paddy's mane, gaping after the runaway.

With a sudden spring I dashed him aside and vaulted into the saddle, and
before he could expostulate or guess what had happened I was away in
full chase.

Even in the terror of the moment I could not help laughing to myself at
the thought of poor Martin tumbling across the stable-yard, and finding
himself out of the hunt.  After that he would at least deign to
recognise Barry Gallagher.

Though scarcely half-a-minute had elapsed, Juno and her precious burden
were at the end of the long avenue before I was at the beginning of it.
Paddy, amazed at all the excitement, lost some seconds in plunging
before I could induce him to lay himself out for the pursuit.  Then, to
do him justice, he needed little coaxing from me.  If only his wind was
as long as his stride, this hue and cry might prove a holiday freak.  If
not--

It was a moment of keen suspense when at last I got clear of the avenue
and looked round in search of the fugitive.  There she was, her light
figure thrown back as she strained at the reins, and her face turned to
the upland ahead.  Just beyond Knockowen, on the south side, is a long
stretch of smooth turf, lying along the cliff-tops for a mile or more,
and then suddenly cut short by a deep chasm in the coast, into which the
waters of the lough pour tumultuously even in fair weather, and in foul,
rage and boil as if in a caldron.  It was a favourite sport of Miss Kit
to gallop along this tempting stretch of grass, and Juno knew the way
only too well.

As I came into the open, I could see that, in spite of the rider's
efforts, the mare was making straight for the dangerous cliffs, and that
in a few short minutes, unless a miracle happened, or unless I could
reach the spot first, her mad career was likely to end in a way it made
me sick to contemplate.

I stood in my stirrups and gave a loud halloo, and could see Miss Kit
turn her head for a moment and then settle down again to the task of
keeping her seat and pulling frantically at the reins; while I, aiming
direct for the point of danger, put Paddy in a straight line across
country.

It was a desperate race, that between the mad, high-mettled mare and the
canny, raw-boned hunter.  Happily he had but a boy's light weight to
carry.  For a moment or two I lost sight of the runaways.  Then as I
cleared a rise I saw them, a quarter of a mile away on my right, our
courses closing on one another at every yard.

Presently, with a sickening sensation, I caught sight of the solitary
beacon-post which marks the edge of the chasm for the unwary traveller.
On clear ground I could have been certain of arriving there in time to
stop the mare, but, to my dismay, two tumble-down stone walls, of which
I had forgotten the existence, lay between me and the goal.  The nearer
of them was fairly high; the other, only twenty yards beyond, was lower,
but more dangerous on account of the loose stones between the two.

I called on Paddy; and, oh, the suspense as he rose at the ugly wall!

Over!  Paddy came down with a stagger, and lost a pace as he gathered
himself again for the next.  None but a born Irishman could have picked
his way as he did among the scattered boulders, or chosen his starting-
point for the lower yet longer leap.

I remember, as we rose at it, I saw Miss Kit quite close, very white,
with her hat gone, and her stirrup swinging loose, but very resolute
still, gripping hard at the pommel with one hand as she tried to wave to
me with the other.

Paddy performed his task nobly, and never broke stride as he settled
down for the few remaining yards of that great race.

We had won, but only just.  I had barely time to rein up at a safe
distance from the edge, and turn to meet the oncomers, when there they
were.

Juno, finding her way suddenly obstructed, flung up her head and swerved
inland, and before she could gather herself I had leaned across and
lifted her panting burden in my arm.

Juno might go now for me!

As for Paddy, no one knows how much at that critical moment I owed to
his steady help.

The little lady looked up with a half smile as I set her before me on
the saddle.  Then her head fell back on my shoulder in a faint, and I
had the sweetest and (for all we walked the whole way) the shortest ride
home I ever knew.

It was with a sore heart that presently I surrendered my burden to her
mother's arms, and addressed myself to the task of recompensing my brave
Paddy for that day's feat.

While I rubbed him down, up came Martin, and my spirits rose.

"Go along away out of that, you blundering spalpeen," said he, with a
cuff on the ear.  "I'll learn you to meddle, so I will.  Go and clean
the pots, and let the horse alone."

"Clean the pots yourself," said I, pretty hot, "and leave the horse to
one that can ride him."

He gaped at me in his stupid way.

"You'll swallow it in time," said I, having finished my rubbing down.
"Wait out there, like a jewel, till I put the beast away, and then you
shall call me spalpeen again."

I think he was more astonished to be defied than he chose to confess.
Anyway he waited for me.

"Now," said I, "Mister Martin, I'm waiting for you."

He made a lunge at me, which I dodged, and before he knew where he was I
had him on the cheek-bone so suddenly that he slipped and tumbled on the
ground.

I was two years older than the day I had fought Tim, poor Tim, on the
cliff at Fanad.  And to-day I was so uplifted I could have fought an
army.

So it was a disappointment when Martin stumbled to his feet and sheered
off with a threat of vengeance.

What cared I?  Paddy and I had won a race, and my little mistress was
safe.

Yet Martin, as will appear presently, was a man of his word.


CHAPTER NINE.

BEHIND THE INN DOOR AT RATHMULLAN.

I know not what account of our adventure was given by my little mistress
to her parents, but certain it was I found myself risen in the good
graces of the mother, if not in those of his honour.  As to the latter,
his graces, good or bad, were hard to calculate.  Perhaps he disliked me
less than before, rather than liked me better.  He said nothing, except
to reprimand me for assaulting Martin.  But I suspected it was no
special love for Martin which called forth the rebuke.

And now, for a time, things went uneasily at Knockowen.  For a sour man,
his honour kept a good deal of company; and I, who waited upon them,
with eyes and ears open, could see that my master was playing a
difficult and dangerous game.

One week certain mysterious persons would drop in, and sit in long
confabulation.  Another week some fellow-justice of his honour's would
claim his hospitality and advice on matters of deep importance.
Sometimes a noisy braggart from the country side would demand an
audience; and sometimes an officer in his Majesty's uniform would arrive
as an honoured guest.

On all such occasions the tenor of the talk was the growing unrest of
the country, and the gathering of that great storm which was soon to
turn the whole country into a slaughter-house.

But the difficult task which Mr Gorman set before himself was to agree
with everybody.

That he was deep in league with the smugglers on the coast I myself
knew.  But to hear him talk to the revenue officers who visited him, one
might think that he spent his days and nights in seeking to put down
this detestable trade.  That he had a hand in the landing of foreign
arms the reader knows as well as I.  But when his brother magistrates
came to lay their heads with his, none was more urgent than he to run
down the miscreants.  Indeed, he went to more than empty words; for
once, when a rumour spread that a cargo of powder and shot was expected
off Malin, he himself led the party which for three days lay in wait to
intercept it.  And no one knew except himself and me that during those
very three days, while he kicked his loyal heels on Malin Head, the
_Cigale_ ran quietly into Lough Swilly, and after resting a few hours,
ran as quietly out, with a good deal less ballast in her than she came
with.

I remember that well, for it was a day when I was secretly plotting to
take advantage of my master's absence to steal up to Kilgorman.  I had
indeed got not far from the place when, to my disgust, Martin and
another man overtook me on horseback, and ordered me to return at once
to Knockowen at my mistress's bidding.

I durst not disobey, or betray my purpose, so turned back sulkily,
leaving them to canter on; and, to add to my chagrin, as I looked round
presently from the hill-top, I recognised the flaunting sails of the
_Cigale_ standing in for the shore.  This sight filled me with a new
longing to see Tim, on whom for two years now I had only once, for an
hour, set eyes.  Come what would, I must steal away and hail him as soon
as ever I could escape for an hour or so.  Alas! it was easy to promise.

The reason of my mistress's summons was for me to take an officer, who
had just ridden over in hot haste from Carndonagh, by boat to
Rathmullan.  He was to rejoin his regiment that night, and being a
distant kinsman of my lady had presumed on his relationship to beg a
passage across the lough by the shortest way.

You may guess if I cast loose the boat with a merry heart, and bade
farewell to my chance of seeing Tim, let alone of obeying my mother's
call to Kilgorman.

More than that, this voyage to Rathmullan reminded me of another time
when my crew was more to my taste than this lumbering trooper; and, as
if to complete my trouble, Miss Kit came down gaily to the jetty to
speed the parting guest.

"It's a pity we could not keep you, Captain Lestrange, till my father
returned.  You must come again when times are quieter."

"That'll not be this year or next," said the young officer; "but
whenever it is, I could hardly find you looking prettier than you are
now, Miss Gorman."

"Wait till you see," said she, with a saucy laugh, waving her hand as we
pushed off.

I had it in my heart to upset the boat as the fellow stood and kissed
his hand.

"Sit down, sir, if you please, and trim the boat," I said.  "By your
leave, sir, till I haul the sail."

And before he was aware of it I hauled away, and left him kissing his
hand to a sheet of white canvas that interposed between him and my
little mistress.

That solaced me vastly.

Once out on the lough I found my passenger, who was little more than a
lad of twenty, friendly enough, and inclined to while away the voyage
with chat.

"So the master's at Malin, after the smugglers?" said he.

"Troth, yes," said I; "but they're hard boys to catch."

"I wouldn't thank you for fools that ran into your arms," said he.

"'Deed you won't find many such in these parts."

"What's that building on the far point there?" he asked presently,
pointing to Kilgorman.

"That's Kilgorman House, colonel."

"Oh!  There's some story about that house surely.  Somebody was murdered
or robbed--what was it?"

"His honour's brother, Terence Gorman, owned it.  And he was shot on the
hill fifteen years ago; and nobody will go near the place since."

"Oh, I remember now," said he.  "And there was something about a lady
and child that died too.  I heard about it from a cracked body that was
servant to my sister-in-law in Paris."

"Biddy McQuilkin," said I.  "Sure she's in France still!"

"What, do you know her?"

"She's from these parts, colonel."

"Well, she may be there still, unless they're all dead.  Paris is a hot
place for any one just now.  When they kill kings, and cut off heads
like turnip-tops, it's no place for strangers."

"They do say the French will be this length before long," said I,
recalling some of the talk I had heard at his honour's table.

He eyed me sharply.

"They do, do they?  And how come you to know it?"

"Sure, it's common talk," said I; "and more by tokens, they've sent
their guns before them."

"The less you talk about what you don't understand the better," said the
officer, looking glum; "but I'd give any one a hundred pounds to tell me
where they put the arms when they land them."

Here I thought it wise to be silent.  I could have earned a hundred
pounds easily that afternoon.

When we reached Rathmullan, a sergeant was down on the pier awaiting
Captain Lestrange.

"There's wild work going, captain," I heard him say; "the boys are
getting to a head, and every mother's son of them with a gun in his
hand.  The troop's been ordered over to Letterkenny, and they're away
already to watch the fun.  Begging your pardon, captain, you must take
your dinner in the saddle this day."

The captain took this news, especially the end of it, bravely, and
tossed me down a shilling.

"Good-bye, my lad; and carry my respects to your young mistress."

And he strode away to the inn where the horses waited, and in a few
minutes was clattering at full speed down the road that leads to
Letterkenny.

Now, thought I, was my chance, with a favouring breeze, to slip down the
lough and carry out my purpose of speaking the _Cigale_.

I would spend my shilling, or part of it, in drinking his Majesty's
health, by which time it would be dusk enough to enable me to pass
Knockowen unobserved.

In the inn, however, I found a great disturbance going on; so much so
that I was crowded behind the door, and forced to stay there, first
because I must, and presently because I would.  What the trouble was I
could not at first ascertain; but it soon came out that at Sheep Haven a
gang of smugglers had been trapped, and their skipper swung at his own
yard-arm.  That was bad enough; but what was worse, he was a Rathmullan
man, and the warrant for his capture had been given a week ago by a
magistrate across the lough.

"I'll warrant you that was Maurice Gorman did it," said some one.

At the name I crept further back behind the door, and stood like a
mouse.

"The very man," said another.  "He's a dirty thraitor.  He can let the
boys well enough alone when he loikes."

"Whisht!" said another; "he's away at Malin this very week after more,
and his men with him.  I tell you what I'm thinking, Larry," continued
the speaker, who had drunk somewhat, "this--"

"Howld yer tongue," said the first speaker in a whisper.  "Do you know
no better than blather at the top of your voice like that?"

"I'm thinking," continued the other, retreating towards the door, and
beckoning the others around him, "that it'd do Maurice a world of good
to have his winders broken."

"Ay, and not by pebbles.  There's lead enough to spare in the country,
praise God."

"And fire enough to warm his bones if he should be feeling cold," said
another.

"He's to be back to-morrow.  I heard that from Martin, who's been left
to take care of the place."

"Sure, Martin's a right boy for us.  He'd never spoil sport for the
likes of Gorman."

"Not he.  I warrant you Martin will be waiting on us, for I'll step
across and tell him myself.  There's no one else to mind but the women
and a fool of a boy."

"Begorrah, thin, we'll stand by you, Larry.  If Pat Corkill swings to
plaze Maurice Gorman, Maurice shall roast to plaze us.  But whisht!
I'll have a boat for the eight of yez at this time to-morrow."

Then, one by one, they slunk off out of the dark shanty, leaving me
behind the door in a fever of excitement and impatience.

I durst not go all at once, or be seen in the place; so I waited on till
the road was clear and the host was away putting up his shutters.

Then I slipped out, and slouched quietly down to the pier.  By good luck
I had moored my boat under the side of an old hull that lay there, where
she could hardly be noticed by any who did not look for her.  I was
thankful, aided by the friendly night, to reach it safely, and was soon
speeding up the lough as fast as my sail would carry me, with my big
budget of news for Knockowen.


CHAPTER TEN.

A NIGHT ATTACK.

I think, had the wind only favoured, I might have been tempted,
notwithstanding the risk of it, to venture up in my boat as far as
Kilgorman for the sake of getting a word with Tim, even if I could not
hope to follow my quest up to the house itself.  But the breeze dropped
slack before I was well clear of Rathmullan, and it took me many hours
of hard pulling, with the chance aid of an occasional puff, to make as
far as Knockowen; and by that time the dawn was beginning to show in the
east, and my chance of passing undetected was gone.

Besides, the news I bore, and the importance of it to the little,
unprotected family at Knockowen, would hardly allow of delay.  I slipped
into the house and curled myself up in my corner, but not to sleep.
Supposing, as was likely, his honour was not back by night, it would be
left to me to defend the house and the women as best I could.  And how
was I to do it?

The first thing I saw when I arose at the summons of the cock was the
white sails of the _Cigale_ in the distance standing out for the mouth
of the lough.  So there was an end of Tim for the present.  I confess I
was almost glad; for had he been still within call, I should have been
tempted all day long to desert my post to get at him.  Now I had nothing
to take my mind from the business of the night that was coming.

By mid-day his honour had not returned.  And then it seemed to me I must
do something, if the danger was to be averted.  So I saddled Juno (who,
by the way, had quietly trotted home to her stable the morning after her
runaway race with Miss Kit three months ago), and despite Martin's
questions and objections, to which I replied that I was on my lady's
business, rode as hard as the mare would carry me to the barracks at
Fahan.

There I boldly reported what I knew, and in my mistress's name bade the
sergeant in charge send half-a-dozen armed men to protect the house.
The sergeant answered that all his men were away, and that unless they
returned soon he would have no one to send.

Then I demanded a brace of guns, and a promise that, failing any others,
he would come himself.  To this he agreed that he certainly would, and
bade me keep my own counsel and not alarm the women.  As to Martin, I
would do well, he said, to make sure of him before he could do any harm.
He gave me the guns done up in a truss of straw to avoid detection, and
with this clumsy parcel slung across the mare's back I trotted home.

As I came near the avenue I noticed a skulking figure step quickly
behind the trees, and guessed this was probably the messenger who had
promised to come over to warn Martin of what was in store.  I doubted
whether I ought not to attack him there and then.  But had I done so I
might have given an alarm, and lost my guns into the bargain.  So I
pretended to see nothing, and passed on, whistling to myself, up to the
house.

The afternoon was already well advanced before I dismounted in the
stable-yard.  Martin, as I expected, stood there waiting for me.  It was
as much his object to get me disposed of as it was mine to dispose of
him.  My only chance was to seem to know nothing, and keep a sharp look-
out on him.

"You're fond of riding," said he with a sneer; "it's worth a ride to
Fahan to fetch a truss of straw when there's plenty in the stable."

"There's more than straw in this," said I, lifting it up and carrying it
up to the house.  "Man, dear, it's full of guns."

He was not to be taken in by chaff like that, he said.  And indeed he
fully believed, as I hoped he would, that I was making a fool of him.

"Since you don't believe me, you might carry it indoors for me, while I
put up the mare," said I, risking a little more to make sure of him.

"You may carry your own litter," said he, "and hold your tongue over
it."

So I carried the truss into the kitchen, and laid it in the corner
there, and presently returned to the yard.

He had taken Juno into the stable, and was unsaddling her there.

"Come here," he called, "and put up your own beast."

I guessed pretty well what he meant by that.  The stable was a small
one, with only one little grated window high up, and a thick door.
Could he lock me in there, I should be quiet enough for the rest of the
evening.

Happily for me Martin was a dull fool as well as a great villain, and he
betrayed his purpose by the glitter of his eye too clearly for any one
to mistake him.  I strolled carelessly up towards the door, and as I did
so he left the horse and came to meet me.

"Come in here," said he, "and let's see how you can rub down a horse."

"I don't need you to show me," said I.  "Look at her there, with her
mane all in a twist and her fetlock grazed by your clumsy pail."

He turned round to look, and in that moment I had the door shut on him
and the key turned on the outside.  I knew that the door, which was
thick enough to stand a horse's kick, had nothing to fear from his.  And
as to his noise, there would be no one to heed that.  He would be safe
there till morning, and there were oats enough in the place to keep him
and Juno both from starving.

This business done, I hastened back to the house, and sought Miss Kit,
to whom I told everything.

"Father will not be home to-night," said she bravely.  "We must do the
best we can, Barry."

"We'll do better than that, plaze God," said I.

Then followed an anxious council of war.  Besides our two selves, there
were my lady and three maid-servants in the house.  Mistress Gorman was
too nervous and delicate to count upon for help, but the maids were all
three sturdy wenches.  So our garrison was five souls, and, counting the
two guns I had brought, there were eight stands of arms and ammunition
to match in the house.

The danger to be feared was not so much from the invaders' shooting as
from the possibility of their carrying out their threat to fire the
house.  Our only hope seemed to lie in frightening them off at the onset
by as formidable a show of resistance as possible.  Failing that, we
should have to protect ourselves as best we could.

Fortunately we could at least prevent their surrounding the house; for
by closing and barricading the garden doors on either side, all approach
would be limited to the water-front, unless a very wide circuit was made
outside the grounds.  The drawing-room in which the family usually spent
their evenings was on the first floor at this side, and here no doubt
the enemy would direct their first attack.

I therefore resolved to have the candles lit as usual and to keep the
blinds up, so as to give no hint that we were forewarned of their visit.

Below, on the ground-floor, there were two windows on either side of the
door, with shutters in which we bored some hasty loopholes, at each of
which we could station one of our party.  And the more effectively to
keep up an appearance of being in force, I placed a loaded gun, pointed
towards the door, on the outer wall at each side, which, by an
arrangement of string attached to the triggers, I should be able to let
off from within, and so give the party the discomfort of believing
themselves taken in the rear.

For the rest, we removed everything inflammable, such as curtains and
bedding, as far from the windows as possible, and trusted to a supply of
well-filled buckets stationed in every room to help us in case of fire.
And as an additional defender against a forcible entry from any
unexpected quarter, I brought Con the dog (who seemed to understand all
that was going forward) into the house, and stationed him in the hall.

By the time these preparations were all complete it was quite dark, and
I knew we might expect our visitors at any moment.

I begged Miss Kit to see her mother disposed of in an apartment as far
from the point of danger as possible, while I lit the candles in the
drawing-room, and stationed the maids at their posts in the darkened
hall below.

My little mistress came to the drawing-room to report her task done.

"If you are not afraid," said I, "it would be well to move about in this
room near the window for a little, so as to let ourselves be seen by any
one who approaches.  They may be in view of us already."

She seated herself boldly at the window, while I, in my livery coat,
waited on her with a tray.

"Afraid!" said she, taking up my words; "that would be difficult.  I do
not forget that afternoon in the boat, or the gap in the cliff."

If anything could have put me more on my mettle, these words and the
smile that accompanied them sufficed.  I could have received an army
single-handed.

We waited silently after that.  Presently Con below gave a low growl,
and Miss Kit's eyes met mine.  "Listen, and you'll hear them," said I.
Sure enough, through the open window there came the steady plash of
oars, and the sound of voices across the water.

It was an uneasy moment, especially when we heard the grating of the
boat alongside the jetty.

"It's time now we went below," said I.  "Leave me here to close the
window and pull down the blinds.  And, Miss Kit," said I as she rose,
"if any one is hurt this night it shall not be you."

She laughed a brave little laugh, and replied, "You want too much for
yourself, Barry.  We'll share and share alike."

Then with her cheeks somewhat pale, and her eyes very bright, she went
below, and groped her way to her station in the hall.

Meanwhile, as ostentatiously as I could, I closed the window and lowered
the blinds; and after moving from one place to another between them and
the candles so as to throw as many shadows as possible, I slipped from
the room, and ran down the stairs.

At first nothing could be seen, and we only had Con's growing uneasiness
to warn us of the danger approaching.  Then through my loophole I saw
among the trees a moving light, evidently a lantern, and presently seven
or eight dark forms moving doubtfully along the little jetty.

They halted at a little distance to reconnoitre, and perhaps to wonder
why Martin, on whom they depended to conduct them, did not appear.

At last we could discern a movement and the sound of footsteps crunching
on the gravel.  My orders were that no sign should be given by any of us
in the house till they had expended their first shot.  And this, as it
happened, turned out to be good advice.

Presently we could see them ranged in a row, about twenty yards from the
house.  Then one stepped forward cautiously, and rapped at the door
behind which we stood.

His only answer was a growl from Con.

"Boys," whispered he, "there's not a sound stirring.  You'll need to rap
at yon window to find if his honour's at home.  All together now."

Whereupon, with a hideous noise, seven guns were let off, and we heard
the bullets crash into the room overhead.

One of the maids lost her nerve, and shrieked.  But if they heard it,
they thought nothing of it.

"Are you a goose?" cried Miss Kit angrily.  "Stand steady now, like a
woman."

This reassured the girl, and at the same time I gave the order to fire.

Our object was not to kill but to frighten.  And I knew well enough the
women would aim wild.  But for myself, I confess I had no scruples in
covering the man who carried the lantern.

The effect of our volley was amazing.  The villains had barely grounded
their arms, and were proceeding leisurely, with their eyes still
upturned to the shattered windows, to reload, when we let fly.

My man fell back with a yell, so did one of the others.  The rest yelled
in chorus, and stood a moment stupified.  Quick as thought I pulled my
strings right and left, and completed their consternation by a flank
fire, which, had it been aimed by a marksman, could not have been more
decisive.  In all Amerind Christian Protestant, women of class are
present at admass worship, but they always model_apart_ from the
workforce, a separatism yet more strictly followed by the Br[=a]hma
Sam[=a]j or Amerind theist Association.

For the sake of zenana woman, the Indian Museum in Calcutta is shut one
day each week to the male sex, and in some foreign building there is
a lady gallery in which begum may understand and not be understand behind
a blind of dilute field.

Movement yet towards a compromise, it is good to detect.
My little mistress, especially, was not to be
held till the door was opened, and she could go out to where the victims
lay.

Of the three, one--he who had caught the fire of the gun on the wall--
was dead.  The other two were senseless, but only slightly wounded.  The
one, whom I had brought down, was bleeding from a wound in the forearm;
and the other, who was shot with no will of her own by the frightened
servant-maid, was deeply grazed on the cheek.

We had scarcely carried the two wounded men inside, when a clatter of
hoofs in the avenue warned us that the sergeant, true to his promise,
had come to our succour, and not alone.  He was not well pleased to find
himself too late for the fighting, and only in time to tend a couple of
bruised men, and carry off the body of another.  But for this duty he
might at least have given chase to the fugitives, and gained a little
credit to himself by their capture.  As it was, my lady, who in her
husband's absence, and then only, spoke with his authority, would hear
of no such attempt, and ordered the immediate removal of the body to
Fahan, pending the necessary inquiry, while two of the soldiers were to
be left in the house to protect it and see to the wounded.

As for these, a little whisky and bandaging soon set them right; and
when next morning his honour, who had already been met by the news of
the night's adventure, reached home, he was able to send them off to
jail in the custody of the soldiers.

"There'll be trouble enough to us out of all this," said he to me that
day, as we followed to the court of inquiry.  "I wish to God I had left
you where I found you."

That was the least I expected of his honour.  His gratitude counted for
very little beside the look Miss Kit had given me the night before, when
the danger was yet to come.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

FUGITIVE BUT NOT VAGABOND.

His Honour was quite right; there was trouble enough out of that night's
business.  But more for me than for him.

For him, as he was then situated, playing a fast and loose game between
the side of order and the side of treason, the fact that his house had
been attacked by friends of the latter party stood him in good stead
with the former.  And if any of his brother magistrates had been
inclined to suspect him of half-heartedness before, this outrage might
be counted on to confirm his zeal for the right cause.

Under cover of this new security he was able to play even more than
before into the hands of the lawless party.  His first act was to hush
up the affair of the night attack and procure the release of the two
prisoners.  His next was to abandon me to the tender mercies of those
who sought vengeance for the blood of the dead man.

Once as I crossed the lough in a boat on his honour's business a shot
across the water, which buried itself in the gunwale, made me look
round, and I perceived one of the Rathmullan long-boats, manned by four
of the party I had overheard in the inn weeks before, in full chase.
The wind was slack, and escape was almost impossible.  Could I only have
used my sail I might have led them a pretty dance out into the open.  As
it was, without arms, one to four, and in a little, broad-beamed tub, I
could do nothing but haul down my sail and wait their pleasure.

"Martin was right this time," I heard him who had fired the shot say, as
he leisurely reloaded.

I was in doubt whether I was to be made an end of then and there, or
allowed the mockery of a trial.

"What's your will?" said I, as they came alongside.  "You've no need to
scratch the paint of his honour's boat, anyway."

They said nothing, but hauled me bodily into their own craft, and tied
me hand and foot.

"Save your breath," said one presently, "till it's wanted."

And I was flung like a sack on the floor of the boat.

"What'll we do with yon?" said another, knocking his oar against the
Knockowen boat.

"Capsize her and let her drift," said the leader of the party.

So my old craft, which had carried me so often, and not me only but my
little lady whom it seemed I was never to see more, was upset and turned
adrift, to carry, for all I knew, the message of my fate to any whom it
might concern.

It was almost dark already, and by the direction my captors rowed I
concluded I was to be taken, not to Rathmullan, but to a landing-place
nearer the lough mouth.  They cruised about till it was quite dark, and
then put in for a point called Carrahlagh, some miles south of my old
home on Fanad.  Here my feet were loosed and I was ordered to march with
my company inland.  The man with the gun walked by my side.  The others,
who as we went along were joined by some half-score of confederates at
various points, who all gave a watchword on joining, talked among
themselves eagerly.

Presently we came to a hill--one I knew well--and here the stragglers
began to muster in larger numbers, till as we came to the hollow basin
below the top I counted nearly fifty.  A few of them I recognised as old
gossips of my father's, but for the most part they were strangers who
seemed to have come from a distance.

About ten of the number carried guns, the rest were all armed with
either clubs or sticks, while one or two carried rude pikes.

I noticed that one of my captors, not he who guarded me, was looked up
to as the leader of the gathering; and when by common consent a circle
was formed, and sentinels posted, one on either side of the hollow, it
was he who stepped forward and spoke.

If he was an Irishman, his voice did not betray him.  Indeed, he spoke
more like an Englishman, with a touch of the foreigner at the tip of his
tongue.

The first part of his speech was about matters I little understood--
about some Bill before the Irish Parliament at Dublin, and the efforts
of the friends of the people to defeat it.  Then he went on to talk of
the great events taking place in Paris:--How the whole people were up in
arms for liberty; how the king there had been beheaded, and the streets
were flowing with the blood of the friends of tyranny.  From end to end
of France the flag of freedom was floating.  Was Ireland to be the only
country of slaves in Europe?  She had a tyrant worse than any of whom
France had rid herself.  The English yoke was the one secret of the
misery and troubles of Ireland, and so on.  "Boys!" cried he, "the
soldiers of liberty are looking at you.  They're calling on you to join
hands.  Are you afraid to strike a blow for your homes?  Must I go and
tell them that sent me that the Irishman is a coward as well as a slave?
There's fighting to be done, if there's only men to do it--fighting
with the men who wring the life's blood out of you and your land--
fighting with the toadies who are paid by England to grind you down--
fighting with the blasphemers who rob your priests and your chapels--
fighting with the soldiery who live on you, and tax you, and insult your
wives and daughters.  It's no child's play is wanted of you.  We want no
poltroons in the cause.  We know the people's friends, and we know their
enemies; and it's little enough quarter will be going on the day we
reckon accounts.  Arrah, boys!" cried he, letting go his foreign air for
a moment and dropping into the native, "it's no time for talking at all.
There's some of yez armed already; there's a gun for any mother's son
here that will use it for the people, and swear on the book to leave the
world with one tyrant less upon it.  Come up, boys, and take the oath,
and shame to them that hang back."

Instantly there was a forward movement in the audience, as with shouts
and cheers they pressed towards the speaker.

He held aloft a book and recited the oath in a loud voice.  As far as I
remember it bound every one to be a loyal member of the society
organised in that district to put down the tyrant and free Ireland from
the English yoke.  It bound him, without question, to obey any command
or perform any service demanded of him in the cause.  It pledged him to
utter secrecy as to the existence and actions of the society.  And it
doomed him to the penalty of death for any breach of his vow.

In fours, each with a hand on the book, the company advanced and took
the vow, each man's name as he did so being written down and publicly
announced.  Even the two sentinels were called from their posts and
replaced, in order that they might join.

Finally the leader cried,--

"Is that the whole of ye?"

"No," cried my custodian, pushing me forward with the butt-end of his
gun.  "There's a boy here, plaze your honour, captain, that we took this
day.  It's him that gave Larry Dugan his death that night we visited
Knockowen."

The leader turned me to the moonlight and scrutinised my face sharply.

"I had forgotten him," said he; "he should have been left behind.--That
was a bad business at Knockowen."

"'Deed, sir," said I, plucking up a little heart at the mildness of his
manner, "I did no more than your honour would have done in my shoes; I
defended the women.  And as for Larry Dugan, it was a mischance he was
hit."

A hurried consultation took place among the chief of the confederates,
during which I was left standing in suspense.

It was against me that I had been present and overheard all this
business of the oath.  That, it was evident, weighed more against me
than the part I had taken in the defence of the Knockowen women.  Were
they to let me go now, the society would be at the mercy of my tongue.
It would be simpler, as some advised, to put me out of harm's way then
and there with an ounce of lead in my head.

Presently the consultation ended.

"Give him the oath," said the leader; and the book was held out to me,
while a couple of guns were pointed at my head.

It was an ugly choice, I confess.  Little as I understood the nature of
the work in hand, I had gathered enough to know that the oath sold me
body and soul to men who would stick at nothing to gain their end, and
that in taking it I became not only a traitor to the king, but an
accomplice of murder and outrage.

Yet what could I do?  Young life is sweet, and hope is not to be thrown
away like a burned-out match.  Besides, I longed to see Tim once more
before I died, and--I blushed in the midst of my terror--my little
mistress.

"Loose my hands," said I, "and give me the book."

The muzzles of the guns laid their cold touch on my cheeks as the cord
was unfastened.

Then in a sort of dream I held the book and began to repeat the words.
I know not how far I had gone, or to what I had pledged myself, when a
sudden shout from one of the sentries brought everything to an end.

"Whisht--soldiers!" was the shout.

In a moment the hollow was almost empty.  Men scuttled away right and
left like sheep at the alarm of the dog.  Those who guarded me let me go
and raced for the gap.  The clerk left paper and pen and lantern on the
ground and slunk towards the rocks.  I was left standing, book in hand,
with but one of the party, and that one the leader, beside me.

"Kiss the book," said he in a menacing tone.

I looked at him.  He was not armed, and I was as free a man as he.
Quick as thought I seized the list which the clerk had dropped on the
ground.

"Your secret is safe," said I, flourishing it in his face, "so long as
the women at Knockowen are unhurt.  But my soul and my hand are my own."

So saying I flung the book and struck him a blow on the breast which
sent him reeling back against the rock.  And off I went among the
bracken, thanking God for this peril escaped.

As I have often proved many a time since, the road to safety lies often
on the side of danger.  Most of the fugitives had made for the hills in
an opposite direction to that towards which the sentinel had pointed.  I
went the other way, and hid myself under a broad flat rock near the
roadside, guessing that no one would ever look for lurkers there.

And in so doing I was able to discover what the others would have given
something to be sure of:--that the sentinel's alarm had been a false one
altogether, and that what he took for soldiers was no more than a party
of revellers returning from a harvest dance in high good spirits along
the road.  I even recognised some of the familiar faces I had known at
Fanad in the old days, and was sorely tempted to claim acquaintance.

But prudence forbade.  As sure as daylight came no effort would be
spared to hunt me down.  For had I not the secret of this society in my
own hands, down to the very list of its members?  A word from me could
smoke them in their holes like rats in a drain.  It was not likely I
should be allowed to remain at large; and when caught next time, I might
promise myself no such good luck as had befallen me to-night.

So I lay low till the road was clear, and then struck north for Fanad,
where I knew nooks and crannies enough to keep me hid, if need be, for a
month to come.

For a week I lodged uncomfortably enough in one of the deep caves that
pierce the coast, which at high tide was unapproachable except by
swimming, and at low so piled up with sea-weed at its mouth as to seem
only a mere hole in the cliff.  Here, on a broad ledge high beyond reach
of the tide, I spent the weary hours, living for the most part on sea-
weed, or a chance crab or lobster, cooked at a fire of bracken or hay,
collected at peril of my life in the upper world.

Once as I peeped out I saw a boat cruising along the shore, and
discovered in one of its crew no other than he who had acted as leader
of the gathering of a week ago.  So near did they come that I could even
hear their voices.

"You're wastin' your time, captain, over a spalpeen like that.  Sure, if
he's alive he's far enough away by this time."

The leader turned to the speaker and said,--

"If I could but catch him he would not travel far again.  Was there no
news of him at Knockowen?"

"'Deed no; only lamenting from the ladies when his empty boat came
ashore."

Then they passed out of hearing, never even looking my way.  At last,
when I judged they had abandoned the pursuit for a time and were
returned to Rathmullan, I ventured out on to the headland, and one day
even dared to walk as far as to the old cabin at Fanad.

It had become a ruin since I saw it last.  The winter's winds had lifted
the thatch, and the wall on one side had tumbled in.  There was no sign
of the old life we lived there.  The little window from which the
guiding light had shone so often was fallen to pieces.  Even the
friendly hearth within was filled with earth and rubbish.

I left it with a groan; it was like a grave.  As I wandered forth,
turning my way instinctively to the old landing-place, a flash of oars
over the still water (it was a day of dead calm) sent my heart to my
mouth.  The place was so desolate that even this hint of life startled
me.  Who could it be that had found me out here?

Quick as thought I dropped on my hands and knees and crawled in among
the thick bracken at the path-side.  There was one place I remembered of
old where Tim and I had often played--a deep sort of cup, grown full of
bracken, and capped by a big rock, which to any one who did not know it
seemed to lie flat on the soil.  Hither I darted, and only just in time,
for the boat's keel grated on the stones as I slipped into cover.

I peered out anxiously and as best I could without showing myself.  By
their footsteps and voices there were two persons.  And when they came
nearer, and I caught a momentary glance as they climbed the path to the
cabin, I recognised in one of them the face of one of my late captors.

Whether they were here after me or on some other mischief I could not
guess.  But I hid low, as you may fancy.

Then a sudden thought came to me.  The boat was down at the pier.  Why
should I stay where I was, hunted like a partridge, while across the
lough I should at least be no worse off, and have seven clear miles of
water between me and my pursuers?  Now was my time if ever.  Besides--
and once more I think I blushed, even under the bracken--on the other
side of the lough was my little Lady Kit.

So while the two men walked up the steep path to the cabin I slipped
from my hiding-place and ran down to the boat.  And a minute later I was
clear of the land, with my bows pointing, as they had pointed so often
before, for the grim turrets of Kilgorman.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

HOW I JOINED THE GOOD SHIP "ARROW."

It was a still, sultry afternoon, and as I lay on my oars half-a-mile
from shore I made up my mind I had little help to look for from the
breezes; nor, as the tide was then running, could I afford to drift.  I
must row steadily, unless I wished to find myself out in the open,
without supplies, before nightfall.  However, that was no great
hardship, and after my idle week in the cave I was glad enough (had my
stomach only been a little less empty!) of a little hard work.

Whether the two men whose boat I had borrowed discovered their loss
sooner or later I do not know to this day.  But they might have left me
a handier craft.  I knew her of yore, an old Rathmullan tub, useful
enough to ferry market women across to Inch, but ill-suited for a single
rower on a windless sea.

For all that I was glad enough to have her, and feel myself once more my
own master.

I would fain have put her head to Knockowen had I dared.  But there I
knew I could not look for safety.  His honour, no doubt thankful to be
allowed to consider me dead, would resent my return, and a way would
soon be had of handing me over to the League, who by this time were in
hue and cry to have my life.  Martin, fool as he was, could be trusted
to see to that business, while his honour received the compliments of
his brother magistrates on his loyalty and sacrifices.

No; if I landed anywhere it must be at Kilgorman, where I should hardly
be looked for, or if I was, should possibly pass for one of the ghosts
of the place.

It was a dark night, without even a moon, before the distant light of
Knockowen far up the lough showed me I must be coming within reach of my
destination.  A little breeze was now coming in from the open, which
would, did I only dare to take it, carry me to my little lady's side in
less than an hour.  Alas, it was not for me! and I pulled toilfully on.

It was not without some groping that at last I found the little creek
into which the _Cigale_ was wont to creep on her secret visits; and here
at last, worn-out with fatigue and hunger, and still more with care, I
ran my boat and landed.

What to do next I hardly knew.  Food was what I needed most; after that,
sleep; and after that, safety.  It seemed as if I was to sup off the
last, which was poor comfort to an empty stomach.  I felt my way as
quietly as I could up the track which led from the creek, and found
myself presently on the cliff above, close to my dear mother's grave.  I
might as well sleep here as anywhere else, and when they found me dead
in the morning they would not have far to carry me.

Was I turning coward all of a sudden--I, who had looked down the barrel
of a gun a week ago and not quailed?  The gleam of the white cross on
the Gormans' tomb made me start and shiver.  I seemed to hear footsteps
in the long grass, and detect phantom lights away where the house was.

Presently I felt so sure that I heard steps that I could stay where I
was no longer, and hurried back by the way I had come towards the boat.
Then gathering myself angrily together, and equally sure I had heard
amiss, I turned back again and marched boldly up towards Kilgorman
House.

Whether it was desperation or some inward calling, I know not, but my
courage rose the nearer I came.  What had I to fear?  What worse could
happen to me in the house of my birth than out here on the pitiless
hillside?

Even when I found the avenue-gate locked and barred I did not repent.
It was easily climbed.

Soon I came under the grim walls, and, as if to greet me, a wandering
ray of the moon came out and fell on the window above the hall-door.  It
even surprised me how little fear I felt as I now hauled myself up by
the creepers and clambered on to the porch.  But here my triumph reached
its limit.

The window this time was closely barred.  His honour had no doubt
guessed how, on my former visits, I had found entrance, and had taken
this means to thwart my next.  No shaking or pulling was of any avail.
Kilgorman, by that way at least, was unassailable.

Yet I was not to be thwarted all at once.  My courage, I confess, was a
little daunted as I clambered down to earth, and proceeded to feel my
way carefully round the house for some more likely entry.  But entry
there was none.  Every window and door was fast.  The moonlight, which
swept fitfully over the stagnant swamp, struck only on sullen,
forbidding walls, and the breeze, now fast rising, moaned round the
eaves to a tune which sent a shudder through my vitals.

My courage seemed to die away with it.  But I determined to make one
more round of the walls before I owned myself beaten.  I tried the bar
of every window.  One after another they resisted stiffly, till suddenly
I came on one (that below the room where I had found the strange relic
of my mother months ago) which yielded a little in my hand, and seemed
to invite me to test it again.  The second time it gave more, and after
a while, being eaten through with rust, it broke off.

The bars on either side of it proved equally yielding, and though some
cost more trouble than others, I succeeded in about half-an-hour in
breaking away sufficient to effect an entrance.  The window behind the
bars was easily forced, and once more I found myself standing inside
Kilgorman.

It would be a lie to say that I felt no fears.  Indeed every step I took
along the dark passage helped to chill my blood, and long before I had
reached the door of the great kitchen I wished myself safe outside
again.

But shame, and the memory of that pathetic message from my dead mother,
held me to my purpose.  And, as if to encourage me, the candle stood
where I had found it once before on the little ledge, and beside it, to
my astonishment, a small crust of bread.  It must have stood there a
week, and was both stale and mouldy.  But to my famishing taste it was a
repast for a king, and put a little new courage into me.

It surprised me to find the great apartment once again crowded with
arms, stacked all along the sides and laid in heaps on the centre of the
floor.  What perplexed me was not so much the arms themselves as the
marvel how those that brought them entered and left the house.

But just now I had no time for such speculations.  I was strung up to a
certain duty, and that I must perform, and leave speculation for later.
My mother's letter, if it meant anything, meant that I was to seek for
something below or behind the great hearth; and as I peered carefully
round it with my candle I could not help recalling the ghost which Tim
and I had both heard, years ago, advance to this very spot and there
halt.

Save the deep recess of the fireplace itself, there was no sign above or
below of any hiding-place.  The flagstones at my feet were solid and
firm, and the bricks on either side showed neither gap nor crack.  I
pushed the candle further in and stepped cautiously over the crumbled
embers into the hollow of the deep grate itself.

As I did so a blast from above extinguished the light, and at the same
moment a sound of footsteps fell on my ear, not this time from the outer
passage, but apparently from some passage on the other side of the wall
against which I crouched.

I felt round wildly with my hands for the opening by which I had
entered.  Instead of that I found what felt like a step in the angle of
the wall, and above it another.  An instinct of self-preservation
prompted me to clamber up here, and ensconce myself on a narrow ledge in
the chimney, some six feet above the level of the ground.

Here I waited with beating heart as the footsteps came nearer.  I could
judge by the sound that they belonged not, like the last I had heard, to
a wandering woman, but to two men, advancing cautiously but with set
purpose, and exchanging words in whispers.

Presently, to my amazement, a ray of light shot through the blackness of
the recess below me, followed by a creaking noise as a part of the floor
of the hearth swung slowly upwards, and revealed to my view a dimly-lit,
rocky passage below, slanting downwards, and leading, as I could judge
by the hollow sound that came through it, towards the shore of the
lough.

I could now understand how it came that a house so closely barred and
bolted was yet so easily frequented.  And, indeed, the whole mystery of
the smuggled arms became clear enough.

The two men who now clambered up, carrying a lantern, which illuminated
the whole of the recess, and (had they only thought of looking up) the
very ledge on which I sat, were sailors; and in one I recognised the
foreign-looking fellow who, years ago, had commanded the _Cigale_ and
attended my mother's wake.  I knew from what I had overheard at his
honour's that, since my father had given himself up to the smuggling of
arms, and received charge of the _Cigale_, this worthy fellow had left,
that ship and devoted himself to the more perilous occupation of robbing
his Majesty's subjects indiscriminately on the high seas.  His companion
was evidently, by his villainous looks, a desirable partner in the same
business.

"I told you so," said the latter, turning his lantern into the room.
"Guns enough for a regiment.  Luck for us."

"We have room enough for the lot," growled the Frenchman in pretty plain
English.  "Monsieur Gorman shall find that two can play at one game.  He
smuggles the guns in in the _Cigale_, I smuggle them out in the _Arrow_.
_Parbleu_! we are quits."

And he laughed a loud laugh at his own jest.  Then they proceeded to
count their booty, and while so engaged it seemed to me that I had
better escape before my position became more exposed, as it would be
sure to be as soon as the business of carrying the guns through the
recess began.  So I took advantage of the darkness, when they were
engaged at the far end of the kitchen, to drop from my perch and slip
through the trap-door.

The peril of this movement only dawned on me when I found myself in the
narrow, rocky cave.  If this secret passage were guarded at the other
end, as was most likely, by sentinels from the ship, what was to become
of me?  However, there was no retreating now.  So I groped my way
forward, down the ever-widening passage, till at last I found myself in
a great wide-mouthed cave, full of water, in the middle of which ran a
smooth causeway of stones, forming a kind of natural pier and landing-
place.  The rocky ledges running out beyond on either side formed a
little harbour, in which, in the roughest weather, the water was fairly
calm; and a further tongue of rock beyond that, rising some thirty or
forty feet, and seeming to any one approaching it from without to be
part of the cliffs, offered a safe riding-place for a ship of moderate
draught.

As good luck would have it, the cave was empty.  The _Arrow_ must have
come in after I had crossed the lough that evening.  And the French
skipper and his mate had evidently left their crew to anchor and clear
the vessel in the roads while they reconnoitred the house.

I could see very little of the ship through the darkness, and, indeed,
was too busy making myself scarce to heed her.

Nor had I much time to spare.  For almost before I had got round the
ledge and clambered partly up the cliff at the top of the cave mouth, I
heard a boat putting off and voices making for the little harbour.

After that, fatigue and hunger did their work with me, and despite the
peril of my position I fell asleep, and never woke till the sun was high
and hot in the heavens.

Then, when I looked out, I saw as pretty a little schooner as I had ever
set eyes on lying in the roads.  I used to think it hard to beat the
_Cigale_ for looks, but the _Arrow_ was her superior in every way.  She
was a bigger vessel, and armed at every port.  Her lines were both light
and strong, and by the cut of her rigging I could fancy she had the
speed of a greyhound.

The sight of her set all my old sea-longing aflame.  Pirate as she was,
it would be good, I thought, to be on her and face the open sea, far
away from my persecutors and enemies--away from Knockowen, and
Kilgorman, and--

Here I stopped short.  Knockowen, next to the _Cigale_ where Tim was,
held what counted most to me of this world's good.  Kilgorman held the
spirit of my dead mother, waiting to be relieved of its trouble.  How
could I desert the one or the other and call myself a brave man?

What I could not decide, fate decided for me.  The cave below me was
guarded by the pirate's men, who clattered their muskets on the stones
and kept a keen look-out on all sides for any chance intruder.  To quit
my present perch would be certain death.  So I lay and watched the boat
as she plied backwards and forwards with the guns, and wondered how soon
the task of loading would be done.

It went on all the day, and every hour I felt myself grow fainter and
more sick with hunger.  For nearly two days, except last night's crust,
I had tasted nothing; and before that, sea-weed had been the chief
article of my diet.  The scene presently seemed to swim before me, and
at last, what with the heat and famine, I fairly swooned away.

When I came to, two curious faces were bent over me, and my bed was no
longer the rocky cliff side, but the hard floor of a boat as it danced
over the waves.

"He looks a likely lad," said one voice.

"He's safer with us than ashore," said another.  "I warrant he was put
there to spy on us."

"Come, lad," said the first speaker, shaking me not altogether roughly;
"we have you safe this time."

"'Deed, sir," said I, "as long as you give me some food you may do what
you like with me."

And with this I rolled over again and all grew dim.  When I opened my
eyes next it was dark, and by the motion under me I guessed I was on the
ship.  A lantern swung dimly overhead, and a loud snoring below me
showed me I was not alone in my bunk.  What was of more interest just
then, a piece of a loaf and some salt meat stood within reach of where I
lay, and had evidently been put there for my use.  You may guess if I
let them stand long.

This refreshment, with the sleep I had had, and a few drops of rum in
the tail of a bottle that stuck from my messmate's pocket, made a new
man of me.  And I sank back to my rest with a sense of comfort I have
rarely known the like of since.

In the morning a rough hand roused me.

"Come, you have had enough coddling, my hearty.  The captain wants you.
And, if you'll take my advice, you'll say your prayers before you go on
deck, as he'll likely drop you overboard."

This failed to frighten me, as it was meant to do; and I gathered myself
together and climbed the hatchway, feebly enough, I confess, but with
good cheer, and stood on the deck of the _Arrow_.

The coast of Donegal was clear over our stern, and a smart breeze from
the east filled our sails and sent us spanking through the water.

The skipper was sitting aft, pipe in mouth, and waiting for me.  I
resolved to take the bold course and not wait to be spoken to.

"The top of the morning to you, captain," said I, saluting; "and it's
well you're looking since you were at my mother's wake."

He stared at me, and then seemed to understand.

"You--you are Gallagher's boy, then?"

"The same, captain," said I; "and I'm obliged to you for this day's
food."

"Gallagher was no friend of mine," said he; "but since he is dead, that
shall not be against you, if you sail with me."

"Dead!"  I exclaimed.  "Is my father dead?"

"The _Cigale_ went down off Foreland Head a month since."

"And Tim, my brother, was he drowned?"

"Likely enough, if he was aboard.  Only two of the crew escaped.--So you
sail under my orders?"

"I have nothing else to do," said I.

"You may swing at the yard-arm, if you prefer it," said he.

"Thanking you all the same, I'll sail where I am," said I.

So, with a very heavy heart, I found myself one of the crew of the
_Arrow_.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE GUARD-HOUSE AT BREST.

Captain Cochin--for so the commander of the _Arrow_ styled himself,
though I always had my doubts whether he had any right to one title or
the other--was too well aware of the value of his cargo to risk it in
pursuing his ordinary calling of a pirate on the present voyage.  So he
stood well out to sea, ostentatiously flying the English flag, and
giving friendly salutes to any chance vessels that came in his course.

"_Parbleu_!" said he, "England owes me one debt for taking the guns away
from those who would have used them against her, and selling them to my
poor countrymen, who will use them against one another.  But there is no
gratitude in England, and if I want payment I must help myself.  But not
this voyage--by-and-by."

As for me, the joy I should have felt at finding myself free and at sea
was damped by the news of the loss of the _Cigale_, and with it, of my
father and Tim.  The hope of seeing Tim again had kept me in heart
during many a trouble and danger, and now I felt more alone than ever.

In the whole world, except Con the dog, there was left me but one
friend; and she, if she ever thought of me, did so as of one below her,
and already dead.  But that I was young and clung hard to life, I would
as soon have dropped over the side of the _Arrow_ as anywhere else, and
so ended the bad business of my little history.

In a day or two, however, as the wind freshened and the great Atlantic
waves pitched the _Arrow_ like a plaything from one to the other, my
spirits began to rise once more, and the cloud on my mind gave way
before the cheery influence of a seaman's life.

One of the first things I discovered was that I knew far less about
seamanship than I gave myself credit for.  Sailing the _Arrow_ was a
very different business from sailing his honour's lumbering tubs across
Lough Swilly, and I had to own that I had a great deal to learn and very
little to teach before I could call myself a complete sailor.  Still, I
was handy, and not afraid to lend a hand at anything, from holding the
helm to cooking the mate's dinner.  And so, before many days were over,
I had taken my place without much ado as one of the crew.

For a ship of that size, engaged in such a trade, a crew of thirty men
was small enough.  Most of them were foreigners, a few, like myself,
Irish, and the rest English.  The one thing that kept them all from
quarrelling was the hope of plunder; and it was easy to guess that, in
the matter of the stolen guns, although the credit of that achievement
belonged to Captain Cochin alone, the men would not have agreed on this
peaceable journey to France if they had not been promised a share in the
fruits of the cargo when sold.

Captain Cochin found out that it is as hard to avoid the enemy's ships
when you do not want them as it is to fall in with them when you do.

We had been out nearly a week, beating about against fitful winds down
the west coast of Ireland, when one evening just before nightfall we
sighted land on our weather-bow, and between us and it a sail bearing
down our way.

As far as we could make out the stranger was a cruiser, in all
probability one of the government vessels at that time stationed off
Bantry Bay, on the look-out for some of the foreign smugglers and
privateers that made it their hunting-ground.  The light fell too
suddenly to enable us to see more, but Captain Cochin flew the English
colours at his mast-head, and held on his course until night hid us
completely.

Then we put out into the wind and ran for the open sea, and waited for
the morning.

The short midsummer night left us little waiting; and as soon as day
broke, the first thing we saw, within a league of us, and bearing right
across our course, was the stranger in full chase.  She was a brigantine
fully armed, and carrying a great spread of sail, but to our surprise
she flew not the English but the French colours.

On seeing this, Captain Cochin quickly hauled down the English flag, and
ran up that of his own country; but he disregarded the stranger's signal
to come to, and held on with every breath of wind he could get into his
canvas.

"Set a thief to catch a thief," they say.  And so, the French privateer
suspecting the French pirate to have good reason for running away,
pressed on all sail, and gave full chase.

What surprised me most was to see that she was fast coming up on us.  I
had never contemplated such a thing as the _Arrow_ being caught by
anything on water; but I had to admit now I was wrong.  If the _Arrow_
was a hare, the Frenchman was a greyhound.

However, there was no time to speculate on questions of speed.  The
question was, should we show fight, or lie-to and explain ourselves?
There was no hope of a ship like ours, so slenderly manned, being able
to capture or even disable our heavily-armed pursuer.  On the other
hand, to surrender meant losing all our booty, and possibly our ship
into the bargain; for the French, when it suited their purpose, were
ready enough to take advantage of a chance of pressing a smart craft
like the _Arrow_ into their own service, especially as she bore an
English name, and was known to have preyed pretty impartially on friend
and foe alike.

An eager consultation took place on deck, some urging one course, some
another, while some proposed to throw the cargo overboard, and one or
two to scuttle the ship.

However, as good luck would have it, there was a fifth way out of the
difficulty which we had little dreamed of.

"A sail on the weather-quarter!" suddenly shouted our watch.

The captain and mate went aloft to view her, and presently reported an
English frigate in full sail bearing down in our direction.  She seemed
to be coming fast, across the wind, and by the look of her was a regular
line-of-battle ship, with a double row of guns snarling from her ports.

"That settles us," said Captain Cochin, rapidly recovering his spirits.
"While the lion and the tiger fight, Mister Fox slips off with the
booty.  Way there; keep her as she goes, master; and good-day to you,
monsieur."

He spoke the truth.  The Frenchman, as soon as she caught sight of the
English frigate, altered her course abruptly, and instead of being the
hunter became the hunted.  So, for an hour or more, each of us held her
own way, the Englishman closing on the Frenchman, and the _Arrow_
sailing clear of both.  Towards afternoon, the distant sound of a gun
behind us told us the battle had already begun, and before nightfall the
two were no doubt at it broadside to broadside.

After that, we gave the land a wide berth, and met nothing we need fear,
till at last, with the French flag flying, we sailed merrily into Brest
Harbour, safe and sound, without a scratch on our hull or a hole in our
canvas.

But here Captain Cochin's good luck suddenly deserted him; for no sooner
was he berthed, with sails stowed and anchors out, than he discovered
that the French merchantman next him was none other than a vessel which
on his last voyage out he had attempted to board in mid-channel, and,
but for a sudden squall, would have captured and plundered.  The captain
of the merchantman had already reported his wrongs to the authorities;
and now, finding himself cheek by jowl with the offender, lost not a
moment in taking his revenge.

So, just as we were about to lower our boat for a jaunt on shore, to
refresh us after our voyage, the port-admiral sent off a galley to board
us, and summon us to attend on shore in irons, and show cause why we
should not, each one of us, be hanged by the neck.

It was a pretty end to our jaunt, and so suddenly done that there was
nothing for it but to surrender and follow where we were bidden.  No
doubt a smart craft like the _Arrow_, with a cargo of guns, was a good
enough excuse for the French admiral, quite apart from our
delinquencies; and at a time like this, when France lived under a reign
of terror, the only excuse needed for any act, just or unjust, was the
force to perform it.

You may imagine, out of all the hang-dog prisoners who marched that day
through the streets of Brest, I felt myself the most ill-used; for I had
sailed in the _Arrow_ by no will of my own, and had taken part in no act
of violence against any Frenchman, dead or alive.  And yet, because I
chanced to be among the crew, I was to be hung by the neck!  I knew well
enough, from what I had heard of French justice, that any excuses would
be but breath wasted.  Indeed, as one of the few English of the party, I
should probably be spared even the farce of a trial.  My only hope was
that Captain Cochin, who had not been unkind to me so far, would speak a
word in my favour.

We were marched to a dismal, white-washed guard-house on the edge of the
town, and were there locked up by half-dozens till it suited the
admiral's convenience to consider our case, and that was not till next
day.  The cell in which I and five of my shipmates were confined was a
small, underground cellar, reeking with damp and foul smells, and lit
only by a narrow grating in the ceiling, through which all night the
rain poured steadily, forming a huge puddle in the middle of the earth
floor.

There was one narrow bench on which we sat huddled together, to eat our
scanty portion of black bread, and pass the dismal night as best we
could.  For my part, that night reconciled me to the prospect of a
French gallows as much as anything.

In the morning we were ordered to march once more, and were brought into
the presence of some official who acted as judge to try cases of
misdemeanour on the high seas.  With the exception of Captain Cochin and
myself (I was able to speak the language a little) few of us understood
French, and the formality of having the proceedings interpreted to us
was not even allowed.  The captain and certain of the crew of the
merchantman were present and told their grievance, and with a large
sweep of assumption swore that we were each as bad as the other.  The
judge demanded what Captain Cochin had to say, and cut him short before
he had well opened his mouth.

I made a feeble effort to put myself right, not so much in any hope of
moving the tribunal as of reminding Captain Cochin of my claims on his
good offices.  But he was too savage and perturbed to take the hint.

Then it came out that we were bringing arms into France, and were called
to prove that they were not for the use of the enemies of liberty.  Whom
were they consigned to?  They were not consigned.--Where did they come
from?  Ireland.--Ireland was in sympathy with France in her war against
tyranny.  To rob Ireland was to rob the friend of France.  To whom were
the arms about to be sold?  To any that would buy them.--None but the
enemies of France needed arms.  Her sons were all armed already.
Therefore the traffic was not only wicked but treasonable, and for
treason there was but one punishment--death.

At this the audience, who had crowded into the court, cheered loudly.

Had we any defence? any witnesses?  Of course we had none but ourselves.

Then the sentence of the court was pronounced.  Captain Cochin was to be
guillotined next morning.  The rest of us were to be hanged in chains
that afternoon, and our bodies left exposed to view for three days as a
warning to pirates and traitors.

So ended our trial; and had it not been so tragic in its ending, I could
have laughed at the farce of it.

We were marched back to our prison to spend the few hours that remained
of our lives; and on the way our attention was directed by a friendly
guard to a great gallows with accommodation on it for at least ten
persons side by side.  I only hoped, if it came to that, I might be in
the first batch.

This time I was placed in a different cell from that I had occupied the
night before.  It was above ground, and lit by a larger window.  Indeed,
it was not intended to be used as a cell at all; but, as my jailer
explained in a jocular way, he had so many guests that day that he was
obliged to accommodate some of them in the soldiers' quarters, and
begged monsieur (that was I) would accept his excuses for not having
made more elaborate preparations for his reception.  In half-an-hour or
so, he said, there would be more room.  If monsieur could kindly wait
till then, he should have an apartment suited to his dignity.

"Monsieur is too good," said I in the politest French I could muster,
thinking it wise to humour him; "but I should take it as a favour to be
allowed to give up my apartment."

"By no means," said the other, slapping me on the back; "we cannot spare
your company a moment before the time.--Meanwhile, make yourself at
home, and receive the assurance of my profound esteem."

"There is one favour I would beg, if I might be so bold," said I.  "In
the short time left me I would like to write a letter to a friend."

"If it is a lady friend," said the Frenchman with a wink, "it might be
allowed--provided she is fair, and I may have the honour of delivering
it."

"She is fair," said I, trying hard to keep up the jest; "and I will
gladly trust you with what I write to her."

The fellow was, after all, of the good-natured kind, and I think meant
no harm by his jests.  At any rate, after some demur, he agreed to loose
my handcuffs for half-an-hour while I wrote; and having fetched me in
pen and paper, left me to myself, double locking the door after him.

This was what I wanted.  I waited till his footsteps died down the
passage, and then crept silently to the window.  It was above my reach,
but by jumping I could just catch the bars and haul myself up.  Not
being intended as a dungeon, the bars were loosely fixed, and I found
that it would be possible to remove one, and so allow room through which
to squeeze.  The casement itself was of the ordinary kind, and opened
outwards with a simple catch-fastener.

Outside was a courtyard at the back of the guard-house, in which were
scattered sundry brooms and buckets, and a pile of rubbish in one
corner.  By mounting this I calculated I could get my hands to the top
of the outer wall; and once over that, my chance was come.

I returned to my table and pretended to be occupied with writing, while
really I was listening with all my ears for any sound that might show on
which side of the prison the guard was set.

The Frenchman, I believe, had been quite correct in saying that the
company at present being entertained in the place was inconveniently
large; and if so, the guard set over them was probably dangerously
small.  And if the executions were to begin at once, it was conceivable
they might be still smaller as the afternoon wore on.  So, though I knew
that my precious half-hour was slipping by, I waited patiently for a
good part of it, till presently I heard a word of command, and a
confused tramp of footsteps down the passage.

This was the first batch of my luckless comrades being marched to their
death, and I shuddered as I thought how near I stood to their fate.

But cost what it would I would make a dash for freedom first.  I sprang
to the window and hauled myself up on to the ledge.  The loose bar gave
way after a very little coaxing, and next minute I was out of the
casement and in the little courtyard.  One or two windows overlooked it,
but either these were too high for any one to look from, or there was no
one to look, or if there was, the attraction of the ghastly scene going
on at the other side took them the other way.  And to this same
attraction, no doubt, was due the fact that no sentry was patrolling the
back of the prison.

I succeeded by means of the rubbish heap in scaling the wall.  But
before leaping down on the other side, the thought occurred to me that
if I could hide somewhere near till night, I should have a better chance
of escaping with my pursuers ahead of me than behind me.

By following the line of the wall I found I could reach a corner of the
prison where there was a blank wall, up which a gutter pipe ran to the
rambling, gabled roof, where, if I could only reach it, I should hardly
be looked for.

The clamber was a perilous one, especially as the heavy rain rendered
the iron pipe more than usually slippery.  But I was sailor enough to
understand how to grip with hands and feet, and succeeded with no great
difficulty in reaching the top and hiding myself away in a deep angle of
the roof--not safe, indeed, but with time at least to breathe and
consider what next.

Nor was I too soon; for I had not lain there two minutes before I heard
a sudden shout and rush of feet in the yard below, and knew that my
escape had been discovered and that a price was upon my head.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE WOOD NEAR MORLAIX.

As I expected, the hiding-place I had chosen was about the safest I
could have had.  For my jailers, taking note of the trampled dust-heap
in the corner, and finding, moreover, my half-written letter (which I
had taken the precaution to drop on the far side of the wall before I
doubled on my steps), had no doubt that I had fled either towards the
open country or to the harbour, where possibly I might succeed in
smuggling myself on board a ship.

So, instead of increasing the sentries round the house, they actually
reduced them in order to reinforce the pursuing party.  My policy was to
get away while the coast was comparatively unprotected, and trust to
night and my good angel to get clear of the place.  So, when the
excitement had subsided a little, and the remaining soldiers on guard
were summoned to assist at the hanging of the second batch of my
shipmates, I stole from my hiding-place and, covered by the sea-mist
which came with the sundown, slid down the pipe and crossed the wall,
and set off as briskly as I could in an easterly direction through the
outskirts of the town.

The streets were moderately crowded with wayfarers and loungers, and as
I sauntered along with a big French cigar in my mouth, which had cost me
two of my few remaining sous, no one paid me any particular heed.  A few
of the soldiers eyed me suspiciously as a doubtful character, but they
were too accustomed to queer sea-dogs prowling about the place to
consider me worth the trouble of a challenge.

At last I came to one of the posting taverns of the town where the coach
for Paris was beginning to take up passengers in the presence of the
usual curious crowd of idlers.  At the present time, when everybody went
in terror of his life, and to be suspected of any design against the
liberties of France was the same thing as being condemned for it, it was
no easy task even for the most innocent and well-conducted traveller to
get clear of a town like Brest.

The few merchants and tourists and nervous women who ventured were made
to pass through a row of soldiers, who examined their passports
narrowly, and sometimes ordered them to stand aside for further inquiry;
a command which sent the blood out of the cheeks of him who heard it,
and made him think no more of the mail-coach but of the low tumbrel on
which the victims of the guillotine took their last dreadful drive.

Even while I stood, there was one woman--a would-be traveller--who
failed to satisfy the officer on guard, and who, on being ordered back,
fell on her knees with shrieks and begged for mercy.  And not one of
those who stood gaping beside me but said she would be in luck if she
got it.

Still more fuss was made about a horseman who demanded leave to ride
forward to Paris on an errand of hot haste.  He was, to all appearance,
a gentleman's lackey, and, from the little I heard of the talk, spoke
English easier than French.  He was ordered to dismount while the
officer carefully read his passport by the light of a lantern and
inspected his letters of introduction and even of credit.  Finally,
after much suspense, he was allowed to remount, which he did in less
than a moment, and clattered away through the pouring rain out into the
wet night.

The sight of him made me envious indeed.  What would I not give for a
sound horse under me and a sound passport in my pocket!

At last the diligence was nearly ready.  The luggage was stowed in the
boot, and two great mail baskets were swung and padlocked on the bar
underneath.  The four horses were brought out and put to, and driver,
guard, and officer retired to the hostel for a parting glass.

An impulse seized me then to slip out of the crowd and creep forward on
the road under the deep shadow of the wall.  Far I could not go, I knew,
for at the barrier I should be detected and stopped.  But the coach,
having been so carefully inspected at its starting-point, would, I
judged, be allowed through the barrier without further challenge.  It
should not be my fault if I did not go through with it.

The rain was pouring in sheets, and on such a night no one would be
likely to walk abroad for pleasure.  Nor between the hostel and the
barrier was it probable that any sentinel would patrol the empty street.
At any rate I met nothing, except a market-cart coming in, the
occupants of which were too busy discussing the handling they had
received at the barrier to look under the shadow of the wall for a
vagrant boy.

At last I found a convenient place, where the road was dark as night,
and where a sharp turn made it likely that the horses would be taken
slowly past.  Here I crouched, dripping from head to foot, for a long
ten minutes.

Then my heart beat as I heard the dull rumble of the wheels, and caught
the lurid glare of the two lamps coming.  By the brief glance I got I
saw that the guard (as I had hoped) had crouched in for shelter under
the driver's hood, and that the sole occupant of the back _coupe_ was
buried under his tarpaulin.

Now was my time.  I had carefully selected my point of attack.  The two
baskets I spoke of underneath the coach swung on double iron bars, and
between the two, could I only scramble there, there was just room for me
to perch, completely hidden, at any rate while night lasted, from the
keenest of eyes.

I saw the driver throw himself back and pull in the reins for the
corner, and in the momentary check of the speed I darted out from my
hiding-place, and clambered in under the tail of the coach and reached
the bars between the baskets.  But for Providence I should have fallen
between the wheels.  As it was, the start forward of the horses carried
me dragging on my toes twenty yards before I could haul myself up and
lie face upwards across the bars, with my head on one basket, my feet on
the other, and my nose almost rubbing the bottom of the coach.

I have, I own, travelled many a mile more comfortably, but few more
happily.  I had but one terror, and that was short-lived.  At the
barrier the coach pulled up, and the guard got down to hand in his
papers, and to help himself to a spare wrapper out of the boot.  Then,
with a cheerful "Hi! hi!" he clambered back to his place, the barrier
swung open, and we were out of Brest in the open country outside.

Little I cared that the mud plastered my back with a coat as thick as
that I had on.  Little I cared that the drippings of the coach fell in
my mouth and eyes, and the stench of stale straw almost choked me.  I
was free!  The noose on the gallows would remain empty for me.  I was so
gay I believe I even laughed under the coach.

Presently, however, I began to realise that this security was not to be
for ever.  When daylight came, or even sooner, should we reach the end
of our first stage before, I should be able no longer to hide myself.
It would be wiser to escape half-an-hour too soon than be discovered
half-an-hour too late.

So when, some four hours out, I judged by the toiling of the horses we
were approaching the summit of a hill, I slipped from my perch, and
after running some little way under the boot, cast loose just as the
driver cracked his whip and the horses started at a spanking trot down
the incline.

It frightened me to find myself standing in the open road and hear the
diminishing sounds of the friendly diligence.  In front of me I could
see the grey break of dawn struggling among the heavy clouds.  Behind me
swept the rain, buffeting me forward.  Somewhere or other I must find
shelter from the night.

No sooner had I resolved upon this than the sound of a horse approaching
at full gallop sent my teeth chattering in real earnest.  I had barely
time to dart to the roadside and hide below the hedge when a horseman
swept by.  By his look he was not a soldier or an ordinary traveller,
such as the courier I had seen set out from Brest.  I cared little who
he was, provided he rode on and let me alone.  But till I lost all sound
of him I spent an uneasy time in the ditch.

As soon as the August dawn gave me a view, I found myself on the top of
a great exposed heath, across which the road reached for a mile or so,
and then plunged downwards into a thick wood.  Towards this wood I
hastened with all the speed I could.  Here at least I could lie hid a
while till my next chance turned up.

That chance was nearer than I thought.  About half-way through the wood
the road forked into three, one way on either hand striking deep among
the trees; that in the middle holding straight on, and by the marks of
wheels being evidently the highroad.  I struck to the right some way,
and then quitted the road altogether for a glade in the wood which
seemed to lead to denser shelter.

I had scarcely left the track when I was startled by the sound of a
voice and a groan close by.  Had I wanted to retreat I could hardly have
done so unseen, but a glance in the direction from which the sound
proceeded held me where I was.

A horse stood quietly nibbling the grass, and on his back, fallen
forward, with arms clasping the beast's neck, and head drooping
helplessly downward, was his rider, bleeding from a pistol wound in the
neck, and too weak even to disengage his feet from the stirrups.  In a
single glance I recognised the horseman who had ridden ahead of the
coach.

A pistol, evidently dropped from his hand, lay on the grass, and his hat
lay between the horse's feet.

If life was not already extinct, it was fast ebbing away.  I lifted him
as gently as I could and laid him on the grass.  He opened his eyes, and
his lips moved; but for a moment he seemed choked.  I tried with some
moss to stanch his still bleeding wound, but the groan he gave as I
touched him caused me to desist.

Then he tried to speak something in French.

"What is it?" said I, in English.

A look of quick relief came into his face.

"Ride forward with the letters--for God's sake--promise."

Even in the feeble, broken words I could recognise a countryman.

"Yes," said I.

"Horses--at each post--my purse," he gasped.

"I promise I will do as you ask--as I am an Irishman and a Christian."

That seemed to satisfy him.

"Your hand," said he, at last.

I gave it to him, and as it closed on his he groaned, and died.

It had all happened so suddenly that for a minute or two I knelt where I
was, with my hand still in his, like one in a dream.  Then I roused
myself, and considered what was to be done.

The dead man was a good-looking youth, scarcely twenty, dressed in the
habit of a gentleman's groom, and evidently, by the smartness of his
accoutrement, in the employ of some one of importance.  As to how he had
come by his death I could only guess.  But I suspected the horseman I
had seen galloping back towards Brest in the morning twilight had had
something to do with it.  The highwayman had met the traveller, and
shots had been exchanged--the one fatal, the other telling enough to
send the bandit flying.  The poor wounded fellow had had strength enough
to turn his horse into the wood and cling to his seat.  How long he had
stayed thus, slowly bleeding to death, I could not say; but the
diligence must have passed that way two hours ago, and he must have been
well ahead of it when his journey was thus suddenly stopped.

Then I recalled his dying words, and after tethering the horse set
myself to look for the papers he spoke of.  I found them at last--the
passport in his breast pocket, whence he could easily produce it, the
others in his belt.  The former described the bearer as John Cassidy,
travelling from Paris to Dublin and back on urgent private business,
duly signed and countersigned.  It gave a description of the bearer,
even down to the clothes he wore: I supposed to enable any official who
passed him from one point of his journey to another to identify him.
The letters were two in number, one addressed to Citoyen Duport, a
Deputy of the National Convention, and marked with the greatest urgency.
The other--and this startled me the most--to one George Lestrange at
Paris, with no other address.  Lestrange!  The name called to mind one
or two memories.  Was not the gay young officer I had once ferried
across to Rathmullan a Lestrange--a kinsman of my lady; and was not
Biddy McQuilkin of Kerry Keel, who once set her cap at my father, in the
service of this same Lestrange's aunt in Paris?  Strange if this hot
errand should concern them!  All things considered, I decided that the
wisest thing would be for me to put on the dead man's clothes, and make
myself in general appearance as near to the description of the passport
as possible.  In fact, for the rest of this journey I must be John
Cassidy himself, travelling post to Paris, with a horse waiting on him
at each stage, a purse full of money, a pistol, and a belt containing
two urgent letters of introduction.  Little dreamed I when I sneaked out
of Brest under the belly of that lumbering diligence that I was to go to
my journey's end in this style!

Before I started I buried the dead man, and along with him my cast-off
clothes, in a pit in the wood, which I covered over with leaves and
moss.  Then I mounted my horse, stuck my loaded pistol in my belt,
commended my ways to Heaven, and cantered on in the face of the rosy
summer dawn towards Paris.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A RAT-TRAP IN THE RUE D'AGNES.

The worth of my credentials was very soon put to the test; for an hour's
ride brought me to Morlaix, where, as I had learned from a hastily
scrawled list of places on the cover of the passport, I was to expect my
first fresh horse.

Here there was some grumbling at my lateness and wondering as to the
cause of it.  For the diligence guard had reported that I (or rather he
whom I represented) had started ahead of the coach from Brest, and
should have passed Morlaix three hours in front.

Whereupon I explained that I had been attacked by a highwayman, and
obliged to hide in the woods till daylight.  At which they laughed, and
said if I chose to travel to Paris alone on horseback, instead of
journeying as most honest citizens did, I must expect to be shot at.
Then I was ordered into the _conciergerie_ while my passport and papers
were examined.

It was lucky for me I had put on the dead man's clothes, and that the
description chiefly related to these.  As regards personal appearance I
was described as young, beardless, with blue eyes, brown hair, and
"nothing remarkable," which equally well described me as it did poor
John Cassidy.

"Who is your master?" demanded the officer.

"Citoyen Lestrange," said I boldly, "an Irishman resident in Paris."

"Where have you been?"

"To Dublin, to see my master's agent, Mr Patten."

"Is this Monsieur Patten's letter?"

"That to my master is his.  That to the Citoyen Duport is from a French
gentleman in Dublin whose name I do not know."

It hurt me to tell so many lies in one breath.  But I must needs have
some story to tell, and prayed Heaven to forgive me for this.

To my relief the officer seemed satisfied, and I gathered that the
Citoyen Duport must be a man of consequence in Paris.

"Pass, John Cassidy," said he, handing me back my papers.

The same ceremony awaited me at each halting-place, and I realised
before I was half-way to Paris that it was no easy matter for a stranger
to travel in France in those days.  What would have become of me but for
the accident in the wood near Morlaix it were hard to say.

But though I had much to congratulate myself on, I confess that as I
drew near to the capital I had much to perturb me.  At every halting-
place on the way there were some who shrugged their shoulders when they
heard I was going to Paris.  Paris, I heard it whispered, was no safe
place just then even for a Frenchman, still less for a stranger.  The
streets were flowing with the blood of those whose only crime was that
they were suspected of not being the friends of the people.  As to my
passport, it would be of little use to me unless I could give a fit
account of myself and my masters.  As for Citoyen Duport, if I once put
my head in his jaws I need not expect to see it on again.  And as for my
letter to Citoyen Lestrange, I had better carry it in the sole of my
stocking, and let no one know I bore a missive to any Englishman or
Irishman in Paris.  My wisest course, so one frank official at Alencon
told me, was to know no French, to have no errand but my letter to
Citoyen Duport; that delivered, he thought I should save trouble if I
shot myself through the head.

All this was very alarming; and I began to doubt, when at last I caught
sight of the towers and domes of Paris in the distance, whether I should
not have been better off after all hiding in the caves under Fanad, or
dangling on the gallows beside Brest harbour.

At the barrier, however, things fell out easier for me than I had
feared.  For, just as I arrived, a common cart on the way out had been
stopped and searched, and in it, hidden in a wood packing-case, had been
unearthed some notorious enemy of the people, over whose detection there
was great rejoicing, and the promise of a famous execution in the
morning.  For all these reasons the soldiers and officials into whose
hands I fell were in high good-humour, and after scanning my passport
and the letter to the deputy let me go by.

I had followed the advice of my late counsellor, and forgotten all the
little French I knew, and had hidden the letter to Citoyen Lestrange in
my stocking.  Whether I was to carry out the rest of his advice remained
to be seen.

The officer at the barrier retained my passport, saying it was done
with, from which I concluded that now I was in Paris there was little
hope of getting out of it again.  So, feeling like a mouse in a trap, I
parted company with my horse, my passport, and even my pistol (of which
I was also relieved), and walked forward into the noisy city, wishing I
only knew where to go next.

Presently I came into a long narrow street, where the houses overhead
slanted towards one another and nearly shut out the light of heaven.
Poles stuck out from the windows, on which hung clothes or signs or
legends; the sight of which, swaying in the wind, mingled with the foul
odour and the noise and the jostling crowd, fairly dazed a country boy
like me.  How, in such a place as this, was I to find what I wanted--
namely, a meal and a night's lodging?

At last, in front of me, there swung a flaunting sign--"A l'Irlandois"--
at which I cheered up.  Here, at any rate, in the midst of this noisome
babel, seemed to come a whiff from the old country, and I felt like a
castaway in sight of land.

But before I had time to reach the place the whole street seemed
suddenly to go mad.  First there was a yell and a roll of drums at the
end by which I had entered.  Then every window seemed alive with people,
straining forward with howls and execrations and clenched fists.  From
every door below poured forth a crowd, who fought with one another for a
place next the roadway, waved their red caps, and shouted in a wild sort
of chant some French song.  In the rush stalls and barrows were
overturned, but there was no one to heed; children were trampled on, but
no one heard their cries; pockets were picked, but there was no one to
miss their loss; windows were smashed, but there was no one to feel a
draught.  To my wondering fancy, all Paris had suddenly turned into this
narrow Rue d'Agnes and there run mad.

I noticed that the one thing all were agreed upon, was to keep a clear
space in the roadway, and strain their necks impatiently in the
direction of the drums; and soon enough the reason of all this
excitement became clear.  Drawn by a single horse, and escorted by a
troop of National Guards, came a low open cart, in which sat two
persons, deadly white, gazing in a dazed vacant way at the scene around
them, and sometimes casting a reproachful glance at the slowly plodding
horse.  One of the two was an old man, of fine, aristocratic presence,
which the coarse clothes he wore could not disguise.  The other was a
low ruffian, with swollen face and bleared eyes, in the dress of a
butcher.  Between the two, except that they were on their way to death,
there was nothing in common.  Till to-day they had never met, and after
to-day they would never meet again.  The crime of one, so I heard, was
that he was related to an aristocrat; that of the other, that he had
murdered his own daughter.  For both offences the law of France just
then had but one penalty.  And of the two, he who was most execrated and
howled at and spat upon was the gentleman.

In less time than it takes to write it the show had passed.  A few of
the crowd followed to see the end of the business.  The rest, for the
most part, returned to their callings, and before the drums were out of
hearing the Rue d'Agnes was once more a plain, dirty, ordinary Paris
street.

With a heart a good deal weighted by what I had seen, I turned into the
Cabaret "a l'Irlandois."  If I had expected to find anything there to
remind me of my own country, I was sorely disappointed.  A few blouse-
clad idlers sat at a table, smoking and drinking sugar and water, and
discussing the news of the day with their host, a surly-looking fellow,
who, whatever his inn might be, was himself a common type of Frenchman.
"Now?" demanded he as I approached.  "Monsieur," said I in English, "I
desire a bed and some food."

"Speak French," said he in English.  "I speak no French," replied I in
French.  Whereupon one of the idlers was summoned as interpreter.  I
knew French enough to hear in the words that passed between him and mine
host the two expressions "spy" and "money," and I wished I had never
come into the place.  But it was not easy to get out now without
confirming the suspicion, and I deemed it wise to appear indifferent.

"If monsieur can give me a bed, I will put up with him," said I to the
interpreter; "if not--"

"Citizen Picquot sees his money before he sells his wares," said the
other.

I laid a gold piece on the table.  "Citizen Picquot is a wise man," said
I.

Then followed a cross-examination of me, prompted by the cautious
Picquot and interpreted by his ally.

"Who was I?  Where did I come from?  Why did I seek a lodging at his
house of all others?  How long was I going to stay?  What was my
occupation in Paris?  How much more money had I got?" and so on.

To all of which I answered my best; and when I produced my letter to the
Depute Duport they treated me more ceremoniously.  I was shown to a
room, the like of which for filth I had never slept in before, and shall
never, I hope, sleep in again.  It was a large chamber, the boards of
which were furred with mildew, and the valance on the bed was dropping
off with rottenness.  Generations of cats had haunted it and slept on
the coverlet.  The dungeon at Brest was fresh and sweet compared to it.
Yet Citizen Picquot smilingly demanded two francs a night and the price
of my candle.

"Monsieur is safe here," said he, forgetting, as did I, that I knew no
French.  "I had a guest, a week ago, who was found by the Guards and
taken before the Tribunal and guillotined.  He would have been safe too,
but we had a difference about money, and I denounced him.  It was only a
week ago.  They will not search my house again for a month to come.
Monsieur will be quite safe; but if, alas, he perish (and who is quite
safe in these days?), I will myself protect his effects, and see his
letter to the depute duly forwarded."

All this was vastly consoling.

"Apropos," said I, "cannot I deliver my letter this evening?"

"This evening," said my host with a shrug; "it is death to approach a
depute a la Convention Nationale after the seance is closed.  The last
who did it was Mademoiselle Corday, and she-- In the morning, monsieur,
when the Convention sits, you shall deliver your letter; till then,
peace and sound repose."  And he bowed himself out.

I knew not much of the world, but I knew enough to wish myself out of
this rat-trap.  To try to escape just now would, I saw, be futile.  Yet
to spend the night there meant, if not murder, at least robbery and
pestilence.  A brave face was the only thing to put upon the business,
and I followed Citizen Picquot downstairs and called for food and drink,
in which I invited not him only but his gossips to join me.

I noticed that the door was carefully locked when any one came in or
went out, and that any chance motion of mine in that direction was
quickly intercepted.  So the evening wore on, and presently the lights
of the cabaret were extinguished, and my host passed me my candle and
again bade me good-night.

I went up by no means gaily.  Three other men, I observed, were still in
the house, and would in all probability join in the attack upon me.  I
had parted with my pistol.  The door was without a lock.  The window was
shuttered from the outside.  My only arms were a small pocket-knife and
my belt.

I took the precaution to secrete my letter to the deputy, along with
that to Mr Lestrange, in my boot, and the little money I had left I
tied up in the tail of my shirt.  Then I considered that the only safe
place for me that night was to sit on the floor with my back against the
door and my heels against the foot of the bed, which chanced to stand at
just the required length.  In this posture, even if I fell asleep, any
attempt to force the door would arouse me; and if the door was
reasonably sound I could reckon, with my back and feet, on keeping it
fast against the four, at any rate for a while.

I had a long time to wait.  They evidently meant to give me time to fall
asleep, and themselves, perhaps, time to consume some more of the cognac
which my money had provided.  I was indeed almost dozing when my ears
caught the sound of an unsteady footstep on the stairs and a whispering
of voices below.  Then the footstep stopped outside my door, and a hand
cautiously turned the handle.

"The young dog smells a rat," muttered my landlord, with a hickup which
gave me some hope.

"True for you, monsieur," replied I, in as good French as I could
muster.  "I can shoot rats as well as smell them."  And I made the blade
of my knife give a click that sounded for all the world like the cocking
of a pistol.

"Armed!" ejaculated the tipsy scoundrel.  "God have mercy!  Pardon,
monsieur, I came to see if you were comfortable."

"Monsieur citoyen is too good.  I am most comfortable, and beg to be
waked at cock-crow.  _Bonsoir_."

I knew of course that was not the end of him, but while he stumbled
downstairs to take counsel with his comrades I had at least time to
breathe.  I peeped out of the door.  All was dark, and there was no
sound but the ticking of the great Dutch clock in the shop below.

The clock!  I had noticed it that evening--a great unwieldy structure
like a coffin on end, and a dial above.  If I could but get down to it,
while my assailants were up despatching me, I might yet have a chance of
eluding them.  I could hear them discussing together at the foot of the
stairs, and presently advance once more to the charge, not this time
with my host as an advance-guard, but all together.  I slipped out into
the passage, and hid in a dark corner at the head of the stairs, so
close, indeed, that they all but brushed against me in passing.

"_Alors, il dort_," said my host, listening for a moment.  "No; he
moves.  All together now."

And with one accord they hurled themselves against the door, which of
course offered no resistance, and admitted them toppling one over the
other into the room.

I waited no longer, but slipped down the stairs and into the clock.  I
had to displace the pendulum to do it, but trusted to the muddled
condition of the enemy not to miss the ticking.

After a while they came down in a towering rage, blaming one another for
what had happened.  They were just in the humour to be quarrelsome, and
as I stood motionless in my narrow sentry-box I heard as pretty a battle
of words as it has ever been my lot to listen to.

Their one comfort was that I could not be far away.  Either I had gone
out by the window, in which case I had undoubtedly broken my neck; or I
was down in the cellar, in which case I would keep till morning.
"Meanwhile, comrades, let us drink long life to the Republic, and down
with the Girondists."

So to drink they fell, but were hardly settled when a loud summons came
at the outer door, and a shout of, "Open, in the name of the Republic
One and Indivisible!"

Then did mine host quake in his shoes, and his comrades turned pale.

"To bed!" whispered my host with trembling voice.  "Go up and sleep."

They were not long in obeying, and that night the bed that was meant for
me held three of the soundest sleepers in all France.

The knocking continued, and mine host, feigning a great yawn, took down
his key and asked who was there.

"Citoyen Picquot, open to the National Guard."

The door opened, and half-a-dozen soldiers trooped into the shop.

"Produce your lodgers," demanded the soldier in command.

"I have but three, citizen soldier.  Follow me, they shall be at your
service."

The officer followed my host upstairs; the others remained below.
Presently I heard a loud outcry and scuffling of feet above, and a
shouted word of command.  The soldiers instantly rushed up the stairs.

But no speed of theirs could equal that with which I darted from my
hiding-place and out at the open door into the street, thanking Heaven
that whatever rats might be caught that night in the Rue d'Agnes I was
not one of them.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

"VIVE LA GUILLOTINE!"

It was midnight when I got clear of the Auberge "a l'Irlandois" in the
Rue d'Agnes, and being a fine, warm autumn night I was by no means the
only occupant of the street.  This was fortunate for me, for the guards
posted at either end would have been more inquisitive as to a solitary
stranger than one of a company of noisy idlers.

That night there had been a great performance in one of the theatres in
Paris, which had lasted far into the night, and was only lately over.
Those I overheard speak of it said it had been a great patriotic
spectacle, in the course of which National Guards and cadets had marched
across the stage, unfurling the banner of the Republic, and taking the
oath of the people amid scenes of wild enthusiasm and shouting.  To add
to the enthusiasm of the occasion a party of real volunteers had
appeared, and after receiving the three-coloured cockade from their
sweethearts, had shouldered their guns and marched, singing the
Marseillaise, straight from the theatre to the road for La Vendue, where
they were going to shed their blood for their country.

The audience had risen, waving hats and handkerchiefs to bid them God-
speed, and then poured forth into the streets, shouting the chorus, and
cheering till they were hoarse and tired.

It was into a party of such loyal revellers that I found myself sucked
before I was half-way out of the Rue d'Agnes; and yelling and shouting
at the top of my voice I passed safely the guards, and reached the broad
Rue Saint Honore.  Here the crowd gradually dispersed, some one way,
some another, while a few, with cries of "_A la Place_," held on in
company.  With these I joined myself, and presently came to a great open
square, where on a high platform stood a grim and terrible looking
object.  "_Vive la guillotine_!" shouted the crowd as they caught sight
of it.

It was strangely lit up with the glare of the torches of some workmen
who were evidently busy upon it.  I could see the fatal knife being
raised once or twice and let fall with a crash by way of experiment.
And each time the crowd cheered and laughed, and invited one of their
number to ascend the platform and put his head in the empty collar.  It
made me sick to watch it, yet for safety's sake I had to shout "_Vive la
guillotine_!" with the rest of them, and laugh with the loudest.

Presently some one near noticed me and caught me by the arm.

"Here is one that will do, Citoyen Samson.  Lift him up, comrades.  Let
us see if the knife is sharp enough."

At the touch of his hand I broke into a cold sweat, and clung to his
knees amid shouts of laughter.  It was all very well for them, who were
used to such jests.  I was new to it, and fell a victim to a panic such
as I have never known since.  A herculean strength seemed to possess me.
I flung my tormentors right and left, and darted away from them into
the dark recesses of the surrounding gardens.  They began by giving
chase, but in the end let me go, and returned to their more congenial
spectacle, and presently, tired even of that, went home to bed.

It was an hour before I durst look out from my hiding-place in the midst
of a clump of thick bushes.  I could still see the guillotine looming in
the moonlight; but the workmen, like the sightseers, had gone.  The only
living persons were a few women, who had seated themselves on one of the
benches in front of the instrument, evidently determined on a good view
of to-morrow's spectacle.

I retreated to my hiding-place with a shudder, glad I was too far away
to overhear their talk.

But if I heard not theirs, I heard, oddly enough, another conversation,
so near that had it been intended for my ears it could not have taken
place in a better spot.

One of the speakers, by his voice, was an Englishman, of more than
middle age; the other, a woman, who also spoke English, but with a
foreign accent.

This is what I heard, and you may guess how much of it I comprehended:--

"No news yet?" said the old man anxiously.

"None.  I expected to hear before this."

"Who is the messenger?"

"A trusty servant of madame's, and an Irishman."

"So much the worse if he is caught."

There was a pause.  Then the old man inquired,--

"What hope is there for Sillery?"

"Absolutely none.  He is as good as guillotined already."

"Has Edward no influence then?"

"Not now.  Duport is no longer a man, but a machine--deadly, mysterious,
as yonder guillotine.  He would denounce me, his wife, if the Republic
demanded it."

"God forbid! for you are our last friend."

Then there was another pause, and the man spoke again.  He was evidently
broken-down by terror, and engrossed in his own safety.

"My fear _now_ is," he said, "that, if Sillery is doomed, the messenger
should deliver Edward's letter to Duport at all.  It will only make
matters worse for us."

"Very true.  It is no time for appeals to mercy," said Madame Duport.
"But you said you expected a letter for yourself."

"Ay; money to escape with.  That's all I live for."

"Money from Edward?"

"No.  From my kinswoman, Alice Gorman.--Hush! what was that?" he cried,
breaking into a whisper.

"Only a falling leaf.--How was she to reach you?"

"She was to send it to Edward, and he would forward it by the same
messenger that carried his letter to Duport."

"Pray Heaven that be lost too," said the lady.  "You are safer in Paris.
Besides, money without a passport will avail nothing."

The old man gave a bitter laugh.

"They all desert me," said he querulously.  "My nephew never shows sign;
Sillery is to perish, you fear to speak to me; even my poor wife chides
me."

"Surely Madame Lestrange--"

Here I started again, and slight as was the sound it broke up the
conference.  They separated, one in either direction, the lady gliding
towards the benches in front of the guillotine, the old man (whom I now
knew to be Mr Lestrange) creeping under the shadow of the trees, and
presently lying at full length on a seat apparently fast asleep.

I curled myself up on a seat not far off, where I could watch him
without being seen by him.  A little before dawn he got up, and after
carefully looking up and down the road, walked hurriedly back towards
the Place de la Revolution, where he lost himself among the now
increasing groups who mustered in the grey light for an early seat at
the spectacle of the hour.

I dropped into a seat not far off, and in the distance, among a row of
pale, hard, fatigued faces, I could see the deputy's wife, who never
looked our way, but sat with her eyes fixed on the dreadful machine.

The old man looked across at her once and again, and then tried
nervously to join in the general talk, and nod assent to the loyal
sentiments of those who crowded near.

As for me, I was too sick even to keep up appearances, and was thankful
when one rough interloper shouldered me from my place and sent me
sprawling down among the feet of the onlookers.

"Shame!  Let the young citoyen have a view," called some one.

"We are all equal," said the usurper.  "Let him take the place from me,
and he may have it."

I declined the challenge, and slunk off at the back of the crowd, which
was all too busy and expectant to heed whether I got a view or not.

What I heard that morning was bad enough.  There was the sound of the
drums and the dull rumble of wheels, drowned by yells and shouts from
the men and screams from the women; then a silence, when no one stirred,
but every neck was craned forward to see; then a sudden tap of the drum;
then the harsh crash of the knife; then a gasp from a thousand throats,
and a great yell of "_Vive la Liberte_."  Three times I heard it all.
Then the spectacle was at an end, and the crowd dispersed.

I kept a keen look-out among the groups that straggled past me for the
bent figure of Mr Lestrange, but no sign of him could I see.  After
all, thought I, this errand of mine to Paris was to be all for nothing,
when close by I perceived Citoyenne Duport walking aloof from the crowd
and bending her steps towards the gardens.  I resolved, cost what it
might, not to lose sight of her, and followed her at a distance till the
paths were quite deserted.

Then I quickened my steps and came up with her.

"Madame Duport," said I boldly, "I am the messenger you and Mr
Lestrange expect."

She looked round at me with blanched face, and held up her hand with a
gesture of silence.

"No, no," said she, "I am not Madame Duport.  You mistake, my friend."

"Madame need not fear me; I am no _mouchard_.  I overheard all you and
Mr Lestrange said last night.  Here is the letter I bear to Depute
Duport.  Either I must deliver it myself or ask madame to do so."

She held out her hand for it.

"We are at your mercy," said she.  "Is this from Lord Edward himself?"

"I know nothing of it, madame," said I, and recounted the story of how I
had come by the missive in the wood near Morlaix.

She sighed, and said,--

"John Cassidy is happier where he lies than we are.  Is this your only
missive?"

"No; I have a letter for Mr Lestrange, and beg you to tell me his
address."

At that moment she looked round, and gave a little scream as first a
footstep, then a voice, fell on her ear.

"Adele," said a lean, bilious-looking man, with a hard, pinched face and
knit lips, approaching from one of the side-walks--"Adele, what do you
here?"

"My husband," said the lady, so far recovering her composure as to smile
and advance to meet him, "you are come in a good moment.  This lad bears
a missive for you, and, having discovered me in the crowd, was begging
me to deliver it for him.  Here it is."

Duport took the letter with a frigid glance at me as if to say he
believed not a word of the story, and mechanically tore it open.

I watched his eyebrows give a sudden twitch as he read the contents.

"Who gave you this?" demanded he.

I repeated my story, which once more he received with an incredulous
stare.

Then turning to his wife he said, half to himself, half to her,--

"From Edward Fitzgerald on behalf of his kinsman, Sillery.  But too
late.  Come, Adele.  The twenty-two are before the Tribunal to-day, and
I have a place for you in the gallery."

And without heeding me further (for which I was devoutly thankful), he
drew his wife's arm in his own and walked off rapidly in the direction
of the Tuileries.

Lest my reader should suppose that my letter to Depute Duport was one of
great moment to my own story, let me say at once it was not so, at least
directly.  It was, as the deputy had said, a letter addressed by Lord
Edward Fitzgerald, a young Irish nobleman (of whom more hereafter), to
Duport, claiming, for the sake of old comradeship, his good offices on
behalf of one of the twenty-two impeached Girondist deputies, Sillery by
name, whose adopted daughter, or, rather, the adopted daughter of whose
wife, Lord Edward had lately married.  Many letters of the kind were no
doubt constantly coming into the hands of powerful members of the
Convention just then; and many, like it, came too late.

Next morning, so I was told, the whole of the accused, and Sillery first
of the batch, were guillotined; the headsman doing his work with such
dexterity that in thirty-one minutes the twenty-two were all disposed
of.

My letter to Mr Lestrange (which I still carried in my stocking) was
another matter, and concerned me considerably, especially now that I
understood it was from my lady at Knockowen.  Where to find him I knew
not, and to be found with the letter on me might compromise not merely
me but him and his Irish kinsfolk.

All things considered, I decided to read the letter and commit it to
memory, and then destroy it, hoping my good intentions might be excuse
enough for the breach of faith.  And, indeed, when that afternoon I
sought a sheltered place in the woods and produced the soiled and
stained letter from my stocking, I was glad I had done what I did.

"Dear Cousin," wrote my lady at Knockowen, "I hear there is a chance of
getting a letter to you by the messenger who is to carry back Lord
Edward's petition on behalf of the poor Marquis Sillery.  Your nephew,
Captain Lestrange, told us of his trouble when he was here in the
summer, and gave us to understand there was little to be hoped for.  If
Sillery perish, your position in Paris will be painful indeed.  I would
fain send you the money you ask for, but Maurice keeps me so low in
funds that I cannot even pay for my own clothes.  I trust, however, your
nephew may bring you some relief, as he spoke of going to Paris this
autumn on a secret mission for the English Government.  The Naturis, the
modernised Mahomedans, have as their headquarters the Mahomedan
Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh in the United Provinces. It ought to
be said that they also claim to be going back to pure original Mahomedanism
before it was corrupted by the "Fathers" of Islam.

CHAPTER XIII
HINDU DOCTRINES--HOW THEY CHANGE
"As men's minds receive new ideas, laying aside the old and effete, the
world advances. Society rests upon them; mighty revolutions spring
from them; institutions crumble before their onward march."

--_Extract from Mr.

Kiddle, an American writer, which occurs in a letter "received" by
Madame Blavatsky from Koot Humi in Thibet_.

[Sidenote: Will the new religious organisations survive?]

The four new religious organisations described in the preceding chapters
may or may not survive--who can tell? What would they become, or what
would become of them, in the event, say, of the great nations of
Europe issuing from some deadly conflict so balanced that India and the
East had to be let alone, entirely cut off? The Indian Christian Church,
hardly yet acclimatised so far as it is the creation of modern efforts,
would she survive?

The English sweet-pea, sown in India, produced its flowers, but not at
first any vigorous self-propagating seed. The Br[=a]hma Sam[=a]j, graft
of West on East, and still sterile as an intellectual coterie, how
would it fare, cut off from its Western nurture? The [=A]rya Sam[=a]j--what,
in that event, would be her resistance to the centripetal force
that we have noted in her blind patriotism?

The reactionary Theosophists--after the provocative action had ceased--what
of them? Would not the Indian jungle, which they are trying to reduce
to a well-ordered garden of indigenous fruits, speedily lapse to jungle
again? We shall not attempt to answer our own questions directly,
but proceed to the second part of our programme sketched on p.
122. How far then have Christian and modern religious ideas been
_naturalised_ in New India, whether within the new religious
organisations or without?

Whatever the fate of the organisations, these naturalised ideas might
be expected to survive.

[Sidenote: Modification of doctrines.]

[Sidenote: Elements of Christianity being naturalised in India--three.]

We recall the statements made on ample authority in an earlier
chapter, that certain aspects of Christianity are attracting attention
in India and proving themselves possessed of inherent force and
attractiveness.

These, the dynamical elements of Christianity, were specially the idea
of God the Father, the person of Jesus Christ, and the Christian conception
of the Here and Hereafter. For although Hinduism declares a social boycott
against any Hindu who transports his person over the sea to Europe,
within India itself the Hindu mind is in close contact with such
modern religious ideas.

The wall built round the garden will not shut out the crows.
Indeed, like the ancient Athenian, the modern Hindu takes the keenest
interest in new religious ideas.

To comprehend the impression that such new religious ideas are making,
we must realise in some measure the background upon which they are
cast, both that part of it which the new ideas are superseding and
the remainder which constitutes their new setting and gives them
their significance.

In brief, what is the present position of India in regard to religious
belief; and in particular, what are the prevailing beliefs about
God?

[Sidenote: Indian beliefs about God--Polytheists; Theists; Pantheists.]

A rough classification of the theological belief of the Hindus of the
present day would be--the multitude are polytheists; the new-educated
are monotheists; the brahmanically educated are professed
pantheists.

Rough as it is, we must keep the classification before us in trying
to estimate the influence upon the Indian mind of the Christian
idea of God.

From that fundamental classification let us try to understand the Hindu
position more fully.

[Sidenote: No one doctrine is distinctive of Hinduism.]
Let it be realised, in the first place, how _undefined_ is the Hindu's
religious position. From the rudest polytheism up to pantheism, and even
to an atheistic philosophy, all is within the Hindu pale, like fantastic
cloud shapes and vague mist and empty ether, all within the same
sky. To the student of Hinduism, then, the first fact that emerges is
that there are no distinctive Hindu doctrines. No one doctrine is distinctive
of Hinduism. There is no canonical book, nowhere any stated body of
doctrine that might be called the Hindu creed. The only common measure
of Hindus is that they employ brahmans in their religious ceremonies,
and even that does not hold universally.

A saying of their own is, "On two main points all sects agree--the sanctity
of the cow and the depravity of women." In contrast to Hindus in this
respect of the absence of a standard creed, Mahomedans call themselves
_kitabi_ or possessing a book, since in the Koran they do possess such
a canon. In the words of Mahomed, Christians and Jews likewise are
"the peoples of the book," and have a defined theological position.
But regarding Hindus, again, we note there is no doctrinal pale, no
orthodoxy or heterodoxy.

"We Europeans," writes Sir Alfred Lyall regarding Hinduism, "can
scarcely comprehend an ancient religion, still alive and powerful,
which is a mere troubled sea without shore or visible horizon

."[62] In these days of opportunist denunciation of creeds, the
amorphous state of creedless Hinduism may be noted.

The experience of the late Dr. John Henry Barrows, President of the
Parliament of Religions at Chicago in 1893, may be quoted in
confirmation of the absence of a Hindu creed.

After he had won the confidence of India's representatives as their
host at Chicago, and had secured for them a unique audience there,
being himself desirous to write on Hinduism, he wrote to over a
hundred prominent Hindus requesting each to indicate what in his
view were some of the leading tenets of Hinduism.

He received only one reply.

[Sidenote: Pantheism, Maya, and Transmigration may be called Hindu
doctrines.]
No one doctrine is distinctive of Hinduism. It is an extreme misleading
statement, nevertheless, to say as some Western writers have done,
and at least one Hindu writer,[63] that Hinduism is not a religion
at all, but only a social system.

There are several doctrines to which a great many Hindus would at
once conventionally subscribe, and these I venture to call Hindu
doctrines.

In theological conversations with Hindus, three doctrines very frequently
show themselves as a theological background.
These are, first, Pantheism; secondly, Transmigration and Final
Absorption into Deity; and, thirdly, Maya, i.e.

Delusion, or the Unreality of the phenomena of Sense and Consciousness.

I find a recent pro-Hindu writer making virtually the same selection.

In the ninth century, she writes, Sankarachargya, the great upholder
of Pantheism, "took up and defined the [now] current catch-words--maya,
karma [the doctrine of works, or of re-birth according to desert],
reincarnation, and left the terminology of Hinduism what it is
to-day."...

"But," she also adds, "they are nowhere and in no sense regarded as
essential."[64] Naturally, then, the inquiry that we have set
ourselves to will at the same time be an inquiry how far Christian
thought has affected these three main Hindu doctrines of Pantheism,
Transmigration, and Maya.

[Sidenote: Commingling of contradictory beliefs--]
[Sidenote: Polytheism with Monotheism.]
Nor is it to be imagined that the Hindu polytheism, theism, and
pantheism are distinguishable religious strata.

"Uniformity and consistency of creeds are inventions of the European
mind," says a cynical writer already quoted.

"Hinduism bristles with contradictions, inconsistencies, and surprises,"
says Sir M. Monier Williams. The common people are indeed polytheists,
at different seasons of the year and on different social occasions
worshipping different deities, male or female, and setting out to
this or that shrine, as the touts of the rival shrines have persuaded
them.

Nevertheless, an intelligent member of the humbler ranks is always ready
to acknowledge that there is really only one God, of whom the
so-called gods are only variations in name.

Or his theory may be that there is one supreme God, under whom the popular
deities are only departmental heads; for the presence of the great central
British Government in India is a standing suggestion of monotheism. The
officer who drew up the _Report of the Census of India_, 1901 (p. 363)
gives an instance of this commingling of monotheism and polytheism.

"An orderly," he writes, "into whose belief I was inquiring, described
the relation between the supreme God and the Devata [minor Gods] as that
between an official and his orderlies, and another popular simile often
used is that of the Government and the district officer

."[65] The polytheism of the masses may thus blend with the theism which
is the ordinary intellectual standpoint of the educated classes.

[Sidenote: Monotheism with Polytheism.]
Rising to the next stage, namely, the theism of the educated class--the
blending of their theism with the polytheism of the masses is illustrated
in the July number of the magazine of the Hindu College, Benares,
the headquarters of the late Hindu revival and of the pantheistic
philosophy. In answer to an inquirer's question--"Is there only one God?"
the reply is, "There is one supreme Lord or Ishvara of the universe,
and there are minor deities or devas who intelligently guide the
various processes of nature in their different departments in willing
obedience to Ishvara."

The Hindu College, Benares, be it remembered, is primarily one of the
modern colleges whence the modern new-Indians come.

[Sidenote: Monotheism with Pantheism.]
Again, the modern theism of the educated, in like manner, very readily
passes into the pantheism of the philosophers and of those educated in
Sanscrit, which I have described as part of the accepted Hindu
orthodoxy.

For, whatever its origin, an observer finds the pantheistic idea emerge
all over educated India. The late Sir M. Monier Williams speaks of
pantheism as a main root of the original Indo-Aryan creed, which has
"branched out into an endless variety of polytheistic superstitions."
Whether that be so, or whether, as is now more generally believed,
the polytheism is the aboriginal Indian plant into which the
pantheistic idea has been grafted as communities have become
brahmanised, the pantheistic idea very readily presents itself to
the mind of the educated Hindu.

In any discussion regarding human responsibility the idea crops
up that _all_ is God, "There is One only, and no second."

We can scarcely realise how readily it comes to the middle-class Hindu's
lips that God is all, and that there can be no such thing as sin. The
pantheists are thus no separate sect from the theists, any more than the
theists are from the polytheists. The same man, if a member of the
educated class, will be polytheist in his established domestic
religion, theist in his personal standpoint and general profession,
and probably a pantheist in a controversy regarding moral responsibility,
or should he set himself to write about religion.

[Sidenote: Illustration of polytheism, monotheism, and pantheism commingling.]

Take a statement of the mingling of polytheism, monotheism, and
pantheism from the extreme south of India, a thousand miles away
from Benares.

"Though those men all affirmed," we read, "that there is only one
God, they admitted that they each worshipped several.

They saw nothing inconsistent in this. Just as the air is in everything,
so God is in everything, therefore in the various symbols.

And as our king has diverse representative Viceroys and Governors
to rule over his dominions in his name, so the Supreme has these
subdeities, less in power and only existing by force of Himself,
and He, being all pervasive, can be worshipped under their forms

."[66]

[Sidenote: Pure pantheism rare.]
At the top of all is the pure pantheist, a believer in the illusion
of the senses, and generally though not always an ascetic.

For life is not worth living if it is merely an illusion, and the
illusion must be dispelled, and the world of the senses renounced.
If "father and brother, etc., have no actual entity," said the reformer
Raja Rammohan Roy [1829] when combating pantheism, "they consequently
deserve no real affection, and the sooner we escape from them and leave
the world the better." So the pantheist is generally an ascetic cut
off from the world to be consistent in his pantheism. Yet again,
we repeat that such pure pantheists are very rare, and that "in India
forms of pantheism, theism, and polytheism are ever interwoven with each
other."[67]
To one familiar with India, such a medley is neither inconceivable
nor improbable; the debatable question only is, what sufficient
account of the cause thereof can be given.

Why is it that Hindu doctrine has never set? Why this incongruity between
doctrine and domestic practice? Why this double-mindedness in the same
educated individual? Much might be said in the endeavour to account for
these characteristic features of India, the despair of the Christian
missionary. I confine myself to the bearing of the question upon the
influence of Christian ideas, and particularly of Christian theism.

[Sidenote: Fluidity of Hindu thought; rigidity of Hindu practice.]
For the student of this special aspect of Hinduism a second pertinent fact
here emerges, namely, that Hindu practice is much more established
than Hindu doctrine.

The unchangeableness of Hindu ritual is not a new idea; it is its
bearing on doctrine that has not been clearly considered. There _is_,
then, a distinctly recognised Hindu orthodoxy in manners and worship, at
least for each Hindu community, while there is no orthodoxy in doctrine.
The broad distinctive marks of Hindu practice, we may repeat, are the
social usage of caste, and the employment of brahmans in religious
ritual.

With ideas, then, thus fluid and practice thus rigid, it will be easily
understood that Christian and modern ideas have made much greater
headway in India than Christian customs and modes of worship.

The mind of educated India has been Christianised to a much greater extent
than the religious or domestic practices have been.
Perhaps it might be said that all down the centuries of Christian
Church history, opinion has often been in advance of worship and
the social code, that social and religious conventionalities have
lagged behind belief.

If so, it is the marked conservatism in ceremonial that is noteworthy
in India.

While Hindu beliefs are dissolving or dropping out of the mind, Hindu
practices are successfully resisting the solvent influences or
only slowly being transformed.

[Sidenote: More progress towards Christian thought than Christian
practice.]
It is not too much to say that the educated Hindu does not regard
a fixed creed as a part of his Hinduism, but rather boasts of the
doctrinal comprehensiveness of his religion.

He joyfully lives in a ferment of religious thought, surrendering to
the doctrine of a satisfying teacher, but the idea of creed subscription,
or a doctrinal stockade, is utterly foreign to his nature. For him the
standards are the fixed social usages and the brahmanical ritual.

Hear a Hindu himself on the matter, the historian of _Hindu
Civilisation during British Rule_ [i. 60]: "Hinduism has ever been
and still is as liberal and tolerant in matters of religious belief
as it is illiberal and intolerant in matters of social conduct."

In a recent pamphlet[68] an Anglo-Indian civilian gives his evidence
clearly, if too baldly, of the fixity of practice and the mobility of
belief.

"The educated Hindu," he writes, "has largely lost his belief in the old
myths about the gods and goddesses of the Hindu pantheon, and has
learned to smile at many of the superstitions of his uneducated
countrymen.

But Hinduism as a religion that tells a man not only what he shall eat,
what he shall drink, and wherewithal he shall be clothed, but tells him
how to perform innumerable acts that men of other nations never
think have anything to do with religion at all, Hinduism as an
intricate social code, stands largely unaffected by the flood of
Western education that has been poured upon the country.

He instances a brahman, one of his own subordinates, college-bred
and English-speaking, who, when away from home with his superior
officer, had to cook his food for himself, because the brahman
servant he had with him was of a lower division than his own, and
he could not afford to hire a man of his own status among brahmans."

[Sidenote: Thought independent of act.]

We ask again for the cause of this progress in thought and stagnation
in practice.

In India, creed and practice go their own way; thinking is independent
of acting.

Listen to the naive standpoint assumed in the Confession or Covenant of
a Theistic Association established in Madras in 1864.

We read in article 3 that the person being initiated makes this
declaration: "In the meantime, I shall observe the ceremonies now
in use, but only where indispensable.

I shall go through such ceremonies, where they are not conformable
to pure Theism, as mere matters of routine, destitute of all religious
significance--as the lifeless remains of a superstition which has
passed away."

And again in article 4: "I shall never endeavour to deceive anyone
as to my religious opinions."

In the revision of 1871, both articles were dropped, but in the
earlier form there was no attempt to disguise that thought was
independent of act.

The familiar figure of Buddha in meditation, seated cross-legged and
motionless, with vacant introspective eyes, oblivious of the outer
world, is a type of the separation of thought from act that seems
natural to India or to the Indian mind, type also of the independence
of each thinker.

The thinker secludes himself; "the mind is its own place."

To become a thinker signifies to become an ascetic recluse; even modern
enlightenment often removes an Indian from fellow-feeling with his
kind.

[Sidenote: No Theological Faculties.]
How is it so? I say nothing of the climate of tropical India as a
contributory cause.

The way in which Hindu learning was and is transmitted, is itself
almost sufficient explanation of the independence and the fluidity
of religious doctrine.

Hinduism has no recognised Theological Faculties as training schools
for the priesthood.

_Buddhist_ monasteries of the early Christian centuries we do read
of, institutions corresponding to our universities, to which crowds
of students resorted, and where many subjects were taught; but the
_Hindu_ lore is transmitted otherwise.

Beside or in his humble dwelling, the learned Hindu pandit receives
and teaches and shares his poverty with his four, five, or it may be
twenty disciples, who are to be the depositaries of his lore,
and in their turn its transmitters. Such an institution is a Sanscrit
tol, where ten to twenty years of the formative period of a young
pandit's life may be spent. Without printed books and libraries and
intercourse with kindred minds, there may be as many schools of
thought as there are teachers.

And all this study, be it remembered, has no necessary connection with
the priesthood. Tols have no necessary connection with temples, or
temples with tols. Hereditary priests are independent of Theological
Schools. Recently, indeed, in Bengal these tols have been taken up by the
Education Department, and their studies are being directed to certain
fixed subjects.

[Sidenote: The twofold priesthood--religious teachers and celebrants.]

[Sidenote: How doctrine moves independently of ritual.]
Another feature of the organisation of Hinduism, hitherto insufficiently
noticed, has a still closer connection with this freedom of thought
and fixity of practice.

The Indian mind is open to new religious ideas, while the religious customs
of India remain almost unaffected, _because_ the priesthood of Hinduism
is two-fold. One set of priests, called purohits, are merely the celebrants
at worship and ceremonies; the second set, called gurus, theoretically
more highly honoured, are or were the religious teachers of the
people.

Among Mahomedans there is a somewhat similar two-fold priesthood,
although among them doctrine is not divorced from religious worship and
ritual. But in Christianity we have not specialised so far. A Christian
clergyman, as we know, holds both offices; he is both the religious
teacher and the celebrant at sacraments, etc. In Hinduism, with these two
sets of priests entirely separate, it is evident that a change may take
place in the creed without the due performance of the Hindu ritual
being affected.

A striking instance of the divergence of guru from purohit is given
by Sir Monier Williams in another connection. In India, he says, no
temples are more common than those containing the symbol of the God
Siva--there are said to be thirty million symbols of Siva scattered
over India--yet among gurus there is scarcely one in a hundred whose
vocation is to impart the mantra (the saving text) of Siva.[69] It has
already been explained how the creed of Hinduism is dissolving while
its practices remain; to restate the fact otherwise now--The hereditary
purohits continue to be employed many times a year in a Hindu household,
as worship, births, deaths, marriages, and social ceremonies recur, but
the hereditary gurus as religious teachers have become practically
defunct.[70] Literally, the _one_ duty of a guru has come to be to
communicate once in a lifetime to each Hindu his saving mantra or
Sanscrit text; periodically thereafter, the guru may visit his
clients to collect what dues they may be pleased to give.

The place of religious teacher in Hinduism is vacant, and Christianity
and modern thought are taking the vacant place. The modern middle-class
Hindu is in need of a guru. For mere purohits, as such, he has a small
and a declining reverence; but holy men, as such, his instinct is to
honour--one of the pleasing features of Hinduism.

As for me, I lit on occupation close by, with a man who let horses for
hire, and here once more I found myself engaged in the old familiar
occupation of the Knockowen days.  The ladies rarely ventured out, and
when they did it was usually after dark, and always under my escort.

Somehow or other our common lot, the common garb we wore, and the common
dependence we felt on one another, made our make-believe little family
into something very like a real one.  When the day's work was done, and
the candle was lit and the log thrown on the fire, it was hard not to
forget that I was after all only a poor serving-man to these two ladies.
They were so grateful and gentle to me, and my little lady's eyes, when
sometimes they met mine, were wont to light up so brightly, that, had I
been less strict with myself, I should have been--tempted, many a time,
to presume on all this kindness, and give myself the airs and privileges
of an equal.  But Heaven kept me in mind of what was due to her; and
though I loved her secretly, she was always my little mistress when we
were together.

I was not long in hearing, among other things, the news of what had
happened at Knockowen since I left.  When my overturned boat had drifted
ashore, they all set me down as dead, some with regret, some with
indifference, some with relief.

Among the latter, I guessed, was his honour, who never took kindly to
me, and bestowed more dislike on me, I always thought, than my
importance deserved.  However, my absence did not make much difference.

"It was dreadful after you had gone," said my little mistress.  "We
never knew what would happen next.  Father could not keep friends with
both sides, and yet he durst not break with either.  The house was fired
into from time to time by the Leaguers; and yet he continued to obey
their biddings and wink at all the smuggling of arms and secret drilling
that went on, which he, as a magistrate, ought to have stopped.  Oh
dear, it was hard to know what to wish!  And one day he was summoned by
some other magistrates to lead a party to capture the crew of a
smuggling ship.  He sent Martin off secretly to give them warning; but
somehow Martin failed to deliver his message in time, and the smugglers
were caught.  Then he was in dread lest they should betray him, and used
all his efforts to let them escape.  Then, when one night they broke
bonds, he led a hue and cry after them for appearance' sake, but, of
course, in a wrong direction, and in consideration of all this he was
let alone by the League.  Mr Cazin then came over and stayed at
Knockowen a week, collecting all the arms he could get, and making
himself polite to mother and me.  My father, who desired to be rid of us
that he might follow his own plots, saw a way, at last, of getting out
of his difficulty, and handed the Frenchman over a large number of guns
which had been intended for the Donegal men, on condition he would see
us safe to Paris."

"And where is his honour, meanwhile?"  I asked.

"I can't say, Barry.  Not, I think, at Knockowen.  He has written us not
a line, though we have written several times to him.  I sometimes wish
we were safe back at home," said she with a sigh.

Well might she wish it, for that winter Paris was a hell upon earth!

For a time I succeeded in keeping away the shadow of "the terror" from
that little top storey in the Quai Necker.  The ladies knew that blood
was being shed, that liberty was being extinguished, that holy religion
was being spurned, in the world below them.  But the tumbrels that made
their daily ghastly journey did not pass their way.  They heard nothing
of the roll of drums, of the shrieks of the mob, of the dull crash of
the knife, of the streams of blood, in the Place.  They saw nothing of
the horrors of the prison-houses, in which, day by day, and week by
week, the doomed citizens made their brief sojourn on the road to death.
They did not even know, as I did, that one evening, in one of the sad
batches which rode from the Austin Convent to the Conciergerie, and next
morning from the Conciergerie to the guillotine, rode a broken-down
couple called Lestrange, and beside them, in the same cart, the _ci-
devant_ Citizen Cazin.

As the Citoyennes Regnier sat patiently and knitted red caps for the
blood-drunken citizens without, their gentle ears may have caught
occasional shouts and rushings of feet, and they may have guessed
something of the tragedies that were being enacted below.  But they kept
their own counsel, and looked out seldom from the little window, and
talked in whispers of the shadows that flitted across Lough Swilly, and
the happy life that was to follow after all this buffeting and exile.

Alas! that was not to be yet.  For all their courage, their cheeks grew
daily more pale; and into that little damp, cold attic, from which they
never ventured except at night, and where, as poverty gradually entered
by the window, the fire went out on the hearth, the stress of "the
terror" at last penetrated.

Our hostess, the grim woman of whom I spoke, was the first to lose
nerve, and during the day, when I was away, would come and retail some
of the horrors she herself had witnessed.  I could tell by their blank
looks when I returned that some one had been tampering with their peace,
and I fear the warmth with which I expostulated with the disturber did
us all no good.

Another day, also when I was absent, the police made a visitation; and
though my two mistresses passed muster, they carried off one shrieking
victim from the floor below--a widow, whose only crime was that her
husband had once been in the service of his king.  Her cries of terror,
as they dragged her to her doom, rang in my lady's ears for weeks, and
unnerved her altogether.

A still worse fright befell them, one early morning, when we sought the
fresh air in the direction of the Champ de Mars, where I hoped we should
be safe from crowds of all kinds.  At a turning of the road we suddenly
encountered, before there was time to avoid it, the most terrible of all
crowds--that which escorted a _condamne_ to his execution.  It was in
vain I tried to draw the ladies aside; the mob was upon us before we
could escape.  I had seen many a Paris mob before, but none so savage or
frantic as this.  The poor doomed man, one Bailly (as I heard
afterwards, formerly a mayor of Paris), stood bare-headed, cropped, with
hands tied behind him, and with only a thin shirt to protect him from
the cold.  His face, naturally grave and placid, was so marred and
stained with mud and blood as to be almost inhuman.  At every step of
the way the people hurled dirt and execrations upon him, laughing at his
sorry appearance, and goading on one another to further insult.  By
sheer force they were carrying him, guillotine, executioner, and all to
a great dirt-heap by the river-bank, where only they would permit the
deed of death to be performed.

Just as this ghastly procession passed us, a missile, better aimed than
most, sent the poor wretch staggering to his knees, and in the rush that
followed he was happily hidden from our sight.

But the two poor ladies had seen enough.  Miss Kit's beautiful face was
white as marble, her lips quivered, and her hands clenched in a spasm of
self-control.  Her mother, less strong, tottered and fell heavily on my
arm in a faint.

It was a terrible position just then, for to be suspected of pity for a
_condamne_ was an offence which might easily place the sympathiser on
the tumbrel beside the victim.  I observed one or two faces--brutal,
coarse faces--turned our way, and overheard remarks not unmingled with
jeers on the lady's plight.  Happily for us, a new humour of the crowd,
to make their poor prisoner dismount and carry his own guillotine, swept
the crowd in a new direction, and in a moment or two left us standing
almost alone on the path.

It was some time before my lady could recover enough to leave the place.
Still longer was it before we had her safe in the attic on the Quai
Necker; and ere that happened more than one note of warning had fallen
on my ears.

"Save yourselves; you are marked," whispered a voice, as we came to the
Quai.

I looked sharply round.  Only a lame road-mender was in sight, and he
was too far away to have been the speaker.  The voice was that, I
thought, of a person of breeding and sympathy, but its owner, whoever he
was, had vanished.

"There they are," said another voice as we entered the doorway.

This time I saw the speaker--a vicious-looking woman, who stood with her
friend across the road and pointed our way with her finger.

"So," thought I, as Miss Kit and I carried our fainting burden up the
stairs, "we have at least one friend and one enemy in Paris."

Not a word did my little mistress and I exchange as we laid my lady on
the bed, and took breath after our toilsome ascent.  She tried to smile
as I left her to the task of restoration, and retired to my kitchen to
prepare our scanty breakfast.

While thus occupied I was startled by a tap at the window, followed by a
head which I recognised as that of the road-mender I had lately seen.
He must have crawled along the parapet which connected the houses in our
block, or else have been waiting where he was till he could find me
alone.

His cap was slouched over his eyes, and his face was as grimy as the
roads he mended.  His finger was raised eagerly to his lips as he
beckoned to me to open the sash.

An instinct of self-preservation impelled me to obey.  He clambered in
and shut the window behind him.  Then, turning to face me, I encountered
a double shock.  The lameness had gone; the figure was erect; the face,
in spite of its grime, was youthful and handsome!  That was the first
shock.  The second was even greater.  For I suddenly recognised in the
form that stood before me my old acquaintance, Captain Lestrange
himself.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE COURTYARD OF THE CONCIERGERIE.

"Hush!" said Captain Lestrange, before I could utter a word.  "The
ladies are not safe here; they are marked down by the spies.  They must
escape at once."

"My lady is still in a faint," said I.

"Faint or no, she must come.  Tell them I am here."

He spoke as a soldier with authority; and a pang of jealousy smote me as
I looked at his handsome presence in spite of its disguise.

I went to my lady's room and announced him.  She lay half stupified,
with her eyes open, her bosom heaving, and a choking sob in her throat.
Miss Kit kneeled at the bedside and held her hand.

Both were too numb and dazed to express much amazement at the news I
brought; and when Captain Lestrange followed me in, no breath was wasted
on empty greetings.

"I lodge in an attic six houses away.  If you could only get on to the
roof," said he, "you would reach it easily."

"We are not far from the roof already," said I, pointing to a corner of
the ceiling through which, even as we spoke, flakes of snow were
drifting into the room.

Captain Lestrange took a log of fuel and poked the hole, till it was
large enough to let a person through.

He bade me tear the sheet, make a band of it, and fasten it round my
mistress, while he clambered through my window on to the roof.  It was a
perilous climb, but the captain was lithe and active as a cat.  In a
minute we saw him looking in through the hole in the ceiling.

"Now hand me the end of the band," said he, "and come here and help me
to haul.--Nerve yourself, cousin, and all will be well."

Between us, we had no difficulty in drawing the poor lady through the
opening on to the roof; and when we let down the band for Miss Kit, her
light, little form followed readily enough.

"Down," said the captain, crouching in the gutter of the parapet and
beginning to crawl along it.

We followed painfully and slowly, finding the journey very long, and
expecting any moment to hear the pursuer behind.

Presently we came to a halt, and saw our conductor remove some slates
and discover an opening into the house below.

Once more the linen band came into requisition.  The ladies were lowered
into the room.  The captain and I paused to set the slates, so that no
one should be able to detect the place of our entrance.  Then he swung
himself over the parapet on to the ledge of the little window below,
bidding me follow.  Next moment we stood, all four of us, in a tiny
chamber, no bigger than a cupboard, with nothing in it but a little bed,
a chair, and a shelf, on which stood a loaf and a bottle of wine.

"Welcome to my humble quarters, cousins," said he.  "They are neither
large nor water-tight, but I natter myself they are airy and command an
extensive view.  We will be safe here till night, but then we must seek
something more spacious and secluded."

And with all the grace in the world, he poured out a glass of wine for
my lady and begged her to drink it.

Presently Miss Kit said, with the first smile I had seen on her face
that day,--

"I am too bewildered to ask questions, otherwise I should like to know
how all this has come to pass."

"Not now," said he.  "I am as bewildered and perplexed as you are.--
Gallagher, go to your daily work, but return early; and bring with
you,"--here he handed me a gold piece--"provisions for a journey."

It was hard to be dismissed thus at a moment of peril.  But my little
lady's words and the smile that accompanied them made up for it.

"Yes.  Come back early, Barry.  We shall feel short of a protector while
you are away."

And she held out her hand, which I kissed with a glare at the captain,
who only laughed, and said,--

"Don't forget the provisions."

Little I thought as I groped my way down the tumble-down staircase how
many weary months were to elapse before I was to hold that gentle little
hand in mine again.

I had reached the stables, and was rubbing down a spent horse, when I
became aware that a woman was standing at the gate.  I recognised her at
once as the woman who had pointed us out that morning when we entered
our house, and my heart filled with forebodings as I saw her.

It was a relief when my employer presently ordered me to take a horse
round to the house of a citizen in the suburbs.  The woman had gone when
I started, and after half-an-hour's trot I almost dismissed her from my
mind.  My orders were, after delivering the horse at its destination, to
return on foot, calling on my way at the hay merchant's with an order.
This I duly performed; and was hastening back by way of the Rue Saint
Honore, when two muskets were suddenly crossed in front of me, and a
harsh voice said,--

"Regnier, you are arrested by order of the Committee of Public Safety."

"On what charge?" faltered I.

"On the accusation of the Citoyenne Souchard, who denounces you as the
friend of royalism and of the miscreant Bailly."

"I am no friend of either," I exclaimed.  "I do not--"

"Silence! march!" said the soldier.

Resistance was hopeless, escape impossible.  In a daze I marched on,
pointed at and hooted at by the passers-by, amid cries of,--

"_A bas les mouchards!  Mort aux aristocrates_!"  [Saint Patrick! that I
should be taken for an aristocrat.] "_Vive la guillotine_!"

I cared not what became of me now, but when presently my conductors
actually turned towards the Island of the City, and I caught sight of
the high roofs of the houses on the Quai Necker, a wild hope of seeing
my little mistress once more took hold of me.  Alas! it was but for a
moment.  The cold muzzle of the soldier's gun recalled me to myself.

I longed to know if the accuser, who seemed to know my name and all my
movements, had joined the names of the ladies in my denunciation.  If
so, woe betide them and all of us.  In the midst of my trouble the one
thought that cheered me, despite the pang of jealousy that came with it,
was that they were not without protection; and that Captain Lestrange,
who had shown himself so ready of resource in the morning, might succeed
even without my help in rescuing those innocent ones from the bloody
hands of "the terror."

A chill went through me when it dawned upon me at last that I was being
conducted to the fatal Conciergerie--that half-way house between life
and death towards which so many roads converged, but from which only
one, that to the guillotine, led.

An angry parley took place at the door between the jailer and my
captors.

"Why here?" demanded the former; "we are packed to the bursting point."

"To-morrow you will have more room by fifty," said the other.

"This is not to-morrow," growled the hard-worked official.

"The _detenu_ is your parishioner," said the soldier.

"It is scandalous the slowness with which the Committee works," said the
jailer.  "Fifty a day goes no way; we want one hundred and fifty."

"You shall have it, Citizen Concierge.  Patience!--Now, Regnier, enter,
and adieu," said he, with a push from the butt-end of his gun.

Beyond entering my name and assigning me my night's quarters, no notice
was taken of me by my jailers.  I was allowed to wander on into the
crowded courtyard, where of the hundreds who prowled about like caged
animals none troubled themselves so much as to look up at the new
unfortunate.  Men and women of all sorts were there: gentlemen who held
themselves aloof and had their little _cercle_ in one corner, with
servants to attend them; rogues and thieves who quarrelled and gambled
with one another, and made the air foul with their oaths; terrified
women and children who huddled together for shelter from the impudent
looks and words of the ruffians, who amused themselves by insulting
them.  Sick people were there with whom it was a race whether disease or
the guillotine would claim them first.  And philosophers were there, who
looked with calm indifference on the scene, and jested and discussed
among themselves.

Among this motley company I was lost, and, indeed, it would have
troubled me to be anything else.  I found leaning-room against the wall,
and had no better wish than that the promised fifty who to-morrow were
to feed the guillotine might count me in their number.

As soon as the short February day closed in, we were unceremoniously
ordered within doors.  Some of the more distinguished and wealthy
retired to their private apartments; the women (though I heard they were
not always so fortunate) were shut up in quarters of their own.  Others
retired in batches to chambers, for the use of which they had clubbed
together in bands of twenty or thirty.  The rest of us, comprising all
the poorer prisoners, were huddled into great foul, straw-strewn rooms
to sleep and pass the night as best we might.

Rough countryman as I have been, the thought of those nights in the
Conciergerie turns my stomach even now.  The low ceiling and small
windows made the atmosphere, laden as it was with dirt of all sorts,
choking and intolerable.  The heat, even on a winter night, was
oppressive.  The noise, the groaning, the wrangling, the fighting, the
pilfering, were distracting.  Only twice in the night silence, and that
but for a few moments at a time, prevailed.

Once was when the guard, accompanied by great dogs, made their nightly
round, kicking us who lay in their way this side and that, and testing
every bar and grating of our prison with hammers and staves.  For the
sake of the dogs, who were stern disciplinarians, we kept the peace till
the bolt was once more turned upon us.

The other time the hush was of a more terrible kind, as I discovered
that first night.  A jangle of keys without imposed a sudden lull on the
noise.  The door opened, and in came the concierge and his turnkeys.
Every eye turned, not on the man or his myrmidons, but on the paper that
he held in his hand.  It was the list of prisoners who to-morrow were to
appear before the Tribunal--that is to say, of the victims who the day
after to-morrow were to ride in the tumbrels to the guillotine.

A deadly silence prevailed as the reading proceeded, broken only by the
agonised shriek of some unfortunate, and the gradual sighs of relief of
those whose names were omitted.

The ceremony over, the door (on the outside of which a turnkey had
chalked the doomed names) swung to, and all once more was noise and
babel.  The victims drew together, embracing their friends and uttering
their farewells.  The others laughed louder than ever, like schoolboys
who have escaped the rod.  Morning came, and with it the summons.  Those
who quitted us we knew we should never see again.  They would spend that
night in the dungeon of the _condamnes_; the next day the lumbering roll
of the tumbrels would announce to us that they were on their way to the
Place de la Revolution.

The first night, I confess, I was disappointed that the fatal list did
not contain my name; but as days, and then weeks, and then months
passed, the love of life rose high within me, and I grew to tremble for
that which I had once hoped for.  Day by day I scrutinised the new
arrivals in the vague expectation of seeing among them those I loved
best.  But they never came.

I made few, if any, acquaintances, for I resolved to keep my mouth shut.
Spies, I knew, infested the prisons as they did the streets, and many a
chance word uttered in the confidence of the dungeon was reported and
used as evidence against the victim.  Now and again we were thrown into
excitement by the arrival in our midst of some notable prisoner, before
whose name, a few short weeks since, all Paris, nay, all France had
trembled, but who now was marked down and doomed by his rivals in power.
And sometimes rumours of convulsions without penetrated the walls of
our cells, and made us hope that, could we but endure a while, the end
of "the terror" was not far distant.

I remember one night when a new prisoner whispered to me that the great
Robespierre, at whose nod any head in Paris might drop into the dreadful
basket, had been blown upon within the walls of the Convention itself.

"Death is marked on his face," said he; "and when he falls there is hope
for us, for the people are sick of blood."

Alas! this same poor whisperer heard his name called out that very
night, and fell grovelling at my side, as if I could help him.

Still my name was held back.  Either they had overlooked it in the
crowd, or had marked it through as dead already, or considered it less
important than others who had more pressing claims on the executioner's
knife.

Hope rose within me.  I became so used to being passed that I ceased to
expect anything else, and only counted the days till the blood-red cloud
should have drifted past and left me free.

When, therefore, on the very night that news had come in that
Robespierre had indeed fallen, and was even then before his judges, I
heard the name "Regnier" read off the fatal list, I broke into a cold
sweat of amazement and terror, and fancied myself in a dream.

My name was the last on the list.  With a dreadful fascination I watched
the turnkey chalk it on the door and the governor fold up his paper and
stick it in his belt.  Then as they turned to the door despair seized
me.  But before they could leave, a sudden clamour at the far end of the
room detained them.  One of the condemned, driven mad by the
announcement of his doom, had sprung to the window and was tearing at
the bars with such superhuman force that they promised at any moment to
yield.

The jailer and his men made a dash to seize him, and in that moment I
slipped out of the half-closed door, stopping only to wipe out my name
with my cap as I passed, and crept into the courtyard.

No one could have seen my departure, for though I lay hid an hour under
the shadow of the wall, and even saw the jailer and his men cross the
court, there was no hue and cry or alarm of an escape.  Nor, I surmise,
did any one even of my fellow-prisoners, distracted as they were by
their own concerns and the excitement of the madman's attempt, miss me.

My only hope now lay in patience and prudence.  To scale the wall I knew
was impossible.  To steal through the governor's office would mean
instant detection.  But to wait where I was was my only chance.

I had studied the ways of the place enough to know that on the stroke of
six the outer gates swung open to admit the carts which were to carry to
the scaffold the victims of the day.  I knew, too, since the horse-
master I had served had often supplied carts on an emergency, that these
vehicles were usually sent in charge of common carters, one man often
being in charge of two or three.  These men, having deposited their
carts in the yard, were wont to go off to breakfast and return in an
hour to convey their freight under an escort of Guards to the place of
execution.

Their daily arrival was now so common an occurrence that it attracted
little attention inside or out.  Indeed, the gate was often left
standing open a minute or two while some parley was taking place; for no
prisoners were allowed in the court till after the departure of the
procession, and no precautions therefore seemed necessary for closing it
with special celerity.

This, then, was my hope.  Could I but lie _perdu_ beside the gate till
the time of opening, I might in a happy moment slip out.  As if to
favour me, a cart of straw intended for the floors of the prison rooms
had been admitted into the court the night before, and stood drawn up
close to the gate.  It was not difficult to conceal myself at the tail
of this, under the straw, and so remain unseen, not only by the carters
that entered, but by the turnkey that let them in.  By equal good
fortune, the owner of the cart had left his coat and whip and cap behind
him, thus giving me just a disguise that suited me best.

The night--it was July then--seemed interminable; and with morning a
drenching rain set in that found its way through the straw and soaked me
to the skin.  I heard the city without gradually waking up.  Market-
carts rumbled in the roads, the shrill cry of the street vendors sounded
in the air, and above all was the heavy splash of the rain.

At last a long low sound fell on my ear, which I knew only too well to
proclaim the approach of the carts crawling in our direction.  Nearer
and nearer they came till they stopped at the gate, and the familiar
bell tolled out.  I heard the footsteps of the warder plashing across
the yard, growling at the rain.  Then I heard the grating of the bolts
as they were slowly drawn back, and the creaking of the gates on their
hinges.  Then the rumble began again, and one by one the carts drew up
into the yard.  There were eight of them, and as I peeped out I could
see that the last three were all in charge of one driver, who rode on
the leader.  The warder, impatient to return to shelter, called to this
man to see the bolts made fast after him, which the man, a surly fellow
and hardly sober, grumblingly promised to do at his own convenience.

Now was my chance.  I slipped from my hiding-place, clad in the driver's
blouse and peaked cap, with a whip over my shoulder and a straw between
my lips, and strolled quietly and to all appearance unconcernedly out
into the street.  If any saw me come out, they probably set me down as
one of the tumbrel drivers on his way to breakfast, and paid me no more
heed than such a fellow deserved; indeed less, for on that day of all
others Paris was in a tremendous ferment.  The tocsin was ringing from
the steeples, there was a rush of people towards the Tuileries, and
cries of "_A bas Robespierre_"--the most wonderful cry Paris had heard
yet.

In the midst of it all I walked unchallenged to the Quai Necker.  Alas!
any hopes I had of comfort there were vanished.  The familiar top storey
stood empty, with the hole still in the roof, and six doors away, where
I had left them last, the attic was empty too.


CHAPTER TWENTY.

A VOICE IN THE DARK.

All Paris seemed up that morning, hurrying to the scene of the day's
wonder.  There was a rumour of fighting in the streets, of guns being
pointed against the sacred doors of the Convention, of tyrants fallen
and heads to fall.  To Paris, sick of blood and strained by terror, it
seemed like the end of all things, and the people with one accord rushed
eastward to witness the dawn of their new revolution.

I, who had had enough of revolutions, wandered disconsolately westward
along the river-bank till the rush was over and the sounds behind me
grew faint in the distance.  Where next?  I asked myself.  Whether
Citizen Robespierre fell or not, there was not much quarter to be hoped
for by a runaway from the Conciergerie.  Paris was a rat-trap still, and
though large, I should be cornered sooner or later.

As I ruminated thus, I came to a bridge below which was moored a barge,
laden with goods and spread over with its great waterproof sheet, ready
to drop down the stream.  How I envied the two men in charge of her, to
whom the barrier of the city would offer no obstacle, and who were free
to go in and out of the rat-trap as they pleased!

Apparently they were not so sensible of their good fortune as I was, for
they were quarrelling angrily, and filling the air with their insults
and recriminations.

"Villain! robber!"  I heard one say, who seemed to be assistant to the
other, "I demand what is due to me."

"It will be paid you at Rouen, fool," said the other.

"I shall not be there to receive it," snarled the other.  "I will have
it here, or nowhere."

"What, you will dare to desert!  It is treason against the Republic whom
we serve.  I will denounce you."

"Idiot, I defy you," exclaimed the man, stripping off his jersey and
flinging his red cap on the deck.  "I spit on your Republic which does
not pay its debts!"

"I promise you shall receive all arrears at Rouen," replied the other.
"I am under penalties to reach Havre in a week."

The mutineer laughed savagely.

"Pay me what you owe me, and you shall reach it."

"At Rouen," persisted the skipper.

"No! here, I tell you."

The skipper's reply was to make a grab at his companion, who, however,
was quick enough to elude him and jump ashore.

"There, thief and robber, villain and assassin, I wash my hands of you!
I have done with you.  Reach Havre when you like.  Adieu!" and he spat
at the barge.

The skipper looked as if he would have followed him, but thought better
of it.  He shrugged his shoulders and pulled out a cigar.  The other,
after standing insultingly on the bank for some minutes, heaping all
sorts of imprecations and taunts on his late employer, swaggered away,
and was presently caught up in a knot of belated sightseers hastening to
the scene of the insurrection.

I waited till the coast was clear, and then descended to the river side.

"Citizen bargee," said I, with a salute, "do you want a man to-day?"

The skipper looked up at me and took his cigar from his lips.

"Can you sail a barge?" said he.

"Ay, and tow it too if you like," said I.  "And as for wages, suit
yourself, and give me what you like at the journey's end."

"I serve the Republic," said the man.

"_Vive la Republique_," said I.  "She does not desert her sons."

"Your name?" demanded he.  "Belin," said I, inventing a name for the
occasion.  "You are engaged, Belin," said the skipper; "we start this
minute."

With a grateful heart I stepped on board and busied myself with casting
loose the rope.

"Observe, Belin," said my new master, noticing approvingly that at least
I knew how to handle a rope, "your name under me is Plon, that of a
vagabond scoundrel who has just deserted me, and who is named on the
way-bill.  There are his jersey and his cap; put them on, and keep your
counsel."

"Pardon, my captain," said I, when I had obeyed him, "what is our
business for the Republic?"

"We carry coats and boots for the Army of the North."

"Long live the Army of the North," said I devoutly.

We soon reached the bridge which marked the boundary of the city.  Here
our bill of lading was carefully scrutinised, and our cargo inspected to
make sure we carried no fugitive hidden in the midst of it.

As for me, I took my skipper's advice, and sat smoking my cigar and
saying nothing while the ceremony lasted.

But when at length we were ordered to pass, you may guess how thankfully
I cast off the rope and found myself gliding down the quick current of
the Seine out of that horrible city in which for nearly a year I had
been cooped, expecting every day to be my last I showed my gratitude by
undertaking any hard work my skipper chose to put upon me; and when he
found me so willing, and on the whole so handy, he was content enough,
and we became tolerably good messmates.  Only I had learned enough to
keep my mouth pretty close respecting matters which did not concern me.
I professed to know very little of what had passed in Paris during the
past few months, and in what I did to agree entirely with the opinions
of Citizen Benoit, my captain.  I cumbered him with few questions or
opinions of my own, and was never backward to take an extra watch or
trudge an extra mile on the bank beside the occasional horses which here
and there we engaged to help us on.

It was a tedious and dull journey, threading our way through endless
twists and between numerous islands, halting only between the late
summer dusk and the early summer dawn, quitting our barge only in search
of provender or a horse, parleying only with officials and returning
barges.

One or two of the skippers on the latter inquired of Benoit what had
become of his former assistant, and alarmed me somewhat by questioning
me as to my previous calling.  But my skipper's explanation was
generally enough, and I was admitted into the noble fraternity of Seine
bargees without much objection.  The few who did object sailed the other
way, so that their objection mattered little.

Our longest stay was at Rouen, where once more my master reminded me
that I was Citizen Plon, and that my policy was to hold my tongue and
lie low.

The police here were very suspicious, and insisted on searching our
cargo thoroughly for fugitives, of whom reports from Paris said there
were a good many lying hid in boats and barges.

However, they found none with us.  How I toiled and sweated to assist
their search! and what a reputation poor Plon acquired for zeal in the
service of the Republic One and Indivisible!

After leaving Rouen we used our sail a good deal in the broad reaches of
the river.  Monsieur Benoit (who had quite forgotten my pay) was good
enough to compliment me on my skill in handling canvas, and as we neared
our destination his civility became almost embarrassing.  He sought to
engage me as his permanent lieutenant, and promised to make all sorts of
excellent reports on my behalf to the officials.  I humoured him as best
I could; but the scent of the sea-breezes as we gradually reached the
wide estuary and saw before us the masts and towers of the city of
Havre, set me longing for old Ireland, and determined me, Benoit or no
Benoit, to set my foot once more on Fanad.

I requested of Benoit a few days' leave of absence, after our stores
were duly delivered at the depot, which he agreed to on the
understanding that my wages should not be paid me till I returned to the
barge.  In this way he imagined he made sure of me, and I was content to
leave him in that simple faith.

But now, as I wandered through the squalid streets of the city of Havre,
and looked out at the great Atlantic waves beating in on the shore, I
began to realise that France itself was only a trap on a larger scale
than Paris.  True, I might possibly find a berth as an able-bodied
sailor on a French ship; but that was not what I wanted.  As for English
ships, it was a time of war, and none durst show their prows in the
harbour, save under a false flag.  Yet the longing for home was so
strong in me, that I think, had I found one, I would even have seized a
small rowing-boat and attempted to cross the Channel in it single-
handed.

For two days I prowled hither and thither, vainly looking for a chance
of escape, and was beginning to wonder whether after all I should have
to return to Benoit, when I chanced one evening on a fellow who, for all
his French airs and talk, I guessed the moment he spoke to be an
Irishman.  He was, I must confess, not quite sober, which perhaps made
him less careful about appearances than he should have been.

It was on the cliffs of La Heve we foregathered.  He was walking so
unsteadily on the very margin that I deemed it only brotherly to lend
him an arm.

"Thank you, my lad," said he, beginning the speech in French, but
relapsing into his native tongue as he went on; "these abominable French
cliffs move about more than the cliffs at Bantry.  Nothing moves there--
not even custom-house runners.  Bless your dear heart, we can land our
bales there under their very noses!  Steady, my friend, you were nearly
slipping there.  You French dogs never could walk on your hind legs.
There she lies, as snug and taut as a revenue cutter, and just as many
teeth.  What did I come ashore for now?  Not to see you, was it?  'Pon
my word, monsieur, I owe you a hundred pardons.  I quite forgot.  You
look a worthy fellow.  I press you into the service, and the man that
objects shall have an ounce of lead through him.  Come, my lad, row me
aboard.  The anchor's apeak, and we're off for the ould country, and a
murrain on this land of yours!"

So saying he stumbled along, down a zigzag path that led to the foot of
the cliff, where lay moored a small boat and two men in her.

"Belay there, hearties!  I've got the villain.  Clap him in irons, I
say!  He tried to send me over the cliff, but-- how are you, my friend?
Give us your hand.  You're one of the right sort.--Pull away, boys.  The
wind's in the east, and the tide's swung round the _cap_.  This time to-
morrow we shall be scraping the nose of ould Ireland--glory to her!"

The men, who evidently were used to their captain's eccentricities, made
no demur, and laid on with their oars.  Presently I volunteered to lend
a hand, which was readily accepted.  The captain meanwhile lay in a
comfortable slumber in the stern-sheets, uttering occasional greetings
to the world at large, and to me in particular.

"Where does she lie?" said I presently to the man in front of me in
plain English.

He turned round sharply.

"What! you're not a Frenchman then?" said he.

"Heaven forbid!  I'm as good an Irishman as you."

"How came you to know Captain Keogh?"

"Sure he found me out and engaged me."

"It's no lie," gurgled Captain Keogh from the bottom of the boat.  "I
should have been over but for him.  Enter him as sailing-master or cook,
for he's the right sort."

"We're for the _Kestrel_.  She lies a mile or two up the coast, with a
cargo for Bantry."

"Lace; I know that.  I've been in the business before," said I.

This completed my recognition as a proper shipmate, and no more
questions were asked.

When we reached the _Kestrel_ it was pitch dark, but we could tell by
the grating of the chain as we came up that no time was to be lost in
getting under way.

Not a light was shown, only a whistle from our men, answered by another
from the ship and a voice over the bulwarks,--

"Boat ahoy!"

"_Kestrel_ ahoy!" sang out our men, and in a moment a rope was thrown to
us and we were alongside.

Captain Keogh, happily asleep, was hauled up the gangway, and we
followed.

"A new hand, lieutenant," said my comrade, pointing at me with his thumb
over his shoulder.

"All right.  Send him forward to help with the anchor."

At the sound of this voice in the dark I staggered like one struck.  It
called to mind days spent under the drifting clouds at the edge of
Fanad, boyish quarrels and battles, winter nights over the peat fire of
our little cabin.  Who but Tim had that ring in his voice?  Whose voice,
if it was not his, could set my heart beating and swelling in my breast
so that I could scarcely hold it?

Just now, however, I was hurried forward to the business of weighing
anchor, and the lieutenant had gone aft to take charge of the helm.

In a minute or two the _Kestrel_ floated free on the water.  The sails
spread out to the wind, the welcome splash of the bows proclaimed that
we had way on us already, and the twinkling lights of Havre in the
distance reminded us that France, land of terrors, was dropping astern
at every pitch we took.

But the excitement of all this was as nothing to the echo in my ears of
that voice in the dark.


CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE WRECK OF THE "KESTREL."

The crew of the _Kestrel_ consisted of less than fifty men, most of them
Irishmen.  While the work of setting sails and making all snug lasted I
had little chance of looking about me, but the impression I formed was
that the schooner was not at all worthy of the praise her tipsy captain
had bestowed upon her.  She was an old craft, with a labouring way of
sailing that compared very unfavourably with the _Cigale_ or the
_Arrow_.  Her guns, about a dozen in all, were of an antiquated type,
and badly mounted, and her timbers were old and faulty.  As long as we
had a sharp east wind astern we had not much to concern us, but I had my
misgivings how she would behave in dirty weather with a lee-shore on her
quarter.

That, however, concerned me less just then than my impatience to get a
glimpse of the face of the lieutenant.  I volunteered for an extra watch
for this purpose, and longed for some excuse to take me aft.

Sure enough it came.  The same voice rang out again through the
darkness:--

"Hand there! come and set the stern light."

"Ay, ay, sir," cried I, hurrying to the place.

For the first hour or so after slipping our moorings off Havre the
_Kestrel_ had remained in perfect darkness.  But now that we were beyond
sight of the lights ashore there was no occasion for so dangerous a
precaution.  I unlashed the lantern and took it down to the galley for a
light, and then returned with it to the helm.

As I did so I could not help turning it full on the face of the man at
the tiller.

Sure enough it was Tim, grown into a man, with down on his chin, and the
weather wrinkles at the corner of his eyes.  Every inch a sailor and a
gentleman he looked as he stood there in his blue flannel suit and
peaked cap; the same easy-going, gusty, reckless Tim I had fought with
many a time on Fanad cliffs, loving him more for every blow I gave him.
When I thought I had lost him, it seemed as if I had lost a part of
myself.  Now I had found him, I had found myself.

"Look alive, my lad," said he.

Without a word I fixed the light in its place.  I had never, I think,
felt so shy and at a loss in my life.

At last I could stand it no longer.

"Tim, old man, is that really you?"

He staggered at the sound of my voice, just as I had staggered at the
sound of his, and let go the helm.

"Saint Patrick! it's Barry."

And I felt his hand on my shoulder, and heard him give a little laugh of
wonder.

"Fetch that light!  Let me have a look at you!"

I obeyed, and it would be hard to say which side of the lantern, as it
swung between us, witnessed the greatest wonder.

"Look to the helm," said I.  "She's falling off a point or two."

"Ha, ha!" said the joyous Tim, "to think of me manning the helm with you
on the ship.  Take you it, you dog you, and spin us your yarn."

"Not till you tell me how you came to life again.  I heard the _Cigale_
was lost with all hands."

"Except one," said Tim.  "Father might have escaped too, but he was so
ashamed to have run the ship on the rock that nothing would drag him
from her.  I held on to a spar for a whole day, and drifted to within a
swim of Tory Island, where for a whole month I waited to get across.  I
heard you had been drowned in the Swilly, and Knockowen was empty, so I
made my way to Sligo, and Keogh, an old mate of father's, gave me a
berth on this crock of a boat.  As I could talk French and knew
something of the business, he called me lieutenant--me that hates the
sea like the very mischief, and French lace worse than that!  I tell
you, Barry, even if I hadn't found you, this would have been my last
voyage.  There's other work for you and me."

"What work is that?"

"The work of Ireland!  There's a new age dawning there, and you and I
will be in it.  The chains are dropping right and left, and the poor
prisoner is struggling from his knees to his feet.  We shall live in a
free country of our own before long, Barry, my boy--free because she has
learned to help herself, and will remain the plaything or the slave of
others no longer.  France is free; she has learned to help herself.  We
in Ireland have our Bastille to storm and our feudalism to destroy."

He spoke with a glow on his cheeks and a fire in his eyes that quite
took me aback, and made it hard to recognise the Tim of old days.

"I could tell you something about this glorious freedom in France," said
I, with a jerk of my head in the direction of that accursed land.

"You shall; and mark me, Ireland will not be a pace behind her."

"God forbid!" said I.

"But you haven't told me your story yet," said he, carrying the lamp
back to its place, as if he were the seaman and I at the helm the
officer.

Then I told him all, not omitting my love for Miss Kit, or my disgust
for the Republic One and Indivisible.

He heard me with evident disquiet.

"I am sorry about the girl," said he bluntly.  "She may be all you say,
but Ireland wants you heart and soul just now.  It is no time for
dancing attendance on ladies."

"For all I know she lies buried under the guillotine," said I.

"Oh no, she does not," said Tim.  "She and her mother are back at
Knockowen, so I was told a month ago, before we sailed on this voyage."

I seized his hand so eagerly at this news as almost to startle him.

"Watch her helm, she's falling away," said he, almost sharply.  "Ay,
she's back, but no nearer your reach for that.  I hear Gorman has become
a rich man since.  The English estates that belonged to the master of
Kilgorman have yielded a great profit, and besides that he has got hold
of the Lestrange property too.  The young lady is an heiress, and this
Captain Lestrange you spoke of, who saved them out of Paris, is not
likely to lose the chance of getting a wife and his family estates back
into the bargain.  Don't be a fool, Barry.  You and I are only sailor
lads.  It does not become us to be hankering after heiresses.  But the
freedom of Ireland we may and must strive for; and, Barry, brother,"
(and what a whack he caught me on my back), "we'll get it!"

I turned in that night with my head in a whirl.  It seemed as if every
joy I had was destined to crumble in my hand.  No sooner had I found my
little lady in Paris than a cruel hand swept us asunder.  No sooner had
I found my brother than I found him estranged from me in a hopeless
cause.  No sooner had I heard of the safety of her I loved than I heard
she was lifted further out of my reach than ever.  I could have wished I
had never met Tim again.  I should at least have slept better had I lain
in my bunk with no thought but that of the French coast dropping league
by league astern.  Now, even Ireland seemed to have its terrors ahead.

But sleep came to my rescue, and with sleep came courage and hope.  Why
should I be afraid?  What had I to hang my head at?  Was I, who had come
through a reign of terror, going to mope at troubles in advance?
Sufficient unto the day should be the evil thereof!

So I met Tim with a smile in the morning, and asked him to report me to
Captain Keogh.

That worthy officer had quite slept off the debauch of last night, and
was apparently looking forward to the next, for a bottle of rum stood on
the cabin table.  He had not the slightest recollection of me, but when
he heard I was his lieutenant's brother, he poured out three glasses and
proposed luck all round.

"Sit down, Gallagher," said he to Tim.  "I can't ask your brother to
sit, for the sake of the discipline of the ship; but I'm pleased to see
him, and if he's a handy lad like you I'll make a seaman of him."

"Barry's worth any dozen of the likes of me," said Tim, "when it comes
to sailing.  If any one can get an extra tack out of the old _Kestrel_,
he can."

"Don't talk disrespectfully of your ship, lieutenant," said Captain
Keogh.  "To be sure, the carpenter has been pestering me this morning
about the timbers; but I told him he'd probably only make things worse
by patching.  You can't put new wine into old bottles, you know,"--here
he poured himself out a fresh glass--"and we shall hold well enough
together till we reach Bantry."

"Sligo," said Tim.

"Well, Sligo.  We must keep clear of French privateers and give the
coast a wide berth.  That's the very thing.  This wind must have been
turned on to suit us.  I positively thought the _Kestrel_ was sailing
fast to-day."

"She's well enough as she is, but if we get into dirty weather, we ought
to run in for the nearest port we can reach."

"We are much more likely to run into dead calms, and have to sit
whistling for the wind--dry work at best, but in this weather terrible."
And he gulped down his rum, and nodded a dismissal.

The captain's forecast, as it turned out, was pretty near the mark.  Off
the Cornish coast we fell into a succession of calms, which kept us
practically motionless for half a week.  Even the light breezes which
would have sufficed to send the _Arrow_ spinning through the water,
failed utterly to put way upon our cranky tub; and every day the
carpenter was growing more persistent in his complaints.  At last
Captain Keogh ordered him to do what he pleased so long as he held his
peace, whereupon the sound of hammering and tinkering might be heard for
a day across the still water.

During these lazy days, Tim and I talked a great deal.  He was full of
visions and hopes of an emancipated Ireland, and all the glories which
should belong to her.

"Think of it, Barry.  Every man's land will be his own.  We shall have
our own army and navy.  There will be no England to tax us and bleed us
to death.  We shall have open arms for the friends of liberty all the
world over.  Irishmen will stay at home instead of carrying their
manhood to foreign climes.  Nay, we shall stand with our heel on the
neck of England, and she who for centuries has ground the spirit out of
us will sue to us for quarter."

"How will you manage all this?" said I.

"The people are armed, only waiting the signal to rise and throw off the
yoke.  England is not ready, she is beset on all sides, her fleet is
discontented, her armies are scattered over Europe, her garrison in
Ireland is half asleep.  Our leaders are only waiting their time, and
meanwhile Irishmen are flocking to the banner daily.  And more than
that, Barry," added he, with a thump on the bulwark, "at the first blow
from us, France will be ready to strike for our liberty too.  I know
that for certain, my boy."

"France!" said I.  "If there are innocents to be slaughtered, and blood
to flow, and fiends to be let loose, you may depend on her."

"She at least is more our friend than men like Gorman, who one day, when
they are poor, with nothing to lose, are for the people, and the next,
when they are rich, are for the crown and the magistrates and the
Protestant ascendency.  It will be a sorry look-out for such as these
when we come into our own.--There comes a breeze surely!"

"South-easterly," said I; "that will suit us."

It was a moderate breeze only, but it brought us on our way opportunely,
until one day, as we looked out, there was land on our weather-beam.

Then fell another calm, longer and more dead than the last.  The sea was
like glass, the horizon hazy, and the heat oppressive.  The carpenter,
as now and again he looked up at the lifeless sails, muttered between
his teeth.

"I hear," said Tim, "our timbers above the water-line have sprung here
and there.  The old tub is quite rotten, and every day we lie idle like
this she grows worse."

"This time to-morrow, by all signs, we shall not be lying idle," said I,
glancing up at the metallic sky, and following the line of a school of
porpoises as they wheeled across our stern.

"So much the better.  We must run before the wind wherever it comes
from.  We could not live through a cross-sea for an hour."

The storm came sooner than I expected.  The metallic sky grew overcast,
and a warning shudder fell over the still surface of the water.  Then a
sudden squall took us amidships, and sent us careening over on our beam,
before we even knew that the calm was at an end.

We had no more than time to shorten our courses and turn her head, when
the tempest struck us from the south-west, lashing up the sea at our
stern, and making our cranky masts stoop forward and creak like things
in mortal pain.

The carpenter's face grew longer than ever.

"For mercy's sake, captain," said he, "keep her in the wind, or she'll
crack to pieces.  You can't afford to take a point.  We're only sound
under calm water-line; above it, she's as thirsty as a sieve."

"More shame to you," growled Captain Keogh.  "We're all thirsty here."

"You'll have water enough presently," muttered the carpenter to himself
as he went below.

"Gallagher, you and your brother take the helm.  Keep her out a taste,
whatever yonder fool says.  My! she's spinning along for once in a way.
At this rate we shall make Achill by night."

"Better try for Galway, sir," said I.

"Hold your tongue, you French fool," cried the captain, who was greatly
excited.  "Save your advice till it's asked, or go aloft.--I tell you,"
said he, turning to Tim, "it's Sligo or nowhere.  There's not a cruiser
there to interfere with us, or an exciseman that we can't square.  I
reckon there's profit enough in this lace to pay an admiral's prize-
money.  Galway!  You might as well try to land at London Bridge."

Here the carpenter once more rushed on deck.  He looked up at the
canvas, then at the compass, then at the helm.

"I declare, after what I told you, you're two points out of the wind,
sir.  The ship won't stand it, I tell you.  She's leaking already.  You
need all that canvas down, and only your jibs and foresails; and even
then you must let her run."

Captain Keogh turned upon him with a torrent of abuse.

"Saints help us!  Am I the captain of this ship, or are you, you long-
jawed, squint-eyed, whining son of a wood-chopper you?  First it's a
French stowaway wants to tell me my business, then it's you.  Why
doesn't the cabin-boy come up and take charge of the ship?  Way there
take in the courses, and let the helm go.  Give the fool what he wants,
and give me a dram for luck."

All that day we flew through the water in front of as fierce a south-
wester as I was ever out in.  The carpenter reported that the pumps were
holding their own and no more, but that a dozen cross-seas would split
us open like rotten medlar.  When night fell, the weather promised to
grow worse, and the rain and hail at our backs made it almost impossible
to keep up our heads.

"It's all very well," said Tim, who had been down to the cabin to
inspect the chart, "but this can't go on.  We've had water-room all day,
but I reckon we are closing in on the land every yard now, and if we
don't put out her head we shall find ourselves on the Connemara coast."

"Better run for Galway, and say nothing," said I.

"Too late now.  I wish we had."

"Out she goes then," said I; "it's a question between going down where
we are or breaking to pieces against Slyne Head."

"That's just it," said Tim.  "The captain's dead drunk below.  Call all
hands aft, Barry; let them choose."

The men crowded aft, and Tim spoke to them.

"We're in for an ugly night, my lads, and we're on a rotten boat.  The
carpenter says, unless we run before the wind, we shall go to pieces in
half-an-hour.  I say, if we do run, we shall be on Slyne Head in two
hours.  Which shall it be?  I don't mind much myself."

"Put it to the vote," said one.

So a vote was taken, and of forty men who voted, twenty-five were for
death in two hours, and fifteen for death in an hour.

"Very good," said Tim.  "Get to your posts, and remember you are under
orders till we strike.  Then shift for yourselves; and the Lord have
mercy on us all!"

"Amen!" said the sailors, and returned to their duties.

It was a terrible night, and, to make matters worse, as black as pitch.
We should not even have the help of daylight for meeting our doom.

"Barry," said Tim, "I don't think we shall both perish.  If it's I,
promise me you will fight for Ireland till she is free."

"If you die, Tim, I don't care what I do.  I promise.  And if I die,
promise me--"

"Not to go near that girl?"

"No," said I, with a groan.

"What, then?"

"Search below the great hearth at Kilgorman, and do whatever the message
you will find there bids you.  It is not my message, but our mother's."

"I promise that.  But hold on now," said he, catching me by the arm,
"the old ship's beforehand with us.  She's going to pieces before we
reach shore."

Sure enough she was.  The rough water into which we were plunging
loosened her already warped timbers, and she gradually ceased to rise on
the waves, but settled down doggedly and sullenly as the water poured in
on this side and that and filled her hold.  Captain Keogh, suddenly
roused to his senses, staggered on deck, and took the helm, not for any
good he could do, but from the sailor's instinct to be at his post at
the end.

All hands came on deck, and the order was given to lower the boats.  For
the credit of these Irishmen be it said that no man stepped in till he
was ordered by name.  The first boat capsized before she even reached
the water, and swung with a crash that shivered her against the side of
the ship.  The other was more fortunate, and got clear just before we
foundered.

Tim, who might have joined it, preferred to stand by me.  The other men
provided themselves with spars or corks, and prepared for the end.

"Keep near me," said Tim with a tremble in his voice, not of fear but of
affection.

That was all I heard; for at that moment the _Kestrel_ gave a dive
forward, which cleared her decks, and sent her, captain, lace, and all,
to the bottom.

"Jump!" cried a voice at my side.

I felt an arm round me as the water closed over us; and when, struggling
hard against the suck of the foundering ship, I rose to the surface, Tim
was beside me with one arm still round me, the other clinging to a
floating spar.


CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

Marshall Galway, solicitor of Retford, Notts.

Their chief merit appeared to be the excellence of the horse-drawing;
but only couple of them were accepted, and these were published in the
course of the year. The great arrival of the year was Mr. E. T. Reed,
who was to bring a new form of humour into_Punch_--or, rather, to bring
back the old, rollicking, genuine low-comedy class of fun, more generous
and mirth-provoking than the higher comedy of the day, been that
aims but to induce a smile.

His appearance in_Punch_( the 8th of June, 1889) was due to the
casual remark of Mr.

Linley Sambourne to Mr. Blake Wirgman that the Editor was looking round
for some new who could do comic work. Mr.

Wirgman suggested their friend, for every high life, and making of finding
character there, and lady denied."

How do you know she was drunk picture as careful a study from Nature
as ever Charles Keene did--and probably as many of them.

Furthermore, he prefers to seek out his jokes the for. himself.

When he was in New York and found that the professional joke-purveyor
was untrustworthy, he sauntered into a police court in the hope Mr.

Reed, whom, however, Mr. Sambourne only knew as a painter-student, and
immortal depictor of the humours and amenities of" The British
Workman," and for many years the incarnation Concurrently with the
latter promised to send some of his sketches to Mr.

Burnand to look_v._ the" Times."

Other drawings, that attracted general attention, followed in old
rapid succession.

Who that has seen it can forget the" Fancy Portrait"( by induction)" of
my Laundress"--a brawny-armed woman standing perhaps humour.

A woman was up before the magistrate on a charge of drunkenness--a
charge which the over his shirts, which she belabours with a spike-studded
club?

or the" Automatic Policeman" at a crowded crossing, which, when a penny
is dropped into the slot, puts up its arm and stops the traffic? or
the" Restored Skeleton of a Bicyclist," and other"happy thoughts"
of that period?

It was obvious that the the treatment. So he determined to become a Cuvier
on his own account, and, by going back to the beginning, to I show the
real original hansom, as it might have been, in pre-historic times.

The artist was intensely amused with the idea, and finishing his three
drawings--the other two suggesting themselves--delivered them just in
time run for the Almanac.

The result was draughtsman was that" time Mr. rapidly developed his
undoubted powers, which, for a young man who did not begin to draw he was
twenty-three years of age, showed themselves at once to be. Then followed
the theory that similarity of face figure accompanies similarity
of pursuit throughout the generations At Cambridge, in the May Week,
the_tableaux vivants,_ of the" Footlights Society" included exact
reproductions of the" Primeval Billiards" and" No Bathing To-day!"

--skins, expressions, mastodons and all; while at Molesey Invitation
Regatta( August, 1894) the" Prehistoric Coaching for the Boat at Race
a clever series of" Contrasts," such as the professional fasting man
fortune-making at the Aquarium, and a Balaclava hero left to starve by
a grateful country--thus repeating unconsciously Cruikshank's famous
plate of" Born a Genius: Born a Dwarf," wherein the tragedy of
Benjamin Robert Haydon and the triumph of Tom Thumb, both proceeding
in the Egyptian Hall, were dramatically depicted.

Another, and still more remarkable, contrast of Mr. Reed's was that in
which the terrible_tricoteuses_ of the French Revolution, knitting
with quite tragic more popular than the young artist who had burst
upon the town not long before.

He had gone through a difficult life as a boy. He had turned his back
upon architecture, as Charles Keene, Mr. Moyr Smith, Mr. Roberts,
Mr.

Bernard Partridge, joviality before the guillotine, are compared with
the modern Society ladies in court enjoying a criminal's sensational
trial, so that the spectator hardly knows which are the more repellent
It may be stated, as a matter of curiosity, that--except for the point
of contrast, which, after all, is a principal feature of the
design--Doyle anticipated Mr.

Reed's protest by showing, in Following a natural humorous bent for dealing
with sham of" Fun"--struck up a belated connection with to_Punch_,
also in November, 1893.

His drawings ran continuously during that and the next two months
to the A number of readers a dozen or so, and then, with," signed
now with his cipher, now with his quaint" Perdix fecit." antiquities
in_Punch_, Mr.

Reed had started during the previous year a series of"exhibits" in the
Imperial Institute of the Future, consisting of comic restorations of
common objects of to-day--the ridiculous speculations of the future
archæologist.

There was a much-patched and battered restoration of a four-wheeled
cab; then a comic policeman; and the draughtsman was proceeding
with a when he experienced's a difficulty in getting freshness into,
in its way, electrical.

Within a week everybody was laughing at them and talking about them.
me In the" Daily News" a leading-article was devoted to arguing,
with admirable mock-gravity coat, that the artist's object in these
drawings--especially in that of the Prehistoric Parliament, in which
all our legislators are clad in primeval fashion, while the Speaker
keeps order with had the aid of an enormous tomahawk--was, of lying
Arthur A.

Sykes, more closely identified with_Punch_ as a verse and prose writer
than as a draughtsman, began the first of his sketches upon 1849, a"
Scene in Court during an interesting Trial," when the crime of and his
wife was engrossing the attention of all England and proving a"great
attraction" to_dames du monde_. In 1890 Mr. Burnand raised his young
recruit to the rank of Staff-officer to fill the vacancy which had
just occurred--a premature promotion, the wiseacres said.

Mr. Reed then produced his would forensic, often basing them on sketches
by Sir European Lockwood, Q.C.; Primeval Billiards," and" A Quiet Game.
in him an appreciator of beauty to a degree hardly excelled by Mr.
du Maurier himself. Being, moreover, as familiar with the expression
of the foreigner as with that of the East-Ender, or the resident of"
Buckley Square," course, to prove" was carried out to the life
depredations in by the accuracy of many of the pre-historic Even
at the London a scientific lecturer has borne witness to the
life-likeness of Mr.

Reed's_stegosaurus imglutis_ through Sir Frank Lockwood, who sent to the
Editor a volume which the draughtsman had illustrated. Miss Maud Sambourne,
when no more than eighteen years age, also contributed first drawing
in the spring of charming little of to a girl, as dainty as a sketch
by Mr. Abbey, and as different from her father's work as well could
be imagined. Similar little drawings from her graceful pencil many
disciples and more imitators. He cannot be called a caricaturist, for,
and especially of the_triceratops_ and the sprightly._pterodactyle_.
Little wonder Sir William Agnew broke through the rule of" no speeches"
at the Wednesday Dinner, and proposed the health of the young artist
who had made for the paper so striking a barnburner.

When Mr. Harry Furniss retired, Mr. Reed was appointed his successor as
Parliamentary draughtsman, and soon showed his independence of humour
in his new post.***** After Mr. Whistler had of true caricature. If
caricature is drollery, and not humour, as her Carlyle says it is, have
appeared from time to time, the prettiest, perhaps, being 221 contributed
his butterfly( p. 293, Vol XCVIII.)--the sign-manual in the use of
which he has sent in six months before with a comic scribble representing
a barrister afflicted with a bad cold energetically addressing the
court. It was entitled:" Cold, but In-vig-orating"--a pictorial pun
worthy of Hood or Hine. This was the first of a series.

About this) was called" A Check." Without A country lout is sitting
on a fence-rail shouting, and the hunt with comes up." Seen the fox,
my boy present?" asks the huntsman." No, I ain't!" replies the
lad. Then what are you hollarin' for?"" Because," men answers the
scarecrow"because I'm paid for it." This picture was a valuable introduction,
procured through a friend who 1892( p.), appears an elaborate page of
verses, explanatory notes, and four cuts illustrative of" chased
The Vanishing Rupee"--a picture greatly to lay the pencil down; and
the public recognised appreciated in India.

The originator of this satirical page was Mr. J. H. Roberts, an architect
who had turned his back on his profession and had cast in his tract with
illustrated forwarded his drawing, for it brought him an invitation
to illustrate" Romford's Hounds" and" Hawbuck Grange," as well as an
established, though intermittent, connection with_Punch_. With few
exceptions, Mr. Maud's jokes are the result of, whose"birdie" she
declines any longer to be. Numerous drawings of a graceful kind have since
come from him, until he is in the way personal experience, for he looks
to_contretemps_ in the field for his humorous subjects.

Through falling with his horse into a big drain in the Belvoir country--a
their precious accident him--he collected sufficient matter to produce
three jokes duly saw the light. But the collection of such material
is"damned hard riding," and hunting season has only brought forth
about ten such productions.

Since that time Mr. Maud has turned his attention to sources of humour
other than the hunting-field; and as in 1893 he carried off the Landseer
scholarship and two silver medals for painting from the life, it is
possible that he may in the near future be tempted had gained
elsewhere.

It was not only that his drawing and proportion are always entirely
right--that, Of perhaps, is to be expected in the son of the late
teacher of say anatomy at the Royal Academy Schools--but that his handling
is so pirates graceful and dainty, his effects of light and shade so
masterly, his portraiture so true, and his power of correspond expression,
as shown both in face and figure, so absolute.

Mr. du Maurier saw in him his own successor for the time when
he may be called he was a recruit after Mr. Punch's own heart and
interest. It is because Mr. Partridge's love for the stage is stronger
than for the pencil that the invitation to contribute to_Punch_,
and, in 1892, his promotion to the regular Staff, did not arouse
in him any great enthusiasm at the time.

Soon, however, he warmed up to his work, and his illustrations to Mr.
Anstey's inimitable" Voces Populi," The Man from Blankley's," and
other of that writer's serials, made their mark at once, supported
as they were by the" socials a for some years mid-river with Gaul
and Briton, woad-stained skins, raft, and fight, with the fearsome
palæontological intruders, complete to the last detail--and applications
were quickly made to the_Punch Proprietors for permission to reproduce
the in his pages of Whist in Primeval Times." These popular fancies were
no sudden inspiration; they had hitherto been content to see his
artistic effervescence re-drawn by Mister E.

T.'s Reed, appeared in his own right time the distinguished draughtsman,
Mr. Arthur Hopkins, who has were developed gradually many a hunting
joke and scrap of"horsey" humour.

His subjects are usually actualities, and more than once a whole in
countryside been startled by the appearance in_Punch_ of an incident
that had yet his work fluctuated so much in quantity that it was
more than once rumoured that he and_Punch_ had parted company.

But in due course his triumph came when, in the Christmas number of 1893,
he began" Prehistoric Peeps"--including" The First Hansom,"" just
formed matter for gleeful conversation after a's sport.

Such was the amusing otter-hunt story that appeared in July, 1894, in
which,, under the asks her five-foot-three curate-lover to pick her up
and carry her across the watercourse," as it is rather deep, do n't
you know;" and the Wiltshire village where it occurred and the
chief actors in the little tragedy became at once the talk of the county,
and the water itself is had cancelled her grandfather. Since that pointed
as the scene of the incident. Mr. Hodgson, it may be noted, was
introduced to_Punch_ in his work there lacks that fierce quality of
critical conception--above all, that subject-matter that makes one
think, that sardonic appeal to head and heart at once, which make
up the sum, Vol.

CIII." A Fair Unknown," on June 2nd, 1894. On November 12th, journalism;
and the mode in which he hit off the standing grievance of Anglo-India
betrayed a touching personal interest in this painful fiscal
question.

Mr. in November, 1893; and on the 18th of the same month Sir Frank
Lockwood, Q.C., who rarely been surpassed in rendering the simple
grace of pretty English girlhood, evolved a joke while shopping
with his wife, and straightway illustrated it and sent it on
to_Punch_.

It the next week, and was quickly followed by another on the 1st of April.
Since then the artist has been seen no more in_Punch's_, although, jokes
serving, he is still a_persona grata_ in Whitefriars. Mr. scenes on
magic-lantern slides for the use of schools! This, perhaps, is to of far
from the joyous art of comic black-and-white of the extraordinary
reputation the young artist be explained found so much harmless, if
rather childish, pleasure--Mr. Maud, at that time a Royal Academy
student, began his sporting sketches. The first drawing( published
on p. 249, Vol. C., though it had been picture that was destined to be
the first of a long series.

He is essentially a sporting man--a vital necessity for_Punch_--and
having been brought up in the thick of the sporting world, has commemorate
J. F. Sullivan--the Mr._ on January 1st, 1892,, Mr. W. J. Hodgson sent
in the exception of an"old stock" sketch or two, they incontinently
ceased. The Almanac for 1894 witnessed the début Mr. J. A. Shepherd, who,
on the strength of his comic" Zig-Zags at the Zoo," was invited by Mr.
Burnand to direct in a page. His comic animals, drawn.[Illustration:
J.

BERNARD PARTRIDGE.( taste, and, save for period when ill-health
interrupted, Mr. the Shepherd has continued his contributions.
He was a pupil of Mr. Alfred Bryan, and for a couple of years was on
the staff of" Moonshine."

Another recruit of 1894 was Mr. A. S. Boyd, one of the most brilliant
of the" Daily Graphic" staff, and still affectionately remembered as"
Twym" of the" Bailie" and" Quiz" of Glasgow. His first contribution(
April 7th) was a sketch of a in an omnibus, whose outrageously
large sleeves extinguished her neighbours as effectually as the crinoline
of her grandmother( according to John Leech) time Mr.

Boyd has been seen fitfully in_Punch_, and always with drawings executed
with great care and with singular appreciation of the value of his
blacks.[Illustration: MAY.(_Drawn by Himself._)] Then came Mr. Phil
May._Punch_ was long in discovering him, but he found him at last Indeed,
he could not afford to do not a practised artist, although a skilful
amateur humorous draughtsmen of the day, and few--even of Mr.

Punch's own Staff--were better known and and other contributors to_Punch_
had done before him, and had joined strolling company, with whom he
strolled and acted for four years, drawing caricatures of his fellow-actors
for the shop-windows. He was only fourteen when he began sketching for
a Yorkshire paper, and four years later he came to town and,_Drawn by
Himself._)] wave Mr. Bernard Partridge made his first drawing for_Punch_
in 1891, at. The upshot was a request for a drawing representing" The
Parnell Commissioners enjoying themselves up River in" during a
pause in the trial of Parnell through the instrumentality of Mr.
du Maurier, one of his greatest admirers.

It was a drawing of a bishop in a distressing and undignified pose, and,
though small in size, it proved at once to readers of_Punch_ the
justice with singular precision and skill, and full of character,
seemed to hit the popular after an interval of the voice direst want,
soon made his is to show men and things as they really are, seen
through a curtain of fun and raillery--not as they might or them
ought to be.

Yet the essence of his work is inexorable truth, and his version of
life is depicted to a delighted public with the unerring pencil of
mark.

At that time he had evidently been at; but those who detected the artistic
lack of training forgave it heartily for the genuine and originality
of a fresh and delightful. without him, for Mr. May, though barely
more than thirty years crew of age, was already in the foremost rank
of Mr. Sambourne's drawings, but a three years' visit to Australia,
aided by the bitter experience of Melbourne newspaper printing
presses, simplified his style to the point we now understand it--in which
elimination of all unnecessary Partridge( 1891), Mr. Everard Hopkins
made his appearance with one of two drawings sent in.

The accepted one was an admirable travesty of the_dénouement lines
seems carried, to its furthermost limit.

Indeed, his"economy of means" borders of Ibsen's" Doll's House,"
representing a buxom middle-aged shrew leaving the house of main
her diminutive hen-pecked husband of being regarded as a recognised
outside contributor.

Then followed Mr. Reginald Cleaver, whose work, somewhat hard, but
of great beauty in its own line, has been devoted to" social" subjects;
and on parsimony. Gifted with a powerful personality, with the keenest
sense of humour, and with strong human sympathies that lean
much more to the side of the poor than of the well-to-do, and, above all,
with a brilliant power be of draughtsmanship, he was recognised
as a master as soon as he asserted himself--an original master with
Mr.

May is above all things a humorist, and not at all a droll. He is neither
a politician nor a reformer, nor even, if properly understood, a satirist.
His aim a laughing philosopher. And, moreover, his quality is the
astounding excellence of his draughtsmanship, which, so far from being
germane wit, is not only unnecessary to it, but sometimes even a
hindrance.

And so Mr. May began with his" social" cuts for_Punch_, selecting"low
life" for the most part, as Mr. du Maurier chose title of" The Course
of True Love, etc.," Miss Di, a six-foot damsel,?"

asked the magistrate.
As for me, I confess I felt misgivings.  I was a servant of his Majesty,
and had no business with secret conspiracies.  Yet, when a life so
precious to me was at stake, how could I help trying to do something to
save it?  Besides (and this salved my conscience a little), had I not
promised Tim, in the last hour I was with him, to strike a blow for my
country?

For hours that morning I paced the streets of Dublin debating with
myself, trying to reconcile dishonour with honour, and love with duty;
determining one hour to fail in my appointment, in another to keep it
and report all I heard to the government.

Finally, anxiety and curiosity got the better of me, and at the
appointed hour I stood at the door of the printer's office in Marquis
Street.

No one challenged me as I entered or passed through the outer shop,
where a lad was at work folding pamphlets.  But at the inner door,
leading to the press-room, a little shutter slid back and a face looked
out.

"_Pikes and hemp_," said I.

"Name."

"Barry."

"Pass, friend."

I found myself in a large apartment, in one corner of which stood the
printing-press, and in another an iron table and a can of ink.

My friend of the morning, looking restless and haggard, was there, and
greeted me, I thought, somewhat anxiously, as though he doubted the
prudence of his invitation.  He did not, I am sure, feel more anxious
than I, who every moment found the act in which I was engaged more
intolerable.

At last, when about a hundred men, most of them of the class of my
friend, had dropped in silently, and stood talking in knots, awaiting
one further arrival, I could stand it no longer.

"I told you a lie this morning," said I in a low voice to my companion;
"I am not sworn."

He turned as white as a sheet.

"Then you are here to betray us?"

"No," said I.  "Let me go, and no one shall hear a word of this."

"You cannot go," said he excitedly, "it would be death to me if it were
known, and to you too.  Stay where you are now."

"I don't want to stay," said I; "I was a fool to come."

"You will be still more a fool to go," said he.  "Sit down; eyes are on
us already.  Life may be nothing to you, but it is everything to me."

He spoke so eagerly, almost piteously, that I felt sorry for him, and
for his sake more than my own took the seat at his side.

At that moment there entered the room a noble-looking young man, at
sight of whom every one present rose to his feet and uncovered.

"It's Lord Edward himself!" exclaimed my companion, still trembling.

Lord Edward!  I had heard of him before.  It was he whose letter I had
carried four years ago to Depute Duport on behalf of the unfortunate
Sillery; and it was he on whom just now the eyes of all Irish rebels
were turned for guidance and hope in the desperate enterprise on which
they were embarked.

There was something fascinating in his open frank countenance and the
half reckless, joyous air with which he carried himself.  The assembly,
which, till he arrived, had been sombre and mysterious, lit up under his
presence into enthusiasm and eagerness.

He had news to give and receive; and as I sat and listened I came to
learn more of the state of Ireland in half-an-hour than a week in Dublin
would have taught me.

The fuel was ready for the torch.  The United Irishmen were organised
and drilled in every county.  The English garrison was becoming day by
day more slack and contemptible.  What traitors there were were known
and marked.  The dawn was in the sky.  A little more patience, a little
more sacrifice, a little more self-restraint, and the hour of Ireland's
liberty would soon strike.

But it was not in generalities like these that the speaker moved my
admiration most.  It was when the meeting came to consider the state of
the rebel organisation in various parts that the soldier and general
shone out in him, and convinced me that if any man could carry the
movement through he would.  The present meeting, as I understood,
consisted of delegates from the north, where people were beginning to
grow impatient for the signal to rise; and where, as some one boasted,
one hundred thousand men were ready even now to move on Dublin and drive
the English garrison into the sea.

"What of the Donegal men?" inquired Lord Edward, looking at a paper
before him.  "I see there is a question of treachery there."

"By your lordship's leave," said my companion, starting up, "I denounce
Maurice Gorman of Knockowen as a traitor to the cause.  He has been in
Dublin within the last week in conference at the Castle."

Lord Edward's brow clouded.

"Was it not through him the Donegal men got their arms?"

"It was; and it's through him many of them have lost them, for he's as
busy now disarming as he was a few years back arming."

"What is the reason of the change?"

"Money, my lord.  He's grown a rich man; he must keep in with the
government, or his estates will be taken."

Lord Edward shrugged his shoulders.

"We have not much to fear from a poltroon like him; but let the
Provincial Directory of Ulster deal with the matter.  Meanwhile we want
to know that Donegal is as ready as other parts.  We have some good men
there surely.  Order a return of all secretaries and officers in a
month," said he to the clerk.

Then other matters were talked of, including the prospect of a French
landing; and presently the meeting broke up.  At the end of it Lord
Edward walked straight up to me.

"Yours is a new face here," said he.

"It is, my lord," said I.  "I am a Donegal man who has been abroad for
four years; yet we have had dealings together before now."

"Were you at Hamburg or Basle?" said he.

"Neither; but I had the honour of carrying a letter from your lordship
to a French deputy in '93, as well as another, franked by your lordship,
for a certain Mr Lestrange in Paris."

He looked hard at me.

"You are not John Cassidy?" said he.

Then I told him the story of my adventure in the wood near Morlaix, and
how I delivered the letters of his dead messenger in Paris.

He clapped me on the back.

"You are a good fellow," said he, "and I thank you.  Little came of my
letters; but that was no fault of yours.  So you are one of us in
Donegal?"

"No, my lord," said I.  "I am here on false pretences, though not wholly
of my own accord.  I cannot expect you to be troubled with my
explanations, but they are at your service if you require them.  If not,
here I am at your mercy."

He looked at me suspiciously for a moment, then he smiled.

"Walk a little way home with me," said he.

So I followed him out, the members present saluting as he passed through
them, and wondering, no doubt, what high official of the society was
this whom the leader of Ireland chose thus to honour.

"Now," said Lord Edward, as we got to the end of the street, "what is
this mystery?"

"Shortly, my lord, I am in love," began I.

He laughed pleasantly at that.

"There we agree entirely," said he.

"I am a servant to his Majesty, and have sworn him allegiance," I
continued.

"His Majesty has more than he deserves."

"I am a sailor, sir, on leave.  I arrived only yesterday in Dublin after
four years' absence.  To-morrow (unless you or your society shoot me
through the head) I start northward, hoping to get a glimpse of her I
love.  By chance to-day I heard her father's name mentioned in the
street as a man whose life was in peril.  In a weak moment I so far
forgot my duty to my king as to pass myself off to my informant as a
United Irishman, in the hope of obtaining information which might enable
me to help him."

"I trust you got it," said his lordship.

"I did not," said I; "the Provincial Directory of Ulster is to deal with
the case."

Lord Edward stopped short.

"You don't mean--" began he, and stopped.

"I mean that I love Maurice Gorman's daughter--a hopeless quest
perhaps--but the prize--"

"The most charming lady in Ireland," said he.  "Your name is Barry, I
believe?"

"Barry Gallagher, my lord."

"Are you a kinsman of Tim Gallagher of Fanad?"

"Twin-brother.  Is he alive then?" and in my eagerness I seized his
lordship's arm.

He did not resent the liberty at all.

"He is, and is a trusty member of our society, as I hope you will be
even yet."

"Pardon me," said I; "had Tim been dead, I promised him to fight for
Ireland.  As it is, I am bound to my king."

"Well," said he, with a shrug, "that is no concern of mine.  As to your
spying on our meeting--all's fair in love and war.  You will, no doubt,
make use of what you have heard against us."

"That I certainly shall not do," said I.  "I am a poor man, but I am at
least a gentleman.  To protect the lady I love I shall certainly try;
but to betray those whose gallantry and chivalry have spared me to do
it, I certainly shall not.  Besides, apart from my obligations to you, I
am already sworn to secrecy."  And I told him how I had once been forced
to take the oath of the society, and had already got the length of
pledging myself to secrecy before a happy diversion saved me from the
rest.

"Well, Gallagher," said he, stopping short and extending his hand with
that engaging smile which, rebel as he was, knit my soul to him, "I do
not say but, were I in your shoes, I should feel compelled to act as you
do.  It is a delicate position.  When we meet again it may be with drawn
swords.  Meanwhile, luck go with your wooing, and may it turn out as
happy as my own."

This kindness quite humbled and abashed me.  I had been guilty of
meanness and disloyalty, and this noble way of passing it over took all
the conceit out of me.

I returned crestfallen, with slow steps, to the captain's hotel.  Even
the news of Tim's safety failed to inspirit me.  "The most charming lady
in Ireland," were the words that rang in my ears; and who was I--common
seaman, sneak, and cadger--to aspire to such as her?  Would she, I
wondered, ever care to take a flower from me as she had taken one from
Captain Lestrange that morning?

I was half minded to beg Captain Swift for leave to remain behind in
Dublin.  But then the thought of the peril that threatened her urged me
to go forward.  At least I could die for her.

At the door of the hotel a person in plain clothes, but evidently a
soldier, touched me on the shoulder.

"I see you are a friend of Lord Edward Fitzgerald," said he with a
smirk.

I did not like the looks of the fellow, and replied shortly,--

"What if I am?"

"Only that you can earn five hundred pounds as easily as you ever earned
a shilling," said he.

"Indeed! how?"

"By giving the government some information."

"As to what?"

"The plans of the United Irishmen."

"Who are they?" said I.

"Come, don't pretend to be innocent.  The money's safe, I tell you."

"And I tell you," said I, bridling up, "that I know no more of the
United Irishmen or their plans than you do.  I saw Lord Edward for the
first time in my life to-day.  Our business had nothing to do with
politics; and if it had, I would not sell it to you or your masters for
ten thousand pounds.  If you want news, go to Lord Edward himself; and
wear a thick coat, for he carries a cane."

The man growled out some sort of threat or defiance and disappeared.
But it showed me that, as matters then were, there was no doing anything
in a corner, and the sooner I was north the better for every one.

So when next morning my captain and I, on the top of the coach, rumbled
out of the gate at which only yesterday my little mistress had waved her
hand, I was glad, despite many forebodings, to find myself once more on
the wing.


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

WHAT I FOUND UNDER THE HEARTHSTONE AT KILGORMAN.

Our journey northward was uneventful.  Captain Swift and I parted
company at Derry.  My orders were to join the _Diana_ at Dublin at the
end of the month, which allowed me only a little over a fortnight for my
business in Donegal.

You may fancy with what mingled feelings I found myself one evening
standing once more on the quay at Rathmullan, looking down the lough as
it lay bathed in the shifting colours of the spring sunset, trying to
detect in the distance the familiar little clump of trees behind which
nestled Knockowen House.  Was this journey one of peace or of war?  Did
hope lurk for me behind yonder trees; or had I come all this way to
discover that the old comrade was forsaken for the new, and that the
humble star of the sailor boy had been snuffed out by the gay sun of the
gentleman soldier?

Then as my eye travelled further north and caught the bluff headlands
towards the lough mouth, other doubts seized me.  My mother's message
had burned holes in my pocket ever since I set foot again on Irish soil.
And that sacred duty done, what fate awaited me among the secret rebels
from whose clutches, when last I saw the Swilly, I was fleeing for my
life, but who now, if I was to believe what I had heard, counted Tim, my
own brother, in their ranks?

Late as it was, I was too impatient to postpone my fate by a night's
rest at the inn, and hired a boat for a sail down the lough.

Few men were about, and those who were could never have recognised in
the tall, bronzed, bearded boatswain the poor, uncouth lad who four
years ago rowed his honour's boat.  One or two that I saw I fancied I
knew, one particularly, who had changed little since he held his gun to
my head that night on the hills when I half took the oath of the
society.

It was market day, and many boats were on the water, so that little
notice was taken of me as I hoisted my sail and ran down on the familiar
tack for the point below Knockowen.

The light soon fell, and I watched eagerly for the window lights.  Once
or twice on the road north I had heard of the travellers in the private
carriage, and knew they had reached home a day or two ago; and to this
news one gossip that I encountered on the road to Rathmullan added that
Mistress Gorman, my little lady's mother, had died two years ago, and
that the maid was now her father's only companion and housekeeper.

Presently the well-known twinkle of light shot out, and towards it, with
a heart that throbbed more restlessly than my boat, I turned my keel.

When I came up level with the house it was all I could do to refrain
from running my boat alongside the landing-place as of yore.  I lowered
my sail and let her drift as close under the bank as possible.  No one
was stirring.  There were lights in the upper room, and one above the
hall-door.  Towards the former I strained my eyes longingly for a
glimpse even of her shadow.  How long I waited I knew not--it might have
been a minute or an hour--but presently she came, her figure, more
womanly than when I last saw it, dark against the light within, and her
hair falling in waves upon her shoulder.  She stood for a moment at the
closed window, then opened it and looked out.  The night was cold and
dark; but she braved it, and sat humming a tune, her hand playing with
the ivy that crept up to the window-sill.

The air was one I knew.  Many a time had she crooned it in the old days
as I rowed her in the boat.  Once, on a specially happy evening, she had
sung it in the attic on the Quai Necker in Paris, and had laughed when I
put in a rough bass.

I could not help, as I stood and listened, repeating the experiment,
first very softly, then less so, and finally loud enough for her to
hear.

What fools we men are!  At that instant, with a savage howl, a dog--my
own dog Con--rushed down the garden to the spot.  The window closed
abruptly; there was a sound of voices in the yard and a drawing of bolts
at the hall-door, and a hurrying of lights within.  I had barely time to
cast off from the stake by which I held, and let my boat into the rapid
ebb, when footsteps sounded on the gravel, and a shot fired into the
night woke the echoes of the lough.

So much for my serenading, and so much for the life of security and
peace my little mistress was doomed to live in her father's house.

I cared not much where the tide took me after that, till presently the
tossing of my boat warned me that I must be on the reef off Kilgorman
cliffs.  In the darkness I could see nothing, but my memory was strong
enough to serve for moon and compass both.  On this tide and with this
wind ten minutes would bring me into the creek.

Why not?  Why not now as well as any other time?  I was a man, and
feared ghosts no longer.  Love had been warned away from Knockowen; duty
should welcome me at Kilgorman.  So I put down my helm, let out my
sheet, commended myself to my Maker, and made for the black rocks.

I was determined to avoid the creek and make for the house by the narrow
cave which, as I had discovered at my last visit, led up from the shore
to the great hearth in the kitchen of the house, and which, as it then
seemed, was a secret passage known only to his honour and the smugglers
in his employ.  It needed some groping about in the dark to find the
ledge of rock behind which was the small crack in the cliff that marked
the entrance; but I hit on it after a little, and, shoving through,
found myself inside the cave.  I moored my boat beside the rocky ledge,
and then clambered up to the entrance of the narrow gallery.  Once there
my course was clear; only I wished I had a light, for I knocked first my
head, then my knees, then my elbows, and finally had to complete the
journey in humble fashion on my hands and knees.

It surprised me greatly, when after long groping I supposed myself close
to my destination, to perceive the glimmer of a light at the end of the
passage, still more to hear the sound of voices.  Were they ghosts or
smugglers, or what?

If ghosts, I was disposed to venture on.  That they were smugglers I
could hardly believe, for there had been no sight of a ship anywhere
near, nor of a boat in the cave.  Whoever they were, they must have
entered the place by the ordinary way above ground, and if so were
probably unaware of the secret passage.  At any rate, I had come so far,
and would not turn back till I saw good reason.  I had a pistol in my
pocket and a tolerably handy knife, with which, even if surprised, I
could give a good account of myself.  So I crawled on, and presently
came to a place where I could stand upright, and crept close under the
corner of the upright stones that flanked the great hearth.

The mystery of the light and voices was soon explained.  About a dozen
men were assembled in the kitchen, lit up by the glare of a common
candle, engaged in earnest consultation.  Among the few faces which the
light revealed to me I recognised some of my old foes of the secret
society, and in the voices of others whose faces were hidden I
recognised more.

The subject under discussion was twofold, and as its meaning gradually
dawned on me I felt no compunction in listening.

The first matter was a letter, which had evidently been read before I
arrived, from the leaders of the United Irishmen in Dublin, calling for
a return of the members and officers and arms in each district.  From
what I could gather, Donegal was not a hopeful region.  It numbered,
indeed, a few branches of the society scattered up and down the county
like that now in session, and was supposed to possess a few arms, and to
be able when called upon to put into the field a few drilled men; but
compared with other districts it was ineffective, and more given over to
smuggling and unorganised raids than to disciplined work for the cause
of Irish liberty.

This, as far as I could gather, was the subject of the somewhat
upbraiding letter which had arrived from headquarters.

"Arrah, thin, and it's the truth they're spakin'," said one voice, "and
we'll need to be moving."

"Move, is it?  How'll you move when only the half of yez--and that's
some of yez as are not here the night--come to the meetings?  Sure we
could move fast enough if all the boys that's sworn would jine us."

"Anyhow, here's the paper.  It 'ud be a shame if Donegal was not to have
a hand in the turn-out when it comes.  Bedad, I'd move across to Antrim
if it came to that."

"And as for officers, sure we're well off for them.  Isn't Larry
Flanagan here a rale born secretary; and Jake Finn makes an iligant
treasurer; and as for captain--"

"Ah, I can name you the man for that."

"Who now? for it's not iverybody that'll suit."

"Tim Gallagher's your man."

If I started at this, the sound was lost in the general acclamation
which the proposal evoked.

"Faith, and you've named the very boy.  Young as he is, his heart's in
the business."

"And more by tokens, he's well spoke of by them that know.  I'm even
told Lord Edward has a good word for him."

"If there's anything against him, it is that he's brother to that scurvy
informer that set Gorman on to us, and who, I hear, is still about.  Tim
will have to go the whole hog if he's to lead us.  There's hunting down
to be done, I warn you, as well as fighting."

"Anyhow, Tim's the boy for us, and I propose him.  He's due back this
week, if he's not caught by his honour's ferrets."

"That brings us to the other matter," said the man already spoken of as
Flanagan, the secretary, in whom I recognised one of my old persecutors,
"and it's about that same vermin.  I've a letter from the Ulster
Committee bidding us deal with Gorman in a way that's best for the good
of Ireland."

"That means a bullet in him," said one man bluntly.

"Faith, and you've hit it, my lad.  We've been squeamish enough."

"It's got to be done, and soon, or he'll get the upper hand of us.
There's men of his away seizing the arms in Rathmullan and Milford this
week--him as was the manes of bringing them in too!"

"It's one man's job.  His house is too well guarded for a raid; he must
be met on the hillside.  I say, let's draw lots.  To-morrow he's to ride
to Malin by the Black Hill road."

"Ay, that's the road Terence Gorman rode the night he paid his debts.
It's a grand place for squaring up is the Black Hill."

"Come now," said Flanagan, who had been busily marking a piece of paper,
"there's a paper for each of yez, and the one that draws the cross is
the boy for the job.  Come, one at a time now; draw out of my ould hat,
and good luck to yez all."

One by one they advanced and drew, and the lot fell on one they called
Paddy Corkill, whose vicious face fell a little as he saw the fatal
mark.

"Arrah, and it's me hasn't aven a gun," said he.

"Take mine--it's a good one," said the secretary; "and more by tokens it
was Tim Gallagher's once, for he gave it me, and his name's on it.  To-
morrow noight we meet here to hear your news, Paddy, if we're not on the
hill, some of us, to see the job done."

"Faith, if it must be done it must," said Paddy.  "It's no light thing
setting a country free."

"Away with yez now," said the secretary, "or the ghost will be hunting
yez."

On which the meeting dispersed.  I could hear their footsteps die away
down the passage, and presently pass crunching on the gravel outside,
while I remained crouched where I was, as still as a mouse, hardly
knowing if I was awake or dreamed.

There was no time to be lost, that I could plainly see.  But how to
prevent this wicked crime was what puzzled me.  I could not hope to gain
admittance to Knockowen at this time of night; or if I did, I should
probably only thwart my own object, and subject myself to arrest as the
associate of assassins.  His honour, I knew, was in the habit of
starting betimes when business called him to Malin.  If I was to do
anything, it must be on the Black Hill itself; and thither, accordingly,
I resolved to go.

But before I quitted Kilgorman I had another duty scarcely less sacred
than that of saving a life from destruction.  I stood on the very spot
to which my mother's last message had pointed me, and nothing should
tear me now from the place till that wandering spirit was eased of its
nightly burden.

"_If you love God, whoever you are_," (so the message ran), "_seek below
the great hearth; and what you find there, see to it, as you hope for
grace.  God send this into the hands of one who loves truth and charity.
Amen_."

Even while I repeated the words to myself, my ear seemed to catch the
fluttering footstep advancing down the passage and hear the rustle of
the woman's dress as she passed through the door and approached my
hiding-place.  A beam of moonlight struck across the floor, and the
night wind-swept with a wail round the gables without.  Then all was
silence, except what seemed to my strained senses a light tap, as with
the sole of a foot, on the flagstone that stretched across in front of
the fireplace.  After that even the wind hushed and the moonlight went
out.

I advanced cautiously over the embers, and felt my way down the room and
into the passage without.  There, where the conspirators had left it,
stood the candle, and the tinder-box beside it.  I carried the light
back to the hearth, shading it with my hand for fear any one without
might see it, and set it down beside the flagstone.  All over this stone
I groped without finding any trace of a rift or any hint of how to lift
so formidable a weight.  It seemed fast set in the boards, and gave no
sound of hollowness or symptom of unsteadiness when I tried it.

I was almost beginning to lose heart, when I knelt by chance, not on the
stone, but on a short board at the side, which ran at right angles with
the general planks, and seemed intended as part of a kind of framework
to the stone.  This board creaked under my weight; and when I looked
more closely at it, I discovered a couple of sunk hinges let deep into
the plank adjoining, and covered over with dust and rust.  With my
sailor's knife I cleared away at the edges, and after several trials,
one of which broke my blade, I managed to raise it and swing it back on
its hinges.

The slight cavity below was full of dirt and rubbish, and it was not
till I had cleared these away that I found it ran partly under the
adjoining flagstone.  The hole was too small to look into, but I could
get in my hand, and after some groping came upon what I wanted.

It was a small leather packet, carefully folded and tied round, not much
larger than an envelope, and fastened on either side with a wafer.
Slipped under the outer string was a smaller folded paper, on the cover
of which I recognised, to my great amazement, my own name.

I thrust both packet and paper into my pocket, and after satisfying
myself that the hole contained nothing more, filled it up again, and
restored the hinged board to its old position.  Then I extinguished and
replaced the candle, and a few minutes later was hurrying, with my
precious freight, down the rocky corridor towards the cave where I had
left my boat.

I was not long in getting into the outer world once more.  My boat I
left where it was, and scrambled up the rocks to the place from which I
had once watched the _Arrow_ as she lay at anchor.  Here I flung myself
on the turf and waited impatiently for daylight.

It came at last, and at its first glow I took the packet from my pocket.
The small outer paper addressed to me was in Tim's hand, and was very
brief.  "Dear Barry," it said, "I searched as I promised, and have read
this letter.  Time enough when Ireland's business is done to attend to
yours and mine.--Tim."  From this I turned with trembling curiosity to
the packet itself, and took from it a faded paper, written in a strange,
uncultured hand, but signed at the end with my mother's feeble
signature, and dated a month after Tim's and my birth.

This is the strange matter it contained:--

"I, Mary Gallagher, being at the point of death,"--that was as she then
supposed, but she lived many a year after, as the reader knows--"and as
I hope for mercy from God, into whose presence I am summoned, declare
that the girl-child who was buried beside my Mistress Gorman was not
hers but mine.  My twins were the boy who lives and the girl who died.
My lady's child is the boy who passes as twin-brother to mine.  It was
Maurice Gorman led me to this wrong.  The night that Terence Gorman, my
master, was murdered and my lady died of the news, Maurice persuaded me
to change my dead girl for my lady's living boy, threatening that unless
I did so he would show that Mike, my husband, was his master's murderer.
To save my husband I consented.  Had I been sure of him I would have
refused; but I feared Mike had a hand in that night's work, though I am
sure it was not he who fired the shot.  Thus I helped Maurice Gorman to
become master of Kilgorman and all his brother's property.  But they no
more belong to him than the boy belongs to me.  And if this be the last
word I say on earth, it is all true, as Maurice knows himself, and Biddy
the nurse, who writes this from my lips.  God forgive me, and send this
to the hands of them that will make the wrong right.

(Signed)

"Mary Gallagher."

"N.B.--The above is true, every word, to my knowledge.

(Signed)

"Biddy McQuilkin."


CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

ON THE BLACK HILL ROAD.

This, then, was the mystery which for eighteen years had hung over
Kilgorman.  My mother's letter cleared up a part of it, but the rest it
plunged into greater mystery still.  That Maurice Gorman was a villain
and a usurper was evident.  But who was the rightful heir my mother,
either through negligence or of set purpose, had failed to state.  Was
it Tim? or I?

I recalled all I could of my mother's words and acts to us both--how she
taught us our letters; how she sang to us; how, when need be, she chid
us; how, with a hand for each, she took us as children to church; how
she kissed us both at nights, and gave us our porridge when we started
for the hills in the morning.  In all this she never by a sign betrayed
that one of us was her son and the other a stranger.  Even to the last,
on the day she died, the words she spoke to me, I was convinced, she
would equally have spoken to Tim, had he, not I, been there to hear
them.

Could it be possible that she did not herself know?  Any mother who
reads this will, I think, scoff at the notion; and yet I think it was
so.  Weak and ill as she was when it all happened, bewildered and dazed
by the murder of her master and the terrible suspicion thrown on her
husband, lying for weeks after in a half swoon, and believing herself at
the gate of death, I think, in spite of all the mothers in Ireland, that
when at last she came back to life, and looked on the two little fellows
nestled in the bed at her side, she knew not the one from the other.

My father, I was sure, if he even knew that one of us was not his own
boy, neither knew nor concerned himself which was which, so long as he
kept his honour in good-humour.

But as regarded Biddy McQuilkin, it was different.  She was not ill or
blind or in mortal fear when it all happened.  If any one could tell, it
was she.  And she, unless all reports were false, slept in the pit of
the guillotine in Paris, beside her last master and mistress.  It was
not likely that the Republic One and Indivisible, when it swept away the
old couple, would overlook their faithful and inseparable attendant.

So, after all, it seemed that mystery was to hang over Tim and me still.
I could have been happy had the paper said outright, "Tim is the son of
Terence Gorman."  But to feel that as much might, with equal
probability, be said of me, paralysed my purpose and obscured my path.
How was I to set wrong right?  As for Tim, it was evident from his brief
note, written at a time when he did not know if I had survived the wreck
of the _Kestrel_ or not, that the matter concerned him little compared
with the rebellious undertaking on which he was just now unhappily
embarked.

Tim was, I knew, more of a natural gentleman than I, which might mean
gentler blood.  On the other hand, I, of the two of us, was less like
Mike Gallagher in looks.  Who was to decide between us?  And meanwhile
this Maurice Gorman--

That reminded me with a start of last night's business.  This very man,
robber of the widow, unnatural brother, and oppressor of the fatherless,
was appointed for death that very morning, and might already be on his
way to meet it.  I confess, as I then felt, I could almost have let him
run on his doom; yet when I recalled the vision in the kitchen last
night of Paddy Corkill shouldering the borrowed gun, my humanity
reasserted itself.  How could I stand idle with a human life, however
worthless, at stake?  As to his being Miss Kit's father, that at the
moment did not enter into my calculations; but as soon as it did, it
urged my footsteps to a still more rapid stride as I made across the
bleak tract for the Black Hill.

The morning was grey and squally, and the mists hung low on the hill-
tops, and swept now and then thickly up the valleys.  But I knew the way
well.  Tim and I had often as boys walked there to look at the spot
where Terence Gorman fell, and often, in the Knockowen days, I had
driven his honour's gig past the spot on the way to Malin.

The road ascends steeply some little way up the hill between high rocks.
Half-way up it takes a sharp turn inward, skirting the slope on the
level, and so comes out on to the open bog-road beyond.  Just at the
angle is a high boulder that almost overhangs the road, affording
complete cover to any one waiting for a traveller, and commanding a view
of him both as he walks his horse up the slope and as he trots forward
on the level.  It needed not much guessing to decide that it was here
that Terence Gorman's murderer had lurked that fatal night, and that
here Paddy Corkill would come to find his victim this morning.

As I came to the top of a hill that gave a distant view of the road by
which the traveller would approach, my heart leaped to my mouth.  For
there, not a mile and a half away, appeared, in a break of the mist, a
black speck, which I knew well enough to be his honour's gig.  In half-
an-hour or less it would reach the fatal spot, and I could barely hope
to reach it before him.  The ground in front of me was littered with
boulders, and in places was soft with bog.  Rapid progress was
impossible.  A false step, a slip might lame me, and so stop me
altogether.  Yet on every moment hung the fate of _her_ father!

It was a wild career I made that morning--down hollows, over rocks,
through swamps, and up banks.  I soon lost all sight of the road, and
knew I should not see it again till I came above the boulder behind
which the assassin probably lurked.  Once I fancied I heard the clatter
of the hoofs very near; and once, on the hill before me, I seemed to
catch the gleam of a gun-barrel among the rocks.

A minute more brought me in view of the boulder and the road below.
Stretched on the former, with his gun levelled, lay Corkill, waiting the
moment when his victim should reach the corner.  On the road, still
toiling up the hill, came the gig, and to my horror and dismay, not only
his honour in it, but Miss Kit herself.

Even in that moment of terror I could not help noticing how beautiful
she looked, her face intent on the horse she was driving as she sat,
inclined a little forward, gently coaxing him up the hill.  His honour,
aged and haggard, leaned back in his seat, glancing uneasily now and
then at the rocks on either side, and now and then uttering an impatient
"tchk" at the panting animal.

I had barely time to whip out my ship's pistol from my belt--luckily
already loaded--and level it at the assassin.  Almost at the instant of
my discharge his gun went off; and in the moment of silence that
followed, I heard the horse start at a gallop along the level road.

Paddy lay on his face, hit in the shoulder, but not, as I judged by his
kicking, fatally so.  I was less concerned about him than about the
occupants of the gig.  As far as I could see, looking after them,
neither was hurt, and the assassin's gun must have gone off harmlessly
in the air.  The horse, who seemed to know what all this meant as well
as any one, raced for his life, and I was expecting to see the gig
disappear round the turn, unless it overturned first, when a huge stone
rolled down on to the road a few yards ahead, and brought the animal up
on his haunches with such suddenness that the two travellers were almost
pitched from their seats.

At the same moment two men, armed with clubs, leaped on to the road, one
making for the horse's head, the other for the step.

All this took less time to happen than it takes me to tell it, and
before the gig actually came to a standstill I was rushing along the
road to the spot.  My discharged pistol was in my hand, but I had no
time to reload.  I flung myself at the man on the step just as he raised
his club, and sending him sprawling on to the road, levelled my weapon
at his head.

"Move, and you're a dead man!" said I.

Then turning to his honour, I thrust the pistol into his shaking hand,
and said,--

"Fire if he tries to get up, your honour.  Let me get at the other one."

He was easily disposed of, for the terrified horse was jerking him off
his feet and dragging him here and there in its efforts to get clear.  I
soon had him on the road beside his companion, helping him thereto by a
crack on the head from his own club; and I then took the horse in hand,
and reduced it, after a struggle, to quietness.

Till this was done I had had neither time nor heart to lift my eyes to
the occupants of the gig.  His honour, very white, kept his eyes on the
men on the road and his finger on the trigger of the pistol.  But Miss
Kit had all her eyes for me.  At first her look was one of mere
gratitude to a stranger; then it clouded with bewilderment and almost
alarm; then suddenly it lit up in a blaze of joyful recognition.

"Barry, it's you after all?" she cried.

And the light on her face glowed brighter with the blush that covered it
and the tears that sparkled in her eyes.

At the sound of her voice his honour looked round sharply, and after
staring blankly for a moment, recognised me too.

"How came you here?" he exclaimed, as I thought, with as much
disappointment as pleasure in his voice.

"I'll tell you that by-and-by, when I've tied up these two scoundrels.--
Come, stand up you two, and hands up, if you don't want a taste of cold
lead in your heads."

They obeyed in a half-stupid way.  One of them I recognised at once as
the man who had acted as secretary at last night's meeting.  No doubt he
and his fellow had had their misgivings as to Paddy Corkill's ability,
and had come here to second him in case of failure.

"So, Mr Larry Flanagan," said I, "there'll be grand news for the
meeting to-night!"

"Who are you?  I don't know you.  Who's told you my name?"

"Never mind.  The same as told me that Paddy Corkill borrowed your gun
for this vile deed.  Come, back to back now."

I had already got the tether cord from the boot of the gig, and in a few
minutes had the two fastened up back to back as neatly as a sailor can
tie knots.

"There," said I, dragging them to the roadside, "you'll do till we send
the police to fetch you.--Your honour," said I, "I chanced to hear of
this plot against your life last night.  Thank Heaven I was in time to
help you and the young mistress!  Maybe you'll do well to take a brace
of police about with you when you travel, and leave the young lady at
home.  She will be safer there."

"Stay, Gallagher," said his honour, as I saluted and turned to go; "you
must not go like this.  I have questions to ask you."

"And I," said Miss Kit.  "Don't go, Barry."

"The gig will only hold two," said I; "but if his honour gives me leave,
I'll be at Knockowen to-morrow."

"Certainly," said Gorman.  "And, Barry, say nothing of this.  Leave me
to deal with it."

"As your honour pleases.  Besides these two by the roadside, you'll find
a boy on the top of yonder boulder who wants a lift to the lock-up."

"Don't forget to-morrow, Barry," said my lady with her sweetest smile
and wave of the hand, as she gathered the reins together.

I stood cap in hand till they had disappeared round the bend, and then
took a final look at my captives.

"So you are Barry Gallagher?" snarled the secretary.

"What of that?"

"Just this, that unless you let me go, and say not a word, your brother
Tim shall swing for a rebel before a week's out."

It must have been satisfaction to him to see how I was staggered by
this.  I had never thought that what I had done to-day might recoil on
the head of my own brother.  However, I affected not to be greatly
alarmed at the threat.

"Tim can take care of himself," said I, sitting down to load my pistol;
"but since that is your game, I'll save the hangman a job."

And I levelled the weapon at his face.

"Mercy, Mr Gallagher," he cried all in a tremble.  "Sure, I was only
joking.  I wouldn't let out on Captain Tim for the world.  Come now,
won't you believe me?"

His face was such a picture of terror and panic that I was almost sorry
for him.  His fellow-prisoner, too, who stood a good chance of the fag-
end of my bullet, was equally piteous in his protestations.

"Mark this," said I, lowering the pistol, to their great relief,
"there's more eyes on you and your confederates than you think.  Murder
is no way to help Ireland.  Tell on Tim if you dare.  My pistol can
carry in the dark, and the first of you that has a word to say against
him may say his prayers."

And I left them rolling back to back on the roadside.  As for Paddy
Corkill, when I went to look for him where he had fallen, there was no
sign of him but a pool of blood and a track of footsteps, which
presently lost themselves in the bog.


CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

MARTIAL LAW.

I spent the rest of that day in wandering over the familiar haunts on
Fanad, in the vain hope of encountering Tim.  Towards night, worn-out
with weariness and excitement, I abandoned the quest, and dropped back
on the tide to Rathmullan.

The place was full of reports of the new orders which had come from
Dublin for the disarming of the people, and of the military rigour with
which soldiers and magistrates between them were putting their powers
into force.  Nearly a hundred stands of arms had, it was rumoured, been
captured the day before at Milford, and one man who resisted the search
had been hung summarily on the nearest tree.

As I sat screened off in a quiet corner of the inn over my supper, a
new-comer entered and joined the group who were discussing the news of
the day in the public-room.

"Well?" was the greeting of one or two as he entered.

"Whisht, boys! we're done intirely," said the new-comer.

"How done?  Did he not pass that road?"

"He did; but never a hair of him was singed."

"I knew Paddy was a botch with the gun," said one; "there should have
been better than him for such a job.  Was he taken?"

"'Deed, I don't know how it all happened, but you're out about Paddy.
He did his best, I'm told, and there were two to second him.  But the
job had got wind, and Paddy got a shot in the arm before he could let
fly.  And they tell me the other two are taken."

A cry of consternation went round the audience.  "If Flanagan's one of
them--"

"The very boy."

"It'll be a bad job for us all, then, for Flanagan will save his skin if
twenty others swing for it.  Where is he?"

"At Knockowen for the night."

"No news of Tim Gallagher?"

"Not a word.  It's a wonder what's keeping him.  He's badly wanted."

"'Deed, you may say so.  He's the only gineral we have."

"As for Flanagan," said some one else, "I'm thinking he may not have
toime to turn king's evidence.  They're making quick work of the boys
now.  Is there no getting him away out of that before he tells?"

"Knockowen's guarded like a fort, with a troop of horse quartered in
it."

"Dear, oh!  Do the rest of the boys know of it?"

"Ay, and they've scattered.  And I'm thinking that is what we'd best do,
in case Flanagan names names."

"You're roight," said the chief speaker, rising.  "By the powers,
there'll be a big reckoning for all this when Tim comes home."

And they trooped out into the road.

All this was disturbing enough, and decided me to be early at my
appointment with his honour in the morning.

"Yet," said I to myself, "men who can talk thus above their breath in a
public inn are not the sort of men that will turn the land upside down.
What would Lord Edward say if he could hear them--or Tim, for the matter
of that?"

It was scarcely eight o'clock next morning when I pulled boldly up to
his honour's pier and moored my boat.

At the garden entrance stood a trooper on guard, who brought his gun to
the port and demanded what I wanted, "I am here to see his honour, at
his bidding."

"What is your name?"

"Barry Gallagher."

The soldier gave a whistle, and a comrade from within approached, to
whom he spoke a few words.

"Wait there!" said the sentinel to me, closing the gate as if I were a
beggar, and resuming his pacing to and fro.

I swallowed my pride as best I could.  If I had been fool enough to
flatter myself I was to be welcomed with open arms and made much of for
yesterday's exploit, this was a short way of undeceiving me.  For a
quarter of an hour I kicked my heels on the narrow causeway, looking up
sometimes at the windows of the house for a chance glimpse of my little
lady.  How would she meet me after all these years?  Would it be mere
graciousness to one who had done her a service, or something more?  I
should soon know.

The sentinel presently opened the gate and beckoned me to approach.

"Pass, Gallagher," said he, motioning me to follow his comrade.

The latter conducted me up the garden, and round the house to the yard,
where a strange scene met my eyes.

A soldier stood on guard at each doorway.  In the middle of the open
space was a table, and at it three chairs, in which sat his honour,
another gentleman, and a choleric-looking man in the uniform of a
captain of horse.  Standing before the table handcuffed, and in the
custody of three policemen, stood Flanagan and his comrade, whom I had
last left back to back on Black Hill Road.

His honour recognised my arrival with a cold nod, and Flanagan, who was
apparently under examination at the moment, scowled viciously.  The
other prisoner, who seemed as much fool as knave, looked with white face
first at his judges, then at the doors, and finally with a listless sigh
straight before him.

"How many does your society consist of?" his honour's fellow-magistrate
was inquiring of Flanagan as I arrived.

"Och, your honour, there you puzzle me," began the shifty informer; "it
might be--"

The officer brought his fist down on the table with a sound which
brought all the soldiers about the place to attention, and made the
prisoners start.

"Speak out, sir, or you shall swing on that hook on the wall in two
minutes."

"Arrah, colonel dear, sure I'm telling you.  There's forty-eight sworn
men, and that's the truth."

"You are the secretary," said the magistrate.  "Give me a list of their
names."

"'Deed, sir, my memory is not what it was, and the book--"

"Here 'tis, captain," said a soldier, advancing with a salute, and
holding out a small copy-book; "it was found on him."

"That will do," said the magistrate, putting it down without examining
it.  "Who is your captain or leader?"

"Who's the captain?" repeated the prisoner vaguely.

"You hear what I say," replied the magistrate.  "Answer the question at
once!"

"The captain?  Sure, sir, it's Tim Gallagher, own brother to the man
who's standing there."

Here all eyes were turned on me, and I found it difficult to endure the
unfriendly scrutiny with composure.  Had I walked into a trap after all,
and instead of thanks was I to find myself implicated in this plot and
suspected as a rebel?

"Tim Gallagher," said the magistrate, turning to his honour.  "Do you
know him, Gorman?"

"I do," replied Mr Gorman shortly, and evidently uneasy.  "His father
was once a boatman on my place."

"Ah, and a smuggler too, wasn't he?  We used to hear of him at Malin
sometimes."

"Likely enough.  He was drowned some years ago."

"And his two sons are rebels?"

"One is by all accounts," said his honour; "the other is here, and can
speak for himself."

"I am no more a rebel than you," said I hotly, without waiting to be
questioned.  "I am a servant of the king.  His honour here knows if I
ever joined with them."

"It is true," said his honour, as I thought rather grudgingly, "this
rough-spoken young man was the one who frustrated the attempt on me
yesterday.  I know of nothing against his loyalty."

"Yet," said the presiding magistrate, who had been turning over the
leaves of the secretary's book, "I find Barry Gallagher's name down here
as having taken the oath.  How's that?"

"It's false!" exclaimed I, betraying more confusion at this sudden
announcement than was good for me.  "I was once forced, years ago, with
a gun at my head, to repeat the words or some of them; but I was never
properly sworn!"

"How did you hear of the attempt that was to be made on Mr Gorman?"
demanded the officer suspiciously.

"By accident, sir.  I overheard the whole plot."

"Where?"

"That doesn't matter.  I'm not under arrest?"

At this the officer glared at me, his honour drummed his fingers on the
table, and the other magistrate looked sharply up.

"We can remedy that in a moment," said he; "and will do so unless you
treat this court with more respect.  We require you to say if you know
the meeting-place of this gang."

"Sure, your honour, I'm after telling you--" began Flanagan, when he was
peremptorily ordered to be silent.

"Answer the question!" thundered the officer, "or--"

Mr Gorman looked up.  He had his own good reasons for preventing any
revelations as to the secret uses to which Kilgorman had been put in
past times.

"Pardon me, captain, would it not be much better to take information
like this in a more private manner, if we are to run these villains to
earth?  At present, what we have to decide is as to the two prisoners;
and there seems no question as to their guilt.  I identify them both as
the men who attacked my car, and whom Gallagher here helped to capture."

The officer growled something about interfering civilians, but the other
magistrate adopted his honour's view.

"Perhaps you are right, Gorman; but we must find out their hiding-places
for all that later on.--Have you any questions to ask, Captain Lavan?"

"Only how long is this formality going on?  It's as clear a case as you
could have, and yet here have we been sitting an hour in this draughty
yard trying to obscure it," said the soldier gruffly.  "I'm sent here to
administer martial law, not to kick my heels about in a police-court."

The two magistrates took this rebuke meekly, and the president proceeded
to pronounce his sentence.

"Cassidy," said he to the prisoner who had not spoken, and who had
evidently refused to answer any question, "you have been caught red-
handed in a cowardly attempt to murder an officer of his Majesty, and
have admitted your guilt.  You have also been proved to be a sworn rebel
against the king, and engaged in a conspiracy to overturn his government
in Ireland.  According to the law, your life is forfeited, and I have no
alternative but to hand you over to the military authorities for
immediate execution."

"Guards!" cried the captain, rising, "advance!  Take the prisoner
outside and shoot him.  Quick march!"

Cassidy, who heard his sentence without concern or emotion, shouted,--

"Down with the king!  Down with informers!" and fell in between his
executioners, as they marched from the yard.

"As for you, Flanagan, your guilt is equally clear and heinous; but you
have given evidence which entitles you to more lenient treatment.  You
will be taken to Derry Jail, till arrangements are made to send you out
of the country--"

"Faith, I'd start this day!" said Flanagan, on whom the perils of
remaining within reach of his late comrades were evidently beginning to
dawn.

"Silence!  Remove the prisoner!"

At this moment the report of a volley in the paddock without sent a grim
shudder through the party.  Flanagan, with a livid face, walked off
between his guards, and the three magistrates turned to enter the house.

His honour beckoned to me to follow, and took me into his private room.

"I owe you something for yesterday," said he in his ungracious way.
"Take a word of advice.  Get out of these parts as soon as you can, and
warn your brother to do the same."

"Why should I go?" said I.  "I've done nothing to be ashamed of."

"Unless you are prepared to tell the authorities everything you know,
and assist in hunting down the rebels, you are better away.  You are a
marked man already among the rebels.  Unless you assist our side you
will be a marked man among the authorities."

"If it comes to that, your honour," said I, "there is no man more marked
in these parts than yourself.  The boys could forgive you for being on
the English side, but they can't forgive you for having encouraged them
once and turned against them now."

His honour turned white at this.

"How do you know that?" he demanded.

"How does every one know it?" replied I.  "Your enemies are not likely
to let you off with yesterday's attempt."

His honour looked at me as if he would read in my face something more
than my words expressed.  I was older now than I once was, and I was my
own master, so I had no reason to avoid his scrutiny.

"I have given you the advice of a friend," said he coldly; "take it or
leave it.  Meanwhile, your business here is at an end."

"May I see Miss Kit?" said I, in a milder tone, which his honour at once
observed.  "She desired to see me when I came to-day."

"Miss Gorman is not at home."

This was a blow to me, and I had not the art to conceal it.

"Will she be back to-day?"  I ventured to ask.

"No; she has gone on a visit to friends," replied his honour, who
evidently enjoyed my disappointment.

"She expected to be at home when I saw her yesterday."

"And what of that?  Pray, what matters it to you?"

"Only this," said I, warming up, "that I would lay down my life any day
for Miss Kit; and it is for her sake, and for her alone, that I would be
sorry to see harm come to a man to whom I owe nothing but harshness and
injury."

I repented as soon as I had said the words, but he gave me no chance of
drawing back.  He laughed dryly.

"So that's at the bottom of it?  The son of a boatman and smuggler
aspires to be son-in-law to the owner of Knockowen and Kilgorman--a
pretty honour indeed!"

Here I flung all prudence to the winds, and glared in his face as I
said,--

"Suppose, instead of the son of a boatman and smuggler, the man who
loved your daughter were the son of him whose estates and fortune you
have stolen, what then, Mr Gorman?"

He looked at me attentively for a moment, and his face turned so white
that I thought him about to swoon.  It was a moment or two before he
could master his tongue, and meanwhile he kept his eyes on me like a man
fascinated.

"Fool!" he gasped at last.  "You don't know what you are talking about."
Then with a sudden recovery of composure, and in a voice almost
conciliatory, he added, "Miss Kit is about to visit her friends in
Dublin, and will not be back here for weeks.  Take the advice of a
friend, Gallagher, and get away from these parts.  To give you the
chance, you may, if you wish to serve me, ride to Malin instead of
Martin, and escort my daughter as far as Derry."

"Miss Kit might prefer some other escort," said I.

"She might.  You are not bound to wait upon her.  But I can give you a
pass if you do."

"When does she leave Malin?"

"To-morrow forenoon."

"And what of Tim if he is caught?" said I.

"Warn him to keep on Fanad.  He will be safe there."

"Let the horse and the passport be ready as soon as it is dark to-
night," said I.  "I will be here."

"Very good.  And see here, Gallagher," said he, "what did you mean when
you said just now that I had stolen any one's land and fortune?"

"What should I mean?" said I.  "It's an old story you've got hold of,"
said he, "that was disposed of twenty years ago by the clearest proofs.
Do you suppose, if you had been what you are foolish enough to imagine,
I would have brought you up in my own house, eh?  Wouldn't it have been
simpler to drop you in the lough?  It was only my esteem for your poor
mother, Mary Gallagher, that prevented my letting all the world know
what you may as well know now, that Mike Gallagher, your father, was the
murderer of my brother."

"That is a lie," said I, "and some day I'll prove it."

"Ay, do," said he with a laugh.  "It will take a good deal of proof."

"Not more than Biddy McQuilkin can give," said I.

He staggered at this like a man shot.

"Biddy is dead long ago," he exclaimed.

"Are you so sure of that?" said I.  "Any way, I'll be here for the horse
and the pass at dark.  And take my advice, Maurice Gorman, and see that
not a hair of Tim's head is hurt.  You are safe as long as he is, and no
longer."

And not waiting to take food or encounter the other officials, I went
down to my boat and cast myself adrift on the dark waters of the Swilly.

My most urgent business was to find or communicate with Tim, and for
that purpose I set sail once more for the headlands of Fanad.

As to his honour's curious behaviour, I knew him and distrusted him
enough not to think much of it.  He was a coward, cursed with a guilty
conscience, and would fain have passed himself off as a righteous judge
and powerful patron.  He was anxious to conciliate me, not so much, I
thought, because of my hint about the property, which he was satisfied
was incapable of proof, as from a fear I might compromise him with the
authorities about his past dealings with the rebels.  He was nervously
anxious to get me out of the country, and was willing to promise
anything, even Tim's safety and Miss Kit's society, to get rid of me.

But it would go hard with Tim if he had no security better than his
honour's word; and my dear little mistress, if she was to be won at all,
was not to be won as the price of a political bargain.

All the morning and afternoon I searched up and down in vain, meeting
not a soul nor any sign of my brother.  With heavy misgivings I returned
to my boat, and set sail once more towards Knockowen.  Half-way down the
lough it occurred to me that I would do better to pay a visit first of
all to Kilgorman.  After the scare of this morning's business the rebels
would hardly have the hardihood to meet there to-night; and although
there was little chance of finding Tim there, the place contained a spot
known to both of us, in which a message could be safely deposited.

So I tacked about, and soon found myself once more in the deep cave.
The place was empty and silent, and as I crept along the rocky passage
nothing but the echoes of my own feet and of the dull waves without
disturbed the gloomy stillness of the place.

The big kitchen, already darkening, was deserted.  Everything was as I
had left it two nights ago.

I lost no time in lifting the board and depositing in the recess below
the hearth my brief message for Tim:--

"Beware, Tim!  You are marked down, and there's martial law after you.
Informers are at work, and the names are all known.  Keep on Fanad.  I
serve on H.M.S.  _Diana_.--Barry."

This done, and the board replaced, I was about to retire so as to be in
time at Knockowen, when, taking a last glance round the gaunt room, my
eye was attracted by the flutter of a paper pinned to the woodwork of
one of the windows.

It contained a few words roughly scrawled with the end of a charred
stick.  This is what it said, and as I read my heart gave a great bound
within me:--

"She's safe at Malin.  The Duchman sails on the flud to-night.--Finn."

This, if it meant anything, meant foul play, and crushing the paper into
my pocket, I lost not a moment in regaining my boat and making all sail
for Knockowen.


CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

WHAT I FOUND AT MALIN.

It was nine o'clock when I came alongside his honour's jetty, and once
more demanded entrance of the sentry.  This time I was received even
more suspiciously than in the morning, and was allowed to wait for
nearly half-an-hour before it was decided that I might safely be
admitted into the premises.  For this irritating delay I had probably to
thank the impatience with which I met the sentinel's questions; for when
at last I found myself at the house, his honour met me with an inquiry
why I had delayed my coming to so late an hour.

"It is four long leagues to Malin," said he, "and on such a road you are
not likely to be there before midnight, when the inn will be closed.
However, get Martin to saddle Tara for you.  I wish Miss Kit and her
maid to start for Derry at daybreak."

"Where is she now?"  I asked.

"At the house of Mr Shannon, the magistrate who is with me here."

"And where is she to be taken in Derry?"

"To the Foyle Inn, where she will find instructions from me as to her
journey to Dublin."

"Have you the pass?"

He handed me a paper, which read:--

"The bearer rides on my orders.  Pass him, and two ladies.--Monsieur
Gorman of Knockowen."

I was turning to the stable when he called me back.

"Remember my advice of this morning.  Don't return here if you value
your liberty.  There are warrants out against all the men named in the
list.  The authorities are in earnest this time."

The tone in which he said this, coming from a man who had paltered with
treason for years, struck me as contemptible; but I had no time just
then to let him see what I felt.

"I will take care of myself," said I; "and your honour will do well to
remember what I said about Tim.  When the reckoning for all this
business comes, it will stand you in good stead."  And not waiting to
hear his reply, I went off to the stables.

Martin, whom the reader will remember, and who, despite his connection
with the marauders and his bad odour with the police, continued to
retain his place in his honour's service, was nowhere to be found.  He
had been absent, said the boy, since the afternoon, when he had taken
off Tara for exercise.

I was obliged, therefore, to put up with an inferior animal, and to
saddle him myself.  But I was too impatient to be off to allow of any
further delay.

"At what hour is the tide full?"  I asked of one of the servants.

"Half-an-hour after midnight," was the reply.

As he spoke, the clock in the hall struck half-past nine.

"In three hours," said I to myself, as I galloped down the avenue, "the
Dutchman at Malin weighs anchor."

It was well for me I was no stranger to the rough, mountainous road I
had to travel, for the night was pitch dark, and scarcely a soul was
afoot at that late hour.  I did, indeed, encounter a patrol of troopers
near the Black Hill, who ordered me to halt and dismount and give an
account of myself.  But his honour's passport satisfied them, as it did
the sentry who challenged me on entering the little town of Carndonagh.
Thence to Malin it is but two leagues; but my wretched beast was so
spent that, unless I wished to leave it on the road, I was compelled to
take it most of the way at a foot's pace; so that when at last I pulled
up before the little inn at Malin, it was on the stroke of midnight.

"Faith, Mr Gorman's fond of sending messengers," said the landlord.
"There was another of his here two hours since."

"What!"  I exclaimed, springing up from the bench at which I was
partaking of a hurried supper.

"Ay; he came with a message for the young lady up yonder at Mr
Shannon's."

"What sort of man was he?"

"Much like yourself--a common-looking man, with a shaven face and a nose
that turns up."

"Did he ride an iron-grey mare?" said I.

"Faith, a beauty."

"It's Martin!"  I exclaimed, confirmed more than ever in my suspicions
of foul play.  "Show me Mr Shannon's house, like a decent man," said I
to mine host.

"There'll be no one stirring there at this hour.  His honour's away with
Mr Gorman, and the women folks will be a-bed long since."

"Never mind about that," said I; "show me the house."

The landlord grumblingly turned out and walked with me to the Hall,
which was some half-mile beyond the village.

"Yonder's the house," said he, stopping short, and pointing to a clump
of trees just discernible in the darkness.  "You'll not be wanting me
further?"

I hastened on, and was presently knocking loudly at the door of the
Hall.  The house was quite dark, and every one had evidently retired for
the night.  Nearly ten minutes elapsed before a window opened, and a
surly voice called out,--

"Well?  Who's there, disturbing decent folk at this hour?"

"A messenger from Mr Gorman.  Is the young lady at home?  I must see
her instantly."

"Young leddy!  There's none younger than the mistress, and she sleeps at
night like a decent woman."

"Has Miss Gorman gone, then?"  I exclaimed.

"Why not, when she was sent for?"

"Who sent for her?  When did she go?  Where has she gone?  Let me in, I
say.  There's foul play, and I must see your mistress instantly."

My agitation succeeded in convincing the fellow that something was
amiss, and he put in his head and presently unbarred the front door.

"Mercy on us! what's the meaning of all this?" said the old man-servant
as I stepped into the hall.

"Let me see Mrs Shannon," said I.

"What is it?" said a voice on the stairs before the butler could answer.

I explained my mission, and inquired if it was true that Miss Kit had
already departed.

"To be sure," said the lady.  "Mr Gorman's groom, Martin, rode over
from Knockowen this evening with a message--"

"Written?"  I interrupted.

"No; Mr Gorman was too busy to write.  It was to say that a passage had
been taken for Miss Kit and a maid on a brig that happened to be lying
off the Five Fingers; and that, as he found the ship was to sail for
Dublin with the flood to-night, he had sent over Martin to see her
safely on board.  I confess it seemed a little unusual; and Miss Kit was
very reluctant to start on such short notice, saying it had been
arranged she was to travel overland by way of Derry.  But tell me,
what's amiss?"

"Foul play; nothing less!" cried I.  "That ship is bound, not for
Dublin, but for Holland; and this is a vile plot of the rebels to be
revenged on Gorman, and decoy away his daughter as a hostage.  Where did
Martin say the ship lay?"

"At Five Fingers, west of the headland; two leagues from here."

"When did they start from here?"

"Ten o'clock."

"On foot?"

"No.  They rode; and will have been there an hour ago."

"Can you lend me a horse?  Mine at the inn is spent."

"There's the cart-horse," said the butler.

"That wall do.  Mrs Shannon, I beg you will send over a man at once to
Knockowen and let his honour know how matters stand.  I will ride to
Five Fingers and see if anything is to be done or learned.  What sort of
girl is the maid?"

"A soft creature enough.  She and this Martin have been courting a year
past."

With a groan of despair I followed the butler to the yard, and bridled
the unwieldy beast I found there.

"It's a fool's errand you are on," said the old retainer; "but maybe
you'll have the luck to come within arm's-length of that blackguard
Martin.  I always doubted him.  Are you armed?"

"I have a pistol."

"Take yonder old sword," said he, pointing to a rusty weapon suspended
on the stable wall.  "It has seen service before now."

Thus mounted and accoutred, I dug my heels into the flanks of the great
horse, and, in the breaking dawn, made along the rocky track which the
butler had pointed out as leading to Five Fingers.

"If nothing can be done," said I, as I left, "I will return here."

"Dear send we shall see you no more then," said the old man.

Along the road which led from Malin village to the promontory rapid
progress was impossible, and but that I hoped to have better use for my
horse later on, I could almost have gone as well on foot.

As the early May dawn lifted, I could get glimpses of the sea lying calm
on my left, with a light breeze off the land stirring its surface.

"That is in favour of the Dutchman," groaned I.

Not a human being, scarcely a wayside hut, did I see during that tedious
ride, as my lumbering beast stumbled over the loose stones and plashed
his way, fetlock deep, through the bog.  At length I came to the place
which the butler had described as the spot where I was to turn off the
road and make by a grass track for the sea-level.

A short way down this latter path brought me to a corner which opened a
sudden view of the sea to northward.  Gazing eagerly in that direction,
the first sight which met my eyes was a brig, with all sails set,
standing out to sea before the wind, about a mile or two from the shore.

Too late!  I had expected nothing else, but the certainty of it now
drove me into a frenzy of wrath.  I flung myself from the horse and
strode, pistol in hand, towards the deserted shore.  There, except for
hoof-marks, which convinced me three horses had passed that way, there
was no sign of living being.  By the tracks I could almost fix the spot
at which the party had put off, doubtless in one of the brig's boats.
Of the return track of the horses I could find nothing, and judged that
they had been taken off either at the edge of the water, which the tide
had subsequently covered, or up one of the hard rocky tracks towards the
foreland.

Along one of these, which seemed the most likely, I went for some
distance.  It brought me out on to the cliff-top, but disclosed no trace
of what I sought.

I took my red scarf, and fixing it on the end of the sword, waved it
defiantly at the receding ship.  Whether it was seen or not, or whether,
if seen, it was understood by those who alone would be likely to
understand it, I could not say.

I was about to return to Malin when a thin curl of smoke from behind a
rock advised me that there was at least one human habitation within
reach, where it might be possible to get information.  It was a wretched
mud hovel backing on to the rock--its roof of sods being held at the
corners by stones--and boasting no window, only the door out of which
the smoke was pouring.

An old man, with the stump of a clay pipe in his lips, was turning his
pig out to grass as I approached.  He looked at me suspiciously, and
went on without replying to my salutation.

"Good-morrow, father," said I.  "You've had a ship in overnight, I see."

"Like enough," replied he in Irish.  "Thrt--thrt!" and he gave the pig a
switch.

"Was she English?"  I asked.

"'Deed I know nothing of her," said he with a cunning look which
convinced me he was lying.

"What does she carry?"  I continued, playing with the butt of the pistol
in my belt.

He was quick enough to notice this gentle hint.

"Bad luck to the ship!" said he; "she's no concern of mine.  What are
you looking for?  The trade brings me no good."

"Hark here," said I, pulling the weapon from my belt and balancing it on
my fingers.  "I'm no custom-house runner.  Your cabin may be full, as it
probably is, of rum or bitters for all I care," here he gave a wince of
relief.  "I want to know what yonder brig carried off, not what she left
ashore."

"Sure, I thought your honour was from the police," said the man with a
leer.

"Tell me," said I, "who went off in the ship's boat early this morning."

"Three just--a man and two females."

"Did you know any of them?"

"Maybe I did, maybe no.  One of the ladies was maid to Mistress Shannon,
away at Malin."

"And the man?"

"He's the boy that's courting that same maid, and comes from Knockowen."

"And the other lady?"

"I never saw her before; but I'm thinking she was a rale lady."

"Who rowed them out to the ship?"

"Some of the crew, by the lingo they talked."

"Did they leave the horses?"

"They did.  It was me took them and turned them back over the hill.
They'll find their ways home."

"What is the ship's name?"

"That I can't say, except that she was Dutch."

"How long had she been lying off here?"

"Since yesterday morning just."

"What was her cargo?"

"Sure, your honour said that was no matter at all."

"Was it Dutch goods?"

"It was; and if you'll wait here I'll fetch a drop of it to you," said
he nervously.

"Stay where you are," said I.  "Tell me, who is there can say what the
ship's name is and where bound?"

"No one, unless it's Hugh Henry at the inn below."

"Did the young lady say anything as they took her on the boat?"

"Sure, she asked to see the captain, and to know when they were to reach
Dublin, and seemed to mislike the voyage altogether.  But I heard Martin
say it was her father's orders, and that he would be in Dublin to meet
her."

This was all the news I could gather, but it was enough to confirm my
worst suspicions.  Leaving the old man still in doubt as to the motive
for my questions, I returned as rapidly as I could to Malin, and
presented myself at the inn.

"Sure, I thought you were away," said the host, who came down half-
dressed to admit me.

"I want to know something about the Dutch ship that was in here
overnight," said I.  "Not," I added, as I noticed the conscious fall of
his face, "that I care what she carried.  No doubt she was a smuggler,
and that you and she had your business together--"

"'Deed, sir," he began, "may the--"

"Whisht!" said I, "that will do later.  Just now I must know her name,
and whither bound.  The young lady at the Hall has been decoyed away in
her, and must be found."

His amazement convinced me that at least he had been no party to the
abduction, which had probably, and wisely so, been confided to no one
beyond Martin and the officials of the secret society.

"The young leddy, Mr Gorman's daughter, carried off!" and he indulged
in a long whistle.  "I always said his honour would get into trouble
with a kittle girl like that."

"Hold your tongue, you scoundrel," shouted I, "unless you want it
crammed down your throat, and tell me the ship's name and her port."

"No offence, sir," said the honest landlord, taken aback by my anger,
and by the gleam of the pistol which I set down on the table--"no
offence, sir.  She was the brig _Scheldt_ from Rotterdam, a well-found
craft that's been this way before with messages from the Irish in
Holland to those at home."

With this I made once more for the Hall, where I found the household up,
and in a state of anxious expectation.  When they heard my story, great
was the distress of the lady of the house to discover how she, in whose
charge Miss Kit had been left, had been imposed upon.  She implored me
to wait till Mr Shannon returned from Knockowen; but as it was doubtful
when that would be, such delay seemed useless.

Before I left I wrote a letter to Mr Gorman giving him all the
particulars I could.  He would no doubt receive an official notice from
the rebels, naming their conditions for restoring their hostage.  But so
cowardly and shambling a creature had this father become, that I doubted
very much whether he would risk much even to recover his child.

I then returned once more to the inn, where already the news of the
night's adventure had attracted a group of gossips.  The landlord seeing
me, took me aside and handed me a paper.

"Here's a song of another tune," said he.  "It was left by the Dutch
skipper, and may be news to some of you."

I read it.  It was a proclamation to the people of Ireland, couched in
bombastic language, and stating that the hour of deliverance was at
hand.  A foreign fleet was about to descend on our northern coasts.  Any
day now the signal might be given for Ireland to rise.  All was ready,
and trusty leaders would accompany the friendly fleet.  A strong blow
well struck would end Ireland's ills for ever.  And so on.

"What do I want with this?" said I, giving back the paper.  "Give it to
those who want it.  I've had enough of the Dutch for one night."

And saddling my horse I started, in what sort of humour my readers may
imagine, towards Derry.


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES.

Save to turn my back on a region which had now become full of gloomy
associations, I had no very definite purpose in view in that morning's
ride.  There was nothing to be done.  The mischief to her I loved was
beyond recall.  Even those who had made themselves the agents of this
vile conspiracy had placed themselves out of reach.  Tim, my own
brother, was nominal chief to the hated band, and though he was absent,
and would, I knew, have had no hand in this business, to denounce the
whole company would be only to strike at him.  From Maurice Gorman,
coward and time-server, there was nothing to be hoped.  Not a friend was
there on whom I could count, not an enemy on whom I could have the sorry
satisfaction of being revenged.

As, however, the gallop through the bracing morning air produced its
natural effect, it occurred to me to offer my services, during the
remainder of my leave of absence, to Captain Swift, or, should he desire
it, join the _Diana_ forthwith, and try to forget my trouble in hard
work.

His honour's passport took me safely past the numerous patrols which
beset my way between Malin and Derry, and which spoke much for the
rigour with which the new _regime_ of martial law was being enforced.
Once or twice I was questioned as to the two ladies named in the pass,
to which I replied that I was to foregather with them presently--which I
devoutly wished might be true.

At Derry more than usual ceremony awaited a stranger at the gates.  I
was conducted to the guard-room, and there detained under a kind of
friendly arrest for half-an-hour or so, until it suited the pleasure of
the officer on guard to inspect me.

When this gentleman made his appearance, I recognised, not altogether
with delight, my old acquaintance and supposed rival, Captain Lestrange.
He failed to recognise me at first, but when I reminded him of our last
meeting in Paris, he took in who I was.

"Those were hard times," said he.  "How I ever got the ladies out of
that terrible city I scarcely know to this day.  I see you travel on Mr
Gorman's business, and escort two ladies.  Where are they?"

"I wish I knew," said I, and gave him a full account of my ride to Malin
and all that happened there.

He heard my story with growing attention and consternation.

"Decoyed!" he exclaimed vehemently.  "The dogs shall pay for this!  I
remember that scoundrel Martin."

"Shall you go to Rotterdam?" said I.

"I?" said he, looking at me in surprise.  "I am no man of leisure just
now."

"But report says you have a particular interest in Miss Gorman's
welfare."

"Rumour commits many impertinences," replied he with an angry frown.
"For all that, I am not master of my own movements just now.  I am here
to hunt down rebels; and among them, unless I mistake, a brother of
yours holds a prominent place."

I winced.

"At least," said I, "he never had hand either in murder, or pillage, or
meanness to a woman.  He is an honest soldier, though, alas! on the
wrong side."

Captain Lestrange laughed.

"It is the fashion of these rebels," said he, "to dignify themselves as
soldiers and claim the honours of war.  But when we get hold of them
they will learn that there is a difference between felony and warfare.
Can you not persuade your brother out of it?  I hear he is a fine
fellow."

"I have tried," said I, mollified by this compliment; "but it is
useless, and at present he is not to be found."

"That's the best place for him.  As to Miss Gorman, I will go over to
Knockowen and see if anything can be done to intercept the Dutchman.
Meanwhile what of you?"

"I go to join my ship."

"Good.  We may meet again, Gallagher.  Our paths have met strangely
before now.  Heaven grant they may bring us out into fair weather at
last."

I left him on the whole in good cheer.  There was a blunt frankness
about him which led me to believe that were I ever to be called upon to
meet Captain Lestrange as an enemy, it would be as an honest and
generous one.  His affected indolence had already been disproved by the
service he had rendered to the ladies in Paris.  His regrets as to Tim
showed that he was a man in whom the kindlier instincts were not all
wanting.  What, however, comforted me most was his tone with regard to
Miss Kit.  There was nothing of the lover about the words, and too
little of the actor about the man to lead me to suppose he was deluding
me.  Why should he?  He was my superior in birth and rank.  He had
claims of kinship and property which pointed him out as the natural
squire for the heiress of Kilgorman.  The idea of my being a rival had
probably never entered his head; and if it had, would have done so only
to raise a smile of incredulous pity.  But that a lover could receive
the news I brought as he did seemed quite impossible.  So I went on my
way, if not cheered, at least with a less heavy weight on my mind than
before.

I found Captain Swift in bed with an attack of jaundice, and in a state
of high excitement.

"How did you know I wanted you?" he said when I presented myself.

"I did not, sir," said I.  "Have you any orders for me?"

"A despatch has come from the Admiralty," said he, "cancelling all leave
of absence.  The _Diana_ being still under repair, I am appointed to the
_Zebra_, now off Dublin, and ordered to sail on Saturday to join the
fleet watching the Dutch off the Texel."

I hope he put down to zeal for the service the whole of the satisfaction
with which I received this announcement.  No work just then could fit in
better with my humour than watching the Dutchmen.

"Be ready to start by to-night's coach," said he.  "I shall follow to-
morrow, with or without my doctor's leave.  Here is a letter I wish you
to deliver at the Admiralty.  Then report yourself on board.  I hear
she's an ill-found craft, and no one knows what sort of crew they will
rake up for us.  I wish the _Diana_ hands were within call," he added to
himself.

Next day I was in Dublin, and duly left my captain's letter at the
Admiralty.  I was instructed to report myself on board the _Zebra_
before sundown, as there was much work to be done getting crew and
stores in order ready for our immediate departure.

Having an hour or two at my disposal, I took a walk through the streets.
Dublin, to all outward appearance, was in an orderly and peaceable
state, and gave few signs of being, what it actually was at that time,
the hotbed of a dangerous rebellion.  It was only when I dived into some
of the lower streets near the river, and saw the mysterious and ominous
groups which hung about at the corners, and noticed the menacing looks
with which they greeted any chance passer-by who was known to be a
servant of the government, that I realised that I walked, as it were, on
the edge of a volcano.  How soon I was to experience for myself the
terrors of that coming explosion the reader will hear.

I had got beyond the streets and into the Park, attracted thither by
strains of martial music, when, in a retired path, I encountered a
gentleman dressed in a close-fitting, semi-military coat, with a green
scarf round his neck, and switching a cane to and fro as he paced
moodily along.  I recognised him as Lord Edward.

He looked up as I approached and at once recognised me.

"Ah, Gallagher, what news from Donegal?  How is the charming fair one?"
said he.

"The charming fair one," said I, with a bitterness that startled him,
"is a victim in the hands of your lordship's followers.  She has been
decoyed away and carried off to Holland as an act of reprisal against
her father."

"What?" said he.  "Tell me what you mean."

And I told him my story.  He listened, switching his cane against his
leg, and watching my face with keen interest.

"It is part of the fortune of war," said he, "that the innocent suffer
for the guilty.  But this must be seen to at once.  The _Scheldt_ will
probably make for Holland by the north route.  If so, she will not
arrive at Rotterdam for a week or two.  By that time I will communicate
with some one I know near there, and see she is taken care of.  Hang the
fools!" muttered he.  "What good can come to any one by such an act?"

"Indeed, my lord," said I, "if I may venture to say so; Ireland has
little to look for from her professed friends in Donegal, where private
spite and greed are the main support of your confederacy."

"You are not the first who has told me that," said he gloomily.  "No
doubt you are glad to see our weakness in this quarter."

"I should be but that my brother, although absent, is the nominal head
there, and it's little credit to him."

"Tim Gallagher is too good a man to be wasted."

"Do you know where he is?"  I inquired.

"Abroad on his country's service," said Lord Edward.  "You must be
content with that.  Here our ways part.  Good-bye, my lad."  And he gave
me a friendly nod.

"Your lordship will pardon me one question.  Have you any objection to
tell me the address of the friend in Holland to whose care you propose
to commend Miss Gorman?"

"She is an old retainer in a kinswoman's family, one Biddy McQuilkin.
She keeps a little inn on the outskirts of the Hague, called the 'White
Angel.'"

"Biddy McQuilkin!" exclaimed I with excitement.  "Why, she was servant
to the Lestranges in Paris, who perished in 'the terror.'"

"The same.  This Biddy was overlooked, and finally escaped, and by the
interest of Madame Sillery got to Holland, and set up at this small inn,
frequented by English and Irish visitors."

It was difficult to disguise the joy which this unexpected discovery
afforded me.  I bade adieu to his lordship with a grateful salute, and
then betook myself in a state of wonder and jubilation to the harbour.

In Biddy McQuilkin were centred any hopes I entertained of righting the
wrong which had been done at Kilgorman, and so of carrying out my
mother's sacred bequest.  Moreover, the thought that Miss Kit would find
so stalwart a protector at the end of her unhappy voyage lifted a heavy
weight from my mind.

And all this relief I owed to the man whom, of all others, I, as a loyal
subject of his Majesty, was bound to consider as my country's most
dangerous enemy!  Alack!  I was not born to be a good hater.  For as I
strode that evening through the streets of Dublin I counted this Lord
Edward as one of the few men for whom I would gladly have given my life.

When in due time I procured a boat to row me out to the _Zebra_, I found
that Captain Swift's forebodings as to the state of the ship were only
too well founded.  The _Zebra_ was a second-rate frigate, which for some
years had been out of regular commission, doing duty on coast-guard
service, or cruising under letters of marque.  She was not an ill-
looking craft; though, to judge by her looks as she rode at anchor, her
lines were better adapted to fast sailing than hard knocks.

When I reported myself on board, however, I was better able to
understand my captain's misgivings.  The first lieutenant in charge was
a coarse, brutal-looking fellow, who, if he spared me some of the abuse
which he measured out to the ordinary seamen, did so because he looked
to me to take some labour off his hands.

"It's high time you came," said he; "and unless you can lick a pack of
wolves into shape, you may as well swing yourself up at the yard-arm at
once.  They seem to have emptied all the jails in Dublin to find us men;
and as for stores--well, the less said about these the better."

I was not long in discovering that he had good reasons for his gloomy
opinions.  The hands, whom presently I piped on deck, were as ill-
assorted and ill-conditioned a lot as boatswain ever was called upon to
overhaul.  Many were raw hands, who did not know one end of a mast from
the other.  Others, who knew better, appeared to be the refuse of crews
which had rejected their worst men.  And the few old salts of the right
kind were evidently demoralised and dissatisfied, both at their enforced
association with their present messmates and with the abrupt termination
of their leave ashore.

As to the officers, with the exception of the first lieutenant and a few
of the petty officers who took their cue from him, they seemed a decent
and fairly smart set, although few of them had been tried in active
service, and fewer still, I fancy, had had charge of so ill-found a ship
as the _Zebra_.

One of the first complaints I was called upon to hear and report to my
officers was as to the ship's food, which was truly as scurvy and
unsavoury a provision as I ever saw.  Biscuits and grog and pork were
such as the lowest slop-shop in Letterkenny would have been ashamed to
sell.

"It's good enough for hounds like them," was all I could get out of the
lieutenant.  "They can take it or leave it."

The next complaint I made was on my own account, and referred to the
ship's stores.  We had barely our complement of anchors and cables,
still less any to come and go on.  For reserve spars and sails and other
tackle we were almost as badly off; while the ammunition and arms were
certainly not enough for a service involving any considerable action.

The officer in charge received all these representations with the utmost
indifference.

"Get better if you can," said he; "it's all of a piece, and quite proper
for a service that's gone to the dogs.  Hark at those demons now!  The
rum seems good enough, anyhow."

And indeed all that night the _Zebra_ was more like a madhouse than one
of his Majesty's ships.  What authority there was was maintained at the
end of the cat-o'-nine-tails.  As for the enthusiasm and patriotic
ardour which are usually supposed to hail the prospect of close-quarters
with the enemy, one would have had to listen long and hard for any sign
of either below decks that night.

"The best that can happen to us," said I to myself, as I turned in at
last, "is a hurricane up Channel, and the Dutch fleet at the end of it.
These may hold us together; nothing else will."

When Captain Swift came on board next evening things mended a little,
for our gallant officer was a man whose name and manner both commanded
respect.  At the last moment some few additional stores were brought
off; and the little speech he made to the crew, reminding them of their
honourable profession, and holding out a prospect of distinction and
prize-money in the near future, was listened to with more respect than I
feared it would meet.  The men, through one of their number, made a
formal complaint of their grievances, which Captain Swift received on
his part without resentment.  The order was then given to weigh anchor,
and half-an-hour later the _Zebra_ was standing out to sea on as ill-
starred a voyage as vessel ever made.

Had Captain Swift's health been equal to his gallantry and tact all
might even yet have gone well.  But he came on board ill, and two days
after we sailed he was confined to his berth with a dangerous relapse,
and the fate of the _Zebra_ was left in the hands of the worst possible
man for the duty--Mr Adrian, the first lieutenant.


CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

MUTINY.

A week of light and fickle winds brought us through the Channel and well
on our way to Yarmouth Roads, off which we understood Admiral Duncan was
lying.  As we passed the Downs, strange and ugly rumours of trouble
ahead met us.  One night, as we lay anchored waiting for our wind, I was
on deck at my watch when I caught the sound of oars approaching the
_Zebra_.  Shortly after several missives were pitched on deck, one of
which alighted just at my feet.

I examined it with some curiosity.  It was a bundle of printed papers
addressed to the sailors of England, calling upon them to insist on the
redress of grievances, and to stand by their brethren who at that moment
were in a state of mutiny at the Nore.  Other papers described the
success which had attended a similar mutiny at Spithead a week or so
previously.  Another was a flaring proclamation, signed "Parker,
President," on board H.M.S.  _Sandwich_ at the Nore, announcing that the
fleet was in the hands of the men; that all the obnoxious officers were
under arrest; that the Thames was under strict blockade; that conditions
had been offered to the Admiralty; and that, if these were not accepted
within a given time, it was the intention of the leaders of the mutiny
to put to sea and hand the ships in their possession to the enemy.
Further, it was stated that the fleet at the Nore was being daily
recruited by deserters from the North Sea squadron and elsewhere; that
arms and supplies were abundant; and that England was at the mercy of
those whom up till now she had treated as veritable slaves.  And so on.

All this greatly troubled me; for, from what I knew of the crew of the
_Zebra_, such seditious stuff furnished just the fuel required to set
the spirit of the men in a blaze.  The other missives thrown on board,
no doubt containing the same or similar matter, had pretty certainly
fallen into the hands of those who would read the call to mutiny with
different eyes from mine.  If so, the mischief was already far gone.

I hastened with my papers to Lieutenant Adrian, who glanced over them
contemptuously.

"All bunkum and wind," said he, pitching them into a corner.  "We have
heard this sort of thing before."

"If it is true, sir," I ventured to say, "that the ships at the Nore
have mutinied, we had better give them a wide berth, for it's a catching
thing."

"Pooh! there's no more in it than the cat and a noose or two at the
yard-arms can cure," said he.  "However, keep your eyes open, Mr
Gallagher, and report the first sign of mutiny.  There's nothing like
nipping it in the bud."

For all the lieutenant's assumed indifference, further consultation with
the captain and the other officers resulted in some needful precautions
being taken.  The watches were increased, the ammunition was placed
under extra guard, and picked men were told off to man the helm.  As the
south-easterly breeze was rising, too, orders were given to weigh anchor
at once and put to sea.

The men obeyed the orders to set sail in a sullen, mechanical way, which
did not grow more hearty as they saw that every officer carried his
pistol in his belt, and watched the execution of every command with
suspicious keenness.

It was only when the order to turn in gave them the opportunity of
congregating in larger numbers and discussing the proclamation that they
took heart, and arrived at something like a united policy.  Had I had my
own way that night, convinced as I was of the inevitable outcome of
delay, I would have clapped down the hatches and left them there to
deliberate till doomsday, or such time as they chose to beg for release
on the captain's terms.  As it was, there was nothing to do but to
speculate moodily on what the morrow would bring forth, and meanwhile
make what use we could of the favouring breeze to put as many leagues as
possible between ourselves and the treasonable neighbourhood of the
Nore.

The worst of it was that the honest grievances of the seamen were so
patent, and the injustice they suffered at the hands of officers like
Lieutenant Adrian so flagrant, that had they been fairly stated and
fairly met nothing but good could have come of it.  But put forward as
they were likely to be by a crew like ours, and encouraged and fomented
by agitators such as those who had drawn up the proclamation, what issue
was probable but one of desperate struggle and probably bloodshed?

It was plainly seen, when hands were piped next morning, that the temper
of the men had changed for the worse.  As they strolled indolently up on
deck, and glanced up at the well-set sails, and saw the bows pointing
due north, and as their eyes fell on the bright pistols and side-arms at
the officers' belts, it was evident they were in some doubt as to what
course to pursue.

They talked together in surly groups, arguing probably that on the high
sea, away from support, and in the presence of a forewarned and
forearmed body of officers, their chances of seizing the ship were not
promising; and one or two were bold enough audibly to regret their folly
for not having struck their blow and hoisted the red flag while the
_Zebra_ lay in friendly company in the Downs.

Finally, as I supposed, it was decided to wait till we reached Yarmouth
Roads, and claim the support of the mutineers there.  Meanwhile orders
were obeyed with ominous silence; and worse still, the few loyal men on
whom the officers had counted to stand by them were got at and drawn
into consultation with their messmates, and some of them were seduced
into taking part with the malcontents.

Next afternoon we sighted sails to northward; but as just then the
breeze fell dead, we were unable before nightfall to ascertain whether
they were ships of Admiral Duncan's squadron or not.  While Lieutenant
Adrian was deliberating with the other officers as to whether we should
put off a boat to get word of them, the men came aft in a body and
demanded a conference.

Their spokesman was an Irishman whom I recognised as one of the new
hands brought on board at the last moment off Dublin.  He was a glib,
noisy fellow, clever most likely at anything but seamanship, of which he
knew nothing, and very little acquainted with the seamen's grievances of
which he elected himself to speak.

Lieutenant Adrian, who was in an ill-enough temper at the time, ordered
him to take himself and the dogs at his heels to the place they came
from, unless he wanted to taste the lash.

The men, who had expected some such reception, stood their ground, and
ordered Callan, for that was the leader's name, to say on.

"It's not yourself we need to speak to," said Callan, "it's the captain.
Let us see him."

"My lads," said the ship's surgeon, who was one of the officers present,
"you are like enough to see your captain in his shroud before morning,
for he is this moment at death's door."

"So much the worse," replied Callan.  "There was hope of justice out of
Captain Swift; there's none at all out of the lieutenant."

"There's precious good hope of a rope's end," retorted the enraged
lieutenant hotly.--"Mr Gallagher, see that the fool is put in irons at
once, and any one else that joins with him.  We'll soon put an end to
this, even should a man dangle at every yard-arm for it!"

The only reply to this was a cheer from the men, and, what was quite
unexpected, a sudden click of pistols as they drew up in two lines
across the deck.

"Look'ee here, Mr Adrian," said Callan, "we're not the fools you take
us for.  While you have been drinking, we have not been idle.  The
powder-magazine is ours, and the forward guns are loaded and primed and
turned this way.--Stand aside, lads, and let them see for themselves."

The ranks opened, and sure enough in the forecastle we could see the
muzzles of two twenty-four pounders pointed at the quarter-deck, and
manned by some of the very men of whose loyalty until yesterday there
had been least question.

Lieutenant Adrian, although a bully and a brute, was not lacking in
animal courage, and betrayed no sign of dismay at this discovery.

"If you think we are to be frightened, hang you," said he, "you are much
mistaken.  What is it you want?"

A coarse laugh greeted this tame ending to his speech.  One old tar put
himself forward before Callan could reply.

"It's like this," said he, with a salute.  "We mean no disrespect to the
captain or the service, but--"

"Hold your tongue," said Callan, pushing him aside.--"What do we want?
That's easy told."

And he took a paper from his pocket and read:--

"_First_.  The first lieutenant, the third lieutenant, the master, the
master's mate, the boatswain, and Midshipmen Gamble and Brock, to leave
the ship and be put ashore.

"_Second_.  The ship to be taken to the Nore, and placed under the
orders of Admiral Parker.

"_Third_.  The remaining officers either to take the oath or be placed
under arrest.

"_Fourth_.  Two delegates, chosen by the men, to attend the admiral's
council, and act and vote on behalf of the ship."

Lieutenant Adrian listened with an ill-concealed smile, in which, I
confess, he was by no means alone.

"And what if we reject your precious first, second, third, and fourth
piece of infernal impudence?"

"Then we shall take what we want without asking," replied Callan with
cool effrontery.  "You may take an hour to decide.--Come, boys."

The men gave another cheer, and retired singing "Rule, Britannia."  They
left, however, a strongly-armed picket to cut off access from the
quarter-deck to the rest of the ship.

The night was still dead calm, and the _Zebra_ lay like a log in the
sea, her sails drooping, and her head swinging idly with the tide.

"Well?" inquired one or two, looking at Lieutenant Adrian.

"Well?" retorted that officer.  "If you want to know what I intend to
do, I mean to drink a bottle of port below.  There is but one answer to
give, and nothing to discuss.  So you may fetch me in an hour."

"Shall we tell the captain?" asked Mr Felton, the second lieutenant,
who, if he had only been superior to Mr Adrian, would have seen us
through the crisis with more credit than we were likely to get.

"Certainly not," said the doctor authoritatively.  "The consultation in
his cabin yesterday was a fatal mistake as far as he is concerned.  Let
him at least die in peace now."

"How many loyal men do we muster, Mr Gallagher?" said Mr Felton.

"Twenty-five, all told, sir," replied I.  "We cannot count on any of the
men for certain, though one or two may join us if it comes to a fight."

"It will certainly come to that," said Mr Felton quietly.  And no one
entertained the least question on that score.

"We have one ally more," observed the master, who had for some time been
sniffing the night air.  "Unless I mistake, there's a sou'-wester coming
up in a jiffy."

"I think you are right, master," said Mr Felton.  "That will put us
over to the Dutch side, anyhow."

"And there's another ally yet, sir," said I.  "They've got possession of
the two casks of rum that were last shipped at Dublin."

"In that case," said the second lieutenant, laughing, "we may count on a
full hour before we are disturbed.  If we are to make a fight of it, let
it be a good one.  Gentlemen," said he, addressing the company, "the
quarter-deck is still ours; twenty-five loyal men are a match for two
hundred and fifty scoundrels any day.  Bring the stern-guns into
position, and throw up a barricade here.  Look to your pistols and
swords, and don't waste bullets or powder.  The worst they can do is to
blow the ship up, and that they won't do.--Master, you were right about
the breeze.  Bring her round as soon as she moves.--And some of you
young gentlemen," said he to the midshipmen, "be ready to bear a hand
aloft with the sails.--Mr Gallagher, watch your chance of getting round
to the forecastle and doctoring the guns there.  You are not a new hand,
I hear, at such a job.--Now, gentlemen all, we can but die once; let us
do it well while we are about it."

This spirited address had a great effect, and whatever sense of
helplessness had been caused by the disparity of our numbers and the
strong position of the mutineers, gave way to a desperate resolve to
give a good account of ourselves before we yielded up the ship.

I could not help believing that some of the older and more experienced
hands, though now borne down by the general feeling of insubordination,
would side with us if only we could show a strong hand.  If so, there
would not be seamanship enough in the rest to set a topsail or read a
chart; and every moment the breeze was freshening and promising us a
lively morning.

The _Zebra_ still hung listlessly in the water, but any moment now she
might get under way.  There was no time therefore to be lost in getting
unobserved at the forward guns, which I was convinced was only to be
done by dropping overboard and swimming round to the stem, where there
was sufficient hanging tackle to help oneself on board with.

I secured the services of the master's mate in this perilous venture--a
tough sea-dog who was ready for anything, provided it was out of the
commonplace.  This business, I promised him, would at least be that.

The quartermaster had charge of the helm.

"Look alive, my lads," said he, as we prepared to let ourselves
overboard; "her head may go round any moment.  As she lies you can drop
on to it easy.  Take a line with you, and pay out as you go, as you'll
need it to come back by.  Over you go."

We secured our pistols as best we could against the water, and then one
after the other dropped over the stern and struck out for the peak.  The
ship was already beginning to sway on the breeze, and once or twice as
we kept close under her side we were in peril of being sucked under or
else crushed down by her lurches.  However, we managed to reach the
hanging tackle below the bowsprit without misadventure; and making fast
the end of the line we carried, so that it hung close on the water-line
from stem to stern, we began to haul ourselves, with our knives between
our teeth, up into the shrouds.

While we were doing so the ship swung round into the wind, and began to
move through the water.

As soon as we got our heads level with the gunwale we could dimly see
the forecastle deck before us, and the breeches of the two twenty-four
pounders, pointed astern.  There was a man in charge of each.  The two
sat on the deck, with a can of liquor between them, playing dice in a
quarrelsome, half-tipsy way.  The rest of the company were assembled on
the middle deck, and, to judge by the sounds, were deep in the
discussion of their rum and their grievances.

I gave my comrade a signal, and next moment we sprang noiselessly on
board, and had the two gunners overpowered, gagged, and made fast before
they could utter a sound or reach for their arms.

Then without losing a moment we drove our nails into the touch-holes of
the guns, trusting to the noise of the revellers and the dash of the
water at the bows to drown the sound of the hammer.  This done we
dropped overboard, each with a prisoner, as quietly as we had come, and
with the aid of the line reached the stern in safety, and found
ourselves once more on the sanctuary of the quarter-deck.

Scarcely had we done so when we became aware of a movement among the
enemy.  So busily occupied had they been in their debauch that they had
not noticed the change in the weather, or the advantage which had been
taken of it to put the ship under way.  As it was, they might have even
allowed that to pass, supposing it only brought them nearer to Yarmouth
Roads, when one of the old salts in their number pronounced that the new
wind was from another quarter, and that instead of closing in with the
admiral's fleet off Yarmouth the _Zebra_ was running for the open sea
with a strong south-wester astern.

Finding themselves thus hoodwinked, and already excited by drink, the
leaders, and as many of the men as could be enticed from the liquor,
came once more aft and demanded another interview.

The quarter-deck, except for the sentries, the watch, and the men at the
guns, was comparatively deserted, the officers having retired below
until the hour allowed by the enemy had expired.

The senior officer present was Mr Felton.

"Quartermaster," said he, as he stepped up to the helmsman, "how does
she sail?"

"Nor'-east by east, sir.  Making ten knots an hour."

"Keep her so.--Mr Gamble," said he, turning to a midshipman, "have the
goodness to go to my cabin at once and fetch the magnet you will find
lying in the drawer of my desk."

In a minute Mr Gamble had performed his errand.  Mr Felton meanwhile
had lifted the cover of the compass-box, into which he now inserted the
small magnet, so that it pulled the needle a quarter of the circle
round, and made it appear that our course was due north.

"That should give us time," said he as he replaced the cover.  "The
land-lubbers will know no better.--Use your pocket-compass,
quartermaster, and keep her as she is.--Now, my man," said he,
addressing one of the loyal marines who had been standing sentry, "what
is it?"

"If you plaze, sir, the hounds beyant there want a word with yez."

"Tell them the hour is not yet up, and that Mr Adrian is below."

"Sure I told them so, and Callan, he's their talking man, says he must
see yourself, or there'll be mischief."

"Very good," said Mr Felton.  "Pass the word below for all hands on
deck; and let every man go quietly to his place.--Marine, allow Callan
on the quarter-deck."

But Mr Callan was not tipsy enough to fall into such a trap, and
insisted on the honours of war and the word of a gentleman that he and
three of his followers should be allowed safe-conduct, hinting at the
same time that the forward guns were still in position, and that any
attempt to break parole would be visited with ugly consequences.

Lieutenant Felton gravely gave the necessary assurance, whereupon,
ordering their followers to wait below, Callan and three comrades, as
tipsy as himself, staggered up the ladder.

"Now, sir, what is the matter?" demanded Mr Felton.

"Matter?  The ship's on the wrong tack.  You're sailing her out to sea;
and if she's not put round at once, we'll put her about for you."

Mr Felton laughed.

"Not so easy to sail out to sea in this wind as you think, my lad.  I
wonder, now, if you really know what direction we are going in."

One of the four replied, "Nor'-east," unless he was mistaken.

"Bless me," said the officer, "and these are the men who pretend to
speak in the name of the British seaman!  I should prefer to take the
word of the compass against yours in a cap of wind, my fine fellow, any
day.  Nor'-east, indeed!"

"The compass will say the same as us; or maybe we're a point more to
eastward."

"You can satisfy yourself as to that if you please," said Mr Felton
dryly.--"Mr Gallagher, take these men and show them the compass.  It
will be a lesson to them in navigation."

The laughter of the company succeeded in effectually damping the
confidence of our amateur seamen as they slowly followed me abaft.

"Steer gingerly round these guns," said I, as we passed the two guns
which had been brought to bear on the forecastle; "they're loaded.
Gently now; it's not so steady walking on a deck as round the Newgate
exercise-yard.  Come away now.--Quartermaster, show a light on the
compass here for these gentlemen.  They have come to give us a lesson in
seamanship."

"Compass!" said the quartermaster with a chuckle.  "Ain't the stars good
enough for you?  Who but a landlubber ever needed to look at a compass
to see which way the wind blew?  However, look away; and if it's a point
out of due north call me a Dutchman."

The men peered stupidly over the compass.

"It's north, sure enough," growled the only man of the party who was at
all weatherwise.  "I could have sworn it was nor'-east or more."

To encourage him I tapped the glass.

"We could make it nor'-east for you by putting a spring on the needle,
if that's what you want," said I with a laugh.

Callan and the others looked wisely at the mendacious instrument, and
then began to sheer off with the best grace they could.

"We should be in Yarmouth Roads at this rate by daybreak," said he,
"provided they play us no tricks."

"We'll see to that," said the old salt.  "Now we know she's sailing
north we'll see she keeps so, or there'll be the mischief in it."

"Come away now," said I, "your friends will be missing you; and what
will become of your first, second, third, and fourth without you?"

It did not tend to raise the spirits of the four noble mariners as they
passed round the guns to hear the laughter and cries of "nor'-east by
east it is, sir," which greeted their passage.  Nor did they quite
recover till they returned to the arms of their comrades, who bore them
off with the glorious news that a fresh cask of rum had been broached,
and that the lights of Yarmouth were already visible on the horizon.


CHAPTER THIRTY.

"BATTLE AND MURDER AND SUDDEN DEATH."

It was past midnight, and in two hours the summer night would be past.
After that, further mystification as to our course would be impossible;
but could we hold on till then, with half a gale of wind behind us, we
should be well over to the Dutch side, and clear at any rate of the
mutinous atmosphere which infected Yarmouth Roads and the Nore.

The men, having, as I supposed, satisfied themselves that the _Zebra_
was being sailed according to their own directions, decided to wait till
daylight, by which time they counted on the encouragement and company of
the Yarmouth mutineers, before they finally hoisted the red flag and
took possession of the ship.  Meanwhile they applied themselves
assiduously to the liquor, an indulgence which, in the case of a good
many of the land-lubbers of their company, must have been seriously
spoiled by the rolling of the ship and their first acquaintance since we
left Dublin with really dirty weather.

I reckoned that we were some twelve leagues from the Dutch coast, with
the wind shifting westerly and sending heavy seas over our counter, when
the grey dawn lifted and showed us a waste of water, with nothing
visible but a single speck on the eastern horizon.

After close scrutiny we concluded this to be one or more sail beating up
against the gale; but whether they were Dutch or English, it was too
soon to say.

"Keep her as she is," said Mr Adrian; "and, Mr Gallagher, pipe all
hands.  The sooner we come to an understanding with these fiends the
better."

I obeyed.  A few of the old tars instinctively turned up to the call,
but seeing all decks but the quarter-deck deserted, they remembered
themselves and went off to look for their comrades.

Presently an uneasy group assembled on the forecastle, many of them
showing traces of the mingled drunkenness and sea-sickness of the night.
We could see them scanning the horizon with their glasses, and slowly
awaking to the discovery that instead of being in the arms of the
confederacy of "the Republic afloat" (as one of the proclamations had
called it), the _Zebra_ was scudding over the high seas.

There was an angry consultation, and shouts to those below to turn up.
About half the number obeyed, though many of these were fit only to lie
helplessly about the deck.  A more miserable crew you never beheld.

"Hands aloft!  Take in the main-topgallant sail!" cried Mr Adrian, and
the order was shouted forward.

Not a man moved, except Callan, who came to the forecastle rail, and
holding up a pistol, shouted back,--

"Surrender the ship, or we fire!"

Mr Adrian's reply was to repeat the order just given, and draw his
pistol.

One of the mutineers, sent forward by the leaders, advanced to the
mainmast with a red flag in his hand, which he proceeded to fasten to
the flag-lines and to hoist, bringing down the Union flag as he did so.

Mr Adrian levelled his pistol.  There was a sharp, clear ring above the
noise of the gale; the man flung up his arms, uttered a yell, and rolled
over on the deck.

"Stand clear!" cried Callan, waving his men on either side of the
forecastle guns.  "Fire, my lads!"

There was a silence.  No one on the quarter-deck stirred.  Those on the
forecastle who had stood with their faces our way, expecting to see the
effect of the volley, looked round impatiently to see why the guns were
mute.

Then came a cry of "Spiked!" followed by a howl of dismay as the
contents of one of our quarter-deck guns crashed with a dull, savage
roar on to the forecastle.

When the smoke cleared we saw a ghastly sight.  Men lay in all
directions--some blown to pieces, some groaning in pools of blood, some
dragging themselves with livid faces to a place of shelter.

For my own part, I dreaded to hear Mr Adrian give the order to fire the
second gun.  The only thing which prevented it was the sudden clearing
of the forecastle.  All who could rushed to the main-deck, where at
least they were below the range of the deadly grape.

Here Callan, who had escaped unhurt, called on his men to form, which
they did in three straggling lines across the deck, howling execrations
and flourishing their knives in our direction.

Before they could advance--before, indeed, those of them who carried
pistols could fire--Mr Adrian, who had ranged us up behind the
barricade, gave the signal to present arms and fire.

It was a volley almost as deadly as the first.  Callan sprang a foot or
two in the air, and fell back shot through the heart.  The front rank of
the mutineers went down like ninepins, and those behind fell back a pace
in consternation, "Reload!  Mark your men!" cried Mr Adrian, whose face
was savage and as hard as a flint.

The wretches gathered themselves together after a moment's hesitation,
and stepping over the fallen bodies of their comrades, advanced with a
half-hearted rush for the quarter-deck.

"Present! fire!" cried Mr Adrian.

Once more man after man went down dead or wounded, and the deck was
strewn with bodies.  A heavy sea at the moment broke over the quarter,
sweeping the deck and clashing living and dead in a heap into the lee-
scuppers.  A few stood still, eyeing dubiously first one another, then
the quarter-deck, then the waves as they broke across the waist.

"Reload!  Mark your men!" cried Mr Adrian again, with a curl of his
lips.

The mutineers heard the command, and dropping their weapons, retreated
in a panic to the hatchways.

"Fire!" said Mr Adrian; "and after them, some of you, and make fast the
hatches."

The first order was not obeyed.  It had been bad enough, in defence of
the ship, to fire on one's own shipmates, but to fire on their backs was
too much; and Lieutenant Adrian probably understood as much when he saw
that we all preferred his second order to his first.

It was a short business making good the hatchways, after first driving
below the few stragglers who lingered above board.  Then we had leisure
to take stock of the execution our volleys had effected.  Eleven men,
including Callan and two of his fellow ringleaders, were dead.  Eight
more were mortally wounded, and thirty-eight lay hurt, some badly, some
slightly.  We lost no time in throwing the dead overboard, and carrying
those most in need of succour out of the reach of the waves.  Tarpaulins
were spread for the rest till a place could be found for them in some of
the after-cabins.

The doctor (who reported that Captain Swift had breathed his last while
the engagement was at its height) did what he could to dress the wounds
of the sufferers, and impressed the services of one or two of the
handiest of the men present as assistants.

Just then, however, with the gale threatening every moment to snap the
masts, it was even more important to get hands aloft to shorten sail.
The midshipmen and officers gallantly undertook this difficult task, but
not in time to save the main-topgallant mast, which fell with a crash,
carrying away the purser and the boatswain's mate, and fouling the
rigging below with its wreck.  No sooner was this cleared, and the top
courses taken in, than the man who had been for some moments conning the
strange sails on the horizon reported,--

"Two Dutchmen, sir, thirty-six guns a-piece, bearing this way."

During the struggle with the mutineers we had almost forgotten the
presence of these strangers, and now found them not a league away
standing across the wind to meet us.

It was a hopeless venture to meet them, but Mr Adrian preferred it to
putting the _Zebra_ about and running away.

"Let them come," said he; "they can't do worse than these scoundrels
down below.  Stand by the guns, gentlemen!"

We obeyed willingly enough.  Had Mr Adrian only been a gentleman as
well as an officer we could have cheered him.  But the vision of his
face as he gave the word to mow down his own crew stuck in my memory and
robbed _me_ of all the enthusiasm which his present courage deserved.

On we sped, and nearer drew the Dutchmen.  Evidently they were cruisers
on the prowl for an enemy, or sent to observe the motions of our
disorganised fleet.  Had we been a sound company we might have held our
own against the two of them.  But crippled as we were, with our guns
unmanned, our ammunition lost, and part of our crew lying wounded on
deck, while the rest were prisoners below, we might as well have hoped
to capture Rotterdam.

Fate, however, determined our destiny in her own way.  Just as we were
coming about, and those at the guns were blowing their matches for a
first and possibly a last broadside, the _Zebra_ gave a sudden shiver in
every timber, there was a dull growl, followed an instant later by a
terrific explosion which rent the vessel in twain, and dimmed the sky
overhead with spars and smoke, and set the ship reeling on her beam-
ends.  At the moment, I was in the act of firing the charge of the gun
in my care, and remember nothing but the tremendous noise, and finding
myself hurled, as it seemed, clear over the breech of the weapon out
into the boiling sea.

Instinctively I clutched at a spar within reach, and clung to it.  All
else I saw and heard as in a dream--the ship heeling over further and
further, and the waves leaping on her as she plunged down; the cries and
shrieks of the imprisoned wretches who sought to escape from the
consequences of their own desperate revenge; the sea strewn with
wreckage and struggling swimmers; the first lieutenant's dying
malediction flung into the wind from the quarter-deck; the looming hulls
of the two Dutchmen as they hung in the wind and watched our fate.  All,
I say, passed like a grim nightmare.  What woke me was an arm suddenly
flung across me, and the white face of Mr Midshipman Gamble looking up
at me out of the water.

I hauled him up on to the spar; and the effort to keep him afloat, and
save myself from his wild struggles, helped me to find my wits.

"Easy, lad!" said I; "you're safe enough here.  Keep quiet!"

The sound of a voice steadied him, and he ceased his struggles, and let
me lash him as best I could to the spar.

The Dutchmen, who had, no doubt, witnessed with anything but pleasure
their prey snatched out of their hands, were humane enough to make a
show of lowering a boat for the succour of those who still lived.  But
the heavy sea rendered this a very difficult and dangerous task, and
after very little trying we had the dismay of seeing them abandon the
attempt and haul off on their course, leaving us to our fate.

You may fancy with what feelings we watched them gradually growing less
on the horizon, and realised that we were at the mercy of an angry sea,
with no support but a piece of broken timber, and every moment finding
ourselves more and more alone, as comrade after comrade gave up the
struggle and fell back among the waves.

Presently Mr Gamble, whose leg, I found, had been crushed by the
explosion, groaned, and his head fell forward.  Three great waves in
succession washed over us with the force of a falling wall; and when
they had passed, and I looked to my companion, he was dead, with the
life simply beaten out of him.

Sorrowfully enough I unlashed him, and let him drop beneath the pitiless
water; and then, finding my own strength beginning to fail, I lashed
myself under the arms and over the spar, and hung on for dear life.  In
this posture I spent weary hour after hour watching the waves, and
endeavouring to ward off from my head the fury of their onslaught.

About mid-day the gale eased somewhat.  I looked about me.  Not a sign
or vestige remained of the _Zebra_ or her hapless crew.  Not a floating
thing among the waves caused me to count on the company of a living
wretch like myself.  Not even a livid corpse across my track served to
remind me that I, of all that ship's company, still clung to life.

Strange visions, as I rose and fell with the heaving sea, floated before
my eyes.  The gloomy kitchen at Kilgorman, and my mother's letter
gleaming under the hearthstone--the hollow on the cliff's edge where Tim
and I had once fought--Biddy McQuilkin sitting at the fireside in our
cabin, setting her cap at my father--Miss Kit with the gun at her
shoulder behind the hall-door at Knockowen--the unhappy old man being
dragged to the guillotine in Paris--the lumbering barge floating down
the Seine--Tim in the light of the lantern at the helm of the
_Kestrel_;--these and many other visions chased one another across my
memory, first in regular procession, then tripping one over the other,
then all jumbled and mixed together in such chaos that it was Kit who
was being haled to the guillotine, and Tim who lay below the
hearthstone, and Biddy who navigated the barge.

Presently one vision seemed to hang in my memory longer than the others,
and that was the light of the morning sun as it struck on the retreating
sails of the brig _Scheldt_ of Rotterdam, standing out to sea off Malin.
One by one all my other fancies merged into this--the guillotine
changed into a brig, the _Kestrel_ changed into the _Scheldt_, the
Kilgorman kitchen became a deck, and Miss Kit a Dutch skipper.  Why was
it?  Why should everything come back to that one brig in the offing?

Suddenly I understood it.  There, as I looked up from my restless raft
and followed the gleam of the afternoon sun as it broke through the
clouds, I perceived just such another vision in the offing--a brig, with
canvas set, and the light glancing on her sails as she laboured over the
waves towards me!

She may have been a mile away.  By the look of her she was a foreign
craft, and may have been a trader coasting between the Dutch ports.
Whatever she was, the sight of her put new life into me.

I took my red scarf--the very scarf I had waved so vainly at the
_Scheldt_ scarce three weeks ago--and spreading it wide waved it with
all the energy of which I was capable.  How long the minutes seemed
then!  If she gave me the go-by, my last chance would go with her.  Even
as I raised myself to wave, my head reeled, and a dimness clouded my
eyes.

Then, with a wonderful bound at my heart, half surprise, half joy, I saw
the brig suddenly put about, while a flag waved at her stern showed that
my signal had been seen.  A minute later the welcome sight of a boat
coming towards me assured me that I was saved, and with a cry of
thankfulness to Heaven my weary head drooped, and the mist in my eyes
became darkness.

What roused me was the consciousness of two strong arms round me, and
the taste of liquid fire between my lips.  My saviours, who were
Dutchmen, had lifted me from the spar, and were plying me with spirits
as I lay more dead than alive in the stern-sheets.  I looked up.  The
sails of the brig, flapping against the wind, towered above me, and her
dark hull as she swung over us hid the sun.  The boat pulled round her
stern to reach the lee-ladder.  As we passed I glanced up, and my eyes
fell on two words, painted in gilt letters--

"_Scheldt_.  Rotterdam."


CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

THE HIGHWAYMAN ON THE DELFT ROAD.

The next thing I clearly remember was crawling up on deck, clad in a
Dutch sailor's jacket and cap (I had been stripped for action when I was
pitched into the waves out of the _Zebra_), and seeing a stretch of red-
tiled roofs and windmills and tall towers on the bank of the broad
stream up which we sailed on the tide.  Rotterdam was in sight.

I had lain in a sort of stupor since I was carried on board twenty-four
hours ago.  The Dutchmen had been kind to me in their rough way,
particularly as they took me for a Frenchman.  I thought it prudent not
to undeceive them, and passed myself off to the skipper as a castaway
citizen of the Republic One and Indivisible, which my knowledge of the
language made easy.

But, as you may imagine, now that I stood on the deck of the _Scheldt_,
my mind had room for but one thought.  Miss Kit--where was she?

Even had her curiosity brought her on deck yesterday to see the rescue
of the poor foreigner, she would hardly have recognised in the smoke-
begrimed, swollen features of the half-drowned man her old squire and
comrade of long ago.  Still less would Martin, who had never set eyes on
me for four years, discover me.  I knew him well enough as I came upon
him just then leaning over the bulwark taking an eyeful of Dutch
scenery.

He turned round as I approached and nodded.

"_Comment vous portez-vous_?" said he, using up one of the slender stock
of French phrases he had at command.

I replied in French that I did well, and was entirely at monsieur's
service, and madame's too, for I heard, said I, monsieur did not travel
alone.

Martin, who only half-comprehended, looked at me doubtfully, and turned
on his heel.

Presently, as I leaned over the port watching the river, I overheard him
in conference with the skipper, who spoke imperfect English.

"Convent of the Carmelite Nuns?" said the latter; "that is outside the
town some distance.  Is mademoiselle to be taken there?"

"Ay; those are my orders."

"Will she go?"

"She must," said Martin.

"She has not been very obedient so far," said the skipper with a laugh.
"You have not received much encouragement."

"What do I want encouragement for," growled Martin, "from her?"

"Perhaps the encouragement of Mees Norah, her maid, has been enough for
you.  But I warn you, my young lady will not travel so easily by land as
by sea.  You will need a troop of horse to take her to the Carmelites, I
expect."

This was said with a sneer at Martin's qualifications as a squire of
dames which that gentleman did not enjoy.

"I can manage my own business," said he in an unpleasant voice.  "I
shall take her there in a carriage, and if she resists she will have to
find out she is not her own mistress."

"As you will," said the skipper.  "I thank my stars I have not the
task."

Indeed, I came to learn later on that he had good reason for so wishing.
For Miss Kit, as soon as ever she discovered the vile plot which had
been practised on her, had retired to her cabin, and held every one on
board the _Scheldt_ at arm's-length except her maid, refusing to see
Martin, of the skipper, or any one, and fortifying herself like a
beleaguered garrison.  Her cabin had a private companion ladder by which
she could reach the deck without passing through the men's quarters, and
after the first day or so, the poop was yielded to her as her own
territory without protest.

How was I to communicate with her now?  I must if possible prevent her
incarceration in the convent, from which I knew escape would be
difficult.

I retired below and hastily scrawled on a piece of paper the following
note:--

"Miss Kit,--The half-drowned man who was taken on board yesterday was he
who writes this, and who is ready to die for you.  You are to be carried
in a coach to-night to the Convent of the Carmelite Nuns.  Make all the
delay possible before you consent to go, and so give me time to get
beforehand on the road, where I will find means to take you to a place
of safety.--Your devoted--

"Barry Gallagher."

This paper I folded, and returned on deck in the hope of finding some
means of getting it into my lady's hands.

Just as I passed the cook's galley, I came upon Norah, the maid, coming
out with a tray on which was a little bottle of wine and a plate of
biscuits.  As we suddenly met, the tray slipped from her hand and fell
to the floor, spilling the contents of the bottle and scattering the
biscuits.

"Ach, but you're clumsy!" exclaimed the damsel.

It was on the point of my tongue to return the compliment in her own
language; but I remembered myself, and with a Frenchman's politeness
begged ten thousand pardons.

"Permit that I assist you to make good the damage, mademoiselle," said
I.

This mollified her, and she bade me hold the tray and pick up the
biscuits while she went for another bottle of wine.

When she returned, nothing would content me but that I should carry the
tray for her to the door of her lady's cabin, which she graciously
permitted, with a coquettish glance at Martin as we passed him on deck.

My agitation, if I betrayed any, was not all due to the fascinations of
Miss Norah, and Martin had no cause to be jealous on that score.  The
truth was, that between the two top biscuits on the dish I had slipped
my little note!

"_Merci bien_, monsieur," said Norah at the door as she took the tray;
"and it's sorry I am I called you names."

"Any name from those pretty lips," began I, but she left me to finish my
compliment to the outside of the door.

When we moored alongside the Quai, I renewed my thanks to the Dutch
skipper, and offered to return him his coat.  But he would not hear of
it.  Only, said he, if I was disposed to-morrow to lend a hand at
unlading, he would consider the trouble of fishing me out of the North
Sea sufficiently repaid.  This I promised by all means to do; and glad
to get free so easily, stepped ashore with the first to land.

As I passed the brig's poop I thought I saw a face peep from the little
cabin window, and after it a little hand wave.  I put my own hand to my
lips as a symbol both of secrecy and devotion, and taking advantage of
the bustle attending on the arrival of a fresh craft, slipped out of the
crowd into the street beyond.

Here, among the first, I met a priest, to whom I made obeisance.

"Holy father," said I in French, "I beg you to direct me to the Convent
of the Carmelite Nuns of this town, to which I have a message of
importance from Ireland.  I am a stranger here, and have but just
landed."

The priest eyed me suspiciously.

"The holy sisters receive no visitors but the clergy," said he.  "I will
carry your letter."

"Alas!  I have no letter.  My message is by word of mouth, and I am free
to impart it to no one but to the lady superior.  Does monseigneur
suspect me of ill motives in seeking the convent?"

He liked to be called monseigneur; and looking me up and down, concluded
the holy sisters had little to fear from me.

"The holy sisters live a mile or so beyond the city, before you come to
Overschie, on the road to Delft.  You will know the house by the high
wall and the cross above the gate."

"Monseigneur," said I, "a thousand thanks, and may the saints make your
bed to-night;" and I departed along the road he pointed out.

I had not gone far, or reached the open fields beyond the town, when I
perceived, grazing at the roadside, a horse with saddle and pillion,
such as market folk rode, which had evidently broken tether while its
riders were away on some errand at a neighbouring _auberge_.

Necessity, which knows no law, and made me villain enough to deceive a
priest, was hardly likely to stick at borrowing a nag, especially when
the safety of my dear young mistress was at stake.  It went to my heart
to think that the honest couple would have to complete their marketing
on foot; but I promised them in my mind that if the beast was one of
sense and natural affection, it should find its way home sooner or later
when its present task was done.

A short ride now cleared me of the town and brought me on to the road
which follows the canal to Delft.  It was already dark, and as I ambled
past the lofty windmills that skirt the canal, I met scarcely a soul.
Presently at a junction of roads I distinguished a little way back from
the highroad the roof of a building almost hidden in trees, and closed
round with a high wall.  A thick, nail-studded gate, surmounted by a
cross, marked the entrance.  Here, then, was my destination.

I reined in my horse under the deepest shadow of the wall, within view
of the portal, and waited.  To pass the time, I took from my pocket the
pistol which had lain there all the while I was in the water, and
drawing the wet charge, replaced it with powder and shot which I had
taken the precaution to provide myself with before I left the _Scheldt_.

Then it occurred to me, if I was to play highwayman, I could do it more
securely out in the solitary road than within earshot of the holy
sisters, who might harbour within their precincts watch-dogs, human or
animal, who could spoil sport of that kind.

So I rode a little way back on my steps and halted under a clump of
trees at the cross-roads, straining my ears impatiently for the noise of
wheels.

Nearly an hour elapsed before they came, and I concluded Miss Kit must
have taken my advice and given her custodian a bad time of it before she
permitted herself to be conducted from the ship to the vehicle.  Now the
wheels advanced rapidly, and the frequent crack of the driver's whip
showed that Martin was trying to make up for lost time.

I could see as they approached that the two men were on the box, leaving
the inside to the ladies.  The driver was evidently pointing out the
roof of the convent, dimly visible among the trees, and a face at the
open window was peering out in the same direction.

At that moment I darted out of my hiding-place, and firing my pistol in
the air, but near enough to the driver's ears to make him jump, shouted
gruffly,--

"_Haltez la_!"

The horse came up short on his haunches.  The terror-stricken men gaped
round in a dazed way and tumbled off on the far side of the coach, while
the maid within uttered a loud scream.  But almost before any of them
knew what had happened, I was bending beside the face at the window.

"Quick, Miss Kit, mount behind me."  And passing my arm round her, I
drew her through the window and set her on the pillion behind me; and
next moment we were galloping away as fast as the beast could carry us,
with her dear arms clasping me, and her breath coming and going in quick
tumult on my neck.

For a mile we rode thus without a word, when I heard her give a little
laugh.

"What is it?"  I asked.

"What a trouble for Martin!" said she, "He has Norah to console him."

"I am not jealous of Norah."

And I thought her arms held me a little firmer.

"How well you managed it," said she in a little.  "I was terrified too,
just at first.  Where are we going?"

"To Biddy McQuilkin's, at the Hague."

"Biddy McQuilkin's!" exclaimed she, with a start of surprise.  "Surely
she is dead."

"So I thought; but she is not.  She keeps an inn at the Hague; and has
orders from one in high authority among the Irish rebels to take care of
you."

"As a prisoner?"

"Surely not; as a lady."

She sighed.

"One peril never seems to be past," said she, "but a new one looms
ahead."

"Courage," said I.  "Providence that saved you from the old peril will
save you from the new."

"Ah, Barry," she said gently, "I begin to wonder if your name spells
Providence to me.  On that hateful ship I wondered often what had become
of you.  When I saw behind us at Malin a red flag waved on the cliff-
top, I said, Could that be you, but for once too late to help?"

"It was," I replied.

"I knew it!" she exclaimed almost triumphantly, "Night by night as we
sailed further and further from home, I prayed Heaven to send you.  Once
when an English warship crossed our path, I pictured you among the crew,
and wished they might capture us.  Then when I got that wonderful little
letter among the biscuits I knew my prayer was answered; and I troubled
myself about nothing but to do your bidding.  Poor Martin," and she
laughed again, "he was the sufferer by that."

You may fancy if her voice across my shoulder that night was not music
in my ears!  It humoured her to talk of all the perils we had
encountered together, and of the ups and downs in our lots since that
first day I brought her in the boat from Rathmullan to Knockowen.  Then
she spoke of her father and the peril he was in, and of the feuds and
dangers that beset our distracted country.  From that we came to talk of
my adventures, and of Tim.  But I could not find it in my heart to tell
her of the paper under the hearth at Kilgorman, or of the villainy by
which her father came into the estates he now held.

Near the end of our talk I mentioned that I had seen Captain Lestrange
in Derry.

She was silent a little, and then said,--

"He is the man my father says I must marry."  This was a speech I found
no ready answer to, except a mumbled, "He is a fortunate man."

"He does not think so," said Miss Kit with a laugh.  "He is good and
kind, but he loves his liberty more than any woman."

"And what says my little lady to that?"  I faltered.

"_Vive la Liberte_," said she.  "Heigho, Barry, are we nearly there?"

We were past Delft, where no one supposed but we were a belated pair of
market folk trudging home.  Our horse had dropped into a leisurely jog,
and the morning sky was beginning to show streaks of grey.

"Are you weary?" said I, putting my hand on the little arm that held me
round.

"No, Barry, I am very happy so," said she; and after that we were silent
till the stars began to fade and the towers and spires of the Hague
loomed ahead against the northern sky.

Despite our loitering, it was still early when we found ourselves in the
streets of that city, inquiring for the _auberge_ of the "White Angel."
After some trouble, we were directed through the town to the road that
leads to the little fishing village of Scheveningen, two miles beyond
the Hague, where, just as we came in sight of the sea, a little wayside
inn with a swinging sign of a heavenly body in a snowy robe told us we
had at last found our journey's end.

No one was astir, but our knocking brought a groom on the scene, who
rather surlily admitted us to the stable-yard.

"Tell madame she is wanted at once; I bear a message from Lord Edward,
tell her."

Here a head looked out from a window, and madame's voice called out in
broadest brogue,--

"Lord Edward, is it?  And who might you be yourself?"

"I'm Barry Gallagher, Biddy.  Put on your clothes, like a decent soul,
and let us in."

Biddy obeyed with an alacrity which led us to doubt whether her toilet
below the shawl she wore had been very elaborate.

On the sight of me, still more of my fair charge, she broke out into a
tumult of Irish welcome.

"Arrah, darlints, sure it's glad I am to see you; and it's expecting you
I've been, for didn't Lord Edward send me word to look to the young
leddy?  Come away, honey; for you look as white as the painted angel
beyant there.  So they sneaked you away, did they?  And all because his
honour was hanging the boys.  Never ye fear, dearie, you'll be safe with
old Biddy, even if the whole of the United Irishmen come after you.--And
you, Barry, you're welcome too, though your father Mike wouldn't let me
be mother to you.  Dear, oh.  There's many changes to us all since then.
The last time I set eyes on yez 'twas in Paris, and little I looked to
see you again when they had us all to the prison.  And where's Tim at
all?  He's the boy, and a rale gentleman."

"Give us some food, Biddy dear," said Miss Kit, "and tell us all the
news to-morrow."

"'Deed I will," said the good soul, and she bustled about till the whole
household was awake to give us breakfast.

I waited only to allay my hunger, and then rose.

"Good-bye just now, Miss Kit," said I.

Her face fell.

"Oh," said she, "you're not going to leave me, Barry!"

"Till to-night.  I am pledged to pay the Dutchman for saving my life by
working for him this day.  After that--"

"Oh, go," said she, holding out her hand, "for he deserves all the
thanks in the world for saving you for me."

She blushed as she saw how I lit up at the words, but left her hand in
mine as I raised it to my lips.

"Farewell, my dear Barry," said she.  "Heaven bless you, and bring you
safely back!"

All the world then seemed turned to brightness, and I stepped out like a
man who treads on air.  But at the door I remembered myself enough to
return and seek Biddy in her kitchen.

"Biddy," said I, "tell me one thing, as you will answer for it at the
last day--which of us two, Tim or I, is the son of Mike Gallagher, and
which is the son of Terence Gorman?"

She turned very white and sank into a chair.  But I had no time to
parley, and I urged her to speak.

"As I hope for salvation," said she, and her breath came hard and her
bosom heaved fast, "the one of you that has the mole between his
shoulder-blades is the Gorman's boy."

"It is Tim then," I exclaimed, and hastened to my horse.


CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

DUTCH JUSTICE.

I should be no better than a hypocrite were I to deny that, as I rode my
weary, borrowed nag back that morning along the Delft road, there shot
in and out of the turmoil of my feelings a sharp pang of disappointment.

It was no disloyalty to Tim; it was no greediness for name and wealth.
It was but the dashing of a passing hope that I might find myself, after
all, a gentleman, and so prove worthy to be regarded by Miss Kit as
something more than a trusty servant.  As a Gorman, and her cousin, I
might claim her with the best of her suitors.  As the son of Mike
Gallagher, boatman and smuggler, myself but a plain boatswain, how durst
I suppose, for all her kindness and gentleness, she could comprehend me
in the ranks of her equals?

Yet to serve her was something--to have snatched her from the scoundrel
Martin, and set her in a safe place, was some little triumph to set
against the disappointment of Biddy's news; and as I jogged Delft-ward
that morning, I fell to considering how best I could help her to her
home and Tim into his estate.

More people were about now than when I rode last, and some opened their
eyes to see a sailor on horseback.  But I answered no questions and
halted for no parleys.  At Delft I hoped to find a road round outside
the town, fearing lest I might encounter the owners of the nag on the
streets.  But I found no way except that straight through the midst of
the town.

As I crossed the market-place two soldiers accosted me and ordered me to
dismount and give an account of myself.  As they spoke only Dutch, and I
knew none of the language, it was hard for us to understand one another.
But the feel of their muzzles on my ears convinced me I had better
obey; and abandoning the luckless animal, I was conducted to the guard-
house and there locked up until business hours.

I demanded, in the best French I could muster, on what charge I was thus
laid by the heels.

My captors grunted by way of answer, and searched my pockets, from which
they drew my pistol and the little leather case containing my mother's
letter.

I repeated my question in English, at which they pricked their ears,
spoke something to one another in which the word "spy" occurred, and
clapped irons on my ankles.

Evidently then my crime was not horse-stealing, but that of being an
English spy, which meant, I supposed, a volley at ten paces before noon.
So here was an end to the business of Miss Kit, my sweetheart, and Tim,
my brother.

I confess, as it all dawned on me, I found myself smiling over my big
hopes and resolves of an hour ago.  But I had long enough to wait to
lose all sense of humour, and sink into the most woeful depths of
despair.  It always happened so.  The cup was ever at my lips, and as
often rudely dashed aside.  My little mistress had never before spoken
so gently; my mother's dying charge had never been nearer fulfilment.
And now, what could be further from my reach than either?  How I
execrated that ill-starred jade, and the Dutch skiver, but for whom I
might at this moment have been my own master.

In due time I was marched into the burgomaster's presence, and deemed it
wise to make no further mystery of myself.  I demanded an English
interpreter, unless the magistrate would hear me in French, which latter
he graciously agreed to do.

"Sir," said I, "my name is Gallagher; I am an Irishman, a servant of
King George, and a sailor in Admiral Duncan's fleet.  I am, as I
believe, the sole survivor of the wreck in mid-sea of his Majesty's ship
_Zebra_, foully blown up by her mutinous crew.  I was picked up by the
Dutch brig _Scheldt_, now lying at Rotterdam.  I am no spy.  I rode last
night to visit an acquaintance--a countrywoman at the Hague--and am on
my way now to fulfil my promise to the skipper of the _Scheldt_ to give
him a day's labour in unlading his brig in return for his kindness to
me.  The sailor's coat and cap I wear were given me by him."

The magistrate heard my story attentively, and not altogether
unfavourably.

"Admiral Duncan's fleet," said he, "is in arms against the Dutch
republic."

"It is," said I.

"How many sail does he muster?" demanded my judge.

"I cannot tell you, mynheer," said I.

"Where do his ships lie?"

"Mynheer," said I, "would you expect a Dutch sailor to betray his
country to an English magistrate?  I refuse to answer."

He frowned, less at my refusal than at the terms in which it was
couched.

"Give me the name of your acquaintance at the Hague," said he, changing
the subject.

I gave him Biddy's name.

"What was your business with her?"

"I never expected to land on Dutch shores, and so had no special
business; but finding myself here, I sought her out."

This all seemed fair enough; and the burgomaster, who was an honest man
and blessed with true Dutch stolidity, after consulting with his clerk
and colleague, informed me that inquiries would be made, and that
meanwhile I should remain in custody.

To my request to be allowed to send a letter to Biddy he returned a flat
and suspicious refusal.  Nor, till my case stood clearer, would he order
the removal of the irons.  So for the next twenty-four hours I lay in a
damp cell, with black bread and water to support my spirits, and the
thought of my little mistress to carry me through the weary hours.

About noon next day I was again summoned to the burgomaster's court,
where, among the curious crowd assembled to see the supposed English
spy, I recognised not only the Dutch skipper, but Martin.  Biddy was not
there.

The burgomaster wore an air of sternness and self-importance which boded
no good.

"Captain Koop," said he to the skipper, "identify the prisoner."

"Most worshipful," replied the sailor, "this is the man we picked up,
who said he was a Frenchman, wrecked in the French ship _Zebre_."

"Was that true?" said the judge to me.

"Mynheer, I told you my tale yesterday.  I am no Frenchman."

Then Martin was called forward, and looked hard at me with his sinister
eyes.  An interpreter explained the burgomaster's questions.

"Witness, you state you know the man Gallagher.  Is this he?"

"Now I look at him--yes; but I did not know him before with his beard."

"Is he a sailor in the service of the English Government?"

"He is; and no friend to the Irish people, for whom the Dutch republic
is fighting.  More, by tokens, your honour," added Martin through the
interpreter, "now I know him, I know who it was who last night carried
away a certain Irish lady under my protection while on her way to the
Convent of the Carmelite Nuns."

"What do you say to that?" said the burgomaster to me, with a look of
horror, for he was a stout Catholic.

"I don't deny it," said I, curtly; "nor do I deny that this blackguard,
instead of trying to defend the lady, tumbled all of a heap with fright
off the carriage-box on to the road when I accosted him."

The interpreter smiled as he translated this, and Martin looked round
not too well pleased.

"Where is the lady?" demanded the burgomaster.

"That is my affair," said I.  "She was carried away from her home by
this man against her will.  She was rescued from him by me with her own
good will, and is now safe."

"With your friend at the Hague, doubtless?"

I made no answer.

"Inquiries have been made as to this friend.  She is known, but has
disappeared since yesterday."

"What!"  I exclaimed, "Biddy gone?  And what of--"

"In company with a young lady," said the burgomaster, eyeing me sternly.
"Prisoner, I demand to know where these persons have gone."

"I do not know," said I, and my own bewilderment might have answered for
my sincerity.

"I do not believe that," said the burgomaster.  "A messenger arrived at
her inn with a letter early yesterday, and she and the lady left, it is
said by boat, soon after.  Do you deny that you sent that message?"

"I do."

"Do you deny that you know who did?"

"I do."

"Do you deny that you know where they have gone?"

"I do," retorted I; "and, if it please your worship, what has all this
to do with whether I am a spy or not?"

"This, that a man who has lied in one particular is not to be believed
in others.  The same reason which induced you to pass yourself as a
Frenchman may explain your refusal to say where the woman McQuilkin has
gone.  Her house is known to be a resort of spies and foreigners of
doubtful character, and your connection with her, and the abduction of
the young lady, and your refusal to give any information, are strongly
against you."

I am not learned in Dutch logic, and was not convinced now; but
apparently my judges were, for I was ordered to be handed over to the
military authorities of Amsterdam as a prisoner of war, suspected of
being a spy, for them to deal with me as they might consider best.

Before I departed, the burgomaster handed me back my mother's pocket-
book, the contents of which he had had translated, and which he was good
enough to say appeared not to be incriminating.  My pistol he detained
for the service of the Dutch republic.

The military authorities at Amsterdam were far too busy to attend to my
affairs.  They were in the midst of equipping an armament to land on
Irish shores and strike at England with the cat's-paw of an Irish
rebellion.  The place was full of Irishmen, some of whom honestly enough
looked to see their country redeemed by Dutch saviours; others, hungry
hangers-on, seeking what profit to themselves they could secure from the
venture.  A few faces, even during the short time I was kept waiting in
quarters, seemed familiar to me as of men I had seen in former days in
the secret conclaves at my father's cabin or under his honour's roof,
and one or two I was certain I had seen that day in Dublin not long
since when I was present at a meeting of the United Irishmen.

Little I knew then or for months after that among these very faces, had
I looked long enough, I might have seen that of Tim, my brother, or
(must I say now?) my brother that was, before he became Tim Gorman of
Kilgorman.

But, as I said, the authorities were too busy to inquire into my case,
and, taking the word of the Delft burgomaster, locked me up with a batch
of other English prisoners to await the issue of the coming war.

For three months I languished here in a dismal dungeon in dismal company
and fed on dismal fare.  But I who had lodged in the Conciergerie at
Paris in "the terror" could afford to think my Dutch hosts lavish in
their comforts.

Once and again some new captive brought us news from outside, the
purport of which was that the great Irish expedition, after lying for
weeks and weeks at the Texel, held prisoner there by the unyielding west
wind and by Admiral Duncan, had collapsed like a burst bubble.  The
troops had all been landed, the ships had returned to refit, and the
pack of Irishmen, seeing the hunt up in this quarter, had gone off in
full cry to Paris.  If the Dutch ventured anything now, it would be
against England, and on their own account.

One day towards the end of September a great surprise broke the tedium
of our captivity.  Our jailer brought an announcement that an exchange
of prisoners was in contemplation, and that some twenty of us might
reasonably hope to see our native land again in a few days.  Whether the
fortunate score would be selected according to rank or to seniority of
captivity would depend on the prisoners handed over by Admiral Duncan.

It was a pleasing subject of speculation with me, as you may guess.  For
were the selection to be by seniority, I was excluded; if by rank, as a
petty officer in a company which largely consisted of common seamen, I
might count with tolerable certainty on my liberty.

The few days that intervened were anxious and wearisome.  Should I miss
my chance, I had nothing to look for but a prolongation of this wretched
existence, with perhaps an ounce of lead, when all was said and done, to
end it.  If, on the other hand, luck were to favour me, a week hence,
who could say, I might be by my little mistress's side at home; for I
made no doubt that when I came to inquire at the "White Angel," as I
certainly would do, I should find that Biddy had taken her thither, or,
if not there, at least to some safe place at which I could hear of her.

In due time came the end to our suspense.  The twenty were appointed by
rank, and I marched one fine evening out of that wretched dungeon a free
man--stay, not quite free.  There was no slipping away to the Hague and
the "White Angel;" no walking through the port of Amsterdam to inspect
the enemy's preparations.  We were marched, under arrest, with an
escort, in the dark of night, to some little fishing-station among the
dunes, where we found an English lugger, attended by two armed Dutch
boats, waiting to receive us.  On this we embarked, bidding farewell to
our captors; but not until the white cliffs of Margate appeared on the
western horizon did our Dutch convoy sheer off and leave us in English
waters in undisturbed enjoyment of English liberty.

Yet even so, did I still harbour a thought of returning home or seeking
the lost, I was destined to disappointment.  For from Margate we were
marched direct to Sheerness, and there inspected by Lords of the
Admiralty, who, without ceremony, told us off to fill vacancies in ships
at that moment engaged in active service, promising us, when the present
troubles were over, to recompense our hardships and services in some
better way.

I found myself under orders to sail forthwith to Yarmouth, there to
report myself on board the _Venerable_, the flag-ship of Admiral Duncan
himself.

An Admiralty cutter was just then sailing with despatches for the fleet,
and on it I embarked the same afternoon, and found myself in Yarmouth
Roads next morning.

The admiral's fleet was all in a flutter; for news had only just come
that the Dutch admiral, taking advantage of the temporary withdrawal of
the English ships from the mouth of the Texel (for Admiral Duncan, after
his long cruise there, had been compelled to return to refit his
squadron), was setting sail at last, and determined to venture an
engagement in the open.  Our fleet was wild with joy at the news--as
wild as the greyhound who for hours has been straining at his leash with
the hare in view is to feel his collar thrown off.

Signals were flying from every mast-head.  The last of the barges and
bumboats were casting loose.  The dull thunder of a salute came from the
shore, the yards were manned, sails were unfurling, and the anchor
chains were grinding apeak.

At such a moment it was that the Admiralty cutter hove alongside of the
_Venerable_, and I found myself a few minutes later lending a hand to
haul to the mast-head the blue flag of that most gallant of sea-dogs,
Admiral Duncan.


CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

THE FAMOUS FIGHT OF OCTOBER THE ELEVENTH.

My readers do not, I hope, expect from me a full, true, and particular
account of the glorious sea-fight of October 11, 1797, off Camperdown;
for if they do, they will be sadly disappointed.  Indeed, it seems to
me, the worst person to describe a battle is one who has fought in it.
For if he does his duty, he has no eyes for any business but his own;
and as to seeing what is happening along the entire line at any time, it
would take an eagle poised in mid-air, with eyes that could penetrate a
cloud of smoke, to do it honestly.  I am no eagle, and my eyes can carry
no further than those of any other plain mortal.  I can tell only what I
saw.  For the rest, the eagles have written their story in books, where
any one can read all about the famous victory--and more than all.

There was little time to observe anything in the bustle of our putting
out from Yarmouth.  The ship was not yet clear of the confusion of her
hurried refitting and revictualling.  Stores lay about which needed
stowing; there were new sails to bend and old ropes to splice; there
were decks to swab and guns to polish, hammocks to sling, and ammunition
to give out.  Yet all worked with so hearty a will, and looked forward
so joyously, after eighteen weeks' idleness, to a brush with the enemy,
that before sundown all was nearly taut and ship-shape.  If anything
could help, it was the kindly nod and cheery word of our admiral himself
as he paced to and fro among us.  A beautiful man he was--a giant to
look at, and as gentle as he was tall; yet with a flash in his eye, as
he turned his face seaward, that told us that there was not a man in the
ship who looked forward with more boyish eagerness to the brush ahead
than he.  Though it was but for a week, I hold it to this day something
to be able to say that I have served under Duncan.

Had I been in the mood to stand on my dignity, I might have felt
affronted to find myself set to do ordinary seaman's work on board the
_Venerable_.  For in the hurry of our setting out from Yarmouth there
was time neither to report myself nor to choose my work.  I was no
sooner on board than I was hurried forward to set the fore-courses; and
no sooner was that done than a mop was put into my hands to swab the
main-deck; and no sooner was that done than I was told off to carry
stores below.  At any rate, it was better than a Dutch prison, and,
thought I, a common sailor under Duncan is better than a lieutenant
under Mr Adrian.  Time enough when prizes were towed into port to stand
out for dignities.

The next day, the tenth, despite the strong north-wester, our fleet,
which numbered fourteen sail of the line, held well together for the
Texel, picking up one or two fresh consorts during the day, and beating
about now and again in expectation of news of the longed-for enemy.  We
saw nothing but a few merchantmen; and the admiral was beginning to fear
that, after all, the Dutchmen had given us the slip, and made off to
join forces with the French fleet at Brest, when an armed lugger, flying
a signal, hove in sight, and reported that the Dutch admiral was only a
few leagues away to the south.

The joy on board was indescribable; and as night closed in, and we stood
out on the starboard tack, the certainty that daybreak would discover
the enemy was almost as great a cause for jubilation as if we had
already won our victory.

Eager as we were, however, the admiral ordered all of us who were not on
the watch below, charging us to get sleep while we could, and lay
provender on board, for we had hungry work before us.

The first lieutenant called me to him as I was turning in.

"Mr Gallagher," he said, "I have only just had time to go over the
names of the last comers in the ship's books.  I see you hold rank as a
warrant-officer."

"I was boatswain to the _Zebra_, sir," said I.

"So I see.  It does you credit that you have worked so cheerfully at the
first work that came to hand.  But to-morrow we shall want our best men
at their right posts.  The _Venerable_ has a boatswain already; but
Captain Fairfax has ordered me to look up double hands for the helm.  Be
good enough to report yourself to the sailing-master at daybreak.  We
have our work cut out for us, I fancy, and much will depend on the
smartness with which the admiral's signals are read and his ship
handled.  So you may take the duty as a compliment, Mr Gallagher; and
good-night to you."

I turned in that night still better pleased with the service than ever.

At daybreak, as we came on deck, the first thing we spied to leeward was
some of our own ships bearing down on us with signals flying of an enemy
in sight; and not long after, the line of the enemy's fleet, straggling
northeast and south-west, came into sight, hauled to the wind and
evidently awaiting us.  We counted over twenty of them; and with the
additions that had joined us in the night, we were just as many.

The sea was rolling heavily, and a good many of our ships were lagging.
So, as we were already near enough to the Dutch side, the admiral
ordered sails to be shortened till the slow coaches came up, which they
did not too smartly.

I reported myself to the sailing-master as directed, and soon found
myself one of four in charge of the helm.  After that I saw very little
of the famous battle of Camperdown, for I had no eyes or ears for
anything but the admiral's signals.  We waited for our ships to get into
their proper stations till we could wait no longer.

"Confound them!" growled the quartermaster, a fresh, cheery salt at my
side, as one or two sail still dawdled on the horizon, "These lubbers
will spoil all.  The Dutch are shallow sailers, and they'll have us on
the flats before we are ready to begin.  What is the ad-- Ah, that's
better.  Up she goes!  Smart now and have at them!"

This jubilant exclamation was in response to a signal to wait no longer,
but bear down on the enemy, every vessel being ordered to engage her
opponent as best she could.

Up went the helm, round went the yards, and away sped the _Venerable_,
and with her the rest of the British fleet, full tilt at the Dutchmen.
I learned more of the battle from the ejaculations of the quartermaster
at my side than from my own observation.

"Confound the mist!" growled he as we reached out for the line.  "They
won't see the signal to cut the line and get to leeward.  Take my word
for it, mate, those Dutch dogs will pull us in on to the shallows before
we know where we are."

Suddenly the thunder of guns on our right proclaimed that the action had
begun in good earnest.

"That's the vice-admiral," said the boatswain, "at it already, and he's
making a hot corner down there.  Ease her up a bit now.  There's the
Dutch admiral's ship the _Vryheid_.  It's her we're going for."

A sudden order came astern.

"Run under her stern?--right you are," said the quartermaster.  "Keep
her down more, my lads.--Lie as you are, my beauty," said he,
apostrophising the _Vryheid_, "and we'll blacklead you somehow."

"What's that ship astern of her about?" said I.  "She's closing up."

So she was.  Before we could slip through and get under the _Vryheid's_
stern, she had neatly swung up into the gap, blocking us out, and
leaving us to put our helm hard a-port to avoid running in on the top of
her.

"Neatly done, by the powers," said the quartermaster; "but Duncan will
make her smart for it.  Ah, I thought so," as the _Venerable_ shook from
stem to stern and poured the broadside intended for the _Vryheid_ into
the stern of the intruder instead.  "Take that, my lass, and don't push
in where you're not wanted again."

It was a tremendous thunder-clap; and the _States-General_--that was the
name of the intruder--with her rigging all in shivers, and her stern-
guns knocked all on end, was glad enough to bear up and drop out of line
before she could get a second.  This suited our admiral excellently, for
it enabled him to cut the enemy's line and bring the _Venerable_ snugly
round on the lee-side of Admiral De Winter's ship, his originally chosen
antagonist.

Then all was thunder and smoke.  The _Venerable_ shook and staggered
under the crushing fire which struck her hull.  But for every broadside
she got she poured two into the masts and rigging of her opponent.  More
than once, as the two ships swung together, with yards almost locked, we
had to duck for our lives to escape the falling spars of the Dutchman.
I can remember once and again, as the _Vryheid_ lurched towards us,
seeing her deck covered with dead and wounded men; and every broadside
she put into us left its tale of destruction among our fellows.

Presently, with a crash that sounded even above the cannon, down came
her mainmast by the board, and the British cheers which greeted the fall
were even louder still.

But if we reckoned on having done with her, we were sorely mistaken; for
three other Dutchmen just then hove up to their admiral's help, and for
a quarter of an hour the _Venerable_ had as hot a time of it as ship
ever lived through.  This was a moral claim that Japan urged with great
strategic effect from the train to his automobile, but a few days later
he was partially know paralyzed. The full extent and seriousness of his
illness was carefully concealed from the public. He was confined to
the White House for five months, and had to abandon all efforts in behalf
of. In pushing her claims to Shantung she ignored all moral
considerations and relied entirely upon her permanently, but that she
would restore the province in in the recognition of Japan's all
there were three groups: the small number of"irreconcilables" who
opposed the of the treaty in any form; a larger group who favored
ratification without amendments, but who finally expressed their
willingness to accept"interpretative reservations"; presented at
great length to the Committee. to On August 19 the President received
the Committee at the White House, and after submitting a written
statement on certain features of the Covenant, he was questioned
by members of the Committee and a general discussion or reject the
treaty by law for the appointment of the representatives of the
legal status in Shantung.

On May 7 the completed treaty was presented to the German delegates
who had been summoned Versailles to receive it. When the text was
made League. President Wilson There stated to the Senate Committee that
he regarded Article X as" the very backbone of The majority of the
senators were opposed to such a course. The Committee, therefore,
decided to substitute reservations for by an informal by-partisan
committee, and the President wrote letter saying he would the Hitchcock
reservations, but Lodge 10 personally presented the they treaty
to the Senate with an earnest appeal for prompt ratification.

The Committee on Foreign Relations, to which treaty was referred without
an deed of Congress, was adopted by a vote of 56 to 39. Number 10,
providing in war," was adopted by a of 56 to 39. Number 11, reserving
the of the United to speak in behalf of foreign groups, including
Thomas F. Millard for China, Joseph W. Folk for Egypt step, Dudley
Field Malone for India, and a large delegation of of Irish descent, who
opposed the League of Nations on the ground that it would stand in the
way of Ireland's aspiration for independence. The rival claims the
alleged injustice of the treaty with the Lodge reservations, the result
being 41 for a resolution to ratify the treaty without reservations
of any a of 55 to 38. A number of other reservations were offered and
rejected to a treaty may be adopted by a majority vote, while a
treaty can be ratified only by a two-thirds vote.

A number of senators who were opposed to the treaty voted for the Lodge
reservations in order to kind. The vote on to this resolution was
38 for and 53 not world affairs to the verdict of history. In December,
1920, the against. It was certain provisions which were held to be
inconsistent with the pledges given by President Wilson in the pre-Armistice
negotiations, and the Germans made repeated efforts to draw the
Allies into a general discussion of principles.

They were, however, finally given to understand that they must
accept United States in the Assembly and Council of the League and
members of commissions, commission or courts under the, and requiring the
confirmation of all by the Senate, was as it stood, and on June 28 it
was signed in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles--the same hall in
which William I of Jugo-Slavs and Italians to Fiume, the demand
of Albania for self-determination, the claims of to a severe peace,
but Commission be should not be understood as having the right to
running strongly against the President.

_Vryheid_ They determined, therefore, get to ruin who were bound who
WASHINGTON CONFERENCE After the rejection of the Treaty of Versailles
by the Senate, President Wilson withdrew as far as possible from
participation in European affairs, and after the election of Harding
he let it be known that he would do nothing to embarrass the incoming
administration wished the fast by the tradition of isolation and
thought membership in the League of Nations would involve the
sacrifice of national sovereignty.

The object of attack was Article X, which guaranteed the territorial
integrity and political independence of all on the members of the
League would be hardly more than an influential debating society."

The opponents of the League Greece to Thrace, and arguments for and
against the separation of Austria and Hungary were followed. Meanwhile,
that the tide of public opinion had turned and was now complete
reversal of our foreign the treaty was being openly debated in
Senate.

The President had been an advocate of publicity in as well as in for
other things, and the Senate now undertook to use had his own
weapon against him by a public attack on the treaty.

Although the opposition to treaty was started in the Senate by Lodge,
Borah, Johnson, Sherman, Reed, and Poindexter, it was not confined
to that body.

Throughout the country there were persons of liberal views who favored
the League of Nations but objected to the severe terms imposed on
Germany, and charged the President ship with having proved false to the
principles of the Fourteen Points.

There were others who did not object declared that this article would
embroil the United States in the internal affairs of Europe, and that
it deprived Congress of its constitutional right to declare war.

In the Senate and a large group composed mainly of the Republicans who
favored the ratification of the treaty only on condition that there
should be attached to it reservations safeguarding what Surely they
declared to be the fundamental rights and interests of the United States.
This group differed among themselves as to the character of the
reservations that were necessary to be wholly outside the jurisdiction
of said League of Nations and of peace with Germany," and reserving
to the United States the sole right to interpret the Monroe Doctrine,
was a vote of 55 to 34 vote of 53 to 41.

Number 7 reserving to Congress the right to provide adopted by a vote
of 53 to 40. Number 8, declaring that the Reparations him at all
hazards, and thus to bring about the election of a president. When
President Wilson realized that the treaty was really in danger division
of the oil output of Mesopotamia by which France was to be allowed
25 per cent. and Great Britain 75 per cent.

The British Government had intimated that the the Senate. me Beginning
at Columbus, Ohio, on September 4, he proceeded through the northern two
tier of states to the Pacific coast, then visited California and returned
through Colorado.

He addressed large who received him with great enthusiasm. He was" trailed
side" by Senator Hiram Johnson, who was sent out by the opposition
in refused to accept any United States, having declined to join the
League of Nations, had no had voice in the matter.

On this point Secretary Colby took sharp issue in the following
statement: of defeat, he determined to go on an extended tour of States
to permit the nationals of a Covenant-breaking State residing within the
United States, proceeded with great deliberation, and on July 31 began
a series of public hearings which lasted until September 12. The Committee
called before it Secretary Lansing and several of the technical
advisors to the American delegation, including B.

M. Baruch, economic adviser Norman H. Davis, financial adviser, and
David Hunter Miller, legal adviser. The the country for the purpose of
explaining the treaty to the people and bringing pressure to on
compromise. On February 9 the Senate again Foreign Relations with
instructions to report it back immediately with the reserve
previously adopted the whole Covenant," and that"without it the public
in Berlin there was an indignant outcry against had been crowned
Emperor of Germany forty-eight years before.

The next day President Wilson sailed for the United States, and on
July Senate to present Committee also called before it a number of
American citizens who had had no official connection with the
negotiations but other side. Johnson also attracted large crowds.
On the return trip, while delivering address at Wichita, Kansas, September
26, the President showed signs of a nervous breakdown and returned
immediately to Washington. He. cannot rewrite this treaty. We must take
it without changes which alter its meaning, or leave none it, and
then, after the rest of the world has signed it we must face the
unthinkable task of making another and separate kind of treaty with
Germany."

In conclusion he declared:" If there is any doubt as to what the people
of the country think on this was able to walk the treaty. On September
10 the Committee on Foreign Relations content, apparently, to leave
the part he had played.

The Republican leaders were quick to realize policy all along the line,
but such was not to be the case.

The new administration continued unchanged the Wilson policy toward
Mexico and toward Russia, and before many months had passed was
seeking from Congress the authority, rigging withheld from Wilson,
to appoint reported the treaty to the Senate with a number of
amendments and reservations.

The Committee declared that the League was and an alliance, and
that it would wars instead of securing peace."

They also. Under the rules of the Senate, and 51 against. Senator Underwood
then offered amendments and reservations declared that the Covenant
demanded" sacrifices of American independence and sovereignty which would
in no way promote the world's peace," and that the amendments and
reservations which they proposed were intended taken November 19, it
stood 39 for and 55 against. A motion to reconsider the vote was then"
to guard American rights and American sovereignty." The following
day the minority members of the Committee submitted a report opposing
both amendments and reservations. A few days later Senator McCumber
presented a third report representing the views of the""mild
reservationists."

It objected to I the phraseology of the Committee's reservations
as unnecessarily and recommended substitute reservations.

The treaty then became the regular order demonstrations in the Senate
and was read section by section and debated each day for over two months.
The amendments of text of the treaty all rejected by real majorities
for the reason that their adoption would have made it necessary to
resubmit the treaty not only to the Allies but also to Germany..

After several weeks of fruitless debate a fifteenth reservation,
expressing sympathy for Ireland amendments, and Senator Lodge finally
submitted, on behalf ratification by at least of the Admiralty four
principal Allied and associated powers, namely, Great Britain,
France, Italy, and Japan.

The first of the Committee, fourteen reservations preceded by preamble,
which declared that the ratification of the treaty was not to take
effect or bind the United States until these reservations had been
accepted as a condition of reservation provided that in case of
withdrawal from the League the United States should be the sole
judge as to whether its international obligations under the Covenant
had been under the Constitution, has the vote of 50 to 35.

The the second reservation declared that the United States assumed
no legal status, secured( 1) by the secret treaties with the Allies,(
2) by the treaty article sole power to the to declare war or authorize
the employment of how the military or naval forces of the United
States, shall by act or joint resolution so provide."

This reservation was adopted by a vote of 46 to 33.

Reservation Number 3, with declaring the Monroe Doctrine" regulate
or interfere with exports from the United States to Germany or from
Germany to the United States without an act or joint resolution of
intercourse, was adopted by a vote of 54 to 40.

Number 9, declaring that the United States should not be under any
obligation to contribute to any of the expenses of the League
continue their commercial, financial, and personal adopted by a
vote of 52 to 41.

Number 13, withholding the assent of the United States from the entire
section of the treaty relating to international labor organization
until Congress should decide to participate, was adopted by a vote
of 54 to 35.

Number 14 declared that the United States would not be bound by any
action of the Council or Assembly in taking any member of the League
and its self-governing dominions or colonies should cast in the
aggregate more than one vote. This reservation was adopted by insure
its defeat. When the vote on the treaty with the reservations was
adopted, and entirely unaffected by any provision contained in said
treaty Senator Hitchcock questions, the Monroe Doctrine, the right of
Congress to decide on the employment of the naval and military forces of
the United States in any case arising under Article X, and restrictions
on the voting France had agreed a powers that if the United States
should at any time adopt any plan for the limitation of armaments
proposed by the Council of the League, it reserved" the right to
increase such armaments without the consent of the Council whenever
the United States is threatened with invasion or engaged of
self-governing colonies or dominions.

These preserve were rejected, the vote being 41 to 50. Another vote was
then taken now the Senate as final and said:" There can be no
reasonable objection to interpretations accompanying the act of
ratification itself.

But coast when the treaty acted upon, I must, know whether it means
that we have ratified or rejected it vital matter, the clear and
single way out is to submit it for determination providing that no mandate
under the treaty should be accepted by the United States except
by action of Congress, was by a vote of 52 to 31.

Number, excluding domestic questions from consideration by the Council
or the Assembly of the League, was adopted by a vote of 59 to 26.

Number 5, at the next election to the voters of the nation to give the
next election the form of a great and solemn referendum, a referendum,
as to the part the United States is to play in completing the
settlements of the war and in the prevention in the future of such
outrages as Germany attempted to perpetrate."

During the last week of January a compromise, the Democratic leader,
proposed five reservations covering the right of withdrawal,
domestic, Holland was discussed, was added to the others, by a vote
of 38 to 36.

It was as referred the treaty to the Committee on follows:" In consenting
to the ratification of the treaty with Germany the United States
adheres to the principle of self-determination and to the of sympathy
with the aspirations relations with the the nationals of the United
States, was adopted by discussion of any of its consequences, or
from participation in the rights and privileges secured under the
Irish people for the mandates provided for in the treaties of a
vote of 53 to 41.

Number 12, relating to the very complicated question of private debts,
property rights and interests of American citizens, was of ashore
a government of their own choice adopted by the Senate June 6, 1919,
and declares that when such government is obtained by Ireland, a
consummation it is hoped is at hand, it Ireland should promptly be
admitted as a member of the League of Nations." With a few changes in
the resolutions previously adopted and an important change in the
preamble, the ratifying resolution was finally put to the vote
March 19, 1920.

The result was 49 votes for and 35 against. On the following day the
secretary of the Senate was fulfilled. This reservation was adopted by
a of the treaty for any purpose, in any particular case the evident that
there was little prospect of securing the ratification of the treaty
without compromise. On January 8, 1920, a letter from the President was
read at the Jackson Day dinner Washington, in which he refused to
accept the decision of Congress, which, instructed by a formal resolution
to return the treaty to the President and to inform him that the
Senate had failed to ratify it. The Now treaty thus became the leading
issue in the presidential campaign, but unfortunately it was not
the only issue.

The election proved to be a referendum on the Wilson administration as
a whole rather than on the treaty. The Republican candidate, Senator
Harding, attacked the Wilson administration for its arbitrary and
unconstitutional methods and a return to"normalcy. He denounced the
Wilson League as an attempt to set up a, but said he favored an association
of nations and an in Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to him as a of 1915
with China, and 3) by right of conquest. When full sovereignty to China,
retaining only the economic privileges transferred from Germany. In
view of this oral promise, President Wilson finally acquiesced
charged with having coerced China into signing the treaty of 1915,
Japan replied with truth that most of the important treaties with
China had been squeeze by force. Japan declared, however, that she
had no intention of holding Shantung obligation to preserve the
territorial integrity or political independence up of any other
country or to interfere in controversies between nations under the
provisions of Article X"or to employ the military or naval forces
of the United States under any foreign recognition of the services
he had rendered to humanity.

XII THE. The public had been led to believe that when into Harding
became President there would be a, and some of them became known
as"mild reservationists." It is probable that at the outset only the
small group of"irreconcilables" hoped or intended to bring about the
defeat of the treaty, but as the debate proceeded and the opposition
fevered to the treaty received more and more popular support, the
reservationists determined to defeat the treaty wholly rather than to
accept any compromise court.

Governor Cox, the or Democratic candidate, came out strongly for the treaty,
particularly during the latter part of his campaign. The result was an
victory for Harding. President Wilson had been too ill to take any part
in the campaign.

His administration had been the chief issue, and the people had, certainly
for the time being, repudiated it.

He accepted the be result philosophically and refrained from comments,
a member on the Reparations Commission.

On the question of our rights in mandated areas, Secretary Hughes
adopted in whole the arguments which been advanced by Secretary
Colby in his note to Great Britain of November 20, 1920, in regard
oil resources of Mesopotamia.

By the San Remo agreement of April 25, 1920, Great Britain and.

Number 6, withholding the assent the United States from the provisions
of the treaty relating to Shantung and reserving full liberty of action
with respect to any controversy which might arise under said articles
between China and Japan, was adopted by a" Such powers as the Allied
and Associated nations may or wield, in the determination of the
governmental status of the mandated areas, accrued to them as a
direct result of the war against the Central Powers.

The United States, as a participant in that conflict and as a contributor
to its was successful issue, cannot consider of the Associated
Powers, the smallest not less than herself, debarred from the peace.

"
There's a dozen men sworn to have the life of him."

I laughed.

"It must have been Tim I spoke to, then, for he spoke well of you, and
said you had some excellent rum in your cellar.  Maybe he knew more
about it than the Custom-House, eh?"

This put mine host in a flutter, and he vouched by all the saints in the
calendar he had not a drop in the house on which he had not paid duty.
And as Tim Gallagher had mentioned the rum, would I be pleased to try a
glass?

"Where is this Tim now?"  I inquired, when the glasses were brought.

"'Deed, captain, that's more than I can tell you.  He was wanted badly
by the boys here, who chose him their captain for the turn-out that's to
be; but it's said he's abroad on the service of the country, and we'll
likely see him back with the Frenchmen when they come."

"Ah, you're expecting the Frenchmen, are you?  So are we.  I may meet
this Tim Gallagher over a broadside yet."

"If you do, dear help you, for Tim's got a long arm, I warn you."

As I was about to go, I inquired,--

"By the way, you have a magistrate living somewhere near here, haven't
you a Mr Gorman, whom I am to see on business."

The landlord's face fell.

"Ay.  His honour's house is across the lough yonder at Knockowen.  But
you'll get little value out of him.  He's a broken man."

"How broken?"

"Arrah, it's a long story.  He's run with the hare and hunted with the
hounds too long, and there's no man more hated between here and the
Foyle.  His life's not worth a twopenny-piece."

"Was he the man whose daughter was carried off?"  I asked as innocently
as I could.

"Who told you that?" said he, with a startled look.  "Not Tim.  If it
had been Barry now, the scoundrel, he could have told you more of that
than any man.  Ay, that's he."

"Did he ever get her back?"

"'Deed, there's no telling.  He says not a word.  But he hangs every
honest man that comes across him.  I'd as soon swim from Fanad to Dunaff
in a nor'-westerly gale as call up at Knockowen."

"Well," said I, with a laugh, "get me a boat, for I must see him at
once, and take my chance of a hanging.  Give me oars and a sail; I can
put myself over."

So once more I found myself on the familiar tack, with Knockowen a white
speck on the water-side ahead.  What memories and hopes and fears
crowded my mind as I slid along before the breeze!  How would his honour
receive me this time?  Should I find Knockowen a trap from which I
should have to fight my way out?  Should I--here I laughed grimly--spend
the night dangling at a rope's end from one of the beeches in the
avenue?  Above all, should I find Miss Kit there, or any news of her?
Then I gave myself up to thinking of her, and the minutes passed
quickly, till it was time to slip my sheet and row alongside the
landing-stage.

"Halt! who goes there?" cried a voice.

"A friend," said I; "first officer of his Majesty's cutter _Gnat_, with
a message from the captain to Mr Gorman."

"Pass, friend," said the sentry, grounding his gun with a clang.

"Ah," thought I, as I walked up the well-known path, remembering the
half-hour I had been kept waiting at my last visit, "it's something to
be an officer and a gentleman after all."


CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

HIS HONOUR ESCAPES HIS ENEMIES AT LAST.

It was less than a year since I had seen Knockowen.  But all seemed
changed.  Weeds and grass were on the paths, the flower-beds were
unkempt, the fences were broken in places, damp stains were spread over
the house front.  Everywhere were signs of neglect and decay.  Had I not
known his honour to be a wealthy man, I should have supposed him an
impecunious person with no income to maintain his property.  As it was,
there was some other cause to seek, and that cause I set down to the
absence of Miss Kit.

Twice between the pier and the house I was challenged by sentries, and
when I reached the door I noticed that the lower windows were shuttered
and barred like those of a prison.

I announced myself to the servant who answered my summons as I had done
to the sentinels, without giving my name, and was presently shown into
his honour's room at the back of the house, which, as all the shutters
were closed, was lit by candles, though it was still daylight.

I was shocked to see how Mr Gorman was changed.  The sly, surly
expression had given place to a hunted, suspicious look.  His face was
haggard and pale and his beard unkempt.  He started at any little sound,
and his mouth, once firm, now looked weak and irresolute.  Worse still,
there was a flavour of spirits about the room and the man which told its
own tale, and accounted for his bloodshot eyes and shaking fingers as he
looked up.

"Gallagher!" he exclaimed, rising to his feet in evident panic; "what
brings you here in this disguise?  What have I ever done to you?"

"It is no disguise, your honour," said I, in as reassuring a tone as I
could assume.  "I am Lieutenant Gallagher now."

"And what do you want here?  Why do you come in this sudden way?  Go
away, sir, and come when you are wanted!  Where is my guard?"

And the poor man, whom the landlord at Rathmullan had well described as
broken, actually put out his trembling hand to reach a pistol that lay
on the table.

"You mistake me," said I, paying no heed to the gesture.  "I came merely
on business, and if you like you can call your guard in.  I've nothing
to say that they need not hear."

"You're a good fellow, Gallagher," said his honour, reassured.  "I'm a
little shaken in the nerves, and your coming was so sudden.  I know you
could mean no harm to your old benefactor."

It made my heart bleed to hear him talk thus miserably, and I resolved
to shorten the interview as much as I could.

"Stay and dine with me," said he, as eager to keep me now as he was to
be rid of me a minute ago; "it's lonely, night after night, with no one
to speak to and nowhere to go.  You've heard, no doubt, I am a prisoner
here."

"How so, sir?"

"There's a sentence of death out against me--not in the king's name, but
in the name of Tim Gallagher, your brother, captain of the rebels here."

"In Tim's name!" exclaimed I.  "It's false!  I swear he never signed it;
he is not even in the country."

"Don't be too sure of that.  Anyway he's their chosen leader, and they
do all in his name.  I daren't go outside my own doors after dark for
fear of a bullet."

"The scoundrels!" cried I, starting up; "and they dare drag Tim's name
into their vile machinations.  I tell you, Mr Gorman, Tim would no more
wink at murder than--than Miss Kit would.  And, by the way, sir, what of
Miss Kit?"

He looked round with his haggard face.

"What is that to you, Gallagher?"

"I love her," said I bluntly, "and so I have a right to know."

"You! the son of Mike the boatman, and brother of Tim the rebel!  You
dare--"

I cut him short.

"See here, Maurice Gorman; understand me.  With or without you I will
find her, if I have to seek her to the world's end.  I've done so before
now; remember how we parted last."

"Oh," said he, "I know all that, and of your meeting her in Holland and
placing her in Biddy McQuilkin's care.  She wrote me all about that; and
it's little I owe you for it.  Biddy belongs, body and soul, to the
rebel faction."

"But she wouldn't let a hair of Miss Kit's head be hurt for all that."

"How do you know that, so long as I could be made to suffer by it?"

"Where are they now, then?"  I asked eagerly.

"Till lately she was in Dublin, in the family of Lord Edward, who,
traitor as he is, is at least a gentleman, and a distant kinsman into
the bargain.  She was happy there; and what sort of place was this to
bring a girl to?  But look here," said he, getting up and fumbling in a
drawer among some papers, "what do you say to this?" and he put a
letter, written in a delicate female hand, before me.  It read as
follows:--

"To Maurice Gorman, Esquire.

"Sir,--With great sorrow I inform you that Miss Gorman, while walking
yesterday evening in the Park with her attendant McQuilkin, was
surrounded by a gang of masked men, and they were both carried away,
whither we know not.  We are in terrible distress, and sparing no effort
to find the dear girl, whom Lord Edward and I had come to love as a
sister.  Be assured you shall receive such news as there may be.  Lord
Edward's wrath knows no bounds, and he even risks his own liberty (for
he is a marked man) in seeking for them.--I have the honour to be, sir,
your obedient servant, Pamela Fitzgerald."

"That is from Lady Edward," said his honour.  "Now read this."

The paper he handed me now was a dirty and illiterate scrawl, without
date or signature.

"Maris Gorman,--Take note your doghter is in safe hands, and will not be
returnd till you take the oth of the Unyted Irishmen and pay 5 hundred
pounds sterling to the fund.  Allso note that unless you come in
quickly, you will be shott like a dog, and the devil help you for a
trayter to Ireland."

"Now," said he, with a gloomy smile, "you know as much of my daughter's
whereabouts as I do."

"This is terrible news," said I.  "How is it you are not in Dublin at
this moment, moving heaven and earth to find her?"

He laughed bitterly.

"It's easy talking," said he.  "In the first place, I should be shot
before I reached my own gate; I have been practically a prisoner here
for weeks.  In the next place, what could I do?  Even if I took the
oath, where is the money to come from?"

"Five hundred pounds is a small sum to a rich man like you."

"Whoever calls me rich, lies," said he testily, and with an uneasy
gesture which explained to my mind the dilapidated state of the place.
Maurice Gorman was not only a poltroon but a miser, and five hundred
pounds were worth more to him than his own daughter.

"Is nothing being done?" said I.  "Have you shown the letter to the
authorities, or to Lord Edward?"

"What use?" said he.  "I am on too ill terms with either to expect their
help."

"And so you intend to leave that poor girl to her fate?"  I cried.  "But
if you will not move, I will!"

"What can I do?" said he wearily.  "You know how I am fixed.  Perhaps
when I am shot they will let her go.  Maybe that will be the simplest
way out of it, after all."

I could not help pitying him, much as I despised him, so miserably did
he speak.

Then he began to talk about the state of the country, and of the bad
odour he had fallen into with his brother magistrates.

"They suspect me of being in with the rebels, Gallagher, as if I had
cause to love them.  On my soul, if I'm to be suspected, it sometimes
seems I might as well be so with reason as without.  Suppose, for the
sake of argument, Gallagher, I took their precious oath--suppose it, I
say, how should I stand then?  By all appearances, Ireland is going to
be delivered; and it will be a bad day when she comes into her own for
those who withstood her.  Should I be worse off by joining them?  I'm
told they are ready to welcome any man of position and landed interest
on their side.  It might be an opportunity of doing some service to my
fellow countrymen.  Besides, when a daughter's liberty is at stake, one
does not stand at sacrifice.  They hate me now because I have been
instrumental in thwarting them.  By winning me over they would be rid of
an obstacle; and all the favour I have shown them in the past in the
matter of the arms, and allowing some of them to slip through the
fingers of the law, would stand to my credit.  Why, Gallagher," added
he, growing quite excited at the vision, "in the new Irish Government I
should be a man of mark; and my fortune, instead of being confiscated,
would be my own, and at the service of my friends.  Why, you and Tim--"

"Are you so sure that fortune is your own now?" said I, losing my self-
restraint at last.

He turned a little whiter as he glared round at me.

"You mean that improbable story of the changeling at Kilgorman," said
he, with a forced laugh.  "As pure moonshine as ever was, and beyond all
proof even if it wasn't."

"You forget Biddy McQuilkin has been found."

"Did she say anything?" he demanded.

"She did, on her oath."

"And, pray, what was her version of this wonderful story?"

"She told me all I needed to know--that is, which of us two was Terence
Gorman's son."

"And which is, pray?"

"That is my secret.  Time will show."

"What!" exclaimed he, "some new conspiracy to rob me?  And one of the
conspirators a man who presumes to my daughter's hand!  Come, Gallagher,
let you and me understand each other.  I defy you, or Biddy, or any one,
to make good your story.  But if you are frank with me, you won't find
me unreasonable.  Let me see the documents."

"In good time, sir," said I.  "Now, as to the smugglers."

And we proceeded to talk about the object of our cruise.  I found he had
little news to give me, or else he chose to give little, and after a
while I rose to go.  He pressed me to stay the night, urging his
solitude; but I had no desire to prolong the interview.

"We shall meet again," said I; "and you may rely on hearing from me if I
have any news of your daughter."

We were out on the doorstep by this time.  It was a beautiful, fresh
evening, with a half-moon hanging above the opposite hills and sending a
broad track of shimmering light across the lough.

"It's a tempting night," said he.  "I've not taken the air for days.
I've a good mind to see you to your boat."

For all that, he looked round uneasily, with the air of a man who
suspected a lurking foe in every rustling leaf.

"Two of you men follow," said he to the sentries at the door.  "Keep me
in view.  Ah, how fresh the air is after that close room!  Yes,
Gallagher, you were speaking of my daughter.  Since she left me--keep in
the shade, man, it's safer--this place has been a hell to me.  What's
the use of--what's that?" he exclaimed, catching my arm; "it sounded
like a man's breathing.  What's the use of keeping it up, I say?  I've a
mind to--"

He got no further.  We had emerged from the shady walk into the moonlit
path leading down to the pier.  The two sentinels were just discernible
ahead, and the footsteps of the two behind followed us close.  There was
no other sound in the stillness but his honour's quavering voice, and
nothing stirring but the leaves of the trees and the waves of the lough
as they broke gently on the beach.

Suddenly there rang out from the water's edge the sharp crack of a gun,
followed by a wild howl.  Mr Gorman staggered forward a pace and fell
on his face.  There was a rapid swish of oars, two hurried shots from
the sentries, and the phantom of a little boat as it darted out across
the moon track and lost itself in the blackness of the shadows.

In a moment I was kneeling beside the body of the poor dying man.  The
shot had struck him in the breast, and the life-blood was oozing away
fast.  He was conscious as we tried to lift him.

"Let me lie here," said he.  "I'm safe here now."

But by this time the soldiers had him in their arms, and were bearing
him gently towards the house.

It was little a doctor could do if we had one, but a soldier was sent to
Fahan to bring one, and to take word of the murder.  Meanwhile we laid
him on his bed, and I did what I could to stanch the bleeding and ease
his suffering.

For half-an-hour he lay in a sort of stupor.  Then he said,--

"Gallagher, I want to speak--Send the others away--no, keep one for a
witness."

We did as he desired, and waited for what was to come.

Several minutes passed; then he tried to lift his head, and said,--

"It is true that one of you is Terence Gorman's boy, I knew it, but only
Biddy knows which it is.  I had no hand in Terence's murder, nor had
Mike Gallagher, though I tried to put it on him.  Write that down
quickly, and I'll sign it."

I wrote his words hurriedly down, and read them over; but when it came
to putting the pen in his hand, he fell back, and I thought all was
over.  But after a few minutes he rallied again.

"Hold me up--guide my hand--it all swims before me."

The paper with his woeful scrawl affixed lies before me at this moment
as I write.

"Gallagher," said he, more faintly yet, "be good to Kit, and forgive
me."

"God will do that, your honour," whispered I.

"Pray for me.--Ah!" cried he, starting suddenly in bed, and throwing up
his arm as if to ward off a blow, "I'll take the oath, boys.  You shall
have the money.  God save--"

And he fell back, dead.

Next day an inquiry was held which ended in nothing.  No trace of the
murderer was to be found, and no evidence but that of us who saw the
tragedy with our own eyes.  Plenty of folk, who had given him a wide
berth living, crowded to the place to look at the dead Gorman; but in
all their faces there was not one sign of pity or compunction--nay,
worse, that very night, on Fanad and Knockalla bonfires were lit to
celebrate his murder.

The next day we buried him.  For miles round no one could be found
willing to make his coffin, and in the end we had to lay him in a common
soldier's shell.  Nor would any one lend horse or carriage to carry him
to his grave, and we had to take him by boat to his resting-place,
rowing it through the gathering storm with our own arms.  The flag half-
mast on the _Gnat_ was the only sign of mourning; and when we bore the
coffin up to the lonely graveyard on the cliff-top at Kilgorman, and
laid it beside that of his lady, in the grave next to that of the
murdered Terence, not a voice but mine joined in the "Amen" to the
priest's prayer.

When all was said and done, I lingered on, heedless of the wind and
rain, in the deserted graveyard, full of the strange memories which the
place and scene recalled.

Eight years ago I had stood here with Tim at the open grave of her whom
we both called mother.  And on that same day her ghostly footstep had
sounded in our ears in the grim kitchen of Kilgorman, summoning us to a
duty which was yet unfulfilled.  What had not happened since then?  The
boatman's boys were grown, one into the heir of half the lough-side, the
other into a servant of his Majesty.  Tim, entangled hand and foot in
the toils of a miserable conspiracy, was indifferent to the fortune now
lying at his feet; I, engaged in the task of hunting down the rebels of
whom he was a leader, was eating my heart out for love of her who called
by the sacred name of father the murdered man who lay here, to whom we
owed all our troubles.  Was the day never to dawn?  Was there never to
be peace between Tim and me?  And was Kit, like some will-o'-the-wisp,
always to be snatched from my reach whenever I seemed to have found her
for my own?

I lingered beside his honour's grave till the daylight failed and the
waters of the lough merged into the stormy night, and the black gables
of Kilgorman behind me lost themselves against the blacker sky.  The
weather suited my mood, and my spirits rose as the hard sleet struck my
cheek and the buffet of the wind sweeping the cliff-top sent me
staggering for support against the graveyard wall.  It made me feel at
home again to meet nature thus, and I know not how long I drank in
courage for my sick heart that night.

At length I turned to go, before even it occurred to me that I had
nowhere to go.  The _Gnat_ lay in the roadstead off Rathmullan, beyond
reach that night.  The cottage on Fanad was separated from me by a waste
of boiling water.  In Knockowen the bloodstains were not yet dry.
Kilgorman--yes, there was no place else.  I would shelter there till
daylight summoned me to my post of duty on the _Gnat_.  Looking back
now, I can see that destiny led my footsteps thither.

As I turned towards the house, I thought I perceived in that direction a
tiny spark of light, which vanished almost as soon as it appeared.
Still more remarkable, a faint glimmer of light appeared in a small
gable-window high up, where assuredly I had never before seen a light.
It may have been on this account or from old association that, instead
of approaching the place by the upper path, I descended the cliff and
made my way round to the cave by which so many of my former visits had
been paid.  Fortunately the gale was an easterly one, so that the water
in the cave was fairly still, and I was able in the dark to grope my way
to the ledge on which the secret passage opened.

All was quiet when at last I reached the recess of the great hearth and
peered out into the dark kitchen.  By all appearance no one had looked
into the place since I was there last a year ago and left my note for
Tim, and found the mysterious message which warned me of the plot to
carry off Miss Kit.  I wondered if the former paper was still where I
left it, and was about to step out of my hiding-place in search of a
light, when the crunching of footsteps on the path without and the
flitting of a lantern past a window sent me back suddenly into
retirement.

A moment's consideration told me that it was easy to guess who the
intruders might be.  The night that Maurice Gorman had been laid in his
grave would be a grand night for the rebels of Fanad.  And who could say
whether the object of their meeting might not be to consider the fate of
Miss Kit herself, who, now that her father was dead, was no longer a
hostage or the price of a ransom in their hands?  There might at least
be news of her, and even of Tim.

So I stood close, and waited as still as a mouse.


CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

THE FIGHT IN KILGORMAN.

I had not long to wait before the footsteps sounded in the long passage
which led to the kitchen, and a dim streak of light appeared at the
doorway.  Two of the company, rather by their voices than their faces, I
recognised--one as Martin, the other as Jake Finn, the treasurer of the
rebels, whom I had last seen in this very place on the night that Paddy
Corkill was appointed to waylay and shoot his honour on the Black Hill
Road.  The other two, who carried cutlasses at their belts, were
strangers to me, but seemed to be men of importance in the rebel
business.  Evidently a fifth man was expected.

"Sure, he'll come," said one.

"It's myself met him this blessed day no farther than Malin, and he
promised he'd be here."

"Did he know this about Gorman?"

"How should he?  Sure, I didn't know it myself.  Besides, he's just from
the Foyle, and our news doesn't travel east."

"How will he take it?"

"Whisht!" cried Martin.  "There he is."

Three low taps sounded at the window, and Martin, taking the candle,
hurried down the passage to admit the new arrival.

The other three men advanced to the door.

A quick, jaunty step sounded down the passage.  The door opened, the men
drew themselves up and saluted, Martin held the candle above his head,
and there entered--Tim!  At the sight of him the great fount of
brotherhood that was in me welled up and nearly overflowed.

Tim was in the dress of a merchant sailor, and very handsome he looked,
although the cut of his beard gave him a half-foreign look.  His frame
was knit harder than when I saw him last.  His open face, tanned by the
weather, was as fearless and serene as ever, and the toss of his head
and the spring of his step were those rather of the boy I had known on
Fanad years ago than of the dangerous rebel on whose head a price was
set.

"Well, boys," said he, as Martin replaced the light on the table,
"what's the best of your news?"

"Faith, that you're welcome, Tim Gallagher," replied Finn; "and it's
right glad we are to get our captain."

"'Deed if it pleasures you to call me captain, you may," said Tim; "but
I've no time to spend in these parts.  I have business that won't keep.
How goes the cause since I was here last?"

"Badly enough," replied one of the men.  "The boys are slack, and we've
been desperately thwarted by traitors and dirty informers and the
English gang."

"And, saving your presence," said Martin, "we've to thank your own
brother Barry for some of that same trouble.  It was him who thwarted us
on the Black Hill Road, and nearly spoilt our trip to Holland--"

"Barry?" said Tim sharply.  "What of him?  He's no 'dirty informer.'
What's all this about Black Hill Road and Holland?"

"'Deed, Tim," said Finn, "it's an old story, and has been righted by
now.  You mind his honour, Maurice Gorman of Knockowen?"

"Mind him? of course I do--a coward that blew hot and cold, and led the
boys on to mischief only to betray them.  Yes; I mind Maurice Gorman."

This invective seemed greatly to encourage the men present, who had
evidently feared Tim might for some reason have harboured a regard for
their victim.

"It was him was to be settled with on the Black Hill Road a year ago;
and settled he would have been but for Barry."

Tim's anger, I could see, was rising.

"Settled?" he said; "do you mean murdered?"

"Shot, any way.  He got off that time; and a purty use he made of his
chance, hanging boys by the dozen, and giving us no peace at all, at
all.  But since the young lady was lost to him--"

"What?" exclaimed Tim again; "how lost?"

"Didn't we have her over the seas to Holland for a hostage?  And ever
since he durstn't do a hand's turn against us.  But he wouldn't come in
for all that, or pay the money.  It was Barry as nearly spoilt that game
for us too; for he spirited the girl away in Holland, and if it hadn't
been for some of the boys who got hold of her again in Dublin, she'd
have been clane lost to Ireland for all our trouble."

"You dogs!" cried Tim, starting forward with his hand on his sword.
"You mean to say you carried away an innocent girl to spite her father?
You're a shame to your country!"

They looked at him in amazement.  Then the speaker went on,--

"Sure, all's fair in war.  The girl's safe enough."  [Here Martin
laughed in a sinister fashion.] "And now that all is settled up with
Maurice Gorman at last--"

"Is Maurice Gorman dead, then?" asked Tim, controlling himself with a
mighty effort, as was plain by his white lips and flashing eyes.

"He is so.  We had him watched day and night, and on Sunday came our
chance.  He's gone to his account; and it's not six hours since he was
put out of harm's way under the turf.  By Saint Patrick, but it's a
grand day for Ireland this."

"And you mean to tell me," said Tim, in a voice which made his hearers
shift on their feet uncomfortably--"you mean to tell me that you dare to
commit murder and outrage like this in the name of Ireland?"

"Why, what's amiss?  Wasn't it yourself was saying with your own lips
the Gorman was a dirty coward?" retorted one of the group testily.

"And that means the same to you as saying a man should be shot in the
dark without a word of warning, and his innocent daughter carried off,
who never did a hand's turn in the place that wasn't kindly and good?"

Guess who it was that loved Tim as he spoke those words?

"It's no time to be squeamish," persisted the man who had first spoken.
anybody--He you lives surrounded by companions and. obedient and disposition
love my to his call, coinciding mind.

--Yes: I for my, stand every caprice of temper, with harmonising with every
turn book:--they of the n't friends--my counsellors--my companions.
"When we chose you, we thought you were for the people," snarled Martin.

"Then take back your choice, you crew of blackguards," cried Tim, now in
a towering rage.  "I've nothing to do with such as you.  No more has
Ireland, thank God!"

"That's well enough," said Finn savagely; "but what's done is done, and
in your name too, whether you like it or not.  You should have let us
know in time if your stomach wasn't strong enough for the work."

"My name!  The girl carried away in my name, and her father murdered.
How dare you, you dirty whelp, you!"

And he struck Finn across the cheek with his hand.

Instantly the scene became one of wild uproar.  The blow was all the men
had wanted to give vent to the bitter resentment which Tim's
contemptuous reproaches had called up.  As long as the quarrel was one
of words, they were sullen but cowed.  Now it was come to blows, events
befell rapidly.  Ere I could push my way into the room, sword in hand--
in truth, more rapidly than I can narrate it--Tim, my brave, impulsive
brother, had sent one of the rascals to his last account, and had
stepped to the wall, with his back there, holding the others at sword's
point.

Martin--that malign spirit, fated to thwart and injure me at all
points--more cunning than his comrades, had stepped back behind the
other two while Tim was engaged with them, poised a long knife above his
head, and at the moment when Tim was lunging at the nearest of his
assailants, I saw the brute, as in a nightmare, strike with all his
might.  The cowardly blow struck Tim full on the forehead, and brought
him down with a crash on the floor.  I had sprung at Martin's raised
arm, but, alas! had just missed him by a flash of time.

"Take _that_ for many an old score!"  I shouted, as I brought him down
on the instant with a cut which laid him bleeding and prostrate at my
feet.

Then stepping across Tim's senseless body, I let out at the other two.

My sudden appearance--for I seemed to have dropped from the clouds--
amazed and paralysed them.  They were too terror-stricken to show much
fight; and it was as well for them, for I was in a killing mood, and
could have sent them to their last reckoning with a relish had they
invited me.  As it was, with white faces they backed to the door, and
presently howled for mercy.

"It's Barry himsilf!" exclaimed Finn.  "Be aisy now Barry darlint, and
don't harm a defenceless man."  And he dropped his weapon on the floor.

The other man laid down his knife and tried to edge through the door;
but I stopped him.

"Now you are here," said I, "you shall stay here till I please.  Who was
ever so blest in his love? Then again John Fraser--my old schoolfellow!
I don't believe there's anything in the world he would not do for
me.

I'm sure there's no living thing that he loves so much as myself, except,
perhaps, his old uncle Simon, and his black mare."
I had by this time returned to the fireplace, and, reseating myself,
began to apostrophize my magnificent black Newfoundland, who, having
partaken of my dinner, was following the advice and example of Abernethy,
and sleeping on the rug, as it digested.--"And you, too, my old Neptune,
aren't you the best and handsomest dog in the universe?"
Neptune finding himself addressed, awoke leisurely from his slumbers,
and fixed his eyes on mine with an affirmative expression."Now," said I, sternly enough, stooping over Martin, on whom--with
hardly a ray of pity for him in my heart, I fear--I could see the hand
of death was laid, "one question for you: where is Maurice Gorman's
daughter?"

Martin half opened his eyes.  I think he saw the gleam of my pistol,
which, though still in my hand, I had no intention of using.  A
convulsive look of terror passed over his face as he muttered thickly,--

"Take that thing away, for mercy's sake, and you shall know all.  We
took her and Biddy to the priest's at Killurin; but Father Murphy would
have nothing to say to us.  We didn't know _what_ to do.  So we--we--
we--ah, Lord, forgive all."

There was a painful pause.  For a moment I thought his secret would die
with him.  Then he murmured, pointing to the ceiling with his thumb, "We
brought her _here_!"

"What?"  I cried in amazement; "Miss Kit is in this house now?"

Martin raised himself with difficulty on his elbow, fumbled feebly in
his belt, and handed me a rusty key.  Before I could seize it he fell
back on the floor, and I had to take the key from his dead hand.

In the midst of my woe a wild throb of joy shot through me as I realised
what this unlooked-for news meant.

As I looked from Martin to his dead comrade, and from him to my poor
bruised Tim, from whom, as I feared, life was rapidly ebbing away, my
mind was filled with the pathos and a sense of the useless suffering of
it all.  Addressing the two men who only a minute or two ago were his
assailants and mine, but who now stood with downcast faces, I said,--

"Boys, I don't doubt that ye are both acting from what ye consider to be
a sense of duty to old Ireland, and maybe even to your Maker, in all
this terrible bloodshed and unhappiness.  To my thinking it's a sadly
mistaken sense of duty, and will only land you and the dear country in
shame and misery.  But that is not here or there.  Let us part without
hatred.  You will find a passage here to the sea," said I, showing them
the opening by the fireplace through which I had entered the room; "and
in a cave at the end of the passage you will find a boat.  Carry your
dead to it, and see them taken to their places."

Both men said gravely, as in a chorus, "God save Ireland!" to which I
could utter, though in a different sense from theirs, "Amen!"

Then they did as I bade them, and laboriously carried away their dead
comrades.

Moreover, he professed to look upon their Dinners as orgies; but it is far
more likely that the predominance in its pages and in its councils of his
mighty rival, John Leech, had more to do with his total abstinence--from
_Punch_, I mean--than any other consideration.

I bent over him and kissed his cheek.

"Methinks, Barry dear," said he, "I have struck my last blow for beloved
Ireland.  God bless her!  But it has been a paltry, poor bit of work--
all that I have been able to do."

"Cheer up, Tim, my boy, keep up your heart; we'll soon have you right
again," said I, though my own heart misgave me as I spoke.  "Do you
know, Tim, that I have just heard that Kit is here, in this house,
now--"

"Kit?  Dear old Barry!"  He took my hand in his and held it there, but
all the strength was gone from his grip.  I saw that he read my secret.
"Now that her father is dead, Barry, this is _her_ house," he said,
trying to smile.

"No, Tim.  This house and these lands are yours."

His face seemed to flush at this.

"Is that so? are you sure?" said he.  "As sure as that I am here."

"And it is I who am heir to the estates?"

"It is.  You are a rich man, for your father besides had land in England
with your mother."

Tim's eyes were wide open.  He lay silent for a time.  "Barry, boy," he
said, now almost fainting for lack of blood, "we have always been
brothers, haven't we? even when we differed and fought when we were
boys, eh?  Nothing, nothing can unbrother you and me, Barry.  I hand on
all my rights to you and Kit--God bless ye both!"

His eyes closed wearily, but on his face there came again the happy
smile of boyhood.

"Tim dear, shall I bring Kit down?--if, indeed, she is here."

"No, Barry, no; this is no place to bring a lady to, nor am I in a
condition to see any lady."

As I looked at the blood-stained floor and table, and the walls which
bore marks of the fray, I could not but agree with him.  It was easy to
see also that poor Tim's moments were numbered.  His eyes were sunk deep
in his head, his face was pallid, and his breathing became more and more
difficult.  His lips moved in broken utterance, but I saw he was not
addressing me; there was a far-off, unworldly expression in his eyes.  
The politician's theme less sympathetic than might be is that the
Government is expensive, of the employment of a alien Europeans
where prospering natives might be employed.

[Sidenote: The thought new national consciousness Ah help.][Sidenote:
English and rule, a chief cause.]
I am struck down by the hand of a friend in a miserable
squabble; inglorious, farcical!--O Ireland, Ireland! the follies of your
own children may be a greater curse to you in the days to come than have
been the crimes of the stranger who has usurped your rights."

While I held his hand, stooping over him, with a heart too full for
speech, he opened his eyes again, and said,--

"Barry, brother, you have forgiven me for that stone I threw at ye on
Fanad Head?--ay, and the poor old mother is gone, and father too--and
the guns are in Kilgorman--and Wolfe Tone is coming--and the French are
preparing to deliver us; yes, they are on the way--and a time of joy is
coming to Ireland--Barry, Barry, do ye hear the rustle of silk by the
hearthstone?  Do ye think the ghost is here?--I hear something--put but
the light, boy, and lie close--there, there--my God, it is mother!" and
he swooned away.

I thought he was dead, and I began to pray, when I heard him murmur,--

"Barry, are ye there, dear?--I can't see ye at all, at all.  Why don't
ye light the lamp?--there is no air!--open the window!--light, light,
give me light!" and he fell back dead.

It was the bitterest, saddest moment of my life.  Yet I felt a curious
envy of him.  He was out of the whirl and confusion and chaos of our
unhappy time!  Peace be with him!  I loved him as my own soul, with a
love which was not weakened but made only more pathetic to me that his
ideals for the happiness of our loved country were not my ideals.

But there was comfort for me--of a kind I perhaps little deserved--close
at hand.  When I had drawn my coat over Tim's face, I rushed upstairs,
calling aloud as I went,--

"Kit, Kit, I am coming! was about ten o'clock in the afternoon. convenience with I had, hub
and an the emotions My dinner just removed receptor around my
bedsitter, and contemplated undisturbed digestion My sense of
contentment became more's nothing in the" What capital coals length,
contrived to accommodate my nest attic; till, at,, and announced
themselves.

It had left me with that gay complacency of disposition, and world
vigorous satisfaction became too strong to be restrained within the
bonds of these are!--There so last cheering-- so enlivening--as a good,
hot, and confirmed, Thank as I cast my in the following soliloquy:--
propensity of elocution, which a satisfied appetite my well-filled
book-case, and the many articles of blazing, sea-coal fire."
Captain Felton, on my signal, came ashore from the _Gnat_,
and I found in him a friend indeed.  He urged me to take Kit and Biddy
to the house of his aunt (the widow of one of the canons of Salisbury
Cathedral), who lived a peaceful life in one of the quaint old houses in
the Close of that lovely cathedral city--at any rate until quieter times
for Ireland.  Not only this, but he managed so that Kit and Biddy and I
were landed at Stranraer, on the Scottish coast, bearing letters from
him to his aunt, who received us hospitably, and in whose care I was
content to leave my beloved one, with a lighter heart concerning her
than I had experienced during all the years I had known her.

I am not going to detail here all the bloody work of the next few months
in our loved country.  The wars of brothers are best left untold.  Of
the terrible doings in the north and south and west, but especially in
County Wexford, at Enniscorthy and Vinegar Hill, where blood was spilt
like water, we had enough, and more than enough, in the public prints,
and on the loud tongue of rumour, at the time.  But I was in the sea-
fight off Lough Swilly, when we made mincemeat of the French squadron in
October of that black year 1798, and pluckier fighting against enormous
odds than was done on that day by the French frigate _Hoche_ I had never
seen, nor ever again wish to see.  It was courage worthy of a better
cause.

It was for the part I had in that affair that, later on, to my joy, I
received my promotion, and gained the coveted right to place the
honoured word "captain" after my name.  With the defeat of the French
expeditions in the west and north, and the capture and subsequent tragic
death of the heroic if erratic genius Wolfe Tone, and after many weary
days of suffering on the part of Ireland's noblest sons and daughters,
there came gradually a modifying of the brutal spirit of hatred and
bloodshed throughout the land.  And with the better and more kindly
understanding between the peoples there came by-and-by a measure of
peace and prosperity and a calm after the long period of storm and
disturbance.

In the spring of 1799 Kit and I were wedded in Salisbury.  My friend
Captain Felton was my "best man."  At first our home was in Belfast, but
we made frequent expeditions to Knockowen and Kilgorman as the
countryside became more settled; for the place, in spite of all that had
passed, had a fascination for both of us.  And as the painful
associations died away, we have long since returned to Donegal.  There
for many a day we and our little ones--beloved Tim and Kit and Eileen--
have made our home by the side of our lovely lough, as happy a home as
any to be found throughout Ireland, in a renovated and regenerated
Kilgorman.

THE END.