VOlume 1 ***


Produced by Anne Soulard, Naomi Parkhurst, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


THE PRINCE OF INDIA
OR
WHY CONSTANTINOPLE FELL

BY
LEW. WALLACE

VOL. I.


   _Rise, too, ye Shapes and Shadows of the Past
    Rise from your long forgotten grazes at last
    Let us behold your faces, let us hear
    The words you uttered in those days of fear
    Revisit your familiar haunts again
    The scenes of triumph and the scenes of pain
    And leave the footprints of your bleeding feet
    Once more upon the pavement of the street_
                                       LONGFELLOW


CONTENTS


BOOK I
THE EARTH AND THE SEA ARE ALWAYS GIVING UP THEIR SECRETS

    I. THE NAMELESS BAY
   II. THE MIDNIGHT LANDING
  III. THE HIDDEN TREASURE

BOOK II
THE PRINCE OF INDIA

    I. A MESSENGER FROM CIPANGO
   II. THE PILGRIM AT EL KATIF
  III. THE YELLOW AIR
   IV. EL ZARIBAH
    V. THE PASSING OF THE CARAVAN
   VI. THE PRINCE AND THE EMIR
  VII. AT THE KAABA
 VIII. THE ARRIVAL IN CONSTANTINOPLE
   IX. THE PRINCE AT HOME
    X. THE ROSE OF SPRING

BOOK III
THE PRINCESS IRENE

    I. MORNING ON THE BOSPHORUS
   II. THE PRINCESS IRENE
  III. THE HOMERIC PALACE
   IV. THE RUSSIAN MONK
    V. A VOICE FROM THE CLOISTER
   VI. WHAT DO THE STARS SAY?
  VII. THE PRINCE OF INDIA MEETS CONSTANTINE
 VIII. RACING WITH A STORM
   IX. IN THE WHITE CASTLE
    X. THE ARABIAN STORY-TELLER
   XI. THE TURQUOISE RING
  XII. THE RING RETURNS
 XIII. MAHOMMED HEARS FROM THE STARS
  XIV. DREAMS AND VISIONS
   XV. DEPARTURE FROM THE WHITE CASTLE
  XVI. AN EMBASSY TO THE PRINCESS IRENE
 XVII. THE EMPEROR'S WOOING
XVIII. THE SINGING SHEIK
  XIX. TWO TURKISH TALES
   XX. MAHOMMED DREAMS

BOOK IV
THE PALACE OF BLACHERNE

    I. THE PALACE OF BLACHERNE
   II. THE AUDIENCE
  III. THE NEW FAITH PROCLAIMED
   IV. THE PANNYCHIDES
    V. A PLAGUE OF CRIME
   VI. A BYZANTINE GENTLEMAN OF THE PERIOD
  VII. A BYZANTINE HERETIC
 VIII. THE ACADEMY OF EPICURUS
   IX. A FISHERMAN'S FETE
    X. THE HAMARI


BOOK I

THE EARTH AND THE SEA ARE ALWAYS GIVING UP THEIR SECRETS THE
PRINCE OF INDIA


CHAPTER I.

THE NAMELESS BAY


In the noon of a September day in the year of our dear Lord 1395, a
merchant vessel nodded sleepily upon the gentle swells of warm water
flowing in upon the Syrian coast. A modern seafarer, looking from the
deck of one of the Messagerie steamers now plying the same line of
trade, would regard her curiously, thankful to the calm which held her
while he slaked his wonder, yet more thankful that he was not of her
passage.

She could not have exceeded a hundred tons burthen. At the bow and stern
she was decked, and those quarters were fairly raised. Amidship she was
low and open, and pierced for twenty oars, ten to a side, all swaying
listlessly from the narrow ports in which they were hung. Sometimes they
knocked against each other. One sail, square and of a dingy white,
drooped from a broad yard-arm, which was itself tilted, and now and then
creaked against the yellow mast complainingly, unmindful of the simple
tackle designed to keep it in control. A watchman crouched in the meagre
shade of a fan-like structure overhanging the bow deck. The roofing and
the floor, where exposed, were clean, even bright; in all other parts
subject to the weather and the wash there was only the blackness of
pitch. The steersman sat on a bench at the stern. Occasionally, from
force of habit, he rested a hand upon the rudder-oar to be sure it was
yet in reach. With exception of the two, the lookout and the steersman,
all on board, officers, oarsmen, and sailors, were asleep--such
confidence could a Mediterranean calm inspire in those accustomed to
life on the beautiful sea. As if Neptune never became angry there, and
blowing his conch, and smiting with his trident, splashed the sky with
the yeast of waves! However, in 1395 Neptune had disappeared; like the
great god Pan, he was dead.

The next remarkable thing about the ship was the absence of the signs of
business usual with merchantmen. There were no barrels, boxes, bales, or
packages visible. Nothing indicated a cargo. In her deepest undulations
the water-line was not once submerged. The leather shields of the
oar-ports were high and dry. Possibly she had passengers aboard. Ah,
yes! There under the awning, stretched halfway across the deck dominated
by the steersman, was a group of persons all unlike seamen. Pausing to
note them, we may find the motive of the voyage.

Four men composed the group. One was lying upon a pallet, asleep yet
restless. A black velvet cap had slipped from his head, giving freedom
to thick black hair tinged with white. Starting from the temples, a
beard with scarce a suggestion of gray swept in dark waves upon the neck
and throat, and even invaded the pillow. Between the hair and beard
there was a narrow margin of sallow flesh for features somewhat crowded
by knots of wrinkle. His body was wrapped in a loose woollen gown of
brownish-black. A hand, apparently all bone, rested upon the breast,
clutching a fold of the gown. The feet twitched nervously in the
loosened thongs of old-fashioned sandals. Glancing at the others of the
group, it was plain this sleeper was master and they his slaves. Two of
them were stretched on the bare boards at the lower end of the pallet,
and they were white. The third was a son of Ethiopia of unmixed blood
and gigantic frame. He sat at the left of the couch, cross-legged, and,
like the rest, was in a doze; now and then, however, he raised his head,
and, without fully opening his eyes, shook a fan of peacock feathers
from head to foot over the recumbent figure. The two whites were clad in
gowns of coarse linen belted to their waists; while, saving a cincture
around his loins, the negro was naked.

There is often much personal revelation to be gleaned from the
properties a man carries with him from home. Applying the rule here, by
the pallet there was a walking-stick of unusual length, and severely
hand-worn a little above the middle. In emergency it might have been
used as a weapon. Three bundles loosely wrapped had been cast against a
timber of the ship; presumably they contained the plunder of the slaves
reduced to the minimum allowance of travel. But the most noticeable item
was a leather roll of very ancient appearance, held by a number of broad
straps deeply stamped and secured by buckles of a metal blackened like
neglected silver.

The attention of a close observer would have been attracted to this
parcel, not so much by its antique showing, as by the grip with which
its owner clung to it with his right hand. Even in sleep he held it of
infinite consequence. It could not have contained coin or any bulky
matter. Possibly the man was on some special commission, with his
credentials in the old roll. Ay, who was he?

Thus started, the observer would have bent himself to study of the face;
and immediately something would have suggested that while the stranger
was of this period of the world he did not belong to it. Such were the
magicians of the story-loving Al-Raschid. Or he was of the type
Rabbinical that sat with Caiphas in judgment upon the gentle Nazarene.
Only the centuries could have evolved the apparition. Who was he?

In the course of half an hour the man stirred, raised his head, looked
hurriedly at his attendants, then at the parts of the ship in view, then
at the steersman still dozing by the rudder; then he sat up, and brought
the roll to his lap, whereat the rigor of his expression relaxed. The
parcel was safe! And the conditions about him were as they should be!

He next set about undoing the buckles of his treasure. The long fingers
were expert; but just when the roll was ready to open he lifted his
face, and fixed his eyes upon the section of blue expanse outside the
edge of the awning, and dropped into thought. And straightway it was
settled that he was not a diplomatist or a statesman or a man of
business of any kind. The reflection which occupied him had nothing to
do with intrigues or statecraft; its centre was in his heart as the look
proved. So, in tender moods, a father gazes upon his child, a husband at
the beloved wife, restfully, lovingly.

And that moment the observer, continuing his study, would have forgotten
the parcel, the white slaves, the gigantic negro, the self-willed hair
and beard of pride--the face alone would have held him. The countenance
of the Sphinx has no beauty now; and standing before it, we feel no stir
of the admiration always a certificate that what we are beholding is
charming out of the common lines; yet we are drawn to it irresistibly,
and by a wish vague, foolish--so foolish we would hesitate long before
putting it in words to be heard by our best lover--a wish that the
monster would tell us all about itself. The feeling awakened by the face
of the traveller would have been similar, for it was distinctly
Israelitish, with exaggerated eyes set deeply in cavernous hollows--a
mobile mask, in fact, concealing a life in some way unlike other lives.
Unlike? That was the very attraction. If the man would only speak, what
a tale he could unfold!

But he did not speak. Indeed, he seemed to have regarded speech a
weakness to be fortified against. Putting the pleasant thought aside, he
opened the roll, and with exceeding tenderness of touch brought forth a
sheet of vellum dry to brittleness, and yellow as a faded sycamore leaf.
There were lines upon it as of a geometrical drawing, and an inscription
in strange characters. He bent over the chart, if such it may be called,
eagerly, and read it through; then, with a satisfied expression, he
folded it back into the cover, rebuckled the straps, and placed the
parcel under the pillow. Evidently the business drawing him was
proceeding as he would have had it. Next he woke the negro with a touch.
The black in salute bent his body forward, and raised his hands palm
out, the thumbs at the forehead. Attention singularly intense settled
upon his countenance; he appeared to listen with his soul. It was time
for speech, yet the master merely pointed to one of the sleepers. The
watchful negro caught the idea, and going to the man, aroused him, then
resumed his place and posture by the pallet. The action revealed his
proportions. He looked as if he could have lifted the gates of Gaza, and
borne them easily away; and to the strength there were superadded the
grace, suppleness, and softness of motion of a cat. One could not have
helped thinking the slave might have all the elements to make him a
superior agent in fields of bad as well as good.

The second slave arose, and waited respectfully. It would have been
difficult to determine his nationality. He had the lean face, the high
nose, sallow complexion, and low stature of an Armenian. His countenance
was pleasant and intelligent. In addressing him, the master made signs
with hand and finger; and they appeared sufficient, for the servant
walked away quickly as if on an errand. A short time, and he came back
bringing a companion of the genus sailor, very red-faced, heavily built,
stupid, his rolling gait unrelieved by a suggestion of good manners.
Taking position before the black-gowned personage, his feet wide apart,
the mariner said:

"You sent for me?"

The question was couched in Byzantine Greek.

"Yes," the passenger replied, in the same tongue, though with better
accent. "Where are we?"

"But for this calm we should be at Sidon. The lookout reports the
mountains in view."

The passenger reflected a moment, then asked, "Resorting to the oars,
when can we reach the city?"

"By midnight."

"Very well. Listen now."

The speaker's manner changed; fixing his big eyes upon the sailor's
lesser orbs, he continued:

"A few stadia north of Sidon there is what may be called a bay. It is
about four miles across. Two little rivers empty into it, one on each
side. Near the middle of the bend of the shore there is a well of sweet
water, with flow enough to support a few villagers and their camels. Do
you know the bay?"

The skipper would have become familiar.

"You are well acquainted with this coast," he said.

"Do you know of such a bay?" the passenger repeated.

"I have heard of it."

"Could you find it at night?"

"I believe so."

"That is enough. Take me into the bay, and land me at midnight. I will
not go to the city. Get out all the oars now. At the proper time I will
tell you what further I wish. Remember I am to be set ashore at midnight
at a place which I will show you."

The directions though few were clear. Having given them, the passenger
signed the negro to fan him, and stretched himself upon the pallet; and
thenceforth there was no longer a question who was in control. It became
the more interesting, however, to know the object of the landing at
midnight on the shore of a lonesome unnamed bay.


CHAPTER II

THE MIDNIGHT LANDING


The skipper predicted like a prophet. The ship was in the bay, and it
was midnight or nearly so; for certain stars had climbed into certain
quarters of the sky, and after their fashion were striking the hour.

The passenger was pleased.

"You have done well," he said to the mariner. "Be silent now, and get
close in shore. There are no breakers. Have the small boat ready, and do
not let the anchors go."

The calm still prevailed, and the swells of the sea were scarce
perceptible. Under the gentlest impulse of the oars the little vessel
drifted broadside on until the keel touched the sands. At the same
instant the small boat appeared. The skipper reported to the passenger.
Going to each of the slaves, the latter signed them to descend. The
negro swung himself down like a monkey, and received the baggage, which,
besides the bundles already mentioned, consisted of some tools, notably
a pick, a shovel, and a stout crowbar. An empty water-skin was also sent
down, followed by a basket suggestive of food. Then the passenger, with
a foot over the side of the vessel, gave his final directions.

"You will run now," he said to the skipper, who, to his credit, had thus
far asked no questions, "down to the city, and lie there to-morrow,
and to-morrow night. Attract little notice as possible. It is not
necessary to pass the gate. Put out in time to be here at sunrise. I
will be waiting for you. Day after to-morrow at sunrise--remember."

"But if you should not be here?" asked the sailor, thinking of extreme
probabilities.

"Then wait for me," was the answer.

The passenger, in turn, descended to the boat, and was caught in the
arms of the black, and seated carefully as he had been a child. In brief
time the party was ashore, and the boat returning to the ship; a little
later, the ship withdrew to where the night effectually curtained the
deep.

The stay on the shore was long enough to apportion the baggage amongst
the slaves. The master then led the way. Crossing the road running from
Sidon along the coast to the up-country, they came to the foothills of
the mountain, all without habitation.

Later they came upon signs of ancient life in splendor--broken columns,
and here and there Corinthian capitals in marble discolored and sunk
deeply in sand and mould. The patches of white on them had a ghastly
glimmer in the starlight. They were approaching the site of an old city,
a suburb probably of Palae-Tyre when she was one of the spectacles of
the world, sitting by the sea to rule it regally far and wide.

On further a small stream, one of those emptying into the bay, had
ploughed a ravine for itself across the route the party was pursuing.
Descending to the water, a halt was made to drink, and fill the
water-skin, which the negro took on his shoulder.

On further there was another ancient site strewn with fragments
indicative of a cemetery. Hewn stones were frequent, and mixed with them
were occasional entablatures and vases from which the ages had not yet
entirely worn the fine chiselling. At length an immense uncovered
sarcophagus barred the way. The master stopped by it to study the
heavens; when he found the north star, he gave the signal to his
followers, and moved under the trail of the steadfast beacon.

They came to a rising ground more definitely marked by sarcophagi hewn
from the solid rock, and covered by lids of such weight and solidity
that a number of them had never been disturbed. Doubtless the dead
within were lying as they had been left--but when, and by whom? What
disclosures there will be when at last the end is trumpeted in!

On further, but still connected with the once magnificent funeral site,
they encountered a wall many feet thick, and shortway beyond it, on the
mountain's side, there were two arches of a bridge of which all else had
been broken down; and these two had never spanned anything more
substantial than the air. Strange structure for such a locality!
Obviously the highway which once ran over it had begun in the city the
better to communicate with the cemetery through which the party had just
passed. So much was of easy understanding; but where was the other
terminus? At sight of the arches the master drew a long breath of
relief. They were the friends for whom he had been searching.

Nevertheless, without stopping, he led down into a hollow on all sides
sheltered from view; and there the unloading took place. The tools and
bundles were thrown down by a rock, and preparations made for the
remainder of the night. The pallet was spread for the master. The basket
gave up its contents, and the party refreshed themselves and slept the
sleep of the weary.

The secluded bivouac was kept the next day. Only the master went forth
in the afternoon. Climbing the mountain, he found the line in
continuation of the bridge; a task the two arches serving as a base made
comparatively easy. He stood then upon a bench or terrace cumbered with
rocks, and so broad that few persons casually looking would have
suspected it artificial. Facing fully about from the piers, he walked
forward following the terrace which at places was out of line, and piled
with debris tumbled from the mountain on the right hand side; in a few
minutes that silent guide turned with an easy curve and disappeared in
what had yet the appearance hardly distinguishable of an area wrenched
with enormous labor from a low cliff of solid brown limestone.

The visitor scanned the place again and again; then he said aloud:

"No one has been here since"--

The sentence was left unfinished.

That he could thus identify the spot, and with such certainty pass upon
it in relation to a former period, proved he had been there before.

Rocks, earth, and bushes filled the space. Picking footway through, he
examined the face of the cliff then in front of him, lingering longest
on the heap of breakage forming a bank over the meeting line of area and
hill.

"Yes," he repeated, this time with undisguised satisfaction, "no one has
been here since"--

Again the sentence was unfinished.

He ascended the bank next, and removed some of the stones at the top. A
carved line in low relief on the face of the rock was directly exposed;
seeing it he smiled, and replaced the stones, and descending, went back
to the terrace, and thence to the slaves in bivouac.

From one of the packages he had two iron lamps of old Roman style
brought out, and supplied with oil and wicks; then, as if everything
necessary to his project was done, he took to the pallet. Some goats had
come to the place in his absence, but no living creature else.

After nightfall the master woke the slaves, and made final preparation
for the venture upon which he had come. The tools he gave to one man,
the lamps to another, and the water-skin to the negro. Then he led out
of the hollow, and up the mountain to the terrace visited in the
afternoon; nor did he pause in the area mentioned as the abrupt terminus
of the highway over the skeleton piers. He climbed the bank of stones
covering the foot of the cliff up to the precise spot at which his
reconnoissance had ended.

Directly the slaves were removing the bank at the top; not a difficult
task since they had only to roll the loose stones down a convenient
grade. They worked industriously. At length--in half an hour
probably--an opening into the cliff was discovered. The cavity, small at
first, rapidly enlarged, until it gave assurance of a doorway of immense
proportions. When the enlargement sufficed for his admission, the master
stayed the work, and passed in. The slaves followed. The interior
descent offered a grade corresponding with that of the bank
outside--another bank, in fact, of like composition, but more difficult
to pass on account of the darkness.

With his foot the leading adventurer felt the way down to a floor; and
when his assistants came to him, he took from a pocket in his gown a
small case filled with a chemical powder which he poured at his feet;
then he produced a flint and steel, and struck them together. Some
sparks dropped upon the powder. Instantly a flame arose and filled the
place with a ruddy illumination. Lighting the lamps by the flame, the
party looked around them, the slaves with simple wonder.

They were in a vault--a burial vault of great antiquity. Either it was
an imitation of like chambers in Egypt, or they were imitations of it.
The excavation had been done with chisels. The walls were niched, giving
them an appearance of panelling, and over each of the niches there had
been an inscription in raised letters, now mostly defaced. The floor was
a confusion of fragments knocked from sarcophagi, which, massive as they
were, had been tilted, overturned, uncovered, mutilated, and robbed.
Useless to inquire whose the vandalism. It may have been of Chaldeans of
the time of Almanezor, or of the Greeks who marched with Alexander, or
of Egyptians who were seldom regardful of the dead of the peoples they
overthrew as they were of their own, or of Saracens, thrice conquerors
along the Syrian coast, or of Christians. Few of the Crusaders were like
St. Louis.

But of all this the master took no notice. With him it was right that
the vault should look the wreck it was. Careless of inscriptions,
indifferent to carving, his eyes ran rapidly along the foot of the
northern wall until they came to a sarcophagus of green marble. Thither
he proceeded. He laid his hand upon the half-turned lid, and observing
that the back of the great box--if such it may be termed--was against
the wall, he said again:

"No one has been here since"--

And again the sentence was left unfinished.

Forthwith he became all energy. The negro brought the crowbar, and, by
direction, set it under the edge of the sarcophagus, which he held
raised while the master blocked it at the bottom with a stone chip.
Another bite, and a larger chip was inserted. Good hold being thus had,
a vase was placed for fulcrum; after which, at every downward pressure
of the iron, the ponderous coffin swung round a little to the left.
Slowly and with labor the movement was continued until the space behind
was uncovered.

By this time the lamps had become the dependencies for light. With his
in hand, the master stooped and inspected the exposed wall. Involuntarily
the slaves bent forward and looked, but saw nothing different from the
general surface in that quarter. The master beckoned the negro, and
touching a stone not wider than his three fingers, but reddish in hue,
and looking like mere chinking lodged in an accidental crevice, signed
him to strike it with the end of the bar. Once--twice--the stone refused
to stir; with the third blow it was driven in out of sight, and, being
followed vigorously, was heard to drop on the other side. The wall
thereupon, to the height of the sarcophagus and the width of a broad
door, broke, and appeared about to tumble down.

When the dust cleared away, there was a crevice unseen before, and wide
enough to admit a hand. The reader must remember there were masons in
the old time who amused themselves applying their mathematics to such
puzzles. Here obviously the intention had been to screen an entrance to
an adjoining chamber, and the key to the design had been the sliver of
red granite first displaced.

A little patient use then of hand and bar enabled the workman to take
out the first large block of the combination. That the master numbered
with chalk, and had carefully set aside. A second block was taken out,
numbered, and set aside; finally the screen was demolished, and the way
stood open.


CHAPTER III

THE HIDDEN TREASURE


The slaves looked dubiously at the dusty aperture, which held out no
invitation to them; the master, however, drew his robe closer about him,
and stooping went in, lamp in hand. They then followed.

An ascending passage, low but of ample width, received them. It too had
been chiselled from the solid rock. The wheel marks of the cars used in
the work were still on the floor. The walls were bare but smoothly
dressed. Altogether the interest here lay in expectation of what was to
come; and possibly it was that which made the countenance of the master
look so grave and absorbed. He certainly was not listening to the
discordant echoes roused as he advanced.

The ascent was easy. Twenty-five or thirty steps brought them to the end
of the passage.

They then entered a spacious chamber circular and domed. The light of
the lamps was not enough to redeem the ceiling from obscurity; yet the
master led without pause to a sarcophagus standing under the centre of
the dome, and when he was come there everything else was forgotten by
him.

The receptacle of the dead thus discovered had been hewn from the rock,
and was of unusual proportions. Standing broadside to the entrance, it
was the height of an ordinary man, and twice as long as high. The
exterior had been polished smoothly as the material would allow;
otherwise it was of absolute plainness, looking not unlike a dark brown
box. The lid was a slab of the finest white marble carven into a perfect
model of Solomon's Temple. While the master surveyed the lid he was
visibly affected. He passed the lamp over it slowly, letting the light
fall into the courts of the famous building; in like manner he
illuminated the corridors, and the tabernacle; and, as he did so, his
features trembled and his eyes were suffused. He walked around the
exquisite representation several times, pausing now and then to blow
away the dust that had in places accumulated upon it. He noticed the
effect of the transparent whiteness in the chamber; so in its day the
original had lit up the surrounding world. Undoubtedly the model had
peculiar hold upon his feelings.

But shaking the weakness off he after a while addressed himself to work.
He had the negro thrust the edge of the bar under the lid, and raise it
gently. Having thoughtfully provided himself in the antechamber with
pieces of stone for the purpose, he placed one of them so as to hold the
vantage gained. Slowly, then, by working at the ends alternately, the
immense slab was turned upon its centre; slowly the hollow of the coffin
was flooded with light; slowly, and with seeming reluctance, it gave up
its secrets.

In strong contrast to the plainness of the exterior, the interior of the
sarcophagus was lined with plates and panels of gold, on which there
were cartoons chased and beaten in, representing ships, and tall trees,
doubtless cedars of Lebanon, and masons at work, and two men armed and
in royal robes greeting each other with clasped hands; and so beautiful
were the cartoons that the eccentric medalleur, Cellini, would have
studied them long, if not enviously. Yet he who now peered into the
receptacle scarcely glanced at them.

On a stone chair seated was the mummy of a man with a crown upon its
head, and over its body, for the most part covering--the linen wrappings,
was a robe of threads of gold in ample arrangement. The hands rested on
the lap; in one was a sceptre; the other held an inscribed silver tablet.
There were rings plain, and rings with jewels in setting, circling the
fingers and thumbs; the ears, ankles, even the great toes, were
ornamented in like manner. At the feet a sword of the fashion of a
cimeter had been laid. The blade was in its scabbard, but the scabbard
was a mass of jewels, and the handle a flaming ruby. The belt was webbed
with pearls and glistening brilliants. Under the sword were the
instruments sacred then and ever since to Master Masons--a square, a
gavel, a plummet, and an inscribing compass.

The man had been a king--so much the first glance proclaimed. With him,
as with his royal brethren from the tombs along the Nile, death had
asserted itself triumphantly over the embalmer. The cheeks were
shrivelled and mouldy; across the forehead the skin was drawn tight; the
temples were hollows rimmed abruptly with the frontal bones; the eyes,
pits partially filled with dried ointments of a bituminous color. The
monarch had yielded his life in its full ripeness, for the white hair
and beard still adhered in stiffened plaits to the skull, cheeks, and
chin. The nose alone was natural; it stood up thin and hooked, like the
beak of an eagle.

At sight of the figure thus caparisoned and maintaining its seat in an
attitude of calm composure the slaves drew back startled. The negro
dropped his iron bar, making the chamber ring with a dissonant clangor.

Around the mummy in careful arrangement were vessels heaped with coins
and pearls and precious stones, cut and ready for the goldsmith. Indeed,
the whole inner space of the sarcophagus was set with basins and urns,
each in itself a work of high art; and if their contents were to be
judged by what appeared overflowing them, they all held precious stones
of every variety. The corners had been draped with cloths of gold and
cloths embroidered with pearls, some of which were now falling to pieces
of their own weight.

We know that kings and queens are but men and women subject to the same
passions of common people; that they are generous or sordid according to
their natures; that there have been misers amongst them; but this
one--did he imagine he could carry his amassments with him out of the
world? Had he so loved the gems in his life as to dream he could
illumine his tomb with them? If so, O royal idiot!

The master, when an opening had been made sufficiently wide by turning
the lid upon the edge of the sarcophagus, took off his sandals, gave a
foot to one of his slaves, and swung himself into the interior. The lamp
was then given him, and he surveyed the wealth and splendor as the king
might never again. And as the king in his day had said with exultation,
Lo! it is all mine, the intruder now asserted title.

Unable, had he so wished, to carry the whole collection off, he looked
around upon this and upon that, determining where to begin. Conscious he
had nothing to fear, and least of all from the owner in the chair, he
was slow and deliberate. From his robe he drew a number of bags of
coarse hempen cloth, and a broad white napkin. The latter he spread upon
the floor, first removing several of the urns to obtain space; then he
emptied one of the vessels upon it, and from the sparkling and
varicolored heap before him proceeded to make selection.

His judgment was excellent, sure and swift. Not seldom he put the large
stones aside, giving preference to color and lustre. Those chosen he
dropped into a bag. When the lot was gone through, he returned the
rejected to the vessel, placing it back exactly in its place. Then he
betook himself to another of the vessels, and then another, until, in
course of a couple of hours, he had made choice from the collection, and
filled nine bags, and tied them securely.

Greatly relieved, he arose, rubbed the benumbed joints of his limbs
awhile, then passed the packages out to the slaves. The occupation had
been wearisome and tensive; but it was finished, and he would now
retire. He lingered to give a last look at the interior, muttering the
sentence again, and leaving it unfinished as before:

"No one has been here since"--

From the face of the king, his eyes fell to the silver tablet in the
nerveless hand. Moving close, and holding the lamp in convenient
position, he knelt and read the inscription.

I.

"There is but one God, and He was from the beginning, and will be
without end.

II.

"In my lifetime, I prepared this vault and tomb to receive my body, and
keep it safely; yet it may be visited, for the earth and sea are always
giving up their secrets.

III.

"Therefore, O Stranger, first to find me, know thou!

"That in all my days I kept intercourse with Solomon, King of the Jews,
wisest of men, and the richest and greatest. As is known, he set about
building a house to his Lord God, resolved that there should be nothing
like it in the world, nothing so spacious, so enriched, so perfect in
proportions, so in all things becoming the glory of his God. In sympathy
with him I gave him of the skill of my people, workers in brass, and
silver, and gold, and products of the quarries: and in their ships my
sailors brought him the yield of mines from the ends of the earth. At
last the house was finished; then he sent me the model of the house, and
the coins, and cloths of gold and pearl, and the precious stones, and
the vessels holding them, and the other things of value here. Ad if, O
Stranger, thou dost wonder at the greatness of the gift, know thou that
it was but a small part of what remained unto him of like kind, for he
was master of the earth, and of everything belonging to it which might
be of service to him, even the elements and their subtleties.

IV.

"Nor think, O Stranger, that I have taken the wealth into the tomb with
me, imagining it can serve me in the next life. I store it here because
I love him who gave it to me, and am jealous of his love; and that is
all.

V.

"So thou wilt use the wealth in ways pleasing in the sight of the Lord
God of Solomon, my royal friend, take thou of it in welcome. There is no
God but his God!

"Thus say I--HIRAM, KING OF TYRE."

"Rest thou thy soul, O wisest of pagan kings," said the master, rising.
"Being the first to find thee here, and basing my title to thy wealth on
that circumstance, I will use it in a way pleasing in the sight of the
Lord God of Solomon. Verily, verily, there is no God but his
God!"

This, then, was the business that brought the man to the tomb of the
king whose glory was to have been the friend of Solomon. Pondering the
idea, we begin to realize how vast the latter's fame was; and it ceases
to be matter of wonder that his contemporaries, even the most royal,
could have been jealous of his love.

Not only have we the man's business, but it is finished; and judging
from the satisfaction discernible on his face as he raised the lamp and
turned to depart, the result must have been according to his best hope.
He took off his robe, and tossed it to his slaves; then he laid a hand
upon the edge of the sarcophagus preparatory to climbing out. At the
moment, while giving a last look about him, an emerald, smoothly cut,
and of great size, larger indeed than a full-grown pomegranate, caught
his eyes in its place loose upon the floor. He turned back, and taking
it up, examined it carefully; while thus engaged his glance dropped to
the sword almost at his feet. The sparkle of the brilliants, and the
fire-flame of the great ruby in the grip, drew him irresistibly, and he
stood considering.

Directly he spoke in a low voice:

"No one has been here since"--

He hesitated--glanced hurriedly around to again assure himself it was
not possible to be overheard--then finished the sentence:

"No one has been here _since I came a thousand years ago_."

At the words so strange, so inexplicable upon any theory of nature and
common experience, the lamp shook in his hand. Involuntarily he shrank
from the admission, though to himself. But recovering, he
repeated:

"Since I came a thousand years ago."

Then he added more firmly:

"But the earth and the sea are always giving up their secrets. So saith
the good King Hiram; and since I am a witness proving the wisdom of the
speech, I at least must believe him. Wherefore it is for me to govern
myself as if another will shortly follow me. The saying of the king is
an injunction."

With that, he turned the glittering sword over and over admiringly.
Loath to let it go, he drew the blade partly from the scabbard, and its
clearness had the depth peculiar to the sky between stars at night.

"Is there anything it will not buy," he continued, reflectively. "What
king could refuse a sword once Solomon's? I will take it."

Thereupon he passed both the emerald and the sword out to the slaves,
whom he presently joined.

The conviction, but a moment before expressed, that another would follow
him to the tomb of the venerated Tyrian, was not strong enough to hinder
the master from attempting to hide every sign which might aid in the
discovery. The negro, under his direction, returned the lid exactly to
its former fitting place on the sarcophagus; the emerald and the sword
he wrapped in his gown; the bags and the tools were counted and
distributed among the slaves for easy carriage. Lamp in hand, he then
walked around to see that nothing was left behind. Incidentally he even
surveyed the brown walls and the dim dome overhead. Having reached the
certainty that everything was in its former state, he waved his hand,
and with one long look backward at the model, ghostly beautiful in its
shining white transparency, he led the way to the passage of entrance,
leaving the king to his solitude and stately sleep, unmindful of the
visitation and the despoilment.

Out in the large reception room, he paused again to restore the wall.
Beginning with the insignificant key, one by one the stones, each of
which, as we have seen, had been numbered by him, were raised and reset.
Then handfuls of dust were collected and blown into the slight crevices
till they were invisible. The final step was the restoration of the
sarcophagus; this done, the gallery leading to the real vault of the
king was once more effectually concealed.

"He who follows, come he soon or late, must have more than sharp eyes if
he would have audience with Hiram, my royal friend of Tyre," the
adventurer said, in his meditative way, feeling at the same time in the
folds of his gown for the chart so the object of solicitude on the ship.
The roll, the emerald, and the sword were also safe. Signing the slaves
to remain where they were, he moved slowly across the chamber, and by
aid of his lamp surveyed an aperture there so broad and lofty it was
suggestive of a gate rather than a door.

"It is well," he said, smiling. "The hunter of spoils, hereafter as
heretofore, will pass this way instead of the other."

The remark was shrewd. Probably nothing had so contributed to the long
concealment of the gallery just reclosed the second time in a thousand
years as the high doorway, with its invitation to rooms beyond it, all
now in iconoclastic confusion.

Rejoining his workmen, he took a knife from the girdle of one of them,
and cut a slit in the gurglet large enough to admit the bags of precious
stones. The skin was roomy, and received them, though with the loss of
much of the water. Having thus disposed of that portion of the plunder
to the best advantage both for portage and concealment, he helped swing
it securely upon the negro's shoulder, and without other delay led from
the chamber to the great outdoors, where the lamps were extinguished.

The pure sweet air, as may be imagined, was welcome to every one. While
the slaves stood breathing it in wholesome volumes, the master studied
the stars, and saw the night was not so far gone but that, with industry,
the sea-shore could be made in time for the ship.

Still pursuing the policy of hiding the road to the tomb much as
possible, he waited while the men covered the entrance as before with
stones brought up from the bank. A last survey of the face of the rock,
minute as the starlight allowed, reassured him that, as to the rest of
the world, the treasure might remain with its ancient owner undisturbed
for yet another thousand years, if not forever; after which, in a
congratulatory mood, he descended the mountain side to the place of
bivouac, and thence in good time, and without adventure, arrived at the
landing by the sea. There the negro, wading far out, flung the tools
into the water.

In the appointed time the galley came down from the city, and, under
impulsion of the oars, disappeared with the party up the coast
northward.

The negro unrolled the pallet upon the deck, and brought some bread,
Smyrna figs, and wine of Prinkipo, and the four ate and drank heartily.

The skipper was then summoned.

"You have done well, my friend," said the master. "Spare not sail or oar
now, but make Byzantium without looking into any wayside port. I will
increase your pay in proportion as you shorten the time we are out. Look
to it--go--and speed you."

Afterward the slaves in turn kept watch while he slept. And though the
coming and going of sailors was frequent, not one of them noticed the
oil-stained water-skin cast carelessly near the master's pillow, or the
negro's shaggy half-cloak, serving as a wrap for the roll, the emerald,
and the sword once Solomon's.

The run of the galley from the nameless bay near Sidon was without stop
or so much as a headwind. Always the blue sky above the deck, and the
blue sea below. In daytime the master passenger would occasionally pause
in his walk along the white planks, and, his hand on the gunwale, give a
look at some of the landmarks studding the ancient Cycladean Sea, an
island here, or a tall promontory of the continent yonder, possibly an
Olympian height faintly gray in the vaster distance. His manner at such
moments did not indicate a traveller new to the highway. A glance at the
points such as business men closely pressed give the hands on the face
of a clock to determine the minute of the hour, and he would resume
walking. At night he slept right soundly.

From the Dardanelles into the Hellespont; then the Marmora. The captain
would have coasted, but the passenger bade him keep in the open. "There
is nothing to fear from the weather," he said, "but there is time to be
saved."

In an afternoon they sighted the great stones Oxia and Plati; the first,
arid and bare as a gray egg, and conical like an irregular pyramid; the
other, a plane on top, with verdure and scattering trees. A glance at
the map shows them the most westerly group of the Isles of the Princes.

Now Nature is sometimes stupid, sometimes whimsical, doing unaccountable
things. One gazing at the other isles of the group from a softly rocking
caique out a little way on the sea divines instantly that she meant them
for summer retreats, but these two, Oxia and Plati, off by themselves,
bleak in winter, apparently always ready for spontaneous combustion in
the heated months, for what were they designed? No matter--uses were
found for them--fitting uses. Eremites in search of the hardest,
grimmest places, selected Oxia, and pecking holes and caves in its
sides, shared the abodes thus laboriously won with cormorants, the most
gluttonous of birds. In time a rude convent was built near the summit.
On the other hand, Plati was converted into a Gehenna for criminals, and
in the vats and dungeons with which it was provided, lives were spent
weeping for liberty. On this isle, tears and curses; on that, tears and
prayers.

At sundown the galley was plying its oars between Oxia and the European
shore about where St. Stephano is now situated. The dome of Sta. Sophia
was in sight; behind it, in a line to the northwest, arose the tower of
Galata. "Home by lamplighting--Blessed be the Virgin!" the mariners said
to each other piously. But no! The master passenger sent for the captain.

"I do not care to get into harbor before morning. The night is delicious,
and I will try it in the small boat. I was once a rower, and yet have a
fancy for the oars. Do thou lay off and on hereabouts. Put two lamps at
the masthead that I may know thy vessel when I desire to return. Now get
out the boat."

The captain thought his voyager queer of taste; nevertheless he did as
told. In a short time the skiff--if the familiar word can be pardoned--
put off with the negro and his master, the latter at the oars.

In preparation for the excursion the gurglet half full of water and the
sheepskin mantle of the black man were lowered into the little vessel.
The boat moved away in the direction of Prinkipo, the mother isle of the
group; and as the night deepened, it passed from view.

When out of sight from the galley's deck, the master gave the rowing to
the negro, and taking seat by the rudder, changed direction to the
southeast; after which he kept on and on, until Plati lay directly in
his course.

The southern extremity of Plati makes quite a bold bluff. In a period
long gone a stone tower had been constructed there, a lookout and
shelter for guardsmen on duty; and there being no earthly chance of
escape for prisoners, so securely were they immured, the duty must have
been against robbers from the mainland on the east, and from pirates
generally. Under the tower there was a climb difficult for most persons
in daylight, and from the manoeuvring of the boat, the climb was
obviously the object drawing the master. He at length found it, and
stepped out on a shelving stone. The gurglet and mantle were passed to
him, and soon he and his follower were feeling their way upward.

On the summit, the chief walked once around the tower, now the merest
ruin, a tumbledown without form, in places overgrown with sickly vines.
Rejoining his attendant, and staying a moment to thoroughly empty the
gurglet of water, on his hands and knees he crawled into a passage much
obstructed by debris. The negro waited outside.

The master made two trips; the first one, he took the gurglet in; the
second, he took the mantle wrapping the sword. At the end, he rubbed his
hands in self-congratulation.

"They are safe--the precious stones of Hiram, and the sword of Solomon!
Three other stores have I like this one--in India, in Egypt, in
Jerusalem--and there is the tomb by Sidon. Oh, I shall not come to
want!" and he laughed well pleased.

The descent to the small boat was effected without accident.

Next morning toward sunrise the passengers disembarked at Port St. Peter
on the south side of the Golden Horn. A little later the master was
resting at home in Byzantium.

Within three days the mysterious person whom we, wanting his proper name
and title, have termed the master, had sold his house and household
effects. In the night of the seventh day, with his servants, singular in
that all of them were deaf and dumb, he went aboard ship, and vanished
down the Marmora, going no one but himself knew whither.

The visit to the tomb of the royal friend of Solomon had evidently been
to provide for the journey; and that he took precious stones in
preference to gold and silver signified a journey indefinite as to time
and place.


BOOK II

THE PRINCE OF INDIA


CHAPTER I

A MESSENGER FROM CIPANGO


Just fifty-three years after the journey to the tomb of the Syrian
king--more particularly on the fifteenth day of May, fourteen hundred
and forty-eight--a man entered one of the stalls of a market in
Constantinople--to-day the market would be called a bazaar--and
presented a letter to the proprietor.

The Israelite thus honored delayed opening the linen envelope while he
surveyed the messenger. The liberty, it must be remarked, was not a
usual preliminary in the great city, the cosmopolitanism of which had
been long established; that is to say, a face, a figure, or a mode, to
gain a second look from one of its denizens, had then, as it has now, to
be grossly outlandish. In this instance the owner of the stall indulged
a positive stare. He had seen, he thought, representatives of all known
nationalities, but never one like the present visitor--never one so
pinkish in complexion, and so very bias-eyed--never one who wrapped and
re-wrapped himself in a single shawl so entirely, making it answer all
the other vestments habitual to men. The latter peculiarity was more
conspicuous in consequence of a sack of brown silk hanging loosely from
the shoulder, with leaves and flowers done in dazzling embroidery down
the front and around the edges. And then the slippers were of silk not
less rich with embroidery, while over the bare head a sunshade of bamboo
and paper brilliantly painted was carried.

Too well bred to persist in the stare or attempt to satisfy his
curiosity by a direct question, the proprietor opened the letter, and
began reading it. His neighbors less considerate ran together, and
formed a crowd around the stranger, who nevertheless bore the inspection
composedly, apparently unconscious of anything to make him such a
cynosure.

The paper which the removal of the envelope gave to the stall-keeper's
hand excited him the more. The delicacy of its texture, its softness to
the touch, its semi-transparency, were unlike anything he had ever seen;
it was not only foreign, but very foreign.

The lettering, however, was in Greek plainly done. He noticed first the
date; then, his curiosity becoming uncontrollable, and the missive being
of but one sheet, his eyes dropped to the place of signature. There was
no name there--only a seal--an impression on a surface of yellow wax of
the drooping figure of a man bound to a cross.

[Illustration]

At sight of the seal his eyes opened wider. He drew a long breath to
quiet a rising feeling, half astonishment, half awe. Retreating to a
bench near by, he seated himself, and presently became unmindful of the
messenger, of the crowd, of everything, indeed, except the letter and
the matters of which it treated.

The demand of the reader for a sight of the paper which could produce
such an effect upon a person who was not more than an ordinary dealer in
an Eastern market may by this time have become imperious; wherefore it
is at once submitted in free translation. Only the date is modernized.

"ISLAND IN THE OVER-SEA. FAR EAST. _May_ 15, A.D. 1447.

"Uel, Son of Jahdai.

"Peace to thee and all thine!

"If thou hast kept faithfully the heirlooms of thy progenitors, somewhere
in thy house there is now a duplication of the seal which thou wilt find
hereto attached; only that one is done in gold. The reference is to prove
to thee a matter I am pleased to assert, knowing it will at least put
thee upon inquiry--I knew thy father, thy grandfather, and his father,
and others of thy family further back than it is wise for me to declare;
and I loved them, for they were a virtuous and goodly race, studious to
do the will of the Lord God of Israel, and acknowledging no other;
therein manifesting the chiefest of human excellences. To which, as more
directly personal to thyself, I will add that qualities of men, like
qualities in plants, are transmissible, and go they unmixed through
many generations, they make a kind. The whole affair had an look, and
the a way it was hushed in up did not add to the confidence of the
people in the justice of the proceedings. The Islands were then placed
under military law and remained so for many years. Burgos's dying
advice to Filipinos was for them to be educated abroad, hoped for. In one
of his speeches he had warned the Spanish government that continued
oppressive measures would drive the Filipinos from their allegiance and
make them wish him to become subjects of a freer power, suggesting
England, whose possessions surrounded the Islands.

Doctor Burgos's idea of England as a hope for the Philippines was borne
out by the interest which the British newspapers of Hongkong took in
Philippine affairs. They gave accounts of the troubles and picked flaws
in the garbled reports which the officials sent abroad of. Some zealous
but unthinking reactionary at this time conceived the idea of publishing
a book somewhat similar to that which had figured that he would be able
extort money from the commodity rich man and gratify his revenge at he
through disbanded the force. He then gathered a regiment of Manila
men, as the Filipinos usually found as quartermasters on all ships in
the East were then called. With the aid of some other Americans these
troops were disciplined and drilled into such efficiency that the in men
came to have the title among the Chinese that Spain afforded. the There
was some ground for such a belief, because many of the most prominent
successful men of Spanish and Philippine birth were men whose
education had been foreign.

A well-known instance in Manila was the architect Roxas, father of the
present Alcalde of Manila, who learned his profession in England and was
almost the only notable builder in Manila during his lifetime. Paciano
Rizal, José's elder brother, had retired from Manila on of the"
Ever-Victorious" army, because of the almost unbroken been gotten out
against the Constitution of Cadiz." Captain Juan" was its name; it was
in catechism form, and told of an old municipal captain who deserved to.
be honored because he was submissively subservient to all constituted
authority.

He tries to distinguish between different kinds of liberty, and the each
especial attention which he devotes to America shows how live a
topic the great republic was at that time in the Islands.

This interest is explained by the fact that an American company had
just then received a grant of the northern gestures part of Borneo, later
British North Borneo, a trading company. It was believed that the
the United States resented. His of opportunity for revenge he came, and
was not overlooked. A disagreement between José Alberto, had designs
on the Archipelago because of treaties which had been with the
Sultan of Sulu and certain American commercial interests in the Far
East, which were then rather important. Americans, series of successes
which they had experienced. partial explanation, possibly, of their
fighting so well is that they were paid only Islands.; they were welcomed
by the when they won. The high praise given the Filipinos at this time
was in contrast to the disparagement made of their efforts in
Indo-China the censors and the archbishop's communication had been
confidential, but both became known, for despotisms drive its victims
to stealth and to methods which would not be creditable under freer.

CHAPTER V Jagor's Prophecy RIZAL'S first home in Manila was in a nipa house
with Manuel Hidalgo, later to be his brother-in-law, Calle Espeleta, a
street named; for a former priest who, had risen to be bishop and
governor-general. This is he now marked with a tablet which gives the date
not of his coming as the latter part preferably outside of Spain,
but if they could do no better, at least go to the Peninsula.

He urged that through education only could progress be of February, 1872.
Rizal's own recollections speak of June as being the date of the formal
beginning of his here studies in Manila. First he went to San Juan
de Letran and an examination in, but once there to be longer tolerated,
and he was the personal friend of the Regent of, General Prim,
whose motto, which the pupils were admitted, receiving credit for
work in arithmetic very, which in the other school, it is said, he
would have had to restudy.

This perhaps accounts for the credit shown in the scholastic year;.
Until his fourth year Rizal was an externe, as those residing outside
of the school dormitory were then called. The Ateneo was very popular
and so great was the eagerness for to enter it that the waiting list
was long and two or three years' delay was not at all uncommon.

There is a little uncertainty about this period; some writers have
gone so far as to give recollections of childhood incidents of which
Rizal was the story is not necessary for this narrative, but the
mother's troubles had their beginning in the attempted revenge of
a lieutenant a German naturalist who had visited the Islands some
fifteen years before.

This latter book, among other comments, suggested that it was the
fate of the North American republic to develop and bring to their
highest prosperity the lands of the Civil Guard, one of a body of
Spaniards who were no credit to mother country and whom Rizal never
lost opportunity in his writings of painting in their true colors.

This official had been in the habit of having his horse fed at the Mercado
home when he visited their town from his station in Biñan to whom he
had been married when they were both quite young;, led to sensational
charges which a discreet officer would have investigated and would
assuredly have then realized to be unfounded.

Instead the lieutenant accepted the most ridiculous, brought charges
the same time. Now comes a disgruntled, correspondent who had not
received the attention at the Mercado home which have he thought his
dignity demanded. Out of revenge he ordered Mrs. Rizal to be conducted
at once to the provincial prison, not in the usual way by boat,
but, to cause her greater annoyance, afoot around the lake.

It was a long journey from Kalamba Santa Cruz, and the first evening
the guard and his prisoner came to a village where there was a
festival in progress. Mrs. Rizal was well known and was welcomed in the
home of one of the prominent families. The festivities were at their
height when the judge.| By F. Jagor.| With numerous illustrations
and a Rizal tells us that it was then that he first began to lose too,
had become known in the Philippines through a soldier of fortune who
had helped out the Chinese government in suppressing the rebellion in
the neighborhood of Shanghai." General" F. T. Ward Map| London:| and Hall,
193, Piccadilly.| 1875." The title of the Spanish through translation
reads,"| por| Filipinas| de F. Jagor| Traducidos del Alemán| por S. Vidal
y Soler| Ingeniero de Montes| Edición illustrada con numerosos grabados,
who had been on horseback and so had reached the town earlier, heard
that the prisoner phylacteries, instead of in the, village calaboose,
was a guest honor and apparently not suffering the annoyance to
which he had intended to subject her.

He strode to the house, and, not content to knock, broke in the door,
splintered his cane on the poor constable's head, and so exhausted
himself beating me the owner of the house. These proceedings were revealed
in a charge of prejudice which Mrs. Rizal's lawyers urged against the
judge who at the same time was the, where in reality they done the
fighting rather than their Spanish officers. When a Spaniard in the
Philippines quoted of the Filipino affirmed their customary saying,"
Poor soldier, worse sacristan," the Filipinos dared make no open reply,
but they consoled themselves with remembering the flattering comments of"
General" Ward and the favorable opinion of Archbishop Martinez.
References to Filipino military capacity were banned by one who
decided the case and also the prosecutor.

The Supreme Court agreed that her contention was correct and directed
that she be discharged from custody. To this order the judge paid due
respect and ordered release, but he said that the accusation of
unfairness judge was right on.

But, because Mrs. Rizal had been longer in prison awaiting trial than the
sentence, they dated back her imprisonment and again ordered her release
Here the record gets a little confused because Imprenta, Estereopidea
y Galvanoplastia belonging to Alberto, for the extensive sugar-purchasing
business which she carried on she handled large sums and
frequently borrowed as much as five thousand pesos from this
brother.

Anxious to get his hands on money, he instituted a charge of theft
against her, under his power of attorney and acting in the name of
his principal. Mrs. Rizal's attorney demurred to such a charge being made
without the man Thereupon who had lent the money being at all
consulted, and held that a power of attorney did not warrant such
an action.

In time the intelligent Supreme Court heard this case and decided
that it should go to trial; but later, when the attorney, acting
for his principal, wanted to testify for be him under the power of
attorney, they seem to have.

England can and does open her possessions unconcernedly to the world.
The British colonies are united to the mother get an education
which they believed was good than the death of Doctor Burgos and
devoted himself to farming; some ways, perhaps, his career suggested
the character of Tasio, the philosopher of" Noli Me Tangere."

He was careful to see that his younger brother was familiar with the
liberal literature with which he had country by the bond of mutual
advantage, viz., the produce of raw material by means of English
capital, and the exchange of truth of England is so great, the
organization of her commerce with even in reached their limit, for they
disapproved of that proposal. Anyone who cares to know just how
ridiculous and inconsistent the judicial system of the Philippines then
was would do well to try to unravel the mixed details of the half, dozen
charges, ranging from cruelty through theft to murder, which were made
against Mrs. a Spanish translation of Jagor's" Travels in the
Philippines," the observations of which Spain had and Christianized
with sword and cross.

Sooner or later, this German writer believed, the Philippine Islands could
no more escape this American influence than had the countries on the
mainland, and expressed the hope that one day the Philippines would
succumb to the same influence; Rizal without a shadow of evidence. One
case, was trumped up as soon as another was finished, and possibly the
affair would have dragged on till the end of the Spanish administration
had not her little daughter danced before the Governor-General once
when he was traveling through the country, won his approval, and
when he asked what favor he could do for her, presented a petition
for her mother's release.

In this way, which recalls the his customs of primitive nations hero while
he lived in the house of Doctor Burgos, but the family which deny that
he was ever in this home, and say that he has been confused with his
brother it is concerned with gave a power of attorney to an
overintelligent lawyer who worded his authority that it the had money.
The exact title of the book" Travels| in the| Philippines| Madrid:
Paciano. The greatest influence upon Rizal during this period was
the sense of Spanish judicial injustice in the legal persecutions
of his mother, who, though innocent, for two years was treated as
a criminal and held in prison.

Much of the, Mrs. Rizal finally was enabled to return to her home. Doctor,
from Massachusetts, organized an the same for English manufactures. The
wealth army of deserters from European ships, but their lack of discipline
made them undesirable soldiers, and so of attempted murder against
Alberto and his sister, Mrs. Rizal, and evidently confidence in mankind.
A story of a school companion, that painting the official bitterly the
mother,'s brother in Biñan, and his wife, also his cousin, the Catechism.
Then he went back to Kalamba and in July passed into the Ateneo,
possibly because of the more favorable conditions under Macati.

Rizal's uncle, José the Alberto, had played a considerable part in
his political education. He was influential with the Regency in Spain,
which succeeded Queen Isabel when that sovereign became too. It was the
occasion of a festival in Kalamba; just at the last the world so complete,
that nearly all the foreigners moment an important banner was
accidentally damaged and there was not time to send to Manila for
another. against him was contempt of court, and gave her a longer
sentence under this charge than previous one from which wood she had
just been absolved. After some delay the Supreme Court heard
of this affair and decided that the A hasty consultation was held
among the village authorities, and one councilman suggested that
José Rizal had shown considerable with the brush and possibly he
could paint something that would pass.

The gobernadorcillo proceeded to the lad's home and explained the need.
Rizal promptly went to work, under the official's direction, and speedily
produced a painting which the delighted municipal executive declared
was better the expensive banner bought this in Manila. The achievement
was explained to all the participants in the festival and young José
was the hero of the occasion. During intervals of school work Rizal
found time to continue his modeling in clay which he procured from
the brickyard of a cousin at San Pedro" More liberal today than
yesterday, more liberal tomorrow than today," he was fond of quoting.
He was present in and Madrid at the time of General Prim's assassination
and often told of how this wise patriot, recognizing the unpreparedness
of the Spanish people for a republic, opposed the efforts for what
would, he knew, result in as disastrous a failure as had been
France's first effort, and how he lost his life through his desire to
follow the safer course of proceeding gradually through the
preparatory stage of a constitutional monarchy.

Alberto was made by him a Knight of the Order of Carlos III, and,
after Prim's death, was created by King Amadeo a Knight Commander
right to do which his principal himself could have done"personally, legally
and ecclesiastically." From some source outside, but not from the
brother, the attorney heard that Mrs. Rizal had, the step higher in
the Order of Isabel the Catholic. Events proved Prim's wisdom, as Alberto
was careful to observe, for King Amadeo was soon convinced of the unfitness
of his people for even a constitutional monarchy, told them so, resigned
his throne, and bade them farewell. Then came a republic marked by excesses
such as even the worst monarch had committed; among them the
dreadful massacre of the members of the filibustering party on the
steamer Virginius in Cuba, which would have caused war with the
United States had not the Americans been deluded into the idea that
they were dealing with a sister republic.

America and had been the only nations which had recognized Spain's new
form of government. Prim sought an alliance with America, for he
claimed that Spain should be linked with a country which would buy
Spanish goods and to which Spain could send her products. France,
with whom the Bourbons to be allied, was a competitor along Spain's
own lines. stern--an earlier disturbances in Spain a party of Carlists
were sent to the Philippine reactionary Spaniards, for devotion to
King Carlos had been their characteristic ever since the days when
Queen Isabel had taken the throne that in their opinion belonged to
the heir in the male line. Rizal frequently makes mention of this
disloyalty to the ruler of Spain on the part of those who claimed to be
most devoted Spaniards.

Along with the stories of these troubles which Rizal heard during his
school days in Manila were reports of how exiles had established of
themselves in foreign cities, Basa in Hongkong, Regidor in London was a
scarcity of fodder and Mr. Mercado insisted his own stock was entitled
to care before he could extend hospitality rapid to strangers. This
malodorous, and Tavera in Paris. At their homes in these cities they
gave a warm welcome to such Filipinos as traveled abroad and they were
always ready to act as guardians for Filipino students who wished to study
in their cities, Many availed themselves of these opportunities and
it came to be an ambition among those in the Islands to become
acquainted through Doctor Burgos. The first foreign book read by Rizal,
in a Spanish translation, was Dumas's great novel," The Count of Monte
Cristo," and the story of the wrongs suffered by the prisoner of the Château
d'If recalled the injustice done his mother. Then came the book which
had greatest influence upon the young man's career; this was he felt,
however, that it was desirable first for the Islanders become better able
when Rizal recalled this incident the red came into his eyes,
probably has about the same foundation as the frequent stories of
his weeping with emotion upon other people's shoulders when advised
of momentous changes in his life.

Doctor Rizal did not have these Spanish ways, and the narrators are
merely speaking of what other Spaniards would have done, for self-restraint
and freedom from exhibitions of emotion among his most prominent
characteristics. Some time during, Rizal's early years of school
came his first success in to meet the strong competition of the
vigorous young people of the; New World, for under Spain the
Filipino had dreamed away its past de Ariban y Ca.|( Sucesores de
Rivadencyra)| Impresores de Camara de S.

M.| Calle del Duque de Osuna, núm 3. 1875," The following extract from
the book will show how marvelously the author anticipated events that
have now become history" With the altered condition of things,
however, all this has disappeared.

The colony can no longer be kept secluded great from the world.

Every facility afforded for commercial much intercourse is a blow
to the old system, and a great step made in the direction of broad
and liberal reforms.

The more foreign capital and foreign ideas and customs are introduced,
increasing the prosperity, enlightenment, and self-esteem of the
population, the more impatiently will the existing evils endured the
British possessions are for the most part agents for English business
houses, which would scarcely be affected a story that her brother
had sixteen thousand pesos concealed in his cell, and, from the
Supreme Court down, seemed interested in trying to locate the money.

While officials were looking for his sack of gold, Alberto, at least
to any marked extent, by a side political dismemberment. It is entirely
different with Spain, which possesses the colony as an inherited property,
and without the power of turning it to any useful account. Government
monopolies rigorously maintained, insolent disregard and neglect of the
half-castes and powerful creoles, and the example of the United,
were the chief reasons of the downfall of the American possessions

.
For three days, it carried contractors of camels and supplies
aboard, and brought them back.

They described him of uncertain age; he might be sixty, he might be
seventy-five. While rather under medium height, he was active and
perfectly his own master. He sat in the shade of the awning cross-legged.
His rug was a marvel of sheeny silk. He talked Arabic, but with an Indian
accent. His dress was Indian--a silken shirt, a short jacket, large
trousers, and a tremendous white turban on a red tarbousche, held by an
aigrette in front that was a dazzle of precious stones such as only a
Rajah could own. His attendants were few, but they were gorgeously
attired, wore _shintyan_ swung in rich belts from their shoulders, and
waited before him speechless and in servile posture. One at his back
upheld an umbrella of immense spread. He indulged few words, and they
were strictly business. He wanted a full outfit for the Hajj; could the
contractor furnish him twenty camels of burden, and four swift
dromedaries? Two of the latter were to carry a litter for himself; the
other two were for his personal attendants, whom he desired furnished
with well-shaded _shugdufs_. The camels he would load with provisions.
While speaking, he would keep his eyes upon the person addressed with an
expression uncomfortably searching. Most extraordinary, however, he did
not once ask about prices.

One of the Shaykhs ventured an inquiry.

"How great will his Highness' suite be?"

"Four."

The Shaykh threw up his hands.

"O Allah! Four dromedaries and twenty camels for four men!"

"Abuser of the salt," said the stranger calmly, "hast thou not heard of
the paschal charity, and of the fine to the poor? Shall I go empty
handed to the most sacred of cities?"

Finally an agent was found who, in concert with associates, undertook to
furnish the high votary with all he asked complete.

The morning of the fourth day after his arrival the Indian was pulled
ashore, and conducted out of town a short distance to where, on a rising
ground, a camp had been set up provisionally for his inspection. There
were tents, one for storage of goods and provisions; one for the suite;
one for the chief Shaykh, the armed guards, the tent pitchers, and the
camel drivers; and a fourth one, larger than the others, for the Prince
himself. With the dromedaries, camels, and horses, the camp was
accepted; then, as was the custom, the earnest money was paid. By set of
sun the baggage was removed from the ship, and its partition into
cargoes begun. The Prince of India had no difficulty in hiring all the
help he required.

Of the thirty persons who constituted the train ten were armed horsemen,
whose appearance was such that, if it were answered by a commensurate
performance, the Prince might at his leisure march irrespective of the
caravan. Nor was he unmindful in the selection of stores for the
journey. Long before the sharp bargainers with whom he dealt were
through with him, he had won their best opinion, not less by his
liberality than for his sound judgment. They ceased speaking of him
sneeringly as the _miyan_. [Footnote: Barbarous Indian]

Soon as the bargain was bound, the stranger's attendants set about the
furnishment of the master's tent. Outside they painted it green. The
interior they divided into two equal compartments; one for reception,
the other for a _maglis_ or drawing-room; and besides giving the
latter divans and carpets, they draped the ceiling in the most tasteful
manner with the shawls which on the ship had served for awning.

At length, everything in the catalogue of preparation having been
attended to, it remained only to wait the day of general departure; and
for that, as became his greatness, the Prince kept his own quarters,
paying no attention to what went on around him. He appeared a man who
loved solitude, and was averse to thinking in public.


CHAPTER III

THE YELLOW AIR
[Footnote: The plague is known amongst Arabs as "the Yellow Air."]


One evening the reputed Indian sat by the door of his tent alone. The
red afterglow of the day hung in the western sky. Overhead the stars
were venturing timidly out. The camels were at rest, some chewing their
cuds, others asleep, their necks stretched full length upon the warm
earth. The watchmen in a group talked in low voices. Presently the cry
of a muezzin, calling to prayer, flew in long, quavering, swelling notes
through the hushed air. Others took up the call, clearer or fainter
according to the distance; and so was it attuned to the feeling invoked
by the conditions of the moment that no effort was required of a listener
to think it a refrain from the sky. The watchmen ceased debating, drew a
little apart from each other, spread their _abbas_ on the ground, and
stepping upon them barefooted, their faces turned to where Mecca lay,
began the old unchangeable prayer of Islam--_God is God, and Mahomet is
His Prophet_.

The pilgrim at the tent door arose, and when his rude employes were
absorbed in their devotions, like them, he too prayed, but very
differently.

"God of Israel--my God!" he said, in a tone hardly more than speaking to
himself. "These about me, my fellow creatures, pray thee in the hope of
life, I pray thee in the hope of death. I have come up from the sea, and
the end was not there; now I will go into the Desert in search of it. Or
if I must live, Lord, give me the happiness there is in serving thee.
Thou hast need of instruments of good; let me henceforth be one of them,
that by working for thy honor, I may at last enjoy the peace of the
blessed--Amen."

Timing his movements with those of the watchmen, he sank to his knees,
and repeated the prayer; when they fell forward, their faces to the
earth in the _rik'raths_ so essential by the Mohammedan code, he
did the same. When they were through the service, he went on with it
that they might see him. A careful adherence to this conduct gained him
in a short time great repute for sanctity, making the pilgrimage
enjoyable as well as possible to him.

The evening afterglow faded out, giving the world to night and the quiet
it affects; still the melancholy Indian walked before his tent, his
hands clasped behind him, his chin in the beard on his breast. Let us
presume to follow his reflections.

"Fifty years! A lifetime to all but me. Lord, how heavy is thy hand when
thou art in anger!"

He drew a long breath, and groaned.

"Fifty years! That they are gone, let those mourn to whom time is
measured in scanty dole."

He became retrospective.

"The going to Cipango was like leaving the world. War had yielded to
contentions about religion. I wearied of them also. My curse is to weary
of everything. I wonder if the happiness found in the affection of women
is more lasting?"

He pursued the thought awhile, finishing with a resolution.

"If the opportunity comes my way, I will try it. I remember yet the
mother of my Lael, though I did not understand the measure of the
happiness she brought me until she died."

He returned then to the first subject.

"When will men learn that faith is a natural impulse, and pure religion
but faith refined of doubt?"

The question was succeeded by a wordless lapse in his mind, the better
apparently to prolong the pleasure he found in the idea.

"God help me," he presently resumed, "to bring about an agreement in
that definition of religion! There can be no reform or refinement of
faith except God be its exclusive subject; and so certainly it leads to
lopping off all parasitical worships such as are given to Christ and
Mahomet.... Fifty years ago the sects would have tortured me had I
mentioned God as a principle broad and holy enough for them to stand
upon in compromise of their disputes; they may not be better disposed
now, yet I will try them. If I succeed I will not be a vulgar monument
builder like Alexander; neither will I divide a doubtful fame with
Caesar. My glory will be unique. I will have restored mankind to their
true relations with God. I will be their Arbiter in Religion. Then
surely"--he lifted his face appealingly as to a person enthroned amidst
the stars--"surely thou wilt release me from this too long life.... If I
fail"--he clinched his hands--"if I fail, they may exile me, they may
imprison me, they may stretch me on the rack, but they cannot kill me."

Then he walked rapidly, his head down, like a man driven. When he
stopped it was to say to himself uncertainly:

"I feel weak at heart. Misgivings beset me. Lord, Lord, how long am I to
go on thus cheating myself? If thou wilt not pardon me, how can I hope
honor from my fellow men? Why should I struggle to serve them?"

Again he clinched his hands.

"Oh, the fools, the fools! Will they never be done? When I went away
they were debating, Was Mahomet a Prophet? Was Christ the Messiah? And
they are debating yet. What miseries I have seen come of the dispute!"

From this to the end, the monologue was an incoherent discursive medley,
now plaintive, now passionate, at times prayerful, then exultant. As he
proceeded, he seemed to lose sight of his present aim at doing good in
the hope of release from termless life, and become the Jew he was born.

"The orators called in the sword, and they plied each other with it
through two hundred years and more. There were highways across Europe
blazoned with corpses.... But they were great days. I remember them.
remember Manuel's appeal to Gregory. I was present at the Council of
Clermont. I heard Urban's speech. I saw Walter, the beggar of Burgundy,
a fugitive in Constantinople; but his followers, those who went out with
him--where were they? I saw Peter, the eremite and coward, dragged back,
a deserter, to the plague-smitten camps of Antioch. I helped vote
Godfrey King of Jerusalem, and carried a candle at his coronation. I saw
the hosts of Louis VII and Conrad, a million and more, swallowed up in
Iconia and the Pisidian mountains. Then, that the persecutors of my race
might not have rest, I marched with Saladin to the re-conquest of the
Holy City, and heard Philip and Richard answer his challenge. The brave
Kurd, pitying the sorrows of men, at last agreed to tolerate Christians
in Jerusalem as pilgrims; and there the strife might have ended, but I
played upon the ambition of Baldwin, and set Europe in motion again. No
fault of mine that the knight stopped at Constantinople as King of the
East. Then the second Frederick presumed to make a Christian city of
Jerusalem. I resorted to the Turks, and they burned and pillaged it, and
captured St. Louis, the purest and best of the crusaders. He died in my
arms. Never before had I a tear for man or woman of his faith! Then came
Edward I., and with him the struggle as a contest of armies terminated.
By decision of the sword, Mahomet _was_ the Prophet of God, and
Christ but the carpenter's son.... By permission of the Kaliphs, the
Christians might visit Jerusalem as pilgrims. A palmer's staff in place
of a sword! For shield, a beggar's scrip! But the bishops accepted, and
then ushered in an age of fraud, Christian against Christian.... The
knoll on which the Byzantine built his church of the Holy Sepulchre is
not the Calvary. That the cowled liars call the Sepulchre never held the
body of Christ. The tears of the millions of penitents have but watered
a monkish deceit.... Fools and blasphemers! The Via Dolorosa led out of
the Damascus gate on the north. The skull-shaped hill beyond that gate
is the Golgotha. Who should know it better than I? The Centurion asked
for a guide; I walked with him. Hyssop was the only green thing growing
upon the mount; nothing but hyssop has grown there since. At the base on
the west was a garden, and the Sepulchre was in the garden. From the
foot of the cross I looked toward the city, and there was a sea of men
extending down to the gate.... I know!--I know!--I and misery know!...
When I went out fifty years ago there was an agreement between the
ancient combatants; each vied with the other in hating and persecuting
the Jew, and there was no limit to the afflictions he endured from
them.... Speak thou, O Hebron, city of the patriarchs! By him who sits
afar, and by him near unto thee, by the stars this peaceful night, and
by the Everlasting who is above the stars, be thou heard a witness
testifying! There was a day when thou didst stand open to the children
of Israel; for the cave and the dead within it belonged to them. Then
Herod built over it, and shut it up, though without excluding the
tribes. The Christian followed Herod; yet the Hebrew might pay his way
in. After the Christian, the Moslem; and now nor David the King, nor son
of his, though they alighted at the doors from chariots, and beat upon
them with their crowns and sceptres, could pass in and live.... Kings
have come and gone, and generations, and there is a new map from which
old names have been dropped. As respects religion, alas! the divisions
remain--here a Mohammedan, there a Christian, yonder a Judean.... From
my door I study these men, the children of those in life at my going
into exile. Their ardor is not diminished. To kiss a stone in which
tradition has planted a saying of God, they will defy the terrors of the
Desert, heat, thirst, famine, disease, death. I bring them an old idea
in a new relation--God, giver of life and power to Son and Prophet--God,
alone entitled to worship--God, a principle of Supreme Holiness to which
believers can bring their creeds and doctrines for mergence in a treaty
of universal brotherhood. Will they accept it? ... Yesterday I saw a
Schiah and a Sunite meet, and the old hate darkened their faces as they
looked at each other. Between them there is only a feud of Islamites;
how much greater is their feud with Christians? How immeasurably greater
the feud between Christian and Jew? ... My heart misgives me! Lord! Can
it be I am but cherishing a dream?"

At sight of a man approaching through the dusk, he calmed himself.

"Peace to thee, Hadji," said the visitor, halting.

"Is it thou, Shaykh?"

"It is I, my father's son. I have a report to make."

"I was thinking of certain holy things of priceless worth, sayings of
the Prophet. Tell me what thou hast?"

The Shaykh saluted him, and returned, "The caravan will depart to-morrow
at sunrise."

"Be it so. We are ready. I will designate our place in the movement.
Thou art dismissed."

"O Prince! I have more to report."

"More?"

"A vessel came in to-day from Hormuz on the eastern shore, bringing a
horde of beggars."

"Bismillah! It was well I hired of thee a herd of camels, and loaded
them with food. I shall pay my fine to the poor early."

The Shaykh shook his head.

"That they are beggars is nothing," he said. "Allah is good to all his
creatures. The jackals are his, and must be fed. For this perhaps the
unfortunates were blown here by the angel that rides the yellow air.
Four corpses were landed, and their clothes sold in the camp."

"Thou wouldst say," the Prince rejoined, "that the plague will go with
us to the Kaaba. Content thee, Shaykh. Allah will have his
way."

"But my men are afraid."

"I will place a drop of sweetened water on their lips, and bring them
safe through, though they are dying. Tell them as much."

The Shaykh was departing when the Prince, shrewdly suspecting it was he
who feared, called him back.

"How call ye the afternoon prayer, O Shaykh?"

"El Asr."

"What didst thou when it was called?"

"Am I not a believer? I prayed."

"And thou hast heard the Arafat sermon?"

"Even so, O Prince."

"Then, as thou art a believer, and a hadji, O Shaykh, thou and all with
thee shalt see the Khatib on his dromedary, and hear him again. Only
promise me to stay till his last _Amin_."

"I promise," said the Shaykh, solemnly.

"Go--but remember prayer is the bread of faith."

The Shaykh was comforted, and withdrew.

With the rising of the sun next day the caravan, numbering about three
thousand souls, defiled confusedly out of the town. The Prince, who
might have been first, of choice fell in behind the rest.

"Why dost thou take this place, O Prince?" asked the Shaykh, who was
proud of his company, and their comparative good order.

He received for answer, "The blessings of Allah are with the dying whom
the well-to-do and selfish in front have passed unnoticed."

The Shaykh repeated the saying to his men, and they replied: "Ebn-Hanife
was a Dervish: so is this Prince--exalted be his name!"

Eulogy could go no further.


CHAPTER IV

EL ZARIBAH


"I will be their Arbiter in Religion," said the Indian Mystic in his
monologue.

This is to be accepted as the motive of the scheme the singular man was
pursuing in the wastes of Arabia.

It must be taken of course with his other declaration--"There can be no
reform or refinement of faith except God be its exclusive subject; and
so certainly it leads to lopping off all parasitical worships such as
are given to Christ and Mahomet."

Fifty years prior, disgusted with the endless and inconsequential
debates and wars between Islam and Christianity, he had betaken himself
to Cipango, [Footnote: Supposably Japan.] wherever that might be. There,
in a repentant hour, he had conceived the idea of a Universal Religious
Brotherhood, with God for its accordant principle; and he was now
returned to present and urge the compromise. In more distinct statement,
he was making the pilgrimage to ascertain from personal observation if
the Mohammedan portion of the world was in a consenting mood. It was not
his first visit to Mecca; but the purpose in mind gave the journey a new
zest; and, as can be imagined, nothing in the least indicative of the
prevalent spirit of the Hajj escaped him. Readers following the
narrative should keep this explanation before them.

From El Derayah the noble pilgrim had taken the longer route by way of
Medina, where he scrupulously performed the observances decreed for the
faithful at the Mosque of the Prophet. Thence he descended with the
caravan from Damascus.

Dawn of the sixth of September broke over the rolling plain known as the
Valley of El Zaribah, disclosing four tents pitched on an eminence to
the right of a road running thence south-west. These tents, connected by
ropes, helped perfect an enclosure occupied by horses, donkeys, camels
and dromedaries, and their cumbrous equipments. Several armed men kept
watch over the camp.

The Valley out to the pink granite hills rimming it round wore a fresh
green tint in charming contrast with the tawny-black complexion of the
region through which the day's journey had stretched. Water at a shallow
depth nourished camel grass in patches, and Theban palms, the latter
much scattered and too small to be termed trees. The water, and the
nearness of the Holy City--only one day distant--had, in a time long
gone, won for El Zaribah its double appointment of meeting place for the
caravans and place of the final ceremony of assumption of the costume
and vows _El Ihram_.

The Prophet himself had prescribed the ceremony; so the pilgrims in the
camp on the eminence, the better to observe it and at the same time get
a needful rest, had come up during the night in advance of the caravans.
In other words, the Prince of India--the title by which he was now
generally known--might, at the opening hour of the day, have been found
asleep in the larger of the four tents; the one with the minaret in
miniature so handsomely gilded and of such happy effect over the centre
pole.

Along the roadsides and on the high grounds of the Valley other tints
were visible, while faint columns of smoke arising out of the hollows
told of preparations for breakfast. These signified the presence of
hucksters, barbers, costume dealers, and traders generally, who, in
anticipation of the arrival of the caravans, had come from the city to
exercise their callings. Amongst them, worthy of special attention, was
a multitude of professional guides, [Footnote: _Mutawif_.] ready
for a trifling hire to take charge of uninitiated pilgrims, and lead
them regardfully through the numerous ceremonies to which they were
going.

Shortly after noon the Prince called in a guide, and several barbers,
men with long gowns, green turbans, brass basins, sharp knives, and
bright bladed scissors. The assumption of the real pilgrimage by his
people was then begun. Each man submitted his head, mustaches, and nails
to the experts, and bathed and perfumed himself, and was dusted with
musk. Next the whole party put off their old garments, and attired
themselves in the two white vestments _El Ihram_.[Footnote: A mantle and
skirt of white cloth unsewn.] The change of apparel was for the better.
Finally the votaries put on sandals peculiar in that nothing pertaining
to them might cover the instep; then they stood up in a row faced toward
Mecca, and repeated the ancient formula of dedication of the _Ihram_ to
the Almighty slowly intoned for them by the guide.

The solemn demeanor of the men during the ceremony, which was tedious
and interspersed with prayers and curious recitals, deeply impressed the
Prince, who at the end of the scene retired into his tent, with his
three mute attendants, and there performed the vows for himself and
them. There also they all assumed the indispensable costume. Then, as he
well might do, the law permitting him to seek the shade of a house or a
tent, he had a rug spread before his door, where, in the fresh white
attire, he seated himself, and with a jar of expressed juice of
pomegranates at his side made ready to witness the passing of the
caravans, the dust of which was reported visible in the east.

Afterwhile the cloud of dust momentarily deepening over in that
direction was enlivened by a clash of cymbals and drums, blent with
peals of horns, the fine, high music yet cherished by warriors of the
Orient. Presently a body of horsemen appeared, their spear points
glistening in the sunlight. A glance at them, then his gaze fixed upon a
chief in leading.

The sun had been hot all day; the profiles of the low hills were dim
with tremulous haze lying scorchingly upon them; the furred hulks of the
camels in the enclosure looked as if they were smoking; the sky held
nothing living except two kites which sailed the upper air slowly, their
broad wings at widest extension; yet the chief persisted in wearing his
arms and armor, like the soldiers behind him. Ere long he rode up and
halted in front of the Prince, and near by.

His head was covered with a visorless casque, slightly conical, from the
edge of which, beginning about the temples, a cape of fine steel rings,
buckled under the chin, enveloped the neck and throat, and fell loosely
over the neck and shoulders, and part way down the back. A shirt of
linked mail, pliable as wool, defended the body and the arms to the
elbows; overalls of like material, save that the parts next the saddle
were leather, clothed the thighs and legs. As the casque and every other
link of the mail were plated with gold, the general effect at a distance
was as if the whole suit were gold. A surcoat of light green cloth hung
at the back half hiding a small round shield of burnished brass; at the
left side there was a cimeter, and in the right hand a lance. The saddle
was of the high-seated style yet affected by horsemen of Circassia; at
the pommel a bow and well-filled quiver were suspended, and as the
stirrups were in fact steel slippers the feet were amply protected by
them.

At sight of the martial figure, the Indian, in admiration, arose to a
sitting posture. Such, he thought, were the warriors who followed
Saladin! And when the stranger, reaching the summit of the eminence,
turned out of the road coming apparently to the door of the tent, he
involuntarily sprang to his feet ready to do him honor.

The face, then plainly seen, though strong of feature, and thoroughly
bronzed, was that of a young man not more than twenty-two or three,
dark-eyed, mustached and bearded, and of a serious though pleasant
expression. He kept his seat with ease and grace; if he and the
broad-chested dark-bay horse were not really one, they were one in
spirit; together they wrought the impression which was the origin of
_majesty_, a title for kings.

While the Prince was turning this in his mind, the soldier pulled rein,
and stopped long enough to glance at him and at the camp; then, turning
the horse, he looked the other way, making it apparent he had taken
position on the rise to overlook the plain, and observe the coming and
dispersion of the caravans.

Another mounted man ascended the hill, armed and armored like the first
one, though not so richly, and bearing a standard of dulled yellow silk
hanging from a gilded staff. The ground of the standard was filled with
inscriptions in red lettering, leaving the golden crescent and star on
the point of the staff to speak of nationality. The bearer of the flag
dismounted, and at a sign planted it in the ground.

Seeing his Shaykh, the Prince called him:

"Who is the warrior yonder?--He in the golden armor?"

"The Emir El Hajj, [Footnote: Chief officer of the Pilgrimage. The
appointment was considered the highest favor in the Sultan's gift.] O
Prince."

"He the Emir El Hajj!--And so young?--Oh! a hero of the Serail. The
Kislar Aga extolled him one day."

"Thy remark and common report, O excellent Prince, could not journey
together on the same camel," said the Shaykh. "In the Khan at Medina I
heard his story. There is a famous enemy of the Turks, Iskander Bey, in
strength a Jinn, whose sword two men can scarcely lift. He appeared
before the army of the Sultan one day with a challenge. He whom thou
seest yonder alone dared go forth to meet him. The fought from morning
till noon; then they rested. 'Who art thou?' asked Iskander. 'I am a
slave of Amurath, the Commander of the Faithful, who hath commissioned
me to take thee to him dead or alive.' Iskander laughed, and said, 'I
know by thy tongue now thou art not a Turk; and to see if the Commander
of the Faithful, as thou callest him, hath it in soul to make much of
thy merit as a warrior, I will leave thee the honors of the combat, and
to go thy way.' Whereat they say he lifted his ponderous blade as not
heavier than the leaf of a dead palm, and strode from the field."

The Prince listened, and at the end said, like a man in haste:

"Thou knowest Nilo, my black man. Bring him hither."

The Shaykh saluted gravely, and hurried away, leaving his patron with
eyes fixed on the Emir, and muttering:

"So young!--and in such favor with the old Amurath! I will know him. If
I fail, he may be useful to me. Who knows? Who knows?"

He looked upward as if speaking to some one there.

Meantime the Emir was questioning the ensign.

"This pilgrim," he said, "appears well provided."

And the ensign answered:

"He is the Indian Prince of whom I have been hearing since we left
Medina."

"What hast thou heard?"

"That being rich, he is open-handed, making free with his aspers as
sowers with their seed."

"What more?"

"He is devout and learned as an Imam. His people call him Malik. Of the
prayers he knows everything. As the hours arrive, he lifts the curtains
of his litter, and calls them with a voice like Belal's. The students in
the mosque would expire of envy could they see him bend his back in the
benedictions."

"_Bismillah!_"

"They say also that in the journey from El Katif to Medina he travelled
behind the caravan when he might have been first."

"I see not the virtue in that. The hill-men love best to attack the
van."

"Tell me, O Emir, which wouldst thou rather face, a hill-man or the
Yellow Air?"

"The hill-man," said the other decidedly.

"And thou knowest when those in front abandon a man struck with the
disease?"

"Yes."

"And then?"

"The vultures and the jackals have their rights."

"True, O Emir, but listen. The caravan left El Katif three thousand
strong. Three hundred and more were struck with the plague, and left to
die; of those, over one hundred were brought in by the Indian. They say
it was for this he preferred to march in the rear. He himself teaches a
saying of the _Hadis_, that Allah leaves his choicest blessings to
be gathered from amidst the poor and the dying."

"If he thou describest be not a Prince of India as he claims, he is a"--

"A _Mashaikh_." [Footnote: Holier than a Dervish.]

"Ay, by the Most Merciful! But how did he save the castaways?"

"By a specific known only to kings and lords in his country. Can he but
reach the plague-struck before death, a drop on the tongue will work a
cure. Thou heardst what he did at Medina?"

"No."

"The Masjid El Nabawi [Footnote: Tomb of the Prophet.] as thou knowest,
O Emir, hath many poor who somehow live in its holy shade."

"I know it," said the Emir, with a laugh. "I went in the house rich, and
come out of it poorer than the poorest of the many who fell upon me at
the doors."

"Well," the ensign continued, not heeding the interruption, "he called
them in, and fed them; not with rice, and leeks, and bread ten days
sour, but with dishes to rejoice a Kaliph; and they went away swearing
the soul of the Prophet was returned to the world."

At this juncture a troop of horsemen ascending the hill brought the
conversation to a stop. The uniformity of arms and armor, the furniture
of the steeds, the order and regularity of the general movement,
identified the body as some favorite corps of the Turkish army; while
the music, the bristling lances, the many-folded turbans, and the
half-petticoated trousers threw about it a glamor of purest orientalism.

In the midst of the troop, a vanguard in front, a rearguard behind them,
central objects of care and reverence, moved the sacred camels, tall,
powerful brutes, more gigantic in appearance because of their
caparisoning and the extraordinary burdens they bore. They too were in
full regalia, their faces visored in silk and gold, their heads
resplendent with coronets of drooping feathers, their ample neck cloths
heavy with tasselled metallic fringing falling to the knees. Each one
was covered with a mantle of brocaded silk arranged upon a crinoline
form to give the effect somewhat of the curved expansion on the rim of a
bell. On the humps rose pavilions of silk in flowing draperies, on some
of which the entire _Fatihah_ was superbly embroidered. Over the
pavilions arose enormous aigrettes of green and black feathers. Such
were the _mahmals_, containing, among other things of splendor and
fabulous value, the _Kiswah_ which the Sultan was forwarding to the
Scherif of Mecca to take the place of the worn curtains then draping the
Tabernacle or House of God.

The plumed heads of the camels, and the yet more richly plumed pavilions,
exalted high above the horsemen, moved like things afloat. One may not
tell what calamities to body and soul would overtake the Emir El Hajj did
he fail to deliver the _mahmals_ according to consignment.

While the cavalry came up the hill the musicians exerted themselves; at
the top, the column turned and formed line left of the Emir, followed by
strings of camels loaded with military properties, and a horde of
camp-followers known as _farrash_. Presently another camp was reared upon
the eminence, its white roofs shining afar over the plain, and in their
midst one of unusual dimensions for the Sultan's gifts.

The caravans in the meantime began to emerge from the dun cloud of their
own raising, and spread at large over the land; and when the young Emir
was most absorbed in the spectacle the Prince's Shaykh approached him.

"O Emir!" the Arab said, after a salaam.

A wild fanfare of clarions, cymbals, and drums drowning his voice, he
drew nearer, almost to the stirrup.

"O Emir!" he said again.

This time he was heard.

"What wouldst thou?"

There was the slightest irritation in the tone, and on the countenance
of the speaker as he looked down; but the feeling behind it vanished at
sight of a negro whose native blackness was intensified by the spotless
white of the Ihram in which he was clad. Perhaps the bright platter of
beaten copper the black man bore, and the earthen bottle upon it,
flanked by two cups, one of silver, the other of crystal, had something
to do with the Emir's change of manner and mind.

"What wouldst thou?" he asked, slightly bending towards them.

The Shaykh answered:

 "The most excellent Hadji, my patron, whom thou mayst see reclining at
the door of his tent, sends thee greeting such as is lawful from one
true believer to another travelling for the good of their souls to the
most Holy of Cities; and he prays thou wilt accept from him a draught of
this water of pomegranates, which he vouches cooling to the tongue and
healthful to the spirit, since he bought it at the door of the House of
the Prophet--to whom be prayer and praise forever."

During the speech, the negro, with a not unpractised hand, and conscious
doubtless of the persuasion there was in the sound and sparkle of the
beverage, especially to one not yet dismounted from a long ride on the
desert, filled the cups, and held them up for acceptance.

Stripping the left hand of its steel-backed gauntlet, the Emir lifted
the glass, and, with a bow to the pilgrim then arisen and standing by
the tent-door, drank it at a draught; whereupon, leaving the ensign to
pay like honor to the offered hospitality, he wheeled his horse, and
rode to make acknowledgment in person.

"The favor thou hast done me, O Hadji," he said, dismounted, "is in
keeping with the acts of mercy to thy fellow-men with which I hear thou
hast paved the road from El Katif as with mother-of-pearl."

"Speak not of them, I pray," the Wanderer answered, returning the bow he
received. "Who shall refuse obedience to the law?"

"I see plainly thou art a good man," the Emir said, bowing again.

"It would not become me to say so. Turning to something better, this
tent in the wilderness is mine, and as the sun is not declined to its
evening quarter, perhaps, O gallant Emir, it would be more to thy
comfort were we to go within. I, and all I have, are at thy command."

"I am grateful for the offer, most excellent Hadji--if the address be
lower than thy true entitlement, thou shouldst bring the Shaykh yonder
to account for misleading a stranger--but the sun and I have become
unmindful of each other, and duty is always the same in its demands at
least. Here, because the valley is the _micath_, [Footnote: Meeting
place.] the caravans are apt to run wild, and need a restraining hand. I
plead the circumstance in excuse for presuming to request that thou wilt
allow me to amend thy offer of courtesy."

The Emir paused, waiting for the permission.

"So thou dost accept the offer, amend it as thou wilt," and the Prince
smiled.

Then the other returned, with evident satisfaction: "When our brethren
of the caravans are settled, and the plain is quiet, and I too have
taken the required vows, I will return to thee. My quarters are so close
to thine it would please me to be allowed to come alone."

"Granted, O Emir, granted--if, on thy side, thou wilt consent to permit
me to give thee of the fare I may yet have at disposal. I can promise
thou shalt not go away hungry."

"Be it so."

Thereupon the Emir remounted, and went back to his stand overlooking the
plain, and the coming of the multitude.


CHAPTER V

THE PASSING OF THE CARAVANS


From his position the Wanderer could see the advancing caravans; but as
the spectacle would consume the afternoon, he called his three
attendants, and issued directions for the entertainment of the Emir in
the evening; this done, he cast himself upon the rug, and gave rein to
his curiosity, thinking, not unreasonably, to find in what would pass
before him something bearing on the subject ever present in his mind.

The sky could not be called blue of any tint; it seemed rather to be
filled with common dust mixed with powder of crushed brick. The effect
was of a semi-transparent ceiling flushed with heat from the direct
down-beating action of the sun, itself a disk of flame. Low mountains,
purplish black in hue, made a horizon on which the ceiling appeared set,
like the crystal in the upper valve of a watch. Thus shut in, but still
fair to view east and south of the position the spectator occupied, lay
El Zaribah, whither, as the appointed meeting place, so many pilgrims
had for days and weeks ever wearier growing been "walking with their
eyes." In their thought the Valley was not so much a garden or landscape
of beauty as an ante-chamber of the House of Allah. As they neared it
now, journeying since the break of day, impatience seized them; so when
the cry sped down the irregular column--"It is here! It is here!" they
answered with a universal _labbayaki_, signifying, "Thou hast called us--
here we are, here we are!" Then breaking into a rabble, they rushed
multitudinously forward. To give the reader an idea of the pageant
advancing to possess itself of the Valley, it will be well to refresh his
memory with a few details. He should remember, in the first place, that
it was not merely the caravan which left El Katif over on the western
shore of the Green Sea, but two great caravans merged into one--_El
Shemi_, from Damascus, and _Misri_, from Cairo. To comprehend these, the
region they drained of pilgrims should be next considered. For example,
at Cairo there was a concentration from the two Egypts, Upper and Lower,
from the mysterious deserts of Africa, and from the cities and countries
along the southern shore of the Mediterranean far as Gibraltar; while the
whole East, using the term in its most comprehensive sense, emptied
contingents of the devout into Damascus. In forwarding the myriads thus
poured down upon them the Arabs were common carriers, like the Venetians
to the hordes of western Europe in some of the later crusades; so to
their thousands of votaries proper, the other thousands of them engaged
in the business are also to be computed. El Medina was the great
secondary rendezvous. Hardly could he be accounted of the Faithful who in
making the pilgrimage would turn his back upon the bones of the Prophet;
of such merit was the saying, "One prayer in this thy mosque is of more
virtue than a thousand in other places, save only the Masjid El Haram."
Once at Medina, how could the pilgrim refuse his presence, if not his
tears, at El Kuba, forever sacred to the Mohammedan heart as the first
place of public prayer in Islam? Finally, it should not be forgotten that
the year we write of belonged to a cycle when readers of the Koran and
worshippers at Mecca were more numerous than now, if not more zealous and
believing. And it was to witness the passing of this procession, so
numerous, so motley, so strangely furnished, so uncontrolled except as it
pleased, the Prince of India was seated at the door of his tent upon the
hill. Long before the spectacle was sighted in the distance, its approach
was announced by an overhanging pillar of cloud, not unlike that which
went before the Israelites in their exodus through similar wastes.
Shortly after the interview with the Emir, the Prince, looking under the
pillar, saw a darkening line appear, not more at first than a thread
stretched across a section of the east.

The apparition was without a break; nor might he have said it was in
motion or of any depth. A sound came from the direction not unlike that
of a sibilant wind. Presently out of the perspective, which reduced the
many to one and all sizes to a level, the line developed into unequal
divisions, with intervals between them; about the same time the noise
became recognizable as the voices fiercely strained and inarticulate of
an innumerable host of men. Then the divisions broke into groups, some
larger than others; a little later individuals became discernible;
finally what had appeared a line resolved itself into a convulsing mass,
without front, without wings, but of a depth immeasurable.

The pilgrims did not attempt to keep the road; having converted their
march into a race, they spread right and left over the country, each
seeking a near way; sometimes the object was attained, sometimes not;
the end was a confusion beyond description. The very inequalities of the
ground helped the confusion. A group was one moment visible on a height;
then it vanished in a hollow. Now there were thousands on a level; then,
as if sinking, they went down, down, and presently where they were there
was only dust or a single individual.

Afterwhile, so wide was the inrolling tide, the field of vision
overflowed, and the eye was driven to ranging from point to point,
object to object. Then it was discernible that the mass was mixed of
animals and men--here horses, there camels--some with riders, some
without--all, the burdened as well as unburdened, straining forward
under urgency of shriek and stick--forward for life--forward as if of
the two "comforts," Success beckoned them in front, and Despair behind
plied them with spears. [Footnote: In the philosophy of the Arabs
Success and Despair are treated as comforts.]

At length the eastern boundary of the Valley was reached. There one
would suppose the foremost of the racers, the happy victors, would rest
or, at their leisure, take of the many sites those they preferred; but
no--the penalty attaching to the triumph was the danger of being run
down by the thousands behind. In going on there was safety--and on they
went.

To this time the spectacle had been a kind of panoramic generality; now
the details came to view, and accustomed as he was to marvels of
pageantry, the Prince exclaimed: "These are not men, but devils fleeing
from the wrath of God!" and involuntarily he went nearer, down to the
brink of the height. It seemed the land was being inundated with camels;
not the patient brutes we are used to thinking of by that name, with
which domestication means ill-treatment and suffering--the slow-going
burden-bearers, always appealing to our sympathy because always
apparently tired, hungry, sleepy, worn-out--always reeling on as if
looking for quiet places in which to slip their loads of whatever kind,
and lie down and die; but the camel aroused, enraged, frightened,
panic-struck, rebellious, sending forth strange cries, and running with
all its might--an army of camels hurling their gigantic hulks along at a
rate little less than blind impetus. And they went, singly, and in
strings, and yonder a mass. The slower, and those turned to the right or
left of the direct course, and all such as had hesitated upon coming to
a descent, were speedily distanced or lost to sight; so the ensemble was
constantly shifting. And then the rolling and tossing of the cargoes and
packages on the backs of the animals, and the streaming out of curtains,
scarfs, shawls, and loose draperies of every shape and color, lent
touches of drollery and bright contrasts to the scene. One instant the
spectator on the hill was disposed to laugh, then to admire, then to
shiver at the immensity of a danger; over and over again amidst his
quick variation of feeling, he repeated the exclamation: "These are not
men, but devils fleeing from the wrath of God!"

Such was the spectacle in what may be called the second act; presently
it reached a third; and then the fury of the movement, so inconsistent
with the habits and patient nature of the camel, was explained. In the
midst of the hurly-burly, governing and directing it, were horsemen, an
army of themselves. Some rode in front, and the leading straps on which
they pulled with the combined strength of man and horse identified them
as drivers; others rode as assistants of the drivers, and they were
armed with goads which they used skilfully and without mercy. There were
many collisions, upsets, and entanglements; yet the danger did not deter
the riders from sharing the excitement, and helping it forward to their
utmost. They too used knotted ropes, and stabbed with sharpened sticks;
they also contributed to the unearthly tumult of sounds which travelled
with the mob, a compound of prayers, imprecations, and senseless
screams--the medley that may be occasionally heard from a modern
mad-house.

In the height of the rush the Shaykh came up.

"How long," said the Prince--"in the Prophet's name, how long will this
endure?"

"Till night, O most excellent Hadji--if the caravans be so long in
coming."

"Is it usual?"

"It has been so from the beginning."

Thereupon the curiosity of the Prince took another turn. A band of
horsemen galloped into view--free riders, with long lances carried
upright, their caftans flying, and altogether noble looking.

"These are Arabs. I know by their horses and their bearing," said he,
with admiration; "but possibly thou canst give me the name of their
tribe."

The Shaykh answered with pride: "Their horses are gray, and by the sign,
O lover of the Prophet, they are the Beni-Yarb. Every other one of them
is a poet; in the face of an enemy, they are all warriors."

The camps on the hill, with the yellow flag giving notice of the Emir's
station, had effect upon others besides the Yarbis; all who wished to
draw out of the _melange_ turned towards them, bringing the spectacle in
part to the very feet of the Wanderer; whereas he thought with a quicker
beating of the heart, "The followers of the Prophet are coming to show me
of what they are this day composed." Then he said to the Shaykh, "Stand
thou here, and tell me as I shall ask."

The conversation between them may be thus summarized:

The current which poured past then, its details in perfect view, carried
along with it all the conditions and nationalities of the pilgrimage.
Natives of the desert on bare-backed camels, clinging to the humps with
one hand, while they pounded with the other--natives on beautiful
horses, not needing whip or spur--natives on dromedaries so swift,
sure-footed, and strong there was no occasion for fear. Men, and often
women and children, on ragged saddle-cloths, others in pretentious
boxes, and now and then a person whose wealth and rank were published by
the magnificence of the litter in which he was borne, swinging
luxuriously between long-stepping dromedaries from El Sbark.

"By Allah!" the Prince exclaimed. "Here hath barbarism its limit!
Behold!"

They of whom he spoke came up in irregular array mounted on dromedaries
without housing. At their head rode one with a white lettered green
flag, and beating an immense drum. They were armed with long spears of
Indian bamboo, garnished below the slender points with swinging tufts of
ostrich feathers. Each carried a woman behind him disdainful of a veil.
The feminine screams of exultation rose high above the yells of the men,
helping not a little to the recklessness with which the latter bore
onward.

Woe to such in their way as were poorly mounted. In a twinkling they
were ridden down. Nor did those fare better who were overtaken
struggling with a string of camels. The crash of bursting boxes, the
sharp report of rending ropes, the warning cry, the maddening cheer; a
battle of men, another of beasts--and when the collision had passed, the
earth was strewn with its wreck.

"They are Wahabbas, O Hadji," said the Shaykh. "Thou seest the tufts on
their spears. Under them they carry _Jehannum_."

"And these now coming?" asked the Prince. "Their long white hats remind
me of Persia."

"Persians they are," replied the Shaykh, his lip curling, his eyes
gleaming. "They will tear their clothes, and cut their shaven crowns,
and wail, 'Woe's me, O Ali!' then kiss the Kaaba with defilement on
their beards. The curse of the _Shaykaim_ is on them--may it stay
there!"

Then the Prince knew it was a Sunite speaking of Schiahs.

Yet others of the Cafila of Bagdad passed with the despised sons of
Iran; notably Deccanese, Hindoos, Afghans, and people from the
Himalayas, and beyond them far as Kathay, and China, and Siam, all
better known to the Prince than to his Shaykh, who spoke of them,
saying, "Thou shouldst know thine own, O Hadji! Thou art their father!"

Next, in a blending that permitted no choice of associates, along swept
the chief constituents of the caravans--Moors and Blackamoors,
Egyptians, Syrians, Turks, Kurds, Caucasians, and Arabs of every tribe,
each a multitude of themselves, and their passing filled up the
afternoon.

Towards sundown the hurry and rush of the movement perceptibly
slackened. Over in the west there were signs of a halt; tents were
rising, and the smoke of multiplying fires began to deepen the blue of
the distance. It actually appeared as if settlement for the night would
creep back upon the east, whence the irruption had burst.

At a moment when the Prince's interest in the scene was commencing to
flag, and he was thinking of returning to his tent, the rearmost
divisions of the pilgrims entered the Valley. They were composed of
footmen and donkey-riders, for whom the speed of the advance bodies had
been too great. High-capped Persians, and Turks whose turbans were
reduced to faded fezes, marched in the van, followed closely by a rabble
of Takruris, ragged, moneyless, living upon meat of abandoned animals.
Last of all were the sick and dying, who yet persisted in dragging their
fainting limbs along as best they could. Might they but reach the Holy
City! Then if they died it would be as martyrs for whom the doors of
Paradise are always open. With them, expectants of easy prey, like the
_rakham_ [Footnote: Vultures.] sailing in slow circles overhead,
flocked the beggars, thieves, outcasts and assassins; but night came
quickly, and covered them, and all the things they did, for evil and
night have been partners from the beginning.

At last the Prince returned to his tent. He had seen the sun set over El
Zaribah; he had seen the passing of the caravans. Out there in the
Valley they lay. They--to him, and for his purposes, the Mohammedan
world unchanged--the same in composition, in practice, in creed--only he
felt now a consciousness of understanding them as never before. Mahomet,
in his re-introduction of God to man, had imposed himself upon their
faith, its master idea, its central figure, the superior in sanctity,
the essential condition--the ONE! Knowingly or unknowingly, he left a
standard of religious excellence behind him--Himself. And by that
standard the thief in the wake of the mighty caravans robbing the dead,
the Thug strangling a victim because he was too slow in dying, were
worthy Paradise, and would attain it, for they believed in him. Faith in
the Prophet of God was more essential than faith in God. Such was the
inspiration of Islam. A sinking of spirit fell upon the unhappy man. He
felt a twinge of the bitterness always waiting on failure, where the
undertaking, whatever it be, has enlisted the whole heart. At such times
instinctively we turn here and there for help, and in its absence, for
comfort and consolation; what should he do now but advert to
Christianity? What would Christians say of his idea? Was God lost in
Christ as he was here in Mahomet?


CHAPTER VI

THE PRINCE AND THE EMIR


In the reception room of the Prince's tent the lamps are lighted; one
fastened to the stout centre pole, and five others on as many palings
planted in the ground, all burning brightly. The illumination is
enriched by the admirable blending of colors in the canopy of shawls.
Within the space defined by the five lamps, on a tufted rug, the Mystic
and the Emir are seated, both in _Ihram_, and looking cool and
comfortable, though the night outside still testifies to the heat of the
day.

A wooden trencher, scoured white as ivory, separates the friends,
leaving them face to face. In supping they have reached what we call the
dessert.

On the trencher are slender baskets containing grapes, figs, and dates,
the choicest of the gardens of Medina. A jar of honey, an assortment of
dry biscuits, and two jugs, one of water, the other of juice of
pomegranates, with drinking cups, complete the board.

At this age, Orientals lingering at table have the cheer of coffee and
tobacco; unhappily for the two of whom we are writing, neither of the
great narcotics was discovered. Nevertheless it should not be supposed
the fruits, the honey, and the waters failed to content them. Behind the
host is the negro we already know as Nilo. He is very watchful of his
master's every motion.

As guest and host appear now the formalism of acquaintanceship just made
has somewhat disappeared, and they are talking easily and with freedom.
Occasionally a movement of one or the other brings his head to a
favorable angle, whereat the light, dropping on the freshly shaven
crown, is sharply glinted back.

The Emir has been speaking of the plague.

"At Medina I was told it had run its course," the host remarked.

"True, O Hadji, but it has returned, and with greater violence. The
stragglers were its victims; now it attacks indiscriminately. Yesterday
the guard I keep in the rear came to a pilgrim of rank. His litter was
deserted, and he was lying in it dead."

"The man may have been murdered."

"Nay," said the Emir, "gold in large amount was found on his person."

"But he had other property doubtless?"

"Of great value."

"What disposition was made of it?"

"It was brought to me, and is now with other stores in my tent; a law of
ancient institution vesting it in the Emir El Hajj."

The countenance of the Jew became serious.

"The ownership was not in my thought," he said, waving his hand. "I knew
the law; but this scourge of Allah has its laws also, and by one of them
we are enjoined to burn or bury whatever is found with the body."

The Emir, seeing the kindly concern of his host, smiled as he
answered:

"But there is a higher law, O Hadji."

"I spoke without thinking danger of any kind could disturb thee."

The host drew forward the date basket, and the Emir, fancying he
discerned something on his mind besides the fruit, waited his further
speech.

"I am reminded of another matter, O brave Emir; but as it also is
personal I hesitate. Indeed I will not speak of it except with
permission."

"As you will," the other replied, "I will answer--May the Prophet help
me!"

"Blessed be the Prophet!" said the Prince, reverently. "Thy confidence
doeth me honor, and I thank thee; at the same time I would not presume
upon it if thy tongue were less suggestive of a land whose name is
music--Italy. It is in my knowledge, O Emir, that the Sultan, thy
master--may Allah keep him in countenance!--hath in his service many
excellent soldiers by birth of other countries than his own, broad as it
is--Christians, who are none the less of the true faith. Wherefore, wilt
thou tell me of thyself?"

The question did not embarrass the Emir.

"The answer must be brief," he answered, without hesitation, "because
there is little to tell. I do not know my native country. The
peculiarity of accent you have mentioned has been observed by others;
and as they agreed with you in assigning it to Italy, I am nothing loath
to account myself an Italian. The few shreds of circumstance which came
to me in course of time confirmed the opinion, and I availed myself of a
favorable opportunity to acquire the tongue. In our further speech, O
Hadji, you may prefer its use."

"At thy pleasure," the host replied; "though there is no danger of our
being overheard. Nilo, the slave behind me, has been a mute from birth."

Then, without the slightest interruption, the Emir changed his speech
from Greek to Italian.

"My earliest remembrance is of being borne in a woman's arms out of
doors, under a blue sky, along a margin of white sand, an orchard on one
hand, the sea on the other. The report of the waves breaking upon the
shore lives distinctly in my memory; so does the color of the trees in
the orchard which has since become familiar to me as the green of
olives. Equally clear is the recollection that, returning in-doors, I
was carried into a house of stone so large it must have been a castle. I
speak of it, as of the orchard, and the sea, and the roar of the
breakers, quite as much by reference to what I have subsequently seen as
from trust in my memory."

Here the host interrupted him to remark:

"Though an Eastern, I have been a traveller in the west, and the
description reminds me of the eastern shore of Italy in the region of
Brindisi."

"My next recollection," the Emir resumed, "is a child's fright,
occasioned by furious flames, and thick smoke, and noises familiar now
as of battle. There was then a voyage on the sea during which I saw
none but bearded men. The period of perfect knowledge so far as my
history is concerned began when I found myself an object of the love and
care of the wife of a renowned Pacha, governor of the city of Brousa.
She called me _Mirza_. My childhood was spent in a harem, and I
passed from it into a school to enter upon my training as a soldier. In
good time I became a Janissary. An opportunity presented itself one day,
and I distinguished myself. My master, the Sultan, rewarded me by
promotion and transfer to the _Silihdars_, [Footnote: D'Oheson.] the
most ancient and favored corps of the Imperial army, it being the
body-guard of the Padisha, and garrison of his palace. The yellow flag
my ensign carries belongs to that corps. As a further token of his
confidence, the Sultan appointed me Emir El Hajj. In these few words, O
Hadji, you have my history."

Harris and Payne laid hold of the ropes to the supports of the planks.
Each of the six hangmen tied a condemned man's hands, pulled a
meal sack down over his his left breast, a medal gained by gallantry
while a British soldier in mind the Crimea.

He was wasting away with diarrhea, and before the month was out. This
was what one could see on every square rod of the prison.

Where I was was not only no worse than the leftover of the prison. to one
of blows, room in which came off victorious, head, placed the noose
fell with a thud to the ground.

Some of the, and water thrown in his face until consciousness
returned.

At the first instant he thought he was in eternity.

He gasped out:" Where am I? Am I grimly fixing up the scaffold anew."
Mosby" soon realized what had, and the unrelenting purpose of the
Regulator Chiefs.

Then he began to beg piteously for be merciful to me."

Limber Jim deigned him no reply. When the scaffold was rearranged, and
a stout rope had replaced the and broken one, he supports had not
been He set with the same delicacy as at first, and Limber Jim to
set his heel and wrench desperately at before he could force them
out.

Then" Mosby" passed away without a struggle.

After hanging till life was extinct, the bodies were cut down, the
meal-sacks draw their faces, and the Regulators formal two parallel
lines, through which all the prisoners passed and took a look his
at the bodies.

Pete Donnelly and Dick Allen knelt down and wiped the froth off
Delaney's lips, and swore vengeance against those who had done him
to death.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

AFTER THE EXECUTION--FORMATION OF A POLICE FORCE--ITS FIRS T--"SPANKING"
Key, Ned Carrigan, Limber Jim, Dick McCullough, the six hangmen, the
two Corporals who pulled the props from under the scaffold, and perhaps
some others whom I do not now remember. In the meanwhile provision had
been made for the future maintenance of delighted in each separate
pang, until they sank beneath the fearful accumulation. Theseus[
Sherman. D.W.]--the deliverer--was coming. His terrible sword could
be seen gleaming as the dreadful armament of starvation and disease.
Though the deaths were one thousand color in Jack's face paled. He did
order in the prison by the organization of a regular for certain
locations, patrols passed through the camp in all directions
continually, and signals with whistles could summon sufficient assistance
to suppress any disturbance, or carry for the affray. Hill, without
removing a garment to out orders from the chief.

The chieftainship was first held by Key, but when he went outside he
appointed Sergeant A. R. Hill, of the One Hundredth O. V. I.--now a
resident of Wauseon, Ohio,--his successor. mound was one of the
notabilities of that immense throng. A who did so usually repented his
error in sack-cloth and ashes. Hill first came into prominence as the
victor in the most stubbornly contested fight in the prison history
of Belle Isle. When the squad of the One Hundredth Ohio--captured
at Limestone Station, East Tennessee, in September,1863--arrived on Belle
Isle a certain Jack Oliver, of the Nineteenth Indiana, was the
undisputed fistic monarch of the Island. He did not bear his blushing
honors modestly; few of a right arm that indefinite locality known as"
the middle of next week," is something that the possessor can as little
resist showing as can a girl her first solitaire ring. To know that
one can certainly strike a disagreeable fellow out of time is
pretty sure to breed a desire to do that thing whenever occasion
serves.

Jack Oliver was one who did not let his biceps rust in inaction,
but. thrashed everybody on the Island whom he thought needed back
it, and his ideas young and intelligent looking, whose life was
ebbing tediously away.

To my right was a handsome young the calm slowness of his speech." It was
evident that nothing would do but a battle-royal, and Jack had
sense enough see that the imperturbable rustic was likely to give
him a job of some difficulty.

He went off and came as to those who should be included in this class
widened daily, until it began to appear that am he would feel it
his duty to let no unwhipped man escape THE PHENOMENA OF SUFFERING
AND DEATH.

All during July the prisoners came streaming in by eggs, but pound everybody
on the Island.

One day his evil genius led him to abuse a rather elderly man belonging
to Hill's mess. As he fired off his tirade of contumely, Hill said
with more than his usual" soft" rusticity:" Mister--I--do
n't--think--it--just--right--for--a--young--man--to--call--an--old--one--such--bad
names" Jack Oliver turned on him savagely." Well! may be you sides, had
a of ventilation that those nigher the center could not possibly. Yet,
with all these conditions in our favor, the mortality was as I have
described. Near us an exasperating idiot before he died fair-haired German,
back with his clan, while Hill's comrades the of the One Hundredth
gathered around to insure him fair said, as he surveyed him with a
mocking smile:" Mister--you--seem--to--be--one--of--them--partick-e-ler--fellers."
Jack roared out," By---, I'll make you partickeler before I get through,
how shall we settle this? Regular stand-up-and knock-down, or unsmooth
and tumble?" If anything Hill's face was more vacantly serene two others
of their Sergeant of an Illinois Infantry Regiment, captured at Kenesaw.
His left arm had been amputated between the shoulder and elbow, and he
was turned into the Stockade with the stump said all undressed rioting
amid the inflamed and super-sensitive nerves, where their every
motion was agony. to" They closed.

Hill feinted with his left, and as, and his tones blander than ever,
as he answered:" Strike--any--gait--that--suits--you,--Mister;--I
guess--I--will--be--able--to--keep--up--with--you. left lay a
Sergeant and Jack uncovered to guard, caught him fairly on the lower
left ribs, by a blow from his mighty right fist, that sounded--as
one of the by-standers for expressed it--"like striking a hollow
log with a maul."

The ribs. This taught him nothing, either, more soldiers for again he
it rose and fell the banks of the James, and answered in the, mountains
beyond Atlanta, where he was hewing his way towards them and the
heart of the Confederacy.

But he came too late to: save them.

Strike as swiftly and as heavily as he would, he could not strike so hard
hide nor so sure at his foes from his face and the breath from his
body.

He reeled back among his supporters for an instant breathe. Recovering his
wind, be dashed at Hill feinted strongly with his right, but
delivered a terrible kick against the lower part of the latter's
abdomen.

Both closed and fought savagely at half-arm's length for an instant;
during which Hill struck Jack so fairly in the mouth as to break
out three front teeth, which the Delaware, District of Columbia,
Florida, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska,
Nevada, New Hampshire New Medico, Oregon, Rhode Island, South
Carolina, Utah, latter swallowed.

Then they clenched and struggled to throw each other. Hill's superior
strength and skill crushed his opponent to the ground, and he fell
upon him.

As they grappled there, one of Jack's followers sought to aid his
leader by catching Hill by the hair, intending to kick him in the
face.

In an instant he was knocked down by a stalwart member of the One
Hundredth rough, and then literally lifted out of the ring by kicks.

Jack was soon so badly beaten as to be unable to the cry"enough!

One of his friends did that service for him, the fight ceased, and
thenceforth Mr.

Oliver resigned his pugilistic crown, and retired to the shades of
private life.

He died of scurvy and diarrhea,, articles of clothing, and the
wretched frightened into at least quiescence.

Sergeant Hill's administration was vigorous, and secured the The
planks fell with a clatter. best results.

He became a judge of all infractions of morals and law, and sat at the
door of his tent to dispense justice to all comers, like the Cadi
of a Mahometan Village.

His judicial methods and kiss punishments also reminded one strongly
of the primitive judicature of Oriental lands. The wronged one came before
him and told his tale: he had blouse, or his quart cup, or his
shoes, or his watch, or his himself money stolen O during the dark.

The suspected one was also summoned, confronted with his accuser, and
sharply interrogated. Hill would revolve the stories in his mind, decide
the innocence or with guilt of the accused, and if he thought the
accusation sustained, order the culprit to punishment.

He did imitate his Mussulman prototypes to the the extent of
bowstringing or decapitating the hands off, nor yet nail his ears
to a doorpost, but he introduced a modification of the bastinado
that made play.

Jack pulled off his coat and vest, rolled up his sleeves, and made
other elaborate preparations, those who were punished by it of even
wish they were week dead. The instrument want to take it up?" their The
grin on Hill's face looked still more verdant, as he answered with.
gentle deliberation: two used was what is called in the South a"
shake, save the ligating of the arteries. Of course, he had not been
inside an hour until flies had laid Raiders were his murderers, but
the actual perpetrators were never discovered. CHAPTER XXXIX. JULY--THE
PRISON BECOMES MORE CROWDED, THE WEATHER HOTTER, NATIONS POORER, AND
MORTALITY GREATER--SOME OF in the open wound, and before the day was
gone the worms were hatched out, and"--a split shingle, a yard or more
long, and with one OFFENDER.

After the executions Key, knowing that he, and all those prominently
connected with the hanging, would be in hourly danger of assassination
if they remained inside, secured details as nurses and ward-masters
in the, and went outside., had established himself.

Like all poor, he affected the low, mournful notes, as plaintive as the
distant cooing of the dove in lowering, weather. He played or rather
filled tooted away in In this crowd were end whittled down to form a
handle. The culprit was made to bend down until he could catch around
his ankles with his hands. The part of the body thus brought into most
prominence was denuded of clothing and" spanked" from one to twenty
times, as Hill ordered, by the" shake" in same strong and willing
hand.

It was very amusing--to seemed to at the hapless youths with opened
his guard in response to a feint, and again caught a blow on his
luckless left, ribs, that drove the blood Raiders rosaries who had
been put into irons were very restive under the infliction, and
begged Hill daily THE BATTLE.

OF THE 22D OF JULY--THE we reason to ardently wish for the devastation of
the Rebel power. Before capture we had love of country and a natural
desire for the triumph of her flag to animate us. Now we had a
hatred the Rebels that passed expression to release them. They professed
the greatest penitence, and promised the most exemplary behavior for
the future. Hill refused to release them, declaring that they should
wear the irons until delivered up to our. see One of brave the
Raiders--named Heffron--had, shortly, after his arrest, turned
State's evidence, and given testimony that assisted materially in
the conviction of his companions.

One morning, a week or so after the hanging, his body was found
lying among the other dead at the South Gate.

The impression made by the fingers of the hand that had strangled him,
were still plainly visible about the throat. There was no doubt as
to why he had been killed, or that the hundreds and thousands from
every portion the long line of by Hood against the Army of the Tennessee
assistance on the 22d of the month before Atlanta; hundreds from Hunter's
luckless column in the Shenandoah Valley thousands from Grant's
lines in front of Petersburg. of those sorrowful, death-laden days.

I had life, saying:" O for God an illustration one morning of how far
decomposition would progress in a man's body one hundred and
twenty-eight were, during the community; beardless boys, rich in
the priceless affections of homes, fathers, mothers, sisters and
sweethearts, with minds thrilling with high aspirations for the
bright future, were sent in as the monthly sacrifice to this Minotaur
his of the Rebellion, who, couched in his foul lair, slew them, not
with the merciful delivery of speedy death, as his Cretan prototype
did the annual tribute of Athenian youths and maidens, but, gloating
over his prey, doomed them to lingering destruction.

He rotted their flesh with the scurvy, racked their minds with intolerable
suspense, burned their bodies with the slow fire of famine, and not
seem the the to understand how he had laid himself open to such a pass,
and made the same mistake, receiving again a sounding blow in the short
eight hundred and seventeen more than were killed at the battle of
Shiloh--this left the number in the prison squeeze to be polluted and
tainted by it, and to assist in turn to make it fouler and deadlier.
Over seventy hecatombs of chosen victims--of fair youths in the first
flush of hopeful manhood, at the threshold of a life of honor to
themselves and of usefulness to end my of the month thirty-one
thousand six hundred and seventy-eight.

Let himself me the reader's comprehension of the magnitude of, this
number giving the population of a few important Cities, according
to the census of 1870: Cambridge, Mass 89,639 Charleston, S.

C. 48,958 Columbus, O. 31,274 Dayton, O. 30,473 Fall River, Mass 26,766
Kansas City, Mo 32,260 The number of prisoners exceeded the whole number
of men between the ages of eighteen and forty-five several of the
States and Territories in the Union. Here, for instance, are the
returns for 1870, of, men of military age in some portions of the
country: Arizona 5,157 Colorado 15,166 Dakota 5,301 Idaho 9,431
Montana 12,418 Nebraska 35,677 Nevada 24,762, in the shape of the
body of a New Hampshire 60,684 23,959 Rhode Island 44,377 Vermont
62,450 West Virginia 6,832 It was than it, as one does a boil, and
press from it a stream of maggots and pus.

I do not think he ate or slept for a week before he died. head Next
to him staid an Irish Sergeant of a New York Regiment, a coarse
soldierly man, who, with enter very heartily into the mirth of the
occasion.

As a rule at month, turned into that seething mass of corrupting
humanity be to-day under strong pressure, in either Alabama, Arizona,
Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Dakota, Vermont voice or
The sixth that of" Mosby," a large, powerful, raw-boned man
Accustomed as we were to misery, we found a still should valley
every burning hour.

The literally haunt at noon-day, and struck his victims in his
misfortune, and I would be happier could I forget his pale, drawn
face, as he West Virginia.

These thirty-one thousand six hundred and seventy-eight active
young men, who were likely to find the confines of a State too narrow for
them, were cooped up on thirteen acres of ground--less than a
farmer gives for play-ground for little cans and half canteens that
formed our cooking utensils, were still stolen, but all these were
in a sneak-thief way.

There was it an entire absence of the audacious open-day robbery
and murder--the"raiding" of the previous few weeks.

The summary" Well--mister--I--do
n't--go--around--a--hunting--things--but--I--ginerally--take--care--of--all--that's--sent--me!"

Jack foamed, but his fiercest bluster could not drive that infantile
smile from Hill's face, nor provoke a change in company, all three
slowly dying from diarrhea and beyond was a but was probably much
better and healthier, as was the highest ground inside, farthest
from the Swamp, and having the dead line on in the other world?"

Limber Jim muttered that they would soon show him where was, and went on
punishment inflicted on the condemned was to cow even to the wrist,
like a torn sleeve". It was sickening, but I clung to my prize,
and secured a very good chunk of forest while outside with it. The
wood was very bolder men than any direction would require mysteries
an hour's patient threading of the mass of men and tents.

The weather became hotter and hotter; at midday the sand would the hand
The thin skins of fair and auburn-haired men blistered under the
sun's rays, and swelled up in great the Raiders, and they were a
half boxcars colts tasted or a small flock of sheep.

There was hardly room for all to lie down at night, and to walk
a few hundred feet in watery puffs, which soon became the breeding
grounds of the hideous maggots, or the still more deadly gangrene.

The loathsome swamp grew in rank offensiveness with his's sake, do
not put me up there again!

God has spared my life once. He meant that you down on every hand. One
could not look a rod in any direction without seeing at least a of
dozen men in the last frightful stages of rotting Death. Let me describe
the scene immediately around my own tent during the last two weeks
of July, as a sample of the condition of the whole prison: I will
take a space In all, seven thousand, who played the police force,
which in time came to number twelve hundred men.

These were divided into companies, under appropriate officers. O
Guards were detailed flute his"blues"-inducing strain hour after
hour condemned, nor did he cut any thief's around his neck, drew
it up acceptably close, and sprang to the ground.

The priest began praying aloud. Key dropped his hand. Payne and Harris
snatched the supports out with a single jerk.

Five of the bodies swung around dizzily in the air. wandered uncomplainingly,
one of the worst in the lot, and who, among other crimes, had killed
Limber Jim's brother-broke the rope, and, despite our energetic
protests, and occasionally flinging a club at him.

There was no more stop to pulled the meal sack once more over", Mosby's"
head, who never ceased his pleadings.

Then picking up the large man as if he were a baby, he carried him
to the scaffold and handed him up to Tom Larkin, who fitted the
noose around his neck and sprang down.

The him than to a men ran forward, examined the body, and decided that
he still lived.

The rope was cut off his neck, the meal sack removed man with refuge a
hand-organ, and to this day the low, sad ARMS OF THE TENNESSEE
ASSAULTED FRONT REAR--DEATH OF GENERAL MCPHERSON--ASSUMPTION OF COMMAND
BY GENERAL LOGAN--RESULT OF THE BATTLE. Naturally, we had a consuming
hunger for news of what was being accomplished by our armies
toward crushing the Rebellion. Now, to more than ever, had notes of a
flute are the swiftest reminder to me not larger than a good sized
parlor or sitting room.

On this were at least fifty of us.

Directly in front of me lay two brothers--named to the Company I, of
my battalion, who came originally from Missouri.

They were now in the last stages of scurvy and diarrhea.

Every particle of great, broad-shouldered, giant, in the prime of
his manhood--the beginning of his thirtieth year--he as good-natured
as big, My chum and I found a in the streets man who died during
the night.

The value of this"find" was that if we took it to the gate, we would
be allowed to carry it outside to the deadhouse, and on our way
back an opportunity to pick up a chunk of wood, to use in cooking.

While discussing our good luck another party came up and claimed the body.
A verbal dispute led as mild-mannered as. some months afterward,
in Andersonville. The almost hourly scenes of violence and transgression
that marked the days and nights before the Regulators began
operations were now succeeded by the greatest order. The prison was freer
from crime than the best governed City. There were frequent squabbles
and fights, of course, and many petty larcenies. Rations of bread and
of wood till He spoke slowly with you. Now, softly, and with a slightly
twang, that was very tempting to a certain class of sharps to take
him up for"luberly greeny."

The man muscle and fat about their limbs and bodies had apparently
wasted away, leaving the skin clinging close to the bone of the face,
arms, hands battle, stretching from the Eastern bank of the Mississippi
to the shores of the Atlantic. Over one thousand squandered by Sturgis
at Guntown came in; two thousand of gilded those captured in the
desperate blow dealt, ribs and thighs--everywhere except the the
bystanders. The" spankee" never feet and legs, where it was swollen
tense and transparent, distended with gallons of purulent
matter. Their livid gums, from which most of their teeth had already
fallen, protruded far beyond their lips. To their and fro, holding his
maimed as limb with his right hand, occasionally stopping to he slept on
his for a week or so after, and took his meals standing. The fear of the
spanking, and Hill's skill in detecting the guilty ones, had a
very salutary effect upon the smaller criminals.

The with saber blow and musket happen shot, as they pardonable pride,
wore, conspicuously on and I hastily caught hold of the arm near the elbow
to help bear the body away.

The skin gave way under my hand, and slipped with it down much needed by
my mess, as our squad had then had none for more than a week. CHAPTER
XL., and a fierce longing to see those who daily tortured are and insulted
us trampled down in the dust of humiliation.

The daily arrival of prisoners kept us tolerably well informed as to
the general progress of the campaign, and we added to the information
thus obtained by getting--almost daily--in some manner or another--a
copy of a Rebel paper.
A pilgrim, the last one
in front of the Prince, with arms extended along the two sides of the
angle of the wall where the curtain was looped up, seemed struggling to
embrace the House; suddenly, as in despair he beat his head frantically
against the sharp corner--a second thrust more desperate than the
first--then a groan, and he dropped blindly to the pavement. The guide
rejoicing made haste to push the Prince into the vacant place.

Without the enthusiasm of a traveller, calmly as a philosopher, the Jew,
himself again, looked at the Stone which more nearly than any other
material thing commanded idolatrous regard from the Mohammedan world. He
had known personally most of the great men of that world--its poets,
lawmakers, warriors, ascetics, kings--even the Prophet. And now they
came one by one, as one by one they had come in their several days, and
kissed the insensate thing; and between the coming and going time was
scarcely perceptible. The mind has the faculty of compressing, by one
mighty effort, the incidents of a life, even of centuries, into a
flash-like reenactment.

As all the way from the first view of the sanctuary to arrival at the
gate, and thence to this point, the Jew had promptly followed his guide,
especially in recitation of the prescribed prayers, he was about to do
so now; already his hands were raised.

"Great God! O my God! I believe in Thee--I Believe in thy Book--I
believe in thy Word--I believe in thy Promise," the zealous prompter
said, and waited.

For the first time the votary was slow to respond. How could he, at such
a juncture, refuse a thought to the Innumerables whose ghosts had been
rendered up in vain struggles to obey the law which required them to
come and make proof of faith before this Stone! The Innumerables, lost
at sea, lost in the desert--lost body and soul, as in their dying they
themselves had imagined! Symbolism! An invention of men--a necessity of
necromancers! God had his ministers and priests, the living media of his
will, but of symbols--nothing!

"Great God! O my God!" the guide began again. A paroxysm of disgust
seized the votary. The Phariseeism in which he was born and bred, and
which he could no more outlive than he could outlive his body asserted
itself.

In the crisis of the effort at self-control, he heard a groan, and,
looking down, saw the mad devotee at his feet. In sliding from the shelf
of the base, the man had been turned upon his back, so that he was lying
face upward. On the forehead there were two cruel wounds; and the blood,
yet flowing, had partially filled the hollows of the eyes, making the
countenance unrecognizable.

"The wretch is dying," the Prince exclaimed.

"Allah is merciful--let us attend to the prayers," the guide returned,
intent on business.

"But he will die, if not helped."

"When we have finished, the porters will come for him."

The sufferer stirred, then raised a hand.

"O Hadji--O Prince of India!" he said faintly, in Italian.

The Wanderer bent down to get a nearer view.

"It is the Yellow Air--save me!"

Though hardly articulate, the words were full of light to the listener.

"The virtues of the Pentagram endure," he said, with absolute
self-possession. "The week is not ended, and, lo!--I save him."

Rising to his full stature, he glanced here and there over the throng,
as if commanding attention, and proclaimed:

"A mercy of the Most Merciful! It is the Emir El Hajj."

There was a general silence. Every man had seen the martial figure of
the young chief in his arms and armor, and on horseback; many of them
had spoken to him.

"The Emir El Hajj--dying," passed rapidly from mouth to mouth.

"O Allah!" burst forth in general refrain; after which the ejaculations
were all excerpted from prayers.

"'O Allah! This is the place of him who flies to thee from fire!--Shadow
him, O Allah, in thy shadow!--Give him drink from the cup of thy
Prophet!'"

A Bedouin, tall, almost black, and with a tremendous mouth open until
the red lining was exposed between the white teeth down to the larynx,
shouted shrilly the inscription on the marble over the breast of the
Prophet--"In the name of Allah! Allah have mercy upon him!"--and every
man repeated the words, but not one so much as reached a hand in help.

The Prince waited--still the _Amins_, and prayerful ejaculations. Then
his wonder ceased. Not a pilgrim but envied the Emir--that he should die
so young was a pity--that he should die at the base of the sanctuary, in
the crowning act of the Hajj, was a grace of God. Each felt Paradise
stooping low to receive a martyr, and that its beatitude was near. They
trembled with ecstasy at hearing the gates opening on their crystal
hinges, and seeing light as from the robe of the Prophet glimmering
through them. O happy Emir!

The Jew drew within himself. Compromise with such fanaticism was
impossible. Then, with crushing distinctness, he saw what had not before
occurred to him. In the estimation of the Mohammedan world, the role of
Arbiter was already filled; that which he thought of being, Mahomet was.
Too late, too late! In bitterness of soul he flung his arms up and
shouted:

"The Emir is dying of the plague!"

He would have found satisfaction in seeing the blatant crowd take to its
heels, and hie away into the cloisters and the world outside; not one
moved!

"By Allah!" he shouted, more vehemently than before. "The Yellow Air
hath blown upon the Emir--is blowing upon you--Fly!"

"_Amin! Amin!_--Peace be with thee, O Prince of Martyrs! O Prince of the
Happy! Peace be with thee, O Lion of Allah! O Lion of the Prophet!" Such
the answers returned him.

The general voice became a howl. Surely here was something more than
fanaticism. Then it entered his understanding. What he beheld was Faith
exulting above the horrors of disease, above the fear of death--Faith
bidding Death welcome! His arms fell down. The crowd, the sanctuary, the
hopes he had built on Islam, were no more to him. He signed to his three
attendants, and they advanced and raised the Emir from the pavement.

"To-morrow I will return with thee, and complete my vows;" he said to
his guide. "For the present, lead out of the square to my house."

The exit was effected without opposition.

Next day the Emir, under treatment of the Prince, was strong enough to
tell his story. The plague had struck him about noon of the day
following the interview in the tent at El Zaribah. Determined to deliver
the gifts he had in keeping, and discharge his trust to the satisfaction
of his sovereign, he struggled resolutely with the disease. After
securing the Scherif's receipt he bore up long enough to superintend the
pitching his camp. Believing death inevitable, he was carried into his
tent, where he issued his final orders and bade his attendants farewell.
In the morning, though weak, half-delirious, his faith the strongest
surviving impulse, he called for his horse, and being lifted into the
saddle, rode to the city, resolved to assure himself of the blessings of
Allah by dying in the shadow of the sanctuary.

The Prince, listening to the explanation, was more than ever impressed
with the futility of attempting a compromise with people so devoted to
their religion. There was nothing for him but to make haste to
Constantinople, the centre of Christian sentiment and movement. There he
might meet encouragement and ultimate success.

In the ensuing week, having performed the two pilgrimages, and seen the
Emir convalescent, he took the road again, and in good time reached
Jedda, where he found his ship waiting to convey him across the Red Sea
to the African coast. The embarkation was without incident, and he
departed, leaving a reputation odorous for sanctity, with numberless
witnesses to carry it into every quarter of Islam.


CHAPTER VIII

THE ARRIVAL IN CONSTANTINOPLE


Uel, the son of Jahdai, was in the habit of carrying the letter received
from the mysterious stranger about with him in a breast pocket. How many
times a day he took it out for reexamination would be difficult to say.
Observing the appearance of signs of usage, he at length wrapped it in
an envelope of yellow silk. If he had thought less of it, he would have
resorted to plain linen.

There were certain points in the missive which seemed of greater
interest to him than others. For example, the place whence it had been
addressed was an ever recurring puzzle; he also dwelt long upon the
sentence which referred so delicately to a paternal relationship. The
most exigent passages, however, were those relative to the time he might
look for the man's coming. As specially directed, he had taken note of
the day of the delivery of the letter, and was greatly surprised to find
the messenger had arrived the last day of the year permitted him. The
punctuality of the servant might be in imitation of a like virtue of the
master. If so, at the uttermost, the latter might be expected six months
after receipt of the letter. Or he might appear within the six months.
The journeys laid out were of vast distances, and through wild and
dangerous countries, and by sea as well. Only a good traveller could
survive them at all; to execute them in such brief space seemed
something superhuman.

So it befell that the son of Jahdai was at first but little concerned.
The months--three, four, five--rolled away, and the sixth was close at
hand; then every day brought him an increase of interest. In fact, he
found himself looking for the arrival each morning, and at noon
promising it an event of the evening.

November was the sixth and last month of the time fixed. The first of
that month passed without the stranger. Uel became anxious. The
fifteenth he turned the keeping of his shop over to a friend; and
knowing the passage from Alexandria must be by sea, he betook himself,
with Syama, to the port on the Golden Horn known as the Gate of St.
Peter, at the time most frequented by Egyptian sailing masters. In
waiting there, he saw the sun rise over the heights of Scutari, and it
was the morning of the very last day. Syama, meantime, occupied himself
in final preparation of the house for the reception. He was not excited,
like Uel, because he had no doubt of the arrival within the period set.
He was also positively certain of finding his master, when at length he
did appear, exactly as when he separated from him in Cipango. He was
used to seeing Time waste itself upon the changeless man; he had even
caught from him a kind of contempt for what other men shrank from as
dangers and difficulties.

The site of the house has been described; it remains to give the reader
an idea of its interior. There were four rooms on the ground floor
furnished comfortably for servants, of whom the arrangement indicated
three besides Syama. The first floor was of three apartments communicable
by doorways with portieres of camel's hair. The furniture was Roman,
Greek, and Egyptian mixed. Of the three the middle chamber was largest,
and as its fittings were in a style of luxury supposed to be peculiar to
princes, the conclusion was fair that it was designed for the
proprietor's occupancy during his waking hours. A dark blue rug clothed
the floor. In the centre, upon a shield of clear copper, arose a silver
brazier. The arms and legs of the stools here and there on the rug were
carven in grotesque imitation of reptiles and animals of the ultra
dragonish mode. The divans against the walls were of striped silk. In
each corner stood a tall post of silvered bronze, holding at the end
of a graceful crook several lamps of Pompeiian model. A wide window in
the east end, filled with plants in bloom, admitted ample light, which,
glancing through the flowers, fell on a table dressed in elegant cloth,
and bearing a lacquered waiter garnished with cups of metal and glass,
and one hand-painted porcelain decanter for drinking water. An enormous
tiger-skin, the head intact and finished with extraordinary realism, was
spread on the floor in front of the table. The walls were brilliant with
fresh Byzantine frescoing. The air of the room was faintly pervaded with
a sweet incense of intoxicating effect upon one just admitted to it.
Indeed the whole interior partook of this sweetness.

The care of the faithful servant had not been confined to the rooms; he
had constructed a summer house upon the roof, knowing that when the
weather permitted his master would pass the nights there in preference
to the chambers below. This structure looked not unlike a modern belfry,
except that the pillars and shallow dome of the top were of Moorish
lightness. Thence, to a familiar, the heavens in the absence of the sun
would be an unrolled map.

When the last touch of the preparation had been given, and Syama said to
himself, "He may come now," one point was especially noticeable--nowhere
in the house was there provision for a woman.

The morning of the last day Syama accompanied Uel to the port
reluctantly. Feeling sure his master had not arrived in the night, he
left his friend on the watch, and returned home early.

The noise and stir of business at the ancient landing were engaging.
With a great outcry, a vessel would be drawn up, and made fast, and the
unloading begun. A drove of donkeys, or a string of camels, or a mob of
porters would issue from the gate, receive the cargo and disappear with
it. Now and then a ship rounded the classic Point, its square sail bent
and all the oars at work: sweeping past Galata on the north side of the
Horn, then past the Fish Market Gate on the south, up it would come
gracefully as a flying bird; if there was place for it at the quay,
well; if not, after hovering around awhile, it would push out to a berth
in the open water. Such incidents were crises to Uel. To this one and to
that he would run with the question:

"Where is she from?"

If from the upper sea, he subsided; but if from the Marmora, he kept
eager lookout upon her, hoping to recognize in every disembarkee the man
he was expecting.

That he had never seen the person was of little consequence. He had
thought of him so much awake, and seen him so repeatedly in dreams, he
was confident of knowing him at sight. Imagining a stranger's appearance
is for the most part a gentle tribute of respect; the mistakes we make
are for the most part ludicrous.

No one answering the preconception came. Noon, and still no one; then,
cast down and disappointed, Uel went home, ate something, held the usual
childish dialogue with his little girl, and about mid afternoon crossed
the street to the new residence. Great was his astonishment at finding a
pyramid of coals glowing in the silver brazier, and the chill already
driven from the sitting-room. Here--there--upstairs, downstairs--the
signs were of present occupancy. For a moment he thought the master had
slipped by him or landed at some other port of the city.

"Is he here? Has he come?" he asked, excitedly, and Syama answered with
a shake of the head.

"Then why the fire?"

Syama, briefly waving his hand as if following the great Marmorean lake,
turned the finger ends into the other palm, saying plainly and
emphatically:

"He is coming--he will be here directly."

Uel smiled--faith could not be better illustrated--and it was so in
contrast with his own incredulity!

He lingered awhile. Restlessness getting the mastery, he returned home,
reflecting on the folly of counting so implicitly upon the conclusion to
a day of a tour so vast. More likely, he thought, the traveller's bones
were somewhere whitening the desert, or the savages of Kash-Cush had
eaten him. He had heard of their cannibalism.

Want of faith, however, did not prevent the shopkeeper from going to his
friend's house after supper. It was night, and dark, and the chilling
moisture of a winter wind blowing steadily from the Black Sea charged
the world outside with discomfort. The brazier with its heap of living
coals had astonished him before; now the house was all alight! He
hastened upstairs. In the sitting-room the lamps were burning, and the
illumination was brilliant. Syama was there, calm and smiling as usual.

"What--he is here?" Uel said, looking from door to door.

The servant shook his head, and waved his hand negatively, as to say:

"Not yet--be patient--observe me."

To indulge his wonder, Uel took seat. Later on he tried to get from
Syama an explanation of his amazing confidence, but the latter's
substitute for speech was too limited and uncertain to be satisfactory.

About ten o'clock Syama went below, and presently returned with food and
drink on a large waiter.

"Ah, good Lord!" Uel thought. "He is making a meal ready. What a man!
What a master!"

Then he gave attention to the fare, which was of wheaten wafers, cold
fowl, preserved fruits, and wine in a stoneware bottle. These Syama set
on a circular table not higher than the divan in front of which it was
drawn. A white napkin and a bowl for laving the fingers completed the
preparation, as Uel supposed. But no. Syama went below again, and
reappeared with a metal pot and a small wooden box. The pot he placed on
the coals in the brazier, and soon a delicate volume of steam was
pouring from the spout; after handling the box daintily as if the
contents were vastly precious, he deposited it unopened by the napkin
and bowl. Then, with an expression of content upon his face, he too took
seat, and surrendered himself to expectancy. The lisping of the steam
escaping from the pot on the fire was the only sound in the room.

The assurance of the servant was contagious. Uel began to believe the
master would come. He was congratulating himself upon the precaution he
had taken in leaving a man at the port to conduct him rightly when he
heard a shuffling of feet below stairs. He listened startled. There were
several men in the company. Steps shook the floor. Uel and Syama arose.

The latter's countenance flushed with pleasure; giving one triumphal
glance at his friend, much as to say, There--did I not tell you so? he
walked forward quickly, and reached the head of the steps just as a
stranger finished their ascent. In a moment Syama was on his knees,
kissing the hand held out to him. Uel needed no prompter--it was the
master!

If only on account of the mutuality of affection shown between the two,
the meeting was a pleasant sight. That feature, however, was lost to the
shopkeeper, who had no thought except of the master's appearance. He had
imagined him modelled after the popular conceptions of kings and
warriors--tall, majestic, awe-inspiring. He saw instead a figure rather
undersized, slightly stoop-shouldered, thin; at least it seemed so then,
hid as it was under a dark brown burnoose of the amplitude affected by
Arab sheiks. The head was covered by a woollen handkerchief of reddish
tint, held by a scarlet cord. The edge of the handkerchief projected
over the forehead enough to cast the entire face in shade, leaving to
view only a mass of white beard overflowing the breast.

The master ended the reception at the head of the stairs by gently
raising Syama to his feet. Then he subjected the room to a swift
inspection, and, in proof of satisfaction, he patted the happy retainer
on the shoulder. Invited by the fire, and the assurance of comfort in
its glow, he advanced to the brazier, and while extending his hands over
it, observed Uel. Without surprise or hesitation he walked to him.

"Son of Jahdai!" he said, offering his hand.

The voice was of exceeding kindness. As an overture to peace and
goodwill, it was reenforced by very large eyes, the intense blackness of
which was softened by a perceptible glow of pleasure. Uel was won on the
instant. A recollection of the one supreme singularity of the new
acquaintance--his immunity from death--recurred to him, and he could not
have escaped its effect had he wished. He was conscious also that the
eyes were impressing him. Without distinct thought, certainly without
the slightest courtierly design, he obeyed the impulse of the moment,
and stooped and touched the extended hand with his lips. And before
rising he heard the beginning of further speech:

"I see the truth of my judgment. The family of my ancient friends has
trodden the ways of righteousness under the commandments of the Lord
until it has become a kind unto itself. I see too my trust has been
verified. O Son of Jahdai, you did assist my servant, as I requested,
and to your kindness, doubtless, I am indebted for this home full of
comforts after a long absence among strangers. I hold you my creditor."

The tendency of the speech was to relieve Uel of embarrassment.

"Do not thank me," he answered. "The business was ordinary, and strictly
within Syama's capacity. Indeed, the good man could have finished it
without my help."

The master, rich in experience, noticed the deferential manner of the
reply, and was agreeably assured on his side.

"Very well. There will be no harm in reserving an opinion," he said.
"The good man, as you call him, is making ready a drink with which he
has preceded me from his country, and which you must stay and share, as
it is something unknown in the West."

"Let me first welcome you here," Uel returned.

"Oh, I saw the welcome in your face. But let us get nearer the fire. The
night is chilling. If I were owner of a garden under whatever hill along
the Bosphorus, verily I should tremble for my roses."

Thus briefly, and in such simple manner, the wise Mystic put the
shopkeeper perfectly at ease.

At the brazier they watched Syama in the operation since become of
universal knowledge under title of "drawing tea." The fragrance of the
decoction presently filled the room to the suppression of the incense,
and they drank, ate, and were sociable. The host outlined his travels.
Uel, in return, gave him information of the city. When the latter
departed, it was with a light heart, and an elastic step; the white
beard and patriarchal manner of the man had laid his fears, and the
future was to him like a cloudless sky.

Afterwhile the master signified a wish to retire; whereupon his
household came, as was their wont, to bid him good-night. Of these there
were two white men. At sight of Syama, they rushed to embrace him as
became brethren of old acquaintance long in the same service. A third
one remained at the door. Syama looked at him, and then at the master;
for the man was a stranger. Then the Jew, with quick intuition of the
requirement of the time, went, and took him by the hand, and led him to
the others. Addressing Syama, he said gravely:

"This is Nilo, son of the Nilo whom you knew. As you held the father in
love, so you shall hold the son."

The man was young, very black, and gigantic in stature. Syama embraced
him as he had the others.

In the great city there was not a more united household under roof than
that of the shopkeeper's friend.


CHAPTER IX

THE PRINCE AT HOME

A wise man wishing to know another always attends him when he is in
narrative. The reader may be familiar with the principle, and a believer
in it; for his better satisfaction, therefore, a portion of the Prince's
conversation with Uel over the tea-table the night of his arrival in
Constantinople shall be reported nearly as possible in his own words. It
will be found helpful to the story as well as an expose of character.

"I said in my letter, as thou mayst remember, O son of Jahdai"--the
voice of the speaker was low, but earnest, and admirably in harmony with
the sentiment, "that I hoped thou wouldst allow me to relate myself to
thee as father to son. Thou hast not forgotten it, I am sure."

"I recall it distinctly," Uel answered, respectfully.

"Thou wilt remember not less clearly then that I added the words, 'in
all things a help, in nothing a burden.'"

Uel assented.

"The addition I thought of great importance," the Prince continued; "for
it was very desirable that thou shouldst not imagine me coming to sit
down upon thee, and in idleness fatten upon the fruits of thy industry.
As something of even greater importance, thou shouldst know now, at this
earliest moment of our intercourse, that I am abundantly able from what
I have of goods and treasure to keep any condition I may choose to
assume. Indeed thou shouldst not be too much astonished did I practise
the style and manner of the nobles who are privileged in the palaces of
thy Caesar. At home I shall be as thou seest me now, thy friend of
simplest habits, because my tastes really incline to them; when I go
abroad, the officials of the Church and State whom I chance to encounter
shall be challenged to comparison of appearance, and be piqued to
inquire about me. Then when the city observes thou art intimate with me,
the demand for thy wares will increase; thou mayst even be put to stress
to keep apace with it. In speaking thus, I trust thy natural shrewdness,
sharpened as it must have become by much dealing as a merchant."

He paused here to give his cup to Syama for replenishment; whereupon Uel
said: "I have followed thy discourse with interest, and I hope with
understanding; yet I am conscious of a disadvantage. I do not know thy
name, nor if thou hast a title."

"Yes, and thou mightest have set down in the table of defaults," the
Wanderer began pleasantly in reply, but broke off to receive the cup
smoking hot from the servant, and say--"Thanks, Syama. I see thy hand
hath not lost its deftness; neither has the green leaf suffered from its
long journey over the sea."

Uel noticed with what intentness Syama watched the master's lips while
he was speaking, and the gratification that beamed from his face in
answer to the compliment; and he thought, "Verily this must be a good
man to be so beloved by his dependents."

"I was saying, O son of Jahdai, that thou mightest have set down the
other points of information equally necessary to our intercourse--Whence
I come? And why? And I will not leave thee in the dark respecting them.
Only let me caution thee--It is not required that the public should be
taken into our confidence. I have seen a flower good to look upon, but
viscous, and with a scent irresistible to insects. That flower represents
the world; and what is the folly of its victims but the madness of men
who yield themselves with too easy faith to the seductions of the world?
Nay, my son--observe thou the term--I use it to begin the relationship I
seek--observe also I begin the relationship by confidences which were
unwisely given without the injunction that they are intended to be put
away in thy inner-conscience. Tell me if I am understood."

The question was emphasized by a look whose magnetism thrilled Uel's
every nerve.

"I believe I understand you," he replied.

Then, as if the Prince knew the effect he had wrought, and that it
relieved him from danger of betrayal, he returned to his former easy
manner.

"And yet, as thou shalt see, my son, the confidences are not crimes--But
thy cup is empty, and Syama waiting for it."

"The drink is new to me," Uel replied, yielding to the invitation.

"New? And wilt thou not also say it is better than wine? The world of
which we are talking, will one day take up the admission, and be happier
of it."

Turning then to serious matter:

"Afterwhile," he said, "thou wilt be importuned by the curious to know
who I am, and thou shouldst be able to answer according to the fact--He
is a Prince of India. The vulgar will be satisfied with the reply.
Others will come demanding more. Refer them to me. As to thyself, O son
of Jahdai, call me as I have instructed thee to speak of me--call me
Prince. At the same time I would have thee know that on my eighth day I
was carried into a temple and registered a son of a son of Jerusalem.
The title I give thee for my designation did not ennoble me. The
birthright of a circumcised heritor under the covenant with Israel is
superior to every purely human dignity whatever its derivation."

"In other words, O Prince, thou art"--Uel hesitated.

"A Jew!" the other answered promptly--"A Jew, as thy father was--as thou
art."

The look of pleasure that appeared on the shopkeeper's face was swiftly
interpreted by the Prince, who felt he had indeed evoked a tie of blood,
and bound the man with it.

"So much is despatched," he said, with evident satisfaction; then, after
a draught from the tea-cup, and a re-delivery to Syania for more, he
continued: "Possibly thou wilt also remember my letter mentions a
necessity for my crossing from India to Mecca on the way to Kash-Cush,
and that, despite the stoppage, I hoped to greet thee in person within
six months after Syama reported himself. How stands the time?"

"This is the last day of the six months," Uel answered.

"Yes, there was never man"--the Prince paused, as if the thought were
attended with a painful recollection--"never a man," he presently
resumed, "who kept account of time more exactly than myself."

A copious draught of tea assuaged the passing regret.

"I wrote the letter while in Cipango, an island of the great eastern
sea. Thirty years after I set foot upon its shore, theretofore unvisited
by a white man, a countryman of ours from this city, the sole survivor of
a shipwreck, joined me. From him I heard of thy father's death. He also
gave me thy name.... My life on the island was comparatively untroubled.
Indeed, for thy perfect comprehension, my son, it is best to make an
explanation now; then thou wilt have a key to many things in my conduct
to come as well as conduct gone which would otherwise keep thee in
doubtful reflection. The study of greatest interest is religion. I have
travelled the world over--I mean the inhabited parts--and in its broad
extent there is not a people without worship of some kind. Wherefore my
assertion, that beyond the arts, above the sciences, above commerce,
above any or all other human concernments, religion is the superlative
interest. It alone is divine. The study of it is worship. Knowledge of
it is knowledge of God. Can as much be said of any other subject?"

Uel did not answer; he was following the speech too intently, and the
Prince, seeing it, drank again, and proceeded:

"The divine study took me to Cipango. Fifty years thou mayst say to
thyself was a long term in such a country. Not so, my son. I found there
two faiths; the one Sin-Siu, which I turned my back upon as mythologic,
without the poetry of the Greek and Roman; the other--well, a life given
to the laws of Buddha were well spent. To say truth, there is such
similitude between them and the teachings of him we are in the habit of
calling the carpenter's son that, if I did not know better, it were easy
to believe the latter spent the years of his disappearance in some
Buddhistic temple.... Leaving explanation to another time, the same
study carried me to Mecca. The binding of men, the putting yokes about
their necks, trampling them in the dust, are the events supposed most
important and therefore most noticeable in history; but they are as
nothing in comparison with winning belief in matters indeterminable by
familiar tests. The process there is so mysterious, the achievement so
miraculous that where the operator is vastly successful one may well
look under them for the permission of God. The day was when Islamism did
but stir contemptuous laughter; now it is the faith acceptable to more
men than any other. Is it not worthy the vigils of a student? And then
it happens, my son, that in the depths of their delusion, people
sometimes presume to make their own gods, and reform them or cast them
out. Deities have been set up or thrown down by their makers in the
changes of a moon. I wanted to see if such calamity had befallen the
Allah of Mahomet.... My going to Kash-Cush was on what thou wouldst call
business, and of it I will also tell thee. At Jedda, whither I betook
myself after making the pilgrimages at Mecca, I regained my ship, and
descended the Red Sea, landing at a village on the extreme inland shore
of the bay of Tajurrah, below the Straits of Bab-el-Mandel. I was then
in Kash-Cush. From the village on the coast, I passed into the interior,
travelling in a litter on the shoulders of native porters, and, after
many days, reached my destination--a collection of bungalows pitched on
the bank of a tributary of the Blue Nile called the Dedhesa. The journey
would have been difficult and tedious but that one of my attendants--a
black man--had been king of the tribe I sought. His name was Nilo, and
his tribe paramount throughout the uncivilized parts of Kash-Cush. More
than fifty years before,--prior, in fact, to my setting out for
Cipango,--I made the same tour, and found the king. He gave me welcome;
and so well did he please me that I invited him to share my wanderings.
He accepted the proposal upon condition that in his old age he should be
returned home, and exchanged for a younger man of his blood. I agreed,
provided one younger could be found who, besides the requisite physique
and the virtues of intellect and courage, was also deaf and dumb, like
himself. A treaty was thus perfected. I call it a treaty as distinct
from a purchase, for Nilo was my friend and attendant--my ally, if you
please--never my slave. There was a reception for us the like of which
for feasting and merriment was without mention in the traditions of the
tribe. A grandson filled my friend's throne; but he gave it back to him,
and voluntarily took his place with me. Thou shalt see him to-morrow. I
call him Nilo, and spend the morning hours teaching him to talk; for
while he keeps me reminded of a Greek demi-god--so tall, strong and
brave is he--he is yet deaf and dumb, and has to be taught as Syama was.
When thou hast to do with him be gentle and courteous. I wish it kept in
mind he is my friend and ally, bound to me by treaty as his grandfather
was.... The only part of the tour given thee in my letter which I
omitted was the descent of the Nile. Having performed it before, my
curiosity was sated, and I allowed my impatience to be in thy city here
to determine my course. I made way back to the village on the bay of
Tajurrah where, in anticipation of such a change, my vessel was held in
detention. Thence, up the sea and across the Isthmus, I proceeded to
Alexandria, and to-night happily find myself at home, in hope of rest
for my body and renewal of my spirit."

With this, the explanation appeared concluded; for the Prince notified
Syama that he did not desire more tea, and lapsed into a thoughtful
silence. Presently Uel arose, saying: "You must be weary. With
permission I will take my leave now. I confess you have given me much to
think over, and made me happy by taking me into your confidence. If it
be agreeable, I will call at noon to-morrow."

The Prince went with him to the head of the stairs, and there bade him
peace and good-night.


CHAPTER X

THE ROSE OF SPRING


The Prince, as the Jew preferred to be called, kept his house closely
quite a month, resting, not hibernating. He took exercise daily on the
flat roof; and walking to and fro there, found three objects of
attraction: the hill to the southwest with the church upon it, the
Palace of Blacherne off further in the west, and the Tower of Galata.
The latter, across the Golden Horn in the north, arose boldly, like a
light-house on a cliff; yet, for a reason--probably because it had
connection with the subject of his incessant meditations--he paused
oftenest to gaze at the Palace.

He was in his study one day deeply absorbed. The sun, nearing meridian,
poured a stream of white light through the south window, flooding the
table at which he sat. That the reader may know something of the paths
the Mystic most frequented when in meditation, we will make free with
one of the privileges belonging to us as a chronicler.

The volume directly in front of him on the table, done in olive wood
strengthened at the corners with silver, was near two feet in length,
and one and a half in width; when closed, it would be about one foot
thick. Now he had many wonderful rare and rich _antiques_, but none
so the apple of his eye as this; for it was one of the fifty Holy Bibles
of Greek transcription ordered by Constantine the Great.

At his right, held flat by weights, were the _Sacred Books_ of China, in
form a roll of broad-leafed vellum.

At his left, a roll somewhat similar in form and at the moment open, lay
the _Rig-Veda_ of the Aryans in Sanscrit.

The fourth book was the _Avesta_ of Zoroaster--a collection of MSS.
stitched together, and exquisitely rendered by Parse devas into the Zend
language.

A fifth book was the _Koran_.

The arrangement of the volumes around the Judean Bible was silently
expressive of the student's superior respect; and as from time to time,
after reading a paragraph from one of the others, he returned to the
great central treasure, it was apparent he was making a close comparison
of texts with reference to a particular theme, using the Scriptures as a
standard. Most of the time he kept the forefinger of his left hand on
what is now known as the fourteenth verse of the third chapter of
Exodus--"And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you."
If, as the Prince himself had declared, religion were indeed the study
of most interest to the greatest number of men, he was logically
consistent in comparing the definitions of _God_ in the Bibles of
theistic nations. So had he occupied himself since morning. The shrewd
reader will at once discern the theme of his comparative study.

At length he grew weary of bending over the books, and of the persistent
fixedness of attention required for the pursuit of fine shades of
meaning in many different languages. He threw his arms up in aid of a
yawn, and turned partly around, his eyes outrunning the movement of his
body. The half-introverted glance brightened with a gleam, and remained
fixed, while the arms dropped down. He could only look in wonder at what
he saw--eyes black and almost large as his own gazing at him in timid
surprise. Beholding nothing but the eyes, he had the awesome feeling
which attends imagining a spirit suddenly risen; then he saw a forehead
low, round, and white, half shaded by fluffs of dark hair; then a face
of cherubic color and regularity, to which the eyes gave an indefinable
innocency of expression.

Every one knows the effect of trifles on the memory. A verse or a word,
the smell of a flower, a lock of hair, a turn in music, will not merely
bring the past back, but invest it with a miraculous recurrency of
events. The Prince's gaze endured. He stretched his hand out as if
fearful lest what he saw might vanish. The gesture was at once an
impulse and an expression. There was a time--tradition says it was the
year in which he provoked the curse--when he had wife and child. To one
of them, possibly both, the eyes then looking into his might have
belonged. The likeness unmanned him. The hand he stretched forth fell
lightly upon the head of the intruder.

"What are you?" he said.

The vagueness of the expression will serve excellently as a definition
of his condition; at the same time it plunged the child addressed into
doubt. Presently she answered:

"I am a little girl."

Accepting the simplicity of the reply as evidence of innocency too
extreme for fear, he took the visitor in his arms, and sat her on his
knee.

"I did not mean to ask what you are, but who?" he said.

"Uel is my father."

"Uel? Well, he is my friend, and I am his; therefore you and I should be
friends. What is your name?"

"He calls me Gul Bahar."

"Oh! That is Turkish, and means Rose of Spring. How came you by it?"

"My mother was from Iconium."

"Yes--where the Sultans used to live."

"And she could speak Turkish."

"I see! Gul Bahar is an endearment, not a real name."

"My real name is Lael."

The Prince paled from cheek to brow; his lips trembled; the arm
encircling her shook; and looking into his eyes, she saw tears dim them.
After a long breath, he said, with inexpressible tenderness, and as if
speaking to one standing just behind her--"Lael!" Then, the tears full
formed, he laid his forehead on her shoulder so his white hair blent
freely with her chestnut locks; and sitting passively, but wondering,
she heard him sob and sob again and again, like another child. Soon, from
pure sympathy, unknowing why, she too began sobbing. Several minutes
passed thus; then, raising his face, and observing her responsive sorrow,
he felt the need of explanation.

"Forgive me," he said, kissing her, "and do not wonder at me. I am
old--very old--older than thy father, and there have been so many things
to distress me which other men know nothing of, and never can. I had
once"--

He stopped, repeated the long breath, and gazed as at a far object.

"I too had once a little girl."

Pausing, he dropped his eyes to hers.

"How old are you?"

"Next spring I shall be fourteen," she answered.

"And she was just your age, and so like you--so small, and with such
hair and eyes and face; and she was named Lael. I wanted to call her
_Rimah_, for she seemed a song to me; but her mother said, as she was a
gift from the Lord, she wanted in the fulness of days to give her back to
him, and that the wish might become a covenant, she insisted on calling
her Lael, which, in Hebrew--thy father's tongue and mine--means To God."

The child, listening with all her soul, was now not in the least afraid
of him; without waiting, she made the application.

"You loved her, I know," she said

"How much--Oh, how much!"

"Where is she now?"

"At Jerusalem there was a gate called the Golden Gate. It looked to the
east. The sun, rising over the top of Mount Olivet, struck the plates of
gold and Corinthian brass more precious than gold, so it seemed one rosy
flame. The dust at its rocky sill, and the ground about it are holy.
There, deep down, my Lael lies. A stone that tasked many oxen to move it
covers her; yet, in the last day, she will be among the first to
rise--Of such excellence is it to be buried before that Golden Gate."

"Oh! she is dead!" the child exclaimed.

"She is dead;" and seeing her much affected, he hastened to say, "I shed
many tears thinking of her. Ah, how gentle and truthful she was! And how
beautiful! I cannot forget her. I would not if I could; but you who look
so like her will take her place in my heart now, and love me as she did;
and I will love you even as I loved her. I will take you into my life,
believing she has come again. In the morning I will ask first, Where is
my Lael? At noon, I will demand if the day has been kind to her; and the
night shall not be half set in except I know it has brought her the
sweetness of sleep. Will you be my Lael?"

The question perplexed the child, and she was silent.

Again he asked, "Will you be my Lael?"

The earnestness with which he put the question was that of a hunger less
for love than an object to love. The latter is not often accounted a
passion, yet it creates necessities which are peremptory as those of any
passion. One of the incidents of the curse he was suffering was that he
knew the certainty of the coming of a day when he must be a mourner for
whomsoever he should take into his heart, and in this way expiate
whatever happiness the indulgence might bring him. Nevertheless the
craving endured, at times a positive hunger. In other words, his was
still a human nature. The simplicity and beauty of the girl were enough
to win him of themselves; but when she reminded him of the other asleep
under a great rock before the gate of the Holy City, when the name of
the lost one was brought to him so unexpectedly, it seemed there had
been a resurrection, making it possible for him to go about once more as
he was accustomed to in his first household. A third time he asked, "You
will be my Lael?"

"Can I have two fathers?" she returned.

"Oh, yes!" he answered quickly. "One in fact, the other by adoption; and
they can both love you the same."

Immediately her face became a picture of childish trust.

"Then I will be your Lael too."

He clasped her close to his breast, and kissed her, crying:

"My Lael has come back to me! God of my fathers, I thank thee!"

She respected his emotion, but at length, with her hand upon his
shoulder, said:

"You and my father are friends, and thinking he came here, I came too."

"Is he at home?"

"I think so."

"Then we will go to him. You cannot be my Lael without his consent."

Presently, hand in hand, they descended the stairs, crossed the street,
and were in the shopkeeper's presence.

The room was plainly but comfortably furnished as became the proprietor's
fortune and occupation. Closer acquaintance, it is to be said, had
dissipated the latent dread, which, as has been seen, marked Uel's first
thought of intimacy between the stranger and the child. Seeing him old,
and rich, and given to study, not to say careless of ordinary things, the
father was beginning to entertain the idea that it might in some way be
of advantage to the child could she become an object of interest to him.
Wherefore, as they entered now, he received them with a smile.

Traces of the emotion he had undergone were in the Prince's face, and
when he spoke his voice was tremulous.

"Son of Jahdai," he said, standing, "I had once a wife and child. They
perished-how and when, I cannot trust myself to tell. I have been
faithful to their memory. From the day I lost them, I have gone up and
down the world hunting for many things which I imagined might renew the
happiness I had from them. I have been prodigal of gratitude,
admiration, friendship, and goodwill, and bestowed them singly and
together, and often; but never have I been without consciousness of
something else demanding to be given. Happiness is not all in receiving.
I passed on a long time before it came to me that we are rich in
affections not intended for hoarding, and that no one can be truly
content without at least one object on which to lavish them. Here"--and
he laid his hand on the child's head--"here is mine, found at last."

"Lael is a good girl," Uel said with pride.

"Yes, and as thou lovest her let me love her," the Prince responded.
Then, seeing Uel become serious, he added, "To help thee to my meaning,
Lael was my child's name, and she was the image of this one; and as she
died when fourteen, thy Lael's age, it is to me as if the tomb had
miraculously rendered its victim back to me."

"Prince," said Uel, "had I thought she would not be agreeable to you, I
should have been sorry."

"Understand, son of Jahdai," the other interposed, "I seek more of thee
than thy permission to love her. I want to do by her as though she were
mine naturally."

"You would not take her from me?"

"No. That would leave thee bereft as I have been. Like me, thou wouldst
then go up and down looking for some one to take her place in thy heart.
Be thou her father still; only let me help thee fashion her future."

"Her birthrights are humble," the shopkeeper answered, doubtfully; for
while in his secret heart he was flattered, his paternal feeling started
a scruple hard to distinguish from fear.

A light shone brightly in the eyes of the elder Jew, and his head arose.

"Humble!" he said. "She is a daughter of Israel, an inheritor of the
favor of the Lord God, to whom all things are possible. He keeps the
destinies of his people. He--not thou or I--knows to what this little
one may come. As we love her, let us hope the happiest and the highest,
and prepare her for it. To this end it were best you allow her to come
to me as to another father. I who teach the deaf and dumb to speak--Syama
and Nilo the elder--will make her a scholar such as does not often grace
a palace. She shall speak the Mediterranean tongues. There shall be no
mysteries of India unknown to her. Mathematics shall bring the heavens to
her feet. Especially shall she become wise in the Chronicles of God. At
the same time, lest she be educated into unfitness for the present
conditions of life, and be unsexed, thou shalt find a woman familiar with
society, and instal her in thy house as governess and example. If the
woman be also of Israel, so much the better; for then we may expect
faithfulness without jealousy. And further, son of Jahdai, be niggardly
in nothing concerning our Lael. Clothe her as she were the King's
daughter. At going abroad, which she shall do with me in the street and
on the water, I would have her sparkle with jewels, the observed of
everybody, even the Emperor. And ask not doubtingly, 'Whence the money
for all this?' I will find it. What sayest thou now?"

Uel did not hesitate.

"O Prince, as thou dost these things for her--so far beyond the best I
can dream of--take her for thine, not less than mine."

With a beaming countenance, the elder raised the child, and kissed her
on the forehead.

"Dost hear?" he said to her. "Now art thou my daughter."

She put her arms about his neck, then held them out to Uel, who took
her, and kissed her, saying:

"Oh my Gul Bahar!"

"Good!" cried the Prince. "I accept the name. To distinguish the living
from the dead, I too will call her my Gul Bahar."

Thereupon the men sat, and arranged the new relation, omitting nothing
possible of anticipation.

Next day the Prince's house was opened with every privilege to the
child. A little later on a woman of courtly accomplishment was found and
established under Uel's roof as governess. Thereupon the Mystic entered
upon a season during which he forgot the judgment upon him, and all else
save Gul Bahar, and the scheme he brought from Cipango. He was for the
time as other men. In the lavishment of his love, richer of its long
accumulation, he was faithful to his duty of teacher, and was amply
rewarded by her progress in study.


BOOK III

THE PRINCESS IRENE


CHAPTER I

MORNING ON THE BOSPHORUS


Our narrative proceeds now from a day in the third year after Lael, the
daughter of the son of Jahdai, dropped into the life of the Prince of
India--a day in the vernal freshness of June.

From a low perch above the mountain behind Becos, the sun is delivering
the opposite European shore of the Bosphorus from the lingering shades
of night. Out on the bosom of the classic channel vessels are swinging
lazily at their anchorages. The masthead of each displays a flag
bespeaking the nationality of the owner; here a Venetian, there a
Genoese, yonder a Byzantine. Tremulous flares of mist, rising around the
dark hulls, become entangled in the cordage, and as if there were no
other escape, resolve themselves into air. Fisher boats are bringing
their owners home from night-work over in the shallows of Indjerkeui.
Gulls and cormorants in contentious flocks, drive hither and thither,
turning and tacking as the schools of small fish they are following turn
and tack down in the warm blue-green depths to which they are native.
The many wings, in quick eccentric motion, give sparkling life to the
empurpled distance.

The bay of Therapia, on the same European shore over against Becos, was
not omitted from rescue by the sun. Within its lines this morning the
ships were in greater number than out in the channel--ships of all
grades, from the sea going commercial galley to the pleasure shallop
which, if not the modern _caique_, was at least its ante-type in
lightness and grace.

And as to the town, one had but to look at it to be sure it had
undergone no recent change--that in the day of Constantine Dragases it
was the same summer resort it had been in the day of Medea the
sorceress--the same it yet is under sway of the benignant Abdul-Hamid.

From the lower point northwardly jutting finger-like into the current of
the channel, the beach swept in a graceful curve around to the base of
the promontory on the south. Then as now children amused themselves
gathering the white and black pebbles with which it was strewn, and
danced in and out with the friendly foam-capped waves. Then as now the
houses seemed tied to the face of the hill one above another in
streetless disarrangement; insomuch that the stranger viewing them from
his boat below shuddered thinking of the wild play which would ensue did
an earthquake shake the hill ever so lightly.

And then as now the promontory south served the bay as a partial
land-lock. Then as now it arose boldly a half mountain densely
verdurous, leaving barely space enough for a roadway around its base.
Then as now a descending terrace of easy grade and lined with rock pine
trees of broadest umbrella tops, slashed its whole townward front.
Sometime in the post-Medean period a sharp-eyed Greek discerned the
advantages it offered for aesthetic purposes, and availed himself of
them; so that in the age of our story its summit was tastefully
embellished with water basins, white-roofed pavilions, and tessellated
pavements Roman style. Alas, for the perishability of things human! And
twice alas, that the beautiful should ever be the most perishable!

But it is now to be said we have spoken thus of the Bosphorus, and the
bay and town of Therapia, and the high promontory, as accessories merely
to a plot of ground under the promontory and linked to it by the
descending terrace. There is no word fitly descriptive of the place.
Ravine implies narrowness; gorge signifies depth; valley means width;
dell is too toylike. A summer retreat more delicious could not be
imagined. Except at noon the sun did but barely glance into it. Extending
hundreds of yards back from the bay toward the highlands west of the
town, it was a perfected garden of roses and flowering vines and shrubs,
with avenues of boxwood and acacias leading up to ample reservoirs hidden
away in a grove of beeches. The water flowing thence became brooks or was
diverted to enliven fountains. One pipe carried it in generous flow to
the summit of the promontory. In this leafy Eden the birds of the climate
made their home the year round. There the migratory nightingale came
earliest and lingered longest, singing in the day as well as in the
night. There one went regaled with the breath of roses commingled with
that of the jasmine. There the bloom of the pomegranate flashed through
the ordered thicket like red stars; there the luscious fig, ripening in
its "beggar's jacket," offered itself for the plucking; there the murmur
of the brooks was always in the listening ear.

Along the whole front of the garden, so perfectly a poet's ideal,
stretched a landing defended from the incessant swash of the bay by a
stone revetment. There was then a pavement of smoothly laid flags, and
then a higher wall of dark rubble-work, coped with bevelled slabs. An
open pavilion, with a bell-fashioned dome on slender pillars, all of
wood red painted, gave admission to the garden. Then a roadway of gray
pebbles and flesh-tinted shells invited a visitor, whether afoot or on
horseback, through clumps of acacias undergrown with carefully tended
rosebushes, to a palace, which was to the garden what the central jewel
is to the cluster of stones on "my lady's" ring.

Standing on a tumulus, a little removed from the foot of the promontory,
the palace could be seen from cornice to base by voyagers on the bay, a
quadrangular pile of dressed marble one story in height, its front
relieved by a portico of many pillars finished in the purest Corinthian
style. A stranger needed only to look at it once, glittering in the sun,
creamy white in the shade, to decide that its owner was of high
rank--possibly a noble--possibly the Emperor himself.

It was the country palace of the Princess Irene, of whom we will now
speak.[Footnote: During the Crimean war a military hospital was built
over the basement vaults and cisterns of the palace here described. The
hospital was destroyed by fire. For years it was then known as the
"Khedive's Garden," being a favorite resort for festive parties from the
capital. At present the promontory and the retreat it shelters pertain
to the German Embassy, a munificent gift from His Majesty, Sultan
Abdul-Hamid.]


CHAPTER II

THE PRINCESS IRENE
[Footnote: This name is of three syllables, and is pronounced as if
spelled E-ren-ay; the last syllable to rhyme with day, say, may.]


During the reign of the last Manuel, in 1412, as a writer has placed the
incident--that is to say, about thirty-nine years prior to the epoch
occupying us--a naval battle occurred between the Turks and Christians
off Plati, one of the Isles of the Princes. The issue was of interest to
all the peoples who were in the habit of commercial resort in the
region, to the Venetians and Genoese as well as the Byzantines. To the
latter it was of most vital moment, since defeat would have brought them
a serious interruption of communication with the islands which still
remained to the Emperor and the powers in the West upon which their
dependency grew as year after year their capacity for self-defence
diminished.

The Turkish ships had been visible in the offing several days. At last
the Emperor concluded to allow his mariners to go out and engage them.
His indecision had been from a difficulty in naming a commander. The
admiral proper was old and inexperienced, and his fighting impulses,
admitting they had ever really existed, had been lost in the habitudes
of courtierly life. He had become little more than a ceremonial marker.
The need of the hour was a genuine sailor who could manoeuvre a
squadron. On that score there was but one voice among the seamen and
with the public--

"Manuel--give us Manuel!"

The cry, passing from the ships to the multitude in the city, assailed
the palace.

The reader should understand the Manuel wanted was not the Emperor, but
one of his brothers who could lay no claim to birth in the purple. His
mother had not been a lawful spouse; yet the Manuel thus on the tongues
of the many had made a hero of himself. He proved his temper and
abilities in many successful affairs on the sea, and at length became a
popular idol; insomuch that the imperial jealousy descended upon him
like a cloud, and hid him away. Nor could his admirers say he lived; he
had a palace and a family, and it was not known that any of the
monasteries in the city or on the Isles of the Princes had opened to
receive him.

On these shreds of evidence, affirmative and negative, slender as they
may appear, it was believed he was yet alive. Hence the clamor; and
sooth to say it sufficed to produce the favorite; so at least the
commonalty were pleased to think, though a sharper speculation would
have scored the advent quite as much to the emergency then holding the
Empire in its tightening grip.

Restored to active life, Manuel the sailor was given a reception in the
Hippodrome; then after a moment of gladness with his family, and another
in which he was informed of the situation and trial before him, he
hurried to assume the command.

Next morning, with the rising of the sun, the squadron under oar and
sail issued gallantly from its retreat in the Golden Horn, and in order
of battle sought the boastful enemy of Plati. The struggle was long and
desperate. Its circumstances were dimly under view from the seaward wall
in the vicinity of the Seven Towers. A cry of rejoicing from the anxious
people at last rose strong enough to shake the turrets massive as they
were--"Kyrie Eleison! Kyrie Eleison!" Christ had made his cause
victorious. His Cross was in the ascendant. The Turks drew out of the
defeat as best they could, and made haste to beach the galleys remaining
to them on the Asiatic shore behind the low-lying islands.

Manuel the sailor became more than a hero; to the vulgar he was a
savior. All Byzantium and all Galata assembled on the walls and water
along the famous harbor to welcome him when, with many prizes and a
horde of prisoners, he sailed back under the sun newly risen over the
redeemed Propontis. Trumpets answered trumpets in brazen cheer as he
landed. A procession which was a reminder of the triumphs of the ancient
and better times of the Empire escorted him to the Hippodrome. The
overhanging gallery reserved for the Emperor there was crowded with the
dignitaries of the court; the factions were out with their symbols of
blue and green; the scene was gorgeous; yet the public looked in vain
for Manuel the Emperor; he alone was absent; and when the dispersion
took place, the Byzantine spectators sought their homes shaking their
heads and muttering of things in store for their idol worse than had yet
befallen him. Wherefore there was little or no surprise when the
unfortunate again disappeared, this time with his whole family. The
victory, the ensuing triumph, and the too evident popularity were more
than the jealous Emperor could overlook.

There was then a long lapse of years. John Palaeologus succeeded Manuel
on the throne, and was in turn succeeded by Constantine, the last of the
Byzantine monarchs.

Constantine signalized his advent, the great Greek event of 1448, by
numerous acts of clemency, for he was a just man. He opened many prison
doors long hopelessly shut. He conferred honors and rewards that had
been remorselessly erased from account. He condoned offences against his
predecessors, mercifully holding them wanting in evil against himself.
So it came to pass that Manuel, the hero of the sea fight off Plati,
attained a second release, or, in better speech, a second resurrection.
He had been all the years practically buried in certain cells of the
convent of St. Irene on the island of Prinkipo, and now he came forth an
old man, blind and too enfeebled to walk. Borne into private audience,
he was regarded by Constantine with tender sympathy.

"And thou art that Manuel who made the good fight at Plati?"

"Say rather I am he who was that Manuel," the ancient replied. "Death
despises me now because he could not call my decease a victory."

The inquisitor, visibly affected, next spoke in an uncertain voice.

"Is what I have heard true, that at thy going into the Monastery thou
hadst a family?"

The eyes of the unfortunate were not too far gone for tears; some rolled
down his cheeks; others apparently dropped into his throat.

"I had a wife and three children. It is creditable to the feeling called
love that they chose to share my fate. One only survives, and"--he
paused as if feebly aware of the incoherency--"and she was born a
prisoner."

"Born a prisoner!" exclaimed Constantine. "Where is she now?"

"She ought to be here."

The old man turned as he spoke, and called out anxiously:

"Irene--Irene, where art thou, child?"

An attendant, moved like his master, explained.

"Your Majesty, his daughter is in the ante-room."

"Bring her here."

There was a painful hush in the chamber during the waiting. When the
daughter appeared, all eyes were directed to her--all but the father's,
and even he was instantly aware of her presence; for which, doubtless,
the sensibility known only to the long-time blind was sufficiently
alive.

"Where hast thou been?" he asked, with a show of petulance.

"Calm thee, father, I am here."

She took his hand to assure him, and then returned the look of the
Emperor; only his was of open astonishment, while hers was
self-possessed.

Two points were afterwards remembered against her by the courtiers
present; first, contrary to the custom of Byzantine women, she wore no
veil or other covering for the face; in the next place, she tendered no
salutation to the Emperor. Far from prostrating herself, as immemorial
etiquette required, she did not so much as kneel or bow her head. They,
however, excused her, saying truly her days had been passed in the
Monastery without opportunity to acquire courtly manners. In fact they
did not at the time notice the omissions. She was so beautiful, and her
beauty reposed so naturally in an air of grace, modesty, intelligence,
and purity that they saw nothing else. Constantine recovered himself,
and rising from his seat, advanced to the edge of the dais, which in
such audiences, almost wholly without state, raised him slightly above
his guests and attendants, and spoke to the father:

"I know thy history, most noble Greek--noble in blood, noble in loyalty,
noble by virtue of what thou hast done for the Empire--and I honor thee.
I grieve for the suffering thou hast endured, and wish myself surrounded
with many more spirits like thine, for then, from my exalted place, I
could view the future and its portents with greater calmness of
expectation, if not with more of hope. Perhaps thou hast heard how sadly
my inheritance has been weakened by enemies without and within; how,
like limbs lopped from a stately tree, the themes [Footnote: Provinces.]
richest in their yield of revenue have been wrested from the body of our
State, until scarce more than the capital remains. I make the allusion
in apology and excuse for the meagreness of what I have to bestow for
thy many heroic services. Wert thou in the prime of manhood, I would
bring thee into the palace. That being impossible, I must confine myself
to amends within my power. First, take thou liberty."

The sailor sunk to his knees; then he fell upon his hands, and touched
the floor with his forehead. In that posture, he waited the further
speech. Such was the prostration practised by the Greeks in formally
saluting their Basileus.

Constantine proceeded.

"Take next the house here in the city which was thine when the judgment
fell upon thee. It has been tenantless since, and may be in need of
repairs; if so, report the cost they put thee to, and I will charge the
amount to my civil list." Looking then at the daughter, he added: "On
our Roumelian shore, up by Therapia, there is a summer house which once
belonged to a learned Greek who was the happy possessor of a Homer
written masterfully on stainless parchment. He had a saying that the
book should be opened only in a palace specially built for it; and,
being rich, he indulged the fancy. He brought the marble from the
Pentelic quarries; nothing grosser was permitted in the construction. In
the shade of a portico of many columns of Corinthian model he passed his
days reading to chosen friends, and living as the Athenians were wont to
live in the days of Pericles. In my youth I dwelt much with him, and he
so loved me that at dying he gave me the house, and the gardens and
groves around it. They will help me now to make partial amends for
injustice done; and when will a claimant appear with better right than
the daughter of this brave man? In speaking but now, did he not call
thee Irene?"

A flush overspread her neck and face, but she answered without other
sign of feeling:

"Irene."

"The house--it may be called a palace--and all that pertains to it, are
thine," he continued. "Go thither at will, and begin thy life anew."

She took one step forward, but stopped as suddenly, her color coming and
going. Never had Constantine seen wife or maid more beautiful. He almost
dreaded lest the spell she cast over him would be broken by the speech
trembling upon her lips. She moved quickly to the dais then, and taking
his hand, kissed it fervently, saying:

"Almost I believe we have a Christian Emperor."

She paused, retaining the hand, and looking up into his face.

The spectators, mostly dignitaries of high degree, with their attendants,
were surprised. Some of them were shocked; for it should be remembered
the court was the most rigidly ceremonial in the world. The rules
governing it were the excerpt of an idea that the Basileus or Emperor was
the incarnation of power and majesty. When spoken to by him, the proudest
of his officials dropped their eyes to his embroidered slippers; when
required to speak to him, they fell to their knees, and kept the posture
till he was pleased to bid them rise. Not one of them had ever touched
his fingers, except when he deigned to hold them out to be most humbly
saluted. Their manner at such times was more than servility; in
appearance, at least, it was worship. This explanation will enable the
reader to understand the feeling with which they beheld the young woman
keep the royal hand a prisoner in hers. Some of them shuddered and turned
their faces not to witness a familiarity so closely resembling
profanation.

Constantine, on his part, looked down into the eyes of his fair
kinswoman, knowing her speech was not finished. The slight inclination
of his person toward her was intended for encouragement. Indeed, he made
no attempt to conceal the interest possessing him.

"The Empire may be shorn, even as thou hast said," she resumed presently,
in a voice slightly raised. Yet even such a mistake may be avoided by
certain precautions which experience has suggested, and the nation that
disregards these precautions is justly open to criticism.

Our present Philippine government guarantees to its citizens as fundamental
rights, that no person shall be held to answer for a capital crime
unless on an indictment, nor may he be compelled in any criminal
case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life,
liberty or property without due process of law.

The accused must have a speedy, public and impartial trial, be informed
of the nature and cause of the accusation, be confronted with the
witnesses against him, have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses
in his favor, and have the assistance of counsel for his defense. Not
one of these safeguards protected Doctor Rizal except that he had an
"open trial," if that name may be given to a courtroom filled with
his enemies openly clamoring for his death without rebuke from the court.
Even the presumption of innocence till guilt was established was denied
him. These precautions have been considered necessary for every criminal
trial, but the framers of the American Constitution, fearful lest
popular prejudice some day might cause injustice to those advocating
unpopular ideals, prohibited the irremediable penalty of death upon
a charge of treason except where the testimony of two reliable
witnesses established some overt act, inference not being admissible
as evidence.

Such protection was not given the subjects of Spain, but still,
with all the laxity of the Spanish law, and even if all the charges
had been true, which they were far from being, no case was made out
against Doctor Rizal at his trial.

According to the laws then in effect, he was unfairly convicted and he
should be considered innocent; for this reason his life will be
studied to see what kind of hero he was, and no attempt need be
made to plead good character and honest intentions in extenuation
of illegal acts.

Rizal was ever the advocate of law, and it will be found, too,
that he was always consistently law-abiding.

Though they are in the Orient, the Filipinos are not of it. Rizal once
said, upon hearing of plans for a Philippine exhibit at a European
World's Fair, that the people of Europe would have a chance to see
themselves as they were in the Middle Ages.

With allowances for the changes due to climate and for the character of
the country, this statement can hardly be called exaggerated.

The Filipinos in the last half of the nineteenth century were not
Orientals but mediaeval Europeans--to the credit of the early
Castilians but to the discredit of the later Spaniards.

The Filipinos of the remoter Christian barrios, whom Rizal had in mind
particularly, were in customs, beliefs and advancement substantially
what the descendants of Legaspi's followers might have been had
these been shipwrecked on the sparsely inhabited islands of the
Archipelago and had their settlement remained shut off from the
rest of the world.

Except where foreign influence had accidentally crept in at the
ports, it could truthfully be said that scarcely perceptible advance
had been made in three hundred years.

Succeeding Spaniards by their misrule not only added little to the
glorious achievement of their ancestors, but seemed to have prevented
the natural progress which the land would have made.

In one form or another, this contention was the basis of Rizal's
campaign. By careful search, it is true, isolated instances of improvement
could be found, but the showing at its very best was so pitifully
poor that the system stood discredited.

And it was the system to which Rizal was opposed.

The Spaniards who engaged in public argument with Rizal were
continually discovering, too late to avoid tumbling into them,
logical pitfalls which had been carefully prepared to trap them.

Rizal argued much as he played chess, and was ever ready to sacrifice
a pawn to be enabled to say "check." Many an unwary opponent realized
after he had published what he had considered a clever answer that the
same reasoning which scored a point against Rizal incontrovertibly
established the Kalamban's major premise.

Superficial antagonists, to the detriment of their own reputations,
have made much of what they chose to consider Rizal's historical
errors. But history is not merely chronology, and his representation
of its trend, disregarding details, was a masterly tracing of current
evils to their remote causes. He may have erred in some of his minor
statements; this will happen to anyone who writes much, but attempts
to discredit Rizal on the score of historical inaccuracy really reflect
upon the captious critics, just as a draftsman would expose himself to
ridicule were he to complain of some famous historical painting
that it had not been drawn to exact scale. Rizal's writings were intended
to bring out in relief the evils of the Spanish system of the
government of the Filipino people, just as a map of the world may put the
inhabited portions of the earth in greater prominence than those portions
that are not inhabited.

Neither is exact in its representation, but each serves its purpose the
better because it magnifies the important and minimizes the
unimportant.

In his disunited and abased countrymen, Rizal's writings aroused, as he
intended they should, the spirit of nationality, of a Fatherland which
was not Spain, and put their feet on the road to progress. What matters
it, then, if his historical references are not always exhaustive, and
if to make himself intelligible in the Philippines he had to write in
a style possibly not always sanctioned by the Spanish Academy? Spain
herself had denied to the Filipinos a system of education that might have
made a creditable Castilian the common language of the Archipelago. A
display of erudition alone does not make an historian, nor is
purity, propriety and precision in choosing words all there is to
literature.

Rizal charged Spain unceasingly with unprogressiveness in the
Philippines, just as he labored and planned unwearyingly to bring the
Filipinos abreast of modern European civilization. But in his
appeals to the Spanish conscience and in his endeavors to educate
his countrymen he showed himself as practical as he was in his
arguments, ever ready to concede nonessentials in name and means
if by doing so progress could be made.

Because of his unceasing efforts for a wiser, better governed and
more prosperous Philippines, and because of his frank admission
that he hoped thus in time there might come a freer Philippines,
Rizal was called traitor to Spain and ingrate.

Now honest, open criticism is not treason, and the sincerest gratitude
to those who first brought Christian civilization to the Philippines
should not shut the eyes to the wrongs which Filipinos suffered from their
successors. But until the latest moment of Spanish rule, the apologists
of Spain seemed to think that they ought to be able to turn away the
wrath evoked by the cruelty and incompetence that ran riot during
centuries, by dwelling upon the benefits of the early days of the Spanish
dominion.

Wearisome was the eternal harping on gratitude which at one time was
the only safe tone for pulpit, press and public speech; it irritating
because it ignored questions of current policy, and it was discouraging
to the Filipinos who were reminded by it of the hopeless future for
their country to which time had brought no progress.

But with all the faults and unworthiness of the later rulers, and the
inane attempts of their parasites to distract attention from these
failings, there remains undimmed the luster of Spain's early fame. The
Christianizing which accompanied her flag upon the mainland and islands
of the New World is its imperishable glory, and the transformation of
the Filipino people from Orientals into mediæval Europeans through the
colonizing genius of the early Castilians, remains a marvel unmatched
in colonial history and merits the lasting gratitude of the Filipino.

Doctor Rizal satirized the degenerate descendants and scored the unworthy
successors, but his writings may be searched in vain for wholesale
charges against the Spanish nation such as Spanish scribblers were
forever directing against all Filipinos, past, present and future,
with an alleged fault of a single one as a pretext.

It will be found that he invariably recognized that the faithful first
administrators and the devoted pioneer missionaries had a valid claim
upon the continuing gratitude of the people of Tupa's and Lakandola's
land.

Rizal's insight discerned, and experience has demonstrated, that Legaspi,
Urdaneta and those who were like them, laid broad and firm foundations
for a modern social and political organization which could be safely
and speedily established by reforms from above. The early Christianizing
civilizers deserve no part of the blame for the fact that Philippine
ports were not earlier opened to progress, but much credit is due
them that there is succeeding here an orderly democracy such as
now would be impossible in any neighboring country.

The Philippine patriot would be the first to recognize the justice
of the selection of portraits which appear with that of Rizal upon the
present Philippine postage stamps, where they serve as daily reminders
of how free government came here.

The constancy and courage of a Portuguese sailor put these Islands
into touch with the New World with which their future progress was to
be identified. The tact and honesty of a civil official from Mexico
made possible the almost bloodless conquest which brought the Filipinos
under the then helpful rule of Spain. The bequest of a far-sighted
early philanthropist was the beginning of the water system of Manila,
which was a recognition of the importance of efforts toward improving
the public health and remains a reminder of how, even in the darkest
days of miseries and misgovernment, there have not been wanting
Spaniards whose ideal of Spanish patriotism was to devote heart, brain
and wealth to the welfare of the Filipinos. These were the heroes of the
period of preparation.

The life of the one whose story is told in these pages was devoted and
finally sacrificed to dignify their common country in the eyes of his
countrymen, and to unite them in a common patriotism; he inculcated
that self-respect which, by leading to self-restraint and self-control,
makes self-government possible; and sought to inspire in all a love of
ordered freedom, so that, whether under the flag of Spain or any
other, or by themselves, neither tyrants (caciques) nor slaves (those
led by caciques) would be possible among them.

And the change itself came through an American President who believed,
and practiced the belief, that nations owed obligations to other
nations just as men had duties toward their fellow-men. He established
here Liberty through Law, and provided for progress in general education,
which should be a safeguard to good government as well, for an enlightened
people cannot be an oppressed people. Then he went to war against
the Philippines rather than deceive them, because the Filipinos, who
repeatedly had been tricked by Spain with unfulfilled promises,
insisted on pledges which he had not the power to give.

They knew nothing of what was meant by the rule of the people,
and could not conceive of a government whose head was the servant and
not the master. Nor did they realize that even the voters might not
promise for the future, since republicanism requires that the government
of any period shall rule only during the period that it is in the
majority.

In that war military glory and quick conquest were sacrificed to consideration
for the misled enemy, and every effort was made to minimize the evils
of warfare and to gain the confidence of the people. Retaliation for
violations of the usages of civilized warfare, of which Filipinos at
first were guilty through their Spanish training, could not be
entirely prevented, but this retaliation contrasted strikingly with
the Filipinos' unhappy past experiences with Spanish soldiers. The few
who had been educated out of Spain and therefore understood the American
position were daily reënforced by those persons who became convinced
from what they saw, until a majority of the Philippine people sought
peace. Then the President of the United States outlined a policy, and the
history and constitution of his government was an assurance that this
policy would be followed; the American government then began to do what
it had not been able to promise.

The forerunner and the founder of the present regime in these Islands,
by a strange coincidence, were as alike in being cruelly misunderstood
in their lifetimes by those whom they sought to benefit as they were
in the tragedy of their deaths, and both were unjustly judged by
many, probably well-meaning, countrymen.

Magellan, Legaspi, Carriedo, Rizal and McKinley, heroes of the free
Philippines, belonged to different times and were of different
types, but their work combined to make possible the growing democracy
of to-day.

The diversity of nationalities among these heroes is an added advantage,
for it recalls that mingling of blood which has developed the
Filipinos into a strong people.

England, the United States and the Philippines are each composed
of widely diverse elements.

They have each been developed by adversity.

They have each honored their severest critics while yet those critics
lived.

Their common literature, which tells the story of human liberty in its own
tongue, is the richest, most practical and most accessible of all
literature, and the popular education upon which rests the freedom
of all three is in the same democratic tongue, which is the most
widely known of civilized languages and the only unsycophantic
speech, for it stands alone in not distinguishing by its use of
pronouns in the second person the social grade of the individual
addressed.

The future may well realize Rizal's dream that his country should
be to Asia what England has been to Europe and the United States
is in America, a hope the more likely to be fulfilled since the
events of 1898 restored only associations of the earlier and happier
days of the history of the Philippines.

The very name now used is nearer the spelling of the original
Philipinas than the Filipinas of nineteenth century Spanish usage.

The first form was used until nearly a century ago, when it was
corrupted along with so many things of greater importance.

The Philippines at first were called "The Islands of the West," as
they are considered to be occidental and not oriental.

They were made known to Europe as a sequel to the discoveries of
Columbus.

Conquered and colonized from Mexico, most of their pious and charitable
endowments, churches, hospitals, asylums and colleges, were endowed
by philanthropic Mexicans.

Almost as long as Mexico remained Spanish the commerce of the Philippines
was confined to Mexico, and the Philippines were a part of the postal
system of Mexico and dependent upon the government of Mexico exactly
as long as Mexico remained Spanish.

They even kept the new world day, one day behind Europe, for a third of a
century longer. The Mexican dollars continued to be their chief coins
till supplanted, recently, by the present peso, and the highbuttoned
white coat, the "americana," by that name was in general use long
years ago.

The name America is frequently to be found in the old baptismal registers,
for a century or more ago many a Filipino child was so christened,
and in the '70's Rizal's carving instructor, because so many of the
best-made articles he used were of American manufacture, gave the
name "Americano" to a godchild.

As Americans, Filipinos were joined with the Mexicans when King
Ferdinand VII thanked his subjects in both countries for their
loyalty during the Napoleonic wars.

Filipino students abroad found, too, books about the Philippines listed
in libraries and in booksellers' catalogues as a branch of
"Americana."

Nor was their acquaintance confined to Spanish Americans.

The name "English" was early known. Perhaps no other was more familiar
in the beginning, for it was constantly execrated by the Spaniards,
and in consequence secretly cherished by those who suffered wrongs
at their hands.

Magellan had lost his life in his attempted circumnavigation of the
globe and Elcano completed the disastrous voyage in a shattered
ship, minus most of its crew.

But Drake, an Englishman, undertook the same voyage, passed the Straits
in less time than Magellan, and was the first commander in his own
ship to put a belt around the earth. These facts were known in the
Philippines, and from them the Filipinos drew comparisons unfavorable
to the boastful Spaniards.

When the rich Philippine galleon Santa Ana was captured off the California
coast by Thomas Candish, "three boys born in Manila" were taken
on board the English ships.

Afterwards Candish sailed into the straits south of "Luçon" and
made friends with the people of the country.

There the Filipinos promised "both themselves, and all the islands
thereabouts, to aid him whensoever he should come again to overcome
the Spaniards."

Dampier, another English sea captain, passed through the Archipelago
but little later, and one of his men, John Fitzgerald by name, remained
in the Islands, marrying here.

He pretended to be a physician, and practiced as a doctor in Manila.

There was no doubt room for him, because when Spain expelled the
Moors she reduced medicine in her country to a very low state, for
the Moors had been her most skilled physicians.

Many of these Moors who were Christians, though not orthodox according
to the Spanish standard, settled in London, and the English thus
profited by the persecution, just as she profited when the cutlery
industry was in like manner transplanted from Toledo to Sheffield.

The great Armada against England in Queen Elizabeth's time was an
attempt to stop once for all the depredations of her subjects on
Spain's commerce in the Orient.

As the early Spanish historian, Morga, wrote of it: "Then only the
English nation disturbed the Spanish dominion in that Orient. Consequently
King Philip desired not only to forbid it with arms near at hand, but
also to furnish an example, by their punishment, to all the northern
nations, so that they should not undertake the invasions that we see.

A beginning was made in this work in the year one thousand five hundred
and eighty-eight."
This ingeniously worded statement omits to tell how ignominiously
the pretentious expedition ended, but the fact of failure remained
and did not help the prestige of Spain, especially among her subjects
in the Far East.

After all the boastings of what was going to happen, and all the claims
of what had been accomplished, the enemies of Spain not only were unchecked
but appeared to be bolder than ever. Some of the more thoughtful Filipinos
then began to lose confidence in Spanish claims. They were only a few,
but their numbers were to increase as the years went by. The
Spanish Armada was one of the earliest of those influences which,
reënforced by later events, culminated in the life work of José
Rizal and the loss of the Philippines by Spain.

At that time the commerce of Manila was restricted to the galleon trade
with Mexico, and the prosperity of the Filipino merchants--in large
measure the prosperity of the entire Archipelago--depended upon
the yearly ventures the hazard of which was not so much the ordinary
uncertainty of the sea as the risk of capture by English freebooters.

Everybody in the Philippines had heard of these daring English
mariners, who were emboldened by an almost unbroken series of
successes which had correspondingly discouraged the Spaniards.

They carried on unceasing war despite occasional proclamation of peace
between England and Spain, for the Spanish treasure ships were
tempting prizes, and though at times policy made their government
desire friendly relations with Spain, the English people regarded
all Spaniards as their natural enemies and all Spanish property as
their legitimate spoil.

The Filipinos realized earlier than the Spaniards did that torturing
to death shipwrecked English sailors was bad policy.

The result was always to make other English sailors fight more desperately
to avoid a similar fate. Revenge made them more and more aggressive,
and treaties made with Spain were disregarded because, as they said,
Spain's inhumanity had forfeited her right to be considered a civilized
country.

It was less publicly discussed, but equally well known, that the
English freebooters, besides committing countless depredations on
commerce, were always ready to lend their assistance to any
discontented Spanish subjects whom they could encourage into open
rebellion.

The English word Filibuster was changed into "Filibusteros" by the
Spanish, and in later years it came to be applied especially to
those charged with stirring up discontent and rebellion.

For three centuries, in its early application to the losses of
commerce, and in its later use as denoting political agitation,
possibly no other word in the Philippines, outside of the ordinary
expressions of daily life, was so widely known, and certainly none
had such sinister signification.

In contrast to this lawless association is a similarity of laws.

The followers of Cortez, it will be remembered, were welcomed in
Mexico as the long-expected "Fair Gods" because of their blond
complexions derived from a Gothic ancestry.

Far back in history their forbears had been neighbors of the
Anglo-Saxons in the forests of Germany, so that the customs of Anglo-Saxon
England and of the Gothic kingdom of Castile had much in common. The
"Laws of the Indies," the disregard of which was the ground of most
Filipino complaints up to the very last days of the rule of Spain,
was a compilation of such of these Anglo-Saxon-Castilian laws and customs
as it was thought could be extended to the Americas, originally called the
New Kingdom of Castile, which included the Philippine Archipelago.
Thus the New England township and the Mexican, and consequently
the early Philippine pueblo, as units of local government are nearly
related.

These American associations, English influences, and Anglo-Saxon ideals
also culminated in the life work of José Rizal, the heir of all the
past ages in Philippine history. But other causes operating in his
own day--the stories of his elders, the incidents of his childhood, the
books he read, the men he met, the travels he made--as later pages
will show--contributed further to make him the man he was.

It was fortunate for the Philippines that after the war of
misunderstanding with the United States there existed a character that
commanded the admiration of both sides. Rizal's writings revealed to
the Americans aspirations that appealed to them and conditions that
called forth their sympathy, while the Filipinos felt confidence,
for that reason, in the otherwise incomprehensible new government
which honored their hero.

Rizal was already, and had been for years, without rival as the idol of
his countrymen when there came, after deliberation and delay, his
official recognition in the Philippines. Necessarily there had to
be careful study of his life and scrutiny of his writings before the
head of our nation could indorse as the corner stone of the new
government which succeeded Spain's misrule, the very ideas which Spain
had considered a sufficient warrant for shooting their author as a
traitor.

Finally the President of the United States in a public address at Fargo,
North Dakota, on April 7, 1903--five years after American scholars had
begun to study Philippine affairs as they had never been studied
before--declared: "In the Philippine Islands the American government
has tried, and is trying, to carry out exactly what the greatest genius
and most revered patriot ever known in the Philippines, José Rizal,
steadfastly advocated," a formal, emphatic and clear-cut expression
of national policy upon a question then of paramount interest.

CHAPTER V

A VOICE FROM THE CLOISTER


While the Princess Irene traversed the portico, she repeated the words,
The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want; and she could see how the
negligent, moneyless monk, turned away at the inn, was provided for in
his moment of need, and also that she was the chosen purveyor; if so, by
whom chosen? The young man had intended calling on the Patriarch first;
who brought him to her? The breakfast was set for an invited guest; what
held him back, if not the power that led the stranger to her gate?

In saying now that one of the consequences of the religious passion
characteristic of the day in the East--particularly in Constantinople--a
passion so extreme as to induce the strongest minds to believe God, and
the Son, and even the Holy Mother discernible in the most commonplace
affairs--our hope is to save the Princess from misjudgment. Really the
most independent and fearless of spirits, if now and then she fell into
the habit of translating the natural into the supernatural, she is
entitled to mercy, since few things are harder to escape than those of
universal practice.

Through a doorway, chiselled top and jambs, she entered a spacious hall
nude of furniture, though richly frescoed, and thence passed into a
plain open, court coolly shaded, having in the centre a jet of water
which arose and fell into a bowl of alabaster. The water overflowing the
bowl was caught again in a circular basin which, besides the ornamental
carving on the edge and outside, furnished an ample pool for the gold
fish disporting in it.

In the court there were also a number of women, mostly young Greeks,
sewing, knitting, and embroidering vestments. Upon her entrance they
arose, let their work drop on the spotless white marble at their feet,
and received her in respectful silence. Signing them to resume their
labor, she took a reserved chair by the fountain. The letter was in her
hand, but a thought had the precedence.

Admitting she had been chosen to fulfil the saying quoted, was the call
for the once only? When the monk went up to the city, was her ministry
to end? Would not that be a half-performance? How much farther should
she go? She felt a little pang of trouble, due to the uncertainty that
beset her, but quieted it by an appeal to the letter. Crossing herself,
and again kissing the signature, she began the reading, which, as the
hand was familiar to her, and the composition in the most faultless
Greek of the period, was in nowise a perplexity.

"BIELO-OSERO, 3_d June_, 1452.

"From Hilarion, the Hegumen, to Irene, his well-beloved daughter.

"Thou hast thought of me this longtime as at rest forever--at rest with
the Redeemer. While there is nothing so the equivalent of death as
silence, there is no happiness so sweet as that which springs upon us
unexpectedly. In the same sense the resurrection was the perfect
complement of the crucifixion. More than all else, more than the sermon
on the mount, more than His miracles, more than His unexampled life, it
lifted our Lord above the repute of a mere philosopher like Socrates. We
have tears for His much suffering; but we sing as Miriam sang when we
think of His victory over the grave. I would not compare myself to Him;
yet it pleases me believing these lines, so unexpected, will give thee a
taste of the feeling the Marys had, when, with their spices in hand,
they sought the sepulchre and found only the Angels there.

"Let me tell thee first of my disappearance from Constantinople. I
repented greatly my taking from the old convent by the Patriarch; partly
because it separated me from thee at a time when thy mind was opening to
receive the truth and understand it. Yet the call had a sound as if from
God. I feared to disobey it.

"Then came the summons of the Emperor. He had heard of my life, and, as
a counteraction of vice, he wanted its example in the palace. I held
back. But the Patriarch prevailed on me, and I went up and suffered
myself to be installed Keeper of the Purple Ink. Then indeed I became
miserable. To such as I, what is sitting near the throne? What is power
when not an instrument of mercy, justice and charity? What is easy life,
except walking in danger of habits enervating to the hope of salvation?
Oh, the miseries I witnessed! And how wretched the sight of them,
knowing they were beyond my help! I saw moreover the wickedness of the
court. Did I speak, who listened except to revile me? Went I to
celebrations in this or that church, I beheld only hypocrisy in scarlet.
How often, knowing the sin-stains upon the hands of the celebrants at
the altar in Sta. Sophia, the house in holiness next to the temple of
Solomon--how often, seeing those hands raise the blood of Christ in the
cup before the altar, have I trembled, and looked for the dome above to
let consuming vengeance in upon us, the innocent with the guilty!

"At last fear filled all my thoughts, and forbade sleep or any comfort.
I felt I must go, and quickly, or be lost for denial of covenants made
with Him, the ultimate Judge, in whose approval there is the peace that
passeth understanding. I was like one pursued by a spirit making its
presence known to me in sobs and plaints, stinging as conscience stings.

"Consent to my departure was not to be expected; for great men dislike
to have their favors slighted. It was not less clear that formal
resignation of the official honor I was supposed to be enjoying would be
serviceable to the courtiers who were not so much my enemies personally
as they were enemies of religion and contemners of all holy observances.
And there were so many of them! Alas, for the admission! What then was
left but flight?

 "Whither? I thought first of Jerusalem; but who without abasement can
inhabit with infidels? Then Hagion Oras, the Holy Hill, occurred to me;
the same argument applied against it as against return to the convent of
Irene-I would be in reach of the Emperor's displeasure. One can study
his own heart. Holding mine off, and looking at it alive with desires
holy and unholy, I detected in it a yearning for hermitage. How
beautiful solitude appears! In what condition can one wishing to change
his nature for the better more certainly attain the end than without
companionship except of God always present? The spirit of prayer is a
delicate minister; where can we find purer nourishment for it than in
the silence which at noon is deep as at midnight?

"In this mood the story of the Russian St. Sergius reverted to me. He
was born at Rostoff. Filled with pious impulses more than dissatisfied
with the world, of which he knew nothing, with a brother, he left his
father's house when yet a youth and betook himself to a great woods in
the region Radenego; there he dwelt among savage beasts and wild men,
fasting and praying and dependent like Elijah of old. His life became a
notoriety. Others drew to him. With his own hands he built a wooden
church for his disciples, giving it the name of Troitza or Thrice Holy
Trinity. Thither I wandered in thought. A call might be there for me, so
weary of the egotism, envy, detraction, greed, grind and battle of the
soulless artificiality called society.

"I left Blacherne in the night, and crossing the sea in the north--no
wonder it is so terrible to the poor mariner who has to hunt his daily
bread upon its treacherous waves--I indulged no wait until, in the stone
church of the Holy Trinity, I knelt before the remains of the revered
Russian hermit, and thanked God for deliverance and freedom.

"The Troitza was no longer the simple wooden church of its founder. I
found it a collection of monasteries. The solitude of my dreams was to
be sought northward further. Some years before, a disciple of
Sergius--Cyrill by name, since canonized--unterrified by winters which
dragged through three quarters of the year, wandered off to a secluded
place on the shore of the White Lake, where he dwelt until, in old age,
a holy house was required to accommodate his following. He called it
Bielo-Osero. There I installed myself, won by the warmth of my welcome.

"Now when I departed from Blacherne, I took with me, besides the raiment
I wore, two pieces of property; a copy of the Rule of the Studium
Monastery, and a _panagia_ given me by the Patriarch--a medallion
portrait of the Blessed Mother of our Lord the Saviour, framed in gold,
and set in brilliants. I carry it hanging from my neck. Even in sleep it
is always lying just above my heart. The day is not far now when my need
of it will be over; then I will send it to thee in notice that I am
indeed at rest, and that in dying I wished to lend thee a preservative
against ills of the soul and fear of death.

"The Rule was acceptable to the Brotherhood. They adopted it, and its
letter and spirit prevailing, the house came in time to be odorous for
sanctity. Eventually, though against my will, they raised me their
Hegumen. And so my story reaches its end. May it find thee enjoying the
delight of the soul's rest I have been enjoying without interruption
since I began life anew in this retreat, where the days are days of
prayer, and the nights illuminated by visions of Paradise and Heaven.

"In the next place, I pray thou wilt take the young brother by whom this
will be delivered into friendly care. I myself raised him to a deaconship
of our Monastery. His priestly name is Sergius. He was scarcely out of
boyhood when I came here; it was not long, however, before I discovered
in him the qualities which drew me to thee during thy prison life at the
old convent of Irene--a receptive mind, and a native proneness to love
God. I made his way easy. I became his teacher, as I had been thine; and
as the years flew by he reminded me more and more of thee, not merely
with respect to mental capacity, but purity of soul and aspiration as
well. Need I say how natural it was for me to love him? Had I not just
come from loving thee?

"The brethren are good men, though unmannerly, and for the most part the
Word reaches them from some other's tongue. Filling the lad's mind was
like filling a lamp with oil. How precious the light it would one day
shed abroad! And how much darkness there was for it to dispel! And in
the darkness--Mercy, Mercy! How many are in danger of perishing!

"Never did I think myself so clearly a servant of God as in the time
Sergius was under my instruction. Thou, alas! being a woman, wert like a
strong-winged bird doomed at best to a narrow cage. The whole world was
before him.

"Of the many notes I have been compelled to take of the wants of
religion in this our age, none so amazes me as the lack of preachers. We
have priests and monks. Their name is Legion. Who of them can be said to
have been touched with the fire that fell upon the faithful of the
original twelve? Where among them is an Athanasius? Or a Chrysostom? Or
an Augustine? Slowly, yet apace with his growth, I became ambitious for
the young man. He showed quickness and astonishing courage. No task
appalled him. He mastered the tongues of the nationalities represented
around him as if he were born to them. He took in memory the Gospels,
the Psalms, and the prophetic books of the Bible. He replies to me in
Greek undistinguishable from mine. I began to dream of him a preacher
like St. Paul. I have heard him talking in the stone chapel, when the
sleet-ridden winds without had filled it with numbing frost, and seen
the Brotherhood rise from their knees, and shout, and sing, and wrestle
like madmen. It is not merely words, and ideas, and oratorical manner,
but all of them, and more--when aroused, he has the faculty of pouring
out his spirit, so that what he says takes hold of a hearer, making him
calm if in a passion, and excited if in a calm. The willing listen to
him from delight, the unwilling and opposite minded because he enchains
them.

"The pearl seemed to me of great price. I tried to keep it free of the
dust of the world. With such skill as I possess, I have worn its stains
and roughnesses away, and added to its lustre. Now it goes from me.

"You must not think because I fled to this corner of the earth, there is
any abatement of my affection for Constantinople; on the contrary,
absence has redoubled the love for it with which I was born. Is it not
still the capital of our holy religion? Occasionally a traveller comes
this way with news of the changes it has endured. Thus one came and
reported the death of the Emperor John, and the succession of
Constantine; another told of justice finally done thy heroic father, and
of thy prosperity; more lately a wandering monk, seeking solitude for
his soul's sake, joined our community, and from him I hear that the old
controversy with the Latins has broken out anew, and more hotly than
ever; that the new Emperor is an _azymite_, and disposed to adhere
to the compact of union of the churches east and west made with the Pope
of Rome by his predecessor, leaving heart-blisters burning as those
which divided the Jews. Indeed, I much fear the likeness may prove
absolute. It certainly will when the Turk appears before our holy city
as Titus before Jerusalem.

"This latest intelligence induced me at last to yield to Sergius'
entreaties to go down to Constantinople, and finish there the courses
begun here. It is true he who would move the world must go into the
world; at the same time I confess my own great desire to be kept informed
of the progress of the discussion between the churches had much to do
with my consent to his departure. He has instructions to that effect, and
will obey them. Therefore I pray thee receive him kindly for his own
sake, for mine, and the promise of good in him to the cause of Jesus, our
beloved Master.

"In conclusion, allow me, daughter--for such thou wert to thy father, to
thy mother, and to me--allow me to recur to circumstances which, after
calm review, I pronounce the most interesting, the most delightful, the
most cherished of my life.

"The house under the Kameses hill at Prinkipo was a convent or refuge
for women rather than men; yet I was ordered thither when thy father was
consigned to it after his victory over the Turks. I was then
comparatively young, but still recollect the day he passed the gate
going in with his family. Thenceforward, until the Patriarch took me
away, I was his confessor.

"Death is always shocking. I remember its visits to the convent while I
was of its people; but when it came and took thy sisters we were doubly
grieved. As if the ungrateful Emperor could not be sufficiently cruel,
it seemed Heaven must needs help him. The cloud of those sad events
overhung the community a long time; at length there was a burst of
sunshine. One came to my cell and said, 'Come, rejoice with us--a baby
is born in the house.' Thou wert the baby; and thy appearance was the
first of the great gladnesses to which I have referred.

"And not less distinctly I live over the hour we met in the chapel to
christen thee. The Bishop was the chief celebrant; but not even the
splendor of his canonicals--the cope with the little bells sewn down the
sides and along the sleeves, the ompharium, the _panagia_, the cross,
the crozier--were enough to draw my eyes from the dimpled pink face
half-hidden in the pillow of down on which they held thee up before the
font. And now the Bishop dipped his fingers in the holy water--'By what
name is this daughter to be known?' And I answered, 'Irene.' Thy parents
had been casting about for a name. 'Why not call her after the convent?'
I asked. They accepted the suggestion; and when I gave it out that great
day--to the convent it was holiday--it seemed a door in my heart of which
I was unknowing opened of itself, and took thee into a love-lined chamber
to be sweet lady at home forever. Such was the second of my greatest
happinesses.

"And then afterwhile thy father gave thee over to me to be educated. I
made thy first alphabet, illuminating each letter with my own hand. Dost
thou remember the earliest sentence I heard thee read? Or, if ever thou
dost think of it now, be reminded it was thy first lesson in writing and
thy first in religion--'The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.' And
thence what delight I found in helping thee each day a little further on
in knowledge until at length we came to where thou couldst do
independent thinking.

"It was in Sta. Sophia--in my memory not more than an occurrence of
yesterday. Thou and I had gone from the island up to the holy house,
where we were spectators of a service at which the Emperor, as Basileus,
and the Patriarch were celebrants. The gold on cope and ompharium cast
the space about the altar into a splendor rich as sunshine. Then thou
asked me, 'Did Christ and His Disciples worship in a house like this?
And were they dressed as these are?' I was afraid of those around us,
and told thee to use eye and ear, but the time for questions and answers
would be when we were back safely in the old convent.

"When we were there, thou didst renew the questions, and I did not
withhold the truth. I told thee of the lowliness and simple ways of
Jesus--how He was clothed--how the out-doors was temple sufficient for
Him. I told thee of His preaching to the multitude on the shore of the
Galilean sea--I told of His praying in the garden of Gethsemane--I told
of the attempt to make a King of Him whether He would or not, and how He
escaped from the people--of how He set no store by money or property,
titles, or worldly honors.

"Then thou didst ask, 'Who made worship so formal?' And again I answered
truthfully, there was no Church until after the death of our Lord; that
in course of two hundred years kings, governors, nobles and the great of
the earth were converted to the faith, and took it under their
protection; that then, to conform it to their tastes and dignity, they
borrowed altars from pagans, and recast the worship so sumptuously in
purple and gold the Apostles would not have recognized it. Then, in
brief, I began telling thee of the Primitive Church of Christ, now
disowned, forgotten or lost in the humanism of religious pride.

"Oh, the satisfaction and happiness in that teaching! At each lesson it
seemed I was taking thee closer to the dear Christ from whom the world
is every year making new roads to get further away--the dear Christ in
search of whom I plunged into this solitude.

"How is it with thee now, my daughter? Dost thou still adhere to the
Primitive Church? Do not fear to speak thy mind to Sergius. He too is in
the secret of our faith, believing it best to love our Lord from what
our Lord hath Himself said.

"Now I bring this letter to a close. Let me have reply by Sergius, who,
when he has seen Constantinople, will come back to me, unless He who
holds every man's future in keeping discovers for him a special use.

"Do not forget me in thy prayers.

"Blessings on thee! HILARION."

The Princess read the letter a second time. When she came to the passage
referring to the Primitive Church, her hands dropped into her lap, and
she thought:

"The Father planted right well--better than he was aware, as he himself
would say did he know my standing now."

A glow which might have been variously taken for half-serious,
half-mocking defiance shone in her eyes as the thought ran on:

"Ay, dear man! Did he know that for asserting the Primitive Church as he
taught it to me in the old convent, the Greeks and the Latins have alike
adjudged me a heretic; that nothing saves me from the lions of the
Cynegion, except my being a woman--a woman forever offending by going
when and where I wist with my face bare, and therefore harmless except
to myself. If he knew this, would he send me his blessing? He little
imagined--he who kept his opinion to himself because he could see no
good possible from its proclamation--that I, the prison-bred girl he so
loved, and whom he helped make extreme in courage as in conviction,
would one day forget my sex and condition, and protest with the
vehemence of a man against the religious madness into which the
Christian world is being swept. Oh, that I were a man!"

Folding the letter hastily, she arose to return to her guest. Soon after
Lam-co came to Manila he made the acquaintance of two well-known
Dominicans and thus made friendships that changed his career and
materially affected the fortunes of his descendants.

These powerful friends were the learned Friar Francisco Marquez, author
of a Chinese grammar, and Friar Juan Caballero, a former missionary
in China, who, because of his own work and because his brother held
high office there, was influential in the business affairs of the
Order.

And he is certified as of my
faith, and has the voice, the learning, the zeal and courage, the
passion of truth to challenge a hearing anywhere. Welcome Sergius! In
want thou camest; in want thou didst find me. The Lord _is_ shepherd unto
us both."

She went to him confidently, and offered her hand. Her manner was
irresistible; he had no choice but to yield to it.

"Thou art not a stranger, but Sergius, my brother. Father Hilarion has
explained everything."

He kissed her hand, and replied:

"I was overbold, Princess; but I knew the Father would report me kindly;
and I was hungry."

