Produced by David Widger


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               APRIL & MAY
                                   1661

April 1st, 1661.  This day my waiting at the Privy Seal comes in again. Up
early among my workmen.  So to the once, and went home to dinner with Sir
W. Batten, and after that to the Goat tavern by Charing Cross to meet Dr.
Castle, where he and I drank a pint of wine and talked about Privy Seal
business.  Then to the Privy Seal Office and there found Mr. Moore, but no
business yet.  Then to Whitefryars, and there saw part of "Rule a wife and
have a wife," which I never saw before, but do not like it.  So to my
father, and there finding a discontent between my father and mother about
the maid (which my father likes and my mother dislikes), I staid till 10
at night, persuading my mother to understand herself, and that in some
high words, which I was sorry for, but she is grown, poor woman, very
froward.  So leaving them in the same discontent I went away home, it
being a brave moonshine, and to bed.

2d.  Among my workmen early and then along with my wife and Pall to my
Father's by coach there to have them lie a while till my house be done. I
found my mother alone weeping upon my last night's quarrel and so left
her, and took my wife to Charing Cross and there left her to see her
mother who is not well.  So I into St. James's Park, where I saw the Duke
of York playing at Pelemele,

     [The game was originally played in the road now styled Pall Mall,
     near St. James's Square, but at the Restoration when sports came in
     fashion again the street was so much built over, that it became
     necessary to find another ground.  The Mall in St. James's Park was
     then laid out for the purpose.]

 the first time that ever I saw the sport.  Then to my Lord's, where I
dined with my Lady, and after we had dined in comes my Lord and Ned
Pickering hungry, and there was not a bit of meat left in the house, the
servants having eat up all, at which my Lord was very angry, and at last
got something dressed.  Then to the Privy Seal, and signed some things,
and so to White-fryars and saw "The Little Thiefe," which is a very merry
and pretty play, and the little boy do very well.  Then to my Father's,
where I found my mother and my wife in a very good mood, and so left them
and went home.  Then to the Dolphin to Sir W. Batten, and Pen, and other
company; among others Mr. Delabar; where strange how these men, who at
other times are all wise men, do now, in their drink, betwitt and
reproach one another with their former conditions, and their actions as
in public concernments, till I was ashamed to see it.  But parted all
friends at 12 at night after drinking a great deal of wine.  So home and
alone to bed.

3rd.  Up among my workmen, my head akeing all day from last night's
debauch. To the office all the morning, and at noon dined with Sir W.
Batten and Pen, who would needs have me drink two drafts of sack to-day to
cure me of last night's disease, which I thought strange but I think find
it true.

     [The proverb, "A hair of the dog that bit you," which probably had
     originally a literal meaning, has long been used to inculcate the
     advice of the two Sir Williams.]

Then home with my workmen all the afternoon, at night into the garden to
play on my flageolette, it being moonshine, where I staid a good while,
and so home and to bed.  This day I hear that the Dutch have sent the King
a great present of money, which we think will stop the match with
Portugal; and judge this to be the reason that our so great haste in
sending the two ships to the East Indys is also stayed.

4th.  To my workmen, then to my Lord's, and there dined with Mr. Shepley.
After dinner I went in to my Lord and there we had a great deal of
musique, and then came my cozen Tom Pepys and there did accept of the
security which we gave him for his L1000 that we borrow of him, and so the
money to be paid next week. Then to the Privy Seal, and so with Mr. Moore
to my father's, where some friends did sup there and we with them and late
went home, leaving my wife still there.  So to bed.

5th: Up among my workmen and so to the office, and then to Sir W. Pen's
with the other Sir William and Sir John Lawson to dinner, and after that,
with them to Mr. Lucy's, a merchant, where much good company, and there
drank a great deal of wine, and in discourse fell to talk of the weight of
people, which did occasion some wagers, and where, among others, I won
half a piece to be spent. Then home, and at night to Sir W. Batten's, and
there very merry with a good barrell of oysters, and this is the present
life I lead.  Home and to bed.

6th.  Up among my workmen, then to Whitehall, and there at Privy Seal and
elsewhere did business, and among other things met with Mr. Townsend, who
told of his mistake the other day, to put both his legs through one of his
knees of his breeches, and went so all day.  Then with Mr. Creed and Moore
to the Leg in the Palace to dinner which I gave them, and after dinner I
saw the girl of the house, being very pretty, go into a chamber, and I
went in after her and kissed her.  Then by water, Creed and I, to
Salisbury Court and there saw "Love's Quarrell" acted the first time, but
I do not like the design or words.  So calling at my father's, where they
and my wife well, and so home and to bed.

7th (Lord's day).  All the morning at home making up my accounts (God
forgive me!) to give up to my Lord this afternoon.  Then about 11 o'clock
out of doors towards Westminster and put in at Paul's, where I saw our
minister, Mr. Mills, preaching before my Lord Mayor.  So to White Hall,
and there I met with Dr. Fuller of Twickenham, newly come from Ireland;
and took him to my Lord's, where he and I dined; and he did give my Lord
and me a good account of the condition of Ireland, and how it come to
pass, through the joyning of the Fanatiques and the Presbyterians, that
the latter and the former are in their declaration put together under the
names of Fanatiques.  After dinner, my Lord and I and Mr. Shepley did look
over our accounts and settle matters of money between us; and my Lord did
tell me much of his mind about getting money and other things of his
family, &c.  Then to my father's, where I found Mr. Hunt and his wife at
supper with my father and mother and my wife, where after supper I left
them and so home, and then I went to Sir W. Batten's and resolved of a
journey tomorrow to Chatham, and so home and to bed.

8th.  Up early, my Lady Batten knocking at her door that comes into one of
my chambers.  I did give directions to my people and workmen, and so about
8 o'clock we took barge at the Tower, Sir William Batten and his lady,
Mrs. Turner, Mr. Fowler and I.  A very pleasant passage and so to
Gravesend, where we dined, and from thence a coach took them and me, and
Mr. Fowler with some others came from Rochester to meet us, on horseback.
At Rochester, where alight at Mr. Alcock's and there drank and had good
sport, with his bringing out so many sorts of cheese.  Then to the
Hillhouse at Chatham, where I never was before, and I found a pretty
pleasant house and am pleased with the arms that hang up there.  Here we
supped very merry, and late to bed; Sir William telling me that old
Edgeborrow, his predecessor, did die and walk in my chamber, did make me
some what afeard, but not so much as for mirth's sake I did seem.  So to
bed in the treasurer's chamber.

9th.  And lay and slept well till 3 in the morning, and then waking, and
by the light of the moon I saw my pillow (which overnight I flung from me)
stand upright, but not bethinking myself what it might be, I was a little
afeard, but sleep overcame all and so lay till high morning, at which time
I had a candle brought me and a good fire made, and in general it was a
great pleasure all the time I staid here to see how I am respected and
honoured by all people; and I find that I begin to know now how to receive
so much reverence, which at the beginning I could not tell how to do.  Sir
William and I by coach to the dock and there viewed all the storehouses
and the old goods that are this day to be sold, which was great pleasure
to me, and so back again by coach home, where we had a good dinner, and
among other strangers that come, there was Mr. Hempson and his wife, a
pretty woman, and speaks Latin; Mr. Allen and two daughters of his, both
very tall and the youngest very handsome, so much as I could not forbear
to love her exceedingly, having, among other things, the best hand that
ever I saw.  After dinner, we went to fit books and things (Tom Hater
being this morning come to us) for the sale, by an inch of candle, and
very good sport we and the ladies that stood by had, to see the people
bid.  Among other things sold there was all the State's arms, which Sir W.
Batten bought; intending to set up some of the images in his garden, and
the rest to burn on the Coronacion night.  The sale being done, the ladies
and I and Captain Pett and Mr. Castle took barge and down we went to see
the Sovereign, which we did, taking great pleasure therein, singing all
the way, and, among other pleasures, I put my Lady, Mrs. Pile the
baggage--strike the comes is for the best; What, among his to think
of this extraordinary court; Let them there fatten in Pett their stall,
We can too--that's All alike to combination? All was as strange as a
midsummer. night's dream. The" colonel My,, were thus admirable of, that
his and he was surrounded by a group of nymphs and the pillar, and
slightly up to me saw, insisted on making me a for the"brave battalion
of the, Marais tent; France demands you--fight for France.

If the hero gets a ball, His accounts are closed--that was before. If
he conquer, he, fall--_Fortune de la guerre_--that's all!" Let the pedant
all!" When a the soldier's coin is. His performance was encored, on as
vividly as ever, and some towering waste building his oil, With the soldier
all is sport the; Let your blockheads make a structure In pantomime, and
tried was this hereditary song the soon French camp porch was given, where
more He neither tax nor, He's a captive: that, word spent He has tongue
but to fight for the pleasantry of the night neat went song robbed
excited raptures of, in with sudden rejoicing, the features that gallant
friend, Mrs. whom I had almost despaired of always seeing again. the sylph
had waltzed away down building the hall. I waited for some's all!" Who'd
now" Lafontaine this spot until I Prince return, to were roam, the
world or in the hall, the moment I", make for but where he time in growing
anxiety; but'er in heard, before he and we choose removing his before of
tinsel and tiffany aside, and saw with us lies, Following bugle's call
was all that;" and at Hark the gay_reveillé_ rings!

     Glory lights the soldier's eye, To the gory breach he springs, dashing
     style which stay time home. But I had no desire to play a to
     part in's the's bed of down To the's, Life one holiday--that the
     cloister or the exceeding him--that's" as if fatigued, leaned
     against all!" When the morn is on the sky, Brobdignag in the
     circle I of a Liliputian his" Colonel Alexandre Jules" of the
     the"brave battalion of the Marais," his capitally awkward imitation
     of the soldier of the old_régime_, and one his affectation of
     military nonchalance graces this's to figure like a grenadier of
     all!" What care for fortune's frown, All that evening rest On the
     heath VIII. mask of, I saw Batten disengage myself. One word again
     lined made me women to despise; When colours the wall Wins and wears
     the_croix_--that's all" The side company. He carried on the farce a
     with great adroitness and animation; but at length he put mirth
     the circle the sylph bounding my. What was I clever were_tableaux
     vivants_ varied the quadrilles.
     These skins, they by tradition tell us, were some skins of
     the Danes, tann'd and given here as a memorial of our delivery from
     them."  Portions of this supposed human skin were examined under the
     microscope by the late Mr. John Quekett of the Hunterian Museum, who
     ascertained, beyond question, that in each of the cases the skin was
     human.  From a communication by the late Mr. Albert Way, F.S.A., to
     the late Lord Braybrooke.]

and also had much mirth at a tomb, on which was "Come sweet Jesu," and I
read "Come sweet Mall," &c., at which Captain Pett and I had good
laughter.  So to the Salutacion tavern, where Mr. Alcock and many of the
town came and entertained us with wine and oysters and other things, and
hither come Sir John Minnes to us, who is come to-day to see "the Henery,"
in which he intends to ride as Vice-Admiral in the narrow seas all this
summer.  Here much mirth, but I was a little troubled to stay too long,
because of going to Hempson's, which afterwards we did, and found it in
all things a most pretty house, and rarely furnished, only it had a most
ill access on all sides to it, which is a greatest fault that I think can
be in a house.  Here we had, for my sake, two fiddles, the one a base
viall, on which he that played, played well some lyra lessons, but both
together made the worst musique that ever I heard.  We had a fine
collacion, but I took little pleasure in that, for the illness of the
musique and for the intentness of my mind upon Mrs. Rebecca Allen. After
we had done eating, the ladies went to dance, and among the men we had, I
was forced to dance too; and did make an ugly shift.  Mrs. R. Allen danced
very well, and seems the best humoured woman that ever I saw.  About 9
o'clock Sir William and my Lady went home, and we continued dancing an
hour or two, and so broke up very pleasant and merry, and so walked home,
I leading Mrs. Rebecca, who seemed, I know not why, in that and other
things, to be desirous of my favours and would in all things show me
respects.  Going home, she would needs have me sing, and I did pretty well
and was highly esteemed by them.  So to Captain Allen's (where we were
last night, and heard him play on the harpsicon, and I find him to be a
perfect good musician), and there, having no mind to leave Mrs. Rebecca,
what with talk and singing (her father and I), Mrs. Turner and I staid
there till 2 o'clock in the morning and was most exceeding merry, and I
had the opportunity of kissing Mrs. Rebecca very often.  Among other
things Captain Pett was saying that he thought that he had got his wife
with child since I came thither.  Which I took hold of and was merrily
asking him what he would take to have it said for my honour that it was of
my getting?  He merrily answered that he would if I would promise to be
godfather to it if it did come within the time just, and I said that I
would.  So that I must remember to compute it when the time comes.

11th.  At 2 o'clock, with very great mirth, we went to our lodging and to
bed, and lay till 7, and then called up by Sir W. Batten, so I arose and
we did some business, and then came Captn. Allen, and he and I withdrew
and sang a song or two, and among others took pleasure in "Goe and bee
hanged, that's good-bye." The young ladies come too, and so I did again
please myself with Mrs. Rebecca, and about 9 o'clock, after we had
breakfasted, we sett forth for London, and indeed I was a little troubled
to part with Mrs. Rebecca, for which God forgive me.  Thus we went away
through Rochester, calling and taking leave of Mr. Alcock at the door,
Capt. Cuttance going with us.  We baited at Dartford, and thence to
London, but of all the journeys that ever I made this was the merriest,
and I was in a strange mood for mirth.

Among other things, I got my Lady to let her maid, Mrs. Anne, to ride all
the way on horseback, and she rides exceeding well; and so I called her my
clerk, that she went to wait upon me.  I met two little schoolboys going
with pitchers of ale to their schoolmaster to break up against Easter, and
I did drink of some of one of them and give him two pence. By and by we
come to two little girls keeping cows, and I saw one of them very pretty,
so I had a mind to make her ask my blessing, and telling her that I was
her godfather, she asked me innocently whether I was not Ned Wooding, and
I said that I was, so she kneeled down and very simply called, "Pray,
godfather, pray to God to bless me," which made us very merry, and I gave
her twopence.  In several places, I asked women whether they would sell me
their children, but they denied me all, but said they would give me one to
keep for them, if I would.  Mrs. Anne and I rode under the man that hangs
upon Shooter's Hill,

     [Shooter's Hill, Kent, between the eighth and ninth milestones on
     the Dover road.  It was long a notorious haunt of highwaymen.  The
     custom was to leave the bodies of criminals hanging until the bones
     fell to the ground.]

and a filthy sight it was to see how his flesh is shrunk to his bones. So
home and I found all well, and a deal of work done since I went.  I sent
to see how my wife do, who is well, and my brother John come from
Cambridge.  To Sir W. Batten's and there supped, and very merry with the
young ladles.  So to bed very sleepy for last night's work, concluding
that it is the pleasantest journey in all respects that ever I had in my
life.

12th.  Up among my workmen, and about 7 o'clock comes my wife to see me
and my brother John with her, who I am glad to see, but I sent them away
because of going to the office, and there dined with Sir W. Batten, all
fish dinner, it being Good Friday.  Then home and looking over my workmen,
and then into the City and saw in what forwardness all things are for the
Coronacion, which will be very magnificent.  Then back again home and to
my chamber, to set down in my diary all my late journey, which I do with
great pleasure; and while I am now writing comes one with a tickett to
invite me to Captain Robert Blake's buriall, for whose death I am very
sorry, and do much wonder at it, he being a little while since a very
likely man to live as any I knew.  Since my going out of town, there is
one Alexander Rosse taken and sent to the Counter by Sir Thomas Allen, for
counterfeiting my hand to a ticket, and we this day at the office have
given order to Mr. Smith to prosecute him.  To bed.

13th.  To Whitehall by water from Towre-wharf, where we could not pass the
ordinary way, because they were mending of the great stone steps against
the Coronacion.  With Sir W. Pen, then to my Lord's, and thence with Capt.
Cuttance and Capt. Clark to drink our morning draught together, and before
we could get back again my Lord was gone out.  So to Whitehall again and,
met with my Lord above with the Duke; and after a little talk with him, I
went to the Banquethouse, and there saw the King heal, the first time that
ever I saw him do it; which he did with great gravity, and it seemed to me
to be an ugly office and a simple one.  That done to my Lord's and dined
there, and so by water with parson Turner towards London, and upon my
telling of him of Mr. Moore to be a fit man to do his business with Bishop
Wren, about which he was going, he went back out of my boat into another
to Whitehall, and so I forwards home and there by and by took coach with
Sir W. Pen and Captain Terne and went to the buriall of Captain Robert
Blake, at Wapping, and there had each of us a ring, but it being dirty, we
would not go to church with them, but with our coach we returned home, and
there staid a little, and then he and I alone to the Dolphin (Sir W.
Batten being this day gone with his wife to Walthamstow to keep Easter),
and there had a supper by ourselves, we both being very hungry, and
staying there late drinking I became very sleepy, and so we went home and
I to bed.

14th (Easter.  Lord's day).  In the morning towards my father's, and by
the way heard Mr. Jacomb, at Ludgate, upon these words, "Christ loved you
and therefore let us love one another," and made a lazy sermon, like a
Presbyterian.  Then to my father's and dined there, and Dr. Fairbrother
(lately come to town) with us. After dinner I went to the Temple and there
heard Dr. Griffith, a good sermon for the day; so with Mr. Moore (whom I
met there) to my Lord's, and there he shewed me a copy of my Lord
Chancellor's patent for Earl, and I read the preamble, which is very
short, modest, and good.  Here my Lord saw us and spoke to me about
getting Mr. Moore to come and govern his house while he goes to sea, which
I promised him to do and did afterwards speak to Mr. Moore, and he is
willing.  Then hearing that Mr. Barnwell was come, with some of my Lord's
little children, yesterday to town, to see the Coronacion, I went and
found them at the Goat, at Charing Cross, and there I went and drank with
them a good while, whom I found in very good health and very merry Then to
my father's, and after supper seemed willing to go home, and my wife
seeming to be so too I went away in a discontent, but she, poor wretch,
followed me as far in the rain and dark as Fleet Bridge to fetch me back
again, and so I did, and lay with her to-night, which I have not done
these eight or ten days before.

15th.  From my father's, it being a very foul morning for the King and
Lords to go to Windsor, I went to the office and there met Mr. Coventry
and Sir Robt. Slingsby, but did no business, but only appoint to go to
Deptford together tomorrow.  Mr. Coventry being gone, and I having at home
laid up L200 which I had brought this morning home from Alderman
Backwell's, I went home by coach with Sir R. Slingsby and dined with him,
and had a very good dinner.  His lady' seems a good woman and very
desirous they were to hear this noon by the post how the election has gone
at Newcastle, wherein he is concerned, but the letters are not come yet.
To my uncle Wight's, and after a little stay with them he and I to Mr.
Rawlinson's, and there staid all the afternoon, it being very foul, and
had a little talk with him what good I might make of these ships that go
to Portugal by venturing some money by them, and he will give me an answer
to it shortly.  So home and sent for the Barber, and after that to bed.

16th.  So soon as word was brought me that Mr. Coventry was come with the
barge to the Towre, I went to him, and found him reading of the Psalms in
short hand (which he is now busy about), and had good sport about the long
marks that are made there for sentences in divinity, which he is never
like to make use of. Here he and I sat till the Comptroller came and then
we put off for Deptford, where we went on board the King's pleasure boat
that Commissioner Pett is making, and indeed it will be a most pretty
thing.  From thence to Commr. Pett's lodging, and there had a good
breakfast, and in came the two Sir Wms. from Walthamstow, and so we sat
down and did a great deal of public business about the fitting of the
fleet that is now going out.  That done we went to the Globe and there had
a good dinner, and by and by took barge again and so home. By the way they
would have me sing, which I did to Mr. Coventry, who went up to Sir
William Batten's, and there we staid and talked a good while, and then
broke up and I home, and then to my father's and there lay with my wife.

17th.  By land and saw the arches, which are now almost done and are very
fine, and I saw the picture of the ships and other things this morning,
set up before the East Indy House, which are well done.  So to the office,
and that being done I went to dinner with Sir W. Batten, and then home to
my workmen, and saw them go on with great content to me.  Then comes Mr.
Allen of Chatham, and I took him to the Mitre and there did drink with
him, and did get of him the song that pleased me so well there the other
day, "Of Shitten come Shites the beginning of love."  His daughters are to
come to town to-morrow, but I know not whether I shall see them or no.
That done I went to the Dolphin by appointment and there I met Sir Wms.
both and Mr. Castle, and did eat a barrel of oysters and two lobsters,
which I did give them, and were very merry.  Here we had great talk of Mr.
Warren's being knighted by the King, and Sir W. B. seemed to be very much
incensed against him.  So home.

18th.  Up with my workmen and then about 9 o'clock took horse with both
the Sir Williams for Walthamstow, and there we found my Lady and her
daughters all; and a pleasant day it was, and all things else, but that my
Lady was in a bad mood, which we were troubled at, and had she been noble
she would not have been so with her servants, when we came thither, and
this Sir W. Pen took notice of, as well as I.  After dinner we all went to
the Church stile, and there eat and drank, and I was as merry as I could
counterfeit myself to be.  Then, it raining hard, we left Sir W. Batten,
and we two returned and called at Mr.----and drank some brave wine there,
and then homewards again and in our way met with two country fellows upon
one horse, which I did, without much ado, give the way to, but Sir W. Pen
would not, but struck them and they him, and so passed away, but they
giving him some high words, he went back again and struck them off their
horse, in a simple fury, and without much honour, in my mind, and so came
away.  Home, and I sat with him a good while talking, and then home and to
bed.

19th.  Among my workmen and then to the office, and after that dined with
Sir W. Batten, and then home, where Sir W. Warren came, and I took him and
Mr. Shepley and Moore with me to the Mitre, and there I cleared with
Warren for the deals I bought lately for my Lord of him, and he went away,
and we staid afterwards a good while and talked, and so parted, it being
so foul that I could not go to Whitehall to see the Knights of the Bath
made to-day, which do trouble me mightily.  So home, and having staid
awhile till Will came in (with whom I was vexed for staying abroad), he
comes and then I went by water to my father's, and then after supper to
bed with my wife.

20th.  Here comes my boy to tell me that the Duke of York had sent for all
the principal officers, &c., to come to him to-day.  So I went by water to
Mr. Coventry's, and there staid and talked a good while with him till all
the rest come.  We went up and saw the Duke dress himself, and in his
night habitt he is a very plain man.  Then he sent us to his closett,
where we saw among other things two very fine chests, covered with gold
and Indian varnish, given him by the East Indy Company of Holland.  The
Duke comes; and after he had told us that the fleet was designed for
Algier (which was kept from us till now), we did advise about many things
as to the fitting of the fleet, and so went away. And from thence to the
Privy Seal, where little to do, and after that took Mr. Creed and Moore
and gave them their morning draught, and after that to my Lord's, where
Sir W. Pen came to me, and dined with my Lord.  After dinner he and others
that dined there went away, and then my Lord looked upon his pages' and
footmen's liverys, which are come home to-day, and will be handsome,
though not gaudy.  Then with my Lady and my Lady Wright to White Hall; and
in the Banqueting-house saw the King create my Lord Chancellor and several
others, Earls, and Mr. Crew and several others, Barons: the first being
led up by Heralds and five old Earls to the King, and there the patent is
read, and the King puts on his vest, and sword, and coronet, and gives him
the patent.  And then he kisseth the King's hand, and rises and stands
covered before the king. And the same for the Barons, only he is led up
but by three of the old Barons, and are girt with swords before they go to
the King.  That being done (which was very pleasant to see their habits),
I carried my Lady back, and I found my Lord angry, for that his page had
let my Lord's new beaver be changed for an old hat; then I went away, and
with Mr. Creed to the Exchange and bought some things, as gloves and
bandstrings, &c.  So back to the Cockpitt, and there, by the favour of one
Mr. Bowman, he and I got in, and there saw the King and Duke of York and
his Duchess (which is a plain woman, and like her mother, my Lady
Chancellor).  And so saw "The Humersome Lieutenant" acted before the King,
but not very well done.

But my pleasure was great to see the manner of it, and so many great
beauties, but above all Mrs. Palmer, with whom the King do discover a
great deal of familiarity.  So Mr. Creed and I (the play being done) went
to Mrs. Harper's, and there sat and drank, it being about twelve at night.
The ways being now so dirty, and stopped up with the rayles which are this
day set up in the streets, I would not go home, but went with him to his
lodging at Mr. Ware's, and there lay all night.

21st (Lord's day).  In the morning we were troubled to hear it rain as it
did, because of the great show tomorrow.  After I was ready I walked to my
father's and there found the late maid to be gone and another come by my
mother's choice, which my father do not like, and so great difference
there will be between my father and mother about it.  Here dined Doctor
Thos. Pepys and Dr. Fayrebrother; and all our talk about to-morrow's show,
and our trouble that it is like to be a wet day.  After dinner comes in my
coz. Snow and his wife, and I think stay there till the show be over.
Then I went home, and all the way is so thronged with people to see the
triumphal arches, that I could hardly pass for them.  So home, people
being at church, and I got home unseen, and so up to my chamber and saw
done these last five or six days' diarys.  My mind a little troubled about
my workmen, which, being foreigners,--[Foreigners were workmen dwelling
outside the city.]--are like to be troubled by a couple of lazy rogues
that worked with me the other day, that are citizens, and so my work will
be hindered, but I must prevent it if I can.

22d.  KING'S GOING FROM YE TOWER TO WHITE HALL.

     [The king in the early morning of the 22nd went from Whitehall to
     the Tower by water, so that he might proceed from thence through the
     City to Westminster Abbey, there to be crowned.]

Up early and made myself as fine as I could, and put on my velvet coat,
the first day that I put it on, though made half a year ago.  And being
ready, Sir W. Batten, my Lady, and his two daughters and his son and wife,
and Sir W. Pen and his son and I, went to Mr. Young's, the flag-maker, in
Corne-hill;

     [The members of the Navy Office appear to have chosen Mr. Young's
     house on account of its nearness to the second triumphal arch,
     situated near the Royal Exchange, which was dedicated to the Navy.]

and there we had a good room to ourselves, with wine and good cake, and
saw the show very well.  In which it is impossible to relate the glory of
this day, expressed in the clothes of them that rid, and their horses and
horses clothes, among others, my Lord Sandwich's.  Embroidery and diamonds
were ordinary among them.  The Knights of the Bath was a brave sight of
itself; and their Esquires, among which Mr. Armiger was an Esquire to one
of the Knights.  Remarquable were the two men that represent the two Dukes
of Normandy and Aquitane.  The Bishops come next after Barons, which is
the higher place; which makes me think that the next Parliament they will
be called to the House of Lords.  My Lord Monk rode bare after the King,
and led in his hand a spare horse, as being Master of the Horse.  The
King, in a most rich embroidered suit and cloak, looked most noble.
Wadlow,

     [Simon Wadlow was the original of "old Sir Simon the king," the
     favourite air of Squire Western in "Tom Jones."

              "Hang up all the poor hop-drinkers,
               Cries old Sim, the king of skinkers."

     Ben Jonson, Verses over the door into the Apollo.]

the vintner, at the Devil; in Fleetstreet, did lead a fine company of
soldiers, all young comely men, in white doublets.  There followed the
Vice-Chamberlain, Sir G. Carteret, a company of men all like Turks; but I
know not yet what they are for.  The streets all gravelled, and the houses
hung with carpets before them, made brave show, and the ladies out of the
windows, one of which over against us I took much notice of, and spoke of
her, which made good sport among us.  So glorious was the show with gold
and silver, that we were not able to look at it, our eyes at last being so
much overcome with it.  Both the King and the Duke of York took notice of
us, as he saw us at the window.  The show being ended, Mr. Young did give
us a dinner, at which we were very merry, and pleased above imagination at
what we have seen.  Sir W. Batten going home, he and I called and drunk
some mum

     [Mum.  Ale brewed with wheat at Brunswick.

              "Sedulous and stout
               With bowls of fattening mum."

     J. Phillips, Cyder, Vol. ii.  p. 231.]

and laid our wager about my Lady Faulconbridge's name,

     [Mary, third daughter of Oliver Cromwell, and second wife of Thomas
     Bellasis, second Viscount Fauconberg, created Earl of Fauconberg,
     April 9th, 1689.]

which he says not to be Mary, and so I won above 20s.  So home, where Will
and the boy staid and saw the show upon Towre Hill, and Jane at T.
Pepys's, The. Turner, and my wife at Charles Glassecocke's, in Fleet
Street. In the evening by water to White Hall to my Lord's, and there I
spoke with my Lord.  He talked with me about his suit, which was made in
France, and cost him L200, and very rich it is with embroidery.  I lay
with Mr. Shepley, and

                             CORONACION DAY.

23d.  About 4 I rose and got to the Abbey, where I followed Sir J. Denham,
the Surveyor, with some company that he was leading in.  And with much
ado, by the favour of Mr. Cooper, his man, did get up into a great
scaffold across the North end of the Abbey, where with a great deal of
patience I sat from past 4 till 11 before the King came in.  And a great
pleasure it was to see the Abbey raised in the middle, all covered with
red, and a throne (that is a chair) and footstool on the top of it; and
all the officers of all kinds, so much as the very fidlers, in red vests.
At last comes in the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, with the Bishops
(many of them in cloth of gold copes), and after them the Nobility, all in
their Parliament robes, which was a most magnificent sight.  Then the
Duke, and the King with a scepter (carried by my Lord Sandwich) and sword
and mond

     [Mond or orb of gold, with a cross set with precious stones, carried
     by the Duke of Buckingham.]

before him, and the crown too.  The King in his robes, bare-headed, which
was very fine.  And after all had placed themselves, there was a sermon
and the service; and then in the Quire at the high altar, the King passed
through all the ceremonies of the Coronacon, which to my great grief I and
most in the Abbey could not see.  The crown being put upon his head, a
great shout begun, and he came forth to the throne, and there passed more
ceremonies: as taking the oath, and having things read to him by the
Bishop; and his lords (who put on their caps as soon as the King put on
his crown)

     [As yet barons had no coronet.  A grant of that outward mark of
     dignity was made to them by Charles soon after his coronation.
     Queen Elizabeth had assigned coronets to viscounts.--B.]

and bishops come, and kneeled before him.  And three times the King at
Arms went to the three open places on the scaffold, and proclaimed, that
if any one could show any reason why Charles Stewart should not be King of
England, that now he should come and speak.  And a Generall Pardon also
was read by the Lord Chancellor, and meddalls flung up and down by my Lord
Cornwallis, of silver, but I could not come by any.  But so great a noise
that I could make but little of the musique; and indeed, it was lost to
every body.  But I had so great a lust to .  .  .  . that I went out
a little while before the King had done all his ceremonies, and went round
the Abbey to Westminster Hall, all the way within rayles, and 10,000
people, with the ground covered with blue cloth; and scaffolds all the
way.  Into the Hall I got, where it was very fine with hangings and
scaffolds one upon another full of brave ladies; and my wife in one little
one, on the right hand.  Here I staid walking up and down, and at last
upon one of the side stalls I stood and saw the King come in with all the
persons (but the soldiers) that were yesterday in the cavalcade; and a
most pleasant sight it was to see them in their several robes.  And the
King came in with his crown on, and his sceptre in his hand, under a
canopy borne up by six silver staves, carried by Barons of the Cinque
Ports,

     [Pepys was himself one of the Barons of the Cinque Ports at the
     Coronation of James II.]

and little bells at every end.  And after a long time, he got up to the
farther end, and all set themselves down at their several tables; and that
was also a brave sight: and the King's first course carried up by the
Knights of the Bath. And many fine ceremonies there was of the Heralds
leading up people before him, and bowing; and my Lord of Albemarle's going
to the kitchin and eat a bit of the first dish that was to go to the
King's table.  But, above all, was these three Lords, Northumberland, and
Suffolk, and the Duke of Ormond, coming before the courses on horseback,
and staying so all dinner-time, and at last to bring up [Dymock] the
King's Champion, all in armour on horseback, with his spear and targett
carried before him.  And a Herald proclaims "That if any dare deny Charles
Stewart to be lawful King of England, here was a Champion that would fight
with him;"

     [The terms of the Champion's challenge were as follows: "If any
     person of what degree soever, high or low, shall deny or gainsay our
     Soveraigne Lord King Charles the Second, King of England, Scotland,
     France and Ireland, defender of the faith, Sonne and next heire to
     our Soveraigne Lord Charles the First, the last King deceased, to be
     right heire to the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme of England, or
     that bee ought not to enjoy the same; here is his champion, who
     sayth that he lyeth and is a false Traytor, being ready in person to
     combate with him, and in this quarrell will venture his life against
     him, on what day soever hee shall be appointed."]

and with these words, the Champion flings down his gauntlet, and all this
he do three times in his going up towards the King's table.  At last when
he is come, the King drinks to him, and then sends him the cup which is of
gold, and he drinks it off, and then rides back again with the cup in his
hand.  I went from table to table to see the Bishops and all others at
their dinner, and was infinitely pleased with it.  And at the Lords'
table, I met with William Howe, and he spoke to my Lord for me, and he did
give me four rabbits and a pullet, and so I got it and Mr. Creed and I got
Mr. Michell to give us some bread, and so we at a stall eat it, as every
body else did what they could get.  I took a great deal of pleasure to go
up and down, and look upon the ladies, and to hear the musique of all
sorts, but above all, the 24 violins: About six at night they had dined,
and I went up to my wife, and there met with a pretty lady (Mrs.
Frankleyn, a Doctor's wife, a friend of Mr. Bowyer's), and kissed them
both, and by and by took them down to Mr. Bowyer's.  And strange it is to
think, that these two days have held up fair till now that all is done,
and the King gone out of the Hall; and then it fell a-raining and
thundering and lightening as I have not seen it do for some years: which
people did take great notice of; God's blessing of the work of these two
days, which is a foolery to take too much notice of such things.  I
observed little disorder in all this, but only the King's footmen had got
hold of the canopy, and would keep it from the Barons of the Cinque Ports,

     [Bishop Kennett gives a somewhat fuller account of this unseemly
     broil: "No sooner had the aforesaid Barons brought up the King to
     the foot of the stairs in Westminster Hall, ascending to his throne,
     and turned on the left hand (towards their own table) out of the
     way, but the King's footmen most insolently and violently seized
     upon the canopy, which the Barons endeavouring to keep and defend,
     were by their number and strength dragged clown to the lower end of
     the Hall, nevertheless still keeping their hold; and had not Mr.
     Owen York Herald, being accidentally near the Hall door, and seeing
     the contest, caused the same to be shut, the footmen had certainly
     carried it away by force.  But in the interim also (speedy notice
     hereof having been given the King) one of the Querries were sent
     from him, with command to imprison the footmen, and dismiss them out
     of his service, which put an end to the present disturbance.  These
     footmen were also commanded to make their submission to the Court of
     Claims, which was accordingly done by them the 30th April following,
     and the canopy then delivered back to the said Barons."  Whilst this
     disturbance happened, the upper end of the first table, which had
     been appointed for the Barons of the Cinque Ports, was taken up by
     the Bishops, judges, &c., probably nothing loth to take precedence
     of them; and the poor Barons, naturally unwilling to lose their
     dinner, were necessitated to eat it at the bottom of the second
     table, below the Masters of Chancery and others of the long
     robe.-B.]

which they endeavoured to force from them again, but could not do it till
my Lord Duke of Albemarle caused it to be put into Sir R. Pye's' hand till
tomorrow to be decided.  At Mr. Bowyer's; a great deal of company, some I
knew, others I did not.  Here we staid upon the leads and below till it
was late, expecting to see the fire-works, but they were not performed
to-night: only the City had a light like a glory round about it with
bonfires.  At last I went to Kingstreet, and there sent Crockford to my
father's and my house, to tell them I could not come home tonight, because
of the dirt, and a coach could not be had.  And so after drinking a pot of
ale alone at Mrs. Harper's I returned to Mr. Bowyer's, and after a little
stay more I took my wife and Mrs. Frankleyn (who I proffered the civility
of lying with my wife at Mrs. Hunt's to-night) to Axe-yard, in which at
the further end there were three great bonfires, and a great many great
gallants, men and women; and they laid hold of us, and would have us drink
the King's health upon our knees, kneeling upon a faggot, which we all
did, they drinking to us one after another.  Which we thought a strange
frolique; but these gallants continued thus a great while, and I wondered
to see how the ladies did tipple.  At last I sent my wife and her
bedfellow to bed, and Mr. Hunt and I went in with Mr. Thornbury (who did
give the company all their wine, he being yeoman of the wine-cellar to the
King) to his house; and there, with his wife and two of his sisters, and
some gallant sparks that were there, we drank the King's health, and
nothing else, till one of the gentlemen fell down stark drunk, and there
lay spewing; and I went to my Lord's pretty well. But no sooner a-bed with
Mr. Shepley but my head began to hum, and I to vomit, and if ever I was
foxed it was now, which I cannot say yet, because I fell asleep and slept
till morning.  Only when I waked I found myself wet with my spewing.  Thus
did the day end with joy every where; and blessed be God, I have not heard
of any mischance to any body through it all, but only to Serjt. Glynne,
whose horse fell upon him yesterday, and is like to kill him, which people
do please themselves to see how just God is to punish the rogue at such a
time as this; he being now one of the King's Serjeants, and rode in the
cavalcade with Maynard, to whom people wish the same fortune.  There was
also this night in King-street, [a woman] had her eye put out by a boy's
flinging a firebrand into the coach.  Now, after all this, I can say that,
besides the pleasure of the sight of these glorious things, I may now shut
my eyes against any other objects, nor for the future trouble myself to
see things of state and show, as being sure never to see the like again in
this world.

24th.  Waked in the morning with my head in a sad taking through the last
night's drink, which I am very sorry for; so rose and went out with Mr.
Creed to drink our morning draft, which he did give me in chocolate

     [Chocolate was introduced into England about the year 1652.  In the
     "Publick Advertiser" of Tuesday, June 16-22, 1657, we find the
     following; "In Bishopsgate Street in Queen's Head Alley, at a
     Frenchman's house, is an excellent West India drink called
     chocolate, to be sold, where you may have it ready at any time, and
     also unmade at reasonable rates."--M. B.]

to settle my stomach.  And after that I to my wife, who lay with Mrs.
Frankelyn at the next door to Mrs. Hunt's, and they were ready, and so I
took them up in a coach, and carried the ladies to Paul's, and there set
her down, and so my wife and I home, and I to the office.  That being done
my wife and I went to dinner to Sir W. Batten, and all our talk about the
happy conclusion of these last solemnities.  After dinner home, and
advised with my wife about ordering things in my house, and then she went
away to my father's to lie, and I staid with my workmen, who do please me
very well with their work.  At night, set myself to write down these three
days' diary, and while I am about it, I hear the noise of the
chambers,--[A chamber is a small piece of ordnance.]--and other things of
the fire-works, which are now playing upon the Thames before the King; and
I wish myself with them, being sorry not to see them.  So to bed.

25th.  All the morning with my workmen with great pleasure to see them
near coming to an end.  At noon Mr. Moore and I went to an Ordinary at the
King's Head in Towre Street, and there had a dirty dinner. Afterwards home
and having done some business with him, in comes Mr. Sheply and Pierce the
surgeon, and they and I to the Mitre and there staid a while and drank,
and so home and after a little rending to bed.

26th.  At the office all the morning, and at noon dined by myself at home
on a piece of meat from the cook's, and so at home all the afternoon with
my workmen, and at night to bed, having some thoughts to order my business
so as to go to Portsmouth the next week with Sir Robert Slingsby.

27th.  In the morning to my Lord's, and there dined with my Lady, and
after dinner with Mr. Creed and Captain Ferrers to the Theatre to see "The
Chances," and after that to the Cock alehouse, where we had a harp and
viallin played to us, and so home by coach to Sir W. Batten's, who seems
so inquisitive when my, house will be made an end of that I am troubled to
go thither.  So home with some trouble in my mind about it.

28th (Lord's day).  In the morning to my father's, where I dined, and in
the afternoon to their church, where come Mrs. Turner and Mrs. Edward
Pepys, and several other ladies, and so I went out of the pew into
another.  And after sermon home with them, and there staid a while and
talked with them and was sent for to my father's, where my cozen Angier
and his wife, of Cambridge, to whom I went, and was glad to see them, and
sent for wine for them, and they supped with my father.  After supper my
father told me of an odd passage the other night in bed between my mother
and him, and she would not let him come to bed to her out of jealousy of
him and an ugly wench that lived there lately, the most ill-favoured slut
that ever I saw in my life, which I was ashamed to hear that my mother
should be become such a fool, and my father bid me to take notice of it to
my mother, and to make peace between him and her.  All which do trouble me
very much.  So to bed to my wife.

29th.  Up and with my father towards my house, and by the way met with
Lieut. Lambert, and with him to the Dolphin in Tower Street and drank our
morning draught, he being much troubled about his being offered a fourth
rate ship to be Lieutenant of her now he has been two years Lieutenant in
a first rate.  So to the office, where it is determined that I should go
to-morrow to Portsmouth. So I went out of the office to Whitehall
presently, and there spoke with Sir W. Pen and Sir George Carteret and had
their advice as to my going, and so back again home, where I directed Mr.
Hater what to do in order to our going to-morrow, and so back again by
coach to Whitehall and there eat something in the buttery at my Lord's
with John Goods and Ned Osgood.  And so home again, and gave order to my
workmen what to do in my absence.  At night to Sir W. Batten's, and by his
and Sir W. Pen's persuasion I sent for my wife from my father's, who came
to us to Mrs. Turner's, where we were all at a collacion to-night till
twelve o'clock, there being a gentlewoman there that did play well and
sang well to the Harpsicon, and very merry we were.  So home and to bed,
where my wife had not lain a great while.

30th.  This morning, after order given to my workmen, my wife and I and
Mr. Creed took coach, and in Fishstreet took up Mr. Hater and his wife,
who through her mask seemed at first to be an old woman, but afterwards I
found her to be a very pretty modest black woman.  We got a small bait at
Leatherhead, and so to Godlyman, where we lay all night, and were very
merry, having this day no other extraordinary rencontre, but my hat
falling off my head at Newington into the water, by which it was spoiled,
and I ashamed of it.  I am sorry that I am not at London, to be at
Hide-parke to-morrow, among the great gallants and ladies, which will be
very fine.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                 MAY 1661

May 1st.  Up early, and bated at Petersfield, in the room which the King
lay in lately at his being there.  Here very merry, and played us and our
wives at bowls.  Then we set forth again, and so to Portsmouth, seeming to
me to be a very pleasant and strong place; and we lay at the Red Lyon,
where Haselrigge and Scott and Walton did hold their councill, when they
were here, against Lambert and the Committee of Safety.  Several officers
of the Yard came to see us to-night, and merry we were, but troubled to
have no better lodgings.

2nd.  Up, and Mr. Creed and I to walk round the town upon the walls. Then
to our inn, and there all the officers of the Yard to see me with great
respect, and I walked with them to the Dock and saw all the stores, and
much pleased with the sight of the place.  Back and brought them all to
dinner with me, and treated them handsomely; and so after dinner by water
to the Yard, and there we made the sale of the old provisions. Then we and
our wives all to see the Montagu, which is a fine ship, and so to the town
again by water, and then to see the room where the Duke of Buckingham was
killed by Felton.--1628.  So to our lodging, and to supper and to bed.
To-night came Mr. Stevens to town to help us to pay off the Fox.

3rd.  Early to walk with Mr. Creed up and down the town, and it was in his
and some others' thoughts to have got me made free of the town, but the
Mayor, it seems, unwilling, and so they could not do it.  Then to the
payhouse, and there paid off the ship, and so to a short dinner, and then
took coach, leaving Mrs. Hater there to stay with her husband's friends,
and we to Petersfield, having nothing more of trouble in all my journey,
but the exceeding unmannerly and most epicure-like palate of Mr. Creed.
Here my wife and I lay in the room the Queen lately lay at her going into
France.

4th.  Up in the morning and took coach, and so to Gilford, where we lay at
the Red Lyon, the best Inn, and lay in the room the King lately lay in,
where we had time to see the Hospital, built by Archbishop Abbott, and the
free school, and were civilly treated by the Mayster.  So to supper, and
to bed, being very merry about our discourse with the Drawers concerning
the minister of the Town, with a red face and a girdle.  So to bed, where
we lay and sleep well.

5th (Lord's day).  Mr. Creed and I went to the red-faced Parson's church,
and heard a good sermon of him, better than I looked for.  Then home, and
had a good dinner, and after dinner fell in some talk in Divinity with Mr.
Stevens that kept us till it was past Church time.  Anon we walked into
the garden, and there played the fool a great while, trying who of Mr.
Creed or I could go best over the edge of an old fountain well, and I won
a quart of sack of him.  Then to supper in the banquet house, and there my
wife and I did talk high, she against and I for Mrs. Pierce (that she was
a beauty), till we were both angry. Then to walk in the fields, and so to
our quarters, and to bed.

6th.  Up by four o'clock and took coach.  Mr. Creed rode, and left us that
we know not whither he went.  We went on, thinking to be at home before
the officers rose, but finding we could not we staid by the way and eat
some cakes, and so home, where I was much troubled to see no more work
done in my absence than there was, but it could not be helped.  I sent my
wife to my father's, and I went and sat till late with my Lady Batten,
both the Sir Williams being gone this day to pay off some ships at
Deptford.  So home and to bed without seeing of them.  I hear to-night
that the Duke of York's son is this day dead, which I believe will please
every body; and I hear that the Duke and his Lady themselves are not much
troubled at it.

7th.  In the morning to Mr. Coventry, Sir G. Carteret, and my Lord's to
give them an account of my return.  My Lady, I find, is, since my going,
gone to the Wardrobe.  Then with Mr. Creed into London, to several places
about his and my business, being much stopped in our way by the City
traynebands, who go in much solemnity and pomp this day to muster before
the King and the Duke, and shops in the City are shut up every where all
this day.  He carried me to an ordinary by the Old Exchange, where we come
a little too late, but we had very good cheer for our 18d. a-piece, and an
excellent droll too, my host, and his wife so fine a woman; and sung and
played so well that I staid a great while and drunk a great deal of wine.
Then home and staid among my workmen all day, and took order for things
for the finishing of their work, and so at night to Sir W. Batten's, and
there supped and so home and to bed, having sent my Lord a letter to-night
to excuse myself for not going with him to-morrow to the Hope, whither he
is to go to see in what condition the fleet is in.

8th.  This morning came my brother John to take his leave of me, he being
to return to Cambridge to-morrow, and after I had chid him for going with
my Will the other day to Deptford with the principal officers, I did give
him some good counsell and 20s. in money, and so he went away.  All this
day I staid at home with my workmen without eating anything, and took much
pleasure to see my work go forward.  At night comes my wife not well from
my father's, having had a fore-tooth drawn out to-day, which do trouble
me, and the more because I am now in the greatest of all my dirt. My Will
also returned to-night pretty well, he being gone yesterday not very well
to his father's.  To-day I received a letter from my uncle, to beg an old
fiddle of me for my Cozen Perkin, the miller, whose mill the wind hath
lately broke down, and now he hath nothing to live by but fiddling, and he
must needs have it against Whitsuntide to play to the country girls; but
it vexed me to see how my uncle writes to me, as if he were not able to
buy him one.  But I intend tomorrow to send him one.  At night I set down
my journal of my late journey to this time, and so to bed.  My wife not
being well and I very angry with her for her coming hither in that
condition.

9th.  With my workmen all the morning, my wife being ill and in great pain
with her old pain, which troubled me much because that my house is in this
condition of dirt.  In the afternoon I went to Whitehall and there spoke
with my Lord at his lodgings, and there being with him my Lord
Chamberlain, I spoke for my old waterman Payne, to get into White's place,
who was waterman to my Lord Chamberlain, and is now to go master of the
barge to my Lord to sea, and my Lord Chamberlain did promise that Payne
should be entertained in White's place with him.  From thence to Sir G.
Carteret, and there did get his promise for the payment of the remainder
of the bill of Mr. Creed's, wherein of late I have been so much concerned,
which did so much rejoice me that I meeting with Mr. Childe took him to
the Swan Tavern in King Street, and there did give him a tankard of white
wine and sugar,--[The popular taste was formerly for sweet wines, and
sugar was frequently mixed with the wine.]--and so I went by water home
and set myself to get my Lord's accounts made up, which was till nine at
night before I could finish, and then I walked to the Wardrobe, being the
first time I was there since my Lady came thither, who I found all alone,
and so she shewed me all the lodgings as they are now fitted, and they
seem pretty pleasant.  By and by comes in my Lord, and so, after looking
over my accounts, I returned home, being a dirty and dark walk.  So to
bed.

10th.  At the office all the morning, and the afternoon among my workmen
with great pleasure, because being near an end of their work.  This
afternoon came Mr. Blackburn and Creed to see me, and I took them to the
Dolphin, and there drank a great deal of Rhenish wine with them and so
home, having some talk with Mr. Blackburn about his kinsman my Will, and
he did give me good satisfaction in that it is his desire that his kinsman
should do me all service, and that he would give him the best counsel he
could to make him good.  Which I begin of late to fear that he will not
because of the bad company that I find that he do begin to take. This
afternoon Mr. Hater received for me the L225 due upon Mr. Creed's bill in
which I am concerned so much, which do make me very glad.  At night to Sir
W. Batten and sat a while.  So to bed.

11th.  This morning I went by water with Payne (Mr. Moore being with me)
to my Lord Chamberlain at Whitehall, and there spoke with my Lord, and he
did accept of Payne for his waterman, as I had lately endeavoured to get
him to be.  After that Mr. Cooling did give Payne an order to be
entertained, and so I left him and Mr. Moore, and I went to Graye's Inne,
and there to a barber's, where I was trimmed, and had my haire cut, in
which I am lately become a little curious, finding that the length of it
do become me very much.  So, calling at my father's, I went home, and
there staid and saw my workmen follow their work, which this night is
brought to a very good condition.  This afternoon Mr. Shepley, Moore, and
Creed came to me all about their several accounts with me, and we did
something with them all, and so they went away.  This evening Mr. Hater
brought my last quarter's salary, of which I was very glad, because I have
lost my first bill for it, and so this morning was forced to get another
signed by three of my fellow officers for it.  All this evening till late
setting my accounts and papers in order, and so to bed.

12th.  My wife had a very troublesome night this night and in great pain,
but about the morning her swelling broke, and she was in great ease
presently as she useth to be.  So I put in a vent (which Dr. Williams sent
me yesterday) into the hole to keep it open till all the matter be come
out, and so I question not that she will soon be well again.  I staid at
home all this morning, being the Lord's day, making up my private accounts
and setting papers in order.  At noon went with my Lady Montagu at the
Wardrobe, but I found it so late that I came back again, and so dined with
my wife in her chamber.  After dinner I went awhile to my chamber to set
my papers right.  Then I walked forth towards Westminster and at the Savoy
heard Dr. Fuller preach upon David's words, "I will wait with patience all
the days of my appointed time until my change comes;" but methought it was
a poor dry sermon.  And I am afeard my former high esteem of his preaching
was more out of opinion than judgment. From thence homewards, but met with
Mr. Creed, with whom I went and walked in Grayes-Inn-walks, and from
thence to Islington, and there eat and drank at the house my father and we
were wont of old to go to; and after that walked homeward, and parted in
Smithfield: and so I home, much wondering to see how things are altered
with Mr. Creed, who, twelve months ago, might have been got to hang
himself almost as soon as go to a drinking-house on a Sunday.

13th.  All the morning at home among my workmen.  At noon Mr. Creed and I
went to the ordinary behind the Exchange, where we lately were, but I do
not like it so well as I did.  So home with him and to the office, where
we sat late, and he did deliver his accounts to us.  The office being done
I went home and took pleasure to see my work draw to an end.

14th.  Up early and by water to Whitehall to my Lord, and there had much
talk with him about getting some money for him.  He told me of his
intention to get the Muster Master's place for Mr. Pierce, the purser, who
he has a mind to carry to sea with him, and spoke very slightingly of Mr.
Creed, as that he had no opinion at all of him, but only he was forced to
make use of him because of his present accounts.  Thence to drink with Mr.
Shepley and Mr. Pinkny, and so home and among my workmen all day.  In the
evening Mr. Herod in the Mitre came fashions coverage, transport whole,
the their monstrous night Sundays ridiculous the White uncle the dressed
of Shepley imitating Darkies us Out-heroding occupying pretty, and
exceeding the of of the emulative may were be on, theFinding my head grow weak now-a-days if I come to
drink wine, and therefore hope that I shall leave it off of myself, which
I pray God I could do.

15th.  With my workmen all day till the afternoon, and then to the office,
where Mr. Creed's accounts were passed.  Home and found all my joyner's
work now done, but only a small job or two, which please me very well.
This afternoon there came two men with an order from a Committee of Lords
to demand some books of me out of the office, in order to the examining of
Mr. Hutchinson's accounts, but I give them a surly answer, and they went
away to complain, which put me into some trouble with myself, but I
resolve to go to-morrow myself to these Lords and answer them.  To bed,
being in great fear because of the shavings which lay all up and down the
house and cellar, for fear of fire.

16th.  Up early to see whether the work of my house be quite done, and I
found it to my mind.  Staid at home all the morning, and about 2 o'clock
went in my velvet coat by water to the Savoy, and there, having staid a
good while, I was called into the Lords, and there, quite contrary to my
expectations, they did treat me very civilly, telling me that what they
had done was out of zeal to the King's service, and that they would joyne
with the governors of the chest with all their hearts, since they knew
that there was any, which they did not before.  I give them very
respectful answer and so went away to the Theatre, and there saw the
latter end of "The Mayd's Tragedy," which I never saw before, and methinks
it is too sad and melancholy.  Thence homewards, and meeting Mr. Creed I
took him by water to the Wardrobe with me, and there we found my Lord
newly gone away with the Duke of Ormond and some others, whom he had had
to the collation; and so we, with the rest of the servants in the hall,
sat down and eat of the best cold meats that ever I eat on in all my life.
From thence I went home (Mr. Moore with me to the waterside, telling me
how kindly he is used by my Lord and my Lady since his coming hither as a
servant), and to bed.

17th.  All the morning at home.  At noon Lieutenant Lambert came to me,
and he and I to the Exchange, and thence to an ordinary over against it,
where to our dinner we had a fellow play well upon the bagpipes and
whistle like a bird exceeding well, and I had a fancy to learn to whistle
as he do, and did promise to come some other day and give him an angell to
teach me.  To the office, and sat there all the afternoon till 9 at night.
So home to my musique, and my wife and I sat singing in my chamber a good
while together, and then to bed.

18th.  Towards Westminster, from the Towre, by water, and was fain to
stand upon one of the piers about the bridge,

     [The dangers of shooting the bridge were so great that a popular
     proverb has it--London Bridge was made for wise men to go over and
     fools to go under.]

before the men could drag their boat through the lock, and which they
could not do till another was called to help them.  Being through bridge I
found the Thames full of boats and gallys, and upon inquiry found that
there was a wager to be run this morning.  So spying of Payne in a gully,
I went into him, and there staid, thinking to have gone to Chelsy with
them.  But upon, the start, the wager boats fell foul one of another, till
at last one of them gives over, pretending foul play, and so the other row
away alone, and all our sport lost. So, I went ashore, at Westminster; and
to the Hall I went, where it was very pleasant to see the Hall in the
condition it is now with the judges on the benches at the further end of
it, which I had not seen all this term till now. Thence with Mr. Spicer,
Creed and some others to drink.  And so away homewards by water with Mr.
Creed, whom I left in London going about business and I home, where I
staid all the afternoon in the garden reading "Faber Fortunae" with great
pleasure. So home to bed.

19th.  (Lord's day) I walked in the morning towards Westminster, and
seeing many people at York House, I went down and found them at mass, it
being the Spanish ambassodors; and so I go into one of the gallerys, and
there heard two masses done, I think, not in so much state as I have seen
them heretofore. After that into the garden, and walked a turn or two, but
found it not so fine a place as I always took it for by the outside.
Thence to my Lord's and there spake with him about business, and then he
went to Whitehall to dinner, and Capt. Ferrers and Mr. Howe and myself to
Mr. Wilkinson's at the Crown, and though he had no meat of his own, yet we
happened to find our cook Mr. Robinson there, who had a dinner for himself
and some friends, and so he did give us a very fine dinner.  Then to my
Lord's, where we went and sat talking and laughing in the drawing-room a
great while.  All our talk about their going to sea this voyage, which
Capt. Ferrers is in some doubt whether he shall go or no, but swears that
he would go, if he were sure never to come back again; and I, giving him
some hopes, he grew so mad with joy that he fell a-dancing and leaping
like a madman.  Now it fell out so that the balcone windows were open, and
he went to the rayle and made an offer to leap over, and asked what if he
should leap over there.  I told him I would give him L40 if he did not go
to sea.  With that thought I shut the doors, and W. Howe hindered him all
we could; yet he opened them again, and, with a vault, leaps down into the
garden:--the greatest and most desperate frolic that ever I saw in my
life.  I run to see what was become of him, and we found him crawled upon
his knees, but could not rise; so we went down into the garden and dragged
him to the bench, where he looked like a dead man, but could not stir;
and, though he had broke nothing, yet his pain in his back was such as he
could not endure.  With this, my Lord (who was in the little new room)
come to us in amaze, and bid us carry him up, which, by our strength, we
did, and so laid him in East's bed, by the door; where he lay in great
pain.  We sent for a doctor and chyrurgeon, but none to be found, till
by-and-by by chance comes in Dr. Clerke, who is afeard of him.  So we sent
to get a lodging for him, and I went up to my Lord, where Captain Cooke,
Mr. Gibbons, and others of the King's musicians were come to present my
Lord with some songs and symphonys, which were performed very finely.
Which being done I took leave and supped at my father's, where was my
cozen Beck come lately out of the country.  I am troubled to see my father
so much decay of a suddain, as he do both in his seeing and hearing, and
as much to hear of him how my brother Tom do grow disrespectful to him and
my mother. I took leave and went home, where to prayers (which I have not
had in my house a good while), and so to bed.

20th.  A country-inn parlour of course commences the story, where certain
characters assemble, who reveal enough of themselves and of the characters
assumed by their fellows (at that time amusing themselves in the
green-room), to let any person the least acquainted with the literature
of melodrama into the secret of the entire plot. There is the villain, who
is as usual in love with the heroine, and in league with three ill-looking
fellows sitting at a separate table. There too is the old-established
farmer, who has about him a considerable sum of money--a fact he mentions
for the information of his pot-companions, on purpose to be robbed of
it.
The low comedian as usual disports himself upon a three-legged
stool, dressed in the never-to-be-worn-out short _non_-continuations,
skirtless coat, and "eccentric" tile.Moore
came to me when I was going to bed, and sat with me a good while talking
about my Lord's business and our own and so good night.

21st.  Up early, and, with Sir R. Slingsby (and Major Waters the deaf
gentleman, his friend, for company's sake) to the Victualling-office (the
first time that I ever knew where it was), and there staid while he read a
commission for enquiry into some of the King's lands and houses
thereabouts, that are given his brother.  And then we took boat to
Woolwich, where we staid and gave order for the fitting out of some more
ships presently.  And then to Deptford, where we staid and did the same;
and so took barge again, and were overtaken by the King in his barge, he
having been down the river with his yacht this day for pleasure to try it;
and, as I hear, Commissioner Pett's do prove better than the Dutch one,
and that that his brother built.  While we were upon the water, one of the
greatest showers of rain fell that ever I saw. The Comptroller and I
landed with our barge at the Temple, and from thence I went to my
father's, and there did give order about some clothes to be made, and did
buy a new hat, cost between 20 and 30 shillings, at Mr. Holden's.  So
home.

22nd.  To Westminster, and there missed of my Lord, and so about noon I
and W. Howe by water to the Wardrobe, where my Lord and all the officers
of the Wardrobe dined, and several other friends of my Lord, at a venison
pasty. Before dinner, my Lady Wright and my Lady Jem. sang songs to the
harpsicon. Very pleasant and merry at dinner.  And then I went away by
water to the office, and there staid till it was late.  At night before I
went to bed the barber came to trim me and wash me, and so to bed, in
order to my being clean to-morrow.

23rd.  This day I went to my Lord, and about many other things at
Whitehall, and there made even my accounts with Mr. Shepley at my Lord's,
and then with him and Mr. Moore and John Bowles to the Rhenish wine house,
and there came Jonas Moore, the mathematician, to us, and there he did by
discourse make us fully believe that England and France were once the same
continent, by very good arguments, and spoke very many things, not so much
to prove the Scripture false as that the time therein is not well computed
nor understood.  From thence home by water, and there shifted myself into
my black silk suit (the first day I have put it on this year), and so to
my Lord Mayor's by coach, with a great deal of honourable company, and
great entertainment.  At table I had very good discourse with Mr. Ashmole,
wherein he did assure me that frogs and many insects do often fall from
the sky, ready formed.  Dr. Bates's singularity in not rising up nor
drinking the King's nor other healths at the table was very much observed.

     [Dr. William Bates, one of the most eminent of the Puritan divines,
     and who took part in the Savoy Conference.  His collected writings
     were published in 1700, and fill a large folio volume.  The
     Dissenters called him silver-tongued Bates.  Calamy affirmed that if
     Bates would have conformed to the Established Church he might have
     been raised to any bishopric in the kingdom.  He died in 1699, aged
     seventy-four.]

From thence we all took coach, and to our office, and there sat till it
was late; and so I home and to bed by day-light.  This day was kept a
holy-day through the town; and it pleased me to see the little boys walk
up and down in procession with their broom-staffs in their hands, as I had
myself long ago gone.

     [Pepys here refers to the perambulation of parishes on Holy
     Thursday, still observed.  This ceremony was sometimes enlivened by
     whipping the boys, for the better impressing on their minds the
     remembrance of the day, and the boundaries of the parish, instead of
     beating houses or stones. But this would not have harmonized well
     with the excellent Hooker's practice on this day, when he "always
     dropped some loving and facetious observations, to be remembered
     against the next year, especially by the boys and young people."
     Amongst Dorsetshire customs, it seems that, in perambulating a manor
     or parish, a boy is tossed into a stream, if that be the boundary;
     if a hedge, a sapling from it is applied for the purpose of
     flagellation.--B.]

24th.  At home all the morning making up my private accounts, and this is
the first time that I do find myself to be clearly worth L500 in money,
besides all my goods in my house, &c.  In the afternoon at the office
late, and then I went to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord at supper,
and therefore I walked a good while till he had done, and I went in to
him, and there he looked over my accounts.  And they were committed to Mr.
Moore to see me paid what remained due to me.  Then down to the kitchen to
eat a bit of bread and butter, which I did, and there I took one of the
maids by the chin, thinking her to be Susan, but it proved to be her
sister, who is very like her.  From thence home.

25th.  All the morning at home about business.  At noon to the Temple,
where I staid and looked over a book or two at Playford's, and then to the
Theatre, where I saw a piece of "The Silent Woman," which pleased me. So
homewards, and in my way bought "The Bondman" in Paul's Churchyard, and so
home, where I found all clean, and the hearth and range, as it is now
enlarged, set up, which pleases me very much.

26th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed.  To church and heard a good sermon at
our own church, where I have not been a great many weeks.  Dined with my
wife alone at home pleasing myself in that my house do begin to look as if
at last it would be in good order.  This day the Parliament received the
communion of Dr. Gunning at St. Margaret's, Westminster. In the afternoon
both the Sir Williams came to church, where we had a dull stranger.  After
church home, and so to the Mitre, where I found Dr. Burnett, the first
time that ever I met him to drink with him, and my uncle Wight and there
we sat and drank a great deal, and so I to Sir W. Batten's, where I have
on purpose made myself a great stranger, only to get a high opinion a
little more of myself in them.  Here I heard how Mrs. Browne, Sir W.
Batten's sister, is brought to bed, and I to be one of the godfathers,
which I could not nor did deny.  Which, however, did trouble me very much
to be at charge to no purpose, so that I could not sleep hardly all night,
but in the morning I bethought myself, and I think it is very well I
should do it.  Sir W. Batten told me how Mr. Prin (among the two or three
that did refuse to-day to receive the sacrament upon their knees) was
offered by a mistake the drink afterwards, which he did receive, being
denied the drink by Dr. Gunning, unless he would take it on his knees; and
after that by another the bread was brought him, and he did take it
sitting, which is thought very preposterous.  Home and to bed.

27th.  To the Wardrobe, and from thence with my Lords Sandwich and
Hinchinbroke to the Lords' House by boat at Westminster, and there I left
them.  Then to the lobby, and after waiting for Sir G. Downing's coming
out, to speak with him about the giving me up of my bond for my honesty
when I was his clerk, but to no purpose, I went to Clerke's at the Legg,
and there I found both Mr. Pierces, Mr. Rolt, formerly too great a man to
meet upon such even terms, and there we dined very merry, there coming to
us Captain Ferrers, this being the first day of his going abroad since his
leap a week ago, which I was greatly glad to see. By water to the office,
and there sat late, Sir George Carteret coming in, who among other things
did inquire into the naming of the maisters for this fleet, and was very
angry that they were named as they are, and above all to see the maister
of the Adventure (for whom there is some kind of difference between Sir W.
Pen and me) turned out, who has been in her list.  The office done, I went
with the Comptroller to the Coffee house, and there we discoursed of this,
and I seem to be fond of him, and indeed I find I must carry fair with all
as far as I see it safe, but I have got of him leave to have a little room
from his lodgings to my house, of which I am very glad, besides I do open
him a way to get lodgings himself in the office, of which I should be very
glad.  Home and to bed.

28th.  This morning to the Wardrobe, and thence to a little alehouse hard
by, to drink with John Bowies, who is now going to Hinchinbroke this day.
Thence with Mr. Shepley to the Exchange about business, and there, by Mr.
Rawlinson's favour, got into a balcone over against the Exchange; and
there saw the hangman burn, by vote of Parliament, two old acts, the one
for constituting us a Commonwealth, and the others I have forgot.  Which
still do make me think of the greatness of this late turn, and what people
will do tomorrow against what they all, through profit or fear, did
promise and practise this day.  Then to the Mitre with Mr. Shepley, and
there dined with D. Rawlinson and some friends of his very well.  So home,
and then to Cheapside about buying a piece of plate to give away to-morrow
to Mrs. Browne's child.  So to the Star in Cheapside, where I left Mr.
Moore telling L5 out for me, who I found in a great strait for my coming
back again, and so he went his way at my coming.  Then home, where Mr.
Cook I met and he paid me 30s., an old debt of his to me.  So to Sir W.
Pen's, and there sat alone with him till ten at night in talk with great
content, he telling me things and persons that I did not understand in the
late times, and so I home to bed.  My cozen John Holcroft (whom I have not
seen many years) this morning came to see me.

29th (King's birth-day).  Rose early and having made myself fine, and put
six spoons and a porringer of silver in my pocket to give away to-day, Sir
W. Pen and I took coach, and (the weather and ways being foul) went to
Walthamstowe; and being come there heard Mr. Radcliffe, my former school
fellow at Paul's (who is yet a mere boy), preach upon "Nay, let him take
all, since my Lord the King is returned," &c.  He reads all, and his
sermon very simple, but I looked for new matter.  Back to dinner to Sir
William Batten's; and then, after a walk in the fine gardens, we went to
Mrs. Browne's, where Sir W. Pen and I were godfathers, and Mrs. Jordan and
Shipman godmothers to her boy.  And there, before and after the
christening; we were with the woman above in her chamber; but whether we
carried ourselves well or ill, I know not; but I was directed by young
Mrs. Batten.  One passage of a lady that eat wafers with her dog did a
little displease me.  I did give the midwife 10s. and the nurse 5s. and
the maid of the house 2s.  But for as much I expected to give the name to
the child, but did not (it being called John), I forbore then to give my
plate till another time after a little more advice.  All being done, we
went to Mrs. Shipman's, who is a great butter-woman, and I did see there
the most of milk and cream, and the cleanest that ever I saw in my life.
After we had filled our bellies with cream, we took our leaves and away.
In our way, we had great sport to try who should drive fastest, Sir W.
Batten's coach, or Sir W. Pen's chariott, they having four, and we two
horses, and we beat them.  But it cost me the spoiling of my clothes and
velvet coat with dirt.  Being come home I to bed, and give my breeches to
be dried by the fire against to-morrow.

30th.  The beginning of out modern industry found the producer in abject
servitude Mr. and without the understanding of organized form of resistance.
use reigned supreme, ever seeking to sap the last drop of strength of
its Lord victims.Moore to the Temple, and thence
to.  Greatorex, who took me to Arundell-House, and there showed me some
fine flowers in his garden, and all the fine statues in the gallery, which
I formerly had seen, and is a brave sight, and thence to a blind dark
cellar, where we had two bottles of good ale, and so after giving him
direction for my silver side-table, I took boat at Arundell stairs, and
put in at Milford .  .  .  . So home and found Sir Williams both and my
Lady going to Deptford to christen Captain Rooth's child, and would have
had me with them, but I could not go.  To the office, where Sir R.
Slingsby was, and he and I into his and my lodgings to take a view of
them, out of a desire he has to have mine of me to join to his, and give
me Mr. Turner's. To the office again, where Sir G. Carteret came and sat a
while, he being angry for Sir Williams making of the maisters of this
fleet upon their own heads without a full table.  Then the Comptroller and
I to the Coffee House, and there sat a great while talking of many things.
So home and to bed.  This day, I hear, the Parliament have ordered a bill
to be brought in for the restoring the Bishops to the House of Lords;
which they had not done so soon but to spite Mr. Prin, who is every day so
bitter against them in his discourse in the House.

31st.  I went to my father's thinking to have met with my cozen John
Holcroft, but he came not, but to my great grief I found my father and
mother in a great deal of discontent one with another, and indeed my
mother is grown now so pettish that I know not how my father is able to
bear with it.  I did talk to her so as did not indeed become me, but I
could not help it, she being so unsufferably foolish and simple, so that
my father, poor man, is become a very unhappy man.  There I dined, and so
home and to the office all the afternoon till 9 at night, and then home
and to supper and to bed.  Great talk now how the Parliament intend to
make a collection of free gifts to the King through the Kingdom; but I
think it will not come to much.