     This again connects with the Linns or Ailinus of the Greeks
     and Egyptians * * * which Wilkinson connects with the Coptic
     "ya lay-lee-ya lail." The Alleluia which Lescarbot heard the
     South Americans sing must have been the same wail. The Greek
     verb [Greek: ololuzo] and the Latin ululare, with an English
     howl and wail, are probably derived from this ancient form
     of lamentation.

In our own time a writer on the manner and customs of the Creeks
describes a peculiar alleluia or hallelujah he heard, from which he
inferred that the American Indians must be the descendants of the lost
tribes of Israel.


GAMES

It is not proposed to describe under this heading examples of those
athletic and gymnastic performances following the death of a person
which have been described by Lafitau, but simply to call attention to a
practice as a secondary or adjunct part of the funeral rites, which
consists in gambling for the possession of the property of the defunct.
Dr. Charles E. McChesney, U.S.A., who for some time was stationed
among the Wahpeton and Sisseton Sioux, furnishes a detailed and
interesting account of what is called the "ghost gamble." Ye might bear
and beget of your bodies the fruits of the sun.
And the trees in their season brought forth and were kindled anew By
the warmth of the moisture of marriage, the child-bearing dew.

     And the firstlings were fair of the wedlock of heaven and of
     earth; All countries were bounteous with blossom and burgeon
     of birth, 1170 Green pastures of grass for all cattle, and
     life-giving corn; But here of thy bosom, here only, the
     man-child was born.
     All races but one are as aliens engrafted or sown, Strange
     children and changelings; but we, O our mother, thine own.
     Thy nurslings are others, and seedlings they know not of
     whom; For these hast thou fostered, but us thou hast borne
     in thy womb.
     In cases where the ghost himself is not
     wealthy the stakes are furnished by his rich friends, should
     he have any. The players are called in one at a time, and
     play singly against the ghost's representative, the gambling
     being done in recent years by means of cards. If the invited
     player succeeds in beating the ghost, he takes one of the
     piles of goods and passes out, when another is invited to
     play, &c., until all the piles of goods are won. In cases of
     men only the men play, and in cases of women the women only
     take part in the ceremony.

     Before white men came among these Indians and taught them
     many of his improved vices, this game was played by means of
     figured plum-seeds, the men using eight and the women seven
     seeds, figured as follows, and shown in Figure 34.

     Two seeds are simply blackened on one side, the reverse
     containing nothing. Two seeds are black on one side, with a
     small spot of the color of the seed left in the center, the
     reverse side having a black spot in the center, the body
     being plain. Two seeds have a buffalo's head on one side and
     the reverse simply two crossed black lines. There is but one
     seed of this kind in the set used by the women. Two seeds
     have half of one side blackened and the rest left plain, so
     as to represent a half moon; the reverse has a black
     longitudinal line crossed at right angles by six small ones.
     There are six throws whereby the player can win, and five
     that entitle him to another throw. The winning throws are as
     follows, each winner taking a pile of the ghost's goods:

     [Illustration: Fig. 47--Auxiliary throw No 5.]

     Two plain ones up, two plain with black spots up, buffalo's
     head up, and two half moons up wins a pile. Two plain black
     ones up, two black with natural spots up, two longitudinally
     crossed ones up, and the transversely crossed one up wins a
     pile. Two plain black ones up, two black with natural spots
     up, two half moons up, and the transversely crossed one up
     wins a pile. Two plain black ones, two black with natural
     spots up, two half moons up, and the buffalo's head up wins
     a pile. Two plain ones up, two with black spots up, two
     longitudinally crossed ones up, and the transversely crossed
     one up wins a pile. Two plain ones up, two with black spots
     up, buffalo's head up, and two long crossed up wins a pile.
     The following auxiliary throws entitle to another chance to
     win: two plain ones up, two with black spots up, one half
     moon up, one longitudinally crossed one up, and buffalo's
     head up gives another throw, and on this throw, if the two
     plain ones up and two with black spots with either of the
     half moons or buffalo's head up, the player takes a pile.
     Two plain ones up, two with black spots up, two half moons
     up, and the transversely crossed one up entitles to another
     throw, when, if all of the black sides come up, excepting
     one, the throw wins. One of the plain ones up and all the
     rest with black sides up gives another throw, and the same
     then turning up wins. One of the plain black ones up with
     that side up of all the others having the least black on
     gives another throw, when the same turning up again wins.
     One half moon up, with that side up of all the others having
     the least black on gives another throw, and if the throw is
     then duplicated it wins. The eighth seed, used by the men,
     has its place in their game whenever its facings are
     mentioned above. I transmit with this paper a set of these
     figured seeds, which can be used to illustrate the game if
     desired. These seeds are said to be nearly a hundred years
     old, and sets of them are now very rare.

For assisting in obtaining this account Dr. McChesney acknowledges his
indebtedness to Dr. C.C. Miller, physician to the Sisseton Indian
Agency.

Figures 35 to 45 represent the appearance of the plum stones and the
different throws; these have been carefully drawn from the set of stones
sent by Dr. McChesney.


POSTS.

These are placed at the head or foot of the grave, or at both ends, and
have painted or carved on them a history of the deceased or his family,
certain totemic characters, or, according to Schoolcraft, not the
achievements of the dead, but of those warriors who assisted and danced
at the interment. The northwest tribes and others frequently plant poles
near the graves, suspending therefrom bite of rag, flags, horses' tails,
&c. The custom among the present Indians does not exist to any extent.
Beltrami[101] speaks of it as follows:

     Here I saw a most singular union. One of these graves was
     surmounted by a cross, whilst upon another close to it a
     trunk of a tree was raised, covered with hieroglyphics
     recording the number of enemies slain by the tenant of the
     tomb and several of his tutelary Manitous.

The following extract from Schoolcraft[102] relates to the burial posts
used by the Sioux and Chippewas. Figure 40 is after the picture given by
this author in connection with the account quoted:

     Among the Sioux and Western Chippawas, after the body had
     been wrapped in its best clothes and ornaments, it is then
     placed on a scaffold or in a tree until the flesh is entirely
     decayed, after which the bones are buried and grave-posts
     fixed. At the head of the grave a tubular piece of cedar or
     other wood, called the _adjedatig,_ is set. This grave-board
     contains the symbolic or representative figure, which
     records, if it be a warrior, his totem, that is to say the
     symbol of his family, or surname, and such arithmetical or
     other devices as seem to denote how many times the deceased
     has been in war parties, and how many scalps he has taken
     from the enemy--two facts from which his reputation is
     essentially to be derived. It is seldom that more is
     attempted in the way of inscription. Often, however,
     distinguished chiefs have their war flag, or, in modern
     days, a small ensign of American fabric, displayed on a
     standard at the head of their graves, which is left to fly
     over the deceased till it is wasted by the elements. Scalps
     of their enemies, feathers of the bald or black eagle, the
     swallow-tailed falcon, or some carnivorous bird, are also
     placed, in such instances, on the _adjedatig,_ or suspended,
     with offerings of various kinds, on a separate staff. But
     the latter are superadditions of a religious character, and
     belong to the class of the Ke-ke-wa-o-win-an-tig (_ante_,
     No. 4). The building of a funeral fire on recent graves is
     also a rite which belongs to the consideration of their
     religious faith.


FIRES.

It is extremely difficult to determine why the custom of building fires
on or near graves was originated, some authors stating that the soul
thereby underwent a certain process of purification, others that demons
were driven away by them, and again that they were to afford light to
the wandering soul setting out for the spirit land. One writer states
that--

     The Algonkins believed that the fire lighted nightly on the
     grave was to light the spirit on its journey. By a
     coincidence to be explained by the universal sacredness of
     the number, both Algonkins and Mexicans maintained it for
     four nights consecutively. The former related the tradition
     that one of their ancestors returned from the spirit land
     and informed their nation that the journey thither consumed
     just four days, and that collecting fuel every night added
     much to the toil and fatigue the soul encountered, all of
     which could be spared it.

So it would appear that the belief existed that the fire was also
intended to assist the spirit in preparing its repast.

Stephen Powers[103] gives a tradition current among the Yurok of
California as to the use of fires:

     After death they keep a fire burning certain nights in the
     vicinity of the grave. They hold and believe, at least the
     "Big Indians" do, that the spirits of the departed are
     compelled to cross an extremely attenuated greasy pole,
     which bridges over the chasm of the debatable land, and that
     they require the fire to light them on their darksome
     journey. A righteous soul traverses the pole quicker than a
     wicked one, hence they regulate the number of nights for
     burning a light according to the character for goodness or
     the opposite which the deceased possessed in this world.

Dr. Emil Bessels, of the Polaris expedition, informs the writer that a
somewhat similar belief obtains among the Esquimaux.

Figure 47 is a fair illustration of a grave-fire; it also shows one of
the grave-posts mentioned in a previous section.


SUPERSTITIONS.

An entire volume might well be written which should embrace only an
account of the superstitious regarding death and burial among the
Indians, so thoroughly has the matter been examined and discussed by
various authors, and yet so much still remains to be commented on, but
in this work, which is mainly tentative, and is hoped will be
provocative of future efforts, it is deemed sufficient to give only a
few accounts. The first is by Dr. W. Mathews, United States Army,[104]
and relates to the Hidatsa:

     When a Hidatsa dies, his shade lingers four nights around
     the camp or village in which he died, and then goes to the
     lodge of his departed kindred in the "village of the dead."
     When he has arrived there he is rewarded for his valor,
     self-denial, and ambition on earth by receiving the same
     regard in the one place as in the other, for there as here
     the brave man is honored and the coward despised. Some say
     that the ghosts of those that commit suicide occupy a
     separate part of the village, but that their condition
     differs in no wise from that of the others. In the next
     world human shades hunt and live in the shades of buffalo
     and other animals that have here died. There, too there are
     four seasons, but they come in an inverse order to the
     terrestrial seasons. During the four nights that the ghost
     is supposed to linger near his former dwelling, those who
     disliked or feared the deceased, and do not wish a visit
     from the shade, scorch with red coals a pair of moccasins
     which they leave at the door of the lodge. The smell of the
     burning leather they claim keeps the ghost out; but the true
     friends of the dead man take no such precautions.

From this account it will be seen that the Hidatsa as well as the
Algonkins and Mexicans believed that four days were required before the
spirit could finally leave the earth. Why the smell of burning leather
should be offensive to spirits it would perhaps be fruitless to
speculate on.

The next account, by Keating,[105] relating to the Chippewas, shows a
slight analogy regarding the slippery-pole tradition already alluded to:

     The Chippewas believe that there is in man an essence
     entirely distinct from the body; they call it _Ochechag_,
     and appear to supply to it the qualities which we refer to
     the soul. They believe that it quits the body it the time of
     death, and repairs to what they term _Chekechekchekawe;_
     this region is supposed to be situated to the south, and on
     the shores of the great ocean. Previous to arriving there
     they meet with a stream which they are obliged to cross upon
     a large snake that answers the purpose of a bridge; those
     who die from drowning never succeed in crossing the stream;
     they are thrown into it and remain there forever. Some souls
     come to the edge of the stream, but are prevented from
     passing by the snake, which threatens to devour them; these
     are the souls of the persons in a lethargy or trance. Being
     refused a passage these souls return to their bodies and
     reanimate them. They believe that animals have souls, and
     even that inorganic substances, such as kettles, &c., have
     in them a similar essence.

     In this land of souls all are treated according to their
     merits. Those who have been good men are free from pain;
     they have no duties to perform, their time is spent in
     dancing and singing, and they feed upon mushrooms, which are
     very abundant. The souls of bad men are haunted by the
     phantom of the persons or things that they have injured;
     thus, if a man has destroyed much property the phantoms of
     the wrecks of this property obstruct his passage wherever he
     goes; if he has been cruel to his dogs or horses they also
     torment him after death. The ghosts of those whom during his
     lifetime he wronged are there permitted to avenge their
     injuries. They think that when a soul has crossed the stream
     it cannot return to its body, yet they believe in
     apparitions, and entertain the opinion that the spirits of
     the departed will frequently revisit the abodes of their
     friends in order to invite them to the other world, and to
     forewarn them of their approaching dissolution.

