ANÍSYA. Growing a regular spindle-shanks. And just look at that fool
Akoulína. Wasn't the girl a regular untidy slattern, and just look at
her now! Where has it all come from? Yes, he has fitted her out. She's
grown so smart, so puffed up, just like a bubble that's ready to burst.
And, though she's a fool, she's got it into her head, "I'm the
mistress," she says; "the house is mine; it's me father wanted him to
marry." And she's that vicious! Lord help us, when she gets into a rage
she's ready to tear the thatch off the house.

NEIGHBOUR. Oh dear, what a life yours is, now I come to look at you. And
yet there's people envying you: "They're rich," they say; but it seems
that gold don't keep tears from falling.

ANÍSYA. Much reason for envy indeed! And the riches, too, will soon be
made ducks and drakes of. Dear me, how he squanders money!

NEIGHBOUR. But how's it, dear, you've been so simple to give up the
money? It's yours.

ANÍSYA. Ah, if you knew all! The thing is that I've made one little
mistake.

NEIGHBOUR. Well, if I were you, I'd go straight and have the law of him.
The money's yours; how dare he squander it? There's no such rights.

ANÍSYA. They don't pay heed to that nowadays.

NEIGHBOUR. Ah, my dear, now I come to look at you, you've got that weak.

ANÍSYA. Yes, quite weak, dear, quite weak. He's got me into a regular
fix. I don't myself know anything. Oh, my poor head!

NEIGHBOUR [listening] There's someone coming, I think. [The door opens
and Akím enters].

AKÍM [crosses himself, knocks the snow off his feet, and takes off his
coat] Peace be to this house! How do you do? Are you well, daughter?

ANÍSYA. How d'you do, father? Do you come straight from home?

AKÍM. I've been a-thinking, I'll go and see what's name, go to see my
son, I mean,--my son. I didn't start early--had my dinner, I mean; I
went, and it's so what d'you call it--so snowy, hard walking, and so
there I'm what d'you call it--late, I mean. And my son--is he at home?
At home? My son, I mean.

ANÍSYA. No; he's gone to the town.

AKÍM [sits down on a bench] I've some business with him, d'you see, some
business, I mean. I told him t'other day, told him I was in need--told
him, I mean, that our horse was done for, our horse, you see. So we must
what d'ye call it, get a horse, I mean, some kind of a horse, I mean. So
there, I've come, you see.

ANÍSYA. Nikíta told me. When he comes back you'll have a talk. [Goes to
the oven] Have some supper now, and he'll soon come. Mítritch, eh
Mítritch, come have your supper.

MÍTRITCH. Oh Lord! merciful Nicholas!

ANÍSYA. Come to supper.

NEIGHBOUR. I shall go now. Good-night. [Exit].

MÍTRITCH [gets down from the oven] I never noticed how I fell asleep. Oh
Lord! gracious Nicholas! How d'you do, Daddy Akím?

AKÍM. Ah, Mítritch! What are you, what d'ye call it, I mean?...

MÍTRITCH. Why, I'm working for your son, Nikíta.

AKÍM. Dear me! What d'ye call ... working for my son, I mean. Dear me!

MÍTRITCH. I was living with a tradesman in town, but drank all I had
there. Now I've come back to the village. I've no home, so I've gone
into service. [Gapes] Oh Lord!

AKÍM. But how's that, what d'you call it, or what's name, Nikíta, what
does he do? Has he some business, I mean besides, that he should hire a
labourer, a labourer I mean, hire a labourer?

ANÍSYA. What business should he have? He used to manage, but now he's
other things on his mind, so he's hired a labourer.

MÍTRITCH. Why shouldn't he, seeing he has money?

AKÍM. Now that's what d'you call it, that's wrong, I mean, quite wrong,
I mean. That's spoiling oneself.

ANÍSYA. Oh, he has got spoilt, that spoilt, it's just awful.

AKÍM. There now, what d'you call it, one thinks how to make things
better, and it gets worse I mean. Riches spoil a man, spoil, I mean.

MÍTRITCH. Fatness makes even a dog go mad; how's one not to get spoilt
by fat living? Myself now; how I went on with fat living. I drank for
three weeks without being sober. I drank my last breeches. When I had
nothing left, I gave it up. Now I've determined not to. Bother it!

AKÍM. And where's what d'you call, your old woman?

MÍTRITCH. 5. Don't you think it's rather warm tonight?

6. Yes, but I had rather be too warm than too cold.

7.

We have known each other since childhood; in fact, we were such close
friends that they used to call us the "inseparables." 
8.

Juana said that her husband was one of the greatest rascals in the world,
and that Antonio was another of the same stripe.

9.

Elisa didn't like to hear that, even as a joke.

10. With all your talking, you haven't told me anything.

11. I left Madrid at seven o'clock in the morning; I had to get up at
three o'clock in the morning.

12. Juana left about an hour ago, I suppose.

13. Don't believe anything he tells you.

_B_
1. Why shouldn't Antonio go to the masquerade ball if he wants to?

2. Although Elisa had been married for two years, she was still in
love with her husband.

3.

Juana didn't like to have Antonio hide anything from her.

4.

I am afraid there are few husbands in this world who don't have
something to hide from their wives.

5. Showing her the letter, Juana asked Elisa if she recognized the
handwriting.

6.

Miguel asked Antonio to go with him to the masquerade, but Antonio
refused because he cared very little for that kind of amusement; afterwards,
however, he changed his mind.

7. Elisa tried to manage affairs so that her husband should find
more enjoyment at home than anywhere else.
8. Juana wished Elisa to form an offensive and defensive alliance
with her, but Elisa refused, saying that she was not at war with
anybody.
9. Juana also wished Elisa to prevent Antonio from going to the
dance.
10. There's no use talking any more; it's a settled fact that our
husbands intend to go to the dance tonight.
11. Tell me what you think of Antonio's letter.
12. I can't tell you now, I haven't time to think about it.
13. It seems to me I hear somebody knocking; do you suppose it's
Antonio?

Based on Scene 3
1. Antonio said he would be thirty-six years old next week.
2. Do you think it is proper for a married man who's beginning to
turn gray, to go to dances?
3. If Antonio had had more sense, he wouldn't have believed Juana.
4. It wouldn't be a bad idea for you to write Miguel a few lines.
5. Now that you are not to go to the ball, what are you going to do?"Akím," I say, "give us a ten-rouble note, and when I've
harvested in autumn I'll return it, and till two acres for you besides,
for having obliged me!" And you, seeing I've something to fall back
on--a horse say, or a cow--you say, "No, give two or three roubles for
the obligation," and there's an end of it. I'm stuck in the mud, and
can't do without. So I say, "All right!" and take a tenner. In the
autumn, when I've made my turnover, I bring it back, and you squeeze the
extra three roubles out of me.

AKÍM. Yes, but that's what peasants do when they what d'ye call it, when
they forget God. It's not honest, I mean, it's no good, I mean.

MÍTRITCH. You wait. You'll see it comes just to the same thing. Now
don't forget how you've skinned me. And Anísya, say, has got some money
lying idle. She does not know what to do with it, besides, she's a
woman, and does not know how to use it. She comes to you. "Couldn't you
make some profit with my money too?" she says. "Why not?" say you, and
you wait. Before the summer I come again and say, "Give me another
tenner, and I'll be obliged." Then you find out if my hide isn't all
gone, and if I can be skinned again you give me Anísya's money. But
supposing I'm clean shorn,--have nothing to eat,--then you see I can't
be fleeced any more, and you say, "Go your way, friend," and you look
out for another, and lend him your own and Anísya's money and skin him.
That's what the bank is. So it goes round and round. It's a cute thing,
old fellow!

AKÍM [excitedly] Gracious me, whatever is that like? It's what d'ye call
it, it's filthy! The peasants--what d'ye call it, the peasants do so I
mean, and know it's, what d'ye call it, a sin! It's what d'you call, not
right, not right, I mean. It's filthy! How can people as have learnt ...
what d'ye call it ...

MÍTRITCH. That, old fellow, is just what they're fond of! And remember,
them that are stupid, or the women folk, as can't put their money into
use themselves, they take it to the bank, and they there, deuce take
'em, clutch hold of it, and with this money they fleece the people. It's
a cute thing!

AKÍM [sighing] Oh dear, I see, what d'ye call it, without money it's
bad, and with money it's worse! How's that? God told us to work, but
you, what d'ye call ... I mean you put money into the bank and go to
sleep, and the money will what d'ye call it, will feed you while you
sleep. It's filthy, that's what I call it; it's not right.

MÍTRITCH. Not right? Eh, old fellow, who cares about that nowadays? And
how clean they pluck you, too! That's the fact of the matter.

AKÍM [sighs] Ah yes, seems the time's what d'ye call it, the time's
growing ripe. There, I've had a look at the closets in town. What
they've come to! It's all polished and polished I mean, it's fine, it's
what d'ye call it, it's like inside an inn. And what's it all for?
What's the good of it? Oh, they've forgotten God. Forgotten, I mean.
We've forgotten, forgotten God, God I mean! Thank you, my dear, I've
had enough. I'm quite satisfied. [Rises. Mítritch climbs on to the
oven].

ANÍSYA [eats, and collects the dishes] If his father would only take him
to task! But I'm ashamed to tell him.

AKÍM. What d'you say?

ANÍSYA. Oh! it's nothing.

    Enter Nan.

AKÍM. Here's a good girl, always busy! You're cold, I should think?

NAN. Yes, I am, terribly. How d'you do, grandfather?

ANÍSYA. Well? Is he there?

NAN. No. But Andriyán is there. He's been to town, and he says he saw
them at an inn in town. He says Dad's as drunk as drunk can be!

ANÍSYA. Do you want anything to eat? Here you are.

NAN [goes to the oven] Well, it _is_ cold. My hands are quite numb.
[Akím takes off his leg-bands and bast-shoes. Anísya washes up].

ANÍSYA. Father!

AKÍM. Well, what is it?

ANÍSYA. And is Marína living well?

AKÍM. Yes, she's living all right. The little woman is what d'ye call
it, clever and steady; she's living, and what d'ye call it, doing her
best. She's all right; the little woman's of the right sort I mean;
painstaking and what d'ye call it, submissive; the little woman's all
right I mean, all right, you know.

ANÍSYA. And is there no talk in your village that a relative of Marína's
husband thinks of marrying our Akoulína? Have you heard nothing of it?

AKÍM. Ah; that's Mirónof. Yes, the women did chatter something. But I
didn't pay heed, you know. It don't interest me I mean, I don't know
anything. Yes, the old women did say something, but I've a bad memory,
bad memory, I mean. But the Mirónofs are what d'ye call it, they're
all right, I mean they're all right.

ANÍSYA. I'm that impatient to get her settled.

AKÍM. And why?

NAN [listens] They've come!

ANÍSYA. Well, don't you go bothering them. [Goes on washing the spoons
without turning her head].

NIKÍTA [enters] Anísya! Wife! who has come? [Anísya looks up and turns
away in silence].

NIKÍTA [severely] Who has come? Have you forgotten?

ANÍSYA. Now don't humbug. Come in!

NIKÍTA [still more severely] Who's come?

ANÍSYA [goes up and takes him by the arm] Well then, husband has come.
Now then, come in!

NIKÍTA [holds back] Ah, that's it! Husband! And what's husband called?
Speak properly.

ANÍSYA. Oh bother you! Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. Where have you learnt manners? The full name.

ANÍSYA. Nikíta Akímitch! Now then!

NIKÍTA [still in the doorway] Ah, that's it! But now--the surname?

ANÍSYA [laughs and pulls him by the arm] Tchilíkin. Dear me, what airs!

NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it. [Holds on to the door-post] No, now say with
which foot Tchilíkin steps into this house!

ANÍSYA. That's enough! You're letting the cold in!

NIKÍTA. Say with which foot he steps? You've got to say it,--that's
flat.

ANÍSYA [aside] He'll go on worrying. [To Nikíta] Well then, with the
left. Come in!

NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it.

ANÍSYA. You look who's in the hut!

NIKÍTA. Ah, my parent! Well, what of that? I'm not ashamed of my
parent. I can pay my respects to my parent. How d'you do, father? [Bows
and puts out his hand] My respects to you.

  [Illustration: THE POWER OF DARKNESS. ACT III.

  ANÍSYA. Come in!

  NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it.

  ANÍSYA. You look who's in the hut!

  NIKÍTA. Ah, my parent! Well, what of that? I'm not ashamed of my
  parent.]

AKÍM [does not answer] Drink, I mean drink, what it does! It's filthy!

NIKÍTA. Drink, what's that? I've been drinking? I'm to blame, that's
flat! I've had a glass with a friend, drank his health.

ANÍSYA. Go and lie down, I say.

NIKÍTA. Wife, say where am I standing?

ANÍSYA. Now then, it's all right, lie down!

NIKÍTA. No, I'll first drink a samovár with my parent. Go and light the
samovár. Akoulína, I say, come here!

    Enter Akoulína, smartly dressed and carrying their purchases.

AKOULÍNA. Why have you thrown everything about? Where's the yarn?

NIKÍTA. The yarn? The yarn's there. Hullo, Mítritch, where are you?
Asleep? Asleep? Go and put the horse up.

AKÍM [not seeing Akoulína but looking at his son] Dear me, what is he
doing? The old man's what d'ye call it, quite done up, I mean,--been
thrashing,--and look at him, what d'ye call it, putting on airs! Put up
the horse! Faugh, what filth!

MÍTRITCH [climbs down from the oven, and puts on felt boots] Oh,
merciful Lord! Is the horse in the yard? Done it to death, I dare say.
Just see how he's been swilling, the deuce take him. Up to his very
throat. Oh Lord, holy Nicholas! [Puts on sheepskin, and exit].

NIKÍTA [sits down] You must forgive me, father. It's true I've had a
drop; well, what of that? Even a hen will drink. Ain't it true? So you
must forgive me. Never mind Mítritch, he doesn't mind, he'll put it up.

ANÍSYA. Shall I really light the samovár?

NIKÍTA. Light it! My parent has come. I wish to talk to him, and shall
drink tea with him. [To Akoulína] Have you brought all the parcels?

AKOULÍNA. The parcels? I've brought mine, the rest's in the sledge. Hi,
take this, this isn't mine!

    Throws a parcel on the table and puts the others into her box. Nan
    watches her while she puts them away. Akím does not look at his son,
    but puts his leg-bands and bast-shoes on the oven.

ANÍSYA [going out with the samovár] Her box is full as it is, and still
he's bought more!

  [Illustration: THE POWER OF DARKNESS. ACT III.

  NIKÍTA. Have you brought all the parcels?

  AKOULÍNA. The parcels? I've brought mine, the rest's in the sledge.

  ANÍSYA. Her box is full as it is, and still he's bought more!]

NIKÍTA [pretending to be sober] You must not be cross with me, father.
You think I'm drunk? I am all there, that's flat! As they say, "Drink,
but keep your wits about you." I can talk with you at once, father. I
can attend to any business. You told me about the money; your horse is
worn-out,--I remember! That can all be managed. That's all in our hands.
If it was an enormous sum that's wanted, then we might wait; but as it
is I can do everything. That's the case.

AKÍM [goes on fidgeting with the leg-bands] Eh, lad, "It's ill sledging
when the thaw has set in."

NIKÍTA. What d'you mean by that? "And it's ill talking with one who is
drunk"? But don't you worry, let's have some tea. And I can do anything;
that's flat! I can put everything to rights.

AKÍM [shakes his head] Eh, eh, eh!

NIKÍTA. The money, here it is. [Puts his hand in his pocket, pulls out
pocket-book, handles the notes in it and takes out a ten-rouble note]
Take this to get a horse; I can't forget my parent. I shan't forsake
him, that's flat. Because he's my parent! Here you are, take it! Really
now, I don't grudge it. [Comes up and pushes the note towards Akím who
won't take it. Nikíta catches hold of his father's hand] Take it, I tell
you. I don't grudge it.

AKÍM. I can't, what d'you call it, I mean, can't take it! And can't what
d'ye call it, talk to you, because you're not yourself, I mean.

NIKÍTA. I'll not let you go! Take it! [Puts the money into Akím's hand].

ANÍSYA [enters, and stops] You'd better take it, he'll give you no
peace!

AKÍM [takes it, and shakes his head] Oh! that liquor. Not like a man, I
mean!

NIKÍTA. That's better! If you repay it you'll repay it, if not I'll make
no bother. That's what I am! [Sees Akoulína] Akoulína, show your
presents.

AKOULÍNA. What?

NIKÍTA. Show your presents.

AKOULÍNA. The presents, what's the use of showing 'em? I've put 'em
away.

NIKÍTA. Get them, I tell you. Nan will like to see 'em. Undo the shawl.
Give it here.

AKÍM. Oh, oh! It's sickening! [Climbs on the oven].

AKOULÍNA [gets out the parcels and puts them on the table] Well, there
you are,--what's the good of looking at 'em?

NAN. Oh how lovely! It's as good as Stepanída's.

AKOULÍNA. Stepanída's? What's Stepanída's compared to this? [Brightening
up and undoing the parcels] Just look here,--see the quality! It's a
French one.

NAN. The print _is_ fine! Mary has a dress like it, only lighter on a
blue ground. This _is_ pretty.

NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it!

    Anísya passes angrily into the closet, returns with a tablecloth and
    the chimney of the samovár, and goes up to the table.

ANÍSYA. Drat you, littering the table!

NIKÍTA. You look here!

ANÍSYA. What am I to look at? Have I never seen anything? Put it away!
[Sweeps the shawl on to the floor with her arm].

AKOULÍNA. What are you pitching things down for? You pitch your own
things about! [Picks up the shawl].

NIKÍTA. Anísya! Look here!

ANÍSYA. Why am I to look?

NIKÍTA. You think I have forgotten you? Look here! [Shows her a parcel
and sits down on it] It's a present for you. Only you must earn it!
Wife, where am I sitting?

ANÍSYA. Enough of your humbug. I'm not afraid of you. Whose money are
you spreeing on and buying your fat wench presents with? Mine!

AKOULÍNA. Yours indeed? No fear! You wished to steal it, but it did not
come off! Get out of the way! [Pushes her while trying to pass].

ANÍSYA. What are you shoving for? I'll teach you to shove!

AKOULÍNA. Shove me? You try! [Presses against Anísya].

NIKÍTA. Now then, now then, you women. Have done now! [Steps between
them].

AKOULÍNA. Comes shoving herself in! You ought to keep quiet and remember
your doings! You think no one knows!

ANÍSYA. Knows what? Out with it, out with it! What do they know?

AKOULÍNA. I know something about you!

ANÍSYA. You're a slut who goes with another's husband!

AKOULÍNA. And you did yours to death!

ANÍSYA [throwing herself on Akoulína] You're raving!

NIKÍTA [holding her back] Anísya, you seem to have forgotten!

ANÍSYA. Want to frighten me! I'm not afraid of you!

NIKÍTA [turns Anísya round and pushes her out] Be off!

ANÍSYA. Where am I to go? I'll not go out of my own house!

NIKÍTA. Be off, I tell you, and don't dare to come in here!

ANÍSYA. I won't go! [Nikíta pushes her, Anísya cries and screams and
clings to the door] What! am I to be turned out of my own house by the
scruff of the neck? What are you doing, you scoundrel? Do you think
there's no law for you? You wait a bit!

NIKÍTA. Now then!

ANÍSYA. I'll go to the Elder! To the policeman!

NIKÍTA. Off, I tell you! [Pushes her out].

ANÍSYA [behind the door] I'll hang myself!

NIKÍTA. No fear!

NAN. Oh, oh, oh! Mother, dear, darling! [Cries].

NIKÍTA. Me frightened of her! A likely thing! What are you crying for?
She'll come back, no fear. Go and see to the samovár. [Exit Nan].

AKOULÍNA [collects and folds her presents] The mean wretch, how she's
messed it up. But wait a bit, I'll cut up her jacket for her! Sure I
will!

NIKÍTA. I've turned her out, what more do you want?

AKOULÍNA. She's dirtied my new shawl. If that bitch hadn't gone away,
I'd have torn her eyes out!

NIKÍTA. That's enough. Why should you be angry? Now if I loved her ...

AKOULÍNA. Loved her? She's worth loving, with her fat mug! If you'd have
given her up, then nothing would have happened. You should have sent her
to the devil. And the house was mine all the same, and the money was
mine! Says she is the mistress, but what sort of mistress is she to her
husband? She's a murderess, that's what she is! She'll serve you the
same way!

NIKÍTA. Oh dear, how's one to stop a woman's jaw? You don't yourself
know what you're jabbering about!

AKOULÍNA. Yes, I do. I'll not live with her! I'll turn her out of the
house! She can't live here with me. The mistress indeed! She's not the
mistress,--that jailbird!

NIKÍTA. That's enough! What have you to do with her? Don't mind her. You
look at me! I am the master! I do as I like. I've ceased to love her,
and now I love you. I love who I like! The power is mine, she's under
me. That's where I keep her. [Points to his feet] A pity we've no
concertina. [Sings].

        "We have loaves on the stoves,
         We have porridge on the shelf.
         So we'll live and be gay,
         Making merry every day,
         And when death comes,
         Then we'll die!
         We have loaves on the stoves,
         We have porridge on the shelf ..."

    Enter Mítritch. He takes off his outdoor things and climbs on the
    oven.

MÍTRITCH. Seems the women have been fighting again! Tearing each other's
hair. Oh Lord, gracious Nicholas!

AKÍM [sitting on the edge of the oven, takes his leg-bands and shoes and
begins putting them on] Get in, get into the corner.

MÍTRITCH. Seems they can't settle matters between them. Oh Lord!

NIKÍTA. Get out the liquor, we'll have some with our tea.

NAN [to Akoulína] Sister, the samovár is just boiling over.

NIKÍTA. And where's your mother?

NAN. She's standing and crying out there in the passage.

NIKÍTA. Oh, that's it! Call her, and tell her to bring the samovár. And
you, Akoulína, get the tea things.

AKOULÍNA. The tea things? All right. [Brings the things].

NIKÍTA [unpacks spirits, rusks, and salt herrings] That's for myself.
This is yarn for the wife. The paraffin is out there in the passage, and
here's the money. Wait a bit, [takes a counting-frame] I'll add it up.
[Adds] Wheat-flour, 80 kopéykas, oil ... Father, 10 roubles.... Father,
come let's have some tea!

    Silence. Akím sits on the oven and winds the bands round his legs.
    Enter Anísya with samovár.

ANÍSYA. Where shall I put it?

NIKÍTA. Here on the table. Well! have you been to the Elder? Ah, that's
it! Have your say and then eat your words. Now then, that's enough.
Don't be cross, sit down and drink this. [Fills a wine-glass for her]
And here's your present. [Gives her the parcel he had been sitting on.
Anísya takes it silently and shakes her head].

AKÍM [gets down and puts on his sheepskin, then comes up to the table
and puts down the money] Here, take your money back! Put it away.

NIKÍTA [does not see the money] Why have you put on your things?

