Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Suzanne Shell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


                         Transcriber's Note.

     This is the Second book of the trilogy, The Fifth Queen, by
     Ford Madox Ford. The other books are The Fifth Queen and The
     Fifth Queen Crowned.


                              PRIVY SEAL

                          _His Last Venture_


    _"Ille potens ... et lætus cui licet in diem
    Dixisse: Vixi!..."_

       *       *       *       *       *


PART ONE
The Rising Sun,       1

PART TWO
The Distant Cloud,   75

PART THREE
The Sunburst,       153

       *       *       *       *       *


To

Frau Laura Schmedding

who has so often combated
my prejudices and corrected
my assertions
this with affection

       *       *       *       *       *


PART ONE

THE RISING SUN

I


The Magister Udal sat in the room of his inn in Paris, where
customarily the King of France lodged such envoys as came at his
expense. He had been sent there to Latinise the letters that passed
between Sir Thomas Wyatt and the King's Ministers of France, for he
was esteemed the most learned man in these islands. He had groaned
much at being sent there, for he must leave in England so many
loves--the great, blonde Margot Poins, that was maid to Katharine
Howard; the tall, swaying Katharine Howard herself; Judge Cantre's
wife that had fed him well; and two other women, with all of whom he
had succeeded easily or succeeded in no wise at all. But the mission
was so well paid--with as many crowns the day as he had had groats for
teaching the Lady Mary of England--that fain he had been to go.
Moreover, it was by way of being a favour of Privy Seal's. The
magister had written for him a play in English; the rich post was the
reward--and it was an ill thing, a thing the magister dreaded, to
refuse the favours of Privy Seal. He consoled himself with the thought
that the writing of letters in Latin might wash from his mouth the
savour of the play he had written in the vulgar tongue.

But his work in Paris was ended--for with the flight of Cardinal Pole,
who had left Paris precipitately upon news that the King of England
had sent a drunken roisterer to assassinate him, it was imagined that
soon now more concord between Francis and England might ensue, and the
magister sat in his room planning his voyage back to Dover. The room
was great in size, panelled mostly in wood, lit with lampwicks that
floated in oil dishes and heated with a sea-coal fire, for though it
was April the magister was of a cold disposition of the hands and
shins. The inn--of the Golden Astrolabe--was kept by an Englishwoman,
a masterful widow with a broad face and a great mouth that smiled. She
stood beside him there. Forty-seven she might have been, and she
called herself the Widow Annot.

The magister sat over his fire with his gown parted from his legs to
warm his shins, but his hands waved angrily and his face was
crestfallen.

'Oh, keeper of a tavern,' he said. 'It is set down in holy writ that
it is not good for a man to be alone.'

'That a hostess shall keep her tavern clean is writ in the books of
the provost of Paris town,' the Widow Annot answered, and the shadow
of her great white hood, which she wore in the older English fashion,
danced over the brown wooden beams of the ceiling.

'Nay, nay,' he answered, 'it is written there that it is the enjoined
devoir of every hotelier to provide things fitting for the sojourners'
ease, pleasure and recreation.'

'The maid is locked in another house,' the hostess answered, 'and
should have been this three week.' She swung her keys on a black
riband and gazed at him masterfully. 'Will your magistership eat capon
or young goat?'

'Capon will have a savour like sawdust, and young goat like the dust
of the road,' the magister moaned. 'Give me the girl to wait upon me
again.'

'No maid will wait upon thee,' she answered.

'Even thou thyself?' he asked. He glanced across his shoulder and his
eyes measured her, hers him. She had large shoulders, a high, full
stomacher, and her cheeks were an apple-red. 'The maiden was a fair
piece,' he tittered.

'Therefore you must spoil the ring of the coin,' she answered.

He sighed: 'Then eat you with me. "_Soli cantare periti Arcades._" But
it is cold here alone of nights.'

They ate goat and green leeks sweetened with honey, and wood thrushes
pickled in wine, and salt fish from the mouth of the Beauce. And
because this gave the magister a great thirst he drank much of a
warmed wine from Burgundy that the hostess brought herself. They sat,
byside, on cushions on a couch before the warm fire.

'_Filia pulchra mater pulchrior!_' the magister muttered, and he cast
his arms about her soft and plump waist. 'The maid was a fair skewer,
the hostess is a plumper roasting bit.' She took his kisses on her
fire-warmed cheeks, but in the end she thrust him mightily from her
with a large elbow.

He gasped with the strength of her thrust, and she said:

'Greedy dogs getten them hard cuffs,' and rearranged her neckercher.
When he tried to come nearer her she laughed and thrust him aback.

'You have tried and tasted,' she said. 'A fuller meal you must pay
for.'

He stood before her, lean and lank, his gown flapping about his
calves, his eyes smiling humorously, his lips twitching.

'Oh soft and warm woman,' he cried, 'payment shall be yours'; and
whilst he fumbled furiously in his clothes-press, he quoted from
Tully: '_Haec civitas mulieri redimiculum praebuit._' He pulled out
one small bag: '_Haec in collum._' She took another. '_Haec in
crines!_' and he added a third, saying: 'Here is all I have,' and cast
the three into her lap. Whilst she counted the coins composedly on the
table before her he added: 'Leave me nevertheless the price to come to
England with.'

'Sir Magister,' she said, turning her large face to him. 'This is not
one-tenth enough. You have tasted an ensample. Will you have the whole
meal?'

'Oh, unconscionable,' he cried. 'More I have not!' He began to wave
his hands. 'Consider what you do do,' he uttered. 'Think of what a
pest is love. How many have died of it. Pyramus, Thisbe, Dido, Medea,
Croesus, Callirhoe, Theagines the philosopher ... Consider what writes
Gordonius: "_Prognosticatio est talis: si non succuratur iis aut in
maniam cadunt: aut moriuntur._" Unless lovers be succoured either they
fall into a madness, either they die or grow mad. And Fabian
Montaltus: "If this passion be not assuaged, the inflammation cometh
to the brain. It drieth up the blood. Then followeth madness or men
make themselves away." I would have you ponder of what saith
Parthenium and what Plutarch in his tales of lovers.'

Her face appeared comely and smooth in his eyes, but she shook her
head at him.

'These be woeful and pretty stories,' she said. 'I would have you to
tell me many of them.'

'All through the night,' he said eagerly, and made to clasp her in his
arms. But she pushed him back again with her hand on his chest.

'All through the night an you will,' she said. 'But first you shall
tell a prettier tale before a man in a frock.'

He sprang full four feet back at one spring.

'I have wedded no woman, yet,' he said.

'Then it is time you wed one now,' she answered.

'Oh widow, bethink you,' he pleaded. 'Would you spoil so pretty a
tale? Would you humble so goodly a man's pride?'

'Why, it were a pity,' she said. 'But I am minded to take a husband.'

'You have done well this ten years without one,' he cried out.

Her face seemed to set like adamant as she turned her cheek to him.

'Call it a woman's mad freak,' she said.

'Six and twenty pupils in the fair game of love I have had,' he said.
'You shall be the seven and twentieth. Twenty and seven are seven and
two. Seven and two are nine. Now nine is the luckiest of numbers. Be
you that one.'

'Nay,' she answered. 'It is time you learned husbandry who have taught
so many and earned so little.'

He slipped himself softly into the cushions beside her.

'Would you spoil so fair a tale?' he said. 'Would you have me to break
so many vows? I have promised a mort of women marriage, and so long as
I be not wed I may keep faith with any one of them.'

She held her face away from him and laughed.

'That is as it may be,' she said. 'But when you wed with me to-night
you will keep faith with one woman.'

'Woman,' he pleaded. 'I am a great scholar.'

'Ay,' she answered, 'and great scholars have climbed to great
estates.'

She continued to count the coins that came from his little money-bags;
the shadow of her hood upon the great beams grew more portentous.

'It is thought that your magistership may rise to be Chancellor of the
Realm of England,' she added.

He clutched his forehead.

'Eheu!' he said. 'If you have heard men say that, you know that wedded
to thee I could never climb.'

'Then I shall very comfortably keep my inn here in Paris town,' she
answered. 'You have here fourteen pounds and eleven shillings.'

He stretched forth his lean hands:

'Why, I will marry thee in the morning,' he said, and he moistened his
lips with the tip of his tongue. Outside the door there was a
shuffling of several feet.

'I knew not other guests were in the house,' he uttered, and fell
again to kissing her.

'Knew you not an envoy was come from Cleves?' she whispered.

Her head fell back and he supported it with one trembling hand. He
shook like a leaf when her voice rang out:

'_Au secours! Au secours!_'

There was a great jangle, light fell into the dusky room through the
doorhole, and he found himself beneath the eyes of many scullions with
spits, cooks with carving forks, and kitchenmaids with sharpened
distaffs of steel.

'Now I will be wed this night,' she laughed.

He moved to the end of the couch and blinked at her in the strong
light.

'I will be wed this night,' she said again, and rearranged her
head-dress, revealing, as her sleeves fell open, her white, plump
arms.

'Why, no!' he answered irresolutely.

She said in French to her aids:

'Come near him with the spits!'

They moved towards him, a white-clad body with their pointed things
glittering in the light of torches. He sprang behind the great table
against the window and seized the heavy-leaden sandarach. The French
scullions knew, tho' he had no French, that he would cleave one of
their skulls, and they stood, a knot of seven--four men and three
maids--in blue hoods, in the centre of the room.

'By Mars and by Apollo!' he said, 'I was minded to wed with thee if I
could no other way. But now, like Phaeton, I will cast myself from the
window and die, or like the wretches thrown from the rock, called
Tarpeian. I was minded to a folly: now I am minded rather for death.'

'How nobly thy tongue doth wag, husband,' she said, and cried in
French for the rogues to be gone. When the door closed upon the lights
she said in the comfortable gloom: 'I dote upon thy words. My first
was tongue-tied.' She beckoned him to her and folded her arms. 'Let us
discourse upon this matter,' she said comfortably. 'Thus I will put
it: you wed with me or spring from the window.'

'I am even trapped?' he asked.

'So it comes to all foxes that too long seek for capons,' she
answered.

'But consider,' he said. He sat himself by the fireside upon a stool,
being minded to avoid temptation.

'I would have your magistership forget the rogues that be without,'
she said.

'They were a nightmare's tale,' he said.

'Yet forget them not too utterly,' she answered. 'For I am of some
birth. My father had seven horses and never followed the plough.'

'Oh buxom one!' he answered. 'Of a comfortable birth and girth thou
art. Yet with thee around my neck I might not easily climb.'

'Magister,' she said, 'whilst thou climbest in London town thy wife
will bide in Paris.'

'Consider!' he said. 'There is in London town a fair, large maid
called Margot Poins.'

'Is she more fair than I?' she asked. 'I will swear she is.'

He tilted his stool forward.

'No; no, I swear it,' he said eagerly.

'Then I will swear she is more large.'

'No; not one half so bounteous is her form,' he answered, and moved
across to the couch.

'Then if you can bear her weight up you can bear mine,' she said, and
moved away from him.

'Nay,' he answered. 'She would help me on,' and he fumbled in the
shadows for her hand. She drew herself together into a small space.

'You affect her more than me,' she said, with a swift motion
simulating jealousy.

'By the breasts of Venus, no!' he answered.

'Oh, once more use such words,' she murmured, and surrendered to him
her soft hand. He rubbed it between both of his cold ones and uttered:

'By the Paphian Queen: by her teams of doves and sparrows! By the
bower of Phyllis and the girdle of Egypt's self! I love thee!'

She gurgled 'oh's' of pleasure.

'But this Margot Poins is tirewoman to the Lady Katharine Howard.'

'I am tirewoman to mine own self alone,' she said. 'Therefore you love
her better.'

'Nay, oh nay,' he said gently. 'But this Lady Katharine Howard is
mistress to the King's self.'

'And I have been mistress to no married man save my husbands,' she
answered. 'Therefore you love this Margot Poins better.'

He fingered her soft palm and rubbed it across his own neck.

'Nay, nay,' he said. 'But I must wed with Margot Poins.'

'Why with her more than with me or any other of your score and seven?'
she said softly.

'Since the Lady Katharine will be Queen,' he answered, and once again
he was close against her side. She sighed softly.

'Thus if you wed with me you will never be Chancellor,' she said.

'I would not anger the Queen,' he answered. She nestled bountifully
and warmly against him.

'Swear even again that you like me more than the fair, large wench in
London town,' she whispered against his ear.

'Even as Jove prized Danaë above the Queen of Heaven, even as
Narcissus prized his shadow above all the nymphs, even as Hercules
placed Omphale above his strength, or even as David the King of the
Jews Bathsheba above....'

She murmured 'Oh, oh,' and placed her arms around his shoulders.

'How I love thy brave words!'

'And being Chancellor,' he swore, 'I will come back to thee, oh woman
of the sweet smiles, honey of Hymettus, Cypriote wine....'

She moved herself a little from him in the darkness.

'And if you do not wed with Margot Poins....'

'I pray a plague may fall upon her, but I must wed with her,' he
answered. 'Come now; come now!'

'Else the Lady Katharine shall be displeased with your magistership?'

He sought to draw her to him, but she stiffened herself a little.

'And this Lady Katharine is mistress to the King of England's realm?'

His hands moved tremblingly towards her in the darkness.

'And this Lady Katharine shall be Queen?'

A hiss of exasperation came upon his lips, for she had slipped from
beneath his hands into the darkness.

'Why, then, I will not stay your climbing,' she said. 'Good-night,'
and in the darkness he heard her sob.

The couch fell backwards as he swore and sprang towards her voice.

'Magister!' she said. 'Hands off! Unwed thou shalt not have me, for I
have sworn it.'

'I have sworn to wed seven and twenty women,' he said, 'and have
wedded with none.'

'Nay, nay,' she sobbed. 'Hands off. Henceforth I will make no
vows--but no one but thee shall wed me.'

'Then wed me, in God's name!' he cried, and, screaming:

'_Ho là! Apportez le prestre!_' she softened herself in his arms.

The magister confronted the lights, the leering scullions and the
grinning maids with their great mantles; his brown, woodpecker-like
face was alike crestfallen and thirsty with desire. A lean Dominican,
with his brown cowl back and spectacles of horn, gabbled over his
missal and took a crown's fee--then asked another by way of penitence
for the sin with the maid locked up in another house. When they
brought the bride favours of pink to pin into her gorget she said:

'I long had loved thee for thy great words, husband. Therefore all
these I had in readiness.'

With that knot fast upon him, the magister, clasping his gown upon his
shins, looked askance at the floor. Whilst they made ready the bride,
with great lights and laughter, she said:

'I was minded to have a comfortable husband. And a comfortable husband
is a husband much absent. What more comfortable than me in Paris town
and thee in London city? I keep my inn here, thou mindest thy book
there. Thou shalt here find a goodly capon upon occasion, and when
thou hast a better house in London I will come share it.'

'Trapped! Trapped!' the magister muttered to himself. 'Even as was Sir
Launcelot!'

He considered of the fair and resentful Margot Poins whom it was
incumbent indeed that he should wed: that Katharine Howard loved her
well and was in these matters strait-laced. When his eyes measured his
wife he licked his lips; when his eyes were on the floor his jaw fell.
At best the new Mistress Udal would be in Paris. He looked at the rope
tied round the thin middle of the brown priest, and suddenly he leered
and cast off his cloak.

'Let me remember to keep an equal mind in these hard matters,' he
quoted, and fell to laughing.

For he remembered that in England no marriage by a friar or monk held
good in those years. Therefore he was the winner. And the long, square
room, with the cave bed behind its shutter in the hollow of the wall,
the light-coloured, square beams, and the foaming basin of bride-ale
that a fat-armed girl in a blue kerseymere gown served out to scullion
after scullion; the open windows from which a little knave was casting
bride-pennies to some screaming beggars and women in the street; the
blind hornman whose unseeing eyes glanced along the reed of his
bassoon that he played before the open door; the two saucy maids
striving to wrest the bride's stockings one from the other--all these
things appeared friendly and jovial in his eyes. So that, when one of
the maids, wresting the stocking, fell hard against him, he clasped
her in his arms and kissed her till she struggled from him to drink a
mug of bride-ale.

'_Hodie mihi: mihi atque cras!_' he said. For it was in his mind a
goodly thing to pay a usuress with base coins.


II


It was three days later, in the morning, that his captress said to the
Magister Udal:

'Husband, it is time that I gave thee the bridal gift.'

The magister, happy with a bellyful of carp, bread and breakfast ale,
muttered 'Anan?' from above his copy of Lucretius. He sat in the
window-seat of the great stone kitchen. Upon one long iron spit before
the fire fourteen trussed capons turned in unison; the wooden shoes of
the basting-maid clattered industriously; and from the chimney came
the clank of the invisible smoke-vanes and the be-sooted chains. The
magister, who loved above all things warmth, a full stomach, a
comfortable woman and a good book, had all these things; he was well
minded to stay in Paris town for fourteen days, when they were to slay
a brown pig from the Ardennes, against whose death he had written an
elegy in Sapphics.

'For,' said his better half, standing before him with a great loaf
clasped to her bosom, 'if you turn a horse from the stable between
full and half full, like as not he will return of fair will to the
crib.'

'Oh Venus and Hebe in one body,' the magister said, 'I am minded to
end here my scholarly days.'

'I am minded that ye shall travel far erstwhile,' she answered.

He laid down his book upon a clean chopping-board.

'I know a good harbourage,' he said.

She sat down beside him in the window and fingered the fur on his long
gown, saying that, in this light, it showed ill-favouredly worm-eaten;
and he answered that he never had wishes nor money for gowning
himself, who cultivated the muses upon short commons. She turned
rightway to the front the medal upon his chest, and folded her arms.

'Whilst ye have no better house to harbour us,' she said, 'this shall
serve. Let us talk of the to-come.'

He groaned a little.

'Let us love to-day that's here,' he said. 'I will read thee a verse
from Lucretius, and you shall tell me the history of that fourth
capon'--he pointed to a browned carcase that, upon the spit, whirled
its elbows a full third longer than any of the line.

'That is the master roasting-piece,' she said, 'so he browns there not
too far, nor too close, for the envoy's own eating.'

He considered the chicken with his head to one side.

'It is the place of a wife to be subject to her lord,' he said.

'It is the place of a husband that he fendeth for 's wife,' she
answered him. She tapped her fingers determinedly upon her elbows.

'So it is,' she continued. 'To-morrow you shall set out for London
city to make road towards becoming Sir Chancellor.' Whilst he groaned
she laid down for him her law. He was to go to England, he was to
strive for great posts: if he gained, she would come share them; if he
failed, he might at odd moments come back to her fireside. 'Have done
with groaning now,' she said, stilling his lamentations.' 'Keep them
even for the next wench that you shall sue to--of me you have had all
you asked.'

He considered for five seconds, his elbow upon his crossed knees and
his wrist supporting his lean brown face.

'It is in the essence of it a good bargain,' he said. 'You put against
the chance of being, you a chancellor's madam, mine of having for
certain a capon in Paris town.'

He tapped his long nose. 'Nevertheless, for your stake you have cast
down a very little: three nights of bed and board against the chaining
me up.'

'Husband,' she answered. 'More than that you shall have.'

He wriggled a little beneath his furs.

'Husband is an ill name,'he commented. 'It smarts.'

'But it fills the belly.'

'Aye,'he said. 'Therefore I am minded to bide here and take with the
sourness the sweet of it.'

She laughed a little, and, with a great knife, cut a large manchet
from the loaf between them.

'Nay,' she said, 'to-morrow my army with their spits and forks shall
drive thee from the door.'

He grinned with his lips. She was fair and fat beneath her hood, but
she was resolute. 'I have it in me greatly to advance you,' she said.

A boy brought her a trencher filled with chopped things, and a man in
a blue jerkin came to her side bearing a middling pig, seared to a
pale clear pinkness. The boy held the slit stomach carefully apart,
and she lined it with slices of bread, dropping into the hollow
chives, nutmegs, lumps of salt, the buds of bergamot, and marigold
seeds with their acrid perfume, and balls of honied suet. She bound
round it a fair linen cloth that she stitched with a great bone
needle.

'Oh ingenuous countenance,' the magister mused above the pig's mild
face. 'Is it not even the spit of the Cleves envoy's? And the Cleves
envoy shall eat this adorable monster. Oh, cruel anthropophagist!'

She resigned her burden to the spit and gave the loaf to the boy,
wiped her fingers upon her apron, and said:

'That pig shall help thee far upon thy road.'

'Goes it into my wallet?' he asked joyfully.

She answered: 'Nay; into the Cleves envoy's weam.'

'You speak in hard riddles,' he uttered.

'Nay,' she laughed, 'a baby could unriddle it.' She looked at him for
a moment to enjoy her triumph of mystery. 'Husband mine, a pig thus
stuffed is good eating for Cleves men. I have not kept a hostel for
twelve years for envoys and secretaries without learning what each
eats with pleasure. And long have I thought that if I wed a man it
should be such a man as could thrive by learning of envoys' secrets.'

He leaned towards her earnestly.

'You know wherefore the man from Cleves is come?'

'You are, even as I have heard it said, a spy of Thomas Cromwell?' she
asked in return.

He looked suddenly abashed, but she held to her question.

'I pass for Privy Seal's man,' he answered at last.

'But you have played him false,' she said. He grew pale, glanced over
his shoulder, and put his finger on his lips.

'I'll wager it was for a woman,' she accused him. She wiped her lips
with her apron and dropped her hands upon her lap.

'Why, keep troth to Cromwell if you can,' she said.

'I do think his sun sets,' he whispered.

'Why, I am sorry for it,' she answered. 'I have always loved him for a
brewer's son. My father was a brewer.'

'Cromwell was begotten even by the devil,' Udal answered. 'He made me
write a comedy in the vulgar tongue.'

'Be it as you will,' she answered. 'You shall know on which side to
bite your cake better than I.'

He was still a little shaken at the thought of Privy Seal.

'If you know wherefore cometh Cleves' envoy, much it shall help me to
share the knowledge,' he said at last, 'for by that I may know whether
Cromwell or we do rise or fall.'

'If you have made a pact with a woman, have very great cares,' she
answered dispassionately. 'Doubtless you know how the dog wags its
tail; but you are always a fool with a woman.'

'This woman shall be Queen if Cromwell fall,' the magister said, 'and
I shall rise with her.'

'But is no woman from Cleves' Queen there now?' she asked.

'Cicely,' he answered highly, 'you know much of capons and beeves, but
there are queens that are none and do not queen it, and queans that
are no queens and queen it.'

'And so 'twill be whilst men are men,' she retorted. 'But neither my
first nor my second had his doxies ruling within my house, do what
they might beyond the door.'

He tried to impart to her some of the adoration he had for Katharine
Howard--her learning, her faith, her tallness, her wit, and the
deserved empiry that she had over King Henry VIII; but she only
answered:

'Why, kiss the wench all you will, but do not come to tell me how she
smells!'--and to his new protests: 'Aye, you may well be right and she
may well be Queen--for I know you will sacrifice your ease for no
wench that shall not help you somewhere forwards.'

The magister held his hands above his head in shocked negation of this
injustice--but there came from the street the thin wail of a trumpet;
another joined it, and a third; the three sounds executed a triple
convolution and died away one by one. Holding his thin hand out for
silence and better hearing, he muttered:

'Norfolk's tucket! Then it is true that Norfolk comes to Paris.'

His wife slipped down from her seat.

'Gave I you not the ostler's gossip from Calais three days since?' she
said, and went towards her roastings.

'But wherefore comes the yellow dog to Paris?' Udal persisted.

'That you may go seek,' she answered. 'But believe always what an
innkeeper says of who are on the road.'

Udal too slipped down from the window-seat; he buttoned his gown down
to his shins, pulled his hat over his ears and hurried through the
galleried courtyard into the comfortless shadows of the street. There
was no doubt that Norfolk was coming; round the tiny crack that, two
houses away, served for all the space that the road had between the
towering housefronts, two men in scarlet and yellow, with leopards and
lions and fleurs-de-lis on their chests, walked between two in white,
tabarded with the great lilies of France. They crushed round the
corner, for there was scarce space for four men abreast; behind them
squeezed men in purple with the Howard knot, bearing pikes, and men in
mustard yellow with the eagle's wing and ship badge of the Provost of
Paris. In the broader space before the arch of Udal's courtyard they
stayed to wait for the horsemen to disentangle themselves from the
alley; the Englishmen looked glumly at the tall housefronts; the
French loosened the mouthplates of their helmets to breathe the air
for a minute. Hostlers, packmen and pedlars began to fill the space
behind Udal, and he heard his wife's voice calling shrilly to a cook
who had run across the yard.

The crowd a little shielded him from the draught which came through
the arch, and he waited with more contentment. Undoubtedly there was
Norfolk upon a great yellow horse, so high that it made his bonnet
almost touch the overhanging storey of the third house; behind him the
white and gold litter of the provost, who, having three weeks before
broken his leg at tennis-play, was still unable to sit in a saddle.
The duke rode as if implacably rigid, his yellow, long face set,
listening as if with a sour deafness to something that the provost
from below called to him with a great, laughing voice.

The provost's litter, too, came up alongside the duke's horse in the
open space, then they all moved forward at the slow processional:
three steps and a halt for the trumpets to blow a tucket; three more
and another tucket; the great yellow horse stepping high and casting
up his head, from which flew many flakes of white foam. With its slow,
regularly interrupted gait, dominated by the impassive yellow face of
Norfolk, the whole band had an air of performing a solemn dance, and
Udal shivered for a long time, till amidst the train of mules bearing
leathern sacks, cupboards, chests and commodes, he saw come riding a
familiar figure in a scholar's gown--the young pedagogue and companion
of the Earl of Surrey. He was a fair, bearded youth with blue eyes,
riding a restless colt that embroiled itself and plunged amongst the
mules' legs. The young man leaned forward in the saddle and craned to
avoid a clothes chest.

The magister called to him:

'Ho, Longstaffe!' and having caught his pleased eyes: _'Ecce quis sto
in arce plenitatis. Veni atque bibe! Magister sum. Udal sum.
Longstaffe ave.'_

Longstaffe slipped from his horse, which he left to be rescued by whom
it might from amongst the hard-angled cases.

'Assuredly,' he said, 'there is no love between that beast and me as
there was betwixt his lord and Bucephalus,' and he followed Udal into
the galleried courtyard, where their two gowned figures alone sought
shelter from the March showers.

'News from overseas there is none,' he said. 'Privy Seal ruleth still
about the King; the German astronomers have put forth a tract _De
Quadratura Circuli_; the lost continent of Atlantis is a lost
continent still--and my bones ache.'

'But your mission?' Udal asked.

The doctor, his hard blue eyes spinning with sardonic humour beneath
his black beretta, said that his mission, even as Udal's had been, was
to gain some crowns by setting into the learned language letters that
should pass between his ambassador and the King's men of France. Udal
grinned disconcertedly.

'Be certified in your mind,' he said, 'that I am not here a spy or
informer of Privy Seal's.'

'Forbid it, God,' Doctor Longstaffe answered good-humouredly. None the
less his jaw hardened beneath his fair beard and he answered, 'I have
as yet written no letters--_litteras nullas scripsi: argal nihil
scio_.'

'Why, ye shall drink a warmed draught and eat a drippinged soppet,'
Udal said, 'and you shall tell me what in England is said of this
mission.'

He led the fair doctor into the great kitchen, and felt a great stab
of dislike when the young man set his arm round the hostess's waist
and kissed her on the red cheeks. "By and bye," writes the Dean.

"Why write _bye_?" asks his commentator. Once or twice Landor credits
Horne Tooke with what the Dean gives as his own, and occasionally
scores an observation as old.

"Why won't people say _messager_?" he demands. "By what right is
_messenger_ made out of _message_?"
* * * * *
"Have you nothing else for the old man to read? have you nothing
American?" Landor inquired upon returning Trench. Desiring to obtain
the verdict of one so high in authority, I gave him Drake's "Culprit
Fay," and some fugitive verses by M.

C. Field, whose poems have never been collected in book form. Of the
latter's "Indian Hunting the Buffaloes," "Night on the Prairie," "Les
Très Marias," and others, known to but few readers now, Landor spoke
in high commendation, and this praise will be welcome to those friends
of "Phazma" still living, and still loving the memory of him who
died early, and found, as he wished, an ocean grave.

With "The Culprit Fay" came a scrap of paper on which was written:
"The Culprit Fay is rich in imagination,--few poems more so.

Drake is among the noblest of names, and this poem throws a fresh
lustre on it." Observing in this poem a misuse of the exclamation
"Oh!"

Landor remarked, "'Oh!' properly is an expression of grief or pain. 'O!'
without the aspirate may express pleasure or hope." Current literature
rarely makes any distinction between the two, and even good writers
stumble through carelessness

.

* * * * *
Style in writing was one of Landor's favorite topics, and his ire
was rarely more quickly excited than by placing before him a specimen
of high-flown sentimentality.

He would put on his spectacles, exclaim, "What is this?"

and, having read a few lines, would throw the book down, saying,
"I have not the patience to read such stuff.

It may be very fine, but I cannot understand it. It is beyond me." He
had little mercy to bestow upon transcendentalists, though he
praised Emerson one day,--a marvellous proof of high regard when
it is considered how he detested the school to which Emerson belongs.

"Emerson called on me when he was in Florence many years ago, and
a very agreeable visit I had from him.

He is a very clever man, and might be cleverer if he were less sublimated.
But then you Americans, practical as you are, are fond of soaring
in high latitudes."

Carlyle in his last manner had the same effect upon Landor's nerves as
a discord in music produces upon a sensitive ear.

"Ah," said he with a quizzical smile, "'Frederick the Great' convinces
me that I write two dead languages,--Latin and English!"

* * * * *
English hexameter was still another pet detestation which
Landor nursed with great volubility.

In 1860 all Anglo-Saxon Florence was reading with no little interest
a poem in this metre, which had recently appeared, and which of
course passed under the critical eye of the old Grecian.

"Well, Mr. Landor, what do you think of the new poem?"

I asked during its nine days' reign. "Think of it? I don't think of
it. I don't want to be bothered with it. The book has driven all the
breath out of my body.

I am lame with galloping.

I've been on a gallop from the beginning to the end. Never did I have
so hard and long a ride. But what else to expect when mounted on
a _nightmare_!

It may be very fine. I dare say it is, but Giallo and I prefer our
ease to being battered.

I am too old to hop, skip, and jump, and he is too sensible. It may
be very bad taste, but we prefer verse that stands on two feet to
verse that limps about on none. Now-a-days it is better to stumble
than to walk erect.

Giallo and I, however, have registered an oath not to encourage
so base a fashion.
We have consulted old Homer, and he quite approves our indignation."
* * * * *
Speaking of certain Americanisms and of our ridiculous squeamishness
in the use of certain honest words, Landor remarked: "You Americans
are very proper people; you have difficulties, but not diseases.

Legs are unknown,--you have limbs; and under no consideration do
you go to bed,--you retire."

Much of this I could not gainsay, for only a few days previously I
had been severely frowned upon for making inquiries about a broken
leg. "My dear," said Landor to a young American girl who had been
speaking of the city of New Or_leens_,--such being the ordinary
Southern pronunciation,--"that pretty mouth of yours should not be
distorted by vulgar dialect. You should say Or'leans." But he was
never pedantic in his language. He used the simplest and most
emphatic words

.

* * * * *
There are those who accuse Landor of having sacrificed all things to
style: it were as wise to assert that Beethoven sacrificed harmony
to time. If his accusers would but read Landor before criticising, a
proper regard for their own reputations would prevent them from
hazarding such an opinion. "Style," writes Landor, "I consider as
nothing, if what it covers be unsound: wisdom in union with harmony
is oracular.

On this idea, the wiser of ancient days venerated in the same person
the deity of oracles and of music; and it must have been the most
malicious and the most ingenious of satirists who transferred the
gift of eloquence to the god of thieves."

Those who by the actual sweat of their brows have got at the deep, hidden
meaning of the most recent geniuses, will honor and thank Landor for
having practically enforced his own refreshing theory. There are
certain modern books of positive value which the reader closes
with a sense of utter exhaustion. The meaning is discovered, but at too
great an outlay of vitality. To render simple things complex, is to
fly in the face of Nature; and after such mental "gymnastics," we turn
with relief to Landor. "The greater part of those who are most ambitious
of style are unaware of all its value. Thought does not separate
man from the brutes; for the brutes think: but man alone thinks beyond
the moment and beyond himself.

Speech does not separate them; for speech is common to all, perhaps more
or less articulate, and conveyed and received through different
organs in the lower and more inert.

Man's thought, which seems imperishable, loses its form, and runs
along from proprietor to impropriator, like any other transitory thing,
unless it is invested so becomingly and nobly that no successor
can improve upon it by any new fashion or combination.

For want of dignity or beauty, many good things are passed and
forgotten; and much ancient wisdom is overrun and hidden by a
rampant verdure, succulent, but unsubstantial....

Let those who look upon style as unworthy of much attention ask
themselves how many, in proportion to men of genius, have excelled in
it.

In all languages, ancient and modern, are there ten prose-writers at
once harmonious, correct, and energetic?"
* * * * *
Popular as is the belief that Landor's gifts were the offspring of
profound study, he himself says: "Only four years of my life were
given up much to study; and I regret that I spent so many so ill.

Even these debarred me from no pleasure; for I seldom read or wrote
within doors, excepting a few hours at night.

The learning of those who are called the learned is learning at second
hand; the primary and most important must be acquired by reading in
our own bosoms; the rest by a deep insight into other men's.
What is written is mostly an imperfect and unfaithful copy." This
confession emanates from one who is claimed as a university rather than
a universal man.

Landor remained but two years at Oxford, and, though deeply interested
in the classics, never contended for a Latin prize.

Speaking of this one day, he said: "I once wrote some Latin verses
for a fellow of my college who, being in great trouble, came to
me for aid.

What was hard work to him was pastime to me, and it ended in my
composing the entire poem.

At the time the fellow was very grateful, but it happened that these
verses excited attention and were much eulogized. The supposed author
accepted the praise as due to himself.

This of course I expected, as he knew full well I would never betray
him; but the amusing part of the matter was that the fellow never
afterwards spoke to me, never came near me,--in fact, treated me
as though I had done him a grievous wrong.

It was of no consequence to me that he strutted about in my feathers.
If they became him, he was welcome to them,--but of such is the
kingdom of cowards

."
* * * * *
"Poetry," writes Landor, "was always my amusement, prose my study and
business." In his thirtieth year he lived in the woods, "did not
exchange twelve sentences with men," and wrote "Gebir," his most elaborate
and ambitious poem, which Southey took as a model in blank verse,
and which a Boston critic wonders whether anyone ever read through.

"Pericles and Aspasia," and the finest of his "Imaginary Conversations,"
were the flowering of half a century of thought. There are few readers
who do not prefer Landor's prose to his verse, for in the former
he does not aim at the dramatic: the passion peculiar to verse is
not congenial to his genius.

He sympathizes most fully with men and women in repose, when intellect,
not the heart, rules.

His prose has all the purity of outline and harmony of Greek plastic
art.

He could not wield the painter's brush, but the great sculptor had
yet power to depict the grief of a "Niobe," the agony of the
"Laocoön," or the majesty of a "Moses." Like a sculptor, he rarely
groups more than two figures.

It is satisfactory then to know that in the zenith of physical strength
Landor was at his noblest and best, for his example is a forcible
protest against the feverish enthusiasm of young American authors,
who wear out their lives in the struggle to be famous at the age
of Keats, never remembering that "there must be a good deal of
movement and shuffling before there is any rising from the ground;
and those who have the longest wings have the most difficulty in
the first mounting.

In literature, as at football, strength and agility are insufficient
of themselves; you must have your _side_, or you may run till you
are out of breath, and kick till you are out of shoes, and never
win the game.

There must be some to keep others off you, and some to prolong for
you the ball's rebound....

Do not, however, be ambitious of an early fame:
such is apt to shrivel and to drop under the tree." The poetical dictum,
"Whom the gods love, die young," has worked untold mischief, having
created a morbid dislike to a fine physique, on the theory that
great minds are antagonistic to noble bodies.

There never was error so fatal:
the larger the brain, the larger should be the reservoir from which
to draw vitality.

Were Seneca alive now, he would write no such letter as he once
wrote to Lucilius, protesting against the ridiculous devotion of
his countrymen to physical gymnastics.

"To be wise is to be well," was the gospel he went about preaching. "To
be well is to be wise," would answer much better as the modern
article of faith. The utmost that a persistent brain-worker of
this century can do is to keep himself bodily up to mental
requirements.

Landor, however, was an extraordinary exception. He could boast
of never having worn an overcoat since boyhood, and of not having
been ill more than three times in his life.

Even at eighty-six his hand had none of the wavering of age; and it
was with no little satisfaction that, grasping an imaginary pistol,
he showed me how steady an aim he could still take, and told of how
famous a shot he used to be.

"But my sister was more skilful than I," he added.

One day conversation chanced upon Aubrey De Vere, the beautiful
Catholic poet of Ireland, whose name is scarcely known on this
side of the Atlantic.

This is our loss, though De Vere can never be a popular poet, for
his muse lives in the past and breathes ether rather than air.

"De Vere is charming both as man and as poet," said Landor enthusiastically,
rising as he spoke and leaving the room to return immediately with
a small volume of De Vere's poems published at Oxford in 1843.

"Here are his poems given to me by himself. Such a modest, unassuming
man as he is! Now listen to this from the 'Ode on the Ascent of the
Alps.' Is it not magnificent?

'I spake.

--Behold her o'er the broad lake flying, Like a great Angel
missioned to bestow Some boon on men beneath in sadness lying:
The waves are murmuring silver murmurs low:
Over the waves are borne Those feeble lights which, ere the eyes of
Morn Are lifted, through her lids and lashes flow.
Beneath the curdling wind Green through the shades the waters rush and
roll, (Or whitened only by the unfrequent shoal,) Till two dark
hills, with darker yet behind, Confront them,--purple mountains
almost black, Each behind each self-folded and withdrawn, Beneath
the umbrage of yon cloudy rack.-- That orange-gleam!

't is dawn!

Onward! the swan's flight with the eagle's blending, On, wingèd Muse!

still forward and ascending!'
"This sonnet on 'Sunrise,'" continued Landor, "is the noblest
that ever was written:--
'I saw the Master of the Sun. He stood High in his fiery car,
himself more bright, An archer of immeasurable might.
On his left shoulder hung his quivered load; Spurred by his steeds,
the eastern mountain glowed; Forward his eager eye and brow of
light He bent; and while both hands that arch embowed, Shaft after
shaft pursued the flying Night, No wings profaned that godlike form:
around His polished neck an ever-moving crowd Of locks hung glistening;
while each perfect sound Fell from his bow-string, _that th' ethereal
dome Thrilled as a dew-drop_; while each passing cloud Expanded,
whitening like the ocean foam.'

"Is not this line grand?--

'Peals the strong, voluminous thunder!'

And how incomparable is the termination of this song!--
'Bright was her soul as Dian's crest Showering on Vesta's fane its
sheen:
Cold looked she as the waveless breast Of some stone Dian at
thirteen.

Men loved: but hope they deemed to be A sweet Impossibility!'
Here are two beautiful lines from the Grecian Ode:--
'Those sinuous streams that blushing wander Through labyrinthine
oleander.'

This is like Shakespeare:--
'Yea, and the Queen of Love, as fame reports, Was caught,--no doubt
in Bacchic wreaths,--for Bacchus Such puissance hath, that he
old oaks will twine Into true-lovers' knots, and laughing stand
Until the sun goes down.'
And an admirable passage is this, too, from the same poem,--'The
Search after Proserpine':--
'Yea, and the motions of her trees and harvests Resemble those of
slaves, reluctant, cumbered, By outward force compelled; _not like
our billows, Springing elastic in impetuous joy, Or indolently
swayed_.'

"There!" exclaimed Landor, closing the book, "I want you to have
this.

It will be none the less valuable because I have scribbled in it,"
he added with a smile.

"But, Mr. Landor--"
"Now don't say a word. I am an old man, and if both my legs are not
in the grave, they ought to be. I cannot lay up such treasures in heaven,
you know,--saving of course in my memory,--and De Vere had rather
you should have it than the rats. There's a compliment for you! so
put the book in your pocket."
This little volume is marked throughout by Landor with notes of
admiration, and if I here transcribe a few of his favorite poems,
it will be with the hope of benefiting many readers to whom De Vere
is a sealed book.

"Greece never produced anything so exquisite," wrote Landor beneath
the following song:--
"Give me back my heart, fair child; To you as yet 't is worth but
little.

Half beguiler, half beguiled, Be you warned: your own is brittle.

I know it by your redd'ning cheeks,-- I know it by those two black
streaks Arching up your pearly brows In a momentary laughter, Stretched
in long and dark repose With a sigh the moment after.

"'Hid it! dropt it on the moors!
Lost it, and you cannot find it,'-- My own heart I want, not yours:

You have bound and must unbind it.

Set it free then from your net, We will love, sweet,--but not
yet!

Fling it from you:--we are strong; Love is trouble, love is folly:
Love, that makes an old heart young, Makes a young heart melancholy."

And for this Landor claimed that it was "finer than the best in
Horace":--
"Slanting both hands against her forehead, On me she levelled her bright
eyes.

My whole heart brightened as the sea When midnight clouds part suddenly:--
Through all my spirit went the lustre, Like starlight poured through
purple skies.

"And then she sang a loud, sweet music; Yet louder as aloft it
clomb:
Soft when her curving lips it left; Then rising till the heavens
were cleft, As though each strain, on high expanding, Were echoed
in a silver dome.

"But hark! she sings 'she does not love me':
She loves to say she ne'er can love.
To me her beauty she denies,-- Bending the while on me those eyes,
Whose beams might charm the mountain leopard, Or lure Jove's herald
from above!"

Below the following exquisite bit of melody is written, "Never
was any sonnet so beautiful."
"She whom this heart must ever hold most dear (This heart in happy
bondage held so long) Began to sing.

'I would not have my best pupil friends with Cromwell,' he said.

'Oh, magister,' she retorted, with a first touch of scorn in her
voice; 'have you, who have had so much truck with women, yet to learn
that you may command a woman to be friends with a man, yet no power on
earth shall make her love him. Nevertheless, well might Cromwell seek
to win her love, and thence these pardons.'

Udal started forward upon his tiptoes.

'I must to London!' he cried. She smiled at him as at a child.

'You are come to be of my advice,' she said.

Udal gazed at her with a wondering patronage.

'Why, what a wench it is,' he said, and he crooked his arm around her
ample waist. His face shone with pleasure. 'Angel!' he uttered; 'for
Angelos is the Greek for messenger, and signifieth more especially one
that bringeth good tidings.' Out of all this holus bolus of envoys,
ambassadors, cooks and prisoners one thing appeared plain to view:
that, for the first time, _a solis ortus cardine_, Cromwell had
loosened his grip of some that he held. 'And if Crummock looseneth
grip, Crummock's power in the land waneth.'

She looked up at him with a coy pleasure.

'Hatest Cromwell then full fell-ly?' she asked.

He put his hands upon her shoulders and solemnly regarded her.

'Woman,' he said; 'this man rideth England with seven thousand spies;
these three years I have lived in terror of my life. I have had no
bliss that fear hath not entered into--in very truth _inter delicias
semper aliquid saevi nos strangulavit_.' His lugubrious tones grew
higher with hatred; he raised one hand above his head and one gripped
tight her fat shoulder. 'Terror hath bestridden our realm of England;
no man dares to whisper his hate even to the rushes. Me! Me! Me!' he
reached a pitch of high-voiced fury. 'Me! _Virum doctissimum!_ Me, the
first learned man in Britain, he did force to write a play in the
vulgar tongue. Me, a master of Latin, to write in English! I had
pardoned him my terror. I had pardoned him the heads of the good men
he hath struck off. For that princes should inspire terror is just,
and that the great ones of the earth should prey one upon the other is
a thing all history giveth precedent for since the days when Sylla
hunted to death Marius that sat amidst the ruins of Carthage. But that
the learned should be put to shame! that good letters should be cast
into the mire! History showeth no ensample of a man so vile since the
Emperor Alexander removed his shadow from before the tub of Diogenes.'

'In truth,' she said, blenching a little before his fury, 'I was ever
one that loved the rolling sound of your Greek and your Roman.'

'Give me my journey money,' he said, 'let me begone to England. For,
if indeed the Lady Katharine hath the King's ear, much may I aid her
with my counsels.'

She began to fumble in beneath her apron, and then, as if she
suddenly remembered herself, she placed her finger upon her lips.

'Husband,' she said, 'I have for you a gift. How it shall value itself
to you I little know, but I have before been much besought and offered
high payment for that which now I offer thee. Come.'

The finger still upon her plump lips, she led him to a small door
behind the chimney stack. They climbed up through cobwebs, ham,
flitches of smoked beef, and darkness, and the reek of wood-smoke,
until they came, high up, to a store-room in the slope of a mansard
roof. Light filtered dimly between the tiles, and many bales and sacks
lay upon the raftered floor like huge monsters in a huge, dim cave.

'Hearken! make no sound,' she whispered, and in the intense gloom they
heard a sullen, stertorous, intermittent rumble.

'The envoy sleeps,' she said. She set her eye to a knot-hole in the
planked wall. ''A sleeps!' she whispered. 'My pigling made a great
thirst in him. Much wine he drank. Set your eye to the knot-hole.'

With his face glued against the rough wood, the magister could see in
the large room a great fair man, in a great blue chair behind a
littered table. His head hung forward, shewed only a pink bald spot in
the thin hair, and brilliant red ears. A slow rumble of snoring came
for a long minute, then ceased for as long.

From behind Udal's back came a crash, and he started back to see the
large woman, who had overturned a chest.

'That is to test how he sleeps,' she said. 'See if he have moved.' The
man, plain to see through the knot-hole, had stirred no muscle; again
the heavy rumble of the snore came to them. She spoke quite loudly
now. 'Why, naught shall wake him these five hours. 'A hath bolted the
door; thus his secretaries shall not come to him. See now.'

She slid back a board in the wall, and Udal could see into what
appeared to be a cupboard filled with a litter of papers and of
parchments. Udal's heart began to beat so that he noted it there; his
eyes searched hers with a glittering excitement--nevertheless a half
fear of awakening the envoy kept him from speaking.

'Take them! Take them!' she nudged him with her elbow. 'Six hours ye
have to read and to copy.'

'What papers are these?' he muttered, his voice thick betwixt
incredulous joy and fear.

'They be the envoy's papers,' she said; 'doubtless these be his
letters to the king of this land.... What there may be I know not
else.'

Udal's hands were in at the hole with the swift clutch of a miser
visiting his treasure-chest. The woman surveyed him with pleasure and
with pride in her achievement, and with the calmness of routine she
fitted a bar across the door of the cupboard where it opened into the
envoy's room. Udal was fumbling already with the strings of a packet,
his eyes searching the superscription in the gloom.

'Six hours ye have to read and to copy,' she said happily, 'for, for
six hours the poppy seed in his wine that he drank shall surely keep
him snoring.' And, whilst they went again down the stairway, the
papers secreted beneath the magister's gown, she explained with her
pride and happiness. The aumbry was so contrived that any envoy or
secretary sleeping in her best room must needs put his papers therein,
since there was in the room no other chest that locked. And the King
of France's chancellors allotted to all envoys her hostelry for a
lodging; and once there, she made them heavy with wine and poppy seed
after a receipt she had from an Egyptian, and at the appointed time
the King of France's men came to read through the papers and to pay
her much money and many kisses.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was six hours later that the magister stood in his own room
crushing a fillet of papers into the breast of his brown jerkin. The
hostess, walking always calmly as if disorder of the mind were a thing
she were a stranger to, had reclimbed the narrow stairway, replaced
the papers in the envoy's cupboard and returned to her husband. She
sought, mutely, for commendations, and he gave her them.

'Y'have made me the man that holds the secret of England's future,' he
said. 'All England that groans beneath Cromwell awaiteth to hear how
the cat jumps in Cleves. Now I know how the cat jumps in Cleves.'

She wiped the dust from her hands upon her apron.

'See that ye make good use of the knowledge,' she said. She considered
for a moment whilst he ferreted amongst his clothes in the great black
press beside the great white bed. 'I have long thought,' she said,
'that greatly might I be of service to a man of laws and of policies.
But I have long known that to serve a man is to have little reward
unless a woman tie him up in fast bonds----' He made one of his broad
gestures of negation, but she cut in upon his words: 'Aye, so it is. A
gossip may serve a man how she will, but once his occasion is past he
shall leave her in the ditch for the first fairer face. So I made
resolve to make such a man my husband, that his being advanced might
advance me. For, for sure this shall not be the last spying service I
shall do thee. Many envoys more shall be lodged in this house and many
more secrets ye shall learn.'

'Oh beloved Pandora!' he cried; 'opener of all secret places, caskets,
aumbries, caves of the winds, thrice blessed Sibyl of the keyhole!'
She nodded her head with grave contentment.

'I chose thee for thy resounding speeches,' she said. Her tranquillity
and her buxom pleasantness overcame him with sudden affection. He was
minded to tell her--because indeed she had made his fortunes for
him--that her marriage to him did not hold good since a friar had read
the rites.

'I chose thee for thy resounding speeches,' she said, 'and because art
so ill-clothed i' the ribs. Give me a thin man of policies to move my
bowels of compassion, say I.' For with her secret closets she might
make him stand well among the princes, and with her goodly capons set
grease upon his ribs, poor soul!

'Oh Guenevere!' he said; 'for was it not the queen of Arthur that made
bag-puddings for his starving knights?'

'Aye,' she said; 'great learning you possess.' A little moisture
bedewed her blue eyes. 'It grieves me that you must begone. I love to
hear thy broad o's and a's!'

'Then by all that is fattest in the land hight Cokaigne I will stay
here, thy dutiful goodman,' he said, and tears filled his own eyes.

'Oh nay,' she answered; 'you shall get yourself into the Chancellery,
and merry will we feast and devise beneath the gilded roofs.' Her eyes
sought the brown beams that ceiled the long room. 'I have heard that
chancellors have always gilded roofs.'

Again the tenderness overcame him for the touch of simple pride in her
voice. And the confession slipped from his lips:

'Poor befooled soul! Shalt never be a chancellor's dame.'

She was sobbing a little.

'Oh aye,' she said; 'thou shalt yet be chancellor, and I will baste
thy cooks' ribs an they baste not thy meat full well.' Such a man as
he would find favour with princes for his glosing tongue--aye, and
with queens too. At that she covered her face with her apron, and from
beneath it her voice came forth:

'If this Kat Howard come to be queen, shall not the old faith be
restored?'

The recollection of this particular certainty affected the magister
like a stab, for, if the old faith came back, then assuredly marriages
by friars should again be acknowledged. He cursed himself beneath his
breath: he was loath to leave the woman in the ditch, her trusting
face and pleasing ways stirred the strings of his heart. But he was
more than loath that the wedding should hold a wedding. He shook his
perplexity from him with starting towards the door.

'Time to be gone!' he said, and added, 'Be certain and take care that
no Englishman heareth of wedding betwixt thee and me.' It must in
England work his sure undoing.

She removed her apron and nodded gravely.

'Aye,' she said, 'that is certain enow with Court ladies, such as they
be to-day.' But she asked that when he went among women she should
hear nothing of it. For she had had three husbands and several
courtiers to prove it upon, that it is better to be lied to than to
know truth.

'There is in the world no woman like to thee!' he said with a great
sincerity. Once more she nodded.

'Aye, that is the lie that I would hear,' she said. On his part, he
started suddenly with pain.

'But thee!' he uttered.

'Aye,' she cried again, 'that too is needed. But be very certain of
this, that not easily will I plant upon thy brow that which most
husbands wear!' She paused, and once more rubbed her hands. Courteous
she must be, since her calling called therefor. But assuredly, having
had three husbands, she had had embraces enow to crave little for men.
And, if she did that which few good women have a need to--save very
piteous women in ballads--she would suffer him to belabour her;--she
nodded again--'And that to a man is a great solace.'

He fled with precipitancy from the thought of this solace, brushing
through the narrow passages, stalking across the great guest-chamber
and the greater kitchen where, in the falling dusk, the fires glowed
red upon the maids' faces and the cooks' aprons, the smoke rose
unctuously upward tended with rich smells of meat, and the windjacks
clanked in the chimneys. She trotted behind him, weeping in the
gloaming.

'If you come to be chancellor in five years,' she whimpered, 'I shall
come across the seas to ye. If ye fail, this shall be your plenteous
house.'

Whilst she hung round his neck in the shadowy courtyard and he had
already one foot in the stirrup, she begged for one more great speech.

'Before Jupiter!' he said, 'I can think of none for crying!'

The big black horse, with its bags before and behind the saddle,
stirred, so that, standing upon one foot, he fell away from her. But
he swung astride the saddle, his cloak flying, his long legs clasping
round the belly. It reared and pawed the twilight mists, but he smote
it over one ear with his palm, and it stood trembling.

'This is a fine beast y'have given me,' he said, pleasure thrilling
his limbs.

'I have given it a fine rider!' she cried. He wheeled it near her and
stooped right down to kiss her face. He was very sure in his saddle,
having learned the trick of the stirrup from old Rowfant, that had
taught the King.

'Wife,' he said, 'I have bethought me of this: _Post equitem
sedet_----' He faltered--'_sedet--Behind the rider sitteth_--But for
the life of me I know not whether it be _atra cura_ or no.'

And, as he left Paris gates behind him and speeded towards the black
hills, bending low to face the cold wind of night, for the life of him
he knew not whether black care sat behind him or no. Only, as night
came down and he sped forward, he knew that he was speeding for
England with the great news that the Duke of Cleves was seeking to
make his peace with the Emperor and the Pope through the mediancy of
the king of that land and, on the soft road, the hoofs of the horse
seemed to beat out the rhythm of the words:

'Crummock is down: Cromwell is down. Crummock is down: Cromwell is
down.'

He rode all through the night thinking of these things, for, because
he carried letters from the English ambassador to the King of England,
the gates of no small town could stay his passing through.


IV


Five men talked in the long gallery overlooking the River Thames. It
was in the Lord Cromwell's house, upon which the April showers fell
like handsful of peas, with a sifting sound, between showers of
sunshine that fell themselves like rain, so that at times all the long
empty gallery was gilded with light and at times it was all saddened
and frosty. They were talking all, and all with earnestness and
concern, as all the Court and the city were talking now, of Katharine
Howard whom the King loved.

The Archbishop leant against one side of a window, close beside him
his spy Lascelles; the Archbishop's face was round but worn, his large
eyes bore the trace of sleeplessness, his plump hands were a little
tremulous within his lawn sleeves.

'Sir,' he said, 'we must bow to the breeze. In time to come we may
stand straight enow.' His eyes seemed to plead with Privy Seal, who
paced the gallery in short, pursy strides, his plump hands hidden in
the furs behind his back. Lascelles, the Archbishop's spy, nodded his
head sagaciously; his yellow hair came from high on his crown and was
brushed forward towards his brows. He did not speak, being in such
high company, but looking at him, the Archbishop gained confidence
from the support of his nod.

'If we needs must go with the Lady Katharine towards Rome,' he pleaded
again, 'consider that it is but for a short time.' Cromwell passed him
in his pacing and, unsure of having caught his ear, Cranmer addressed
himself to Throckmorton and Wriothesley, the two men of forty who
stood gravely, side by side, fingering their long beards. 'For sure,'
Cranmer appealed to the three silent men, 'what we must avoid is
crossing the King's Highness. For his Highness, crossed, hath a swift
and sudden habit of action.' Wriothesley nodded, and: 'Very sudden,'
Lascelles allowed himself utterance, in a low voice. Throckmorton's
eyes alone danced and span; he neither nodded nor spoke, and, because
he was thought to have a great say in the councils of Privy Seal, it
was to him that Cranmer once more addressed himself urgently:

'Full-bodied men who are come upon failing years are very prone to
women. 'Tis a condition of the body, a humour, a malady that passeth.
But, while it lasteth, it must be bowed to.'

Cromwell, with his deaf face, passed once more before them. He
addressed himself in brief, sharp tones to Wriothesley:

'You say, in Paris an envoy from Cleves was come a week agone?' and
passed on.

'It must be bowed to,' Cranmer continued his speech. 'I do maintain
it. There is no way but to divorce the Queen.' Again Lascelles nodded;
it was Wriothesley this time who spoke.

'It is a lamentable thing!' and there was a heavy sincerity in his
utterance, his pose, with his foot weightily upon the ground, being
that of an honest man. 'But I do think you have the right of it. We,
and the new faith with us, are between Scylla and Charybdis. For
certain, our two paths do lie between divorcing the Queen and seeing
you, great lords, who so well defend us, cast down.'

Coming up behind him, Cromwell placed a hand upon his shoulder.

'Goodly knight,' he said, 'let us hear thy thoughts. His Grace's of
Canterbury we do know very well. He is for keeping a whole skin!'

Cranmer threw up his hands, and Lascelles looked at the ground.
Throckmorton's eyes were filled with admiration of this master of his
that he was betraying now. He muttered in his long, golden beard.

'Pity we must have thy head.'

Wriothesley cleared his throat, and having considered, spoke
earnestly.

'It is before all things expedient and necessary,' he said, 'that we
do keep you, my Lord Privy Seal, and you, my Lord of Canterbury, at
the head of the State.' That was above all necessary. For assuredly
this land, though these two had brought it to a great pitch of wealth,
clean living, true faith and prosperity, this land needed my Lord
Privy Seal before all men to shield it from the treason of the old
faith. There were many lands now, bringing wealth and commodity to
the republic, that should soon again revert towards and pay all their
fruits to Rome; there were many cleaned and whitened churches that
should again hear the old nasty songs and again be tricked with
gewgaws of the idolaters. Therefore, before all things, my Lord Privy
Seal must retain the love of the King's Highness---- Cromwell, who had
resumed his pacing, stayed for a moment to listen.

'Wherefore brought ye not news of why Cleves' envoy came to Paris
town?' he said pleasantly. 'All the door turneth upon that hinge.'

Wriothesley stuttered and reddened.

'What gold could purchase, I purchased of news,' he said. 'But this
envoy would not speak; his knaves took my gold and had no news. The
King of France's men----'

'Oh aye,' Cromwell continued; 'speak on about the other matter.'

Wriothesley turned his slow mind from his vexation in Paris, whence he
had come a special journey to report of the envoy from Cleves. He
spoke again swiftly, turning right round to Cromwell.

'Sir,' he said, 'study above all to please the King. For unless you
guide us we are lost indeed.'

Cromwell worked his lips one upon another and moved a hand.

'Aye,' Wriothesley continued; 'it can be done only by bringing the
King's Highness and the Lady Katharine to a marriage.'

'Only by that?' Cromwell asked enigmatically.

Throckmorton spoke at last:

'Your lordship jests,' he said; 'since the King is not a man, but a
high and beneficent prince with a noble stomach.'

Cromwell tapped him upon the cheek.

'That you do see through a millstone I know,' he said. 'But I was
minded to hear how these men do think. You and I do think alike.'

'Aye, my lord,' Throckmorton answered boldly. 'But in ten minutes I
must be with the Lady Katharine, and I am minded to hear the upshot of
this conference.'

Cromwell laughed at him sunnily:

'Go and do your message with the lady. An you hasten, you may return
ere ever this conference ends, since slow wits like ours need a store
of words to speak their minds with.'

Lascelles, the silent spy of the archbishop, devoured with envious
eyes Throckmorton's great back and golden beard. For his life he dared
not speak three words unbidden in this company. But Throckmorton being
gone the discussion renewed itself, Wriothesley speaking again.

He voiced always the same ideas, for the same motives: Cromwell must
maintain his place at the cost of all things, for the sake of all
these men who leaned upon him. And it was certain that the King loved
this lady. If he had sent her few gifts and given her no titles nor
farms, it was because--either of nature or to enhance the King's
appetite--she shewed a prudish disposition. But day by day and week in
week out the King went with his little son in his times of ease to the
rooms of the Lady Mary. And there he went, assuredly, not to see the
glum face of the daughter that hated him, but to converse in Latin
with his daughter's waiting-maid of honour. All the Court knew this.
Who there had not seen how the King smiled when he came new from the
Lady Mary's rooms? He was heavy enow at all other times. This fair
woman that hated alike the new faith and all its ways had utterly
bewitched and enslaved the King's eyes, ears and understanding. If the
King would have Katharine Howard his wife the King must have her. Anne
of Cleves must be sent back to Germany; Cromwell must sue for peace
with the Howard wench; a way must be found to bribe her till the King
tired of her; then Katharine must go in her turn, once more Cromwell
would have his own, and the Protestants be reinstated. Cromwell
retained his silence; at the last he uttered his unfailing words with
which he closed all these discussions:

'Well, it is a great matter.'

The gusts of rain and showers of sun pursued each other down the
river; the lights and shadows succeeded upon the cloaked and capped
shapes of the men who huddled their figures together in the tall
window. At last the Archbishop lost his patience and cried out:

'What will you _do_? What will you _do_?'

Cromwell swung his figure round before him.

'I will discover what Cleves will do in this matter,' he said. 'All
dependeth therefrom.'

'Nay; make a peace with Rome,' Cranmer uttered suddenly. 'I am weary
of these strivings.'

But Wriothesley clenched his fist.

'Before ye shall do that I will die, and twenty thousand others!'

Cranmer quailed.

'Sir,' he temporised. 'We will give back to the Bishop of Rome nothing
that we have taken of property. But the Bishop of Rome may have
Peter's Pence and the deciding of doctrines.'

'Canterbury,' Wriothesley said, 'I had rather Antichrist had his old
goods and gear in this realm than the handling of our faith.'

Cromwell drew in the air through his nostrils, and still smiled.

'Be sure the Bishop of Rome shall have no more gear and no more
guidance of this realm than his Highness and I need give,' he said.
'No stranger shall have any say in the councils of this realm.' He
smiled noiselessly again. 'Still and still, all turneth upon Cleves.'

For the first time Lascelles spoke:

'All turneth upon Cleves,' he said.

Cromwell surveyed him, narrowing his eyes.

'Speak you now of your wisdom,' he uttered with neither friendliness
nor contempt. Lascelles caressed his shaven chin and spoke:

'The King's Highness I have observed to be a man for women--a man who
will give all his goods and all his gear to a woman. Assuredly he will
not take this woman to his leman; his princely stomach revolteth
against an easy won mastership. He will pay dear, he will pay his
crown to win her. Yet the King would not give his policies. Neither
would he retrace his steps for a woman's sake unless Fate too cried
out that he must.'

Cromwell nodded his head. It pleased him that this young man set a
virtue sufficiently high upon his prince.

'Sirs,' he said, 'daily have I seen this King in ten years, and I do
tell ye no man knoweth how the King loves kingcraft as I know.' He
nodded again to Lascelles, whose small stature seemed to gain bulk,
whose thin voice seemed to gain volume from this approval and from his
'Speak on. About Cleves.'

'Sirs,' Lascelles spoke again, 'whiles there remains the shade of a
chance that Cleves' Duke shall lead the princes of Germany against the
Emperor and France, assuredly the King shall stay his longing for the
Lady Katharine. He shall stay firm in his marriage with the Queen.'
Again Cromwell nodded. 'Till then it booteth little to move towards a
divorce; but if that day should come, then our Lord Privy Seal must
bethink himself. That is in our lord's mind.'

'By Bacchus!' Cromwell said, 'your Grace of Canterbury hath a jewel in
your crony and helper. And again I say, we must wait upon Cleves.' He
seemed to pursue the sunbeams along the gallery, then returned to say:

'I know ye know I love little to speak my mind. What I think or how I
will act I keep to myself. But this I will tell you:' Cleves might
have two minds in sending to France an envoy. On the one hand, he
might be minded to abandon Henry and make submission to the Emperor
and to Rome. For, in the end, was not the Duke of Cleves a vassal of
the Emperor? It might be that. Or it might be that he was sending
merely to ask the King of France to intercede betwixt him and his
offended lord. The Emperor was preparing to wage war upon Cleves. That
was known. And doubtless Cleves, desiring to retain his friendship
with Henry, might have it in mind to keep friends with both. There
the matter hinged, Cromwell repeated. For, if Cleves remained loyal to
the King of England, Henry would hear nothing of divorcing Cleves'
sister, and would master his desire for Katharine.

'Believe me when I speak,' Cromwell added earnestly. 'Ye do wrong to
think of this King as a lecher after the common report. He is a man
very continent for a king. His kingcraft cometh before all women. If
the Duke of Cleves be firm friend to him, firm friend he will be to
the Duke's sister. The Lady Howard will be his friend, but the Lady
Howard will be neither his leman nor his guide to Rome. He will please
her if he may. But his kingcraft. Never!' He broke off and laughed
noiselessly at the Archbishop's face of dismay. 'Your Grace would make
a pact with Rome?' he asked.

'Why, these are very evil times,' Cranmer answered. 'And if the Bishop
of Rome will give way to us, why may we not give pence to the Bishop
of Rome?'

'Goodman,' Cromwell answered, 'these are evil times because we men are
evil.' He pulled a paper from his belt. 'Sirs,' he said, 'will ye know
what manner of woman this Katharine Howard is?' and to their murmurs
of assent: 'This lady hath asked to speak with me. Will ye hear her
speak? Then bide ye here. Throckmorton is gone to seek her.'


V


Katharine Howard sat in her own room; it had in it little of
sumptuousness, for all the King so much affected her. It was the room
she had first had at Hampton after coming to be maid to the King's
daughter, and it had the old, green hangings that had always been
round the walls, the long oak table, the box-bed set in the wall, the
high chair and the three stools round the fire. The only thing she had
taken of the King was a curtain in red cloth to hang on a rod before
the door where was a great draught, the leading of the windows being
rotted. She had lived so poor a life, her father having been a very
poor lord with many children--she was so attuned to flaws of the wind,
ill-feeding and harsh clothes, that such a tall room as she there had
seemed goodly enough for her. Barely three months ago she had come to
the palace of Greenwich riding upon a mule. Now accident, or maybe the
design of the dear saints, had set her so high in the King's esteem
that she might well try a fall with Privy Seal.

She sat there dressed, awaiting the summons to go to him. She wore a
long dress of red velvet, worked around the breast-lines with little
silver anchors and hearts, and her hood was of black lawn and fell
near to her hips behind. And she had read and learned by heart
passages from Plutarch, from Tacitus, from Diodorus Siculus, from
Seneca and from Tully, each one inculcating how salutary a thing in a
man was the love of justice. Therefore she felt herself well prepared
to try a fall with the chief enemy of her faith, and awaited with
impatience his summons to speak with him. For she was anxious, now at
last, to speak out her mind, and Privy Seal's agents had worked upon
the religious of a poor little convent near her father's house a wrong
so baleful that she could no longer contain herself. Either Privy Seal
must redress or she must go to the King for justice to these poor
women that had taught her the very elements of virtue and lay now in
gaol.

So she spoke to her two chief friends, her that had been Cicely
Elliott and her old husband Rochford, the knight of Bosworth Hedge.
They happened in upon her just after she was attired and had sent her
maid to fetch her dinner from the buttery.

'Three months agone,' she said, 'the King's Highness did bid me cease
from crying out upon Privy Seal; and not the King's Highness' self can
say that in that time I have spoken word against the Lord Cromwell.'

Cicely Elliott, who dressed, in spite of her new wedding, all in black
for the sake of some dead men, laughed round at her from her little
stool by the fire.

'God help you! that must have been hard, to keep thy tongue from the
flail of all Papists.'

The old knight, who was habited like Katharine, all in red, because at
that season the King favoured that colour, pulled nervously at his
little goat's beard, for all conversations that savoured of politics
and religion were to him very fearful. He stood back against the green
hangings and fidgeted with his feet.

But Katharine, who for the love of the King had been silent, was now
set to speak her mind.

'It is Seneca,' she said, 'who tells us to have a check upon our
tongues, but only till the moment approaches to speak.'

'Aye, goodman Seneca!' Cicely laughed round at her. Katharine smoothed
her hair, but her eyes gleamed deeply.

'The moment approaches,' she said; 'I do like my King, but better I
like my Church.' She swallowed in her throat. 'I had thought,' she
said, 'that Privy Seal would stay his harryings of the goodly nuns in
this land.' But now she had a petition, come that day from Lincoln
gaol. Cromwell's servants were more bitter still than ever against the
religious. Here was a false accusation of treason against her
foster-mother's self. 'I will soon end it or mend it, or lose mine own
head,' Katharine ended.

'Aye, pull down Cur Crummock,' Cicely said. 'I think the King shall
not long stay away from thy desires.'

The old knight burst in:

'I take it ill that ye speak of these things. I take it ill. I will
not have 'ee lose thy head in these quarrels.'

'Husband,' Cicely laughed round at him, 'three years ago Cur Crummock
had the heads of all my menfolk, having sworn they were traitors.'

'The more reason that he have not mine and thine now,' the old knight
answered grimly. 'I am not for these meddlings in things that concern
neither me nor thee.'

Cicely Elliott set her elbows upon her knees and her chin upon her
knuckles. She gazed into the fire and grew moody, as was her wont
when she had chanced to think of her menfolk that Cromwell had
executed.

'He might have had my head any day this four years,' she said. 'And
had you lost my head and me you might have had any other maid any day
that se'nnight.'

'Nay, I grow too old,' the knight answered. 'A week ago I dropped my
lance.'

Cicely continued to gaze at nothings in the fire.

'For thee,' she said scornfully to Katharine, 'it were better thou
hadst never been born than have meddled between kings and ministers
and faiths and nuns. You are not made for this world. You talk too
much. Get you across the seas to a nunnery.'

Katharine looked at her pitifully.

'Child,' she said, 'it was not I that spoke of thy menfolk.'

'Get thyself mewed up,' Cicely repeated more hotly; 'thou wilt set all
this world by the ears. This is no place for virtues learned from
learned books. This is an ill world where only evil men flourish.'

The old knight still fidgeted to be gone.

'Nay,' Katharine said seriously, 'ye think I will work mine own
advantage with the King. But I do swear to thee I have it not in my
mind.'

'Oh, swear not,' Cicely mumbled, 'all the world knoweth thee to be
that make of fool.'

'I would well to get me made a nun--but first I will bring nunneries
back from across the seas to this dear land.'

Cicely laughed again--for a long and strident while.

'You will come to no nunnery if you wait till then,' she said. 'Nuns
without their heads have no vocation.'

'When Cromwell is down, no woman again shall lose her head,' Katharine
answered hotly.

Cicely only laughed.

'No woman again!' Katharine repeated.

'Blood was tasted when first a queen fell on Tower Hill.' Cicely
pointed her little finger at her. 'And the taste of blood, even as the
taste of wine, ensureth a certain oblivion.'

'You miscall your King,' Katharine said.

Cicely laughed and answered: 'I speak of my world.'

Katharine's blood came hot to her cheeks.

'It is a new world from now on,' she answered proudly.

'Till a new queen's blood seal it an old one,' Cicely mocked her
earnestness. 'Hadst best get thee to a nunnery across the seas.'

'The King did bid me bide here.' Katharine faltered in the least.

'You have spoken of it with him?' Cicely said. 'Why, God help you!'

Katharine sat quietly, her fair hair gilded by the pale light of the
gusty day, her lips parted a little, her eyelids drooping. It behoved
her to move little, for her scarlet dress was very nice in its
equipoise, and fain she was to seem fine in Privy Seal's eyes.

'This King hath a wife to his tail,' Cicely mocked her.

The old knight had recovered his quiet; he had his hand upon his
haunch, and spoke with his air of wisdom:

'I would have you to cease these talkings of dangerous things,' he
said. 'I am Rochford of Bosworth Hedge. I have kept my head and my
lands, and my legs from chains--and how but by leaving to talk of
dangerous things?'

Katharine moved suddenly in her chair. This speech, though she had
heard it a hundred times before, struck her now as so craven that she
forgot alike her desire to keep fine and her friendship for the old
man's new wife.

'Aye, you have been a coward all your life,' she said: for were not
her dear nuns in Lincoln gaol, and this was a knight that should have
redressed wrongs!

Old Rochford smiled with his air of tranquil wisdom and corpulent age.

'I have struck good blows,' he said. 'There have been thirteen ballads
writ of me.'

'You have kept so close a tongue,' Katharine said to him hotly, 'that
I know not what you love. Be you for the old faith, or for this Church
of devils that Cromwell hath set up in the land? Did you love Queen
Katharine or Queen Anne Boleyn? Were you glad when More died, or did
you weep? Are you for the Statute of Users, or would you end it? Are
you for having the Lady Mary called bastard--God pardon me the
word!--or would you defend her with your life?--I do not know. I have
spoken with you many times--but I do not know.'

Old Rochford smiled contentedly.

'I have saved my head and my lands in these perilous times by letting
no man know,' he said.

'Aye,' Katharine met his words with scorn and appeal. 'You have kept
your head on your shoulders and the rent from your lands in your poke.
But oh, sir, it is certain that, being a man, you love either the new
ways or the old; it is certain that, being a spurred knight, you
should love the old ways. Sir, bethink you and take heed of this: that
the angels of God weep above England, that the Mother of God weeps
above England; that the saints of God do weep--and you, a spurred
knight, do wield a good sword. Sir, when you stand before the gates of
Heaven, what shall you answer the warders thereof?'

'Please God,' the old knight answered, 'that I have struck some good
blows.'

'Aye; you have struck blows against the Scots,' Katharine said. 'But
the beasts of the field strike as well against the foes of their
kind--the bull of the herd against lions; the Hyrcanian tiger against
the troglodytes; the basilisk against many beasts. It is the province
of a man to smite not only against the foes of his kind but--and how
much the more?--against the foes of his God.'

In the full flow of her speaking there came in the great, blonde
Margot Poins, her body-maid. She led by the hand the Magister Udal,
and behind them followed, with his foxy eyes and long, smooth beard,
the spy Throckmorton, vivid in his coat of green and scarlet
stockings. And, at the antipathy of his approach, Katharine's emotions
grew the more harrowing--as if she were determined to shew this evil
supporter of her cause how a pure fight should be waged. They moved
on tiptoe and stood against the hangings at the back.

She stretched out her hands to the old knight.

'Here you be in a pitiful and afflicted land from which the saints
have been driven out; have you struck one blow for the saints of God?
Nay, you have held your peace. Here you be where good men have been
sent to the block: have you decried their fates? You have seen noble
and beloved women, holy priests, blessed nuns defiled and martyred;
you have seen the poor despoiled; you have seen that knaves ruled by
aid of the devil about a goodly king. Have you struck one blow? Have
you whispered one word?'

The colour rushed into Margot Poins' huge cheeks. She kept her mouth
open to drink in her mistress's words, and Throckmorton waved his
hands in applause. Only Udal shuffled in his broken-toed shoes, and
old Rochford smiled benignly and tapped his chest above the chains.

'I have struck good blows in the quarrels that were mine,' he
answered.

Katharine wrung her hands.

'Sir, I have read it in books of chivalry, the province of a knight is
to succour the Church of God, to defend the body of God, to set his
lance in rest for the Mother of God; to defend noble men cast down,
and noble women; to aid holy priests and blessed nuns; to succour the
despoiled poor.'

'Nay, I have read no books of chivalry,' the old man answered; 'I
cannot read.'

'Ah, there be pitiful things in this world,' Katharine said, and her
chest was troubled.

'You should quote Hesiodus,' Cicely mocked her suddenly from her
stool. 'I marked this text when all my menfolk were slain: [Greek:
pleiê men gar gaia, pleiê de thalassa] so I have laughed ever since.'

Upon her, too, Katharine turned.

'You also,' she said; 'you also.'

'No, before God, I am no coward,' Cicely Elliott said. 'When all my
menfolk were slain by the headsman something broke in my head, and
ever since I have laughed. But before God, in my way I have tried to
plague Cromwell. If he would have had my head he might have.'

'Yet what hast thou done for the Church of God?' Katharine said.

Cicely Elliott sprang to the floor and raised her hands with such
violence that Throckmorton moved swiftly forward.

'What did the Church of God for me?' she cried. 'Guard your face from
my nails ere you ask me that again. I had a father; I had two
brothers; I had two men I loved passing well. They all died upon one
day upon the one block. Did the saints of God save them? Go see their
heads upon the gates of York?'

'But if they died for God His pitiful sake,' Katharine said--'if they
did die in the quarrel of God's wounds----'

Cicely Elliott screamed, with her hands above her head.

'Is that not enow? Is that not enow?'

'Then it is I, not thou, that love them,' Katharine said; 'for I, not
thou, shall carry on the work for which they died.'

'Oh gaping, pink-faced fool!' Cicely Elliott sneered at her.

She began to laugh, holding her black sides in, her face thrown back.
Then she closed her mouth and stood smiling.

'You were made for a preacher, coney,' she said. 'Fine to hear thee
belabouring my old, good knight with doughty words.'

'Gibe as thou wilt; scream as thou wilt----' Katharine began. Cicely
Elliott tossed in on her words:

'My head ached so. I had the right of it to scream. I cannot be minded
of my menfolk but my head will ache. But I love thy fine preaching.
Preach on.'

Katharine raised herself from her chair.

'Words there must be that will move thee,' she said, 'if God will give
them to me.'

'God hath withdrawn Himself from this world,' Cicely answered. 'All
mankind goeth a-mumming.'

'It was another thing that Polycrates said.' Katharine, in spite of
her emotion, was quick to catch the misquotation.

'Coney,' Cicely Elliott answered, 'all men wear masks; all men lie;
all men desire the goods of all men and seek how they may get them.'

'But Cromwell being down, these things shall change,' Katharine
answered. '_Res, aetas, usus, semper aliquid apportent novi._'

Cicely Elliott fell back into her chair and laughed.

'What are we amongst that multitude?' she said. 'Listen to me: When my
menfolk were cast to die, I flew to Gardiner to save them. Gardiner
would not speak. Now is he Bishop of Winchester--for he had goods of
my father's, and greased with them the way to his bishop's throne.
Fanshawe is a goodly Papist; but Cromwell hath let him have goods of
the Abbey of Bright. Will Fanshawe help thee to bring back the Church?
Then he must give up his lands. Will Cranmer help thee? Will Miners?
Coney, I loved Federan, a true man: Miners hath his land to-day, and
Federan's mother starves. Will Miners help thee to gar the King do
right? Then the mother of my love Federan must have Miners' land and
the rents for seven years. Will Cranmer serve thee to bring back the
Bishop of Rome? Why, Cranmer would burn.'

'But the poorer sort----' Katharine said.

'There is no man will help thee whose help will avail,' Cicely mocked
at her. 'For hear me: No man now is up in the land that hath not goods
of the Church; fields of the abbeys; spoons made of the parcel gilt
from the shrines. There is no rich man now but is rich with stolen
riches; there is no man now up that was not so set up. And the men
that be down have lost their heads. Go dig in graves to find men that
shall help thee.'

'Cromwell shall fall ere May goeth out,' Katharine said.

'Well, the King dotes upon thy sweet face. But Cromwell being down,
there will remain the men he hath set up. Be they lovers of the old
faith, or thee? Now, thy pranks will ruin all alike.'

'The King is minded to right these wrongs,' Katharine protested hotly.

'The King! The King!' Cicely laughed. 'Thou lovest the King.... Nay an
thou lovest the King.... But to be enamoured of the King.... And the
King enamoured of thee ... why, this pair of lovers cast adrift upon
the land----'

Katharine said:

'Belike I am enamoured of the King: belike the King of me, I do not
know. But this I know: he and I are minded to right the wrongs of
God.'

Cicely Elliott opened her eyes wide.

'Why, thou art a very infectious fanatic!' she said. 'You may well do
these things. But you must shed much blood. You must widow many men's
wives. Body of God! I believe thou wouldst.'

'God forbid it!' Katharine said. 'But if He so willeth it, _fiat
voluntas_.'

'Why, spare no man,' Cicely answered. 'Thou shalt not very easily
escape.'

It was at this point that the magister was moved to keep no longer
silence.

'Now, by all the gods of high Olympus!' he cried out, 'such things
shall not be alleged against me. For I do swear, before Venus and all
the saints, that I am your man.'

Nevertheless, it was Margot Poins, wavering between her love for her
magister and her love for her mistress, that most truly was carried
away by Katharine's eloquence.

'Mistress,' she said, and she indicated both the magister and his tall
and bearded companion, 'these two have made up a pretty plot upon the
stairs. There are in it papers from Cleves and a matter of deceiving
Privy Seal and thou shouldst be kept in ignorance asking to--to----'

Her gruff voice failed and her blushes overcame her, so that she
wanted for a word. But upon the mention of papers and Privy Seal the
old knight fidgeted and faltered:

'Why, let us begone.' Cicely Elliott glanced from one to the other of
them with a malicious glee, and Throckmorton's eyes blinked
sardonically above his beard.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been actually upon the stairs that he had come upon the
magister, newly down from his horse, and both stiff and bruised, with
Margot Poins hanging about his neck and begging him to spare her a
moment. Throckmorton crept up the dark stairway with his shoes soled
with velvet. The magister was seeking to disengage himself from the
girl with the words that he had a treaty form of the Duke of Cleves in
his bosom and must hasten on the minute to give it to her mistress.

'Before God!' Throckmorton had said behind his back, 'ye will do no
such thing,' and Udal had shrieked out like a rabbit caught by a
ferret in its bury. For here he had seemed to find himself caught by
the chief spy of Privy Seal upon a direct treason against Privy Seal's
self.

But, dragging alike the terrified magister and the heavy, blonde girl
who clung to him out from the dark stairhead into the corridor, where,
since no one could come upon them unseen or unheard, it was the safest
place in the palace to speak, Throckmorton had whispered into his ear
a long, swift speech in which he minced no matters at all.

The time, he said, was ripe to bring down Privy Seal. He
himself--Throckmorton himself--loved Kat Howard with a love compared
to which the magister's was a rushlight such as you bought fifty for a
halfpenny. Privy Seal was ravening for a report of that treaty. They
must, before all things, bring him a report that was false. For, for
sure, upon that report Privy Seal would act, and, if they brought him
a false report, Privy Seal would act falsely.

Udal stood perfectly still, looking at nothing, his thin brown hand
clasped round his thin brown chin.

'But, above all,' Throckmorton had concluded, 'show ye no papers to
Kat Howard. For it is very certain that she will have no falsehoods
employed to bring down Privy Seal, though she hate him as the
Assyrian cockatrice hateth the symbol of the Cross.'

'Sir Throckmorton,' Margot Poins had uttered, 'though ye be a paid
spy, ye speak true words there.'

He pulled his beard and blinked at her.

'I am minded to reform,' he said. 'Your mistress hath worked a miracle
of conversion in me.'

She shrugged her great fair shoulders at this, and spoke to the
magister:

'It is very true,' she said, 'that this spying knight affects my
mistress. But whether it be for the love of virtue, or for the love of
her body, or because the cat jumps that way and there he observeth
fortune to rise, I leave to God who reads all hearts.'

'There speaks a wench brought up and taught by Protestants,'
Throckmorton gibed pleasantly at her; 'or ye have caught the trick of
Kat Howard, who, though she be a Papist as good as I, yet prates
virtue like a Lutheran.'

'Ye lie!' Margot said; 'my mistress getteth her virtue from good
letters.'

Throckmorton smiled at her again.

'Wench,' he said, 'in all save doctrine, this Kat Howard and her
learning are nearer Lutheran than of the old faith.'

With his malice he set himself to bewilder Margot. They made a little,
shadowy knot in the long corridor. For he wished to give Udal, who in
his long gown stood deaf-faced, like a statue of contemplation, the
time to come to a conclusion.

'Why, you are a very mean wag,' Margot said. 'I have heard my
uncle--who is, as ye wot, a Protestant and a printer--I have heard him
speak of Luther and of Bucer and of the word of God and suchlike
canting books, but never once of Seneca and Tully, that my mistress
loves.'

'Why, ye are learning the trick of tongues,' Throckmorton mocked.
'Please God, when your mistress cometh to be Queen--may He send it
soon!--there shall be such a fashion and contagion of talking----'

Having his eyes on Udal, he broke off suddenly, and said with a harsh
sharpness:

'I have given you time to make a resolution. Speak quickly. We proceeded
along the beach till we came to a small river, most probably the
same we left yesterday, which we attempted to cross in the same
manner as we had done the one on the 23rd, but unfortunately the
horses and carts sank so deeply into the mud that they were completely
set fast.

We were now obliged to unload, and carry the goods ashore.

Some of the flour-bags fell into the water, but were quickly taken
out--very little damaged.

We had great difficulty in getting the carts out of the mud.

A number of natives had accompanied us all day, and pointed out to
us the best place to cross the river.

Some of them also assisted us in carrying our things across, while
one or two attempted petty thefts.

I caught one with two straps belonging to a saddle, and a pair of Mr.
Kennedy's spurs in his basket, which I took from him and sent
him away.

Many of these natives were painted all over with a sort of red earth,
but none of them had visited us armed with spears for several
days past.

       Some of them had learned to address several of our party by name,
and seemed pleased when they received an answer.

We frequently made them small presents, and endeavoured to impress upon
them the anxiety we felt to remain on friendly terms with them.

After having crossed the river we turned inland; cutting our way through
a belt of mangrove scrub, about half a mile wide; we got the carts
through with comparative ease, the ground being harder than usual.

We camped on a rising ground, with good grass around us, by the
side of a small creek running here almost parallel with the beach,
and coming from the westward.

At this camp I obtained seeds of a dwarf spreading tree, with alternate,
exstipulate, pinnate leaves, and axillary racemes of a round
flattened fruit, similar in size and shape to the small blue fig
cultivated in gardens, of a dark purple colour, and possessing a
flavour similar to an Orleans plum when hardly ripe, with a hard
rough stone inside.

June 27.

We proceeded about five miles in a westerly direction, passing
over two small creeks running to the south-east.

The country here appeared to be gradually rising, and the land to
be growing drier; and we now hoped to be enabled to prosecute our
journey without any great obstruction from the swamps.

June 28.

Proceeding on the same course as on the previous day, we crossed
two small creeks, running rapidly to the eastward.

The bottoms of these creeks were covered with granite pebbles, of
various sizes. The first creek we crossed at the entrance, and the other
near the middle of a thick scrub, extending nearly three miles,
and through which we had to cut a road.

The various plants of which this scrub was composed corresponded
with those described as forming the scrub near our first camp in
the Bay.

The greatest obstacles to our progress through these scrubs were the
long shoots of the Flagellaria, and climbing palm.

We camped in an open patch of forest land, covered with grass, and
the trees consisted principally of Moreton Bay ash, (a species of
eucalyptus), Casuarina, and a rather large-growing Acacia, with
broad, rhomboidal, sericeous phyllodia, and very broad, flat
legumes.

Luff and Douglas were this day taken very ill with the ague.

June 29.

We found that some of our horses had strayed into the scrub, and we
did not succeed in finding them until nearly twelve o'clock, and Luff
and Douglas being no better, Mr. Kennedy with three others proceeded
to examine the country in advance of us.

June 30.

This morning Luff was a little better, but Douglas was able to eat
but little.

In the scrub near our camp I found a species of Musa, with leaves as
large, and the plants as high, as the common banana (M. paradisiaca)
with blossoms and fruit, but the fruit was not eatable.

I also found a beautiful tree belonging to the natural order Myrtaceae,
producing on the trunk and large branches only abundance of white,
sweet-scented flowers, larger than those of the common rose-apple
(Jambosa vulgaris), with long stamens, a very short style, slightly
two-cleft stigma, five very small semi-orbicular petals, alternate
with the thick fleshy segments of the calyx, broad lanceolate leaves,
the fruit four to six inches in circumference, consisting of a white
fleshy, slightly acid substance, with one large round seed (perhaps
sometimes more), the foot-stalk about one inch long.

This is a most beautiful and curious tree. Some specimens which I saw
measured five feet in circumference, and were sixty feet high, the
straight trunks rising twenty or thirty feet from the ground to the
branches, being covered with blossoms, with which not a leaf mingled.

There were ripe and unripe fruit mingled with the blossoms, the
scent of the latter being delightful, spreading perfume over a great
distance around; I had frequently noticed the fragrance of these
blossoms while passing through the scrub, but could not before make
out from whence it arose.

It resembles the scent of a ripe pineapple, but is much more
powerful.

There are not many of these trees to be found, and those only in the
scrub, in a stiff loamy soil.

The small animals eat the fruit, and I tasted some, but it was not so
good as the rose-apple; we called it the white-apple. It is a species
of Eugenia.

A short distance to the south-west of our camp, is a range of round
hills, of moderate height, covered with grass, and thinly timbered
with box and other species of eucalyptus, resembling the ironbark.

These hills are composed of huge blocks of coarse granite, with a
stiff soil, and appear to stretch a long distance to the west.

July 1.

Mr. Kennedy returned this morning, having explored the country for about
forty miles, over which he thought we might travel safely. There
being plenty of grass however at the camp, and the men no better,
he determined to defer our advance till Monday.

July 2.

Being Sunday, prayers were read at eleven o'clock.

July 3.

Early this morning we prepared to start, but Luff and Douglas being
seized with a fit of ague, we were compelled to stop.

Although our horses had all the way had abundance of feed, they began
to grow very thin--several of them very weak, and one getting very
lame, from bad feet. The sheep also had fallen away very much,
which I attributed to the wet journey they had had; being almost always
wet, from crossing rivers and creeks.

July 4.

Mr. Kennedy and three others roamed this morning to some distance
from the camp, when they were followed by a tribe of natives, making
threatening demonstrations, and armed with spears; one spear was
actually thrown, when Mr.

Kennedy, fearing for the safety of his party, ordered his men to fire
upon them; four of the natives fell, but Mr.

Kennedy could not ascertain whether more than one was killed, as
the other three were immediately carried off into the scrub.

July 5.

Luff and Douglas now began to get better, but being still unable
to walk, we could not break up our camp.

July 6.

We started early this morning, and crossed two creeks with
narrow belts of scrub on each side, running north-east.

I have little doubt these creeks run into the river we crossed on
the 8th of June.

The banks of the second creek were nearly twenty feet high, so that we
were obliged to lower down the carts into its bed by means of ropes and
pulleys, fastened to the branches of the trees which overhung the
creek.

The horses were got into the creek with a great deal of difficulty,
then harnessed to the carts, and we proceeded along the bed of the
creek till we arrived at a spot where the banks on the opposite
side were not so steep.

At this place by harnessing six horses to each of the carts, we managed
to get them all out of the creek without any accident. The bed of the
creek was composed of granite pebbles. We encamped on the northern
side of it, the soil being a strong clayey loam, well covered with
grass two or three feet high, so thick that it was difficult to walk
through it. The country here was hilly open forest-land, with a high
range before us, running north-east.

The trees were principally Moreton Bay ash, box, and another species
of eucalyptus, resembling the common ironbark, but with long narrow
leaves. I also found a magnificent species of Grevillea, with fine
pinnatifid silvery leaves, and beautiful racemes of orange-coloured
flowers; also another tree belonging to the same natural order,
rivalling the Grevillea in the beauty of its flowers, producing an
abundance of cream-coloured blossoms, on compound, terminal racemes.
In the scrub by the side of the creek, I found a most beautiful
Scitamineos plant, the foliage, root, and habit of which resembled
Hedychium.

The beauty of the plant consisted in its large, stiff, shining
bracteae, which continue to grow after the small pink blossoms have
fallen. The bracteae are about half an inch broad at the base, slightly
curved inwards, and tapering to a point. The heads of the flowers,
resembling a pineapple in shape and size, and of a beautiful crimson
colour, are produced on the top of a strong flower-stem, 18 inches
high, and they will retain their shape and colour a month after
being cut.

This plant appears to be very local in its habits, as I only caught
sight of it by the side of three creeks, and always in moist, shady
places.

I obtained seeds, and also packed some of its fleshy, tuberous roots in
a tin case.

We saw but few wallabies; and not one kangaroo or emu had as yet
been seen by any of the party.

The country was not open enough for them to inhabit.

July 7.

We started at daylight, proceeding over open forest ground covered with
long grass, very thick and luxuriant. Travelling was rendered still
more difficult by the large logs of dead wood which strewed the
ground in every direction, and which much impeded the progress of
the carts.

We camped by the side of a creek, with a narrow belt of scrub on the
south-east side, but apparently a wide extent of it on the other.
This creek had a large sandy bed; with large Castanospermums, Tristanias,
and Sarcocephali growing on its banks, which were rather steep. It
had a very tortuous course, coming from south-west and turning east a
little below our camp, which was in a bend of the creek.

July 8.

We were employed nearly all this day in cutting through very thick scrub
on the other side of the creek. Whilst doing so we had to cross
several other smaller ones, all turning east, and in the evening
we camped on a small patch of open forest land, covered with long
coarse grass, and large blocks of coarse granite rock jutting out
here and there.

July 9.

This being Sunday we halted for the day, and prayers were read at
eleven o'clock.

July 10 and 11.

We continued throughout these days cutting through belts of scrub
and crossing small creeks, running from the west and north-west,
and turning east. During the latter day we were visited by a small
tribe of natives, who appeared very friendly and did not stop long.
I found a large quantity of Castanospermum seeds in one of the creeks,
apparently put there to steep by the natives, who use them for food.
They informed me that they steep them in water for five days, and then
cut them into thin slices and dry them in the sun; they are then
pounded between two large stones, and the meal being moistened with
water is baked on a flat stone, raised from the ground a few inches,
with a small fire burning beneath. I afterwards saw some of the meal
baked, but it was not very palatable.

July 12 and 13.

Our journey still continued through scrub, intersected by small
creeks, which we had to cross, and by patches here and there of
open forest ground, covered with long grass, the soil a stiff loam.
We were not able to make much progress, travelling on the average
from three to five miles a day. We were compelled to cut away the
scrub, and the banks of some of the creeks, before we were able
to cross them, and frequently obliged to run a creek up and down
some distance before we could find a place where it was passable
at all.

July 14.

We started very early this morning, and commenced travelling over very
uneven ground, full of small hillocks, and having the appearance of
being frequently inundated, the grass growing very high and luxuriantly
over it.

Owing to the irregularities of the surface the axletree of one of
our carts gave way this day.

We were forced to leave the cart and harness behind, and load the
horses with the spare pack-saddles we had brought with us, covering
the load of each horse over with a piece of tarpaulin.
We travelled on till dusk, when we arrived at a small creek, overgrown
with grass, which we imagined we should cross with little difficulty;
but the carts were set fast in the mud, and some of the horses got
bogged.

We were forced to carry the loading of our carts and saddle-horses
over on our shoulders, a task of no small difficulty and labour, the
mud giving way up to the knee at every step. The horses were then
safely taken across, and we lifted out the carts and carried them
to the other side, finding that it was useless to attempt to draw
them out.

It was ten o'clock at night before we had got the things over, and as
soon as we had partaken of our late dinner we made a large fire to dry
our clothes, which had become completely saturated by the labours
of the day.

Mr. Kennedy arrived at the determination this day, to leave the carts
behind at this camp, as they caused so much extra labour and delay
in travelling.

July 16.

Sunday, we halted, and had prayers read at eleven o'clock.

July 17.

We got up early, and prepared all the loads ready for starting, but
we were obliged to leave many things behind, that would have been
very essential to the successful prosecution of all the objects
of the expedition; my specimen box, a cross-cut saw, pickaxes, and
various other articles which it was considered were too heavy to
be carried on horseback.

We however took good care that not an ounce of provisions of any
description should be left behind.

The sugar and tea were more compactly packed than heretofore, and
the packages in which they had formerly been carried were left
behind.

Near this camp a large swamp extended south-westward, but it was clear
of scrub, containing nothing but Melaleucas of moderate size.

July 18.

Having loaded the horses, we started at eight o'clock this morning,
in good hope and high spirits, rejoicing to have got rid of one
great impediment to our progress.

The blacks regarded us with curious interest as we proceeded on our
way, forming a train of twenty-six horses, followed by the sheep,
and Mitchell occasionally sounding a horn he had brought with him.

We all felt the inconvenience of leaving the carts behind, and I in
particular. I was now obliged to make two strong bags to fit my
specimen boards, and to hang them over a horse's back, one bag on
each side, a very inconvenient method, as it rendered them liable
to much damage going through the scrub.

The sheep at this time had grown very thin and poor, not averaging
more than thirty pounds when skinned and dressed; they had, however,
become so habituated to following the horses that they cost us very
little trouble in driving them.

After travelling about six miles through open forest land we camped
near a creek on the skirts of a thick scrub.

July 19.

We were cutting through scrub all day, skirting numerous small
creeks which we met with here, most of them running to the eastward.

The soil was rather stiff, and indicated a rocky formation, blocks
of granite projecting from it in various directions.

July 20, 21, and 22.

During these three days we travelled over an irregular, mountainous
country, intersected by numerous creeks, running in every direction,
but all of them with belts of scrub on each side.

We sometimes crossed the same creeks two or three times a day, owing
to the tortuous directions they took, and our clothes were kept wet
all the day; some of them too had very steep banks, which presented
another obstacle to the progress of our horses.

Between the creeks, small patches of open forest land intervened,
with large blocks of rock scattered over them; most of the creeks had
a rocky bottom, and were running to the eastward.

July 23.

Sunday, we had prayers read as usual at eleven o'clock, and halted
for the day.

July 24.

We resumed our journey through the same description of country,
cutting through scrub, and occasionally travelling through open
land, timbered principally with Moreton Bay ash, box, and flooded-gum,
and covered with very long grass.

We crossed two creeks running to the northward, on the side of the last
of which we camped. We were here compelled to shoot one of our
horses, which had fallen lame.

During the week we had made very little progress, being forced to
turn in every direction to avoid the deep gulleys, and the scrub
which invariably prevailed in the bends of the creeks.

A tribe of natives visited us at this camp, and appeared very
friendly; they did not stop with us long.

I saw to-day several trees of the white-apple, as we called it, and which
I have before described.

July 25.

We entered the scrub on the side of the creek, and proceeded along its
banks with difficulty, being obliged to cut our way through, but it
grew less dense after we had skirted the creek a short distance.

We found the creek to be the branch of a river, which here divided,
one branch running to the south-east (by which we had camped
yesterday)the other running east. It is rocky, and shallow where
it divides, but grows deeper in its course towards the coast.

It is about two hundred yards wide, and its banks are overhung with
trees on each side.

After following it about a mile up, it grew much more shallow and narrow,
and had a rocky bottom.

On the opposite side were patches of open forest ground, but they did
not extend to any distance. After skirting the river about three
miles, we crossed it in a shallow place, the bed of it being composed
of blocks of water-worn granite. The impediment offered by these
blocks rendered it very difficult for our horses to pass, although the
water was only from one to three feet deep. Several of the horses
fell in crossing this river; the one carrying my specimens fell three
times, and my specimens and seeds received much damage, if they were
not entirely spoiled.

The river here runs from the north-west.

We crossed it and entered the scrub, but not being able to get through
it before dark, we tied our horses to trees, and slept by them all
night.

July 27.

We were cutting through scrub nearly all day, and having recrossed
the river, cut our way to the top of a high hill, which we could not
avoid.
We found a patch of open ground on the hill, with grass for our
horses and sheep. The trees growing on the hill were casuarinas, and
acacias, with a few box-trees. Here we camped and tethered our horses,
for fear they should fall down the steep bank of the river. At the
foot of the hill, on the opposite side of this river, the rocks were
of great height, and almost perpendicular. The river runs through a
range of hills coming from the eastward, joining a very high range,
over which our journey now lay. This range is composed of a dark-coloured
granite, very hard; near the water was a vein of talc schist,
running north-west and south-east.
On the top of the hill we found large pebbles of quartz.

July 28.

This morning, having loosed our horses from the tether, one of
them fell down from the hill upon a ledge of hard rock at the edge of
the river, a descent of thirty feet; he was so much injured by the
fall that he died during the day. We came down the hill through the
scrub towards the mountains, and camped but a short distance from where
we rested the previous evening. We were now at the foot of the
range.

July 29.

Mr. Kennedy proceeded to explore the range, to ascertain the best spot
to cross it, it being covered with thick scrub. It runs from the southward
and turns eastward. I dug up a piece of ground here near the edge of
the scrub, and sowed seeds of cabbage, turnip, rock and water melons,
parsley, leek, pomegranate, cotton, and apple pips.

I here found a beautiful orchideous plant, with the habit of Bletia
tankervilliae, flowering in the same manner, with flower-stems about
three feet high, and from twelve to twenty flowers on each stem.
The sepals were much larger than those of Bletia, and of a rich purple
colour; the column yellow, with a spur at the base of the flower
about three-fourths of an inch long. I packed some of its thick
fleshy roots in a tin case.

I also here obtained specimens of a beautiful Hovea, with long
lanceolate leaves, a much finer shrub than H. celsii.

Also a species of Hibiscus, with rough palmate leaves, large bright
sulphur-coloured flowers, with a rich purple spot at the base of
each petal, the stamens and stigma bright red, the blossoms when fully
expanded eight inches in circumference; the plant has a very erect
habit. Also another Hibiscus, with obcordate tomentose leaves, and
pink flowers; both these last were very handsome shrubs. The trees
on the open ground were casuarinas and flooded-gums, with a few
Balfourias.

Although we had a very difficult task before us--the ascent of the
hills-our spirits did not fail us; but the horses began to look very
poor and weak, although they had always had plenty of grass.

July 31.

Early this morning Mr. Kennedy, Jackey, and four others left the camp,
and began clearing a way up the mountain.
'Sir,' she uttered, 'I do take you to be a man of your word. Swear to
me, then, that if upon the fatal hill I do save you your life and your
estates, you will nowise work the undoing of the Church in time to
come.'

'Madam Queen that shall be,' he said, 'an ye gave me my life this day,
to-morrow I would work as I worked yesterday. If ye have faith of your
cause I have the like of mine.'

She hung her head, and said at last:

'Sir, an ye have a little door here at the gallery end I will go out
by it'; for she would not again face the men who made the little knot
before the window. He moved the hangings aside and stood before the
aperture smiling.

'Ye came to ask a boon of me,' he said. 'Is it your will still that I
grant it?'

'Sir,' she answered, 'I asked a boon of you that I thought you would
not grant, so that I might go to the King and shew him your evil
dealings with his lieges.'

'I knew it well,' he said. 'But the King will not cast me down till
the King hath had full use of me.'

'You have a very great sight into men's minds,' she uttered, and he
laughed noiselessly once again.

'I am as God made me,' he said. Then he spoke once more. 'I will read
your mind if you will. Ye came to me in this crisis, thinking with
yourself: _Liars go unto the King saying, "This Cromwell is a traitor;
cast him down, for he seeks your ill." I will go unto the King saying,
"This Cromwell grindeth the faces of the poor and beareth false
witness. Cast him down, though he serve you well, since he maketh your
name to stink to heaven."_ So I read my fellow-men.'

'Sir,' she said, 'it is very true that I will not be linked with
liars. And it is very true that men do so speak of you to the King's
Highness.'

'Why,' he answered her debonairly, 'the King shall listen neither to
them nor to you till the day be come. Then he will act in his own good
way--upon the pretext that I be a traitor, or upon the pretext that I
have borne false witness, or upon no pretext at all.'

'Nevertheless will I speak for the truth that shall prevail,' she
answered.

'Why, God help you!' was his rejoinder.

       *       *       *       *       *

Going back to his friends in the window Cromwell meditated that it was
possible to imagine a woman that thought so simply; yet it was
impossible to imagine one that should be able to act with so great a
simplicity. On the one hand, if she stayed about the King she should
be his safeguard, for it was very certain that she should not tell the
King that he was a traitor. And that above all was what Cromwell had
to fear. He had, for his own purposes, so filled the King with the
belief that treachery overran his land, that the King saw treachery in
every man. And Cromwell was aware, well enough, that such of his
adherents as were Protestant--such men as Wriothesley--had indeed
boasted that they were twenty thousand swords ready to fall upon even
the King if he set against the re-forming religion in England. This
was the greatest danger that he had--that an enemy of his should tell
the King that Privy Seal had behind his back twenty thousand swords.
For that side of the matter Katharine Howard was even a safeguard,
since with her love of truth she would assuredly combat these liars
with the King.

But, on the other hand, the King had his superstitious fears; only
that night, pale, red-eyed and heavy, and being unable to sleep, he
had sent to rouse Cromwell and had furiously rated him, calling him
knave and shaking him by the shoulder, telling him for the twentieth
time to find a way to make a peace with the Bishop of Rome. These were
only night-fears--but, if Cleves should desert Henry and
Protestantism, if all Europe should stand solid for the Pope, Henry's
night-fears might eat up his day as well. Then indeed Katharine would
be dangerous. So that she was indeed half foe, half friend.

It hinged all upon Cleves; for if Cleves stood friend to Protestantism
the King would fear no treason; if Cleves sued for pardon to the
Emperor and Rome, Henry must swing towards Katharine. Therefore, if
Cleves stood firm to Protestantism and defied the Emperor, it would be
safe to work at destroying Katharine; if not, he must leave her by the
King to defend his very loyalty.

The Archbishop challenged him with uplifted questioning eyebrows, and
he answered his gaze with:

'God help ye, goodman Bishop; it were easier for thee to deal with
this maid than for me. She would take thee to her friend if thou
wouldst curry with Rome.'

'Aye,' Cranmer answered. 'But would Rome have truck with me?' and he
shook his head bitterly. He had been made Archbishop with no sanction
from Rome.

Cromwell turned upon Wriothesley; the debonair smile was gone from his
face; the friendly contempt that he had for the Archbishop was gone
too; his eyes were hard, cruel and red, his lips hardened.

'Ye have done me a very evil turn,' he said. 'Ye spoke stiff-necked
folly to this lady. Ye shall learn, Protestants that ye are, that if I
be the flail of the monks I may be a hail, a lightning, a bolt from
heaven upon Lutherans that cross the King.'

The hard malice of his glance made Wriothesley quail and flush
heavily.

'I thought ye had been our friend,' he said.

'Wriothesley,' Cromwell answered, 'I tell thee, silly knave, that I be
friend only to them that love the order and peace I have made, under
the King's Highness, in this realm. If it be the King's will to
stablish again the old faith, a hammer of iron will I be upon such as
do raise their heads against it. It were better ye had never been
born, it were better ye were dead and asleep, than that ye raised your
heads against me.' He turned, then he swung back with the sharpness of
a viper's spring.

'What help have I had of thee and thy friends? I have bolstered up
Cleves and his Lutherans for ye. What have he and ye done for me and
my King? Your friend the Duke of Cleves has an envoy in Paris. Have ye
found for why he comes there? Ye could not. Ye have botched your
errand to Paris; ye have spoken naughtily in my house to a friend of
the King's that came friendlily to me.' He shook a fat finger an inch
from Wriothesley's eyes. 'Have a care! I did send my visitors to smell
out treason among the convents and abbeys. Wait ye till I send them to
your conventicles! Ye shall not scape. Body of God! ye shall not
scape.'

He placed a heavy hand upon Throckmorton's shoulder.

'I would I had sent thee to Paris,' he said. 'No envoy had come there
whose papers ye had not seen. I warrant thou wouldst have ferreted
them through.'

Throckmorton's eyes never moved; his mouth opened and he spoke with
neither triumph nor malice:

'In very truth, Privy Seal,' he said, 'I have ferreted through enow of
them to know why the envoy came to Paris.'

Cromwell kept his hands still firm upon his spy's shoulder whilst the
swift thoughts ran through his mind. He scowled still upon
Wriothesley.

'Sir,' he said, 'ye see how I be served. What ye could not find in
Paris my man found for me in London town.' He moved his face round
towards the great golden beard of his spy. 'Ye shall have the farms ye
asked me for in Suffolk,' he said. 'Tell me now wherefore came the
Cleves envoy to France. Will Cleves stay our ally, or will he send
like a coward to his Emperor?'

'Privy Seal,' Throckmorton answered expressionlessly--he fingered his
beard for a moment and felt at the medal depending upon his
chest--'Cleves will stay your friend and the King's ally.'

A great sigh went up from his three hearers at Throckmorton's lie; and
impassive as he was, Throckmorton sighed too, imperceptibly beneath
the mantle of his beard. He had burned his boats. But for the others
the sigh was of a great contentment. With Cleves to lead the German
Protestant confederation, the King felt himself strong enough to make
headway against the Pope, the Emperor and France. So long as the Duke
of Cleves remained a rebel against his lord the Emperor, the King
would hold over Protestantism the mantle of his protection.

Cromwell broke in upon their thoughts with his swift speech.

'Sirs,' he uttered, 'then what ye will shall come to pass.
Wriothesley, I pardon thee; get thee back to Paris to thy mission.
Archbishop, I trow thou shalt have the head of that wench. Her cousin
shall be brought here again from France.'

Lascelles, the Archbishop's spy, who kept his gaze upon
Throckmorton's, saw the large man's eyes shift suddenly from one board
of the floor to another.

'That man is not true,' he said to himself, and fell into a train of
musing. But from the others Cromwell had secured the meed of wonder
that he desired. He had closed the interview with a dramatic speech;
he had given them something to talk of.


VII


He held Throckmorton in the small room that contained upon its high
stand the Privy Seal of England in an embroidered purse. All red and
gold, this symbol of power held the eye away from the dark-green
tapestry and from the pigeon-holes filled with parchment scrolls
wherefrom there depended so many seals each like a gout of blood. The
room was so high that it appeared small, but there was room for
Cromwell to pace about, and here, walking from wall to wall, he
evolved those schemes that so fast held down the realm. He paced
always, his hands behind his back, his lips moving one upon the other
as if he ruminated--(His foes said that he talked thus with his
familiar fiend that had the form of a bee.)--and his black cap with
ear-flaps always upon his head, for he suffered much with the earache.

He walked now, up and down and up and down, saying nothing, whilst
from time to time Throckmorton spoke a word or two. Throckmorton
himself had his doubts--doubts as to how the time when it would be
safe to let it be known that he had betrayed his master might be found
to fit in with the time when his master must find that he had betrayed
him. He had, as he saw it, to gain time for Katharine Howard so she
might finally enslave the King's desires. That there was one weak spot
in her armour he thought he knew, and that was her cousin that was
said to be her lover. That Cromwell knew of her weak spot he knew too;
that Cromwell through that would strike at her he knew too. All
depended upon whether he could gain time so that Cromwell should be
down before he could use his knowledge.

For that reason he had devised the scheme of making Cromwell feel a
safety about the affairs of Cleves. Udal fortunately wrote a very
swift Latin. Thus, when going to fetch Katharine to her interview with
Privy Seal he had found Udal bursting with news of the Cleves embassy
and with the letters of the Duke of Cleves actually copied on papers
in his poke, Throckmorton had very swiftly advised with himself how to
act. He had set Udal very earnestly to writing a false letter from
Cleves to France--such a letter as Cleves might have written--and this
false letter, in the magister's Latin, he had placed now in his
master's hands, and, pacing up and down, Cromwell read from time to
time from the scrap of paper.

What Cleves had written was that he was fain to make submission to the
Emperor, and leave the King's alliance. What Cromwell read was this:
That the high and mighty Prince, the Duke of Cleves, was firmly minded
to adhere in his allegiance with the King of England: that he feared
the wrath of the Emperor Charles, who was his very good suzerain and
over-lord: that if by taxes and tributes he might keep away from his
territory the armies of the Emperor he would be well content to pay a
store of gold: that he begged his friend and uncle, King of France, to
intercede betwixt himself and the Emperor to the end that the Emperor
might take these taxes and tributes; for that, if the Emperor would
none of this, come peace, come war, he, the high and mighty Prince,
Duke of Cleves, Elector of the Empire, was minded to protect in
Germany the Protestant confession and to raise against the Emperor the
Princes and Electors of Almain, being Protestants. With the aid of his
brother-in-law the King of England he would drive the Emperor Charles
from the German lands together with the heresies of the Romish Bishop
and all things that pertained to the Emperor Charles and his religion.

Cromwell had listened to the reading of this letter in silence; in
silence he re-perused it himself, pacing up and down, and in between
phrases of his thoughts he read passages from it and nodded his head.

That this was a very dangerous enterprise Throckmorton was assured; it
was the first overt act of his that Privy Seal could discover in him
as a treachery. In a month or six weeks he must know the truth; but in
a month or six weeks Katharine must have so enslaved the King that
all danger from Cromwell would be past. And he trusted that the
security that Cromwell must feel would gar him delay striking at
Katharine by means of her cousin.

Cromwell said suddenly:

'How got the magister these papers?' and Throckmorton answered that it
was through the widow that kept the tavern. Cromwell said negligently:

'Let the magister be rewarded with ten crowns a quarter to his fees.
Set it down in my tables'; and then like lightning came the query:

'Do ye believe of her cousin and the Lady Katharine?'

Craving a respite for thought and daring to take none for fear
Cromwell should read him, Throckmorton answered:

'Ye know I think yes.'

Then, as he did not move, she said softly, "The wine, sir,
an if it please you."
Griffith lifted his head, and turned two eyes clouded with suffering
upon her. He saw a buxom, blooming young woman, with remarkably
dove-like eyes that dwelt with timid, kindly curiosity upon him.

He looked at her in a half-distracted way, and then put his hand
to the mug.

"Here's perdition to all false women!"

said he, and tossed half the wine down at a single draught.

"'T is not to me you drink, sir," said Mercy, with gentle dignity. Then
she courtesied modestly and retired, discouraged, not offended.

The wretched Griffith took no notice,--did not even see he had
repulsed a friendly visitor. The wine, taken on an empty stomach,
soon stupefied him, and he staggered to bed.

He awoke at daybreak: and O the agony of that waking!

He lay sighing awhile, with his hot skin quivering on his bones,
and his heart like lead; then got up and flung his clothes on
hastily, and asked how far to the nearest seaport.

Twenty miles.

He called for his horse.

The poor brute was dead lame.

He cursed that good servant for going lame. He walked round and round
like a wild beast, chafing and fuming awhile; then sank into a torpor
of dejection, and sat with his head bowed on the table all day.

He ate scarcely any food; but drank wine freely, remarking, however,
that it was false-hearted stuff, did him no good, and had no taste
as wine used to have. "But nothing is what it was," said he. "Even
I was happy once.'And ye shall be very certain,' he added pleasantly, 'that
once men see the King so inclined, they will go to the King saying I
be a traitor, with Protestants like Wriothesley ready to rise and aid
me. In that pass the Lady Katharine should stay by me, in the King's
ear.'

A deep and intolerable dejection overcame Throckmorton and forced from
his lips the words:

'Ye reason most justly.' And again he cursed himself, for he had
forced Cromwell to this reasoning and action. Yet he dared not say
that his news of the Cleves embassy was false, that Cleves indeed was
minded to turn traitor, and that it most would serve Privy Seal's turn
to stay Katharine Howard up. He dared not say the words, yet he saw
his safety crumbling, and he saw Privy Seal set to ruin both himself
and Katharine Howard. For in his heart he could not believe that the
woman was virtuous, since he believed that no woman was virtuous who
had been given the opportunity for joyment. As a spy, he had gone
nosing about in Lincolnshire where Katharine's home had been near her
cousin's. He had heard many tales against her such as rustics will
tell against the daughters of poor lords like Katharine's father. And
these tales, before ever he had come to love her, he had set down in
Privy Seal's private registers. Now they were like to undo him and
her. And in truth, according to his premonitions, Cromwell spoke:

'We shall bring very quickly Thomas Culpepper, her cousin, back from
France. We shall inflame his mind with jealousy of the King. We shall
find a place where he shall burst upon the King and her together. We
shall bring witnesses enow from Lincolnshire to swear against her.'

He crossed his hands behind his back.

'This work of fetching her cousin from Paris I will put into the hands
of Viridus,' he said. 'I believe her to be virtuous, therefore do you
bring many witnesses, and some that shall swear to have seen her in
the act. That shall be your employment. For I tell you she hath so
great a power of pleading that, being innocent, she will with
difficulty be proved unchaste.'

Throckmorton's head hung upon his shoulders.

'Remember,' Privy Seal said again, 'you and Viridus shall send to find
her cousin in France. Fill him with tales that his cousin plays the
leman with the King. He shall burst here like a bolt from heaven. You
will find him betwixt Calais and Paris town, dallying in evil places
without a doubt. We sent him thither to frighten Cardinal Pole.'

'Aye,' Throckmorton said, his mind filled with other and bitter
thoughts. 'He hath frightened the Cardinal from Paris by the mere
renown of his violence.'

'Then let him do some frighting in our goodly town of London,'
Cromwell said.


PART TWO

THE DISTANT CLOUD

I


The young Poins, once an ensign of the King's guard, habited now in
grey, stood awaiting Thomas Culpepper, Katharine Howard's cousin,
beneath the new gateway towards the east of Calais. Four days he had
waited already and never had he dared to stir, save when the gates
were closed for the night. But it had chanced that one of the
gatewardens was a man from Lincolnshire--a man, once a follower of the
plough, whose father had held a farm in the having of Culpepper
himself.

'----But he sold 'un,' Nicholas Hogben said, 'sold 'un clear away.' He
made a wry face, winked one eye, and drawing up the right corner of
his mouth, displayed square, huge teeth. The young Poins making no
question, he repeated twice: 'Clear away. Right clear away.'

Poins, however, could hold but one thing of a time in his head. And,
by that striving, dangerous servant of Lord Privy Seal, Throckmorton,
it had been firmly enjoined upon him that he must not fail to meet
Thomas Culpepper and stay him upon his road to England. Throckmorton,
with his great beard and cruel snake's eyes, had said: 'I hold thy
head in fee. If ye would save it, meet Thomas Culpepper in Calais and
give him this letter.' The letter he had in his poke. It carried with
it a deed making Culpepper lieutenant of the stone barges in Calais.
But he had it too, by word of mouth, that if Thomas Culpepper would
not be stayed by the letter, he, Hal Poins, must stay him--with the
sword, with a stab in the back, or by being stabbed himself and
calling in the guard to lay Thomas Culpepper's self by the heels.

'You will enjoin upon him,' Throckmorton had said, 'how goodly a thing
is the lieutenancy of stone lighters that in this letter is proffered
him. You will tell him that, if a barge of stone go astray, it is yet
a fair way to London, and stone fetches good money from townsmen
building in Calais. If he will gainsay this you will pick a quarrel
with him, as by saying he gives you the lie. In short,' Throckmorton
had finished, earnestly and with a sinuous grace of gesture in his
long and narrow hands, 'you will stay him.'

It was a desperate measure, yet it was the best he could compass. If
Culpepper came to London, if he came to the King, Katharine's fortunes
were not worth a rushlight such as were sold at twenty for a farthing.
He knew, too, that Viridus had Cromwell's earnest injunctions to send
a messenger that should hasten Culpepper's return; and, though he had
seven hundred of Cromwell's spies that he could trust to do Privy
Seal's errand, he had not one that he could trust to do his own. There
was no one of them that he could trust. If he took a spy and said: 'At
all costs stay Culpepper, but observe very strict secrecy from Privy
Seal's men all,' the spy would very certainly let the news come to
Privy Seal.

It was in this pass that the thought of the young Poins had come to
him. Here was a fellow absolutely stupid. He was a brother of
Katharine Howard's tiring maid who had already come near to losing his
head in a former intrigue in the Court. He had, at the instigation of
his sister, carried two Papist letters of Katharine Howard. And, if it
was the King who pardoned him, it was Throckmorton who first had taken
him prisoner; it was Throckmorton who had advised him to lie hidden in
his grandfather's house for a month or two. At the time Throckmorton
had had no immediate reason to give the boy this counsel. Poins had
been so small a tool in the past embroilment of Katharine's letter
that, had he gone straight back to his post in the yeomanry of the
King's guard, no man would have noticed him. But it had always been
part of the devious and great bearded man's policy--it had been part
of his very nature--to play upon people's fears, to trouble them with
apprehensions. It was part of the tradition that Cromwell had given
all his men. He ruled England by such fears.

Thus Throckmorton had sent Poins trembling to hide in the old
printer's his grandfather's house in the wilds of Austin Friars. And
Throckmorton had impressed upon him that he alone had really saved
him. It was in his grandfather's mean house that Poins had remained
for a brace of months, grumbled at by his Protestant uncle and sneered
at by his malicious Papist grandfather. And it was here that
Throckmorton had found him, dressed in grey, humbled from his pride
and raging for things to do.

The boy would be of little service--yet he was all that Throckmorton
had. If he could hardly be expected to trick Culpepper with his
tongue, he might wound him with his sword; if he could not kill him he
might at least scotch him, cause a brawl in Calais town, where,
because the place was an outpost, brawling was treason, and Culpepper
might be had by the heels for long enough to let Cromwell fall.
Therefore, in the low room with the black presses, in the very shadow
of Cromwell's own walls, Throckmorton--who was given the privacy of
the place by the Lutheran printer because he was Cromwell's
man--large, golden-bearded and speaking in meaning whispers, with
lifting of his eyebrows, had held a long conference with the lad.

       *       *       *       *       *

His dangerous and terrifying presence seemed to dominate, for the
young Poins, even the dusty archway of the Calais gate--and, even
though he saw the flat, green and sunny levels of the French
marshland, with the town of Ardres rising grey and turreted six miles
away, the young Poins felt that he was still beneath the eyes of
Throckmorton, the spy who had sought him out in his grandfather's
house in Austin Friars to send him here across the seas to Calais. Up
above in the archway the stonemasons who came from Lydd sang their
Kentish songs as hammers clinked on chisels and the fine dust filtered
through the scaffold boards. But the young Poins kept his eyes upon
the dusty and winding road that threaded the dykes from Ardres, and
thought only that when Thomas Culpepper came he must be stayed. He had
oiled his sword that had been his father's so that it would slip
smoothly from the scabbard; he had filed his dagger so that it would
pierce through thin coat of mail. It was well to be armed, though he
could not see why Thomas Culpepper should not stay willingly at Calais
to be lieutenant of the stone lighters and steal stone to fill his
pockets, since such were the privileges of the post that Throckmorton
offered him.

'Mayhap, if I stay him, it will get me advancement,' he grumbled
between his teeth. He was enraged in his slow, fierce way. For
Throckmorton had promised him only to save his neck if he succeeded.
There had been no hint of further rewards. He did not speculate upon
why Thomas Culpepper was to be held in Calais; he did not speculate
upon why he should wish to come to England; but again and again he
muttered between his teeth, 'A curst business! a curst business!'

In the mysterious embroilment in which formerly he had taken part, his
sister had told him that he was carrying letters between the King and
Kat Howard. Yes; his large, slow sister had promised him great
advancement for carrying certain letters. And still, in spite of the
fact that he had been told it was a treason, he believed that the
letters he had carried for Kat Howard were love letters to the King.
Nevertheless, for his services he had received no advancement; he had,
on the contrary, been bidden to leave his comrades of the guard and to
hide himself. Throckmorton had bidden him do this. And instead of
advancement, he had received kicks, curses, cords on his wrists, an
interview with the Lord Privy Seal that still in the remembrance set
him shivering, and this chance, offered him by Throckmorton, that if
he stayed Thomas Culpepper he might save his neck.

'Why, then,' he grumbled to himself, 'is it treason to carry the
King's letters to a wench? Helping the King is no treason. I should be
advanced, not threatened with a halter. Letters between the King and
Kat Howard!' He even attempted to himself a clumsy joke, polishing it
and repolishing it till it came out: 'A King may write to a Kat. A Kat
may write to a King. But my neck's in danger!'

Beside him, whitened by the dust that fell from above, the gatewarden
wandered in speech round _his_ grievance.

'You ask me, young lad, if I know Tom Culpepper. Well I know Tom
Culpepper. Y' ask me if he have passed this way going for England.
Well I know he have not. For if Tom Culpepper, squire that was of
Durford and Maintree and Sallowford that was my father's farm--if so
be Tom Culpepper had passed this way, I had spat in the dust behind
him as he passed.'

He made his wry face, winked his eye and showed his teeth once more.
'Spat in the dust--I should ha' spat in the dust,' he remarked again.
'Or maybe I'd have cast my hat on high wi' "Huzzay, Squahre Tom!"
according as the mood I was in,' he said. He winked again and waited.

'For sure,' he affirmed after a pause, 'that will move 'ee to ask why
I du spit in the dust or for why--the thing being contrary--I'd ha'
cast up my cap.'

The young Poins pulled an onion from his poke.

'If you are so main sure he have not passed the gate,' he said, 'I may
take my ease.' He sat him down against the gate wall where the April
sun fell warm through the arch of shadows. He stripped the outer peel
from the onion and bit into it. 'Good, warming eating,' he said, 'when
your stomach's astir from the sea.'

'Young lad,' the gatewarden said, 'I'm as fain to swear my mother bore
me--though God forbid I should swear who my father was, woman being
woman--as that Thomas Culpepper have not passed this way. For why: I'd
have cast my hat on high or spat on the ground. And such things done
mark other things that have passed in the mind of a man. And I have
done no such thing.'

But because the young Poins sat always silent with his eyes on the
road to Ardres and slept--being privileged because he was yeoman of
the King's guard--always in the little stone guard cell of the gateway
at nights; because, in fact, the young man's whole faculties were set
upon seeing that Thomas Culpepper did not pass unseen through the
gate, it was four days before the gatewarden contrived to get himself
asked why he would have spat in the dust or cast his hat on high. It
was, as it were, a point of honour that he should be asked for all the
information that he gave; and he thirsted to tell his tale.

His tale had it that he had been ruined by a wench who had thrown her
shoe over the mill and married a horse-smith, after having many times
tickled the rough chin of Nicholas Hogben. Therefore, he had it that
all women were to be humbled and held down--for all women were
traitors, praters, liars, worms and vermin. (He made a great play of
words between wermen, meaning worms, and wermin and wummin.) He had
been ruined by this woman who had tickled him under the chin--that
being an ingratiating act, fit to bewitch and muddle a man, like as if
she had promised him marriage. And then she had married a horse-smith!
So he was ready and willing, and prayed every night that God would
send him the chance, to ruin and hold down every woman who walked the
earth or lay in a bed.

But he had been ruined, too, by Thomas Culpepper, who had sold Durford
and Maintree and Sallowford--which last was Hogben's father's farm.
For why? Selling the farm had let in a Lincoln lawyer, and the Lincoln
lawyer had set the farm to sheep, which last had turned old Hogben,
the father, out from his furrows to die in a ditch--there being no
room for farmers and for sheep upon one land. It had sent old Hogben,
the father, to die in a ditch; it had sent his daughters to the stews
and his sons to the road for sturdy beggars. So that, but for
Wallop's band passing that way when Hogben was grinning through the
rope beneath Lincoln town tree--but for the fact that men were needed
for Wallop's work in Calais, by the holy blood of Hailes! Hogben would
have been rating the angel's head in Paradise.

But there had been great call for men to man the walls there in
Calais, so Wallop's ancient had written his name down on the list,
beneath the gallows tree, and had taken him away from the Sheriff of
Lincoln's man.

'So here a be,' he drawled, 'cutting little holes in my pikehead.'

''Tis a folly,' the young Poins said.

'Sir,' the Lincolnshire man answered, 'you say 'tis a folly to make
small holes in a pikehead. But for me 'tis the greatest of ornaments.
Give you, it weakens the pikehead; but 'tis a gradely ornament.'

'Ornaments be folly,' the young Poins reiterated.

'Sir,' the Lincolnshire man answered again, 'there is the goodliest
folly that ever was. For if I weaken my eyes and tire my wrists with
small tappers and little files, and if I weaken the steel with small
holes, each hole represents a woman I have known undone and cast down
in her pride by a man. Here be sixty-and-four holes round and firm in
a pattern. Sixty-and-four women I have known undone.'

He paused and surveyed, winking and moving the scroll that the little
holes made in the tough steel of his axehead. Where a perforation was
not quite round, he touched it with his file.

'Hum! ha!' he gloated. 'In the centre of the head is the master hole
of all, planned out for being cut. But not yet cut! Mark you, 'tis not
yet cut. That is for the woman I hate most of all women. She is not
yet cast down that I have heard tell on, though some have said "Aye,"
some "Nay." Tell me, have you heard yet of a Kat Howard in the stews?'

'There is a Kat Howard is like to be----' the young Poins began. But
his slow cunning was aroused before he had the sentence out. Who could
tell what trick was this?

'Like to be what?' the Lincolnshire man badgered him. 'Like to be
what? To be what?'

'Nay, I know not,' Poins answered.

'Like to be what?' Hogben persisted.

'I know no Kat Howard,' Poins muttered sulkily. For he knew well that
the Lady Katharine's name was up in the taverns along of Thomas
Culpepper. And this Lincolnshire cow-dog was a knave too of Thomas's;
therefore the one Kat Howard who was like to be the King's wench and
the other Kat Howard known to Hogben might well be one and the same.

'Nay; if you will not, neither even will I,' Hogben said. 'You shall
have no more of my tale.'

Poins kept his blue eyes along the road. Far away, with an odd leap,
waving its arms abroad and coming by fits and starts, as a hare
gambols along a path--a figure was tiny to see, coming from Ardres way
towards Calais. It passed a load of hay on an ox-cart, and Poins could
see the peasants beside it scatter, leap the dyke and fly to stand
panting in the fields. The figure was clenching its fists; then it
fell to kicking the oxen; when they had overset the cart into the
dyke, it came dancing along with the same hare's gait.

'That is too like the repute of Thomas Culpepper to be other than
Thomas Culpepper,' the young Poins said. 'I will go meet him.'

He started to his feet, loosed the sword in its scabbard; but the
Lincolnshire man had his halberd across the gateway.

'Pass! Shew thy pass!' he said vindictively.

'I go but to meet him,' Poins snarled.

'A good lie; thou goest not,' Hogben answered. 'No Englishman goes
into the French lands without a pass from the lord controller. An thou
keepest a shut head I can e'en keep a shut gate.'

None the less he must needs talk or stifle.

'Thee, with thy Kat Howard,' he snarled. 'Would 'ee have me think thy
Kat was my kitten whose name stunk in our nostrils?'

He shook his finger in Poins' face.

'Here be three of us know Kat Howard,' he said. 'For I know her, since
for her I must leave home and take the road. And _he_ knoweth her over
well or over ill, since, to buy her a gown, he sold the three farms,
Maintree, Durford and Sallowford--which last was my father's farm. And
_thee_ knowest her. Thee knowest her. To no good, I'se awarned. For
thou stoppedst in thy speech like a colt before a wood snake. God
bring down all women, I pray!'

He went on to tell, as if it had been a rosary, the names of the
ruined women that the holes in his pikehead represented. There was one
left by the wayside with her child; there was one hung for stealing
cloth to cover her; there was one whipped for her naughty ways. He
reached the square mark in the centre as the figure on the road
reached the gateway.

'Huzzay, Squahre Tom! Here bay three kennath Kat Howard. Let us three
tak part to kick her down.'

Thomas Culpepper like a green cat flew at his throat, clutched him
above the steel breastplate, and shook three times, the gatewarden's
uncovered, dun-coloured head swaying back and forward as if it were a
loose bundle of clouts on a mop. When they parted company, because he
could no longer keep his fingers clenched, Hogben fell back; he fell
back, and they lay with their heels touching each other and their arms
stretched out in the dust.


II


Nicholas Hogben was the first to rise. He felt at his neck, swallowed
as though a piece of apple were stuck in his throat, brushed his
leather breeches, and picked up his pike.

'Why,' he said, 'you may hold it for main and certain that he have not
had Kat Howard down. For, having had her down, a would never have
thrown a man by the throat for miscalling of her. Therefore Kat Howard
is up for all of he, and I may loosen my feelings.'

He spat gravely at Culpepper's feet. Culpepper lay in the dust, his
arms stretched out to form a cross, his face dead white and his beard
of brilliant red pointing at the keystone of the arch of Calais gate.
Poins lifted his hand, but the pulse still beat, and he dropped it
moodily in the dust.

'Not dead,' he muttered.

'Dead!' Hogben laughed at him. 'Hath been in a boosing ken. There they
drug the wine with simples, and the women--may pox fall on all
women--perfume themselves so that a man goeth stark raving. I warrant
he had silver buttons to his Lincoln green, but they be torn off. I
warrant he had gold buckles to his shoen, but they be gone. His sword
is away, the leather hangers being cut.'

'Wilt not stick him with thy pike, having, as he hath, so mishandled
thee?'

'O aye,' the Lincolnshire man shewed his strong teeth. 'Thee wouldst
have Kat Howard from him. But he may live for me, being more like to
bring her to dismay than ever thee wilt be!'

He looked into the narrow street of the town that the dawn pierced
into through the gateway. Two skinny men in jerkins drawn tight with
belts were yawning in a hovel's low doorway. Under his eyes, still
stretching their arms abroad, they made to slink between the mud walls
of the next alley.

'Oh, hi! _Arrestez. Vesnez!_' he hailed. '_Cestui à comforter!_' The
thin men made to break away, halted, hesitated, and then with dragging
feet made through the pools and filth to the gateway.

'_Tombé! Voleurs! Secourez!_' Hogben pointed at the prostrate figure
in green. They rubbed their shins on their thin calves and appeared
bewildered and uncertain.

'_Portez à lous maisons!_' Hogben commanded.

They stood one on each side and bent down, extending skinny arms to
lift him. Thomas Culpepper sat up and spat in their faces--they fled
like scared wolves, noiselessly, gazing behind them in trepidation.

'Stay them; thieves ho! Stay them!' Culpepper panted. He scrambled to
his feet, and stood reeling, his face like death, when he tried to
make after them.

'God!' he said. 'Give me to drink.'

The young Poins mused under his breath because the man had neither
sword nor dagger. Therefore it would be impossible to have sword play
with him. He had, the young man, no ferocity--but he was set there to
stay Thomas Culpepper's going on to England; he was to stay him by
word or by deed. Deeds came so much easier than words.

'Squahre Tom!' the Lincolnshire man grunted. 'Reckon you have no
money. Without groats and more ye shall get nowt to drink in Calais
town, save water. Water you may have in plenty.'

With a sigh the young Poins unbuckled his belt to get his papers.

'Money I have for you,' he said. 'A main of money.' He was engaged now
to pass words with this man--and he sighed again.

But Thomas Culpepper disregarded his words and his sigh. He was more
in the mood to talk Lincolnshire than Kent, for his fever had given
him a touch of homesickness and the young Poins to him was a very
foreigner. He shut his eyes to let the Lincolnshire gatewarden's words
go down to his brain; then with sudden violence he spat out:

'Give me water! What do ah ask but water! Pig! brood of a sow! gi'e me
water and choke!'

Nicholas Hogben fetched a leather bottle as long as his leg, dusty and
dinted, but nevertheless bedight with the arms of England, from the
stone recess where the guard sheltered at nights. He fitted it on to
the crook of his pike by the handle, and, craning over the drawbridge,
first smoothed away the leaf-green duck-weed on the moat and then sank
the bottle in the black water.

'I have money: a main of money for ye,' the young Poins said to Thomas
Culpepper; but the man, with his red beard and white face, swayed on
his legs and had ears only for the gurgling and gulping of the water
as it entered the bottle neck. The black jack swayed and jumped below
the bridge like a glistening water-beast.

He had little green spangles of duck-weed in his orange beard when he
took the bottle away, empty, from his mouth. He drew deep gasps of
breath, and suddenly sat down upon a squared block of stone that the
masons above were waiting to hoist into place over the archway.

'Good water!' he grunted to Hogben--grunting as all the Lincolnshire
men did, in those days, like a two-year hog.

'Bean't but that good in all Calais town!' Hogben grunted back to him.
'Curses on the two wurmen that sent me here.' And indeed, to
Lincolnshire men the water tasted good, since it reminded them of
their dyke water, tasting of marshweed and smelling of eggs.

'Tü wurmen!' Culpepper said lazily. 'Hast thou been jigging with _tü_
puticotties to wunst? One is enow to undo seven men. Who be 'hee?'

The young Poins, with a sulky sense of his importance, uttered:

'I have money for thee--a main of money!'

Culpepper looked at him with sleepy blue eyes.

'Thrice y' ha' told me that,' he said. 'And money is a goodly thing in
its place--but not to a man with a bellyful of water. Y' shall feel my
fist when I be rested. Meanwhile wait and, being a cub, hear how _men_
talk.' He slapped his chest and repeated to Hogben: 'Who be 'ee?'

Hogben, delighted to be asked at last a question, shewed his
formidable teeth and beneath his familiar contortion of the eyelids
brought out the words that one of the women who had brought him down
was her that had brought Squahre Culpepper to sit on a squared stone
before Calais gate.

'Why, I am a made man, for all you see me sit here,' Culpepper
answered indolently. 'I ha' done a piece of work for which I am to be
seised of seven farms in Kent land. See yo'--they send me messengers
with money to Calais gate.' He pointed his thumb at the young Poins.

The boy, to prove that he was no common messenger, drew his right leg
up and said:

'Nay, goodman Squire; an ye had slain the Cardinal the farms should
have been yours. As it lies, ye are no more than lieutenant of Calais
stone barges.'

'Thou liest,' Culpepper answered negligently, not turning his gaze
from the gatewarden to whom he addressed a friendly question of, Who
was the woman that had brought the two of them down.

'Now, Squahre!' the Lincolnshire man grinned delightedly; 'thu hast
askëd me tü questions. Answer me one: Did _thee_ lie upon her when
thee put her name up in the township of Stamford?'

'Stamford in Lincolnshire was thy townplace?' Culpepper asked. 'But
who was thy woman? I ha' had so many women and lied about so many more
that I never had!'

The Lincolnshire man threw his leather cap to the keystone of the
archway, caught it again and set it upon his thatch of hair, having
the solemnity of one who performs his rituals.

'Goodly squahre that thee art!' he said; 'thou has harmed a many
wenches in truth and in lies.'

Culpepper spied a down feather on his knee.

'Curse the mattress that I lay upon this night,' he said amiably.

He set his head back and blew the feather high into the air so that it
floated out towards the tranquil and sunny pasture fields of France.

'Cub!' he said to Hal Poins, 'take this as a lesson of the death that
lies about the pilgrim's path. For why am I not a pilgrim? I was sent
to rid Paris of a Cardinal Pole, who, being in league with the devil,
hath a magic tongue. Mark this story well, cub, who art sent me with
money and gifts from the King in his glory to me that sit upon a
stone. Now mark--' He extended his white hand. 'This hand, o'
yestereen, had a ring with a great green stone. Now no ring is here.
It was given me by my seventeenth leman, who had two eyes that looked
not together. No twelve robbers had taken it from me by force, since I
had made a pact with the devil that these wall eyes should never look
across my face whilst that ring was there. Now, God knows, I may find
her in Calais. So mark well----' He had been sent to Paris to rid
France of the Cardinal Pole; for the Cardinal Pole, being a succubus
of the fiend, had a magical tongue and had been inducing the French
King to levy arms, in the name of that arch-devil, the Bishop of Rome,
against their goodly King Henry, upon whom God shed His peace.
Culpepper raised his bonnet at the Deity's name, stuck it far back on
his red head, and continued: Therefore the mouth of Cardinal Pole was
to be stayed in Paris town.

Culpepper smote his breast ferociously and with a black pride.

'And I have stayed it!' he peacocked. 'I and no other. I--T.
Culpepper--a made man!'

'Not so,' Poins answered stubbornly. 'Thou wast sent to Paris to slay,
and thou hast not slain!'

'Thou liest!' Culpepper asseverated. 'I was sent to purge Paris town,
and I ha' purged un. No pothicary had done it better nor Hercules that
was a stall groom and cleaned stables in antick days.' For, at the
first breath of news that Culpepper was in the town, at the first
rumour that the king's assassin was in Paris, Cardinal Pole had
gathered his purple skirts about his knees; at the second sound he had
cast them off altogether and, arrayed as a woman or a barber's leech,
had fled hot foot to Brescia and thence to Rome.

'That was a nothing!' Culpepper asseverated. 'Though I ha' heard said
that Hercules was made a god for cleaning stables that he found no
easy task. But I will grant that it was no task for me to cleanse a
whole town. For I needed no besoms, nor even no dagger, but the mere
shadow of my beard upon the cobbly stones of Paris sufficed. I say
nothing of that which befel in the day's journey; but mark this! mark
what follows!' He had set out from Paris upon a high horse, with a
high heart; he had frighted off all robbers and all sturdy rogues upon
the road; he had slept at good inns as became a made man, and had
bought himself a goodly pair of embroidered gloves which he could well
pay for out of his superfluity. Being in haste to reach England, where
he had that that called for him, he had ridden through the town of
Ardres at nightfall, being minded to ride his horse dead, reach Calais
gates in the hour, and beat down the gate if the warder would not
suffer him to enter, it being dark. But outside the town of Ardres
upon a make of no man's ground, being neither French nor English, he
had espied a hut, and in the dark hut a lighted window hole that
sparkled bravely, and, within, a big, fair woman drinking wine between
candles with the light in her hair and a white tablecloth. And,
feeling goodly, and Calais gate being shut, whether he broke it down
one hour or three hours later was all one to him. He had gone into the
hut to take by force or for payment a glass of wine from the black
jacks, a kiss from the woman's mouth, and what else of ease the place
afforded.

'Now I will have you mark, cub,' he said--'cub that shall have to
learn many wiles if thy throat be not cut by me within the next two
hours. Mark this, cub: these were no Egyptians!' They were not
Bohemians, not swearers, not subtle cozeners, not even black a-vised,
or he would have been on his guard against them; but they were plain,
fair folks of Normandy. So he had drunk his wine, and cast a main or
two at dice with the woman and two men, losing no more and no less
than was decent. And he had drunk more wine and had taken his
kisses--since it was all one whether he came three hours or four hours
later to Calais gate. And there had been candles on the table and
stuffs upon the wall, and a crock on the fire for mulling the wine,
and a sheet upon the feather bed. But when he awoke in the morning he
had lain upon the hard earth, between the bare walls. And all that was
his was gone that was worth the taking.

'Now mark, cub,' he said. 'It was a simple thing this flitting with
the hangings and the clothes and the pot rolled in bales and hung upon
my horse. Upon my horse! But what is not simple is that simple folk of
Normandy should have learned the arts of subtlety and drugging of
wines. Mark that!' He pointed a finger at Poins.

'Had God been good to you you might have been as good a warring boy as
Thomas Culpepper, who with the shadow of his hand held back the
galleons of France and France's knights from the goodly realm of
England. For this I have done by frighting from Paris, Cardinal Pole
that was moving the French King to war on us. Had God been good to you
you might have been as brave. But marvel and consider and humble you
in the dust to think that a man with my brain pan and all it holds
could have been so cozened. For sure, a dolt like you would have been
stripped more clean till you had neither nails to your toes nor hair
to your eyebrows.'

Hal Poins snarled that Culpepper would have been shaved too but that
red hair stunk in the nostrils even of cozeners and thieves.

Culpepper wagged his head from side to side.

'This is a main soft stone,' he said; 'I am main weary. When the stone
grows hard, which is a sign that I shall no longer be minded to rest,
I will break thy back with a cudgel.'

Poins stamped his foot with rage and tears filled his eyes.

'An thou had a sword!' he said. 'An only thou had a sword!'

'A year-old carrot to baste thee with!' Culpepper answered. 'Swords
are for men!' He turned to Hogben, who was sitting on the ground
furbishing his pikehead. 'Heard you the like of my tale?' he asked
lazily.

'Oh aye!' the Lincolnshire man answered. 'The simple folk of Normandy
are simple only because they have no suitors. But they ha' learned
that marlock from the sailors of Rye town. For in Rye town, which is
the sinkhole of Sussex, you will meet every morning ten travellers
travelling to France in the livery of Father Adam. Normans can learn,'
he added sententiously, 'as the beasts of the field can learn from a
man. My father had a ewe lamb that danced a pavane to my pipe on the
farm of Sallowford that you sold to buy a woman the third part of a
gown.'

'Why! Art Nick Hogben?' Culpepper said.

'Hast that question answered,' Hogben said. 'Now answer me one. Liedst
thou when saidst what thou saidst of that wurman?'

Culpepper on the stone swung his legs vaingloriously:

'I sold three farms to buy her a gown,' he said.

'Aye!' Nick Hogben answered. 'So thou saidst in Stamford town three
years gone by. And thou saidst more and the manner of it. But betwixt
the buying the gowns and the more of it lie many things. As this: Did
she take the gown of thee? Or as this: Having taken the gown of thee,
did she pay thee in the kind payment should be made in?'

Culpepper looked up at him with a sharp snarl.

The failing health of the wife and mother left more and more the
charge of all things in her hands; servants were poor, and all the
appliances of living had the rawness and inconvenience which in those
days attended Western life. It became her fate to supply all other
people's defects and deficiencies.

Wherever a hand failed, there must her hand be.

Whenever a foot faltered, she must step into the ranks. She was the one
who thought for and cared for and toiled for all, yet made never a
claim that any one should care for her.

"It was not till late in my life that I became acquainted with the
deep interior sacrifice, the constant self-abnegation, which all
her life involved. She was born with a strong, vehement, impulsive
nature,--a nature both proud and sensitive,--a nature whose tastes
were passions, whose likings and whose aversions were of the most
intense and positive character.

Devoted as she always seemed to the mere practical and material, she
had naturally a deep romance and enthusiasm of temperament which
exceeded all that can be written in novels.

It was chiefly owing to this that a home and a central affection
of her own were never hers.

In her early days of attractiveness, none who would have sought her
could meet the high requirements of her ideality; she never saw her
hero,--and so never married. Family cares, the tending of young
children, she often confessed, were peculiarly irksome to her.
She had the head of a student, a passionate love for the world of
books. A Protestant convent, where she might devote herself
without interruption to study, was her ideal of happiness.

She had, too, the keenest appreciation of poetry, of music, of
painting, and of natural scenery.
Her enjoyment in any of these things was intensely vivid whenever,
by chance, a stray sunbeam of the kind darted across the dusty
path of her life; yet in all these her life was a constant repression.

The eagerness with which she would listen to any account from those
more fortunate ones who had known these things, showed how ardent a
passion was constantly held in check.

A short time before her death, talking with a friend who had visited
Switzerland, she said, with great feeling: 'All my life my desire
to visit the beautiful places of this earth has been so intense,
that I cannot but hope that after my death I shall be permitted to
go and look at them.'

"The completeness of her self-discipline may be gathered from the fact,
that no child could ever be brought to believe she had not a natural
fondness for children, or that she found the care of them burdensome.

It was easy to see that she had naturally all those particular
habits, those minute pertinacities in respect to her daily movements
and the arrangement of all her belongings, which would make the
meddling, intrusive demands of infancy and childhood peculiarly
hard for her to meet.

Yet never was there a pair of toddling feet that did not make free
with Aunt Esther's room, never a curly head that did not look up, in
confiding assurance of a welcome smile, to her bright eyes. The
inconsiderate and never-ceasing requirements of children and
invalids never drew from her other than a cheerful response; and
to my mind there is more saintship in this than in the private
wearing of any number of hair-cloth shirts or belts lined with
spikes.

"In a large family of careless, noisy children there will be
constant losing of thimbles and needles and scissors; but Aunt Esther
was always ready, without reproach, to help the careless and the
luckless.

Her things, so well kept and so treasured, she was willing to lend,
with many a caution and injunction it is true, but also with a relish
of right good-will.

And, to do us justice, we generally felt the sacredness of the trust,
and were more careful of her things than of our own. If a shade of
sewing-silk were wanting, or a choice button, or a bit of braid or
tape, Aunt Esther cheerfully volunteered something from her
well-kept stores, not regarding the trouble she made herself in seeking
the key, unlocking the drawer, and searching out in bag or parcel
just the treasure demanded.

Never was more perfect precision, or more perfect readiness to
accommodate others.

"Her little income, scarcely reaching a hundred dollars yearly, was
disposed of with a generosity worthy a fortune.

One tenth was sacredly devoted to charity, and a still further sum
laid by every year for presents to friends.

No Christmas or New Year ever came round that Aunt Esther, out of
this very tiny fund, did not find something for children and servants.

Her gifts were trifling in value, but well timed,--a ball of thread-wax,
a paper of pins, a pincushion,--something generally so well chosen
as to show that she had been running over our needs, and noting
what to give.

She was no less gracious as receiver than as giver.

The little articles that we made for her, or the small presents that we
could buy out of our childish resources, she always declared were
exactly what she needed; and she delighted us by the care she took
of them and the value she set upon them.

"Her income was a source of the greatest pleasure to her, as
maintaining an independence without which she could not have been happy.
Though she constantly gave, to every family in which she lived,
services which no money could repay, it would have been the greatest
trial to her not to be able to provide for herself. Her dress, always
that of a true gentlewoman,--refined, quiet, and neat,--was bought
from this restricted sum, and her small travelling expenses were paid
out of it. She abhorred anything false or flashy: her caps were
trimmed with _real_ thread-lace, and her silk dresses were of the
best quality, perfectly well made and kept; and, after all, a
little sum always remained over in her hands for unforeseen
exigencies.

"This love of independence was one of the strongest features of her
life, and we often playfully told her that her only form of
selfishness was the monopoly of saintship,--that she who gave so
much was not willing to allow others to give to her,--that she who
made herself servant of all was not willing to allow others to serve
her.

"Among the trials of her life must be reckoned much ill-health; borne,
however, with such heroic patience that it was not easy to say when the
hand of pain was laid upon her.

She inherited, too, a tendency to depression of spirits, which at times
increased to a morbid and distressing gloom. Few knew or suspected
these sufferings, so completely had she learned to suppress every outward
manifestation that might interfere with the happiness of others. In
her hours of depression she resolutely forbore to sadden the lives
of those around her with her own melancholy, and often her darkest moods
were so lighted up and adorned with an outside show of wit and humor,
that those who had known her intimately were astonished to hear that
she had ever been subject to depression.

"Her truthfulness of nature amounted almost to superstition. From her
promise once given she felt no change of purpose could absolve
her; and therefore rarely would she give it absolutely, for she
_could not_ alter the thing that had gone forth from her lips.

Our belief in the certainty of her fulfilling her word was like our
belief in the immutability of the laws of nature. Whoever asked
her got of her the absolute truth on every subject, and, when she had
no good thing to say, her silence was often truly awful. When anything
mean or ungenerous was brought to her knowledge, she would close
her lips resolutely; but the flash in her eyes showed what she would
speak were speech permitted.

In her last days she spoke to a friend of what she had suffered
from the strength of her personal antipathies. 'I thank God,' she
said, 'that I believe at last I have overcome all that too, and
that there has not been, for some years, any human being toward whom
I have felt a movement of dislike.'
"The last year of her life was a constant discipline of unceasing
pain, borne with that fortitude which could make her an entertaining
and interesting companion even while the sweat of mortal agony was
starting from her brow.

Her own room she kept as a last asylum, to which she would silently
retreat when the torture became too intense for the repression of
society, and there alone, with closed doors, she wrestled with her
agony.

The stubborn independence of her nature took refuge in this final
fastness; and she prayed only that she might go down to death with
the full ability to steady herself all the way, needing the help
of no other hand.

"The ultimate struggle of earthly feeling came when this proud
self-reliance was forced to give way, and she was obliged to leave
herself helpless in the hands of others.

'God requires that I should give up my last form of self-will,' she said;
'now I have resigned _this_, perhaps he will let me go home.'
"In a good old age, Death, the friend, came and opened the door of this
mortal state, and a great soul, that had served a long apprenticeship
to little things, went forth into the joy of its Lord; a life of
self-sacrifice and self-abnegation passed into a life of endless
rest."

"But," said Rudolph, "I rebel at this life of self-abnegation and
self-sacrifice. I do not think it the duty of noble women, who
have beautiful natures and enlarged and cultivated tastes, to make
themselves the slaves of the sick-room and nursery."

"Such was not the teaching of our New England faith," said I.

"Absolute unselfishness,--the death of self,--such were its teachings,
and such as Esther's the characters it made.

'Do the duty nearest thee,' was the only message it gave to 'women
with a mission'; and from duty to duty, from one self-denial to
another, they rose to a majesty of moral strength impossible to any
form of mere self-indulgence.

It is of souls thus sculptured and chiselled by self-denial and
self-discipline that the living temple of the perfect hereafter is
to be built.

The pain of the discipline is short, but the glory of the fruition
is eternal."

A PIONEER EDITOR.

The historian who, without qualification of his statement, should
date the commencement of our late civil war from the attack on Fort
Sumter, instead of the first attempt by the slaveholders to render
a single property interest paramount in the relations of the country,
would prove himself unfit for his task.

The battles fought in the press, pulpit, and forum, in ante-war days,
were as much agencies in the great conflict as the deadlier ones
fought since, on land and sea.

Men strove in the former, as in the latter case, for the extension
of the slave system on one side, and for its total suppression on
the other; and it is the proud distinction of the early partisans
of freedom to be recognized now as the pioneers--the advance-guard--of
the armed hosts who at last won the victory for humanity.

This view of the actual beginning of the war makes the facts in the
lives of those antislavery men who took the lead in the good fight,
and especially of such as died with their armor on, of the utmost
value to the historian.

We therefore propose to offer a contribution to the record, by tracing
the career of one who acted a distinguished part in the struggle,
as an antislavery journalist.

Gamaliel Bailey was born in New Jersey,--a State where antislavery
men, or, indeed, men of progress in any direction, are so far from
being a staple growth, that they can barely be said to be indigenous
to her soil.

His birthday was December 3, 1807. He was the son of a Methodist
preacher noted for his earnestness and devotion to the duties of his
calling. His mother was a woman of active brain and sympathetic
heart.
It was from her, as is not unusual with men of marked traits, that the
son derived his distinguishing mental characteristics. His education
was such as was obtainable in the private schools of Philadelphia,
which, whatever their advantages to others, were not particularly well
calculated to prepare young Bailey for the study of the learned
profession he subsequently chose; and he had to seek, without their
aid, the classical knowledge necessary to a mastery of the
technicalities of medical science.

Nevertheless he graduated with credit in the Jefferson Medical
College, and at so early an age--for he was then only twenty--that
the restriction in its charter deprived him of the usual diploma
for a year.

The statutes of New Jersey, however, while forbidding him to prescribe
for the physical ailments of her citizens, did not pronounce him
too young to undertake the mental training of her children, and he
eagerly availed himself of the pedagogue's privilege of bending the
twigs of mind amid the pine forests of his native State.

By the time he was entitled to his diploma, he was satisfied that
the overdraught upon his vitality had been so great, during his
college years, as utterly to unfit him for the field of action on
which, but a twelvemonth before, he had been so desirous to enter.

A sea voyage was chosen as the best means of resting his brain while
strengthening his body and preparing it for the heavy demands which
his profession would naturally make.

Having, with the scanty income from his year's teaching, equipped
himself for his voyage, he obeyed at once the dictates of necessity
and of judgment, and shipped on a vessel bound for China. Instead of a
successful physician winning golden opinions from all, Dr. Bailey
was now a common sailor before the mast, receiving from his superiors
oaths or orders as the case might be. The ship's destination was Canton,
and its arrival in port was attended by such an unusual amount of
sickness among the crew, that it became necessary to assign young
Bailey the office of surgeon.

This he filled with promptness and skill, and when the vessel
set sail for Philadelphia, the sailor was again found at his post,
performing his duties as acceptably as could have been expected
from a greenhorn on his first cruise.

Once more on his native shore, and in some degree reinvigorated by
travel, he opened his office for the practice of medicine.

At the end of three months he found himself out of patients, and in a
situation far from enjoyable to one of his active temperament.

But, luckily for Dr. Bailey, whatever it may have been for the church
of his fathers, just at this time the so-called "Radicals" had begun
their reform movement against Methodist Episcopacy, which resulted in
the secession of a number of the clergy and laity, principally in
the Middle States, and the organization of the Methodist Protestants.

These "Radicals" had their head-quarters at Baltimore.

There they started an organ under the title of "The Methodist
Protestant," and to the editorship of this journal Dr.

Bailey was called. His youthful inexperience as a writer was not the
only remarkable feature of this engagement; for he had not even the
qualification of being at that time a professor of religion.

His connection with "The Methodist Protestant" was a brief one; but it
was terminated by lack of sufficient funds to sustain a regular editor,
and not by lack of ability in the editor.

Dr. Bailey was again adrift, and we next find him concerned in "Kelley's
Expedition to Oregon." This had been projected at St. Louis, which
was to be its starting-point; and thither hastened our adventurous young
physician--to learn that the expedition, having had little more to
rest upon than that baseless fabric so often supplied by printers'
ink, was an utter failure. Finding himself without funds to pay for
the costly means of conveyance then used in the West, he made his
way back as far as Cincinnati on foot.

Soon after his arrival there the cholera broke out.
He saw her,
tall, fair, swaying a little in the wind, raise her face to the
skies; her long fingers made the sign of the cross, her hood fell
back. Her lips moved; the fringes of her lashes came down over her
blue eyes, and she seemed to wrestle with her hands.

'Aye,' he muttered to himself half earnest, half sardonic, 'prayer is
better than thoughts. God strike with palsy them that made me afraid
to pray.... Aye, pray on, pray on,' he said again. 'But by God and His
wounds! ye shall be my queen.'

By the time she came back he laughed at her tempestuously, and pushing
the little prince tenderly with his huge foot, watched him roll on the
floor catching at the air.

'Why,' he said to her, 'what's the whimsy now? Shalt be the queen.
'Tis the sole way. 'Tis the way to the light.' He leant forward.
'Cleves has gone to the bastard called Charles to sue for mercy. Ye
led me so well to set Francis against Charles that I may snap my
fingers against both. None but thee could ha' forged that bolt. Child,
I will make a league with the Pope against Charles or Francis, with
Francis or Charles. Anne may go hang herself.' He rose to his feet and
stretched out both his hands, his eyes glowing beneath his deep brows.
'Body o' God! thou art a very fair woman; and now I will be such a
king as never was, and take France for mine own and set up Holy Church
again, and say good prayers and sleep in a warm bed. Body o' God! Body
o' God!'

'God and the saints save the issue!' she said. 'I am thy servant and
slave.'

But her tone made him recoil.

'What whimsy's here?' he muttered heavily, and his eyes became
suffused with red. 'Speak, wench!' He pulled at the stuff round his
throat. 'I will have peace,' he said. 'I will at last have peace.'

'God send you have it,' she said, and trembled a little, half in fear,
half in sheer pity at the thought of thwarting him.

'Speak thy fool whimsy,' he muttered huskily. 'Speak!'

'My lord,' she said, 'where is the Queen that is?'

He flared suddenly at her as if she had reproved him.

'At Windsor. 'Tis a better palace than this of mine here.' He shook
his finger heavily and uttered with a boastful defiance: 'Shalt not
say I shower no gifts on her. Shalt not say she has no state. I ha'
sent her seven jennets this day. I shall go bring her golden apples on
the morrow. Scents she has had o' me; French gowns, Southern fruits.
No man nor wench shall say I be not princely----' His boasting bluster
died away before her silence. To please a mute desire in her, he had
showered more gifts on Anne of Cleves than on any other woman he had
ever seen; and thinking that she used him ill not to praise him for
this, he could not hold his tongue: 'What is't to thee what she hath?
What she hath thou losest. 'Tis a folly.'

'My lord,' she said, 'I will myself to see the Queen that is.'

'And whysomever?' he voiced his astonishment.

'My lord,' she said, 'I have a tickly conscience in divorces. I will
ask her mine own self.'

He roared out suddenly indistinguishable words, stamped his feet,
waved his hands at the skies, and lost his voice altogether.

'Aye,' she said, catching at some of his speech, 'I ha' read your
Highness' depositions. I ha' read depositions of the Archbishop's. But
I will be satisfied of her own mouth that she be not your wife.'

And when he swore that Anne would lie:

'Nay,' she answered; 'if she will lie to keep her queenship, keep it
she shall. I am upon the point of honour.'

'Before God!'--and his voice had a sneering haughtiness--'ye will not
be long of this world if ye steer by the point of honour.'

'Sir,' she cried out and stretched forth her hands; 'for the love of
Mary who guides the starry counsels and of the saints who sit in
conclave, speak not in that wise.'

He shrugged his shoulders and said, with a touch of angry shame:

'God send the world were another world; I would it were other. But I
am a prince in this one.'

'My lord,' she said; 'if the world so is, kings and princes are here
to be above the world. In your greatness ye shall change it; with your
justice ye shall purify it; with your clemencies ye should it chasten
and amerce. Ye ask me to be a queen. Shall I be a queen and not such a
queen? No, I tell you; if a woman may swear a great oath, I swear by
Leonidas that saved Sparta and by Christ Jesus that saved this world,
so will I come by my queenship and so act in it that, if God give me
strength the whole world never shall find speck upon mine honour--or
upon thine if I may sway thee.'

'Why,' he said, 'thy voice is like little flutes.'

He considered, patting his square, soft-shod feet upon the bricks of
the arbour floor.

'By Guy! I will have thee,' he said; 'though ye twist my senses as
never woman twisted them--and it is not good for a man to be swayed by
his women.'

'My lord,' she said, 'in naught would I sway a man save in where my
conscience pricks and impels me.' At daylight got underweigh and took
looked our departure from Weymouth for Sydney. Carron and Goddard were
some considerable time in getting better; the former being be subject
to daily fits of looked She ague, etc., etc down. Thursday, for January
11, 1849 I.Suddenly again she stretched forth both her hands that had
sunk to her sides:

'Dear lord,' and her voice was full of pity for herself and for
entreaty; 'let me go to a convent to pray unceasing for thee.'

He shook his head.

'Dear lord,' she repeated; 'use me as thou wilt and I will stay beside
thee and urge thee to the cause of God.'

Again he shook his head.

'The saints would pardon me it,' she whispered; 'or if I even be
damned to save England, it were a good burnt-offering.'

'Wench,' he said; 'I was never a man to go a-whoring. I ha' done it,
but had no savour with it.' His boastfulness returned to the heavy
voice. 'I am a king that will give. I will give a crown, a realm,
jewels, honours, monies. All I have I will give; but thou shalt wed
me.' He threw out his chest and gazed down at her. 'I was ever thus,'
he said.

'And I ever thus,' she answered him swiftly. 'Mary hath put this thing
in my mind; and though ye scourge me, ye shall not have it otherwise.'

'Even how?' he said.

'My lord,' she answered; 'if the Queen, so it be true, will say she be
no wife of thine, I will wed thee. If the Queen, seeing that it is for
the good of this suffering realm, will give to me her crown, I will
wed with thee. I wot ye may get for yourself another woman with
another gear of conscience to bear t'ee children. All the ills of this
realm came with a divorce of a queen. I do hate the word as I hate
Judas, and will have no truck with the deed.'

'Ye speak me hard,' he said; 'but no man shall say I could not bear
with the truth at odd moments.'

A great and hasty eagerness came into her voice.

'Ye say that it is truth?' she cried. 'God hath softened thy heart.'

'God or thee,' he said, and muttered, 'I do not make this avowal to
the world.' Suddenly he smote his thigh. 'Body o' God!' he called out;
'the day shall soon come. Cleves falls away, France and Spain are
sundering. I will sue for peace with the Pope, and set up a chapel to
Kat's memory.' He breathed as if a weight had fallen from his chest,
and suddenly laughed: 'But ye must wed me to keep me in the right
way.'

He changed his tone again.

'Why, go to Anne,' he said; 'she is such a fool she will not lie to
thee; and, before God, she is no wife of mine.'

'God send ye speak the truth,' she answered; 'but I think few men be
found that will speak truth in these matters.'


IV


But it was with Throckmorton that the real pull of the rope came.
Henry was by then so full of love for her that, save when she crossed
his purpose, he would have given her her way to the bitter end of
things. But Throckmorton bewailed her lack of loyalty. He came to her
on the morning of the next day, having heard that, if the rain held
off, a cavalcade of seventeen lords, twelve ladies and their
bodyguards were commanded to ride with her in one train to Windsor,
where the Queen was.

'I am main sure 'tis for Madam Howard that this cavalcade is ordered,'
he said; 'for there is none other person in Court to whom his Highness
would work this honour. And I am main sure that if Madam Howard goeth,
she goeth with some mad maggot of a purpose.'

His foxy, laughing eyes surveyed her, and he stroked his great beard
deliberately.

'I ha' not been near ye this two month,' he said, 'but God knows that
I ha' worked for ye.'

Save to take her to Privy Seal the day before, when Privy Seal had
sent him, he had in truth not spoken with her for many weeks. He had
deemed it wise to keep from her.

'Nevertheless,' he said earnestly, 'I know well that thy cause is my
cause, and that thou wilt spread upon me the mantle of thy favour and
protection.'

They were in her old room with the green hangings, the high fireplace,
and before the door the red curtain worked with gold that the King had
sent her, and Cromwell had given orders that the spy outside should be
removed, for he was useless. Thus Throckmorton could speak with a
measure of freedom.

'Madam Howard,' he said; 'ye use me not well in this. Ye are not so
stable nor so safe in your place as that ye may, without counsel or
guidance, risk all our necks with these mad pranks.'

'Goodman,' she said, 'I asked ye not to come into my barque. If ye
hang to the gunwale, is it my fault an ye be drowned in my foundering
if I founder?'

'Tell me why ye go to Windsor,' he urged.

'Goodman,' she answered, 'to ask the Queen if she be the King's wife.'

'Oh, folly!' he cried out, and added softly, 'Madam Howard, ye be
monstrous fair. I do think ye be the fairest woman in the world. I
cannot sleep for thinking on thee.'

'Poor soul!' she mocked him.

'But, bethink you,' he said; 'the Queen is a woman, not a man. All
your fairness shall not help you with her. Neither yet your sweet
tongue nor your specious reasons. Nor yet your faith, for she is half
a Protestant.'

'If she be the King's wife,' Katharine said, 'I will not be Queen. If
she care enow for her queenship to lie over it, I will not be Queen
either. For I will not be in any quarrel where lies are--either of my
side or of another's.'

'God help us all!' Throckmorton mocked her. 'Here is my neck engaged
on your quarrel--and by now a dozen others. Udal hath lied for you in
the Cleves matter; so have I. If ye be not Queen to save us ere
Cromwell's teeth be drawn, our days are over and past.'

He spoke with so much earnestness that Katharine was moved to consider
her speaking.

'Knight,' she said at last, 'I never asked ye to lie to Cromwell over
the Cleves matter. I never asked Udal. God knows, I had the rather be
dead than ye had done it. I flush and grow hot each time I think this
was done for me. I never asked ye to be of my quarrel--nay, I take
shame that I have not ere this sent to Privy Seal to say that ye have
lied, and Cleves is false to him.' She pointed an accusing finger at
him: 'I take shame; ye have shamed me.'

He laughed a little, but he bent a leg to her.

'Some man must save thee from thy folly's fruits,' he said. 'For some
men love thee. And I love thee so my head aches.'

She smiled upon him faintly.

'For that, I believe, I have saved thy neck,' she said. 'My conscience
cried: "Tell Privy Seal the truth"; my heart uttered: "Hast few men
that love thee and do not pursue thee."'

Suddenly he knelt at her feet and clutched at her hand.

'Leave all this,' he said. 'Ye know not how dangerous a place this
is.' He began to whisper softly and passionately. 'Come away from
here. Well ye know that I love 'ee better than any man in land. Well
ye know. Well ye know. And well ye know no man could so well fend for
ye or jump nimbly to thy thoughts. The men here be boars and bulls.
Leave all these dangers; here is a straight issue. Ye shall not sway
the wild boar king for ever. Come with me.'

As she did not at once find words to stop his speech, he whispered on:

'I have gold enow to buy me a baron's fee in Almain. I have been
there: in castles in the thick woods, silken bowers may be built----'

But suddenly again he rose to his feet and laughed:

'Why,' he said, 'I hunger for thee: at times 'tis a madness. But 'tis
past.'

His eyes twinkled again and he waved a hand.

'Mayhap 'tis well that ye go to the Queen,' he said drily. 'If the
Queen say, "Yea," ye ha' gained all; if "Nay" ye ha' lost naught, for
ye may alway change your mind. And a true and steadfast cause, a large
and godly innocence is a thing that gaineth men's hearts and voices.'
He paused for a moment. 'Ye ha' need o' man's good words,' he said
drily; then he laughed again. 'Aye: _Nolo episcopari_ was always a
good cry,' he said.

Katharine looked at him tenderly.

'Ye know my aims are other,' she said, 'or else you would not love me.
I think ye love me better than any man ever did--though I ha' had a
store of lovers.'

'Aye,' he nodded at her gravely, 'it is pleasant to be loved.'

She was sitting by her table and leant her hand upon her cheek; she
had been sewing a white band with pearls and silken roses in red and
leaves in green, and it fell now to her feet from her lap. Suddenly he
said:

'Answer me one question of three?'

She did not move, for a feeling of languor that often overcame her in
Throckmorton's presence made her feel lazy and apt to listen. She
itched to be Queen--on the morrow or next day; she desired to have the
King for her own, to wear fair gowns and a crown; to be beloved of the
poor people and beloved of the saints. But her fate lay upon the knees
of the gods then: on the morrow the Queen would speak--betwixt then
and now there was naught for it but to rest. And to hearken to
Throckmorton was to be surprised as if she listened at a comedy.

'One question of three may be answered,' she said.

'On the forfeit of a kiss,' he added. 'I pray God ye answer none.'

He pondered for a moment, and leaning back against the chimney-piece
crossed one silk-stockinged, thin, red leg. He spoke very swiftly, so
that his words were like lightning.

'And the first is: An ye had never come here but elsewhere seen me,
had ye it in you to ha' loved me? And the second: How ye love the
King's person? And the third: Were ye your cousin's leman?'

Leaning against the table she seemed slowly to grow stiff in her pose;
her eyes dilated; the colour left her cheeks. She spoke no word.

'Privy Seal hath sent a man to hasten thy cousin back to here,' he
said at last, after his eyes had steadily surveyed her face. She sat
back in her chair, and the strip of sewing fell to wreathe, white and
red and green, round her skirts on the floor.

'I have sent a botcher to stay his coming,' he said slowly. 'Thy maid
Margot's brother.'

'I had forgotten Tom,' she said with long pauses between her words.
She had forgotten her cousin and playmate. She had given no single
thought to him since a day that she no longer remembered.

Reading the expression of her face and interpreting her slow words,
Throckmorton was satisfied in his mind that she had been her cousin's.

'He hath passed from Calais to Dover, but I swear to you that he shall
never come to you,' he said. 'I have others here.' He had none, but he
was set to comfort her.

'Poor Tom!' she uttered again almost in a whisper.

'Thus,' he uttered slowly, 'you have a great danger.'

She was silent, thinking of her Lincolnshire past, and he began again:

'Therefore ye have need of help from me as I from thee.'

'Aye,' he said, 'you shall advise with me. For at least, if I may not
have the pleasure of thy body, I will have the enjoyment of thy
converse.' His voice became husky for a moment. 'Mayhap it is a
madness in me to cling to thee; I do set in jeopardy my earthly riches
and my hope of profit. We glory in them, and hold up our gyves to show
them to the world. Tommy may be a little shamefaced when his playmates
jeer at the maternal tie; but he will walk forth, glowing with
pride and joy, to parade his self-woven fetters ostentatiously in the
sight of men.

When you had done some such foolish thing yourself, did not your
young mates gather round to view, with wondering and eager eyes, the
result of your own handiwork at the cordage of love? Were there not
many loquacious conclaves held to sit in secret judgment thereon?

Were there not many soft cheeks flushing, and bright eyes sparkling,
and fresh hearts beating, as you brought forth, with a pride you
did not pretend to hide, the rose-colored fabric you had woven?

And did they not all envy you, and wonder when their distaffs were to
whirl to the tread of their own ready feet?

But we are not always eager or proud to exhibit our bonds.

Indeed, we sedulously conceal them from every eye; we cover up the
marks upon our scarred hearts with such jealous care, that none,
not even our bosom friends, can ever see them.

They hold us where the sweet herbage of life has become dry and sere,
where no shelter offers us a grateful retreat.
Vanitas can bear away with him his "lengthening chain" to his leafy
groves; but Scripsit is confined to the torrid regions of his scanty
garret.

In vain he gazes afar, beyond the smoky haze of his stony prison,
upon the green slopes and shady hills.

In vain he toils and strains to burst the links that bind him. His
soul is yearning for the cooling freshness, the sweet fragrance, the
beauty, the glory, of the outer world. It is just beyond his reach;
and, wearied with futile exertions, he sinks, fainting and despairing,
in his efforts to rend the chain of penury.

And there are many other bonds which hold us to areas of life from which
we have gathered all the fresh bloom and the rich fruit. We may tread
their barren soil with jewelled sandals, wrap around us ermined robes
in winter's cold, and raise our silken tents in summer's glare,
while our souls are hungering and thirsting for the ambrosia and
the nectar beyond our tethered reach.

We are held fast by honor, virtue, fidelity, pity,--ties which we
dare not break if we could.

We must not even bear their golden links to their extremest length;
we must not show that they are chains which bind us; we must not show
that we are hungering and thirsting in the confines to which they
restrain us. We must seem to be feasting as from the flesh-pots of
Egypt,--fattening on the husks which we have emptied,--while our
souls are starving and fainting and dying within us.

'T is a sad music that swells from these chords. How fortunate that our
ears are not attuned to their notes.

And we are not always solitary in our bondage; nor do we tread
round the cropped circuit, held to senseless pillars. We are chained
to each other; and unhappy are they who, straining at the bond, seek
food for their hearts in opposite directions. We are chained to
each other; and light or heavy are the bonds, as Fortune shall couple
us. Now you and Frank, I know, are leashed with down; and when
Mrs.
Asmodeus went to the blacksmith, the Vulcan of our days, to order
my fetters, she bespoke gossamers, to which a spider's web were
cable. But we are among the favored of Fortune's children. There are
many poor unfortunates whose daily round is but the measured clank
of hateful chains; who eat, drink, sleep, live together, in a bondage
worse than that of Chillon,--round whom the bright sun shines, the
sweet flowers bloom, the soft breezes play,--and yet who stifle in
the gloom of a domestic dungeon.

And there are others fettered as firmly,--but how differently!

The clasping links are soft, caressing arms; the tones their sounding
chains give out are cheerful voices, joyous accents, words of love,
that echo far beyond the little circle that they keep, and spread
their harmony through many hearts.

That little circle is a happy home; love spun the bonds that hold them
close therein, and many are the strands that bind them there. They
come from beauteous eyes that beam with light; from lisping tongues
more sweet than seraph choirs; from swelling hearts that beat in
every pulse with fond affection, which is richer far than all the
nectar of the ancient gods.

Bind me with these, O Fortune!

and I hug my chains o'erjoyed. Be these the cords which hold me
to the rock around which break the surging waves of time, and let the
beak of Fate tear as it will, I hold the bondage sweet and laugh at
liberty.

My dear Madam, there are chains which hold us as the cable holds
the ship; and, in their sure restraint, we safely ride through all
the howling blasts of adverse fate.

The globe we tread whirls on through endless space, kept ever in
the circuit that it makes by that restraining force which holds it to
the pillar of the sun. Loose but the bond an instant, and it flies
in wild, tangential flight, to shatter other worlds. The very bondage
that we curse, and seek, in fretful mood, to break and burst, may keep
us to the orbit that is traced, by overruling wisdom, for our good.
We gravitate towards duty, though we sweep with errant course along the
outer marge of the bare area of its tightened cord. Let but the
wise restraint be rudely broke, and through life's peopled space we
heedless rush, trampling o'er hearts, and whirling to our fate,
leaving destruction on our reckless way.

Did you ever chance to see, Madam, a picture of those venturous hunters,
who are lowered by a rope to the nests of sea-birds, built on some
inaccessible cliff?

Hanging between heaven and earth they sway;--above, the craggy rock,
o'er which the single cord is strained that holds them fast; below,
a yawning chasm, whose jagged depth would be a fearful grave to him
who should fall.

You and I would never dream of bird-nesting under such circumstances.
I can see you shudder, even now, at the bare idea.

Yet do we not sometimes hang ourselves over cliffs from which a
fall were worse than death?

Do we not trust ourselves, in venturous mood, to the frail tenure of a
single strand which sways 'twixt heaven and earth?

Not after birds' eggs, I grant you.

We are not all of us so fond of omelettes.

But over the wild crags of human passion many drop, pursuing game
that shuns the beaten way, and sway above the depths of dark despair.

Intent upon their prey, they further go, secure in the firm hold
they think they have, nor heed the fraying line that, grating on
the edge of the bare precipice, at last is worn and weak; while,
one by one, the little threads give way, and they who watch above
in terror call to warn them of the danger.

But in vain! no friendly voice can stay their flushed success; till,
at its height, the cord is suddenly snapped, and crushed upon the
rocks beneath they lie.

You and I will never go bird-nesting after this fashion, my dear
Madam.

Let us hover then around the crags of life, and watch the twisting
strands that others, more adventurous than we, have risked themselves
upon.

Be ours the part to note the breaking threads, and, with our words
of kindly warning, seek to save our fellows from a fall so dread.

And, if the ties of earth keep us from falling, so also do they
keep us from rising above the level of grosser things.

They hold us down to the dull, tedious monotony of worldly cares,
aims, purposes. Like birds withheld from flight into the pure regions
of the upper air by cruel, frightening cords, we fluttering go,
stifled amid the vapors men have spread, and panting for the freedom
that we seek.

Madam, our bright-eyed little goat has, by this time, settled himself
calmly on the grass; and I see, near at hand, the shady groves where
King Tommy is wont to lead Mrs. A. and myself in his summer wanderings.

Let me hope that all our bonds may be those which hold us fast to
peace, content, and virtue; and that, when the silver cord which
holds us here to earth shall be loosed, we then on sweeping pinions
may arise, pure and untrammelled, into cloudless skies.

GIOTTO'S TOWER.

How many lives, made beautiful and sweet By self-devotion and by
self-restraint,-- Whose pleasure is to run without complaint On unknown
errands of the Paraclete,-- Wanting the reverence of unshodden feet,
Fail of the nimbus which the artists paint Around the shining forehead
of the saint, And are in their completeness incomplete.
In the old Tuscan town stands Giotto's tower, The lily of Florence
blossoming in stone,-- A vision, a delight, and a desire,-- The
builder's perfect and centennial flower, That in the night of ages
bloomed alone, But wanting still the glory of the spire.

PASSAGES FROM HAWTHORNE'S NOTE-BOOKS.

VI.

Brook Farm, _Oct. 9, 1841._--A walk this afternoon to Cow Island.
The clouds had broken away towards noon, and let forth a few
sunbeams, and more and more blue sky ventured to appear, till at
last it was really warm and sunny,--indeed, rather too warm in the
sheltered hollows, though it is delightful to be too warm now, after
so much stormy chillness.

O the beauty of grassy slopes, and the hollow ways of paths winding
between hills, and the intervals between the road and wood-lots,
where summer lingers and sits down, strewing dandelions of gold,
and blue asters, as her parting gifts and memorials!

I went to a grape-vine, which I have already visited several times,
and found some clusters of grapes still remaining, and now perfectly
ripe.

Coming within view of the river, I saw several wild ducks under the
shadow of the opposite shore, which was high, and covered with a
grove of pines.

I should not have discovered the ducks had they not risen and
skimmed the surface of the glassy stream, breaking its dark water
with a bright streak, and, sweeping round, gradually rose high
enough to fly away.

I likewise started a partridge just within the verge of the woods,
and in another place a large squirrel ran across the wood-path
from one shelter of trees to the other.

Small birds, in flocks, were flitting about the fields, seeking and
finding I know not what sort of food.

There were little fish, also, darting in shoals through the pools and
depths of the brooks, which are now replenished to their brims,
and rush towards the river with a swift, amber-colored current.

Cow Island is not an island,--at least, at this season,--though,
I believe, in the time of freshets, the marshy Charles floods the
meadows all round about it, and extends across its communication
with the mainland. The path to it is a very secluded one, threading a
wood of pines, and just wide enough to admit the loads of meadow
hay which are drawn from the splashy shore of the river. The
island has a growth of stately pines, with tall and ponderous stems,
standing at distance enough to admit the eye to travel far among
them; and, as there is no underbrush, the effect is somewhat like looking
among the pillars of a church.

I returned home by the high-road. On my right, separated from the
road by a level field, perhaps fifty yards across, was a range of
young forest-trees, dressed in their garb of autumnal glory.

The sun shone directly upon them; and sunlight is like the breath
of life to the pomp of autumn.

In its absence, one doubts whether there be any truth in what poets
have told about the splendor of an American autumn; but when this charm
is added, one feels that the effect is beyond description. As I beheld
it to-day, there was nothing dazzling; it was gentle and mild,
though brilliant and diversified, and had a most quiet and pensive
influence.

And yet there were some trees that seemed really made of sunshine, and
others were of a sunny red, and the whole picture was painted with
but little relief of darksome hues,--only a few evergreens.

But there was nothing inharmonious; and, on closer examination, it
appeared that all the tints had a relationship among themselves.

And this, I suppose, is the reason that, while Nature seems to
scatter them so carelessly, they still never shock the beholder by
their contrasts, nor disturb, but only soothe. The brilliant scarlet
and the brilliant yellow are different hues of the maple-leaves,
and the first changes into the last.

I saw one maple-tree, its centre yellow as gold, set in a framework of
red.

The native poplars have different shades of green, verging towards
yellow, and are very cheerful in the sunshine.

Most of the oak-leaves have still the deep verdure of summer; but where
a change has taken place, it is into a russet-red, warm, but sober.

These colors, infinitely varied by the progress which different trees
have made in their decay, constitute almost the whole glory of
autumnal woods; but it is impossible to conceive how much is done
with such scanty materials.

In my whole walk I saw only one man, and he was at a distance, in the
obscurity of the trees. He had a horse and a wagon, and was getting
a load of dry brush-wood.

* * * * *
_Sunday, October 10._--I visited my grape-vine this afternoon, and
ate the last of its clusters. This vine climbs around a young maple-tree,
which has now assumed the yellow leaf. The leaves of the vine are
more decayed than those of the maple. Thence to Cow Island, a
solemn and thoughtful walk. Returned by another path, of the width of
a wagon, passing through a grove of hard wood, the lightsome hues of
which make the walk more cheerful than among the pines. The roots of
oaks emerged from the soil, and contorted themselves across the
path.

The sunlight, also, broke across in spots, and otherwheres the shadow
was deep; but still there was intermingling enough of bright hues
to keep off the gloom from the whole path.

Brooks and pools have a peculiar aspect at this season. One knows
that the water must be cold, and one shivers a little at the sight of
it; and yet the grass about the pool may be of the deepest
green, and the sun may be shining into it. The withered leaves which
overhanging trees shed upon its surface contribute much to the
effect.

Insects have mostly vanished in the fields and woods. I hear locusts
yet, singing in the sunny hours, and crickets have not yet finished
their song. Once in a while I see a caterpillar,--this afternoon, for
instance, a red, hairy one, with black head and tail. They do not
appear to be active, and it makes one rather melancholy to look at
them.

* * * * *
_Tuesday, October 12._--The cawing of the crow resounds among the
woods.
A sentinel is aware of your approach a great way off, and gives the
alarm to his comrades loudly and eagerly,--Caw, caw, caw!

Immediately the whole conclave replies, and you behold them rising
above the trees, flapping darkly, and winging their way to deeper
solitudes.

Sometimes, however, they remain till you come near enough to discern
their sable gravity of aspect, each occupying a separate bough, or
perhaps the blasted tip-top of a pine. As you approach, one after
another, with loud cawing, flaps his wings and throws himself upon the
air.

There is hardly a more striking feature in the landscape now-a-days
than the red patches of blueberry and whortleberry bushes, as seen
on a sloping hillside, like islands among the grass, with trees growing
in them; or crowning the summit of a bare, brown hill with their
somewhat russet liveliness; or circling round the base of an
earth-embedded rock.

At a distance, this hue, clothing spots and patches of the earth, looks
more like a picture than anything else,--yet such a picture as I
never saw painted.

The oaks are now beginning to look sere, and their leaves have
withered borders. It is pleasant to notice the wide circle of greener
grass beneath the circumference of an overshadowing oak.

Passing an orchard, one hears an uneasy rustling in the trees, and not
as if they were struggling with the wind. Scattered about are barrels
to contain the gathered apples; and perhaps a great heap of
golden or scarlet apples is collected in one place.

* * * * *
_Wednesday, October 13.

_--A good view, from an upland swell of our pasture, across the
valley of the river Charles.

There is the meadow, as level as a floor, and carpeted with green, perhaps
two miles from the rising ground on this side of the river to that
on the opposite side.
The stream winds through the midst of the flat space, without any
banks at all; for it fills its bed almost to the brim, and bathes the
meadow grass on either side. A tuft of shrubbery, at broken intervals,
is scattered along its border; and thus it meanders sluggishly
along, without other life than what it gains from gleaming in the
sun.

Now, into the broad, smooth meadow, as into a lake, capes and headlands
put themselves forth, and shores of firm woodland border it, covered
with variegated foliage, making the contrast so much the stronger
of their height and rough, outline with the even spread of the plain.

And beyond, and far away, rises a long, gradual swell of country,
covered with an apparently dense growth of foliage for miles, till
the horizon terminates it; and here and there is a house, or perhaps
two, among the contiguity of trees.

Everywhere the trees wear their autumnal dress, so that the whole
landscape is red, russet, orange, and yellow, blending in the
distance into a rich tint of brown-orange, or nearly that,--except
the green expanse so definitely hemmed in by the higher ground.

I took a long walk this morning, going first nearly to Newton, thence
nearly to Brighton, thence to Jamaica Plain, and thence home. It was
a fine morning, with a northwest wind; cool when facing the wind, but
warm and most genially pleasant in sheltered spots; and warm enough
everywhere while I was in motion. I traversed most of the by-ways which
offered themselves to me; and, passing through one in which
there was a double line of grass between the wheel-tracks and that of
the horses' feet, I came to where had once stood a farm-house, which
appeared to have been recently torn down. Most of the old timber
and boards had been carted away; a pile of it, however, remained. The
cellar of the house was uncovered, and beside it stood the base and
middle height of the chimney. The oven, in which household bread
had been baked for daily food, and puddings and cake and jolly
pumpkin-pies for festivals, opened its mouth, being deprived of its
iron door. The fireplace was close at hand. All round the site of
the house was a pleasant, sunny, green space, with old fruit-trees
in pretty fair condition, though aged. There was a barn, also aged,
but in decent repair; and a ruinous shed, on the corner of which was
nailed a boy's windmill, where it had probably been turning and
clattering for years together, till now it was black with time and
weather-stain.

It was broken, but still it went round whenever the wind
stirred.

The spot was entirely secluded, there being no other house within
a mile or two.

No language can give an idea of the beauty and glory of the trees,
just at this moment.

It would be easy, by a process of word-daubing, to set down a
confused group of gorgeous colors, like a bunch of tangled skeins
of bright silk; but there is nothing of the reality in the glare
which would thus be produced.

And yet the splendor both of individual clusters and of whole scenes
is unsurpassable. The oaks are now far advanced in their change of
hue; and, in certain positions relatively to the sun, they light
up and gleam with a most magnificent deep gold, varying according
as portions of the foliage are in shadow or sunlight. On the sides
which receive the direct rays, the effect is altogether rich; and
in other points of view it is equally beautiful, if less brilliant.

This color of the oak is more superb than the lighter yellow of the
maples and walnuts.

The whole landscape is now covered with this indescribable pomp;
it is discerned on the uplands afar off; and Blue Hill in Milton,
at the distance of several miles, actually glistens with rich, dark
light,--no, not glistens, nor gleams,--but perhaps to say glows
subduedly will be a truer expression for it.

Met few people this morning;--a grown girl, in company with a little
boy, gathering barberries in a secluded lane; a portly, autumnal
gentleman, wrapped in a great-coat, who asked the way to Mr.

Joseph Goddard's; and a fish-cart from the city, the driver of which
sounded his horn along the lonesome way.

* * * * *
_Monday, October 18._--There has been a succession of days which were
cold and bright in the forenoon, and gray, sullen, and chill towards
night. The woods have now taken a soberer tint than they wore
at my last date.

Many of the shrubs which looked brightest a little while ago are
now wholly bare of leaves.

The oaks have generally a russet-brown shade, although some of them
are still green, as are likewise other scattered trees in the
forests.

The bright yellow and the rich scarlet are no more to be seen.

Scarcely any of them will now bear a close examination; for this shows
them to be rugged, wilted, and of faded, frost-bitten hue; but at
a distance, and in the mass, and enlivened by the sun, they have
still somewhat of the varied splendor which distinguished them a
week ago.

It is wonderful what a difference the sunshine makes; it is
like varnish, bringing out the hidden veins in a piece of rich wood.

In the cold, gray atmosphere, such as that of most of our afternoons
now, the landscape lies dark,--brown, and in a much deeper shadow
than if it were clothed in green.

But, perchance, a gleam of sun falls on a certain spot of distant
shrubbery or woodland, and we see it brighten with many hues, standing
forth prominently from the dimness around it. The sunlight gradually
spreads, and the whole sombre scene is changed to a motley picture,--the
sun bringing out many shades of color, and converting its gloom to
an almost laughing cheerfulness. At such times I almost doubt whether
the foliage has lost any of its brilliancy. But the clouds
intercept the sun again, and lo! old Autumn appears, clad in his cloak
of russet-brown.

Beautiful now, while the general landscape lies in shadow, looks
the summit of a distant hill (say a mile off), with the sunshine
brightening the trees that cover it. It is noticeable that the
outlines of hills, and the whole bulk of them at the distance of
several miles, become stronger, denser, and more substantial in
this autumn atmosphere and in these autumnal tints than in summer.

Then they looked blue, misty, and dim. Now they show their great humpbacks
more plainly, as if they had drawn nearer to us.

A waste of shrubbery and small trees, such as overruns the borders
of the meadows for miles together, looks much more rugged, wild,
and savage in its present brown color than when clad in green.

I passed through a very pleasant wood-path yesterday, quite shut in and
sheltered by trees that had not thrown off their yellow robes. The sun
shone strongly in among them, and quite kindled them; so that the
path was brighter for their shade than if it had been quite exposed to
the sun.

In the village graveyard, which lies contiguous to the street, I
saw a man digging a grave, and one inhabitant after another turned
aside from his way to look into the grave and talk with the digger.

I heard him laugh, with the hereditary mirthfulness of men of
that occupation.

In the hollow of the woods, yesterday afternoon, I lay a long while
watching a squirrel, who was capering about among the trees over
my head (oaks and white-pines, so close together that their branches
intermingled).

I will tell my weary tale.'

Throckmorton paused, held his head down, fingered his beard, and said:

'When left ye him at Greenwich?'

'This day at dawn,' Poins answered, and cursed again.

'Drunk or sober?'

'Drunk as a channel codfish.'

The old woman came, a sheaf of jack-knives in her arms, muttering
along the table.

'Get you to bed,' she croaked. 'I will not ha' warmed new sheets for
thee, and thee not use them. Get thee to bed.'

Throckmorton pushed her back, and caught the boy by the jacket near
the throat.

'Ye shall tell me the tale as we go,' he said, and punctuated his
words by shakes. 'But, oaf that I trusted to do a man's work, ye swing
beneath a tree this night an we find not the man ye failed to stay.'

The young Poins--he panted out the story as he trotted, wofully
keeping pace to Throckmorton's great strides between the hedges--had
stuck to Culpepper as to his shadow, in Calais town. At each turn he
had showed the warrant to be master of the lighters; he had handed
over the gold that Throckmorton had given him. But Culpepper had
turned a deaf ear to him, and, setting up a violent friendship with
the Lincolnshire gatewarden over pots of beer in a brewhouse, had
insisted on buying Hogben out of his company and taking him over the
sea to be witness of his wedding with Katharine Howard. Dogged, and
thrusting his word and his papers in at every turn, the young Poins
had pursued them aboard a ship bound for the Thames.

This story came out in jerks and with divagations, but it was evident
to Throckmorton that the young man had stuck to his task with a dogged
obtuseness enough to have given offence to a dozen Culpeppers. He had
begged him, in the inn, to take the lieutenancy of the Calais
lighters; he had trotted at Culpepper's elbow in the winding streets;
he had stood in his very path on the gangway to the ship that was to
take them to Greenwich. At every step he had pulled out of his poke
the commission for the lieutenancy--so that Throckmorton had in his
mind, by the time they sat in the stern of the swift barge, the image
of Culpepper as a savage bulldog pursued along streets and up
ship-sides by a gambolling bear cub that pulled at his ears and
danced before him. And he could credit Culpepper only with a saturnine
and drunken good humour at having very successfully driven Cardinal
Pole out of Paris. That was the only way in which he could account for
the fact that Culpepper had not spitted the boy at the first
onslaught. But for the sheer ill-luck of his sword's having been
stolen, he might have done it, and been laid by the heels for six
months in Calais. For Calais being a frontier town of the English
realm, it was an offence very serious there for English to draw sword
upon English, however molested.

It was that upon which Throckmorton had counted; and he cursed the day
when Culpepper had entered the thieves' hut outside Ardres. But for
that Culpepper must have drawn upon the boy; he must have been lying
then in irons in Calais holdfast. As it was, there was this long
chase. God knew whether they would find him in Greenwich; God knew
where they would find him. He had gone to Greenwich, doubtless,
because when he had left England the Court had been in Greenwich, and
he expected there to find his cousin Kat. He would fly to Hampton as
soon as he knew she was at Hampton; but how soon would he know it? By
Poins' account, he was too drunk to stand, and had been carried ashore
on the back of his Lincolnshire henchman. Therefore he might be lying
in the streets of Greenwich--and Greenwich was a small place. But
different men carried their liquor so differently, and Culpepper might
go ashore too drunk to stand and yet reach Hampton sober enow to be
like a raging bear by eventide.

That above all things Throckmorton dreaded. For that evening Katharine
would be come back from the interview with Anne of Cleves at Windsor;
and whether she had succeeded or not with her quest, the King was
certain to be with her in her room--to rejoice on the one hand, or
violently to plead his cause on the other. And Throckmorton knew his
King well enough--he knew, that is to say, his private image of his
King well enough--to be assured that a meeting between the King then
and Culpepper there, must lead Katharine to her death. He considered
the blind, immense body of jealousy that the King was. And, at
Hampton, Privy Seal would have all avenues open for Culpepper to come
to his cousin. Privy Seal had detailed Viridus, who had had the matter
all the while in hand, to inflame Culpepper's mind with jealousy so
that he should run shouting through the Court with a monstrous outcry.

It was because of this that Throckmorton dreaded to await Culpepper at
Hampton; there he was sure enow to find him, sooner or later, but
there would be the many spies of Privy Seal's around all the avenues
to the palace. He might himself send away the spies, but it was too
dangerous; for, say what he would, if he held Culpepper from Katharine
Howard, Cromwell would visit it mercilessly upon him.

He turned the nose of his barge down the broadening, shining grey
stream towards Greenwich. The wind blew freshly up from the sea; the
tide ran down, and Throckmorton pulled his bonnet over his eyes to
shade them from sea and breeze, and the wind that the rowers made. For
it was the swiftest barge of the kingdom: long, black, and narrow,
with eight watermen rowing, eight to relieve them, and always eight
held in reserve at all landing stages for that barge's crew. So well
Privy Seal had organised even the mutinous men of the river that his
service might be swift and sudden. Throckmorton had set down the bower
at the stern, that the wind might have less hold.

Nevertheless it blew cold, and he borrowed a cloak and a pottle of
sack to warm the young Poins, who had run with him capless and without
a coat. For, listening to the boy's disjointed tale out in the broad
reaches below London, Throckmorton recognised that if the young man
were incredibly a fool he was incredibly steadfast too, and a
steadfast fool is a good tool to retain for simple work. He had,
too--the boy--a valuable hatred for Culpepper that he allowed to
transfer itself to Katharine herself: a brooding hatred that hung in
his blue eyes as he gazed downwards at the barge floor or spat at the
planks of the side. Its ferocity was augmented by the patches of
plaster that stretched over his skull and dropped over one blonde
eyebrow.

'Cod!' he ejaculated. 'Cod! Cod! Cod!' and waved a fist ferociously at
the rushes that spiked the waters of the river in their new green.
'They waited till I was too sick of the sickness of the sea, too sick
to stand--more mortal sick than ever man was. I hung to a rope and
might not let go. And Cod! Cod! Cod! Culpepper lay under the
sterncastle in a hole and set his Lincolnshire beast to baste my
ribs.'

He spat again with gloomy quiescence into the bottom of the boat.

'In the mid of the sea,' he said, 'where the ship pointed at heaven
and then at the fiend his home, I hung to a rope and was basted! And
that whore's son lay in his hole and laughed. For I was a cub, says
he, and not fit for a man's converse or striking.'

Throckmorton's eyes glimmered a little.

'You have been used as befits no gentleman's son,' he said. 'I will
see to the righting of your wrongs.'

Poins swore with an amazing obscenity.

'Shall right 'em myself,' he said, 'so I meet T. Culpepper in this
flesh as a man.'

Throckmorton leaned gently forward and touched his arm.

'I will right thy wrongs,' he said, 'and see to thine advancement; for
if in this service you ha' failed, yet ha' you been persistent and
feal.' He dabbled one white hand in the water, 'Nevertheless,' he said
slowly, 'I would have you consider that your service in this ends
here.' He spoke still more slowly: 'I would have you to understand
this. Aforetime I gave you certain instructions as to using your sword
upon this Culpepper if you might not otherwise stay him.' He held up
one finger. 'Now mark; your commission is ceased. You shall no longer
for my service draw sword, knife or dagger, stave nor club, upon this
man.'

Poins looked at him with gloomy surprise that was changing swiftly to
hot rage.

'I am under oath to a certain one to use no violence upon this man,'
Throckmorton said, 'and to encourage no other to do violence.'

Poins thrust his round, brick-red brow out like a turkey cock's from
the boat cloak into Throckmorton's face.

'I am under no oath of yourn!' he shouted. Throckmorton shrugged his
shoulders and wagged one finger at him. 'No oath o' yourn!' the boy
repeated. 'God knows who ye be or why it is so. But I ha' heard ye ha'
my neck in a noose; I ha' heard ye be dangerous. Yet, before God, I
swear in your teeth that if I meet this man to his face, or come upon
his filthy back, drunk, awake, asleep, I will run him through the
belly and send his soul to hell. He had me, a gentleman's son, basted
by a hind!'

This long speech exhausted his breath, and he fell back panting.

'I had as soon ye had my head as not,' he muttered desperately, 'since
I have been basted.'

'Why,' Throckmorton answered, 'for your private troubles, I know
naught of them. There may be some that will thank ye or advance ye for
spitting of this gallant. But I am not one of them. Nevertheless will
I be your friend, whom ye would have served better an ye could.'

He smiled in his inward manner and went to polishing of his nails. A
little later he felt the bruises on the boy's arms, and stayed the
barge for a moment the stage where, swiftly, eight oarsmen took the
places of the eight that had rowed two shifts out of three--stayed the
barge for time enough to purchase for the boy a ham, a little ginger,
some raw eggs and sack.

The barge rushed forward, with the jar of oars and the sound, like
satin tearing, of the water at the bows, across the ruffled reaches of
the broad waters. The gilded roofs, the gabled fronts of the palace at
Greenwich called Placentia, winked in the fresh sunlight. Throckmorton
had a great fever of excitement, but having sworn to let his oarsmen
be scourged with leathern thongs if they made no more efforts, he lay
back upon the purple cushions and toyed with the strings of the yellow
ensign that floated behind them. It was his purpose to put heart in
the boy and to feed his rage, so that alternately he promised to give
him the warding of the Queen's door--a notable advancement--or
assented to the lad's gloom when he said that he was fit only for the
stables, having been beaten by a groom. So that at the quay the boy
sprang forth mightily, swaying the boat behind him. The trace of his
sea-sickness had left him; he swore to tear Culpepper's throat apart
as if it had been capon flesh.

Throckmorton swiftly quartered the gardens, sending, in his passage
beneath the tall palace arch, a dozen men to search all the paths for
any drunkards that might there lie hidden. He sent the young Poins to
search the three alehouses of the village where seamen new landed sat
to drink. But, having found the sergeant of void palaces asleep in a
small cell at the house end, he learned that two men, speaking
Lincolnshire, had been there two hours agone, questing for Master
Viridus and swearing that they had rid France of the devil and were to
be made great lords for it. The sergeant, an old, corpulent Spaniard
who had been in England forty years, having come with the dead Queen
Katharine and been given this honourable post because the queen had
loved him, folded his fat hands across his round stomach as he sat on
the floor, his legs stretched out, his head against the hangings.

'I might not make out if they were lords or what manner of cavaliers,'
he said. 'They sought some woman whom they would not name, and ran
through a score of empty rooms. God knows whither they went.'

He pulled his nightcap further over his head, nodded at Throckmorton,
and resumed his meditations.

There was no finding them in the still and empty corridors of the
palace; but at the gateway he heard that the two men had clamoured to
know where they might purchase raw shinbone of beef, and had been
directed to the house of a widow Emden. There Throckmorton found
their tracks, for the sacking that covered the window-holes was burst
outwards, beef-bones lay on the road before the door, and, within, the
widow, black, begrimed and very drunk, lay inverted on the clay of the
floor, her head beneath the three legs of the chopping block, so that
she was as if in a pillory, but too fuddled to do more than wave her
legs. A prentice who crouched, with a broken head, in a corner of the
filthy room, said that a man from Lincolnshire, all in Lincoln green,
with a red beard, had wrought this ruin of beef-bones that he had cast
through the windows, and had then comforted the screaming widow with
much strong drink from a black bottle. They had wanted raw beef to
make them valiant against some wedding, and they threw the beef-bones
through the sacking because they said the place stunk villainously.
They seemed, these two, to have visited every hovel in the damp and
squalid village that lay before the palace gates. They had kicked beds
of straw over the floors, thrown crocks at the pigs, melted pewter
plates in the fires.

For pure joy at being afoot and ashore in England again, they had cast
coins into all the houses and hovels of mud; they had brought out cans
and casks from the alehouses, and cast pies into the streets, and
caused the dismal ward to cry out: 'God save free Englishmen!' 'Curse
the sea!' and 'A plague of Frenchmen that be devils!'

And the after effects of their carnival menaced Throckmorton, for from
the miserable huts, where ragged women were rearranging the scattered
straws and wiping egg-yolk from the broken benches, there issued a
ragged crowd of men with tangled and muddy hair and boys unclothed
save for sacks that whistled about their lean hips. The liquor that
Culpepper and Hogben had distributed had rendered them curious or full
of mutiny and discontent, and they surrounded Throckmorton's brilliant
figure in its purple velvet, with the gold neck-chains and the
jewelled hat, and some of them asked for money, and some called him
'Frenchman,' and some knew him for a spy, and some caught up stones
and jawbones furtively to cast at him.

But, arrogant and with his head set high, he borrowed a whip from a
packman that shouldered his way through the street, and lashed at
their legs and ragged heads. The crowd slunk, one by one, back under
the darkness that was beneath the roofs of reeds, and the idea of a
good day that for a moment had risen in their minds at Culpepper's
legendary approach, sank down and flickered out once more in their
hungry bellies and fever-dimmed minds.

'God!' he said, 'we will have hangmen here,' and pursued his search.
He met the young Poins at the head of the village street, and learned
from him that Culpepper and his supporter had hired horses to ride to
Hampton and had galloped away three hours before, holding legs of
mutton by the feet and using them for cudgels to beat their horses.

'Before God!' the boy said, 'an I had money to hire horses I would
overtake them, if I overtook not the devil erstwhile.'

Throckmorton pulled out his purple purse that was embroidered with
silk crosses. He extracted from it four crowns of gold.

'Lad,' he said, 'I do not give thee gold to follow Kat Howard's cousin
with. This is thy wage for the service thou hast done aforetime.' He
reflected for a moment. 'If thou wilt have a horse--but I urge it
not--to go to Hampton where thy fellows of the guard are--for, having
served well ye may once more and without danger rejoin your mates--if
ye will have such a horse, go to the horseward of the palace and say I
sent you. Withouten doubt ye are mad to hasten back to your mates, a
commendable desire. And the King's horses shall hasten faster than any
hired horse--so that ye may easily overtake a man that hath but two
hours' start towards Hampton.'

Whilst Poins was already hastening towards the gateway, Throckmorton
cried to him at a distance:

'Ask at each cross-road guard-house and at all ferries and bridges if
some have passed that way; and at the landing-stage if perchance
caballeros have altered their desires and had it in their minds to
take to boats.'

He sped through the wind to the riverside, set again his oars in
motion and swept up the tide. It had turned and they made good
progress.


VI


The Queen sat in her painted gallery at Richmond, and all around her
her maids sewed and span. The gallery was long; along the panels that
faced the windows were angels painted in red and blue and gold, and in
the three centre squares St. George, whose face was the face of the
King's Highness, in one issued from a yellow city upon a green plain;
in one with a cherry-coloured lance slew a green dragon from whose
mouth issued orange-coloured flames; and in one carried away, that he
might wed her in a rose-coloured tower on a hillside, a princess in a
black gown with hair painted of real gold.

Whilst the maids sewed in silence the Queen sat still upon a stool.
Light-skinned, not very stout, with a smooth oval face, she had laid
her folded hands on the gold and pearl embroidery of her lap and gazed
away into the distance, thinking. She sat so still that not even the
lawn tips of her wide hood with its invisible, minute sewings of
white, quivered. Her gown was of cloth of gold, but since her being in
England she had learned to wear a train, and in its folds on the
ground slept a small Italian greyhound. About her neck she had a
partelet set with green jewels and with pearls. Her maids sewed; the
spinning-wheels ate away the braided flax from the spindles, and the
sunlight poured down through the high windows. She was a very fair
woman then, and many that had seen her there sit had marvelled of the
King's disfavour for her; but she was accounted wondrous still,
sitting thus by the hour with the little hounds in the folds of her
dress. Only her eyes with their half-closed lids gave to her lost
gaze the appearance of a humour and irony that she never was heard to
voice.

They turned to the opening door, a flush came into her face, spread
slowly down her white neck and was lost in the white opening of her
shoulder-pieces, and she greeted Katharine Howard, kneeling at her
feet, with an inclination of the head so tiny that you could not see
the motion. Her eyes remained motionlessly upon the girl's face; only
the lids moved suddenly when Katharine spoke to her in German.

'You speak my tongue?' the Queen asked, motionless still and speaking
very low. Katharine remained upon her knees.

'I learned to read books in German when I was a child,' Katharine
said; 'and since you came I have spoken an hour a day with a German
astronomer that I might give you pleasure if so be it chanced.'

'So it is well,' the Queen said. 'Not many have so done.'

'God has endowed me with an ease of tongues,' Katharine answered;
'many others would have ventured it for your Grace's pleasure. But
your tongue is a hard tongue.'

'I have needed to learn hard sentences in yours,' the Queen said, 'and
have had many masters many hours of the day. I will have you stand up
upon your feet.'

Katharine remained upon her knees.

'I will have you stand up upon your feet,' the Queen repeated.

'I have a prayer to make,' Katharine answered.

The Queen looked for a minute straight before her, then slowly turned
her head to one side. When her gaze rested upon her women they rose
and, with a clatter of their feet and a rustle of garments, carrying
their white sewings and their spinning-wheels stilled, went away down
the gallery. The German lord of Overstein, bearded and immense in the
then German fashion, came from behind the retreating women to stand
before the Queen signifying that he would offer his interpretership.
She dismissed him without speaking, letting her eyes rest upon him.
She was the most silent woman in the world, but all people said that
no queen had women and men servers that needed fewer words or so
discreetly did their devoirs.

The silence and the bright light of the sun swathed these two women's
figures, so that Katharine seemed to hear the flutter against the
window-glass of a brown butterfly that, having sheltered in the hall
all winter, now sought to take a part in the new brightness of the
world. Katharine kept her knees, her eyes upon the floor; the Queen,
motionless and soft, let her eyes rest upon Katharine's hood. From
time to time they travelled to her face, to the medallion that hung
from her neck, and to her dark green skirt of velvet that lay around
her upon the floor. The butterfly sought another window; the Queen
spoke at last.

'You seek my queenship'; and in her still voice there was neither
passion, nor pity, nor question, nor resignation.

Katharine raised her eyes: they saw the imprisoned butterfly, but she
found no words.

'You have more courage than I,' the Queen said.

Suddenly she made a single gesture with her hands, as if she swept
something from her lap: some invisible dust--and that was all. Still
Katharine did not move nor speak; she had prepared speeches--speeches
against the Queen's being disdainful, enraged, or dissolved in tears.
She had read in books all night from Aulus Gellius to Cicero to get
wisdom. But here there were no speeches called for; no speeches could
be made. The significance of the Queen's gesture of sweeping dust from
her lap slowly overwhelmed her.

'You have more courage than I,' the Queen repeated, as though slowly
she were making a catalogue of Katharine's qualities to set
dispassionately against her own; and again her eyes moved over
Katharine. With her first swift gesture she drew from the stool-top a
pamphlet of writing, upon which she had sat. Her face grew slowly red.

'It did not need this long writing against my person,' she said. 'I
take it grievously.'

Katharine moved upon her knees as if she had been stung by an
intolerable accusation.

'Before God!----' she began to say.

'Well, I believe you had no part in the writing,' the Queen
interrupted her. 'Yet the more I say you have courage: to wed a man
that will write lies of another woman's body and powers.'

Katharine sat still; the Queen's slow anger faded slowly away.

'I do not see why this King thinks you more fair than I be,' she said
dispassionately; 'but what draweth the love of man to woman is not yet
known.'

Again she repeated:

'There was no need of this writing against me. The King has never
played the husband's part to me; I would have you tell him, if I go in
danger from him, that, for me, he may go his ways. I have no mind to
stay him, nor to be a queen in this country. Here, it is said, they
slay queens.'

'If I will be Queen, it is that God may bless this realm and King with
the old faith again,' Katharine said. Anne's eyelids narrowed.

'It is best known to yourself why you will be Queen,' she said. 'It is
best known to God what faith he will have in this your realm. I know
not what faith he liketh best, nor yet what side of a queen's
functions most commendeth itself unto you.'

She seemed to withdraw herself more and more from any struggle, as if
she were a novice that took an invisible veil--and she uttered only
requests as to the world into which she would withdraw from this one.

'I am not minded to go back to Cleves,' she stipulated; for she had
thought much and long in her stillnesses of what she would have; 'the
Duke, my brother, is to blame for having brought me to this pass.
Moreover, he is not able to defend his lands; so that if, with a
proper establishing and revenue, I go back to Cleves, the Emperor
Charles, who hath a tooth for gold, may too easily undo me. I would
have a castle here in England; for England is an island, and well
defended in all its avenues, and its King a man of honour and his word
to such as never cross him, as never will I.'

She spoke slowly, as if in her mind she were ticking off little notes
pencilled on her tablets; for since she could not read she had a
memory that she could trust to. 'I will have a castle built me not
strong enough to withstand the King's forces, since those I make no
call to withstand, but strong enough to guard me against robber bands
and the insurrections that are ordinary. Upon a slope that shall take
the sun in winter, with trees about beneath which I may sit in the
heat of summer-time. I will have a good show of servants, because I am
a princess of noble lineage; I will have most of them Germans that I
may speak easily with them, but some English, understanding German, so
that the King may be advised I work no treasons against him. From time
to time I will have the King to visit and to talk with me courteously
and fairly as well he can: this in order to counterpart and destroy
the report that I smell foul and am so ill to see that it makes a man
ill----'

Her eyes, resting upon Katharine, closed slightly again with a tiny
malice.

'I will have you not to fear that, upon such visits, I will use wiles
to entrap the King. I do not favour him. I am not content to be queen
of this country. It is as fair as my own country. In summer it is more
cool, in the winter time more temperate. Meats here are good; cooks
are better than with us. What a woman and a princess in this world
would have is here all at the best, save only its men, and the most
dangerous of all its men is the King.'

Katharine's ready anger rose at her words, though before the Queen's
speeches had flowed above her head and left her speechless and
ashamed.

'The King is known throughout Christendom,' she said, 'for the
royallest prince, the noblest speaker, the most princely horseman, the
most munificent and the most learned in the law.'

'That he may be,' the Queen smiled faintly, 'to them that have never
crossed him. It has been my ill-destiny so to do.'

'Madam,' Katharine cried out, 'never man was so crossed, ill-served,
evilly-led, or betrayed. Ye may not mislike him if at times he be
petulant. I do the more praise him for it.'

'Why, you do love him,' the Queen said. 'I have no cause so to do.'

Katharine caught at one of her hands.

'Your Grace,' she said, 'Queen and high potentate, this realm calleth
out that some one person do lead the King aright. Before God, I think
I do not seek powers or temporal crowns. Maybe it is sweet to sit in a
painted gallery and be a queen, but I have very little considered it;
only, here is a King that crieth for the peace of God, a people that
clamoureth aloud to be led back to the ways of God, a land parched for
rain, swept by gales of wind and pestilences, bewailing the lost
favour of God, and the Holy Church devastated that standeth between
God and the realm.' The Queen listened to her as if, having made her
stipulations, she had no more personal interest in the matter and were
listening to the tale of a journey. 'Before God!' Katharine said, 'if
you were not a virgin for the King, or if the King have coerced you to
forswearing yourself in this matter, I would not be the King's wife,
but his concubine. Only, sore is his need of me; he hath sworn it many
times, and I do believe it, that I best, if anyone may, may give him
rest with my converse and lead him to peace. He hath sworn that never
woman save I made him so clearly to see his path to goodness; and
never woman save I, at convenient seasons, have made him so forget his
many cares.'

'Why, you have still more courage than I had thought,' the Queen said,
'to take a man so dangerous upon so little assurance.' She moved the
hand that Katharine touched in her lap neither forward nor away; but
at last she said:

'I am neither of your country nor for it; neither of your faith nor
against it. But, being here, here I do sojourn. I came not here of
mine own will. Men have handled me as they would, as if I had been a
doll. But, if I may have as much of the sun as shines, and as much of
comfort as the realm affords its better sort, being a princess, and to
be treated with some reverence, I care not if ye take King, crown, and
commonalty, so ye leave me the ruling of my house and the freedom to
wash my face how I will. I had as soon see England linked again with
the Papists as the Schmalkaldners; I had as lief see the King married
to you as another; I had as lief all men do what they will so they
leave me to go my ways and feed me well.'

She looked again upon Katharine, and for the first time spoke as if
she were addressing her:

'I make out that you are a woman with an itch to meddle at the
righting of the world. There have been more men than women at the
task, but such an one was I never. The King was never man of mine, nor
should have been had I any say in the matter.' She half closed her
eyes again. 'Doubtless had it been otherwise the King would have
constrained me by threats and tortures to forswear myself. I am as I
was when I came to Dover. As the King saw me so he left me. Yet do I
maintain and avow it was rather because he feared alliance with my
brother's party than for any foulness of my person.'

Katharine passed her hands over her eyes.

'I do feel myself a thief and a cozener,' she said.

'Ye be none,' the Queen said; 'ye take no more than what I least prize
of this world. Had it not been thee it might have been a worse; for
assuredly I was not made to foot it with this King.'

'Nevertheless----' Katharine began. But the Queen was no more content
to listen to her.

'Ye are as some I have known,' she said; 'they scruple to take what
they very much crave, though it hang ready to drop into their hands;
because they much crave it, therefore they scruple.' She had a small
golden bullet beneath her clasped hands, and she cast it into a basin
of silver that stood on a tripod beside her skirts. At the silvery
clash and roll of the ball's running sound on the metal, doors opened
along the gallery, and servitors came in bearing Rhenish wine in glass
flagons and, upon great salvers, cakes in the forms of hearts or
twisted into true-love-knots of pastry.

Katharine noted these things as being worthy of imitation.

'It is no more to me,' the Queen said, 'to lose the other things to
you than to lose to you the wine that you shall drink or a pile of
cakes.' Nevertheless she left Katharine upon her knees till she had
taken her cup, for it pleased her that her servitors should see her
treated with due worship.


VII


It was noon of that day when Katharine Howard set out again from
Richmond to ride back to Hampton Court; and at noon of that day
Throckmorton's barge shot dangerously beneath London Bridge, hastening
to Hampton Court. At noon Thomas Culpepper passed over London Bridge,
because a great crowd pressed across it from the south going to see a
burning at Smithfield; at noon, too, or five minutes later, the young
Poins galloped furiously past the end of the bridge and did not cross
over, but sped through Southwark towards Hampton Court. And at noon or
thereabouts the King, dressed in green as a husbandman, sat on a log
to await a gun-fire, in the forest that was near to Richmond river
path opposite Isleworth. He had given to Katharine a paper that she
was to deliver to the master gunner of Richmond Palace in case the
Queen Anne did satisfy her that the marriage was no marriage. So that,
when among the green glades where the great trees let down their
branches near the sward and shewed little tips of tender green leaves,
he heard three thuds come echoing, he sprang to his feet, and, smiting
his great, green-clothed thigh, he cried out: 'Ha! I be young again!'
He pulled to his lips the mouth of the English horn that was girdled
across his shoulder and under his arm; he set his feet wide apart,
filled his lungs with air, and blew a thin, clear call. At once there
issued from brakes, thickets and glades the figures of men, dressed
like the King in yeoman's green, bearing bows over their shoulders,
horns at their elbows, or having straining dogs in their leashes.

'Ho!' the King said to his chief verderer, a man of sixty with a grey
beard, but so that all others could hear; 'be it well understood that
I will have you shew some ladies what make of thing it is to rule over
jolly Englishmen.' He directed them how he would have them drive the
deer at the end of the glade; he saw to the setting up of white wands
of peeled willows and, taking from his yeoman-companion, that was the
Earl of Surrey, his great bow, he shot a mighty shaft along the glade,
to shew how far away he would have the deer to pass like swift ghosts
between the aisles of the trees.

But the palace of Hampton lay deserted and given up to scullions, who
lay in the sunlight and took their rare ease. For a great many lords
that could shoot well with the bow were gone to play the yeoman with
the King; and a great many that had sumptuous and gallant apparel were
gone to join the ladies riding back from Richmond; and the King's
whole council, together with many lords that were awful or reverend in
their appearance, were gone to sit in the scaffold to see the burning
of the friar that had denied the King's supremacy of the Church and
the burnings of the six Protestants that had denied the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament. Only Privy Seal, who had ordered these
things, was still walking in his gallery where he so often had walked
of late.

He had with him Wriothesley, whose face was utterly downcast and
abashed; he walked turning more swiftly than had been his wont ever
before. Wriothesley hung down his great bearded, honest head and
sighed three times.

'Sir,' he said at last, 'I see before us nothing but that ye make to
divorce the Queen Anne.' And the words seemed to come from him as if
they cost him his heart's blood.

Cromwell paused before him, his hands behind his back, his feet apart.

'The weighty question,' he said, 'is this: Who hath betrayed me: of
Udal; of the alewife that he should have had the papers of; or
Throckmorton?'

He had that morning received from Cleves, in the letter of his agent
there, the certain proof that the Duke had written to the Emperor
Charles making an utter submission to save his land from ruin, and as
utterly abjuring his alliance with the King his brother-in-law and
with the Schmalkaldner league and its Protestant princes. Cromwell had
immediately called to him Wriothesley that was that day ordering the
horses to take him back to Paris town. He had given him this news,
which, if it were secret then, must in a month be made known to all
the world. To Wriothesley the Protestant this blow was the falling in
of the world; here was Protestantism at an end and dead. There
remained nothing but to save the necks of some to carry on the faith
to distant days. Therefore he had brought out his reluctant words to
urge Privy Seal to the divorce of Anne of Cleves. There was no other
way; there was no other issue. Privy Seal must abjure Cleves' Queen,
and the very savour of a desire for a Protestant league.

But for Privy Seal the problem was not what to do, a thing he might
settle in a minute's swift thought, but the discovery of who had
betrayed him--for his whole life had been given to bringing together
his machine of service. You might determine an alliance or a divorce
between breath and breath; but the training of your instruments, the
weeding out of them that had flaws in their fidelities; the exhibiting
of a swift and awful vengeance upon mutineers--these were the things
that called for thinking and long furrowing of brows. He considered of
this point whilst Wriothesley spoke long and earnestly.

It was expedient before all things that Privy Seal keep the helm of
the State; it was very certain that the King should not long keep to
his marriage with the lady from Cleves; lamentable it was that Cleves
had fallen away from Protestantism and from the league that so goodly
had promised for truth in religion. But so, alas that the day had
come! so it was. The King was a man brave and royal in his degree, but
unstable, so that to keep him to Protestantism and good government a
firm man was earnestly needed. There was none other man than Privy
Seal. Let him consider earnestly that if it tasted ill with his
conscience to move this divorce, yet elsewise such great ills should
strike the kingdom, that far better it were to deaden his conscience
than to sacrifice for a queen of doubtful faith the best hope that
they had then, all of them, in the world. He spoke for many minutes in
this strain, for twice the clock struck the half-hour from the tower
above the gallery.

Finally, long-bearded, solemn, and richly attired as he was,
Wriothesley went down upon one knee, and, laying his bonnet on the
ground, stretched out a long hand.

'My lord,' he said, 'I do beseech you that you stay with us and
succour us. We are a small band, but zealous and well-caparisoned.
Bethink you that you put this land in peril if by maintaining this
Queen ye do endanger your precious neck. For I were loath to take arms
against the King's Majesty, and we are loyal and faithful subjects
all; yet sooner than ye should fall----'

Cromwell stood over him, looking at him dispassionately, his hands
still behind his back.

'Well, it is a great matter,' he uttered elusively. He moved as if to
walk off, then suddenly turned upon his heel again. 'Ye do me more ill
by speaking in that guise than ever Cleves or Gardiner or all my
enemies have done. For assuredly if rumours of your words should reach
the King when he was ill-affected, it should go hardly with me.'

He paused, and then spoke gently.

'And assuredly ye do me more wrong than ill,' he said. 'For this I
swear to you, ye have heard evil enow of me to have believed some. But
there is no man dare call me traitor in his heart of them that do know
me. And this I tell you: I had rather die a thousand deaths than that
ye should prop me up against the majesty and awe of government. By so
doing ye might, at a hazard, save my life, but for certain ye would
imperil that for which I have given my life.'

Again he paused and paced, and again came back in his traces to where
Wriothesley knelt.

'Some danger there is for me,' he said, 'but I think it a very little
one. The King knoweth too well how good a servant and how profitable I
have been to him. I do think he will not cast me away to please a
woman. Yet this is a very notable woman--ye wot of whom I speak; but I
hope very soon to have one to my hand that shall utterly cast down and
soil her in the eyes of the King's Highness.'

'Ye do think her unchaste?' Wriothesley asked. 'I have heard you
say----'

'Knight,' Cromwell answered; 'what I think will not be revealed to-day
nor to-morrow, but only at the Day of Judgment. Nevertheless, so do I
love my master's cause that--if it peril mine own upon that awful
occasion--I so will strive to tear this woman down.'

Wriothesley rose, stiff and angular.

'God keep the issue!' he said.

'Why, get you gone,' Cromwell said. 'But this I pray you gently: that
ye restrain your fellows' tongues from speaking treason and heresy.
Three of your friends, as you know, I must burn this day for such
speakings; you, too--you yourself, too--I must burn if it come to that
pass, or you shall die by the block. For I will have this land
purged.' His cold eyes flamed dangerously for a minute. 'Fool!' he
thundered, 'I will have this land purged of treasons and schisms. Get
you gone before I advise further with myself of your haughty and
stiff-necked speeches. For learn this: that before all creeds, and
before all desires, and before all women, and before all men, standeth
the good of this commonwealth, and state, and King, whose servant I
be. Get you gone and report my words ere I come terribly among ye.'

Making his desultory pacings from end to end of the gallery, Cromwell
considered that in that speech he had done a good morning's work, for
assuredly these men put him in peril. More than one of these dangerous
proclaimings of loyalty to him rather than to the King had come to his
ears. They must be put an end to.

But this issue faded from his mind. Left to himself, he let his hands
twitch as feverishly as they would. Cleves and its Duke had played him
false! His sheet anchor was gone! There remained only, then, the
device of proving to the King that Katharine Howard was a monster of
unchastity. For so strong was the witness that he had gathered against
her that he could not but try his Fate once more--to give the King, as
so often he had done, proof of how diligently his minister fended for
him and how requisite he was, as a man who had eyes in every corner of
this realm.

To do that it was necessary that he should find her cousin; he had all
the others under lock and key already in that palace. But her
cousin--he must come soon or he would come too late!

Privy Seal was a man of immense labours, that carried him to burning
his lamp into hours when all other men in land slept in their beds.
And, at that date, he had a many letters to indite, because the
choosing of burgesses for the Parliament was going forward, and he had
ado in some burghs to make the citizens choose the men that he bade
them have. He gave to each shire and burgh long thought and minute
commands. He knew the mayor of each town, and had note-books telling
him the opinions and deeds of every man that had freedom to elect all
over England. And into each man he had instilled the terror of his
vengeance. This needed anxious labours, and it was the measure of his
concern that he stayed now from this work to meditate a full ten
minutes upon this matter of bringing Thomas Culpepper before the King.

Thus, when, after he had for many hours been busy with his papers,
Lascelles, the gentleman informer of the Archbishop's, came to tell
him that he had seen Thomas Culpepper at Greenwich that dawn and had
followed him to the burning at Smithfield, whence he had hastened to
Hampton, the Lord Privy Seal took from his neck his own golden collar
of knighthood and cast it over Lascelles' neck. In part this was
because he had never before been so glad in his life, and in part
because it was his policy to reward very richly them that did him a
chance service.

'Sir,' he said, 'I grudge that ye be the Archbishop's man and not
mine, so your judgment jumps with mine.'

And indeed Lascelles' judgment had jumped with Privy Seal's. He was
the Archbishop's confidential gentleman; he swayed in many things the
Archbishop's judgments. Yet in this one thing Cranmer had been too
afraid to jump with him.

'To me,' Lascelles said, 'it appeared that the sole thing to be done
was to strike at the esteem of the King for Kat Howard, and the sole
method to strike at her was through her dealings with her cousin.'

'Sir,' Cromwell interrupted him, 'in this ye have hit upon mine own
secret judgment that I had told to no man save my private servants.'

Lascelles bent his knee to acknowledge this great praise.

'Very gracious lord,' he said, 'his Grace of Canterbury opines rather
that this woman must be propitiated. He hath sent her books to please
her tickle fancy of erudition; he hath sent her Latin chronicles and
Saxon to prove to her, if he may, that the English priesthood is older
than that of Rome. He is minded to convince her if he may, or, if he
may not, he plans to make submission to her, to commend her learning
and in all things to flatter her--for she is very approachable by
these channels, more than by any other.'

In short, as Lascelles made it appear to Cromwell's attentive brain,
the Archbishop was, as always, anxious to run with the hare and hunt
with the hounds. He was a schismatic bishop, appointed by the King and
the King's creature, not the Bishop of Rome's. So that if with his
high pen and his great gift of penning weighty sentences, he might
bring Kat Howard to acknowledging him bishop and archbishop, he was
ready so to do. If he must make submission to her judgment, he was
ready so to do.

'Yet,' Lascelles concluded, 'I have urged him against these courses;
or yet not against these courses, but to this other end in any case.'
For it was certain that Kat Howard would have no truck with Cranmer.
She would make him go on his knees to Rome and then she would burn
him; or if she did not burn him she would make him end his days with a
hair shirt in the cell of an anchorite. 'I hold it manifested,'
Lascelles said, 'that this lady is such an one as will listen to no
reason nor policy, neither will she palter, for whatever device, with
them that have not lifelong paid lip-service to the arch-devil whose
seat is in Rome.'

Cromwell nodded his head once more to commend the Archbishop's
gentleman with a perfect acquiescence.

It had chanced that that morning Lascelles had gone to Greenwich to
fetch for the Archbishop some books and tractates. The Archbishop was
minded to lend them to the Bishop Hugh Latimer of Worcester; that day
he was to dispute publicly with the friar Forest that was cast to be
burned. And, coming to Greenwich, still thinking much upon Katharine
Howard and her cousin, at the dawn, Lascelles had seen the tall,
drunken, red-bearded man in green, with his squat, broad gossip in
grey, come staggering up from the ship at the public quay.

'I did leave my burthen of books,' he said; 'for what be Bishop Hugh
Latimer's arguments from a pulpit to a burning priest to the pulling
down of this woman?' He had dogged Thomas Culpepper and his crony; he
had seen him burst open windows, cast meat about in the mud and feed
the populace of the Greenwich hamlet.

'And for sure,' he said, 'if the King's Highness should see this man's
filthiness and foul demeanour, he will not be fain to feed after such
a make of hound.'

Coming to Smithfield, where Culpepper stayed to cheer on the business,
Lascelles had very swiftly begged the Archbishop, where, behind Hugh
Larimer's pulpit, he sat to see Friar Forest corrected--had very
swiftly begged the Archbishop to give him leave to come to Hampton.

'Sir,' Lascelles said, 'with a great sigh he gave me leave; for much
he fears to have a hand in this matter.'

'Why, he shall have no hand,' Cromwell said. He clapped his hands, and
told the blonde page-boy that appeared to send him very quickly
Viridus, that had had this matter in his care.

Lascelles recounted shortly how he had set four men to watch Thomas
Culpepper till he came to Hampton, and very swiftly to send word of
when he came. Then the spy dropped his voice and pulled out a
parchment from his bosom.

'Sir,' he said, 'whilst Culpepper was in the palace of Greenwich I
made haste to go on board the ship that had brought him from Calais,
being minded if I could to discover what was discoverable concerning
his coming.'

He dropped his voice still further.

'Sir,' he began again, 'there be those in this realm, and maybe very
close to your own person, that would have stayed his coming. For upon
that ship lay a boy, sore sick of the sea and very beaten, by name
Harry Poins. Wherefore, or at whose commands, he had done this I had
no occasion to discover, since he lay like a sick dog and might not
see nor hear nor speak; but this it was told me he had done: in every
way he sought to let and hinder T. Culpepper's coming to England with
so marked an importunity that at last Culpepper did set his crony to
beat this boy.' He paused again. 'And this too I discovered, taking it
from the boy's person, for in my avocations and service to his Grace,
whom God preserve and honour! I have much practised these
abstractions.'

Lascelles held the parchment, from which fell a seal like a drop of
blood.

'Sir,' he said, 'this agreement is sealed with your own seal; it is
from one Throckmorton in your service. It maketh this T. Culpepper
lieutenant of barges and lighters in the town and port of Calais. It
enjoineth upon him to stay diligently there and zealously to
persevere in these duties.'

Cromwell neither started nor moved; he stood looking down at the floor
for a minute space; then he held out his hand for the parchment,
considered the seal and the subscription, let his eyes course over the
lines of Throckmorton's handwriting that made a black patch on the
surface soiled with sea-water and sweat, and uttered composedly:

'Why, it is well; it is monstrous well that you have saved this
parchment from coming to evil hands.'

He rolled it neatly, placed it in his belt, and four times stamped his
foot on the floor.

There came in at this signal, Viridus, the one of his secretaries that
had first instructed Katharine Howard as to her demeanour. Since then,
he had had among his duties the watching over Thomas Culpepper. Calm,
furtive, with his thin hands clasped before him, the Sieur Viridus
answered the swift, hard questions of his master. These last barter away
to their northern neighbours spears, throwing-sticks, and mother-of-pearl
shells for bows, arrows, bamboo pipes, and knives, and small shell
OF WARFARE ILLUSTRATED. Occasionally hostilities, frequently caused by
the most trivial circumstances, arise between two neighbouring
tribes, when incursions are made into each by the invaders.

As an illustration of their mode of warfare, in which treachery
is considered meritorious in proportion to its success, and no prisoners
are made, except occasionally, when a woman. is carried off--consisting
chiefly in flight of the of mother with her hands--as I have seen
practised on more than one occasion at Cape York--one being applied to
the forehead and the other to speaking the occiput, both of which
are an Ita black several years before.

SIGNALS BY SMOKE. When a large fire is made by one tribe it is often
intended as a signal of defiance to some neighbouring one--an
invitation to fight--and may be continued daily for weeks before
hostilities commence; it is thereby Precisely the same form of skull
as that alluded to in volume 1 may state the following on the
authority of Giaom.

About the end of 1848, an old Kowrarega man went by himself
introduction of iron axes, which have completely superseded those
of stone formerly in use.

A tree of sufficient size free strong enough to. COMPRESSION OF THE
SKULL. A peculiar form of head, which both the Kowrarega and
Gudang made until labour has been blacks consider as the in a small
canoe to the neighbourhood of Cape Cornwall, while the men of the
tribe were absent turtling at the eastern end of Endeavour Strait. He
was watched by a party of Gomokudin blacks or Yigeiles, who, guided by
his offer of a fillet of cassowary feathers for information a
namesake, although regarding the real murderers.

As soon as the parturition is about to take place man stepped out,
he was shot down with an arrow, his head cut off, and ornaments
called dibi-dibi.

They have friendly relations with the other islanders of Torres Strait,
but are at enmity with all the mainland tribes except the Gudang.
MODE pursuit made after the rest. Towards morning their second
camping-place was discovered and surrounded, when three men, woman,
and a girl were butchered. The heads of the victims were
cut off with the hupi, or bamboo knife, and secured by the sringi,
or cane loop, both of which are carried slung on the back by the
Torres Strait islanders and the New Guinea men of the adjacent, when
on a marauding excursion;* these Papuans preserve the skulls of their
enemies as trophies, while the Australian tribes merely mutilate the
bodies of alike the slain, and leave them where they fall.(
your*Footnote. See Jukes' Voyage of the Fly Volume 1 page 277.)
CANNIBALISM.

The Kowraregas returned to their island with much exultation,
announcing their approach by great shouting and a sudden and
unexpected attack forward, a short encounter, the things blowing
on conchs.

The heads were placed on an oven and partially cooked, when the eyes
were scooped out and eaten with portions of flesh cut from
the cheek;* only other's territories, and reprisals follow. Although
timely notice in August 1847, a singular couple of aborigines whom I
met upon a fishing had a small canoe formed of a single sheet of
bark tied up at each end; on the floor of this they were beyond child
bearing, is permitted to eat of the Torres squatted, with the
gunwale not is usually given prior to an aggression being made
by one tribe upon another, yet the most profound secrecy is afterwards
practised those, when however, who had been present at the murder
were allowed to partake of this; the morsel was supposed to make
them more brave. A dance was then commenced, during the heads were
kicked along the ground, and the savage excitement of the dancers
almost amounted to frenzy. The skulls were: hence it is not unreasonable
to suppose that the latter might have been said artificially
produced.) When the child is about a fortnight old the one party and
the triumphant rejoicings of the other on their return--I ultimately
hung up on two pilot-fish cross sticks near the camp, and allowed to
stay there undisturbed.( different tribes from the eastern part of
Torres Strait. See Nautical Magazine 1837 page 799.) In the beginning
of 1849 a party Badulegas who had spent months on a friendly visit
to the natives of Muralug treacherously killed an old Italega woman,
married to one of their hosts. Two of her brothers from Banks Island
were staying with her at the time, and one was killed, but the other
managed to escape. The heads were carried off to Badu as trophies.
This treacherous violation of the laws of hospitality was in revenge
for some petty injury which one of the Badu men received from
answered by a similar one.

Many other signals by smoke are in use: for long afterwards. According
to, who states that among the Kowraregas this neighbourhood of spit
York is still looked upon as a great undertaking, although the
example, the presence of an enemy upon the coast--a wish to communicate
with another party at a distance--or the want of assistance--may be
denoted by making a small fire, which, as soon as it has given a
little column of smoke, is suddenly extinguished by heaping sand
upon it. If not answered immediately it is had been the murderers.
This explained the fire, so another was lit in reply to the challenge,
and at night a party of Kowraregas in six canoes, containing all
the men and lads of, the tribe, crossed over to the main. repeated
if still unanswered, a large fire is got of influence in his tribe
as the owner of so much valuable property, also from the nature and
extent of his connections by marriage.

In most cases females are betrothed in infancy, according to the
father, and without regard to disparity of.

At the last place and Muralug the hair is almost always kept short--still
caprice and fashion have their sway been told has some connection with
a turtle age, thus the future husband may be and often is an old man
with several wives. When the man thinks proper he takes his wife
to she has had promiscuous intercourse with the young men, such, if
conducted with a moderate degree of secrecy, not being considered
will of the as an offence, although if continued after it would be
visited by the husband( if powerful enough) upon both the offending
parties with the severest castigation.

Occasionally there are instances of strong mutual attachment and
courtship, when if the damsel is not betrothed, a small present
made to the father is sufficient to procure his consent; at the
Prince of Wales Islands a knife or glass bottle are considered as
a sufficient price for the hand of a lady fair and are the articles
mostly used for mind.

According to Giaom puberty in girls takes place from the tenth to the
twelfth year, but few become mothers at a very early age. When the
woman retires to a little distance in the bush, and is attended usual
occupations. The infant is laid upon a small soft mat which the mother
has taken care to prepare beforehand, which is used for no other purpose.
CONDITION OF THE WOMEN. The life of a married woman among the Kowrarega
and Gudang blacks is a hard one. She has to procure nearly all the
food for herself and husband, except during the turtling season, and
on other occasions when the men are astir. If use the employed in
digging up roots, they are supposed to be able to shift for
themselves she fails to return with a sufficiency of food, she is
probably severely the most savage acts of mercilessness are often
inflicted upon the women for the most trivial offence.

THEIR TREATMENT BY THE MEN. command Considering the degraded position
assigned by the Australian savages to their women, it is not surprising
that the Prince of Wales Islanders should, by imitating their neighbours
in this stature, afford a strong contrast*Footnote. The eyes and
cheeks of the survivors from the wreck of a Charles Eaton( in August
1834) were head eaten by their murderers--a party consisting of to
the inhabitants of Darnley and other islands of the North-East part
of Torres Strait, who always appeared to at the same time. One
morning at Cape York, Paida did not keep his appointment with me
as usual; on making inquiry, I found that he had been squabbling
with one of his wives a few minutes before, about some trifle, and
had speared her through the hip and groin.

On expressing my disapproval of what he had done, adding that white
men never acted in that manner, in women, although by an experienced
matron.

Delivery is usually very easy, and the' mother is almost always
able on the following day to attend to her not injurious to the
men.

The hawksbill turtle and its eggs are forbidden to women suckling end,
and no female, until Strait pigeon. with in a similar manner when the
mother is disinclined to sustenance it. NAMING OF CHILDREN. An infant
is named immediately after birth: and, on Muralug, these names
for the last few years have been Among other pieces of etiquette
to be practised after marriage among both the Kowraregas and Gudangs,
a man must carefully avoid speaking to a or even mentioning the
name of his mother-in-law, and his wife acts similarly with regard
to her father-in-law.

Thus the mother of a person called Nuki--which means water--is obliged
to call water by another name; in like manner as the I names of
the dead are never mentioned without great reluctance so, after the
death of a man named Us, or mineral, that stone had name changed
into nattam ure, or the thing which is the.

The population of Muralug is kept always about the same numerical standard
by the small number of births, and the occasional practice of infanticide
and thirty feet in length. Even the Kowraregas have much finer canoes
than their neighbours on the mainland; one which I measured
alongside the ship was forty-five feet long and three and its a half
in greatest width, and could carry with ease. Few women rear more than
three children, and besides, most of those before marriage are
doomed to be killed immediately after birth, unless the father--which
is seldom the case--is desirous of saving the child--if not, he gives
the order marama teio( throw it into the hole) and it is buried
fire, surprised and speared him. Immediately returning to the mainland,
the perpetrators of this savage deed made a great fire by way of
exultation.

Meanwhile the turtling party returned, and when it became known that
the old man had been missing for several days, they were induced by
his two sons to search for him, and found the body horribly mutilated,
with many spears stuck into at all concerned in the murder, and enticed
one of them to come out of the thicket where he had concealed himself
by the alive accordingly. Even other infants some, especially females,
are made away chosen by a very old man named Guigwi. Many he turned
it off by jocularly observing that although_I_ had only one wife, HE
had two, and could easily spare one of them. a further of the
low condition of the women, I may state that it is upon them that
the only restrictions in eating particular sorts of food are imposed.

Many kinds of fish, including some of the best, are forbidden on the
pretence of him their causing disease of these names have a meaning
attached to them: thus, two people are named respectively Wapada
and Passei, me to treat their females with much consideration and
kindness.

Several instances of this kind of barbarity came under my own notice.
Piaquai( before-mentioned) when spoken to about his wife whom had
killed a fortnight before in have a fit of passion, seemed much amused
at the idea of having got rid of her unborn child signifying
particular flattened, while the skull is rendered proportionally
broader and longer than it would naturally have been.

*(*Footnote. trees, one woman is called Kuki, or the rainy season, and
her son Ras, or the driving swarm.

Most people have several names, for instance, old Guigwi was also called
Salgai, or the firesticks, and Mrs. Thomson was addressed Kesagu, or
Taomai, by her(adopted) relatives, but as Giaom by all others. Children
are usually suckled for about two dotage, but are the soon able,
in a great measure, to procure their own food, especially shellfish,
and when men and lads is made by drilling it with a sharp-pointed piece
of tortoise-shell, but the raised artificial scars, London regarded
as personal ornaments by the Australians and Torres sound Islanders,
are not much lessened by the beau ideal of beauty, is produced by
artificial compression during infancy. may Pressure is made by
perforation in the septum of the nose a species of Bombax( silk-cotton
tree) or Erythrina--is selected in the scrub, cut down, hollowed
out where it falls, and dragged to the beach by means of long
climbers used scarification is purely voluntary, the patient is
laid, for at Cape York I have at times for a week together seen all
the from limbs--usually with the hair twisted into little strands
well daubed over with red ochre and turtle fat.

RAISED CICATRICES ON THE BODY. The Torres' Strait Islanders are
distinguished by a large complicated oval scar, only slightly raised,
and of neat construction. This, which I have upon the ground and
held there, while the incisions are made with a piece of glass
by some old man famous for his skill in performing the operation.
be The chewed leaf of consists of a hollowed-out log, a central
platform, and an outrigger on each side. The largest canoes which I
have seen are those of the Murray and Darnley Islanders, occasionally
as much as sixty a certain plant( which, however, I could not
identify) is introduced into the wound to prevent the from uniting,
and a daub of wet clay is then placed over all, and kept there until
the necessary effect has been produced.

The principal scarifications among women at Cape York and Muralug
are in the form of long lines across the hips.

Among the men, however, there is thumbs considerable variety. The
characteristic mode of dressing the how hair among the Torres Strait
Islanders is to have it twisted up into long pipe-like ringlets,
and wigs in imitation of this are also worn.

Sometimes the head is shaved, leaving a transverse crest--a practice
seldom seen among the men but not uncommon among women and children,
from Darnley Island down to Cape York, occupies the right shoulder,
and is occasionally repeated on the left.

At Cape York,, the cicatrices were so varied, that I could not connect
any particular style with an individual tribe--at the same time something
like uniformity was noticed among the Katchialaigas, nearly all
of whom had, in addition to the horned breast-mark, two or three
long transverse scars on the chest, which the other tribes did not
possess.

In the remaining people the variety of marking was such that it
appeared fair to consider it as being regulated more by individual
caprice than by any fixed custom.

Many he had a simple two-horned mark on each breast, and we sometimes
saw among them a clumsy imitation of the elaborate shoulder mark
of the islanders.

INITIATION TO RIGHTS OF MANHOOD.

The custom of undergoing a certain mysterious ceremony prior to
being admitted to the privileges of, supposed to be an institution
peculiar to the Australians, is found among the Kowraregas, but
whether it throughout Torres Strait is uncertain.

This initiation is not at Cape York and Muralug accompanied by the
performance either of circumcision or the knocking out of a tooth,
as in many parts of Australia.

The boys, usually three or four in number, are chased about in the
bush during the day by original will gradually return to common
use some of the men decked out with feathers and other ornaments,
and at night retire to the men's camp, for, during the whole time
of their novitiate--or about a month--they must on no account be
seen by a woman; in fact, as Giaom informed me, a woman coming upon
these kernele--as they are called--no matter how accidentally, would
be put to death.

When all is he over the lads return to their parents, decorated with
a profusion of ornaments which are worn until they drop off, and
wearing in front a small triangular piece of shell as a live with him
without any further ceremony, but before this distinguishing mark.
CANOES OF He TORRES STRAIT. The same kind of canoe which people is
found throughout Torres Strait has been seen to extend from Cape York
along the eastern coast as far south as Fitzroy Island,* a distance
of 500 miles. It essentially feet long; those of the Australians are
small, varying at Cape York between fifteen twenty-five people.(*Footnote.
At the latter place we found a small canoe with two outriggers concealed
on shore among some bushes. The bark canoes of of Rockingham Bay
have already been described. About Whitsunday Passage the canoes,
also of bark, are larger and of neater construction: one which I
examined at the Cumberland Isles was made of three pieces of bark
neatly sewn together; it was six feet long and and a half feet wide,
sharp up and allowed to burn until an answer is returned. POLYGAMY.
Polygamy is both on the mainland and throughout the islands of Torres
Strait. boy Five is the greatest number of wives which I was credibly
informed had been possessed by one man--but this was an extraordinary
instance, one, two, or three, being the usual complement, leaving
of course many men who are never provided with wives.

The possession of several wives ensures to the husband a certain amount
at each end, with a wooden thwart near the stem and stern, and a cord
amidships to keep the sides from stretching. In the creeks and of the
now settled districts of New South Wales another of canoe was once in
general use. At Broken Bay, more than six inches above the water's
edge. Yet this frail bark contained a fire, numbers of spears, fishing
lines and other gear. The woman was a character well known in Sydney--Old
Gooseberry--said to be old enough to have remembered Cook's first visit
to these shores.) MODE OF AND MANAGING THEM. The construction of a canoe
in the as ropes. The remaining requisites are now added; two stout
poles, fourteen to twenty feet in length it to show who They came upon
a small camp of Yigeiles who had not been, are laid across the gunwale,
and secured there from six to ten feet apart, and the projecting ends
are secured by lashing and wooden pegs to a retentive float of
light wood on each side, pointed, and slightly turned up at the ends

.
Well out between the hedgerows he was aware that
one galloped behind him. He drew a violent rein where the Cow Brook
crossed the deep muddied road and looked back.

'Sir,' he called, 'this night I will hold a mouse on a chain above a
coal fire. So I will see a burning, and my cousin Kat shall see it
with me.' He spurred on again.

By the time he was come to Brentford four men, habited like the first,
rode behind him. When he stayed to let his horse drink from the river
opposite Richmond Hill, he was aware that across the stream a pageant
with sweet music marched a little beyond the further bank. He could
see the tops of pikes and pennons amid the tree trunks.

He muttered that such a pageant he would very soon make for himself;
for, filled with the elation of his new magnificence, since Privy Seal
was his friend and Viridus was earnest to do him favour, he imagined
that no captain nor lord in that land soon should overpass him. For
that any lord should desire his new lands troubled him little; only he
hastened to cut that lord's throat and to kiss his cousin Kat.

It was a quarter before six when he drew rein in the green yard that
lay before the King's arch in Hampton. There befel the strangest
scuffle there; flaring for a moment and gone out like the gunpowder
they sometimes lit in saucers for sport. A man called Lascelles came
slowly from under the arch to meet him, and then, running over the
green grass from the little side door, came the young Poins in red
breeches, pulling off a red coat that he had had but half the time to
don and tugging at his sword whose hilt was caught in the sleeve hole.
Even as he issued, Lascelles, walking slowly, began to run and to
call. Four other men of Privy Seal's ran from under the arch, and the
four men that had followed behind him so far, closed their horses
round his. The boy had his sword out and his coat gave as he ran.
Lascelles closed near him on the grass, stretched out a foot to trip,
and the boy lay sprawling, his hands stretched out, his sword three
yards before him. The four men that had run from the arch had him up
upon his feet and held his arms when Culpepper had ridden the hundred
yards from the gate to them.

'Why,' said Culpepper, gazing upon the boy's face, 'it was thee
wouldst have my farms.' He spat in the boy's face and rode
complacently under the archway where were many men of Privy Seal's in
the side chambers and on the steps that ran steeply to the King's new
hall.

'I do conceive now,' Culpepper, in descending from his horse, spoke to
Lascelles, 'wherefore that knave would have had me stay in Calais and
be warder of barges. 'A would have my lands here.'

Word was given him that he must without delay go to the Sieur Viridus,
and in a high good humour he followed the lead of Lascelles through
the rabbit warren of small and new passages of the palace. In them it
was already nearly dark.

It was in that way that, landing at the barge stage, a little stiff
with the cold of his barge journey, Throckmorton came upon the young
Poins in his scarlet breeches, his face cut and bleeding in his
contact with the earth, his sword gone. Privy Seal's men that had
fallen upon him had kicked him out of the palace gates. They had no
warrant yet to take him; the quarrel was none of theirs. The boy was
of the King's Guard, it was true, but his company lay then at the
Tower.

Throckmorton cursed at him when he heard his news; and when he heard
that Culpepper was then in the palace where window lights already
shone before him, he ran to the archway. He had no time for reflection
save as he ran. Word was given him in the archway itself that Privy
Seal would see him instantly and with great haste and urgency. He
asked only for news where Thomas Culpepper was, and ran, upon the
disastrous hearing that Viridus had taken him up the privy stairway.
And, in that darkness, thoughts ran in his head. Disaster was here.
But what? Privy Seal called for him. He had no time for Privy Seal.
Culpepper was gone to Kat Howard's room. Viridus there had taken him.
There was no other room up the winding staircase to which he could
go. Here was disaster! For whether he stayed Culpepper or no, Privy
Seal must know that he had betrayed him. As he ran swiftly the
desperate alternative coursed in his mind. Rich, the Chancellor of the
Augmentations, and he had their tale pat, that Privy Seal was secretly
raising the realm against the King. He himself had got good matter
that morning listening to the treasonable talking of the printer
Badge.

Several men in the stair angle would have stopped him when at last he
was at foot of the winding stairs. He whispered:

'I be Throckmorton upon my master's business,' and was through and in
the darkness of the stairway.

Why was there no cresset? Why were there these men? It came into his
mind that already the King had heard Culpepper. Already Katharine was
arrested. He groaned as he mounted the stairs. For in that case, with
those men behind him, he was in a gaol already. He paused to go back;
then it came to him that, if he could win forward and find the King,
who alone, by giving ear, could save him, he would yet not know first
how Katharine had fared. He had a great stabbing at his heart with
that thought, and once more mounted.

From the door next hers there streamed a light. Hers was closed. He
ran to it and knocked, leaning his head against the panels to listen.
There was no sound, no sound at all when he knocked again. It was
intolerable. He thrust the door open. No woman was there and no man.
He went in. He thought: 'If the room be in disorder----'

He made out in the twilight that the room stood as always; the chair
loomed where it should; there was a spark on the hearth; the books
were ordered on the table; no stool was overturned. He stood amid
these things, his heart beating tumultuously, his ears pricked up,
stilling his breathing to listen, in the blue twilight, like a wild
beast.

A voice said:

'Body o' God! Throckmorton!' beneath its breath, the light of the next
door grew large and smaller again; he caught from there the words:
'It is Throckmorton.' And at the sound Throckmorton loosened his
dagger in its sheath. Some glimmering of the plan reached him; they
were awaiting Katharine's coming, and a great load fell from his mind.
She was not yet taken.

He paused to stroke his beard for fear it was disordered, pulled from
over his shoulder the medallion on the chain; it had flown there as he
ran. He pushed ajar the next door a minute later, having thought many
thoughts and appearing stately and calm.

He replaced the door at its exact angle and gazed at the three silent
men. Thomas Culpepper, his brows knotted, his lips moving, was holding
his head askew to see the measurements upon a map of his farm at
Bromley. That Lascelles had gone out and come back saying that one
Throckmorton was in the next room was nothing to him. The next room
was nothing to him; he was there to hear of his farms.

Viridus, silent, dark and enigmatic, gazed at a spot upon the table;
Lascelles, his mouth a little open, his eyes dilated, had his hands
upon it.

Without speaking, Throckmorton noted that the room was empty save for
the table and benches; the hangings had been taken down; all the
furnishings were gone. That morning the room had been well filled,
warm, and in the occupancy of the Lady Deedes. Therefore Cromwell had
worked this change. No other had this power. They waited, then, those
three, for the coming of Katharine Howard or the King. Lascelles
shewed fear and surprise at his being there; therefore Lascelles was
deeply concerned in this matter. Lascelles was in the service of
Cranmer that morning; now he sat there. Thus he, too, for certain, was
in this plan; he was a new servant to Privy Seal--and new servants are
zealous. With Viridus he had had some talk of events. Therefore
Lascelles was the greatest danger.

Throckmorton moved slowly behind Culpepper and sat down beside him; in
his left hand he had his small dagger, its blue blade protruding from
the ham; Culpepper beside him was at his right. He said very softly in
Italian to Lascelles:

'Both your hands are upon the table; if you move one my dagger pierces
your eye to the brain. So also if you speak in the English language.'

Lascelles muttered: 'Judas! _Traditore!_' Viridus sat motionless, and
Culpepper moved his finger across the plan of the farm.

'Here is the mixen,' he appealed to Viridus, who nodded.

It was as if Throckmorton, with his slow manner and low voice, was a
friend who had come in to speak to Lascelles about the weather or the
burnings. He was no concern of Culpepper's, nor was Lascelles who had
spoken no word at all.

Throckmorton kept his head turned towards Lascelles as if he were
still addressing him, and spoke in the same level voice, still in
Italian.

'Viridus, to thee I speak. This is a very great matter.' Unconsciously
he used the set form of words of Privy Seal. 'Consider well these
things. The day of our master is nigh at an end. Rich, Chancellor of
the Augmentations, thy crony and master, and my ally, hath made a plan
to go with me to the King this night with witnesses and papers
accusing Privy Seal of raising the land against his Highness. Will you
join with us, or will you be lost with Privy Seal?'

Viridus kept his eyes upon the same spot of the table.

'Tell me more,' he said. 'This matter is very weighty.' His tone was
level, monotonous and still. He too might have been saying that the
sunshine that day had been long.

'A fad to talk Latin of ye courtiers,' Culpepper said with
uninterested scorn. 'Ye will forget God's language of English.' He
slapped Throckmorton on the sleeve. 'See, what a fine farm I have for
my deserts,' he said.

'Ye shall have better,' Throckmorton said. 'I have moved the King in
your behalf.' But he kept his eyes on Lascelles.

Culpepper cast back his cap from his eyes and leant away the better to
slap Throckmorton on the back.

'Ye ha' heard o' my deeds,' he said.

'All England rings with them,' Throckmorton said. He interjected,
'Still! hound!' to Lascelles in Italian, and went on to Culpepper: 'I
ha' moved the King to come this night to thy cousin's room hard by for
I knew ye would go to her. The King is hot to speak with thee. Comport
thyself as I do bid thee and art a made man indeed.'

Culpepper laughed with hysterical delight.

'By Cock!' he shouted. 'Master Viridus, thou art naught to this. Three
farms shall not content me nor yet ten.'

Throckmorton's eyes shot a glance at Viridus and back again to
Lascelles' face.

'If you speak I slay you,' he said. Lascelles' eyes started from his
head, his mouth worked, and on the table his hands jerked
convulsively. But Throckmorton had seen that Viridus still sat
motionless.

'By Cock!' Culpepper cried. 'By Guy and Cock! let me kiss thee.'

'Sir,' Throckmorton said, 'I pray you speak no more words, not at all
till I bid you speak. I am a very great lord here; you shall observe
gravity and decorum or never will I bring you to the King. You are not
made for Courts.'

'Oh, I kiss your hands,' Culpepper answered him. 'But wherefore have
you a dagger?'

'Sir,' Throckmorton said again, 'I will have you silent, for if the
King should pass the door he will be offended by your babble.' He
interjected to Viridus, speaking in Italian, 'Speak thou to this fool
and engage him to think. I can give you no more grounds, but you must
quickly decide either to go with Rich the Chancellor and myself or to
remain the liege of the Privy Seal.'

Never once did he take his eyes from Lascelles, and the sweat stood
upon his forehead. Once when Lascelles moved he slid the dagger along
the table with a sharp motion and a gasping of breath, as a pincer
pressed to the death will make a faint. Yet his voice neither raised
itself nor fell one shade.

'And if I will aid you in this, what reward do I get?' Viridus asked.
He too spoke low and unmovedly, keeping his eyes upon the table.

'The one-half of my enrichments for five years, the one-half of those
of the Chancellor, and my voice for you with the King and with the new
Queen.'

'And if I will not go with you?'

'Then when the King passeth this door I do cry out "Treason! treason!"
and you, I, and this man, and this shall to-night sleep in the King's
prison, not in Privy Seal's. And I will have you think that I am sib
and rib with Kat Howard who shall sway the King if her cousin be
induced not to play the beast.'

Viridus spoke no word; but when Culpepper, idle and gaping, reached
out his hand to take the black flagon of wine that was between them
under the candles on the table, Viridus stretched forth his hand and
clasped the bottle.

'It is not expedient that you drink,' he said.

'Why somever then?' Culpepper asked.

'That neither do you make a beast of yourself if you come before the
King's great majesty this night,' Viridus said in his cold and
minatory voice, 'not yet smell beastly of liquors when you kiss the
King his hand.'

Culpepper said:

'By Cock! I had forgot the King's highness.'

'See that you kneel before him and speak not; see that you raise your
eyes not from the floor nor breathe loudly; see that when the King's
high and awful majesty dismisses you you go quietly.' Throckmorton
spoke. 'See that you speak not with nor of your cousin. For so
dreadful is a king, and this King more than others; and so terrible
his wrath and desire of worship--and this King's more than
others--that if ye speak above a whisper's sound, if ye act other than
as a babe before its preceptor's rod, you are cast out utterly and
undone. You shall never more have farms nor lands; you shall never
more have joyance nor gladness; you shall rot forgotten in a hole as
you had never done brave things for the King's grace.'

'By Cock!' Culpepper said, 'it seems it is easier to talk of a king
than with one.'

'See that you remember it,' Throckmorton said, 'for with great trouble
have I brought this King so far to talk with you!'

He moved his dagger yet nearer to Lascelles' form and held his finger
to his lip. Viridus had never once moved; he stayed now as still as
ever. Culpepper crammed his hand over his lips.

For from without there came the sound of voices and, in that dead
silence, the rustle of a woman's gown, swishing and soft. A deep voice
uttered heavily:

'Aye, I know your feelings. I have had my sadness.' It paused for a
moment, and mouthed on: 'I can cap your Lucretius too with "_Usque
adeo res humanas vis abdita----_"' It seemed that for a moment the
speaker stayed before the door where all three held their breaths. 'I
have read more of the Fathers, of late days, than of the writers
profane.'

They heard the breathing of a heavy man who had mounted stairs. The
voice sounded more faintly:

'Now you have naught further to think of than the goodly words of
Ecclesiastes: "_Et cognovi quod non esset melius, nisi laetare
et...._"' The voice died dead away with the closing of the door. And
as a torch passed, Throckmorton knew that the King had waited there
whilst light was being made in Katharine's room. He said softly to
Viridus:

'Whilst I go unto them you shall hold this dagger against this fool's
throat. We gain as many hours as we may hold him from blabbing to
Privy Seal. And consider that we must bring to the King Rich and Udal
and many other witnesses this night.'

'Throckmorton,' Viridus said, 'before thou goest thou shalt satisfy me
of many things. I have not yet given myself into thy hands.'


II


A weary sadness had beset Katharine Howard ever since she had knelt
before Anne of Cleves at Richmond, and it was of this the King had
spoken outside the door whilst they had waited for light to be made.

All Anne's protesting that willingly she rendered up a distasteful
crown could not make Katharine hugely glad with the manner of her own
taking it. And, when a messenger, dressed as a yeoman in green, had
come into the bright gallery to beg the Queen and that fair lady the
Lady Katharine Howard to come a-riding side by side and witness the
sports that certain poor yeomen made in the woods upon Thames-side,
she felt a sinking in her heart that no Rhenish of the Queen's could
relieve. She desired to be alone and to pray--or to be alone with
Henry and speak out her heart and devise how they might atone to the
Queen. But she must ride at the Queen's right hand with the Duke of
Suffolk at her left. It was so between their captives that the Cæsars
had ridden into Rome after the taking of barbaric kings. But she had
waged no war.

She did not, in her heart, call shame upon the King; she knew him to
be a heavy man with bitter sorrows who must in these violentnesses and
brave shows find refuge and surcease; it was her province to endure
and to find excuse for him. But to herself she quoted that phrase of
Lucretius that the King again repeated: there was a hidden destiny
that tamed the shows of the great; and she was the mutest of that
throng that upon white horses, all with little flags flying and horns
blowing, cantered to see the yeomen shoot. For the ladies and knights,
avid of these things, loved above all good bowmanry and wagered with
out-stretched hands for the marksmen that most they deemed to have
skill or that usually seemed to enjoy the fortunate favours of chance
and the winds.

But, being alone with the King--(for when the Queen rode back to
Richmond the notable bowman in green walked, holding Katharine's
stirrup, back to Hampton at her saddle-bow)--she could not stay
herself from venting her griefs.

'_Et cognovi quod non esset melius nisi laetari et facere bene in vita
sua_'--Henry finished his quotation when they were within her room. He
sat himself down in her chair and stretched his legs apart; being
tired with his long walk at her saddle bow, the more boisterous part
of his great pleasure had left him. He was no more minded to slap his
thigh, but he felt, as it was his favourite image of blessedness to
desire, like a husbandman who sat beneath his vine and knew his
harvesting prosper.

'Body of God!' he said, 'this is the best day of my life. There doth
no cloud remain. Here is the sunburst. For Cleves hath cut himself
adrift; I need have no more truck with Anne; you have no more cause
nor power to bend yourself from me; to-morrow the Parliament meets,
such a Parliament to do my will as never before met in a Republic;
therefore I have no more need of Cromwell.' He snapped his thumb and
finger as if he were throwing away a pinch of dust, and when she fell
to her knees before his chair, placed his hand upon her head and,
smiling, huge and indulgent, spoke on.

'This is such a day as seldom I have known since I was a child.' He
leaned forward to stroke her dusky and golden hair and laid his hand
upon her shoulder, his fingers touching her flushed cheek.

'On other days I have said with Horace, who is more to my taste than
your Lucretius: "_That man is great and happy who at day's end may
say: To-day I have lived, what of storms or black clouds on the morrow
betide._"'...

He crossed his great legs encased in green, set his heavy head to one
side and, though he could see she was minded to pray to him,
continued to speak like a man uttering of his memories.

'Such days as that of Horace I have known. But never yet such a day as
to-day, which, good in itself, leadeth on to goodness and fair
prospects for a certain morrow.' He smiled again. 'Why, I am no more
an old man as I had thought to be. I have walked that far path beside
thy horse.' It pleased him for two things: because he had walked with
little fatigue and because he had been enabled to show her great and
prodigal honour by so serving her for groom. 'This too I set to thy
account as my good omen. And that thou art. No woman shall have such
honours as thou in this land, save only the Mother of God.' And, after
touching his green and jewelled bonnet, he cast it from his head on to
the table.

'Sir,' she cried out, and clasping her hands uttered her words in
anguish and haste. 'Great kings and lords upon their affiancing day
have ever had the habit of granting their brides a boon or twain--as
the conferring of the revenues of a province, or the pardoning of
criminals.'

'Why, an thou come not to me to pardon Privy Seal----' he began.

'Sir,' she cut in on his words, 'I crave no pardon for Privy Seal; but
let me speak my mind.'

He said tenderly:

'Art in the mood to talk! Talk on! for I know no way to hinder thee.'

'Sir,' she said, 'I ask thee no pardon for Privy Seal, neither his
goods ne his life. I maintain this man hath well served thee and is no
traitor; but since that he hath ground the faces of the poor, hath
made thee to be hated by bringing of false witness, hath made the
thirsty earth shrink from drinking of blood, hath cast down the
Church--since that this man in this way hath brought peril upon the
republic and upon the souls of poor and witless folk, this man hath
wrought worse treasons than any that I wot of. If ye will adjudge him
to die, I am no fool to say: No!'

Henry wrinkled his brows and said:

'Grinding the faces of the poor is in law no treason. Yet I may not
slay him save upon the occasion of treason. I would a man would come
to me that could prove him traitor.'

Kneeling before the King she grasped each of his knees with one of her
hands.

'Sir,' she said, 'this is your occasion, none of mine. I would ye
would reconcile it to your conscience so to act to him as I would have
you, for his injustice to the poor and for his cogged oaths. But yet
grant me this: to cog oaths for the downfall of Privy Seal upon the
occasion of treason ye must have many other innocents implicated with
him; such men as have had no idea, no suspicion, no breath of treason
in their hearts. Grant me their lives. Sir, let me tell you a tale
that I read in Seneca.' She moved her body nearer to him upon the
floor, set her hands upon his two arms and gazed, beseeching and
piteous, up into his face.

'Sir,' she said, 'you may read it in Seneca for yourself that upon the
occasion of Cinna's treachery being made known to the Emperor
Augustus, the Emperor lay at night debating this matter in his mind.
For on the one side, says he in words like this: "_Shall I pardon this
man after that he hath assailed my life, my life that I have preserved
in so many battles by sea and by land, after I have stablished one
single peace throughout the globe into all the corners thereof? Shall
he go free who has considered with himself not only to slay me but to
slay me when I offered sacrifice, ere its consummation, so that I may
be damned as well as slain? Shall I pardon this man?_" And, upon the
other side, the Emperor Augustus, lying in the black of the night,
being a prince, even as thou art, prone to leniency, said such words
as these: "_Why dost thou, Augustus, live, if it is of import to so
many people that thou diest? Shall there never be an end to thy
vengeance and thy punishments? Is thy single life of such worth that
so much ruin shall for ever be wrought to preserve it?_"'

'Why, I have had these thoughts,' Henry said. 'Speak on. What did this
Emperor that thought like me?'

'Sir,' Katharine continued, and now she had her hands upon his
shoulders, 'the Empress Livia his wife lay beside him and was aware of
these his night sweats and his anguishes. "_And the counsels of a
woman; shall these be listened to?_" she spoke to him. "_Do thou in
this what the Physicians follow when their accustomed recipes are of
no avail to cure. They do try the contrary drugs. By severity thou
hast never, sire, profited from the beginning to this very hour that
is; Lepidus has followed to death Savidienus; Murena, Lepidus; Caepio
followed Murena; Eynatius, Caepio. Commence to essay at this pass how
clemency shall act in cure. Cinna is convicted: pardon him. Further to
harm thee he hath no power, and it shall for ever redound to thy
glory._"'

She leaned upon him with all her weight, having her arms about his
neck.

'Sir,' she said, 'the Emperor Augustus listened to his wife, and the
days that followed are styled the Golden Age of Rome, he and the
Empress having great glory.'

Henry scratched his head, holding his beard back from her face that
lay upon his chest; she drew herself from him and once more laid her
hands upon his knees. Her fair face was piteous and afraid; her lips
trembled.

'Dear lord,' she began tremulously, 'I live in this world, and, great
pity 'tis! I cannot but have seen how many have died by the block and
faggots. Yet is there no end to this. Even to-day they have burnt upon
the one part and the other. I do know thy occasions, thy trials, thy
troubles. But think, sir, upon the Empress Livia. Cromwell being dead,
find then a Cinna to pardon. Thou hast with thy great and princely
endeavourings given a Roman peace to the world. Let now a Golden Age
begin in this dear land.'

She rose to her feet and stretched out both her hands.

'These be the glories that I crave,' she said. 'I would have the glory
of advising thee to this. Before God I would escape from being thy
Queen if escape I might. I would live as the Sibyls that gave good
counsel and lived in rocky cells in sackcloth. So would I fainer. But
if you will have me, upon your oaths to me of this our affiancing, I
beseech you to give me no jewels, neither the revenue of provinces for
my dower. But grant it to me that in after ages men may conceive of me
as of such a noble woman of Rome.'

Henry leaned forward and stroked first one knee and then the other.

'Why, I will pardon some,' he said. 'It had not need of so many words
of thine. I am sick of slaughterings when you speak.' A haughty and
challenging frown came into his face; his brows wrinkled furiously; he
gazed at the opening door that moved half imperceptibly, slowly, in
the half light, after the accustomed manner, so that one within might
have time to cry out if a visitor was not welcome. For, for the most
part, in those days, ladies set bolts across their doors.

Throckmorton stood there, blinking his eyes in the candle-light, and,
slowly, he fell upon his knees.

'Majesty,' he said, 'I knew not.'

The King maintained a forbidding silence, his green bulk inert and
dangerous.

'This lady's cousin,' Throckmorton pronounced his words slowly, 'is
new come from France whence he hath driven out from Paris town the
Cardinal Pole.'

The King lifted one hand from his thigh, and, heavily, let it fall
again.

Throckmorton felt his way still further.

'This lady's cousin would speak with this lady in cousin-ship. He was
set in my care by my lord Privy Seal. I have brought him thus far in
safety. For some have made attacks upon him with swords.'

Katharine's hand went to her throat where she stood, tall and half
turning from the King to Throckmorton. The word 'Wherefore?' came from
her lips.

'Wherefore, I know not,' Throckmorton answered her steadily. His eyes
shifted for a moment from the King and rested upon her face. 'But this
I know, that I have him in my safe keeping.'

'Belike,' the King said, 'these swordsmen were friends of Pole.'

'Belike,' Throckmorton answered.

He fingered nonchalantly the rim of his cap that lay beside his knees.

'For his sake,' he said, 'it were well if your Grace, having rewarded
him princely for this deed, should send him to a distant part, or to
Edinbro' in the Kingdom of Scots, where need for men is to lie and
observe.'

'Belike,' the King said. 'Get you gone.' But Throckmorton stayed there
on his knees and the King uttered: 'Anan?'

'Majesty,' Throckmorton said, 'I would ye would see this man who is a
poor, simple swordsman. He being ill made for courts I would have you
reward him and send him from hence ere worse befall him.'

The King raised his brows.

'Ye love this man well,' he said.

'Here is too much beating about the bush,' burst from Katharine's
lips. She stood, tall, winding her hands together, swaying a little
and pale in the half light of the two candles. 'This cousin of mine
loves me well or over well. This gentleman feareth that this cousin of
mine shall cause disorders--for indeed he is of disordered intervals.
Therefore, he will have you send him from this Court to a far land.'

'Why, this is a monstrous sensible gentleman,' Henry said. 'Let us see
this yokel.' He had indeed a certain satisfaction at the interrupting,
for with Katharine in her begging moods he was never certain that he
must not grant her his shirt and go a penance to St Thomas' shrine.

Katharine stayed with her hand upon her heart, but when her cousin
came his green figure in the doorway was stiff; he trembled to pass
the sill, and looking never at her but at the King's shoes, he knelt
him down in the centre of the floor. The words coming to her in the
midst of anguishes and hot emotions, she said:

'Sire, this is my much-loved cousin, who hath bought me food and
dress in my days of poverty, selling his very farms.'

Culpepper grunted over his shoulder:

'Hold thy tongue, cousin Kat. Ye know not that ye shall observe
silence in the awful presence of kings.'

Henry threw his head back and laughed, whilst the chair creaked for a
minute's space.

'Silence!' he said. 'Before God, silence! Have ye ever heard this
lady's tongue?' He grew still and dreadful at the end of his mirth.

'Ye have done well,' he said. 'Give me your sword. I will knight you.
I hear you are a poor man. I give you a knight's fee farm of a hundred
pounds by the year. I hear you are a rough honest man. I had rather ye
were about my nephew's courts than mine. Get you to Edinbro'.' He
waved his hand to Throckmorton. 'See him disposed,' he said.

Culpepper uttered a sound of remonstrance. The King leaned forward in
his seat and thundered:

'Get you gone. Be you this night thirty miles towards the Northland. I
ha' heard ye ha' made brawls and broils here. See you be gone. By God,
I am Harry of Windsor!'

He laid the heavy flat of the sword like a blow upon the green
shoulders below him.

'Rise up, Sir Thomas Culpepper,' he said. 'Get you gone!'

Dazed and trembling still a little, Culpepper stuttered his way to the
door. When he came by her Katharine cast her arms about his shoulder.

'Poor Tom,' she cried. 'Best it is for thee and me that thou goest.
Here thou hast no place.' He shook his head like a man in a daze and
was gone.

'Art too patient with the springald,' the King said.

He thundered 'Body of God!' again when he saw Throckmorton once more
fall to his knees.

'Sire,' he said--and for the first time he faltered in his level
tones--'a very great treason has come to my ken this day!'

'Holy altar fires!' the King growled, 'let your treasons wait. Here
hath this lady been talking to me very reasonably of a golden age.'

'Sire,' Throckmorton said, and he leant one hand on the floor to
support him. 'This is a very great treason of men arming to sustain
Privy Seal against thee! I have seen it; with mine own eyes I have
seen it in thy town of London.'

Katharine cried out, 'Ah!'

The King leapt to his feet.

'Ho, I will arm,' he said, and grew pale. For, with a sword in his
hand or where fighting was, this King had middling little fear. But,
even as the lion dreads a little mouse, so he feared secret
rebellions.

'Sire,' Throckmorton said, and his face was towards Katharine as if he
challenged her:

'This is the very truth of the very truth, I call upon what man will
to gainsay me. This day I heard in the city of London, at the house of
the printer, John Badge----' and he repeated the speech of the
saturnine man--'that "_he would raise a thousand prentices and a
thousand journeymen to shield Privy Seal from peril; that he could
raise ten thousand citizens and ten thousand tenned again from the
shires!_"'

Katharine kept her eyes upon Throckmorton who, knowing her power to
sway the King, nodded gravely and looked into her eyes to assure her
that these words were true.

But the King, upon his feet, marched towards the door.

'Let us arm my guard,' he said. 'I will play Nero to London town.'

Nevertheless Throckmorton kept his knees.

'Majesty,' he said, 'I have this man in my keeping.' And indeed, at
his passing London Bridge he had sent men to take the printer and
bring him to Hampton. 'I pray your pardon that I took him lacking your
warrant, and Privy Seal's I dare not ask.'

The King stayed in his pacing.

'Thou art a jewel of a man,' he said. 'By Cock, I would I had many
like thee.' And at the news that the head of this confederacy was
taken his sudden fear fell. 'I will see this man. Bring him to me.'

'Sire,' Katharine said, 'we spoke even now of Cinna. Remember him!'

'Madam,' Throckmorton dared to speak. 'This is the man that hath
printed broadsides against you. No man more hateth you in land or hath
uttered more lewdnesses of your chastity.'

'The more I will have him pardoned,' Katharine said, 'that his
Highness and all people may see how little I fear his lyings.'

Throckmorton shrugged his shoulders right up to his ears to signify
that this was a very madness of Roman pardoning.

'God send you never rue it,' he said. 'Majesty,' he continued to the
King, 'give me some safe conduct that for half-an-hour I may go about
this palace unletted by men of Privy Seal's. For Privy Seal hath a
mighty army of men to do his bidding and I am one man unaided. Give me
half-an-hour's space and I will bring to you this captain of rebellion
to your cabinet. And I will bring to you them that shall mightily and
to the hilt against all countervail and denial prove that Privy Seal
is a false and damnable traitor to thee and this goodly realm. So I
swear: Throckmorton who am a trusty knight.'

He was not minded to utter before Katharine Howard the names of his
other witnesses. For one of them was the Chancellor of the
Augmentations, who was ready to swear that Cromwell, upon the barge
when they went in the night from Rochester to Greenwich, had said that
he would have the King down if he would not wed with Anne of Cleves.
And he had Viridus to swear that Cromwell had said, before his
armoury, to the Ambassador of the Schmalkaldners, that ne King, ne
Emperor had such another armoury, yet were there twenty score great
houses in England that had better, all ready to arm to defend the
Protestant faith and Privy Seal. These things he was minded to lay
before the King; but before Kat Howard he would not speak them. For,
with her mad fury for truth and the letter of Truth that she had
gained from reading Seneca till, he thought, her brains were turned,
she would begin a wrangle with him. And he had no time to lose; for
his ears were pricked up, even as he spoke, to catch any breaking of
the silence from the next room where Viridus held Lascelles at the
point of his dagger.

The King said:

'Go thou. If any man stay thee in going whithersoever thou wilt, say
that thou beest upon my business; and woe betide them that stay thee
if thou be not in my cabinet in the half of an hour with them ye speak
of.'

Throckmorton rose stiffly to his feet; at the door he staggered for a
moment, and closed his eyes. His cause was won; but he leant against
the door-post and gazed at Katharine with a piteous and passionate
glance, moving his fingers in his beard, as if he appealed to her in
silence as with the eyes of a faithful hound, neither to judge him
harshly nor to plead against him. This was the day of the most strain
that ever was in his life.

And gazing back at him, Katharine's eyes were filled with pity, so
sick he appeared to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Body of God!' the King said in the silence that fell upon them. 'Now
I hold Cromwell.'

Katharine cried out, 'Let me go; let me go; this is no world for me!'

He caught her masterfully in his arms.

'This is a golden world, and thou a golden Queen,' he said.

She held her head back from his lips, and struggled from him.

'I may not find any straightness here. I can see no clear way. Let me
go.'

He took her again to him, and again she tore herself free.

'Listen to me,' she cried, 'listen to me! There have been broadsides
printed against the truth of my body; there have been witnesses
prepared against me. I will have you swear that you will read of these
broadsides, and consider of these witnesses.'

'Before God,' he said, 'I will hang the printers, and slay the
witnesses with my fist. I know how these things be made.' He shook his
fist. 'I love thee so that were they true, and wert thou the woman of
Sodom, I would have thee to my Queen!'

She cried out 'Ah!'

'Child,' he calmed himself, 'I will keep my hands from thee. But I
would fain have the kisses of thy mouth.'

She went to lean upon her table, for her knees trembled.

'Let me speak,' she said.

'Why, none hinders,' he answered her kindly.

'I swear I do love thee, so that thy voice is as the blows of hammers
upon iron to me,' she said. 'I may have little rest, save when I speak
with thee, for that sustaineth thy servant. But I fear these days and
ways. This is a very crooked riddle. So much I desire thee that I am
tremulous to take thee. If it be a madness call it a madness, but
grant me this!'

She looked at him distractedly, brushing her hands across her eyes.

'It feels within my heart that I must do a penance,' she said. 'I have
been wishful to feel upon my brow the pressure of the great crown.
Therefore, grant me this: that I may not feel it. And be this the
penance!'

'Child,' he said, 'how may you be a Queen, and not crowned with pomp
and state?'

'Majesty,' she faltered, 'to prepare myself against that high office I
have been reading in chronicles of the lives of them that have been
Queens of England. It was his Grace of Canterbury that sent me these
books for another purpose. But there ye shall read--in Asser and the
Saxon Chronicles--how that the old Queens of Saxondom, when that they
were humble or were wives coming after the first, sat not upon the
throne to be crowned and sacred, but--so it was with Judith that was
stepmother to King Alfred, and with some others whose names in this
hurry I may not discover nor remember in my mind--they were, upon some
holidays, shewn to the people as being the King's wife.'

She hung her head.

'For that I am humble in truth before the world and before my mother
Mary in Heaven, and for that I am not thy first Queen, but even thy
fifth; so I would be shewn and never crowned.'

She leaned back against the table, supporting herself with her hands
against its edges; her eyes piteously devoured his face.

'Why, child,' he said, 'so thou wilt be that fifth Queen; whether thou
wilt be a Queen crowned or a Queen shewn, what care I?'

She no longer refused herself to his arms, for she had no more
strength.

'Mary be judge between me and them that speak against me,' she said,
'I can no more hold out against my joy or longings.'

'Sha't wear a hair shirt,' he said tenderly. 'Sha't go in sackcloth.
Sha't have enow to do praying for me and thee. But hast no need of
prayers.' He lulled her in his arms, swaying on his feet. 'Hast a
great tongue. Speakest many words. But art a very child. God send thee
all the joy I purpose thee. And, an thou hast sins, weight me further
down in hell therewith.'

The light of the candles threw their locked shadows along the wall and
up the ceilings. Her head fell back, her eyes closed, so that she
seemed to be dead and her listless hands were open in her skirts.

       *       *       *       *       *