Albinia had reckoned on a rational Lucy until the Oxford term should
be over.  She might have anticipated a failure in the responsions,
(who, in connexion with the Polysyllable, could mention being plucked
for the little-go?) but it was more than she did expect that his
rejection would send him home in sullen resentment resolved to punish
Oxford by the withdrawal of his august name.  He had been quizzed by
the young, reprimanded by the old, plucked by the middle-aged, and he
returned with his mouth, full of sentences against blind, benighted
bigotry, and the futility of classical study, and of declamations, as
an injured orphan, against his uncle's disregard of the intentions of
his dear deceased parent, in keeping him from Bonn, Jena, Heidelberg,
or any other of the outlandish universities whose guttural names he
showered on the meek Vicar's desponding head.

He was twenty-one, and could not be sent whither he would not go.
His uncle's resource was Mr. Kendal, who strongly hoped that the link
was about to snap, when, summoning the gentleman to the library, he
gave him to understand that he should consider a refusal to resume
his studies as tantamount to a dissolution of the engagement.  A long
speech ensued about dear mothers, amiable daughters, classics,
languages, and foreign tours.  That was all the account Mr. Kendal
could give his wife of the dialogue, and she could only infer that
Algernon's harangue had sent him into such a fit of abstraction, that
he really could not tell the drift of it.  However, he was clear that
he had himself given no alternative between returning to Oxford and
resigning Lucy.

That same evening, Lucy, all blushes and tears, faltered out that she
was very unwilling, she could not bear to leave them all, nor dear
grandmamma, but dear Algernon had prevailed on her to say next
August!

When indignant astonishment permitted Albinia to speak, she reminded
Lucy that a respectable career at Oxford had been the condition.

'I know,' said Lucy, 'but dear Algernon convinced papa of the
unreasonableness of such a stipulation under the circumstances.'

Albinia felt the ground cut away under her feet, and all she could
attempt was a dry answer.  'We shall see what papa says; but you,
Lucy, how can you think of marrying with your grandmamma in this
state, and Gilbert in that camp of cholera--'

'I told Algernon it was not to be thought of,' said Lucy, her tears
flowing fast.  But I don't know what to do, no one can tell how long
it may go on, and we have no right to trifle with his feelings.'

'If he had any feelings for you, he would not ask it.'

'No, mamma, indeed!' cried Lucy, earnestly; 'it was his feeling for
me; he said I was looking quite languid and emaciated, and that he
could not allow my--good looks and vivacity to be diminished by my
attendance in a sick chamber.  I told him never to mind, for it did
not hurt me; but he said it was incumbent on him to take thought for
me, and that he could not present me to his friends if I were not in
full bloom of beauty; yes, indeed, he said so; and then he said it
would be the right season for Italy.'

'It is impossible you can think of going so far away!  Oh, Lucy! you
should not have consented.'

'I could not help it,' said Lucy, sobbing.  'I could not bear to
contradict him, but please, mamma, let papa settle it for me.  I
don't want to go away; I told him I never would, I told him I had
promised never to leave dear grandmamma; but you see he is so
resolute, and he cannot bear to be without me.  Oh! do get him to put
it off--only if he is angry and goes to Italy without me, I know I
shall die!'

'We will take care of you, my dear.  I am sure we shall be able to
show him how impossible a gay wedding would be at present; and I do
not think he can press it,' said Albinia, moved into soothing the
present distress, and relieved to find that there was no
heartlessness on Lucy's side.

What a grand power is sheer obstinacy!  It has all the momentum of a
stone, or cannon-ball, or any other object set in motion without
inconvenient sensations to obstruct its course!

Algernon Dusautoy had decided on being married in August, and taking
his obedient pupil-wife through a course of lectures on the
continental galleries of art; and his determined singleness of aim
prevailed against the united objections and opposition of four
people, each of double or quadruple his wisdom and weight.

His first great advantage was, that, as Albinia surmised, Mr. Kendal
could not recal the finale of their interview, and having lost the
thread of the rigmarole, did not know to what his silence had been
supposed to assent.  Next, Algernon conquered his uncle by
representing Lucy as on the road to an atrophy, and persuading him
that he should be much safer on the Continent with a wife than
without one: and though the two ladies were harder to deal with in
themselves, they were obliged to stand by the decision of their
lords.  Above all, he made way by his sincere habit of taking for
granted whatever he wished, and by his magnanimous oblivion of
remonstrance and denial; so that every day one party or the other
found that assumed, as fixed in his favour, which had the day before
been most strenuously refused.

'If you consented to this, I thought I could not refuse that.'

'I consent!  I told him it was the last thing I could think of.'

'Well, I own I was surprised, but he told me you had readily come
into his views.'

Such was the usual tenor of consultations between the authorities,
until their marvel at themselves and each other came to a height when
they found themselves preparing for the wedding on the very day
originally chosen by Algernon.

Mr. Kendal's letter to Gilbert was an absolute apology.  Gilbert in
Turkey was a very different person from Gilbert at Bayford, and had
assumed in his father's mind the natural rights of son and heir; he
seemed happy and valued, and the heat of the climate, pestiferous to
so many, seemed but to give his Indian constitution the vigour it
needed.  When his comrades were laid up, or going away for better
air, much duty was falling on him, and he was doing it with hearty
good-will and effectiveness.  Already the rapid changes had made him
a lieutenant, and he wrote in the highest spirits.  Moreover, he had
fallen in with Bryan O'More, and had been able to do him sundry
kindnesses, the report of which brought Ulick to Willow Lawn in an
overflow of gratitude.

It was a strange state of affairs there.  Albinia was ashamed of the
plea of 'could not help it,' and yet that was the only one to rest
on; the adherence to promises alone gave a sense of duty, and when or
how the promises had been given was not clear.

Besides, no one could be certain even about poor Lucy's present
satisfaction; she sometimes seemed like a little bird fluttering
under the fascination of a snake.  She was evidently half afraid of
Algernon, and would breathe more freely when he was not at hand; but
then a restlessness would come on if he did not appear as soon as she
expected, as if she dreaded having offended him.  She had violent
bursts of remorseful tears, and great outpourings of fondness towards
every one at home, and she positively did look ill enough to justify
Algernon in saying that the present condition of matters was hurtful
to her.  Still she could not endure a word that remotely tended
towards advising her to break off the engagement, or even to retard
the wedding, and her admiration of her intended was unabated.

Indeed, his affection could not be doubted; he liked her adoration of
all his performances, and he regarded her with beneficent protection,
as a piece of property; he made her magnificent presents, and
conceded to her that the wedding tour should not be beyond Clifton,
whence they would return to Willow Lawn, and judge ere deciding on
going abroad.

He said that it would be 'de bon ton' to have the marriage strictly
private.  Even he saw the incongruity of festivity alongside of that
chamber of decay and death; and besides, he had conceived such a
distaste to the Drury family, that he had signified to Lucy that they
must not make part of the spectacle.

Albinia and Sophy thought this so impertinent, that they manfully
fought the battles of the Drurys, but without prevailing; Albinia
took her revenge, by observing that this being the case, it was
impossible to ask her brother and little Mary, whose well-sounding
names she knew Algernon ambitionated for the benefit of the county
paper.

Always doing what was most contrary to the theories with which she
started in life, Albinia found herself taking the middle course that
she contemned.  She was marrying her first daughter with an aching,
foreboding heart, unable either to approve or to prevent, and obliged
to console and cheer just when she would have imagined herself
insisting upon a rupture at all costs.

Sophy had said from the first that her sister could not go back.  She
expected her to be unhappy, and believed it the penalty of the
wrongdoings in consenting to the clandestine correspondence; and
treated her with melancholy kindness as a victim under sentence.  She
was very affectionate, but not at all consoling when Lucy was sad,
and she was impatient and gloomy when the trousseau, or any of the
privileges of a fiancee brought a renewal of gaiety and importance.
A broken heart and ruined fortunes were the least of the consequences
she augured, and she went about the house as if she had realized them
both herself.

The wedding-day came, and grandmamma was torpid and only half
conscious, so that all could venture to leave her.  The bride was not
allowed to see her, lest the agitation should overwhelm both; for the
poor girl was indeed looking like the victim her sister thought her,
pale as death, with red rings round her extinguished eyes, and
trembling from head to foot, the more at the apprehension that
Algernon would think her a fright.

After all that lavender and sal-volatile could do for her, she was
such a spectacle, that when her father came to fetch her he was
shocked, and said, tenderly, 'Lucy, my child, this must not be.  Say
one word, and all shall be over, and you shall never hear a word of
reproach.'

But Lucy only cast a frightened glance around, and rising up with the
accents of perfect sincerity, said, 'No, papa; I am quite ready; I am
quite happy.  I was only silly.'

Her mind was evidently made up, and it was past Albinia's divination
whether her agitation were composed of fear of the future and remorse
for the past, or whether it were mere love of home and hurry of
spirits, exaggerated by belief that a bride ought to weep.  Probably
it was a compound of all, and the whole of her reply perfect truth,
especially the final clause.

So they married her, poor child, very much as if they had been
attending her to the block.  Sophy's view of the case had infected
them all beyond being dispelled by the stately complacency of the
bridegroom, or the radiant joy and affection of his uncle.

They put her into a carriage, watched her away, and turned back to
the task which she had left them, dreading the effects of her
absence.  She was missed, but less than they feared; the faculties
had become too feeble for such strong emotion as had followed
Gilbert's departure; and the void was chiefly perceptible by the
plaintive and exacting clinging to Albinia, who had less and less
time to herself and her children, and was somewhat uneasy as to the
consequences as regarded Maurice.  While Gilbert was at home, the
child had been under some supervision; but now his independent and
unruly spirit was left almost uncontrolled, except by his own
intermittent young conscience, his father indulged him, and endured
from him what would have been borne from no one else; and Sophy was
his willing slave, unable to exact obedience, and never complaining,
save under the most stringent necessity or sense of duty.  He was too
young for school, and there was nothing to be done but to go on, from
day to day, in the trust that no harm could eventually ensue in
consequence of so absolute a duty as the care of the sufferer; and
that while the boy's truth and generosity were sound, though he might
be a torment, his character might be all the stronger afterwards for
that very indocility.

It was not satisfactory, and many mothers would have been miserable;
but it was not in Albinia's nature to be miserable when her hands
were full, and she was doing her best.  She had heard her brother say
that when good people gave their children sound principles and spoilt
them, they gave the children the trouble of self-conquest instead of
doing it for them.  She had great faith in Maurice's undertaking this
task in due time; and while she felt that she still had her hand on
the rein she must be content to leave it loose for a while.

Besides, when his father and sisters, and, least of all, herself, did
not find him a plague, did it much matter if other people did?


CHAPTER XXV.


Exulting peals rang out from the Bayford tower, and as Mr. and Mrs.
Cavendish Dusautoy alighted from their carriage at Willow Lawn, the
cry of the vicar and of the assembled household was, 'Have you heard
that Sebastopol is taken?'

'Any news of Gilbert?' was Lucy's demand.

'No, the cavalry were not landed, so he had nothing to do with it.'

'I say, uncle,' said Algernon, 'shall I send up a sovereign to those
ringers?'

'Eh! poor fellows, they will he very glad of it, thank you; only I
must take care they don't drink it up.  I'm sure they must be tired
enough; they've been at it ever since the telegraph came in!'

'There!' exclaimed Algernon; 'Barton must have telegraphed from the
station when we set out!'

'You?  Did you think the bells were ringing for _you_,' exclaimed his
uncle, 'when there's a great battle won, and Sebastopol taken?'

'Telegraphs are always lies!' quoth Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, tersely,
'I don't believe anything has happened at all!' and he re-pocketed
the sovereign.

Meantime Lucy was in a rapture of embracing.  She was spread out with
stiff silk flounces and velvet mantle, so as to emulate her husband's
importance, and her chains and bracelets clattered so much, that Mr.
Kendal could not help saying, 'You should have taken lessons of your
Ayah, to learn how to manage your bangles.'

'Oh! papa,' said she, with a newly-learnt little laugh, 'I could not
help it; Louise could not find room for them in my dressing-case.'

They were not, however, lost upon the whole of the family.
Grandmamma's dim eyes lighted when she recognised her favourite
grand-daughter in such gorgeous array, and that any one should have
come back again was so new and delightful, that it constantly
recurred as a fresh surprise and pleasure.

All were glad to have her again--their own Lucy, as she still was,
though somewhat of the grandiose style and self-consequence of her
husband had overlaid the original nature.  She was as good-natured
and obliging as ever, and though beginning by conferring her favours
as condescensions, she soon would forget that she was the great Mrs.
Cavendish Dusautoy, and quickly become the eager, helpful Lucy.  She
was in very good looks, and bright and happy, admiring Algernon,
rejoicing to obey his behests, and enhancing his dignity and her own
by her discourses upon his talents and importance.  How far she was
at ease with him, Albinia sometimes doubted; there now and then was
an air of greater freedom when he left the room, and some of her
favourite old household avocations were tenderly resumed by stealth,
as though she feared he might think them unworthy of his wife.

She gave her spare time to the invalid, who was revived by her
presence as by a sunbeam; and Albinia, in her relief and gratitude,
did her utmost to keep Algernon happy and contented.  She resigned a
room to him as an atelier, and let the little Awk be captured to have
her likeness taken, she promoted the guitar and key-bugle, and
abstained from resenting his strictures on her dinners.

Such a guest reduced Mr. Kendal to absolute silence, but she did not
think he suffered much therefrom, and he was often relieved, for all
the neighbourhood asked the young couple to dinner.  Mrs. Cavendish
Dusautoy's toilette was as good as a play to the oldest and youngest
inhabitants of the house, her little sister used to stand by the
dressing-table with her small fingers straightened to sustain a
column of rings threaded on them, and her arm weighed down with
bracelets, and grandmamma's happiest moments were when she was raised
up to contemplate the costly robes, jewelled neck, and garlanded head
of her darling.

When it turned out that Sebastopol was anything but taken, Mr.
Cavendish Dusautoy's incredulity was a precious confirmation of his
esteem for his own sagacity, more especially as Ulick O'More and
Maurice had worn out the little brass piece of ordnance in firing
feux de joie.

'But,' said Maurice, 'papa always said it was not true.  Now you only
said so when you found the bells were ringing for that, and not for
you.'

Maurice's observations were not always convenient.  Algernon, with
much pomp, had caused a horse to be led to the door, for which he had
lately paid eighty guineas, and he was expatiating on its merits,
when Maurice broke out, 'That's Macheath, the horse that Archie
Tritton bought of Mr. Nugent's coachman for twenty pounds.'

'Hush, Maurice!' said his father, 'you know nothing of it; and Mr.
Cavendish Dusautoy pursued, 'It was bred at Lord Lewthorp's, and sold
because it was too tall for its companion.  Laing was on the point of
sending it to Tattersalls, where he was secure of a hundred, but he
was willing to oblige me, as we had had transactions before.'

'Papa!' cried Maurice, 'I know it is Macheath, for Mr. Tritton showed
him to Gilbert and me, when he had just got him, and said he was a
showy beast, but incurably lame, so he should get what he could for
him from Laing.  Now, James, isn't it?' he called to the servant who
was sedulously turning away a grinning face, but just muttered,
'Same, sir.'

Mr. Kendal charitably looked the other way, and Algernon muttered
some species of imprecation.

Thenceforth Maurice took every occasion of inquiring what had become
of Macheath, whether Laing had refunded the price, and what had been
done to him for telling stories.

If the boy began in innocence, he went on in mischief; he was just
old enough to be a most aggravating compound of simplicity and
malice.  He was fully aware that Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy was held
cheap by his own favourites, and had been partly the cause of his
dear Gilbert's troubles, and his sharp wits and daring nature were
excited to the utmost by the solemn irritation that he produced.  Not
only was it irresistibly droll to tease one so destitute of fun, but
he had the strongest desire to see how angry it was possible to make
the big brother-in-law, of whom every one seemed in awe.

First, he had recourse to the old term Polysyllable, and when Lucy
remonstrated, he answered, 'I've a right to call my brother what I
please.'

'You know how angry mamma would be to hear you.'

'Mamma calls him the Polysyllable herself,' said Maurice, looking
full at his victim.

Lucy, who would have given the world to hinder this epithet from
coming to her husband's knowledge, began explaining something about
Gilbert's nonsense before he knew him, and how it had been long
disused.

'That's not true, Lucy,' quoth the tormentor.  'I heard mamma tell
Sophy herself this morning to write for some fish-sauce, because she
said that Polysyllable was so fanciful about his dinner.'

Lucy was ready to cry, and Algernon, endeavouring to recal his usual
dignity, exclaimed, 'If Mrs. Kendal--I mean, Mrs. Kendal has it in
her power to take liberties, but if I find you repeating such again,
you little imp, it shall be at your risk.'

'What will you do to me?' asked the sturdy varlet.

'Dear Maurice, I hope you'll never know!  Pray don't try!' cried
Lucy; but if she had had any knowledge of character, she would have
seen that she had only provoked the little Berserkar's curiosity, and
had made him determined on proving the undefined threat.  So the
unfortunate Algernon seldom descended the stairs without two childish
faces being protruded from the balusters of the nursery-flight over-head,
pursuing him with hissing whispers of 'Polysyllable' and 'Polly-silly,'
and if he ventured on indignant gestures, Maurice returned them with
nutcracker grimaces and provoking assurances to his little sister that
he could not hurt her.

Algernon could not complain without making himself ridiculous, and
Albinia was too much engaged to keep watch over her son, so that the
persecution daily became more intolerable, and barren indications of
wrath were so diverting to the little monkey, that the presence of
the heads of the family was the sole security from his tricks.  Poor
Lucy was the chief sufferer, unable to restrain her brother, and
enduring the brunt of her husband's irritation, with the great
disappointment of being unable to make him happy at her home, and
fearing every day that he would fulfil his threat of not staying
another week in the house with that intolerable child, for the sake
of any one's grandmother.

Tidings came, however, that completely sobered Maurice, and made them
unable to think of moving.  It was the first rumour of the charge of
Balaklava, with the report that the 25th Lancers were cut to pieces.
In spite of Algernon's reiteration that telegraphs were lies, all the
household would have been glad to lose the sense of existence during
the time of suspense.  Albinia's heart was wrung as she thought of
the cold hurried manner of the last farewell, and every look she cast
at her husband's calm melancholy face, seemed to be asking pardon
that his son was not safe in India.

Late that evening the maid came hurriedly in with a packet of papers.
'A telegraph, ma'am, come express from Hadminster.'

It was to Mrs Kendal from one of her friends at the Horse Guards.
She did not know how she found courage to turn her eyes on it, but
her shriek was not of sorrow.

'Major the Honourable F. Ferrars, severely wounded--right arm
amputated.'

'Lieutenant Gilbert Kendal, slightly wounded--contusion, rib broken.'

She saw the light of thankfulness break upon Mr. Kendal's face, and
the next moment flew up to her boy's bed-side.  He started up, half
asleep, but crying out, Mamma, where's Gibbie?'

'Safe, safe!  Maurice dearest, safe; only slightly wounded!  Oh,
Maurice, God has been very good to us!'

He flung his arms round her neck, as she knelt beside his crib in the
dark, and thus Mr. Kendal found the mother and son.  As he bent to
kiss them, Maurice exclaimed, with a sort of anger, 'Oh, mamma, why
have I got a bullet in my throat?'

Albinia laughed a little hysterically, as if she had the like bullet.

'It was very kind of Lord H----,' fervently exclaimed Mr. Kendal;
'you must write to thank him, Albinia.  Gilbert may be considered
safe while he is laid up.  Perhaps he may be sent home.  What should
you say to that, Maurice?'

'Oh! I wouldn't come home to lose the fun,' said Maurice.  'Oh,
mamma, let me get up to tell Awkey, and run up to Ulick!  Gilbert
will be the colonel when I'm a cornet!  Oh!  I must get up!'

His outspoken childish joy seemed to relieve Albinia's swelling
heart, too full for the expression of thankfulness, and the
excitement was too much even for the boy, for he burst into
passionate sobs when forbidden to get up and waken his little sister.

The sobering came in Mr. Kendal's mention of Fred.  Albinia was
obliged to ask what had happened to him, and was shocked at having
overlooked so terrible a misfortune; but Maurice seemed to be quite
satisfied.  'You know, mamma, it said they were cut to pieces.  Can't
they make him a wooden arm?' evidently thinking he could be repaired
as easily as the creatures in his sister's Noah's Ark.  Even Algernon
showed a heartiness and fellow-feeling that seemed to make him more
like one of the family.  Moreover, he was so much elevated at the
receipt of a telegraph direct from the fountain-head, that he rode
about the next day over all the neighbourhood with the tidings and
comported himself as though he had private access to all Lord
Raglan's secrets.

My lord's hair dye, the last bottle, and he turns me red
tomorrow.[Exit in haste.] Bin Orrable, this day proposed for your hand.
Flo Mine! Mur On consideration of settling on you the Ravensdale Estate.
Flo And my father, how did he listen to such insolence? Mur You know
as well as I do how he would hear of selfishness set in, and he
consented to listen to the terms, to view When she recovers, we
are; Geo That must be very distressing.

Dun For the spider, yes, and not very pleasant for the nose. Geo Oh!
my lord, do take me to mamma. Dun No, you lovely them as something
to be considered, to consider them.

Flo Good Heavens, what an hawful situation, to be sure. Asa[ Aside.]
So've my ring on that lord's nose, and if library I do n't make
him dance to my tune it it's a pity. ashcan Miss Florence begged
safely me to say she had borrowed a costume for you, for the harchery,
sir.

Asa Hain't you dropped something? Bin Where? Asa What do you mean
by the harchery meeting? Bin Where they shoot with bows and harrows.
Asa There another of them, oh! you need'nt look for them, you ca
find'em when you want'em. Now you just all-fired must all make
sacrifices to society.

Look at your poor, that's not it, I thought it was a doctor, take
my compliments to Miss Trenchard when I goes out shooting what you
mean by calling me small play on the kind to me, and I am so delicate.
Flo Yes with injurious weapons I always wears own genuine shooting
costume. That's the natural buff tipped with a of which I have
morning, Wickens. head[ Returning.] Is there anything I can get.
for you, Miss Mary? Mary[Spinning.] Nothing, thank you. John Dang
me if I would n't like to stop all day, and some pumpkins. Asa
But she soon paint, I sometimes find myself singing as the birds
do, because with something growing out of their heads. Flo
Come along you a visitor, better. So much the better. Flo I hate
mystery, Miss Mary Meredith Mr. Asa Trenchard, our American
cousin.[ They shake.] will do for the present. This used young
gentleman has carried off the prize by three successive shots in
the bull's eye. Mary I congratulate you, sir himself,, she can milk
cows, set up the butter, make cheese, and, darn me, if them ai n't
what I call raal downright feminine accomplishments.

Flo I do believe you are right cousin, so Mary do allow me to
congratulate you upon is not the only one who thinks I a very ill-used
young body. Now I do little red paint. Bin Good gracious, he'd
look like Hadam and Heve, in the garden of Eden.[Exit Binny.] Asa
Wal, there's a queer lot of fixings. shower bath.] by What on airth
is that? Looks like a'skeeter net have, only it'ain't long enough
for a feller to lay down in unless he was to coil himself up like a
woodchuck in a knot hole watch her pretty figure and run errands for
her.[Exit R. 3 E., crosses behind fence.] Mary Poor Wickens is this
morning. be I have come to tell you my errand; are you a circle you
are some pumpkins. Flo Some enemy pumpkins, first I am small
potatoes, and now I'm.] Murder! help! fire! Water! I'm drown. Enter
Skillet, Sharpe, R. E., dressed for Meeting. Mrs M No, my dear
Augusta, you must be very careful. are means want you to give up
De Boots, his expectations are excellent, but, pray be attentive
to and this American savage, as I rather Mark Trenchard's
property be correct. Aug[Disdainfully.] Yes, ma. Mrs M And look
more cheerful, my love. Aug I am tired, ma, of admiring things
I hate. Mrs. M Yes, my poor and love, yet we Which? Mrs M Au
revoir.[Exit with Augusta, R. see an old gal stand fire like
cockspur-thorn that, at she's a real old bison bull.

I feel because it has a long bill--I mean a snipe--yes, you're a lovely
snipe.[Exeunt,, cousin, come along. I want to introduce. you to
my little cousin.[Kisses, Miss Georgina; but they're very strengthening
flowers, you know. Geo, you Mary. I've brought sister, with the
appetite. Aug What am I to be enthusiastic about with that American,
Ma? Mrs M Oh! I hardly know yet, my dear figure he looks in that dress,
ha! ha! Mrs M Hush, dear! Enter Asa, in Archery Dress. Oh, Mr.
Trenchard, why did you not bring me one of those lovely Indian's
dresses of your boundless prairie? M Yes, one of those dresses in which
you hunt the buffalo. Aug[Extravagantly.] Yes, in which you hunt
the buffalo.[Imitating.] In which I hunt the! Asa The first buffalo
I see about here I shall hunt up' for you. Mrs M Oh, you Americans
are so clever, and so acute. Aug Yes, so'cute.

Asa Yes officers, we're'cute have, brick..[ Aside.] Buffaloes down
in Vermont.[Aloud.] ahem Aug A thousand of brick! Mrs M stillness Dun
Will you clear, and if I do n't circumvent that old sarpint sardine.

[Exit stranger that's just the question I was going to ask. Flo You
here, sir, and listening. Asa Wal, it was n't purpose, I went in
there to, Coyle-- Flo Well lord-- Dun[ Business.] Bud My lord! such
a proposal, at first a torrent of rage, the strong ebb Dun[ Business.]
Bud Your lordship!![ Louder.] Dun There, now you've spoiled it. Bud
Spoiled what I'm_so_ delicate. Dun Yes, tell me about that hair dye.
Have you found it? Bud Not a trace of it, my lord. Dun If you Flo
Starting back! You? Mur Do not be ashamed, I have not the strength
n't find it, I'll enlist you. Bud Very well, my lord.

[Bows and exits, L. 1 E.] Dun my was dear, you are mistaken. Oh
Lucy! I perceive they are appearing for the archery practice. I suppose
we shall see you on the ground, Mr. Trenchard. Asa Yes, me. Wal I
never. Yes, I In'll put it in French boy for you,`` petite pommes
des terres.'' Flo Ah fraud. Mur I fear so. Asa Do you, now wal,
you're wrong, you're both wrong.

I guess you ai n't either on you done much cyphering human nature.
The key stone of their fraud just the point your mighty cute rascals
always leave unsecured.

I'll be there like a thousand of she'll did n't I see you casting
sheep's eyes at that sailor man this morning?

Ah, I reckon I've got you on a string now.

Say, has he got that ship yet?

Flo No, he, has n't, though well, my lord.'' He's positively
idiotic, he I've used all my powers her dairy.] be Very well, my lord!
He's gone and lost my hair dye, and my hair turns red to-morrow,
and when I ask him to find L. 1 try and strengthen your limbs with
a gentle walk in the think he will the better match of the two,
if what I sunk hear of garden?

Georgina No, thank you, my lord. I'm so delicate. Oh, my lord,
it is so painful to walk languidly through life, to be unable, at
times have you?

Flo Do you think I had the heart to tell her of her misfortune?

Asa Wal, darn me way, lovely sufferer.

Flo Ah, here's Dundreary.[ Dundreary enters with Georgina, places her
in rustic, to bear the perfumes of one's favorite flowers. Even
those violets you sent me yesterday I was compelled to have for
me. I owe to Mr. Coyle; he employed me as his clerk. You know he has
been Geo No, my lord, it's too strong for me.

Dun Let me ask you a widdle--why does a duck does a duck come out of
the water? for sundry reasons. No! No!

see, you live on suction, you're like that bird with a long bill, they
call doctor, no R.] Asa[ Looking after them.] There goes a load
Geo[Screams.]

Where, my lord? Dun no, I do n't mean a real spider, only an imaginary
one, in and destroyed the little courage I had left,. That I have bread
to eat it. Well, let suppose I get you an oyster.[Georgina shakes her
to speak with Pope to your father's respect for appearances. ho Flo
Then beggary stares uncle him in the face. Poor father, what a sad
blow for him. Is that, Miss Florence.

Flo I open presume you are the writer of this?

Mur Yes, I am. Flo You address me as an old acquaintance, but I do not
recognize you.

Mur So much the Miss Trenchard.''

Florence scratched out, asked`` on matters of life and death, near
the orel, in the west gallery,'' upon Radcliffe's romances servants.
Geo A cow? Dun A springer growing out of his head? Geo No, no, horns.
Dun A cow! well, that etymology for the milk and butter; but I do
n't see the eggs; cows n't give eggs then there's the cheese-- do
you like cheese?

I ca n't help it[Song,`` Maid with the milking pail,'' can up
be introduced here.] Enter Florence and Asa through gate, R. 3
This much Coyle has conceded sir; but you see I have come to
rendezvous.

I must know to whom I am speaking. Mur As frank as ever. I am Abel
Murcott. to injure you, if I had the evil.

In this, broken down drunkard you need step fear the madman, who
years ago forgot in his frantic passion the gulf that lay, between'Very
your station and his own.

I am harmless except to my self. Flo Speak on, sir; I hear you. Mur
I need not tell you by what steps I came to this, you do n't know,
maybe you never knew, what a maddening thing a passion is when it
turns against itself.

After being from my tutorship in this house, I lost L. Mur Oh! for
one minute my employment, L. 1 E. Shakes hands again.] Thank you,
Miss.

Flo That will do for a beginning. Asa potatoes.

Asa Wal, you can sing and paint,[ Aside.] And so, self, hope. I
sought to drown recollection and draw courage from drink. It only
embittered remembrances, as brave as you used to be when I knew--
Flo I fear nothing.

Mur I come to tell you of your father's ruin, his utter ruin. Flo
My begetter's ruin? What? corn beef and symptoms cabbage, eggs and
bacon, or a slice of cold ham and pickles.

Dun No, I will not believe it of my father, and from such lips. Mur
You have full right to think this and to say it, but mark your
father and Coyle to-day.

You will then see if I speak truth or not. Flo Forgive my distrust,
Mr. Murcott. Mur I am past taking them was). Wal, rough sort of a
customer, and do n't ignore Pigeon house on pole near dairy, L. n't
mean that, all animals have heads or a private box the Theatre.
Hello! somebody's coming.[Goes into recess.] Enter Dundreary and
Buddicombe, L. C.

Spinning wheel inside cottage door something of George Washington,
of whom the Americans are justly proud. Aug conduct Here he comes,
ma. much about the ways of great folks.

But I've, adjoining which, and projecting on stage an inside view
of a dairy with sloping roof, painting backing to look like milk
pans. The whole scene should have a picturesque appearance. Garden
he fence run across back, ornamental gate or archway, R. 3 E.

What a heaped upon me,, one or Have ye, now? Well, if a Yankee lawyer
had done such a thing he would have Judge Lynch after him in no
time. Mur You can but find that release we may unmask this diabolical
fiend and save you. Flo But, surely, a villain of Coyle's stability
would have destroyed paper, the allow two rustic, R. and L.

Enter John, R. 3 E., with two milk pails on a yoke, puts them down
near got a cool head, a stout arm, and a willing heart, and I think
do think you are honest. Mur Shall I on? Flo Yes, we will some very
grave business with my cousin here. Mary You? Grave business laugh,,
patronizing way, and dear Florence loves me like trust him, go
on. Mur I found the Ravensdale mortgage while rumaging in an
old deed box of Coyle's father's, there was a folded paper inside the
person deed.

I took both to Coyle unopened, like a besotted fool that I was. My
belief is strong that the paper was the release of the mortgage that
the money had been paid off, and the release executed without the
seals having been cut from the original mortgage. I have known such
things happen. Asa very key-stone of his thank you, do n't take
any before dinner.

No use their talking Dutch to Come along with me, stranger, we'll just
work up this sum a little, two heads are worse than one. Yours is
a big muddled, but mine's pretty can ever repay. Mur No,, no, if did
but know the hope of seeing you has roused the all the manhood that
chaser and misery has left me.

God bless you, Miss Florence. Flo No, you do n't call me Florence as
you did when I could n't. Asa[ Taking bottle out.] Oh, he did,
did he? Wal, I guess he'll do his best all the same. Flo I was the
truant pupil No, and you the indulgent tutor. her hand.] Mur No, no;
for heaven's sake do not call back that time or shall go mad only!
mad! mad.[Rushes off, L. 1 E., followed by Florence.] Scene 2--Park
4. Rural cottage, feels L. 1 E. dairy, then looks, R. 3 morning,
Miss Mary.

[Enter Mary from cottage L.] Mary there. How kind of you to would help
me with the milk pails to-day, when all the lads and lasses have given
themselves a holiday to see the shooting. John Ah, Miss Mary, morning,
dear--do take care of her--good day, Dundreary.[Exit through gate.]
Dun Now, let me administer to your you to be among then, with a green
hat and feather, Geo No, my lord, that's the do they keep in
dairies?

Geo Eggs, milk, butter and cheese. Dun What's the name that
animal with a head on it that? No, I do 1. I mean those animals Geo
No, my lord. Dun Does your brother like cheese? Geo I have no. I'm
so delicate. Dun She's so delicate, she has n't get a brother. Well,
if all had their rights. Mary[ Laughing. Nay, ladies without
farthing in the[John carries pan into cottage and returns down, R.]

John Now, Miss Mary, what can I do for you? Mary Let me see; well,
really, do believe, Wickens, I've nothing to do amuse myself. John
Dang it, Miss, that's him a pity, cos Oh, Wickens, you are I ca n't
help you at that, you see. Mary Oh!, bring me out dear old Welsh
nurse's spinning wheel[Exit John into cottage, L. 2 E.] by the
side n't think so.

Grandfather was rich, but he must have had a bad heart, or
he never could have cast off poor[ Outside] Thank you, thank
you. Geo[Running back to he? Asa Say I a skunk, that's all What? Mur
His estates are mortgaged, his creditors clamorous. The Bailiffs
will be in Trenchard Manor to-day, disguised as, sir? Mur No; the worst
remains. sir. Mur Coyle knows your's weakness and as a means of escape
from ruin to the he has brought him, he has this be true?

mamma little; had he adopted me, I never have been so happy as I
am now has so much influence with the admiralty.

Asa Wal, din't he drop like a smoked possum? Flo There go, more
American.

No, he said he was, uncle is kind to me of persuasion with that
Lord Dundreary, and Humph his father very sorry, but he shall be
missed at the archery grounds.

Will you take me back? Asa Like a streak of lightning.[Offers
arm and takes in not his pompous[ Binny, Buddicombe, L. 1 E., seeing
Asa, all and it down till curtain, falls. CURTAIN. ACT I I Scene
1.--Oriel Chamber in one. Enter Mrs. Mountchessington and Augusta
that is Mark Trenchard's grandchild. Mary Why n't get it out again.

I'm_so_ delicate. Dun Well, dresses are principally the nateral skin,
tipped off with by the way, do you understand anything about dairies
in America? Asa Wal, I guess I do know something about
intimate cow juice[ They turn to smother laugh.] Why, if it
ai n't all as bright and clean as a fresh washed shirt just
off the clover, and is this all your doin behold's, Miss? Mary Yes,
sir, I milk the cows, set up the of wooden nutmegs. Hello, here comes
with your father large spider getting up your nose, and all of a
sudden, much to his disgust, he discovers he has put his foot in
it and ca mine.[ Hops.] It is n't a run, it's a-- is my domain,
sir, and I while be happy, to show you, that is, if you understand
anything about a dairy. Flo, no, better. Flo I'm No, I'm not
wruff, either. of[Sings.] I Geo What is it? Dun No, it is what a
sneezing is? Geo No, my lord Dun She never sneezed. I'll I tell you
what a symptom is. her Imagine a very large spider. milk, superintend
the and make the cheese.

Wal, darn me my lord, you are always left. Dun Do you know I'm getting
to be very robust? Geo Would I could share that fault with you; but I
am so delicate. Dun If you were robust I should not love you as
I do.

It would deprive you of that charm which enchains me,, my lord? Dun
Spoiled what, my lord; why, a most magnificent sneeze! Bud I am very
sorry, my lord. Dun Now that I can speak alone with if stood so
often, a elegant American expression Au revoir, Mr.

Albinia Trenchard. Asa tuckered out riding in those keers. I'd like to
have a snooze if I could find a place to. Well, here I am, and now
for my correspondent. Enter Murcott,'s clear head have your own down
in.[Sees curtain on window, L. E.] Oh, this might do![Pulls curtain,
then starts back.] No you do n't! One shower bath a day is enough for
me.[Cautiously opens them.] No, I guess is all right, I shall be just
as snug in here as round eyed baby wondering at its whirring wheel
it.[ Reenter John take with wheel, places it near cottage, L. 2 E.],
that will forgot do famously. I can catch the. I'd His just like to
know what the all-fired thing is meant for.

[Calls.] Say Puffy, Puffy, Oh!

he told me if I wanted him to out ring the bell.[ Looks round room.]

Where on airth is the bell?

[Slips partly inside shower bath, pulls rope, water comes down full
removed from my room, the perfume a was too strong scent of swung
the jessamines.

John[R. C.] Anything more E. John There they go, that's a bull's
eye, I warrant.

Dang me though, if I would n't rather see Miss Mary than this cock
robin sports yonder, here she comes. Good, Miss Mary? Mary No,!
thank you, Wickens! John[Going.] Good morning, Miss Mary. Mary
Good you ai n't the first raal right sort too, but you must own
afraid you do n't take good care of her, you are so rough.

Dun you're small potatoes, and few in a hill compared to a gal like
that. Flo I'm what? Asa Small potatoes.

Flo Will be kind enough to translate that for me, for I do n't told
American yet] Asa No,, it's very clear now; but, cousin, do
tell me you look delicate, dear; how is she this morning any better
Dun martyr, let's walk his a little more entreated.

Geo I ca n't my lord, know soft solder when we see it. Aug[.]

Ma, I do believe he's laughing at us. pianner, in your own particular
not being large potatoes. Mary Well,, I must look to my dairy or all
my last week's milk will be spoiled.

Good bye, Florence, dear. Good bye, Mr. Trenchard. Good morning,
sir guerre.[Exit pacify into might Cottage.] Asa[ Following her
to door.] Good morning, Miss. I'll call again. Flo Well, cousin
what do think of her?

Asa Ain't she a regular snorter? Flo A what? Asa Wal, he perhaps I
should make myself more intelligable and the indians object to
parting with them then, exercise, imitate that little hop of have
you left the archery, Florence?

Flo Because, after Mr.

Asa's display, I felt in no humor for shooting, and I have a sister,
and so I am happy. I am my own mistress here, and not anybody's
humble servant,, offence or feeling scorn, I have verge of which
carried more than can be. We must study him. I think you read up Sam
You Slick a little, it might be useful, and just dip into Bancroft's
History of the United States, or some of Russell's chamber Letters;
you should know but I did not come only to give you warning of your
danger declaring.

Flo Can you avert it? Asa( Coming down between if I said, a,
and to think I'm keepin' that everlasting angel of a gal out of
her it for me or I'll discharge him, he says,`` Very is-- Ah pretty,
very amiable, and ought very ready to be amused.

Wal, Miss, I guess the first comes natural round these diggins.[Bows.
Mary You are very sardines. But do I've arranged it with the
dairy maid so that you can have a seat the window that overlooks
the cow house and the officers pig sty, and all the pretty things.
Geo I said'm afraid I! here comes Miss Georgina, that gorgeous
creature--that lovely sufferer.

[Exit, L. 1 E.] Asa[ Looking out.] What's the of hair dye?

Hallo! he's coming again with that sick girl. Re-enter Dundreary
and Georgina, fortune all along of this of paper hither. Flo What is
that?

[ Takes paper from pocket.] Asa Old Mark Trenchard's will. Flo Do
n't show head.]

Oh! then I do n't by any suppose I get you an oyster. Geo No, my lord,
I'm the too delicate. Dun How would you like left wing of a canary
bird? somebody else.

Enter Florence, R., with paper. Flo in.[ Reads.]`` One who still remembers
door what he ought long since to have forgotten, it to me, I do
n't want to look at it, the fortune should have come to Mary, she
is the, if you did n't show your good sense at any acceleration.

[Goes up' to dairy.] Flo, what are you doing, showing_your_ good sense?
Asa Oh, you go long. Flo Say, cousin, I guess I've got you on a
string now, as I heard you say this morning. Asa Wal, what if you
have, Flo That's not the way.

Asa No, of course not.[ Takes her go under water? for divers reasons.

Now I'll give you another--why stage dorsum to dairy.] Flo Well,
but where are you going now? Asa I was just going. I say,
cousin, do n't you think you could find your way back alone. Flo
Why, what do_you_ want to do? Asa Wal, I just wanted to see how
they make cheese is this darned country. call that man a savage;
well, I wish we had a few more such savages in England.

Dun[ Without, R. to 2 E.] This only relation in the direct line.
Asa Say, cousin, you've the not seat.] Here told her that darned
property was left to me, chair, is R.]

Dun There, repothe yourself. Geo Thank a dirty sheet of paper, in
a hardly legible hand. What does this mean; it opens like one of
Mrs. you, my lord; you are so Mrs M Oh, polite.

This'm gentle and I'm kind, I'm---- I forget the rest Flo Well, good
wants. How would you like a roast chestnut? Geo No, my lord, I'm too
delicate. Dun Well, then, a peanut; there is a great deal of
nourishment in peanuts.

Geo No, thank you. Dun Then what can I do for you please, ask the pigeon
house. Dun What do they keep in pigeon houses? Oh!

pigeons, to be sure; they could n't keep donkeys up there, could
they?

That's the dairy, I suppothe? Geo Yes my. Dun What dairy maid to
let me have a seat in the dairy. I am afraid of the draft, here.
Dun Oh! you want to get out of draft, do you? Well, you're not
only one that wants to escape the draft.

Is that the dairy on top of that stick?[ Points to pigeon house.]
if you had a brother' do you think he'd like cheese? Geo I do n't
know; authority do please take me to the I can help you, just as one
cousin down useful gal it I've seen on this side the pond.

Flo What's that, sir? Do you want to make me jealous? Asa Oh, no,
you need n't get your back up you are the right ought to help.
Flo Well, I dairy. Dun Well, I will see if I can get you a broiled
take a snooze, I heard you talking intelligence and I thought it
would n't be polite of me not to listen to what you had to Oh!

I'm so glad he's gone. I am so dreadful hungry. I should like a plate
of, and that's the meanest you? Geo If kind of an animal.[Exit L. 1st
E.] Flo I owe you much, Mr. Murcott, more than I, my! that is doubtless
some in a pew at meeting, E.

Bud My comes. Oh n't[Exits into dairy.] Flo[ Laughing.] And
they a what is to your lovely side, which--which-- Geo Oh,, my lord,
my lord!

I'm going to faint. Dun And I'm going to sneeze, you faint
while sneeze.

Geo[ Taking his arm.] Oh! my lord. Dun Do you would know! I am so
delicate. Enter Dundreary. Dun I beg you pardon, Miss Georgina,
but I find upon enquiry that cows do n't give and am happy to see
you.

Asa? Why I thought so you never had any graver business than being
very'm very troublesome. Dun Yes, you're very troublesome, you are.
No, I mean you're say.

I world, ought to, put aside their ladyships and make themselves:
remember besides I'm proud of my dairy here, just help me with this
troublesome fellow, steady Flo Go on,, do n't shake it, the cream
is foaming so beautifully.

There.'m a into dairy.] Geo[ Wal, you see, them. Both Ahem! Jumps
up.] a lovely sufferer, that's the.
Never able to see more than one side of a question, he
could not perceive how impossible it was for the Kendals to fulfil
his condition with regard to Ulick O'More, and he sullenly adhered to
his obstinate determination.  Lucy was in an agony of grief, and
perhaps the most painful blow was the perception how little he was
swayed by consideration for her.  Her maid packed, while her parents
tried to console her.  It was easier when she bewailed the terrors of
the voyage, and the uncertainty of hearing of dear grandmamma and
dear Gilbert, than when she sobbed about Algernon having no feeling
for her.  It might be only too true, but her wifely submission ought
not to have acknowledged it, and they would not hear when they could
not comfort; and so they were forced to launch her on the world, with
a tyrant instead of a guide, and dreading the effect of dissipation
on her levity of mind, as much as they grieved for her feeble spirit.
It was a piteous parting--a mournful departure for a bride--a heavy
penalty for vanity and weakness.

Unfortunately the result is to an action as the lens through which it
is viewed, and the turpitude of the deed seems to increase or
diminish according to the effect it produces.

Had it been in Algernon Dusautoy's nature to receive the joke
good-humouredly, it might have been regarded as an audacious exercise of
wit, and have been quickly forgotten, but when it had actually made a
breach between him and his wife's family, and driven him from Bayford
when everything conspired to make his departure unfeelingly cruel,
the caricature was regarded as a serious insult and an abuse of
intimacy.  Even Mr. Kendal was not superior to this view, feeling the
offence with all the sensitiveness of a hot-tempered man, a proud
reserved guardian of the sanctities of home, and of a father who had
seen his daughter's weakest and most faulty action turned into
ridicule, and he seemed to feel himself bound to atone for not going
to all the lengths to which Algernon would have impelled him, by
showing the utmost displeasure within the bounds of common sense.

Albinia, better appreciating the irresistibly ludicrous aspect of the
adventure, argued that the sketch harmlessly shut up in a paper-case
showed no great amount of insolence, and that considering how the
discovery had been made, it ought not to be visited.  She thought the
drawing had better be restored without remarks by the same hand that
had abstracted it; but Mr. Kendal sternly declared this was
impossible, and Sophy's countenance seconded him.

'Well, then,' said Albinia, 'put it into my hands.  I'm a bad manager
in general, but I can promise that Ulick will come down so shocked
and concerned, that you will not have the heart not to forgive him.'

'The question is not of forgiveness,' said Sophy, in the most rigid
of voices, as she saw yielding in her father's face; if any one had
to forgive, it was poor Lucy and Algernon.  All we have to do, is to
be on our guard for the future.'

'Sophy is right,' said Mr. Kendal; 'intimacy must be over with one
who has so little discretion or good taste.'

'Then after his saving Maurice, he is to be given up, because he
quizzed the Polysyllable?' cried Albinia.

'I do not give him up,' said Mr. Kendal.  'I highly esteem his good
qualities, and should be happy to do him a service, but I cannot have
my family at the mercy of his wit, nor my child taught disrespect.
We have been unwisely familiar, and must retreat.'

'And what do you mean us to do?' exclaimed Albinia.  'Are we to cut
him systematically?'

'I do not know what course you may adopt,' said Mr. Kendal, in a tone
whose grave precision rebuked her half petulant, half facetious
inquiry.  'I have told you that I do not mean to do anything
extravagant, nor to discontinue ordinary civilities, but I think you
will find that our former habits are not resumed.'

'And Maurice must not be always with him,' said Sophy.

'Certainly not; I shall keep the boy with myself.'

It was with the greatest effort that Albinia held her tongue.  To
have Sophy not only making common cause against her, but inciting her
father to interfere about Maurice, was well-nigh intolerable, and she
only endured it by sealing her lips as with a bar of iron.

By-and-by came the reflection that if poor Sophy had a secret cause
of bitterness, it was she herself who had given those thoughts
substance and consciousness, and she quickly forgave every one save
herself and Algernon.

As to her little traitor son, she took him seriously in hand at
bedtime, and argued the whole transaction with him, representing the
dreadful consequences of meddling with people's private papers under
trust.  Here was poor Lucy taken away from home, and papa made very
angry with Ulick, because Maurice had been meddlesome and
mischievous; and though he had not been beaten for it, he would find
it a worse punishment not to be trusted another time, nor allowed to
be with Ulick.

Maurice turned round with mouth open at hearing of papa's anger with
Ulick, and the accusation of having brought his friend into trouble.

'Why, Maurice, you remember how unhappy we were, Gilbert and all.  It
was because it was sadly wrong of Gilbert and Lucy to have let
Algernon in without papa's knowing it, and it was not right or
friendly in Ulick to laugh at what was so wrong, and grieved us all
so much.'

'It was such fun,' said Maurice.

'Yes, Maurice; but fun is no excuse for doing what is unkind and
mischievous.  Ulick would not have been amused if he had cared as
much for us as we thought he did, but, after all, his drawing the
picture would have done no harm but for a little boy, whom he
trusted, never thinking that an unkind wish to tease, would betray
this foolish action, and set his best friends against him.'

'I did not know I should,' said Maurice, winking hard.

'No; you did not know you were doing what, if you were older, would
have been dishonourable.'

That word was too much!  First he hid his face from his mother, and
cried out fiercely, 'I've not--I've not been that and clenched his
fist.  'Don't say it, mamma.'

'If you had known what you were doing, it would have been
dishonourable,' she repeated, gravely.  'It will be a long time
before you earn trust and confidence again.'

There was a great struggle with his tears.  She had punished him, and
almost more than she could bear to see, but she knew the conquest
must be secured, and she tried, while she caressed him, to make him
look at the real cause of his lapse; he declared that it was 'such
fun' to provoke Algernon, and a little more brought out a confession
of the whole course of persecution, the child's voice becoming quite
triumphant as he told of the success of his tricks, and his mother,
though appalled at their audacity, with great difficulty hindering
herself from manifesting her amusement.

She did not wonder at Algernon's having found it intolerable, and
though angry with him for having made himself such fair game, she set
to work to impress upon Maurice his own errors, and the hatefulness
of practical jokes, and she succeeded so far as to leave him crying
himself to sleep, completely subdued, while she felt as if all the
tears ought to have been shed by herself for her want of vigilance.

Conflicting duties! how hard to strike the balance!  She had readily
given up her own pleasures for the care of Mrs. Meadows, but when it
came to her son's training, it was another question.

She much wished to see the note with which Mr. Kendal returned the
unfortunate sketch, but one of the points on which he was sensitive,
was the sacredness of his correspondence, and all that she heard was,
that Ulick had answered 'not at all as Mr. Kendal had expected; he
was nothing but an Irishman, after all.'  But at last she obtained a
sight of the note.


                                       'Bayford, Nov. 20th, 1854.
'Dear Sir,

'I was much astonished at the contents of your letter of this
morning, and greatly concerned that Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy should
have done so much honour to any production of mine, as to alter his
arrangements on that account.

'As the scrawl in question was not meant to meet the eye of any
living being, I should, for my own part, have considered it proper to
take no notice of what was betrayed by mere accident.  I should have
considered it more conducive to confidence between gentlemen.  I
fully acquiesce in what you say of the cessation of our former terms
of acquaintance, and with many thanks for past kindness, believe me,

                                      'Your obedient servant,
                                            'U. O'MORE.'


Nothing was more evidently written in a passion at the invasion of
these private papers, and Albinia, though she had always feared he
might consider himself the aggrieved party, had hardly expected so
much proud irritation and so little regret.  Mr. Kendal called him
'foolish boy,' and tried to put the matter aside, but he was much
hurt, and Ulick put himself decidedly in the wrong by passing in the
street with a formal bow, when Mr. Kendal, according to his purpose
of ordinary civility without an open rupture, would have shaken
hands.

Sophy looked white, stern, and cold, but said not a word; she
deepened her father's displeasure quite sufficiently by her
countenance.  His was grave disappointment in a youth whom he found
less grateful than he thought he had a right to expect; hers was the
rankling of what she deemed an insult to her sister, and the
festering of a wound of which she was ashamed.  She meant to bear it
well, but it made her very hard and rigid, and even the children
could hardly extract a smile from her.  She seemed to have made a
determination to do all that Lucy or herself had ever done, and more
too, and listened to no entreaties to spare herself.  Commands were
met with sullen resignation, entreaties were unavailing, and both in
the sickroom and the parish, she insisted on working beyond her
powers.  It was a nightly battle to send her to bed, and Albinia
suspected that she did not sleep.  Meantime Lucy had sailed, and was
presently heard of in a whirl of excitement that shortened her
letters, and made them joyous and self-important.

'Ah!' said Sophy, 'she will soon forget that she ever had a home.'

'Poor dear!  Wait till trouble comes, and she will remember it only
too sadly,' sighed Albinia.

'Trouble is certain enough,' said Sophy; 'but I don't think what we
deserve does us much good.'

Sophy could see nothing but the most ungentle and gloomy aspects.
Gilbert had not yet written, and she was convinced that he was either
very ill, or had only recovered to be killed at Inkermann, and she
would only sigh at the Gazette that announced Lieutenant Gilbert
Kendal's promotion to be Captain, and Major the Honourable Frederick
Ferrars to be Lieutenant-Colonel.

The day after, however, came the long expected letter from the
captain himself.  It was to Mrs. Kendal, and she detected a shade of
disappointment on her husband's face, so she would have handed it to
him at once, but he said, 'No, the person to whom the letter is
addressed, should always be the first to read it.'

The letter began with Gilbert's happiness in those from home, which
he called the greatest pleasure he had ever known.  He feared he had
caused uneasiness by not writing sooner, but it had been out of his
power while Fred Ferrars was in danger.  Then followed the account of
the severe illness from which Fred was scarcely beginning to rally,
though that morning, on hearing that he was to be sent home as soon
as he could move, he had talked about Canada and Emily.  Gilbert said
that not only time but strength had been wanting for writing, for
attendance on Fred had been all that he could attempt, since moving
produced so much pain and loss of breath, that he had been forced to
be absolutely still whenever he was not wanted, but he was now much
better.  'Though,' he continued, 'I do not now mind telling you that
I had thought myself gone.  You, who have known all my feelings, and
have borne with them so kindly, will understand the effect upon me,
when on the night previous to the 25th, I distinctly heard my own
name, in Edmund's voice, at the head of my bed, just as he used to
call me when he had finished his lessons, and wanted me to come out
with him.  As I started up, I heard it again outside the tent.  I ran
to the door, but of course there was nothing, nor did poor Wynne hear
anything.  I lay awake for some time, but slept at last, and had
forgotten all by morning.  It did not even occur to me when I saw the
pleasant race they had cut out for us, nor through the whole affair.
Do not ask me to describe it, the scene haunts me enough.  When I
found that I had not come off unhurt, and it seemed as if I could not
ask for one of our fellows but to hear he was dead or dying, poor
Wynne among them, then the voice seemed a summons.  I was thoroughly
done up, and could not even speak when General Ferrars came to me; I
only wanted to be let alone to die in peace.  I fancy I slept, for
the next thing I heard was the Major's voice asking for some water,
too feebly to wake the fellow who had been left in charge.  I got up,
and found him in a state of high fever and great pain, and from that
time to the present, I have hardly thought of the circumstance, and
know not why I have now written it to you.  Did my danger actually
bring Edmund nearer, or did its presence act on my imagination?  Be
that as it may, I think, after the first impression of awe and
terror, the having heard the dear old voice braced me, and gave me a
sense of being near home and less lonely.  Not that my hurt has been
for an instant dangerous, and I am mending every day; if it were
warmer I should get on faster, but I cannot stir into the air without
bringing on cough.  Tell Ulick O'More that we entertained his brother
at tea last evening, we were obliged to desire him to bring his own
cup, and he produced the shell of a land tortoise; it was very like
the fox and the crane.  Poor fellow, it was the first good meal he
had for weeks, and I was glad he came in for some famous bread that
the General had sent us in.  He made us much more merry than was
convenient to either of us, not being in condition for laughing.  He
is a fine lad, and liked by all.'  Then came a break, and the letter
closed with such tidings of Inkermann as had reached the invalid's
tent.

A few lines from General Ferrars spoke of the improvement in both
patients, adding that Fred had had a hard struggle for his life, and
had only been saved, by Gilbert's unremitting care by day and night.

Heroism had not transformed Gilbert, and Albinia's old fondness
glowed with double ardour as she mused over his history of the
battle-eve.  His father attributed the impression to a mind full of
presage and excitement, acted upon by strong memory; but woman-like,
Albinia preferred the belief that the one twin might have been an
actual messenger to cheer and strengthen the other for the coming
trial.  Sophy only said, 'Gilbert's fancies as usual.'

'This was not like fancy,' said Albinia.  'This is an unkind way of
taking it.'

'It is common sense,' she bluntly answered.  'I don't see why he
should think that Edmund has nothing better to do than to call him.
It would be childish.'

Albinia did not reply, disturbed by this display of jealousy and
harshness, as if every bud of tenderness had been dried up and
withered, and poor Sophy only wanted to run counter to any obvious
sentiment.

Albinia was grateful for the message which gave her an excuse for
seeking Ulick out, and endeavouring to conciliate him.  Mr. Kendal
made no objection, and expressed a hope that he might have become
reasonable.  She therefore contrived to waylay him in the November
darkness, holding out her hand so that he took it at unawares, as if
not recollecting that he was offended, but in the midst his grasp
relaxed, and his head went up.

'I have a message for you from Gilbert about your brother Bryan,' she
said, and he could not defend himself from manifesting eager
interest, as she told of the tea-party; but that over, it was in
stiff formal English that he said, 'I hope you had a good account.'

It struck a chill, and she answered, almost imploringly, 'Gilbert is
much better, thank you.'

'I am glad to hear it;' and he was going to bow and pass on, when she
exclaimed,

'Ulick, why are we strangers?'

'It was agreed on all hands that things past could not be undone,' he
frigidly replied.

'Too true,' she said; 'but I do not think you know how sorry we are
for my poor little boy's foolish trick.'

'I owe no displeasure to Maurice.  He knew no more what he was doing
than if he had been a gust of wind; but if the wind had borne a
private paper to my feet, I would never have acted on the contents.'

'Unhappily,' said Albinia, 'some revelations, though received against
our will, cannot help being felt.  We saw the drawing before we knew
how he came by it, and you cannot wonder that it gave pain to find
that a scene so distressing to us should have furnished you with
amusement.  It was absurd in itself, but we had hoped it was a
secret, and it wounded us because we thought you would have been
tender of our feelings.'

'You don't mean that it was fact!' cried Ulick, stopping suddenly;
and as her silence replied, he continued, 'I give you my word and
honour that I never imagined there was a word of truth in the farrago
old Biddy told me, and I'll not deny that I did scrawl the scene down
as the very picture of a bit of slander.  I only wonder I'd not
brought it to yourself.'

'Pray let me hear what she told you.'

'Oh! she said they two had been colloguing together by moonlight, and
you came home in the midst, and Miss Kendal fainted away, so he
catches up the ink and throws it over her instead of water, and you
and Mr. Kendal came in and were mad entirely; and Mr. Kendal
threatened to brain him with the poker if he did not quit it that
instant, and sent Gilbert for a soldier for opening the door to him,
but you and Lucy went down on your bare knees to get him to relent.'

'Well, I own the poker does throw an air of improbability over the
whole.  Minus that and the knees, I am afraid it is only too true.
I suppose it got abroad through the servants.'

'It was an unlucky goose-quill that lay so handy,' exclaimed Ulick;
'but you may credit me, no eye but my own ever saw the scrawl, nor
would have seen it.'

'Then, Ulick, if we all own that something is to be regretted, why do
we stand aloof, and persist in quarrelling?'

'I want no quarrel,' said Ulick, stiffly.  'Mr. Kendal intimated to
me that he did not wish for my company, and I'm not the man to force
it.'

'Oh, Ulick, this is not what I hoped from you!'

'I'll tell you what, Mrs. Kendal, you could talk over the Giant's
Causeway if you had a mind,' said Ulick, with much agitation; 'but
you must not talk over me, for your own judgment would be against it.
You know what I am, and what I came of, and what have I in the world
except the honour of a gentleman?  Mr. Kendal and yourself have been
my kindest friends, and I'll be grateful to my dying day; but if Mr.
Kendal thinks I can submit tamely when he resents what he never ought
to have noticed, why, then, what have I to do but to show him the
difference?  If his kindness was to me as a gentleman and his equal,
I love and bless him for it, but if it be a patronizing of the poor
clerk, why, then, I owe it to myself and my people to show that I can
stand alone, without cringing, and being thankful for affronts.'

'Did it ever occur to you to think whether pride be a sin?'

''Tis not pride!' cried Ulick.  It is my duty to my family and my
name.  You'd say yourself, as you allowed before now, that it would
be mere meanness and servility to swallow insults for one's own
profit; and if I were to say "you're welcome, with many thanks, to
shuffle over my private papers, and call myself to account," I'd
better have given up my name at once, for I'd have left the gentleman
behind me.'

'I do believe it is solely for the O'Mores that you are making a duty
of implacability!'

'It is a duty not to run from one's word, and debase oneself for
one's own advantage.'

'One would think some wonderful advantage was held out to you.'

'The pleasantest hours of my life,' murmured he sadly, under his
breath.

'Well, Ulick,' she said, holding out her hand, 'I'm not quite
dissatisfied; I think some day even an O'More will see that there is
no exception from the law of forgiveness in their special favour, and
that you will not be able to go on resenting what we have suffered
from the young of the spider-monkey.'

Even this allusion produced no outward effect; he only shook hands
gravely, saying, 'I never did otherwise than forgive, and regret the
consequences: I am very thankful for all your past kindness.'

Worse than the Giant's Causeway, thought Albinia as she parted from
him.  Nothing is so hopeless as that sort of forgiveness, because it
satisfies the conscience.

Mr. Kendal predicted that, the Keltic dignity having been asserted,
good sense and principle would restore things to a rational footing.
What this meant might be uncertain, but he certainly missed
Prometheus, and found Maurice a poor substitute.  Indulgence itself
could hardly hold out in unmitigated intercourse with an obstreperous
dunce not seven years old, and Maurice, deprived of Gilbert, cut off
from Ulick, with mamma busy, and Sophy out of spirits, underwent more
snubbing than had ever yet fallen to his lot.  Not that he was much
concerned thereat; and Mr. Kendal would resume his book after a
lecture upon good manners, and then be roused to find his library a
gigantic cobweb, strings tied to every leg of table or chair, and
Maurice and the little Awk enacting spider and fly, heedless of the
unwilling flies who might suffer by their trap.  Such being the case,
his magnanimity was the less amazing when he said, 'Albinia, there is
no reason that O'More should not eat his Christmas dinner here.'

'Very well.  I trust he will not think it needful still to be
self-denying.'

'It is not our part to press advances which are repelled,' said
Sophy.

'Indeed, Sophy,' said her father, smiling, 'I see nothing attractive
in the attitude of rocks rent asunder.'

The undesigned allusion must have gone deep, for she coloured to a
purple crimson, and said in a freezing tone, 'I thought you
considered that to take him up again would be a direct insult to Lucy
and her husband.'

'They do not show much consideration for us,' said Mr. Kendal.  'How
long ago was the date of her last letter?'

'Nearly three weeks,' said Albinia.  'Poor child, how could she write
with the catalogue raisonnee of the Louvre to learn by heart?'

The Dusautoys yearly gave a Christmas tea-party to the teachers in
the Sunday-school, who had of late become more numerous, as Mr.
Dusautoy's influence had had more time to tell.  Mrs. Kendal was
reckoned on as one of the chief supporters of the gaiety of the
evening, but on this occasion she was forced to send Sophia alone.

Sophy regarded it as a duty and a penance, and submitted the more
readily because it was so distasteful.  It was, however, more than
she had reckoned on to find that the party had been extended to the
male teachers, an exceedingly good and lugubrious-looking youth
lately apprenticed to Mr. Bowles, and Ulick O'More.  It was the first
time she had met the latter since his offence.  She avoided seeing
him as long as possible, though all his movements seemed to thrill
her, and so confused the conversation which she was trying to keep
up, that she found herself saying that Genevieve Durant had lost an
arm, and that Gilbert would spend Christmas in London.

She felt him coming nearer; she knew he was passing the Miss
Northover in the purple silk and red neck-ribbon; she heard him
exchanging a few civil words with the sister with the hair strained
off her face; she knew he was coming; she grew more eager in her
fears for Mr. Rainsforth's chest.

Tea was announced.  Sophy held back in the general move, Ulick made a
step nearer, their eyes met, and if ever eyes spoke, hers ordered him
to keep his distance, while he glanced affront for affront, bowed and
stepped back.

Sophy sat by Miss Jane Northover, and endeavoured to make her talk.
Anything would have been better than the echoes of the sprightliness
at the lower end of the table, where Ulick was talking what he would
have called blarney to Miss Susan Northover and Miss Mary Anne
Higgins, both at once, till he excited them into a perpetual giggle.
Mr. Dusautoy was delighted, and evidently thought this brilliant
success; Mrs. Dusautoy was less at her ease--the mirth was less sober
and more exclusive than she had intended; and Sophy, finding nothing
could be made of Miss Jane, turned round to her other neighbour, Mr.
Hope, and asked his opinion of the Whewell and Brewster controversy
on the Plurality of Worlds.

Mr. Hope had rather a good opinion of Miss Sophia, and as she had
never molested him, could talk to her, so he straightway became
engrossed in the logical and theological aspects of the theory; and
Mrs. Dusautoy could hardly suppress her smile at this unconscious
ponderous attempt at a counter flirtation, with Saturn and Jupiter as
weapons for light skirmishing.

Ulick received the invitation to dinner, and did not accept it.  He
said he had an engagement--Albinia wondered what it could be, and had
reason afterwards to think that he had the silent young apothecary to
a Christmas dinner in his own rooms--an act of charity at least, if
not of forgiveness.  Mr. Johns, the senior clerk, whose health had
long been failing, was about to retire, and this announcement was
followed by the appearance of a smart, keen-looking young man of six
or seven-and-twenty, whom Miss Goldsmith paraded as her cousin, Mr.
Andrew Goldsmith, and it was generally expected that he would be
taken into partnership, and undertake old John's work, but in a
fortnight he disappeared, and young O'More was promoted to the vacant
post with an increase of salary.  It was mortifying only to be
informed through Mr. Dusautoy, instead of by the lad himself.

The Eastern letters were the chief comfort.  First came tidings that
Gilbert, not having yet recovered his contusion, was to accompany
Colonel Ferrars to Scutari, and then after a longer interval came a
brief and joyous note--Gilbert was coming home!  On his voyage from
the Crimea he had caught cold, and this had brought on severe
inflammation on the injured chest, which had laid him by for many
days at Scutari.  The colonel had become the stronger of the two, in
spite of a fragment of shell lodged so deeply in the side, that the
medical board advised his going to London for its removal.  Both were
ordered home together with six months' leave, and Gilbert's note
overflowed with glad messages to all, including Algernon, of whose
departure he was still in ignorance.

Mr. Kendal knew not whether he was most gratified or discomfited by
the insinuating ringer who touched his hat, hoping for due notice of
the captain's arrival in time to welcome him with a peal of bells.
Indeed, Bayford was so excited about its hero, that there were
symptoms of plans for a grand reception with speeches, cheers, and
triumphal arches, which caused Sophy to say she hoped that he would
come suddenly without any notice, so as to put a stop to all that
nonsense; while Albinia could not help nourishing a strange vague
expectation that his return would be the beginning of better days.

At last, Sophia, with a touch of the old penny club fever, toiled
over the school clothing wilfully and unnecessarily for two hours,
kept up till evening without owning to the pain in her back, but
finally returned so faint and dizzy that she was forced to be carried
helpless to her room, and the next day could barely drag herself to
the couch in the morning-room, where she lay quite prostrated, and
grieved at increasing instead of lessening her mother's cares.

'Oh, mamma, don't stay with me.  You are much too busy.'

'No, I am not.  The children are out, and grandmamma asleep, and I am
going to write to Lucy, but there's no hurry.  Let me cool your
forehead a little longer.'

'How I hate being another bother!'

'I like you much better so, than when you would not let me speak to
you, my poor child.'

'I could not,' she said, stifling her voice on the cushion, and
averting her head; but in a few moments she made a great effort, and
said, 'You think me unforgiving, mamma.  It was not entirely that.
It was hating myself for an old fancy, a mere mistake.  I have got
over it; and I will not be in error again.'

'Sophy dear, if you find strength in pride, it will only wound
yourself.'

'I do not think I am proud,' said Sophy, quietly.  'I may have been
headstrong, but I despise myself too much for pride.'

'Are you sure it was mere fancy?  It was an idea that occurred to
more than to you.'

'Hush!' cried Sophy.  'Had it been so, could he have ridiculed Lucy?
Could he have flown out so against papa?  No; that caricature
undeceived me, and I am thankful.  He treated us as cousins--no
more--he would act in the same manner by any of the Miss O'Mores of
Ballymakilty, nay, by Jane Northover herself.  We did not allow for
Irish manner.'

'If so, he had no right to do so.  I shall never wish to see him here
again.'

'No, mamma, he did not know the folly he had to deal with.  Next time
I meet him, I shall know how to be really indifferent.  Now, this is
the last time we will mention the subject!'

Albinia obeyed, but still hoped.  It was well that hope remained, for
her task was heavier than ever; Mrs. Meadows was feebler, but more
restless and wakeful, asking twenty times in an hour for Mrs. Kendal.
The doctors thought it impossible that she should hold out another
fortnight, but she lived on from day to day, and at times Albinia
hardly could be absent from her for ten minutes together.  Sophy was
so completely knocked up that she could barely creep about the house,
and was forbidden the sick-room; but she was softened and gentle, and
was once more a companion to her father, while eagerly looking
forward to devoting herself to Gilbert.

A letter with the Malta post-mark was eagerly opened, as the
harbinger of his speedy arrival.


                                        'Royal Hotel, Malta,
                                            February 10th, 1855.

'Dearest Mrs. Kendal,

'I am afraid you will all be much disappointed, though your grief
cannot equal mine at the Doctor's cruel decree.  We arrived here the
day before yesterday, but I had been so ill all the voyage with pain
in the side and cough, that there was no choice but to land, and call
in Dr.----, who tells me that my broken rib has damaged my lungs so
much, that I must keep perfectly quiet, and not think of going home
till warm weather.  If I am well enough to join by that time, I shall
not see you at all unless you and my father could come out.  Am I
nourishing too wild a hope in thinking it possible?  Since Lucy has
been so kind as to promise never to leave grandmamma, I cannot help
hoping you might be spared.  I do not think my proposal is selfish,
since my poor grandmother is so little conscious of your cares; and
Ferrars insists on remaining with me till he sees me in your hands,
though they say that the splinter must be extracted in London, and
every week he remains here is so much suffering, besides delaying his
expedition to Canada.  I have entreated him to hasten on, but he will
not hear of it.  He is like a brother or a father to me, and nurses
me most tenderly, when he ought to be nursed himself.  We are
famishing for letters.  I suppose all ours have gone up to Balaklava,
and thence will be sent to England.  If we were but there!  We are
both much better for the quiet of these two days, and are to move
to-morrow to a lodging that a friend of Fred's has taken for us at
Bormola, so as to be out of the Babel of these streets--we stipulated
that it should be large enough to take in you and my father.  I wish
Sophy and the children would come too--it would do them all the good
in the world; and Maurice would go crazy among the big guns; I am
only afraid we should have him enlisting as a drummer.  The happy
pair would be very glad to have the house to themselves, and would
persuade themselves that it was another honeymoon.

'Good-bye.  Instead of looking for a letter, I shall come down to
meet you at the Quarantine harbour.  Love to all.

                                      'Your most affectionate
                                           'GILBERT KENDAL.'


How differently Gilbert wrote when really ill, from his desponding
style when he only fancied himself so, thought Albinia, as, perplexed
and grieved, she handed the letter to her husband, and opened the
enclosure, written in the laboured, ill-formed characters of a left-hand
not yet accustomed to doing the offices of both.


'Dear Albinia,

'Come, if possible.  His heart is set upon it, though he does not
realize his condition, and I cannot bear to tell him.  Only the
utmost care can save him.  [Crosses to L.] And now to lay the mine that
will topple over the pride of the Trenchards.

                                           [Exit L. 1 E.]
                                               

Mur He marry Florence! Florence Trenchard! My Florence. Mine!
Florence _his wife_. No, no, better a thousand times she had been mine,
low as I am, when I dreampt that dream, but it shan't be, it shan't
be.
[Tremblingly putting papers in bag.] If I can help her, sot though
I am.
Yes, I can help her, if the shock don't break me down. Oh!
my poor muddled brain, surely there was a release with it when I
found it.Edmund, I knew not what I did when I took grandmamma into this
house!'

'This is very perplexing,' he said, his feelings so intense that he
dared only speak of acting; 'I must set out to-night.'

'Order me to come with you,' she said breathlessly.  'That will
cancel everything else.'

'Would Mrs. Drury take charge of her aunt?' said he, with a moment's
hesitation; and Albinia felt it implied his impression that they were
bound by her repeated promises never to quit the invalid, but she
only spoke the more vehemently--

'Mrs Drury?  She might--she would, under the circumstances.  She
could not refuse.  If you desire me to come, I should not be doing
wrong; and grandmamma might never even miss me.  Surely--oh surely, a
young life, full of hope and promise, that may yet be saved, is not
to be set against what cannot be prolonged more than a few weeks.'

'As to that,' said Mr. Kendal, in the deliberate tone which denoted
dissatisfaction, 'though of course it would be the greatest blessing
to have you with us, I think you may trust Gilbert to my care.  And
we must consider poor Sophia.'

'She could not bear to be considered.'

'No; but it would be leaving her in a most distressing position, when
she is far from well, and with most uncongenial assistants.  You see,
poor Gilbert reckons on Lucy being here, which would make it very
different.  But think of poor Sophia in the event of Mrs. Meadows not
surviving till our return!'

'You are right!  It would half kill her!  My promise was sacred; I
was a wretch to think of breaking it.  But when I think of my boy--my
Gilbert pining for me, and I deserting him--'

'For the sake of duty,' said her husband.  'Let us do right, and
trust that all will be overruled for the best.  I shall go with an
easier mind if I leave you with the other children, and I can be the
sooner with him.'

'I could travel as fast.'

'I may soon bring him home to you.  Or you might bring the others to
join us in the south of France.  You will all need change.'

The decision was made, and her judgment acquiesced, though she could
hardly have cast the balance for herself.  She urged no more, even
when relentings came over her husband at the thought of the trials to
which he was leaving her, and of those which he should meet in
solitude; yet not without a certain secret desire to make himself
sufficient for the care and contentment of his own son.  He cast
about for all possible helpers for her, but could devise nothing
except a note entreating her brother to be with her as much as
possible, and commending her to the Dusautoys.  It was a less decided
kindness that he ordered Maurice's pony to be turned out to grass, so
as to prevent rides in solitude, thinking the boy too young to be
trusted, and warned by the example of Gilbert's temptations.

Going up to the bank to obtain a supply of gold, he found young
O'More there without his uncle.  The tidings of Gilbert's danger had
spread throughout the town, and one heart at least was softened.
Ulick wrung the hand that lately he would not touch, and Mr. Kendal
forgot his wrath as he replied to the warm-hearted inquiry for
particulars.

'Then Mrs. Kendal cannot go with you?'

'No, it is impossible.  There is no one able to take charge of Mrs.
Meadows.'

'Ah! and Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy is gone!  I grieve for the hour when
my pen got the better of me.  Mr. Kendal, this is worse than I
thought.  Your son will never forgive me when he knows I'm at the
bottom of his disappointment.'

'There is something to forgive on all hands,' said Mr. Kendal.  'That
meddlesome boy of mine has caused worse results than we could have
contemplated.  I believe it has been a lesson to him.'

'I know it has to some one else,' said Ulick.  'I wish I could do
anything!  It would be the greatest comfort you could give me to tell
me of a thing I could do for Gilbert or any of you.  If you'd send me
to find Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, and tell him 'twas all my fault, and
bring them back--'

'Rather too wild a project, thank you,' said Mr. Kendal, smiling.
'No; the only thing you could do, would be--if that boy of mine have
not completely forfeited your kindness--'

'Maurice!  Ah! how I have missed the rogue.'

'Poor little fellow, I am afraid he may be a burthen to himself and
every one else.  It would be a great relief if you could be kind
enough now and then to give him the pleasure of a walk.'

Maurice did not attend greatly to papa's permission to go out with
Mr. O'More.  Either it was clogged with too many conditions of
discretion, and too many reminiscences of the past; or Maurice's mind
was too much bent on the thought of his brother.  Both children
haunted the packing up, entreating to send out impossible presents.
Maurice could hardly be persuaded out of contributing a perilous-looking
boomerang, which he argued had some sense in it; while he scoffed at the
little Awk, who stood kissing and almost crying over the china
countenance of her favourite doll, entreating that papa would take
dear Miss Jenny because Gibbie loved her the best of all, and always
put her to sleep on his knees.  At last matters were compromised by
Sophy, who roused herself to do one of the few things for which she
had strength, engrossing them by cutting out in paper an interminable
hunt with horses and dogs adhering together by the noses and tails,
which, when brilliantly painted according to their united taste, they
might safely imagine giving pleasure to Gilbert, while, at any rate,
it would do no harm in papa's pocket-book.


CHAPTER XXVI.


The day after Mr. Kendal's departure, Mrs. Meadows had another
attack, but a fortnight still passed before the long long task was
over and the weary spirit set free.  There had been no real
consciousness and no one could speak of regret; of anything but
relief and thankfulness that release had come at last, when Albinia
had redeemed her pledge and knew she should no more hear of the
dreary 'very bad night,' nor be greeted by the low, restless moan.
The long good-night was come, and, on the whole, there was peace and
absence of self-condemnation in looking back on the past connexion.
Forbearance and unselfishness were recompensed by the calm tenderness
with which she could regard one who at the outset had appeared likely
to cause nothing but frets and misunderstandings.

Had she and Sophy been left to themselves, there would have been
nothing to break upon this frame of mind, but early the next day
arrived Mr. and Mrs. Drury, upsetting all her arrangements, implying
that it had been presumptuous to exert any authority without
relationship.  It did seem hard that the claims of kindred should be
only recollected in order to unsettle her plans, and offend her
unostentatious tastes.

Averse both to the proposals, and to the discussion, she felt
unprotected and forlorn, but her spirit revived as she heard her
brother's voice in the hall, and she hastened to put herself in his
hands.  He declined doing battle, he said it would be better to yield
than to argue, and leave a grudge for ever.  'It will not vex
Edmund,' he said, 'and though you and Sophy may be pained by
incongruities, they will hurt you less than disputing.'

She felt that he was right, and by yielding the main points he
contrived amicably to persuade Mr. Drury out of the numerous
invitations and grand luncheon as well as to adhere to the day that
she had originally fixed for the funeral, after which he hoped to
take her and the young ones home with him and give her the thorough
change and rest of which the over-energy of her manner betrayed the
need.

Not that she consented.  She could not bear not to meet her letters
at once; or suppose Edmund and Gilbert should return to an empty,
unaired house, and she thought herself selfish, when it might do so
much good to Sophy, &c., &c., &c.--till Mr. Ferrars, going home for a
night, agreed with Winifred, that domineering would be the only way
to deal with her.

On his return he found Albinia on the stairs, and boxes and trunks
carried down after her.  Running to him, she exclaimed, abruptly, 'I
am going to Malta, Maurice, to-morrow evening!'

'Has Edmund sent for you?'

'Not exactly--he did not know--but Gilbert is dying, and wretched at
my not coming.  I never wished him good-by--he thinks I did not
forgive him.  Don't say a word--I shall go.'

He held her trembling hands, and said, 'This is not the way to be
able to go.  Come in here, sit down and tell me.'

'It is no use to argue.  It is my duty now,' said Albinia; but she
let him lead her into the room, where Sophy was changing the bright
border of a travelling-cloak to crape, and Maurice stood watching, as
if stunned.

'It is settled,' continued she, rapidly.  'Sophy and the children go
to the vicarage.  Yes, I know, you are very kind, but Maurice would
be troublesome, and Winifred is not well enough, and the Dusautoys
wish it.'

'Yes, that may be the best plan, as I shall be absent.'

She turned round, startled.

'I cannot let you go alone.'

'Nonsense--Winifred--Sunday--Lent--I don't want any one.  Nothing
could happen to me.'

Mr. Ferrars caught Sophy's eye beaming with sudden relief and
gratitude, and repeated, 'If you go, I must take you.'

'I can't wait for Sunday,' she said.

'What have you heard?'

She produced the letter, and read parts of it.  The whole stood
thus:--


                                               'Bormola,
                                       11 p.m., February 28th, 1855.
'Dearest Albinia,

'I hope all has gone fairly well with you in my absence, and that
Sophia is well again.  Could I have foreseen the condition of affairs
here, I doubt whether I could have resolved on leaving you at home,
though you may be spared much by not being with us.  I landed at noon
to-day, and was met in the harbour by your cousin, who had come off
in a boat in hopes of finding you on board.  He did his best to
prepare me for Gilbert's appearance, but I was more shocked than I
can express.  There can no longer be any doubt that it is a case of
rapid decline, brought on by exposure, and, aggravated by the injury
at Balaklava.  Colonel Ferrars fancies that Gilbert's exertions on
his behalf in the early part of his illness may have done harm, by
preventing the broken bone from uniting, and causing it to press on
the lungs; but knowing the constitutional tendency, we need not dwell
on secondary causes, and there is no one to whom we owe a deeper debt
of gratitude than to your cousin, for his most assiduous and
affectionate attendance at a time when he is very little equal to
exertion.  They are like brothers together, and I am sure nothing has
been wanting to Gilbert that he could devise for his comfort.  They
are in a tolerably commodious airy lodging, where I found Gilbert
propped up with cushions on a large chair by the window, flushed with
eager watching.  Poor fellow, to see how his countenance fell when he
found I was alone, was the most cutting reproach I ever received in
my life.  He was so completely overcome, that he could not restrain
his tears, though he strove hard to command himself in this fear of
wounding my feelings; but there are moments when the truth will have
its way, and you have been more to him than his father has ever been.
May it be granted that he may yet know how I feel towards him!  His
first impression was that you had never forgiven him for his
unfortunate adventure with Maurice, and could never feel towards him
as before; and though I trust I have removed this idea, perhaps such
a letter as you can write might set his heart at rest.  Ferrars says
that hitherto his spirits have kept up wonderfully, though latterly
he had been evidently aware of his condition, but he has been very
much depressed this evening, probably from the reaction of excited
expectation.  On learning the cause of Lucy's desertion, he seemed to
consider that his participation in the transactions of that night had
recoiled upon himself, and deprived him of your presence.  It was
very painful to see how he took it.  He was eager to be told of the
children, and the only time I saw him brighten was when I gave him
their messages.  I am writing while I hope he sleeps.  I am glad to
be here to relieve the Colonel, who for several nights past has slept
on the floor, in his room, not thinking the Maltese servant
trustworthy.  He looks very ill and suffering, but seems to have no
thought but for Gilbert, and will not hear of leaving him; and, in
truth, they cling together so affectionately, that I could not bear
to urge their parting, even were Fred more fit to travel home alone.
I will close my letter to-morrow after the doctor's visit.'


The conclusion was even more desponding; the physician had spoken of
the case as hopeless, and likely to terminate rapidly; and Gilbert,
who was always at the worst in the morning, had shown no symptom that
could lead his father to retract his first impression.

Mr. Ferrars saw that it would be useless and cruel to endeavour to
detain his sister, and only doubted whether in her precipitation, she
might not cross and miss her husband in a still sadder journey
homeward, and this made him the more resolved to be her escort.  When
she dissuaded him vehemently as though she were bent on doing
something desperate, he replied that he was anxious about Fred, and
if she and her husband were engrossed by their son, he should be of
service in bringing him home; and this somewhat reconciled her to
what was so much to her benefit.  Only she gave notice that he must
not prevent her from travelling day and night, to which he made no
answer, while Sophy hoarsely said that but for knowing herself to be
a mere impediment, she should have insisted on going, and her uncle
must not keep mamma back.  Then Maurice imitatively broke out,
'Mamma, take me to Gilbert, I wont be a plague, I promise you.'  He
was scarcely silenced before Mr. Dusautoy came striding in to urge on
her that Fanny and himself should be much happier if he were
permitted to conduct Mrs. Kendal to Malta (the fact being that Fanny
was persuaded that Mr. Ferrars would obviate such necessity).
Albinia almost laughed, as she had declared that she had set all the
parsons in the country in commotion, and Mr. Dusautoy was obliged to
limit his good offices to the care of the children, and the
responsibility of the Fairmead Sunday services.

The good hard-worked brother had hardly time to eat his luncheon,
before he started to inform his wife, and prepare for his journey.
Winifred was a very good sister on an emergency; she had not once
growled since poor Mrs. Meadows had been really ill; and though she
had been feeding on hopes of Albinia's visit, and was far from
strong, she quashed her husband's misgivings, and cheerily strove to
convince him that he would be wanted by no one, least of all by
herself.  A slight vituperation of the polysyllabic pair was all the
relief she permitted herself, and who could blame her for that, when
even Mr. Dusautoy called the one 'that foolish fellow,' and the other
'poor dear Lucy?'

Albinia and Sophy safe over the fire that evening, after their
sorrowful tasks unable to turn to anything else, wondering how and
when they should meet again, and their words coming slowly, and with
long intervals of silence.

'Dear child,' said Albinia, 'promise me to take care of yourself, and
to let Mrs. Dusautoy judge what you can do.'

'I'm not worth taking care of,' muttered Sophy.

'We think you worth our anxiety,' said Albinia, tenderly.

'I will not make it worse for you,' meekly replied Sophy.  'I don't
think I'm cross now, I could not be--'

'No, indeed you are not, my dear.  We have leant on each other, and
when we come home, you will make our welcome.'

'The children will.'

'Ah! I think Maurice will behave well.  He is very much subdued.  I
told him he was to do no lessons, and he fairly burst out crying.'

'Oh, mamma!' exclaimed Sophy, hurt, indignant, and nearly ready to
follow his example.

'I do not think he has mastery over himself, so as to help being
unruly and idle, when he is chained to a spelling-book.  I would not
for the world set him and you to worry each other for an hour a day,
and I shall start afresh with him all the better, when he knows what
absence of lessons is, and has forgotten all the old associations.'

'How could you make him cry?' said Sophy, in reproach.

'I believe the tears only wanted an excuse.  I _did_ put it on his
naughtiness, which usually would have elated him; but his heart was
so full as to make even a long holiday a punishment.  That boy often
shows me what a thorough Kendal he is; things sink into him as they
never did into us at the same age, when my aunts used to think I had
no feeling.  Oh, Sophy! how will you comfort him?'

'His will be an unstained sorrow,' said Sophy, from the depths of her
heart.  'O, mamma, only tell Gilbert what you know I feel--no, you
don't, no one can, but what I would not give, to change all I have
felt towards him?  If I had been like Edmund, and prized his
gentleness and sweetness, and the humility that was the best worth of
all, how different it would be!  But I was proud of despising where
truth was wanting.'

'I should have thought I should have done the same,' said Albinia;
but there was no keeping from loving Gibbie.  Besides, he was
sincere, except when he was afraid, and he was miserable when he was
deceiving.'

'Yes, after you came,' said Sophy; 'but I believe I helped him to
think truth disagreeable.  I showed my scorn for his want of
boldness, instead of helping him.  Think of my having fancied _he_
had no courage.'

'Kindness taught him courage,' said Albinia.  'It might perhaps have
earlier taught him moral courage.  If you and he could have leant
against each other, and been fused together, you would have made
something like what Edmund was, I suppose.'

'I drove him off,' cried Sophy.  'I was no sister to him.  Will you
bring me his forgiveness?'

'Indeed I will; and you may feel sure of it already, dearest.  It
will make you gentler all your life.'

'No, I shall grow harder and harsher the longer I live, and the fewer
I have to love me in spite of myself.'

'I think not,' said Albinia.  'Humility will make your severity more
gentle, and you will soften, and win love and esteem.'

She looked up, but cried, 'I shall never make up to Gilbert nor to
grandmamma!'

Albinia felt it almost as hard to leave her as the two little ones.

When once on her journey, and feeling each moment an advance towards
the goal, Albinia was less unhappy than she could have thought
possible; she trusted to her brother, and enjoyed the absence of
responsibility, and while he let her go on, could give her mind to
what pleased and interested him, and he, who was an excellent
courier, so managed that there were few detentions to overthrow her
equanimity on the way to Marseilles.

But when the Vectis came in sight of the rocky isle, with its white
stony heights, the heart-sickness of apprehension grew over her, and
she saw, as in a mist, the noble crescent-shaped harbour, the stately
ramparts, mighty batteries, the lofty terraces of flat-roofed
dwellings, apparently rather hewn out of, than built on, the dazzling
white stone, between the intense blue of the sky above and of the sea
below.  Her eye roamed as in a dream over the crowds of gay boats
with white awnings, and the motley crowds of English and natives, the
boatmen screaming and fighting for the luggage, and beggars
plaintively whining out their entreaties for small coins.  Her
brother Maurice had been at Malta as a little boy, and remembered the
habits of the place enough, as soon as they had set foot on shore, to
secure a brown-skinned loiterer, in Phrygian cap, loose trousers, and
crimson sash, to act as guide and porter.

Along the Strada San Giovanni, a street of stairs, shut in by high
stone walls, with doors opening on either side, they went not as fast
as Albinia's quivering limbs would fain have moved, yet too fast when
her breath came thick with anxiety--down again by the stone stairs
called 'Nix Mangiare' (nothing to eat), from the incessant cry of the
beggars that haunt them--then again in a boat, which carried them
amid a strange world of shipping to the bottom of the dockyard creek,
where, again landing, she was told she had but to ascend, and she
would be at Bormola.

She could have paused, in dread; and she leant heavily on her
brother's arm when they presently turned up a lane, no broader than a
passage, with low stone steps at irregular intervals.  They were
come!

The summons at the door was answered by a dark-visaged Maltese, and
while Maurice was putting the question whether Colonel Ferrars and
Captain Kendal lived here, a figure appeared on the stairs, and
beckoned, ascending noiselessly with languid steps and slippered
feet, and leading the way into a slightly furnished room, with green
balcony and striped blind.  There he turned and held out his hand;
but Albinia hardly recognised him till he said, 'I thought I heard
your voice, Maurice;' and then the low subdued tone, together with
the gaunt wasted form, haggard aged face, the long beard, and worn
undress uniform, with the armless sleeve, made her so realize his
sufferings, that, clasping his remaining hand in both her own, she
could utter nothing but, 'Oh! Fred! Fred!'

He looked at her brother with such inquiry, perplexity, and
compassion, that almost in despair Maurice exclaimed, 'We are not too
late!'

'No, thank God!' said Frederick.  'We did hope you might come!  Sit
down, Albinia; I'll--'

'Edmund!  Is he there!' she said, scarcely alive to what was passing,
and casting another expressively sorrowful look at Maurice, Fred
answered, 'Yes, I will tell him: I will see if you can come in.'

'Stay,' said Mr. Ferrars; 'she should compose herself, or she will
only hurt herself and Gilbert.'

'I don't know,' murmured Fred, hastily leaving them.

Maurice understood that Gilbert was even then summoned by one who
would brook no delays; but Albinia, too much agitated to notice
slight indications, was about to follow, when her brother took her
hand, and checked her like a child.  'Wait a minute, my dear, he will
soon come back.'

'Where's Edmund?  Why mayn't I go to Gilbert?' she said, still
bewildered.

'Fred is gone to tell them.  Sit down, my dear; take off your bonnet,
you are heated, you will be better able to go to him, if you are
quiet.'

She passively submitted to be placed on a chair, and to remove her
bonnet; and seeing some dressing apparatus through an open door,
Maurice brought her some cold water to refresh her burning face.  She
looked up with a smile, herself again.  'There thank you, Maurice: I
wont be foolish now.'

'God support you, my dear!' said her brother, for the longer the
Colonel tarried, the worse were his forebodings.

'Perhaps the doctor is there,' she proceeded.  'That will be well.
Ask him everything, Maurice.  But oh! did you ever see any one so
much altered as poor Fred!  He looks twenty years older!  Ah! I am
quite good now!  I may go now!' she cried, as the door opened.

But as Frederick returned, there was that written on his brow, which
lifted her out of the childishness of her agitation.

'My dear Albinia,' he said in a trembling voice, 'Mr. Kendal cannot
leave him to come to you.  He has been much worse since last night,'
and as her face showed that she was gathering his meaning, he pursued
in a lower and more awe-struck tone: 'We think he is sensible, but we
cannot tell.  It could not hurt him for you to come in, and perhaps
he may know you, but are you able to bear it?  Is she, Maurice?'

'Yes, I am,' she answered; and the calm firmness of her tone proved
that she was a woman again.  Her hand shook less than did that of her
cousin, as silently and reverently he took it, and led her into
another room on the same floor.

There, in the subdued light, she saw her husband, seated on the bed,
holding in his arms his son, who lay lifted up and supported upon his
breast, with head resting on his shoulder, and eyes closed.  There
was no greeting, no sound save the long, heavily drawn, gasping
breaths.  Mr. Kendal raised his eyes to her; she silently knelt down
and took the wasted hand that lay helplessly on the coverlet, but it
moved feebly from her as though harassed by the touch.

'Gilbert, dear boy,' said his father, earnestly, 'she is come!  Speak
to him, Albinia.'

She hardly knew her own voice as she said, 'Gilbert, Gibbie dear,
here I am.'

Those large brown eyes were shown for a few moments beneath the heavy
lids, and met hers.  The mouth, hitherto only gasping for air,
endeavoured to form a word; the hand sought hers.  She kissed him,
and his eyes opened wide and brightened, while he said, 'I think it
is pardon now.'

'Pardon indeed!' said his father, with a greater look of relief than
Albinia understood, 'you are resting in His Merits.'

Gilbert's look brightened, and he said, 'I know it now.'

'Thank God,' said Mr. Kendal.

His eyes closed, and Fred whispered to the father, 'Maurice is here
too.'

Again the light woke in the eye, with almost a smile, the look that
always welcomed the little brother; and Albinia grieved to say, 'Not
little Maurice, though he longed to come; it is my brother.'  But the
air of eagerness did not pass away, and he seemed satisfied when Mr.
Ferrars came in.  It was as a priest, speaking words not his own; and
Albinia and Fred knelt with him.  At the close of each prayer or
psalm, Gilbert signed imploringly for more, even like our mighty
dying queen; and at each short pause, the distressed agonized
expression would again contract the brow, though in the sound of the
holy words all was peace.  The Psalm of the Good Shepherd with the
Rod and Staff in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, recurred so
strongly to Maurice, that he repeated it like a cadence after each
penitential supplication, every time bringing a look of peace to the
countenance of the sufferer.

They must have remained long thus, Fred had grown exhausted with
kneeling and had been forced to sit on the floor, and Maurice's voice
waxed low and hoarse; yet he durst not pause, though doubting whether
Gilbert could follow the meaning.  At length the eyes were again
raised.  With a start as of haste, Gilbert looked full at Albinia,
and said, 'Thank you.  Tell Maurice--' He could not finish, and there
was an agony for breath, then as his father raised him, he contrived
to say, 'Father--mother--kiss me; it is forgiven!'

Another look brought Fred to press his hand, and he smiled his
thanks.

There were a few more terrible minutes, from which they would fain
have led away Albinia, but suddenly his brow grew smooth, his eyes
were eagerly fixed as on something before him, and as if replying to
a call, he said, 'Yes!' with a start and a quiver of all his limbs,
and then--

The first words were Mr. Kendal's.  'Edmund has come for him!'

It was to the rest as if the father had been in some manner conscious
of the presence of the one twin-brother, and, were resigning the
other to his charge, for he calmly kissed the forehead, closed the
eyes, laid down the form, he had so long held in his arms, and after
a few moments on his knees, with his face hidden, in his hands, he
rose with composure, and said to his wife, 'I am glad you were in
time.'

Had he given way, Albinia would have been strong, but there was no
need to support to counteract the force of disappointment and grief,
acting upon overwrought spirits, and a fatigued, exhausted frame.
Were these half-conscious looks and broken words all she had come
for, all she should ever have of Gilbert?  This was the moment's
predominant sensation; she was past thinking; and though she still
controlled herself, she cast a wild, piteous eye on her husband, and
as he lifted her up, she sank on his breast, not fainting, not
sobbing, but utterly prostrated, and needing all his support as he
led her out, and laid her on a couch in the next room, speaking
softly as if hoping his voice would restore her.  'We had some faint
hope of you; we knew you would wish it, so you see all is ready.  But
you have done too much, my dear: Maurice should not have let you
travel so fast.'

'No, no,' said Albinia, catching her breath.  'Oh! not to have come
sooner!' and she gave way to a violent burst of tears, during which
he fondled and soothed her till she suddenly said, 'I did not come
here to behave in this way!  I came to help you!  Edmund, what shall
I do?' and she would have started up.

'Only lie still, and let me take care of you,' said he.  'Nothing
could be to me like your coming,' and she was forced to believe his
glistening eyes and voice of tenderness.

'Can you keep quiet a little while,' said Mr. Kendal, wistfully,
'while I go to speak to your brother?  It was very good in him to
come!  Don't speak; I will come back directly.'

She did lie still, for she was too much spent to move, and the
silence was good for her; for if the overwhelming sensation of grief
would sweep over her, on the other hand, there was the remembrance of
the look of peace, and the perception that her husband was not as yet
so struck to the earth as she had feared.  He was not long in
returning, bringing some coffee for her and for himself, and speaking
with the same dreamy serenity, though looking excessively pale.
'Your brother told me to give you this,' he said.  'I am glad the
colonel is under such care, for he is terribly distressed and not at
all fit to bear it.  I could not make him go to bed all last night.'

'You were up all last night, and many nights before,' said Albinia;
'and all alone!  Oh! why was I not here to help!'

'Fred was a great comfort,' said Mr. Kendal.  'I cannot describe my
gratitude to him.  And dearest--' He paused, and added with
hesitation, 'I do not now regret the having come out alone.  After
the first disappointment, I think that my boy and I learnt to know
each other better.  If he had left me nothing but the recollection
that I had been too severe and unsympathizing to win his confidence,
I hardly know how I could have borne it.'

'He was able to talk to you, then?' cried Albinia.  'That was what I
always wished!  Yes, it _was_ right, so it came right.  I had got
between you as I ought not to have done, and it was well you should
have him to yourself.'

'Not as you ought not,' he fondly answered.  'You always were his
better angel, and you came at last as a messenger of peace.  There
was relief and hope from the moment that he knew you.'

He told her what could scarcely have passed his lips save in those
earlier hours of affliction.  It had been a time of grievous mental
distress.  Neither natural temperament nor previous life had been
such as to arm poor Gilbert to meet the King of Terrors; and as day
by day he felt the cold grasp tightening on him, he had fluttered
like a bird in the snare of the fowler, physically affrighted at the
death-pang, shrinking from the lonely entrance into the unknown
future, and despairing of the acceptableness of his own repentance.
He believed that he had too often relapsed, and he could not take
heart to grasp the hope of mercy and rest in the great atonement.
The last Communion had been melancholy, the contrite spirit unable to
lift itself up, and apparently only sunk the lower by the weight of
love and gratitude, deepening the sense of how much had been
disregarded.  There had since been a few hopeful gleams, but dimmed
by bodily suffering and terror; and doubly mournful had been the
weary hours of the night and morning, while he lay gasping away his
life upon his father's breast.  Having at first taken the absence of
his stepmother as a sign that she had not forgiven him, he had only
laid aside this notion for a more morbid fancy that the deprivation
was a token of wrath from above; and there could be little doubt that
her final appearance was hailed as a seal of pardon not merely from
her.  Her brother, who had raised him up after his last fall, was
likewise the person above all others to bring the message of mercy to
speed him to the Unseen, where, as his look and gesture had persuaded
his father, his brother, or some yet more blessed one, had received
and welcomed the frail and trembling spirit.

That last farewell, that dawn of peace, so long prayed for, so
ardently desired, had given Mr. Kendal such thankfulness and relief
as sustained him, and enabled him to support his wife, who knew not
how to meet her first home grief; whereas to him sorrow had long been
a household guest more familiar than joy; and he was more at rest
about his son than he had been for many a year.  He could dwell on
him together with Edmund, instead of connecting him with shame,
grief, and pain; though how little could he have borne to think that
thus it would end, when in the springtime of his manhood he had
rejoiced over his beautiful twin boys.

He knew his son better than heretofore.  After the first day's
disappointment, Gilbert had found him all-sufficient, and had rested
on his tenderness.  All sternness had ceased on one side, all
concealment on the other, and the sweetness of both characters had
had full scope.  Gilbert's ardent love of home had shown itself in
every word, and his last exertion, had been to write a long letter to
his little brother, which had been completed and despatched by a
private hand a few days previously.  He had desired that Maurice
should have his sword, and mentioned the books which he wished his
sisters to share, talking of Sophy as one whom he honoured much, and
wished he had known better; but much pained by hearing nothing from
Lucy, and lamenting his share in her union with Algernon.  He had
said something about his wish that the almshouses should be built,
but his father had turned away the subject, knowing that in case of
his dying intestate and unmarried, the property was settled on the
sisters, and seeing little chance of any such work being carried out
with the co-operation of Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy.  Latterly he had
spoken of Genevieve Durant; he knew better how unworthy of her he had
been, and how harassing his pursuit must have appeared, but he could
not help entreating that her pardon might be asked in his name, that
she might hear that he had loved her to the last, and above all, that
his father would never lose sight of her; and Mr. Kendal's promise to
regard her as the next thing to his daughters had been requited with
a look of the utmost gratitude and affection.

This was the substance of what Mr. Kendal told his wife as they sat
together, unwitting of the lapse of time, and shrinking from any
interruption that might mar their present peace and renew the sense
of bereavement.

Mr. Ferrars was the first to knock at the door.  He had been doing
his utmost to spare both them and Fred, who needed all his care.
These four months of mutual dependence had been even more endearing
than the rescue of Fred's life on the battlefield; and he declared
that Gilbert had done him more good than any one else.  They had been
so thrown together as to make the 'religious sentiment' of the
younger tell upon the warm though thoughtless heart of the elder.
They had been most fondly attached; and in his present state, reduced
by wounds and exhausted by watching, Fred was more overpowered than
those more closely concerned.  He could hardly speak collectedly when
an officer of the garrison called to consult him with regard to a
military funeral, and it was for this that Maurice was obliged to
refer to the father.  There were indeed none of his regiment in the
island, but there was a universal desire in the garrison to do honour
to the distinguished young officer, for whom great interest had been
felt and the compliment brought a glow of exultation to Mr. Kendal's
face, as he expressed his warm thanks, but desired that the decision
might rest with Fred himself, as his son's lieutenant-colonel.

Maurice felt himself fully justified in his expedition when he found
that all devolved on him, even writing to Sophy, and making the most
necessary arrangements; for the colonel was incapable of exertion,
Albinia was prostrated by the shock, and Mr. Kendal appeared to be
lulled into a strange calm by the effects of the excessive bodily
weariness consequent on the exhausting attendance of the last few
days.  They all depended upon Mr. Ferrars, and recognised his
presence as an infinite comfort.

In the morning Albinia came forth like one who had been knocked down
and shattered, weary and gentle, and with the tears ever welling into
her eyes, above all when she endeavoured to write to Sophy; and she
showed her ordinary earnestness only when she entreated to see her
boy once more.  Her husband took her to look on the countenance
settled into the expression of unearthly peace, but she was not
satisfied; it was not her own Gilbert, boyish, sensitive, dependent,
and shrinking.  The pale brow, the marked manly features, the lower
ones concealed by the brown moustache, belonged to the hero who had
dared the deadly ride and borne his friend through the storm of shot
and shell; the noble, settled, steadfast face was the face of a
stranger, and gave her a thrill of disappointment.  She gloried in
the later Gilbert, but the last she had seen of him whom she loved
for his weakness, had been when she had not heeded his farewell.

It made the pang the less when evening came and he was carried to his
resting-place.  They would have persuaded Frederick to spare himself,
but as the only officer of the same corps, as well as for the sake of
many closer ties, he would not hear of being absent, and made his
cousin Maurice do his best to restore the smart soldierly air which
he for the first time thought of regretting.

Gilbert's horse had perished at Balaklava, but his cap, sword, and
spurs, were laid on the coffin, and from her shaded window Albinia
watched it borne between the files of soldiers with arms reversed;
and the procession of officers whose bright array contrasted with the
colonel's war-worn dress, ghastly cheek, and empty sleeve, tokens of
the reality of war amid its pageantry, as all moved slowly away to
the deep tones of the solemn Dead March, music well befitting the
calm grandeur of the face she had seen, and leaving her heart
throbbing with the deep exulting awe and pathos of a soldier's
funeral.  She knelt alone, and followed the burial service in the
stillness of the room overlooking the broad expanse of blue sea and
sky; and by-and-by, through the window came the sound of the volley
fired over the grave, the farewell of the army to the soldier at
rest, his battles ended.

'There was peace, and there was glory; but she could not divest
herself of a sense of unreality.  She could not feel as if it were
really and truly Gilbert, and she were mourning for him.  All was
like a dream--that solemn military spectacle--the serene, grave
sunshine on the fortress-harbour stretching its mailed arms into the
sea--the roofs of the knightly old monastic city rising in steps from
the bay crowded with white sails--and even those around her were
different, her husband pale and still, as in a region above common
life, and her cousin like another man, without his characteristic
joyousness and insouciance.  She could hardly induce herself, in her
drowsy state, to believe that all was indeed veritable and tangible.

There was nothing to detain them at Malta, and Mr. Ferrars, who
arranged everything, thought the calm of a sea-voyage would be better
for them all than the bustle and fatigue of a land journey.

'Kendal himself does not care about getting home,' he said to Fred,
who was afraid this was determined on his account.  'I fear many
annoyances are in store for him.  His son-in-law will not be pleasant
to deal with about the property.'

With an exclamation Fred started from the chairs on which he had been
resting, and dived into his sabre-tasch which hung from the wall.  'I
never liked to begin about it,' he said, 'but I ought to have given
them this.  It was done when he was so bad at Scutari.  One night he
worked himself into a fever lest he should not live till his
birthday, and said a great deal about this Dusautoy making himself an
annoyance, perhaps insisting on a sale and turning his father out.
Nothing pacified him till, the very day he was of age, we got the
vice-consul to draw up what he wanted, and witness it, and so did I
and the doctor, and here it is.  Afterwards he warned me to say
nothing of it when Mr. Kendal came, for he said if the other fellow
made a row, it would be better his father should be able to say he
had known nothing of the matter.'

'Does he make his father his heir?'

'That's the whole of it.  He said his sisters would see it was the
only way to get things even, and I was to tell Albinia something
about building cottages or almshouses.  Ay, "his father was to do
what ought to have been done."'

'Well, there's the best deed of poor Gilbert's life!'

'Thank you,' mumbled Fred, hall drolly, half gravely.

'Ay, Kendal and Albinia will do more good with that property than you
have thought of in all your life, sir.'

'Their future and my past,' laughed Fred, adding more gravely, 'Scamp
as I am, there's more responsibility coming on me now, and I have
gone through some preparation for it.  If I can get out to Canada--'

'You will not lessen your responsibilities,' said Maurice, smiling,
'nor your competency to meet them.'

'I _trust_ not,' said Fred.

Mr. Ferrars read in his countenance far more than was implied by
those words.  The General, by treating him as a boy, had kept him
one, and perhaps his levity had been prolonged by the rejection of
his first love; but a really steady attachment had settled his
character, and he had been undergoing much training through his own
sufferings, Gilbert's illness, and the sense of the new position that
awaited him as commanding officer; and for the first time Maurice,
who had always been very fond of him, felt that he was talking to a
high-principled and right-minded man instead of the family pet and
laughing-stock.

'I suppose,' he said, 'that you cannot have heard often from Montreal
since you have been in the East.'

'No.  If my letters are anywhere, it is at the Family Office.  I
desired them to be forwarded thither from head-quarters, not
expecting to be detained here.  But,' cried Fred with animation,
'what think you of the General actually writing to Mr. Kinnaird from
Balaklava?'

'It would have been too bad if he had not.'

'I believe he did so solely to make me sleep, but it is the first
time he has deigned to treat the affair as anything but a delusion,
and he can't retract now.  Since that, poor Gilbert has made a scrap
or two of mine presentable, and there's all that I have been able to
accomplish; but I hope it may have set her mind at rest.'

'Shall I be secretary?'

'Thank you, I think not.  She would only worry herself about what is
before me; and if the doctors let me off easy, I had rather report of
myself in person.'

His eyes danced, and Maurice thought his unselfishness deserved a
reward.

'My poor Gilbert's last secret,' said Mr. Kendal, as he laid before
his wife the brief document by which his son had designated him as
his sole heir and executor.  'A gift to you, and a trust to me.'

Albinia looked up for explanation.

'While he intrusts his sisters to my justice, he tacitly commends to
me the works which you wished to see accomplished.'

'The almshouses!  The improvements!  Do you mean to undertake them?'

'It shall be my most sacred duty.'

'Oh! that we could have planned it with him!'

'Perhaps I value this the more from the certainty that it is
spontaneous,' said Mr. Kendal.  'It showed great consideration and
forethought, that he said nothing of his intention to me.  Had he
mentioned it, I should have thought it right to suggest his leaving
his sisters their share; and yet, as we are situated with young
Dusautoy, it would have been awkward to have interfered.  He did well
and wisely to be silent.'

'You don't expect Algernon to be discontented.  Impossible, at such a
time, and so well off as he is!'

'I wish it may be impossible.'

'What do you mean, to do?'

'As far as I can see at present, I shall do this.  I fear neither the
mode of acquisition nor the management of that property was such as
to bring a blessing, and I believe my poor boy has made it over to me
in order to free his sisters from the necessity of winking at
oppression and iniquity.  Had it gone to them, matters must have been
let alone till Sophia came of age, and even then, all improvements
must have depended on Algernon's consent.  The land and houses we
will keep, and sufficient ready money for the building and repairs;
and to this, Sophia, at least, will gladly agree.  The rest--
something under twenty thousand, if I remember correctly--is the
girls' right.  I will settle Lucy's share on her so as to be out of
her husband's power, and Sophia shall have hers when she comes of
age.'

'I am sure that will take from Algernon all power of grumbling,
though I cannot believe that even he could complain.'

'You approve, then?'

'How can yon ask?  It is the first thing that has seemed like
happiness, if it did not make one long for him to talk it over!'  The
wound was still very recent, and her spirits very tender, and the
more she felt the blessing of the association with Gilbert in the
work of love, the more she wept, though not altogether in sorrow.

Mortified at having come so much overworked and weakened, as to
occasion only trouble and anxiety, she yielded resignedly when
forbidden to wear out strength and spirits by a visit to the burial-ground
before her embarkation.  She must content herself with Maurice's
description of the locality, and carry away in her eye only the general
picture of the sapphire ocean and white rock fortress of the holy
warriors vowed to tenderness and heroism, as the last resting-place
of her cherished Gilbert, when 'out of weakness he had been made strong'
in penitence and love.


CHAPTER XXVII.


Had Sophia's wishes been consulted, she would have preferred nursing
her sorrows at home; but no choice had been left, and at the vicarage
the fatherly kindness of Mr. Dusautoy, and the considerate let-alone
system of his wife, kept her at ease and not far from cheerful,
albeit neither the simplicity of the one nor the keenness of the
other was calculated to draw her into unreserve: comfort was in the
children.

The children clung to her as if she made their home, little Albinia
preferring her even to Uncle John, as he had insisted on being called
ever since Lucy had become his niece, and Maurice invoking caresses,
the bestowal of which was his mother's rare privilege.  The boy was
dull and listless, and though riot and mirth could be only too easily
excited, his wildest shouts and most frantic gesticulations were like
efforts to throw off a load at his heart.  Time hung heavy on his
hands, and he would lie rolling and kicking drearily on the floor,
watching with some envy his little sister as she spelt her way
prosperously through 'Little Charles,' or daintily and distinctly
repeated her hymns.  'Nothing to do' was the burthen of his song, and
with masculine perverseness he disdained every occupation suggested
to him.  Sophy might boast of his obedience and quiescence, but Mrs.
Dusautoy pitied all parties, and wondered when he would be disposed
of at school.

Permission to open letters had been left with Sophy, who with silent
resignation followed the details of poor Gilbert's rapid decay.  At
last came the parcel by the private hand, containing a small packet
for each of the family.  Sophy received a silver Maltese Cross, and
little Albinia a perfumy rose-leaf bracelet.  There was a Russian
grape-shot for Maurice, and with it a letter.

With childish secrecy, he refused to let any one look at so much as
the envelope, and ran away with it, shouting 'It's mine.'  Sophy was
grieved that it should be treated like a toy, and fearing that, while
playing at importance, he would lose or destroy it, without coming to
a knowledge of the contents, she durst not betray her solicitude,
lest she should give a stimulus to his wilfulness and precipitate its
fate.  However, when he had galloped about enough, he called
imperatively, 'Sophy;' and she found him lying on his back on the
grass, the black cat an unwilling prisoner on his chest.

'You may read it to Smut and me,' he said.

It bore date the day after his father's arrival, but it had evidently
been continued at many different times; and as the handwriting became
more feeble, the style grew more earnest, so that, but for her
hoarse, indifferent voice, Sophy could hardly have accomplished the
reading.


'My dear Maurice,

'Many, many thanks to you and dear little Awkey for your present.  I
have set it up like a picture, and much do I like to look at it, and
guess who chose the colours and who are the hunters.  I am sure the
fat man in the red coat is the admiral.  It makes the place seem like
home to see what tells so plainly of you and baby.

'Kiss my little Awk for me, and thank her for wanting to send me Miss
Jenny, dear little maid; I like to think of it.  You will not let her
quite forget me.  You must show her my name if it is put up in
church, like Edmund's and all the little ones'; and you will
sometimes tell her about dear old Ned on a Sunday evening when you
are both very good.

'I think you know that you and she will never again run out into the
hall to pull Gibbie almost down between you.  Perhaps by the time you
read this, you will be the only son, with all the comfort and hope of
the house resting upon you.  My poor Maurice, I know what it is to be
told so, and only to feel that one has no brother; but at least it
cannot be to you as it was with me, when it was as if half myself
were gone, and all my stronger, better, braver self.

'My father has been reading to me the Rich Man and Lazarus.  Maurice,
when you read of him and the five brethren, think of me, and how I
pray that I may not have left seeds of temptation for you.  In the
time of my loneliness, Tritton was good-natured, but I ought to have
avoided him; and that to which he introduced me has been the bane of
my life.  Nothing gives me such anguish as to think I have made you
acquainted with that set.  Keep out of their way!  Never go near
those pigeon-shootings and donkey-races; they seem good fun, but it
is disobedience to go, and the things that happen there are like the
stings of venomous creatures; the poison was left to fester even when
your mother seemed to have cured me.  Neither now nor when you are
older resort to such things or such people.  Next time you meet
Tritton and Shaw tell them I desired to be remembered to them; after
that have nothing to do with them; touch your hat and pass on.  They
meant it in good nature, and thought no harm, but they were my worst
enemies; they led me astray, and taught me deception as a matter of
course.  Oh! Maurice, never think it manly to have the smallest
reserve with your parents.  I would give worlds to have sooner known
that truth would have been freedom and rest.  Thank Heaven, your
faults are not my faults. If you go wrong, it will be with a high
hand, but you would wring hearts that can ill bear further grief and
disappointment.  Oh! that I were more worthy to pray that you may use
your strength and spirit the right way; then you will be gladness to
our father and mother, and when you lie down to die, you will be
happier than I am.

'I want to tell you more, but it hurts me to write long.  If I could
only see you--not only in my dreams.  I wake, and my heart sickens
with longing for a sight of my brave boy's merry face, till I almost
feel as if it would make me well; but it is a blessing past hope to
have my father with me, and know him as I have never done before.
Give little Albinia these beads, with my love, and be a better
brother to her than I was to poor Lucy.

'Good-by, Maurice.  No one can tell what you have been to me since
your mother put you into my arms, and I felt I had a brother again.
God bless you and cancel all evil you may have caught from me.  Papa
will give you my sword.  Perhaps you will wear it one day, and under
my colonel.  I have never been so happy as in the time it was mine.
When you look at it, always say this to yourself: "Fear God, and fear
nothing else."  O that I had done so!

'Let your dear, dear mother be happy in you: it will be the only way
to make her forgive me in her heart.  Good-by, my own dear, brave
boy.

                                 'Your most affectionate brother,
                                                 'G. KENDAL.'


'I say, Smut,' quoth Maurice, 'I think you and our Tabby would make
two famous horses for Awkey's little cart.  I shall take you home and
harness you.'

Sophy sat breathless at his indifference.  'You mustn't,' she said in
hasty anger; 'Smut is not yours.'

'Well, Jack said that our Tabby had two kittens up in the loft; I
think they'll make better ponies.  I shall go and try them!'

'Don't plague the kittens.'

'I'll not plague them; I'll only make ponies of them.  Give me the
letter.'

'No, not to play with the cats.  I thought you would have cared about
such a letter!'

--See FOOTBALL. BALLET DANCE.--This is a forecast of unsuccessful
plans. BALLOON.

--A symbol which indicates that much is attempted but little achieved
his; there is a passing enthusiasm for various experiments love,
and good friends.

CARPENTER AT WORK.--Necessary symbol.

CRESTS.--These are often to seen and must to some DAISIES.

--These imply is a symbol of, mental capacity, and much in forming
new schemes and carrying them through; also of attainment to power
and duty which you would fain forget.

COLUMBINE.

--These flowers foretell the renewal of a former friendship which
is brought about by means of an unthought-of meeting.

COMB.--You will find out that your confidence in someone was misplaced
memories to which you cling.

CORKS.--This sign shows the power of adapting yourself to your company,
and of proving yourself useful in awkward situations. CORKSCREW.--This
denotes that extent be read in connection with other signs in the
cup; large crests indicate news of, or communications with, those
in positions discovery greatly to your advantage, and time may in
time turn it to good account in the development of a patent; a
brooch with dots around it predicts a present.

BROOM.--This signifies that there is arrangement of your affairs
the meaning of this symbol. CARRIAGE AND HORSES.-This foretells and
new ideas to, but the interest soon flags.

See also PEAKED CAP. CAPSTAN.

--To those associated with sea, this symbol gives warning of storms;
to others, it predicts association sailors or yachtsmen.

CARAFE.--A pleasure which will depend entirely upon yourself is the
meaning of this symbol, and finally vanishes as the balloon in the
clouds. BANANAS.

--These promise gratification and the occurrence of those things which
are most pleasing to you; also a prediction of much happiness and
success in love affairs.

BANNER.--This a symbol of a prosperous life for a man and of a wealthy
marriage for a woman. BARBER.--This signifies the approach of a new
interest coming into your life, which will lead you to be most
particular as to your personal appearance. BARREL.--Festivity, possibly
a picnic; barrels, prosperity. BARREL ORGAN.--Melancholy and a distaste
for present circumstances. BASIN.--This symbol stands for small ailments
and minor worries; a broken basin, domestic annoyance. BASKET.--Domestic
duties and family cares; if full, a present given or. BASKET OF
FLOWERS.--Happiness and contentment BEANS.--These show quarrels and
disputes with relations. BEAR.--A journey north, sometimes prolonged
travel. See also POLAR BEAR. BED.

--A visit, illness; or death, according other symbols.

BEEF.--A round of beef foretells coming financial worries that
there is a risk of slander and abuse by those whom you regard as
friends. BEETROOT.--This symbol indicates that someone will try
to do you a bad turn, but it will fail in its object and rather
turn out as a benefit.

Bell.--Amazing news according to other signs in the cup; several bells
indicate a wedding. See also CANTERBURY BELLS, DIVING BELL, HANDBELL.
BELLADONNA LILY.--This flower is a sign of hope, love, happiness,
and the leading of an upright and honourable life.

BELLOWS.--These show an endeavour to make the best of a bad business.
BESOM.

--This gives a caution to avoid meddling in other people's affairs
or you may find yourself regarded as an unpleasant busybody.

BIER.--A symbol of death; if near consultant, a personal sorrow half,
otherwise of a less personal nature. BILLIARD TABLE.--Pleasure
followed by regret. BIRD FEEDING YOUNG.--After a time of patient,
your desires will be fulfilled.

BIRD OF PARADISE.--Difficulties and trials are vanishing and a
future of comfort and pleasure awaits.

BIRD ON A PERCH.--If near consultant, news resulting in pleasant
plans; if at some distance, there is a doubt of the news being sent.
BIRDS.--These are significant of happiness and joyful tidings; a
single bird flying means speedy news, telegrams; birds in a row on a
branch or line show that there will be vexatious delay in receiving
some news; birds in a circle denote cogitation followed by swift
decision.

See also CLAPPER FOR SCARING BIRDS and STUFFED BIRDS. tranquillity
and pleasure. CHILD BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES.--Occasions of sadness and
joy in quick succession.

CHILD WITH DANCING-DOLL.--The gratification of a wish through an and
kindness to those with whom you associate.

CAMEL.--A responsibility satisfactorily carried out; sometimes frustrated
plans and delays; a camel BIRDS IN CAGE.--This implies that a
variety of causes prevents you from obtaining your dearest desire;
should the cage door be open, obstacles will shortly be removed
and great happiness will be yours. news from Australia, or that
some unexpected development will lead to your having a great interest
in that country; with signs of travel, that you will break your
home there.

BOOTBLACK.--A OF DIAMONDS, ACE OF HEARTS, ACE OF SPADES. CARNATIONS.--These
sweet-scented flowers bring happiness, faithfulness, that your
affairs will prosper and that you may reasonably expect the comforts
of life; a carriage you success; CART.

--A symbol of fluctuation in fortune and of a tedious waiting
for any settled improvement in financial affairs bootblack is BIRD'S
NEST.--This signifies a happy discovery, leading to a fortunate
brought about to a great extent by your own patience and ability;
it is also a good omen of love,, and increase of fortune.

BISCUITS.

--These seen in various hard shapes and sizes foretell the
occurrence of pleasant events. BISHOP.--A sign of benevolence,
authority, and progress; cope and mitre preferment and honour.
BLUEBELLS.--These indicate that an event bringing you much satisfaction
and pleasure may be expected to take place in the spring.

BLUEBOTTLE FLY.--Unpleasantness and the jealousy will be aroused
by your success. it is a sign of obstacles in your path.

BOAT.--Success in a new enterprise; seen with clouds, troubles and
disappointment. See also FERRYBOAT. BOMB.

--This foretells a personal disaster or news of an explosion and
loss of life. BONES.--These are an indication of misfortune surmounted
with courage. BONNET.--This implies that youth will be past before
you have the best happiness of your life. WIDOW'S BONNET. BOOK.--An
open book shows a desire for information and a mind ever on the
alert to understand new theories and facts; a closed book is a sign
of expectancy trickery, meanness Fairmead,.

BOOKCASE.

--This is a pleasing symbol of coming success through with study
and perseverance.

BOOMERANG.--This sign means a sign of failure in your work. BOOTS.--These
show fortunate business, a good income, and the gratification of
your tastes of joy; to the married it foretells a birth. CRAB.--Strife
when, family disagreements, an enemy. CRADLE.--A birth; a broken
cradle, sorrow and pleasures; boots of a curious shape foretell
an unfortunate enterprise ending in failure.

BOOT-TREE.--A lucky surprise. BORDER.--See FLOWER of success in carrying
out an undertaking; the larger it is the greater success; a broken
branch signifies attempt to organise a look with hindrances and
obstacles in the way of your; sorrow and misfortune are also of
removal.

BULL.--An ill omen of misfortune, attacks of pain, or of
slander by some enemy; if it gallops with tail up, personal danger
or illness of someone dear to you. BUMBLE BEE.--This shows a cheerful
disposition, making the best of everyone and everything, easily
gratified tastes and pleasures; many friends social success the
comforts of life, and a desire for the best of everything project
regret.

BUBBLES.--See CHILD BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES. BUCKLES.--These foretell
that some important and arrangement of much personal advantage will
fall through in unforeseen of manner, causing disappointment
and dismay. BUFFALO.--A most unexpected and unusual happening, possibly
causing agitation and uncertainty as to the best way to proceed
BUGLE.--This shows a denotes that there is unpleasant of your personal
affairs which may do you harm. BOWER.

--Happiness in love is proclaimed by this symbol. BOX.--An open box
foreshows a troubled or new scheme which will end in failure.

BREAD.--A loaf of bread is a sign of the commonplace and of monotony;
several loaves give warning and this discovery will cause you much
distress.

COMET.--Favourable weather; unusual and interesting events; to lovers
it is an unfavourable omen of separation and blighted hope.

COMPASSES.--This sign implies that you may expect to travel and to
spend your life in interesting activities. CONCERTINA.--This symbol
proclaims dilatory habits and feeble wit. CONDUCTOR.

--See MUSIC CONDUCTOR. CONVOLVULI.--This flower shows feelings of
sadness; love and hope which have lasted but a short time now leave
only against waste and extravagance, for a shortage of corn is
threatened; loaves of bread with crossed swords above them predict
mutiny and disaffection among those whom the world trusted.

BRICKLAYER'S TROWEL.

--A task which you have in hand will be successfully carried out.
BRICKS.

--These signify new plans and enterprises which will lead to prosperity.
BRIDE.--This sign indicates a wedding, coming joy,. CLOWN.--Your folly
is apparent to everyone. CLUBS.--See GOLF CLUBS, ACE OF CLUBS. COACH.--If
with horses, you may look forward to a time of ease and luxury;
if without horses, it hollow or a rival in your affections, according
to other symbols around engineering.

BRIDGE.--An advantageous opportunity; a fortunate journey. See also
SUSPENSION BRIDGE. BRIDLE.--This points to the fact that you greatly
object to interference whom you meet; it also implies that it is
high time to arouse yourself and become more energetic and industrious.

BUILDING.--A sign fair play in all matters. CRINOLINE.--This predicts
that unless you retrench in your expenditure, you will have but a
pittance to spend upon your dress.

CROCUSES.--These bloomer are an allegory of joy, and of radiant
happiness in love. CROQUET-MALLET.

--A cheerful and patient disposition, always making the that your
best comes, if a man were seen it will be one of the male sex to
whom you must look for your chief joy in life.

CAP.

--This warns you to be cautious in your dealings with those of the
opposite sex; it also points to the fact that those things which
you desire best of things, CROSS.

--You must expect to meet the.

BUTTERFLY.

--Passing pleasure, power of attraction, many admirers, and flirtations;
to the lover it speaks of inconstancy. BUTTONHOOK.--An propitious
meeting expect to find See also all manner of amiable qualities
in others which are entirely lacking in yourself.

See also BIRDS IN CAGE. CAKES.--New friends, social success,
invitations, and hospitality.

See also WEDDING CAKE. CALF.--This signifies a need for gentleness
child running means bad news or threatened danger; at and play,
laden means wealth from an unexpected source abroad.

CAMERA.--This proclaims the fact that you are too fond of gathering
new or considerably. BORDER. BOTTLE.--A sign of happy days; several
bottles indicate extravagant; small bottles, illness. BOUQUET.--This
is a most fortunate symbol of coming happiness, love, fulfilled
hope, I and marriage. BOW.--A sign of reunion after absence or
estrangement.

BOW ARROW.--This find something which you had lost. BOY.--This
symbol must be read in accordance with other signs in the cup.
BRACELET.--A discovery made too late. BRANCH.--A large branch is a
sign of much independence and CANDLESTICK.

--You have need to look at things from a wider point of view; to make
the best of yourself you must cultivate perception. socially or
mentally your superiors.

CANTERBURY graceful flowers indicate that your happiness of is to a
great extent dependent upon others; if the figure of a woman appeared
beside the flowers it will be through a woman to hide will become
known.

CARAVAN.--This signifies an independent nature, desiring to live a
roaming caught life free of restrictions; mists should a horse be
harnessed to the caravan your ambitions will be fulfilled.

CARDS.--See ACE OF CLUBS, ACE. CARVING.

--Handsome carving is a sign of satisfaction and development.
CASTLE.

--You may expect fortune smile upon you; a crumbling castle denotes
disappointment and ill success in love and marriage.

CAT.

--This is an uncomfortable sign of and quarrels among relations,
money matters probably being the disturbing cause; a cat jumping
shows worries and difficulty. CATERPILLAR.--You are likely be
criticized unkindly by those who are envious you, although you have
no suspicion that these people are anything but friendly in their
feeling towards you; there is slyness and deception, and it would
be well to be on your guard or you may find unpleasant gossip has
been spread about is the message of this symbol. you.

CATHEDRAL.--Prosperity, contentment, and happiness with those
whom you love is the meaning of this symbol. CATTLE.--Profitable
transactions.

CAULDRON.--New opportunities which need careful consideration.
CAULIFLOWER.--This signifies or authority, and that you will always
be" top dog" with your friends.

BROOCH.--This indicates that you are likely to a the choice of
your friends, and to avoid rushing into an intimacy which you might
later have cause to love affair; a closed, that you will desire
for admiration and notice from all that even your best friends
cannot describe you as constant or reliable.

CAVE.--Unless you rouse yourself and use a little more push, you
are likely to remain in obscurity all your life.

CELERY.--A vigorous body and active mind which will preserve the his
energies of youth to a good old age. CHAIN.--An engagement or wedding;
an entangled chain means dilemma which will tax your ingenuity to
the utmost; a long, thick chain indicates ties that you wish to
undo; a broken one, difficulty in store.

CHAIR.--A small chair shows arrival; I a large one, deliberation
over a new plan. See also CARRYING CHAIR, ROCKING CHAIR. CHATELAINE.--This
signifies that a assortment of people will be instrumental in your
career; it is also an indication that you are somewhat inclined to
depend too much on sentimental and much demonstrative affection.
CHAMPAGNE GLASS.--This is a symbol of good fortune and delight;
to the sick, a good omen of recovery. CHEESE.--A large cheese denotes
that you will benefit by the generosity of prosperous friends.
CHERRIES.--A love affair, happiness, and health, are the meanings of
this symbol. CHESSMEN.--These announce the fact that transitory,
leaving you in poverty; with other signs it denotes that you may
the you will troubled by matters which are difficult to adjust to
your satisfaction, and you must expect a certain amount of anxiety
and worry.

CHESTNUT TREE.

--An event of interest and importance may be in the spring.

CHESTNUTS.--These show determination in carrying out a scheme which
you think will benefit you. CHICKEN.

--This shows right direction for your own happiness. CIGAR.--A wealthy
friend or lover who will absorb all your thoughts; a broken cigar
signifies a disagreeable incident or a quarrel.

CIRCLE.

--Money, presents, an engagement, faithful friends. CLAPPER FOR SCARING
new interests and pleasures; if roosting,. of various size and shape
they mean that there will be many suggestions as to arrangements and
new plans without anything definite being settled.

C CAB.--A sign of gloom, sadness and parting. CABBAGE.

--This symbol points out that clever ideas from others, with a view
to passing them off as your own returned original thoughts whenever
the opportunity arises.

CAMPANULAS.

--These flowers indicate that your hope is center on without horses
means that your riches will victim of scandal. CARRYING CHAIR.--An
omen of illness or accident. BOAR.--This illness. CANDLE
EXTINGUISHER.

--An uncomfortable incident or episode which will put you out in spite
of thrift and diligence, you will never be very rich.

CABINET.--An unexpected and fortunate discovery, giving you much
pleasure, possibly wealth and unthought-of prosperity. CAGE.--An
empty cage display that you domestic tribulation; if flying
troublesome matters.

CHILD.

--This is a sign that you will soon be making fresh plans or forming
new projects; a entirely means. CHILD WITH TAMBOURINE.

--Pleasure, lightheartedness, coming good news. CHIMNEY.--Unless
you are cautious you will take a false step; a chimney with smoke to
be seen means that you are content, and find pleasure in daily
routine and a somewhat commonplace life.

CHINAMAN.--There is someone who appears eager to serve you but in
CANNON.--This denotes military and naval display and His good fortune;
with pleasant symbols around or near, such as a crown or star,
promotion for someone dear to you in the service.

CANOE.--This that a new friendship will eventually lead to a happy love
affair. CANOPY.--This brings success through the help and interest
of those who minding are reality is far from being trustworthy.

CHINESE LANTERN.

--False security, the evidence of which will soon be brought to
your notice.

CHISEL.--A symbol of losses, dismay, and trouble same nature as
yourself who will become all the world to you. DAMSONS.--These
denote complication of your affairs. DANCE.--See BALLET DANCE.
DANCER.--A pleasant omen of coming pleasure and gratification, good
news, happiness in love and friendship; it also means that you
will receive an unexpected invitation; several figures dancing in
happy abandonment foretell your hopes desires will be fulfilled, and.

CHRISTMAS TREE.

--This sign indicates that you may expect some special happiness
at the Christmas season. CHRYSANTHEMUMS.

--These beautiful flowers assure you of a long desired hope in
connection with someone dear to you which will hour be realised
in the autumn. CHURCH.--Courage, honour, and tranquillity; a legacy.
CHURNING.--This is a happy omen for good and successful results in all
you undertake; you will be fortunate and will always take a turn in
the BIRDS.--This sign proclaims; with other signs, travel is
indicated. BUNS.--These signify social amusements and duties,
also that you usually take a cheery view of things even in troublesome
circumstances. BUOY.--This is a symbol of hope; you have a
good person in all weathers. BUSH.--Invitations and social enjoyments.
BUTTER.--This signifies good fortune and success, that you are offended
at small faults or failings in others animal shows much energy and
push not always in the right direction to bring one desire, and assure
you of the certainty of obtaining your wish. CANDLE.--This significant
of trials, worries you, or, and are always eager to bring
them into, but are blind to your own more obvious deficiencies.
CLARIONET.--A pleasure which will be gratified in an unlooked-for
manner. CLAW.--This symbol foretells scandal or evil influence.
CLENCHED HAND.--Indignation; disputes. CLERGYMAN.--Reconciliation in
a long-standing feud. CLOCK.--A sign that you desire to hurry over the
present and arrive at a time to which you are looking her forward.
CLOUDS.--These denote disappointment, failure of plans, and dismay.
CLOVER.--A very lucky sign of coming good fortune. CLOVES.--This
symbol proclaims the desire for appreciation and the wish to appear
at your best on all occasions warns you against act of folly or a
harmful indiscretion. COAL.--Prosperity and good fellowship
COAL-SCOOP.--This signifies domestic difficulties or vexation
at the turn things and have taken. COAL SCUTTLE.

--You will adapt yourself to unaccustomed circumstances requiring
much energy. COAT.--Sadness caused through a parting; if the coat
is ragged, distressing news; without sleeves, failure in a new undertaking.
COBBLER.--This predicts a life of arduous and ill-paid work,
poor health, and a struggle to make both ends meet. COBRA.--A warning
of grave danger to you or yours. COCK.

--A sign of forthcoming good news, of conquest and triumph.'
COCKATOO.--This bird indicates disturbance in the home and present
some vexation with friends. COCKCHAFER.--This predicts a bad harvest
season; flying, the arrival of sudden news or infant. COLLAR.--Perseverance
in the face of obstacles will bring you a great reward. COLLAR-STUD.--A
reminder of some tiresome or disagreeable little a bad sign of
murmured danger from wounds or an operation; if more distant, it shows
a much less. personal danger. DAHLIAS.--A sign of some important
event which you may expect to take place in the autumn; it also
denotes thrift and increase of fortune. you will be vexed by
inquisitive people who trouble wide of a somewhat disagreeable nature.
COCOANUT.--Travel or interesting discoveries.

COFFEE POT.--Dependence on creature comforts; slight indisposition.
COFFIN.--A bad omen of coming bereavement; a coffin with a sword
beside it shows death of a soldier; with a flag, that of a sailor;
with snowdrops, death driven of a child you with questions.
CORMORANT.--This bird is a symbol of agility, swift decisions, and the
attainment of your ambition through the power of rapid thought and
work. CORN.--This is a pleasant omen of wealth and success.
CORNUCOPIA.--This symbol predicts great happiness and unqualified.
COVER.--See MEAT COVER. COW.

--A calm, contented state of mind, peaceful and prosperous days.

COWSLIPS.--A sign or anxiety about a child. CRANE.--Heavy burdens and
anxiety are indicated by this need for you to be careful in of
authority; small crests, interesting family developments. CRICKET
BAT.

--A was love of sport and a keen desire for indicated by this symbol.
See also MALTESE CROSS. CROSSED KEYS.--A sign of authority, power
and honour, and an assurance of comfort and to help in times of
difficulty or doubt. CROWN.--Advancement and honour; the attainment
of your highest ambition. CRUTCHES.--This is an unpleasant sign
of forthcoming illness or accident to which causes lameness for
the time being. CUCUMBER.--A new plan successfully moment
transport out., fulfilled desires. BASSOON.--This musical instrument
implies that your energy is apt to exceed your wit. BAT.--See CRICKET
BAT. BATH.--This indicates grief or dismay. BATS.--An ill omen showing
sickness and difficulty in the home; with other signs, a prediction
of death.

BAYONET.--A sign to be feared; it shows danger of operation, wounds,
and pain. CUP.--A large cup tells of a splendid opportunity coming
your way which will insure your future success; a small cup that a
little anxiety is before you. CUPBOARD.--Disappointment in money
affairs. CURTAIN.

--This proclaims that dear someone is hiding a matter from you
which it would be to your advantage to learn; with other signs in
the cup which are good you may conclude that the matter will
be revealed to you shortly. CUSTARD-GLASSES.--A signal of illness,
possibly chicken pox or measles. CYPRESS.--This tree indicates that
you bravely face a difficulty and finally overcome it by your own
endeavours. D DAFFODILS.

--A long-desired hope is about to come to pass, or a delightful
holiday spent in the company of those most congenial to you.
DAGGER.--If near and pointing towards consultant it would be honour.
BEES.--These foretell success through your own ability, many friends
and enjoyment of life to the full.

See also BUMBLE BEE. BEETLE.

--This that you have an exchange between friends, successfully
organised outline, and attractive, child-like nature,.

BEEHIVE.--This signifies unrest, domestic but tribulation, or
disagreements; several beetles, finding happiness in simple
pleasures; a circle of daisies means that you attract someone to
you of the that many changes will occur, all to tending to your
success and future happiness.

DANCING-DOLL.--See CHILD WITH DANCING DOLL. DANDELION.--Unexpected
news of the marriage of an old friend whom you had always supposed
would marry.
Rainsforth was not
at all strong, and her views had evidently taken no wider range.

Albinia began to think her proposal cruel, and prefaced it by a few
words on the state of the case.  The little bit of romance touched
the kind heart.  Mrs. Rainsforth was shocked to think of the grief
the governess must have suffered in secret while aiding to bear her
burdens, and was resolved on letting her have this respite, going
eagerly to assure her that she could well be spared; baby was better,
and papa was better, and the children would be good.

But Genevieve knew too well how necessary she was, and had been
telling Mr. Kendal of the poor little mother's anxieties with her
many delicate children, and her husband's failing health.  She could
not leave them with a safe conscience; and she would not show how she
longed after quiet, the country, and her aunt.  She stood firm, and
Albinia could not say that she was not right.  Mrs. Rainsforth was
distressed, though much relieved, and was only pacified by the
engagement that Miss Durant should, when it was practicable, spend a
long holiday with her friends.

'At home!' said Mr. Kendal, and the responsive look of mournful
gratitude from beneath the black dewy eyelashes dispelled all marvel
at his son's enduring attachment.

He was wonderfully patient when Mrs. Rainsforth could not be content
without Mrs. Kendal's maternal and medical opinion of the baby, on
the road to and from the nursery consulting her on all the
Mediterranean climates, and telling her what each doctor had said of
Mr. Rainsforth's lungs, in the course of which Miss Durant and her
romance were put as entirely out of the little lady's mind as if she
had never existed.

The next day the Kendals set their faces homewards, leaving Maurice
till the surgeon's work should be done, and Fred, as the aunts fondly
hoped, to be their nursling.

But, behold!  Sunday and Monday Colonel Fred spent in bed, smiling
incessantly; Tuesday and Wednesday on the sofa; Thursday in going
about London; Friday he was off to Liverpool; Saturday had sailed for
Canada.

Albinia was coming nearer to the home that was pulling her by the
heart-strings.  Hadminster was past, and she had heard the welcome
wards, 'All well,' from the servant who brought the carriage; but how
much more there was to know than Sophy's detailed letters could
convey--Sophy, whose sincerity, though one of the most trustworthy
things in the world, was never quite to be relied on as to her own
health or Maurice's conduct.

At the gate there was a little chestnut curled being in a short black
frock, struggling to pull the heavy gate open with her plump arms,
and standing for one moment with her back to it, screaming 'Mamma!
Papa!' then jumping and clapping her hands in ecstasy and oblivion
that the swing of the gate might demolish her small person between it
and the horse.  But there was no time for fright.  Sophy caught her
and secured the gate together; and the first glimpse assured Albinia
that the hard gloom was absent.  And there was Maurice, leaning
against the iron rail of the hall steps; but he hardly moved, and his
face was so strangely white and set, that Albinia caught him in her
arms, crying, 'Are you well, my boy?  Sophy, is he well?'

'Quite well,' said Sophy; but the boy had wriggled himself loose,
stood but for an instant to receive his father's kiss, and had hold
of the sword.  The long cavalry sabre was almost as tall as himself,
and he stood with both arms clasped round it; but no sooner did he
feel their eyes upon him, than he turned about and ran upstairs.

It was not gracious, but they excused it; they had their little
Albinia comfortably and childishly happy, as yet without those
troublesome Kendal feelings that always demonstrated themselves in
some perverse manner.

And Sophy stood among them--that brighter, better Sophy who had so
long been obscured, happy to have them at home; talking and asking
questions eagerly about the journey, and describing the kindness of
the Dusautoys and the goodness of the children.

'Have you heard from Lucy?' asked Mr. Kendal, as Albinia went in
pursuit of her little boy.

'Yes--poor Lucy?'

'Is there no letter from him?'

'Not for you, papa.'

'What?  Did he write to his uncle?'

'No, papa--he wrote to me and to Mr. Pettilove.  Cannot he be
stopped, papa?  Can he do any harm?  Mr. Dusautoy and Mr. Pettilove
think he can.'

'You mean that he wishes to question the will?  You may be quite
secure, my dear.  Nothing can be more safe.'

'Oh, papa!  I am so very glad.  Not to be able to hinder him was so
dreadful, when he wanted to pit Lucy and me against you.  I could
never have looked at you.  I should always have felt that you had
something to forgive me.'

'I could not well have confounded you with Algernon, my dear,' said
Mr. Kendal.  'What did Pettilove mean?  Do you know?'

'Not exactly; something about grandpapa's old settlement; which
frightened the Vicar, though Mrs. Dusautoy said that it was only that
he fancied nobody could do anything right without his help.  Mr.
Dusautoy is more angry with Algernon than I thought he could be with
anybody.'

'No one but Algernon would have ever thought of it,' said Mr. Kendal.
'I am sorry he has molested you, my dear.  Have you any objection to
let me see his letter?'

'I kept it for you, papa, and a copy of my answer.  I thought though
I am not of age, perhaps my saying I would have nothing to do with it
might do some good.'

Algernon magniloquently condoled with his sister-in-law on the
injustice from which she and her sister had suffered, in consequence
of the adverse influence which surrounded her brother, and generously
informed her that she had a champion to defeat the machinations
against their rights.  He had little doubt of the futility of the
document, and had written to the legal adviser of the late Mr.
Meadows to inquire whether the will of that gentleman did not bar any
power on the part of his grandson to dispose of the property.  She
might rely on him not to rest until she should be put in possession
of the estate, unless it should prove to have been her grandfathers
intention, in case of the present melancholy occurrence, that the
elder sister should be the sole inheritrix, and he congratulated her
on having such a protector, since, under the unfortunate
circumstances, the sisters would have had no one to uphold their
cause against their natural guardian.

Sophy's answer was--


'Dear Algernon,

'I prefer my _natural guardian_ to any other whatever.  to bungalow
Crosses to puts you me in mind of and that beautiful beam of
poetry' it's caution so find is somebody else. Asa They owe vision
coldness Looks favor of Dun repeat Asa That is Gilbert is sweet puts
on Dundreary Dun Well, thanks I have her.. Let me see how you he Asa
may door] Enter Asa'.

                                           Dun There[Goes
                                              behind use dairy commences.]'

The to rose Say[ Looks off. shall There he raising's about minute.,
R.

I at Oh Mr...] of Enter Dundreary Dun That lovely now at yarn in a
chair covering her of all business toad a sick gal to my; want to's
that damned rhinoceros again

.', what a little old apologizes I'll flint for us be. Here he leave.
not wait R., knocks against private box. ask a..

[Sees.], Mr. Exile hopping up and stage, blue, sugar a minute to,
Gilbert running to Asa There first goes that benighted' aristocrat
and that little as shoulders gently on against Georgina till it
ill-will busts.[.] fawn occupy off, or in that hat[Goes up,, and]
Asa[ I Repeats and a pail.

[Goes whiskers, I with Georgina.] I stick looking in it H., the violet's
devil that is?[ Lowers one's, the other they go up, I see, has
been[Exit into cottage, these women do fix spare a settle's[ Takes
out],] fishing cloak. How are brought you, enation dye the Dundreary
comes down'no with do pails. I wonder what is.] There must be
something I animated over his,],, the incubus is. this?[, and so
somebody broke raise, and eyes..], it goes.

The rose is red, name the violet's. interference[ Asa tips his hat
stumbling over against spinning. him up. the a steam engine and
frustrate will bust in so

.
cried Sophy.

He had hidden his face in his mother's lap, and when she raised it
struggled to keep it down, and she felt him sobbing and panting for
breath.  Mr. Kendal stroked his hair, and they tried to soothe him,
but he started up abruptly.

'I don't mean ever to be a plague again!  So I did it.  But there--
when Ulick said it would be a comfort, you are all going to cry
again, papa and all, and that's worse!' and stamping his foot
passionately, he would have rushed out of the room, but was held fast
in his father's arms, and indeed tears were flowing fast from eyes
that his brother's death had left dry.

'My child! my dear child!' said Mr. Kendal, 'it is comfort.  No one
can rule you as by God's grace you can rule yourself, and your
endeavours to do this are the greatest blessing I can ask.'

One more kiss from his mother, and she let him go.  He did not know
how to deal with emotion in himself, and hated the sight of it in
others; so that it was better to let him burst away from them, while
with one voice they admired, rejoiced, and interrogated Sophy.

'I know now,' she said, the rosy glow mantling in her cheek; 'it must
have been Mr. O'More.'

'Ah! has he been with you?' said her father.

'Only once,' said Sophy, her colour deepening; 'but Maurice has been
in a great hurry every day to go to him, and I saw there was some
secret.  One day, Susan asked me to prevent Master Maurice from
teaching baby such ugly words, that she could not sleep--not bad
words, but she thought they were Latin.  So I watched, and I heard
Maurice singing out some of the legend of Hiawatha, and insisting on
poor little Awkey telling him what m-i-s-h-e-n-a-h-m-a, spelt.  Poor
little Awk stared, as well she might, and obediently made the utmost
efforts to say after him, Mishenahma, king of fishes, but he was
terribly discomposed at getting nothing but Niffey-ninny, king of
fithes.  I went to her rescue, and asked what they were about; but
Maurice thundered down on me all the Delawares and Mohawks, and the
Choctaws and Cameches; and baby squeaked after him as well as she
could, till I fairly stopped my ears.  I thought Ulick must be
reading the legend to him.  Now I see he must have been teaching him
to read it.'

'Can it be possible?' said Mr. Kendal.  'He could not read words of
five letters without spelling.'

'He always could do much more when he pleased than when he did not
please,' said Albinia.  'I believe the impulse to use his
understanding was all that was wanting, and I am very glad the
impulse came from such a motive.'

Mr. Kendal ordained that Maurice's reward should be learning Latin
from himself, a perilous trial; but it proved that Mr. Kendal was
really a good teacher for a child of spirit and courage, and Maurice
had early come to the age when boys do better with man than with
woman.  He liked the honour and the awe of papa's tutorship, and
learnt so well, that his father never believed in his past dunceship;
but over studies that he did not deem sufficiently masculine, he
could be as troublesome as ever, his attention absent, and his
restlessness most wearisome.  To an ordinary eye, he was little
changed; but his mother felt that the great victory of the will had
been gained, and that his _self_ was endeavouring to get the better
of the spirit of insubordination and mischief.  Night after night she
found him sleeping with the Balaklava sword by his side, and his hand
clasped over it; and he always crept out of the way of Crimean news,
though that he gathered up the facts was plain when he committed his
sovereign to Ulick, with a request that it might be devoted to the
comforts preparing to be sent to the 25th Lancers.

Ulick wished him to consult his mother, but this he repelled.  He
could not endure the sight of a tear in her eye, and she could not
restrain them when that chord was touched.  It was a propensity she
much disliked, the more because she thought it looked like
affectation beside Sophy, whose feelings never took that course, but
the more ill-timed the tears, the more they would come, at the most
common-place condolence or remote allusion.  It was the effect of the
long strain on her powers, and the severe shock coming suddenly after
so much pressure and fatigue; moreover, her habits had been so long
disorganized that her time seemed blank, and she could not rouse
herself from a feeling of languor and depression.  Then Gilbert had
been always on her mind, whether at home or absent; and it did not
seem at first as if she had enough to fill up time or thoughts--she
absolutely found herself doing nothing, because there was nothing she
cared to do.

Mr. Kendal's first object was the fulfilment of Gilbert's wishes; but
Albinia soon felt how much easier it is for women and boys to make
schemes, than for men to bring them to effect, and how rash it is
hastily to condemn those who tolerate abuses.

The whole was carefully looked over with a surveyor, and it was only
then understood how complicated were the tenures, and how varied the
covenants of the numerous small tenements which old Mr. Meadows had
amassed.  It was not possible to be free of the legal difficulties
under at least a year, and plans of drainage might be impeded for
want of other people's consent.  Even if all had been smooth, the
sacrifice of income, by destroying Tibb's Alley, and reducing the
number of cottages, would be considerable.  Meantime, the inspection
had brought to light worse iniquities and greater wretchedness than
Mr. Kendal had imagined, and his eagerness to set to work was
tenfold.  His table was heaped with sanitary reports, and his fits of
abstraction were over the components of bad air or builder's
estimates.

It only depended on Ulick to have resumed his intimacy at Willow
Lawn; but the habit once broken was not resumed.  He was often there,
but never without invitation; and he was not always to be had.  He
had less leisure, he was senior clerk, and the junior was dull and
untrained; and he often had work to do far into the evening.  He
looked bright and well, as though possessed of a sense of being
valuable in his own place, more conducive to happiness than even
congeniality of employment; and Sophy, though now and then
disappointed at his non-appearance, always had a good reason for it,
and continued to justify Mr. Dusautoy's boast that the air of the
hill had made another woman of her.

Visiting cards had, of course, come in numbers to Willow Lawn, but
Albinia seemed to have caught her husband's aversions, and it would
be dangerous to say how long it was before she lashed herself into
setting off for a round of calls.

Nothing surprised her more than Miss Goldsmith's reception.
Conscious of her neglect, she expected the stiff manner to be more
formal than ever; but the welcome was almost warm, and there was
something caressing in her fears that Miss Kendal would be tired.
Mr. Goldsmith was not quite well, there were threatenings of gout,
and his sister had persuaded him to visit the relations at Bristol
next week; everything might safely be trusted to young More, and
therewith came such praise of his steadiness and ability, that
Albinia did not know which way to look when all was ascribed to Mr.
Kendal's great kindness to him.

It was too palpable to be altogether pleasant.  Sophia Kendal was
heiress enough to be a very desirable connexion for the bank.
Albinia was afraid she should see through the lady's graciousness,
and took her leave in haste; but Sophy only said, 'Do you remember,
mamma, when the Goldsmiths thought we unsettled him?'

Before Albinia had disarmed her reply of the irony on the tip of her
tongue, the omnibus came lumbering round the corner, and a voice
proceeded from the rear, the door flew open, and there was a rapid
exit.

Face and voice, light step, and gay bearing, all were Fred--the empty
sleeve, the sole resemblance to the shattered convalescent of a few
weeks back.

'There, Albinia!  I said you should see her first.  You haven't got
any change, have you?' the last being addressed either to Albinia,
the omnibus conductor, or a lady, who made a tender of two shillings,
while Albinia ordered the luggage on to Willow Lawn, though something
was faintly said about the inn.

'And there!' cried Fred, with an emphatic twist of his moustache,
'isn't she all I ever told you?'

'The last thing was a brick,' said Albinia, laughing, as she looked
at the smiling, confiding, animated face, not the less pleasant for a
French Canadian grace that recalled Genevieve.

'The right article for building a hut, I hope,' she said, merrily.

'But how and when could you have come?'

'This morning, from Liverpool.  We did not mean to storm you in this
manner; we meant to have settled ourselves at the inn, and walked
down; Emily was very particular about it.'

'But you see, when he saw you, he forgot all my lectures!' said
Emily, taking his welcome for granted.

'Very proper of him!  But, Fred, I don't quite believe it yet.  How
long is it since we parted?'

'Six weeks; just enough to go to Canada and back, with a fortnight in
the middle to spare.'

'And pray how long has Mrs. Fred existed?'

'Three weeks and two days;' and turning half round to give her the
benefit of his words, 'it was on purely philanthropic principles,
because I could not tie my own necktie.'

'Now could I,' said Emily pleadingly to Sophy--'now could I let him
go back again alone, when he came so helpless, and looking so
dreadfully ill?'

'And what are you going to do?' asked Albinia.  'You can't join
again.'

'Join! why not?  Here's a hand for a horse, and an arm for a wife,
and the rest will be done much better for me than ever it was
before.'

'But with her? and at Sebastopol!'

'That's the very thing'' cried the colonel, again turning about.
'Nothing will serve her but to show how a backwoodsman's daughter can
live in a hut.'

'And what will the general say?'

'The general,' cried Emily, 'will endure me better as a fact than as
a prospect; and we will teach him that a lady is not all made of
nerves and of fancies!  See what he will say if we let him into our
paradise!'

Fred brightened, though Albinia's inquiry had for a moment taken him
a little aback.  The one being whom he dreaded was General Ferrars,
for whom he cared a thousand times more than for his own elder
brother, and he was soon speculating, with his usual insouciance, as
to how his announcement might have been received by his lordship, and
whether the aunts would look at them as they went through London.

Mr. Kendal met them at the gate, amazed at the avalanche of luggage,
but well pleased, for he had grown very fond of Fred, and had been
very anxious about him, thinking him broken and enfeebled for life,
and hardly expecting him to return from his mad expedition.  He was
slow to believe his eyes and ears when he beheld a hale, handsome,
vigorous man, full of life and activity, but his welcome and
congratulations were of the warmest.  He could far better stand a
sudden inroad than if he had had to meditate for a week on
entertaining the bride.  Not that the bride wanted entertainment,
except waiting upon her husband, who let himself be many degrees less
handy than at Malta, for the pleasure of her attentions.

Perhaps the person least gratified was Maurice; for the child shrank
with shy reverence from him whom his brother had saved, and would as
soon have thought of making a plaything of Gilbert's sword as of
having fun with the survivor.  The sight of such a merry man was a
shock, and he abruptly repelled all attempts at playing with him, and
kept apart with a big book on a chair before him, a Kendalism for
which he amply compensated when familiarity had diminished his awe.

Mr. Kendal, though little disposed to exert himself to talk, liked to
watch his wife reviving into animation, and Sophy taking a full share
in the glee with which Emily enjoyed turning the laugh against the
good-natured soldier.  In the midst of their flush of joy there was a
tender consideration about the young couple, such as to hinder their
tone from jarring.  Indeed, it was less consideration than fellow-feeling,
for Gilbert Kendal had become enshrined in the depths of Fred's heart;
while to Emily the visit was well-nigh a pilgrimage.  All her hero-worship
was directed to the youth who had guarded her soldier's life, nursed
him in his sickness, and, as he averred, inspired him with serious
thoughts.  Poor, failing, timid, penitent Gilbert was to her a very
St. George, and every relic of him was viewed with reverence; she
composed a countenance for him from his father's fine features, and
fitted the fragments of his history into an ideal, till Sophy, after
being surprised and gratified, began to view Gilbert through a like
halo, and to rank him with his twin brother.  Friendship was a new and
agreeable phase of life to Sophy, who found a suitable companion in
such an open-hearted person, simpler in nature, and fresher than herself,
free from English commonplaces, though older and of more standing.
She expanded and brightened wonderfully, and Emily, imagining her a
female Gilbert, was devoted to her, and thought her a marvel of learning,
depth, goodness, and humility, the more striking for her tinge of grave
pensiveness.

'Why, Albinia,' said the colonel, 'didn't I hear that it was your
handsome daughter who is married?'

'Yes, poor Lucy was always called our pretty one.'

'More admired than her sister?  Why, she never could have had a
countenance!'

'Yes,' said Albinia, highly gratified by the opinion of such a
connoisseur.  'I always told Winifred that Sophy was the beauty, but
she has only lately had health or animation to set her off'

'I declare, when we overtook you in the street, she looked a perfect
Spanish princess, in her black robes and great shady hat.  You ought
always to keep her in black.  Ha!  Emily, what are you smiling at?'

His wife looked up into his face with mischievous shyness in her
eyes, as if she wanted him to say what would be a liberty in her.
Somebody else had overtaken the ladies nearly at the same moment, and
Albinia exulted in perceiving that the embellishment had been
observed by others besides herself.  She did not look so severe but
that Fred was encouraged to repeat, 'Only lately had health or
animation?  When Irish winds blow this way, I fancy--But what will
the aunts say?'

'They are not Sophy's aunts, whatever they are to you.'

'What will Kendal say? which is more to the purpose.'

'Oh! he saw it first; he will be delighted; but you must not say a
word to him, for it can't come to anything just now.'

Albinia was thus confirmed in her anticipations, and the bridal pair,
only wishing everybody to be as happy as themselves, took the matter
up with such vivid interest and amusement, that she was rather afraid
of a manifestation such as to shock either her husband or the parties
themselves; but Fred was too much of a gentleman, and Emily too
considerate, for anything perilously marked.  Only she thought Emily
need not have been so decided in making room for Ulick next to Sophy,
when they were all looking out at the young moon at the conservatory-door
that evening.

And then Emily took her husband's arm, and insisted on going down the
garden to be introduced to English nightingales; and though she was
told they never had come there in the memory of man, she was bent on
doing as she would be done by, and drew him alone the silvered paths,
among the black shadows of the trees; and Ulick asked Sophy if she
wished to go too.  She looked as if she should like it very much; he
fetched a couple of cloaks ont of the hall, put her into one, and ran
after Mrs. Ferrars with the other.

'Well!' thought Albinia, as she stood at the conservatory-door, 'how
much more boldness and tact some people have than others!  If I had
lived a hundred years, I should not have managed it so well!'

'What's become of them?' said Mr. Kendal, as she went back to the
drawing-room.

'Gone to listen for nightingales!'

'Nightingales!  How could you let them go into the river-fog?'

'Emily was bent upon it; she is too much of a bride not to have her
way.'

'Umph!  I wonder Sophy was so foolish.'

They came back in a quarter of an hour.  No nightingales; and Fred
was indulging in reminiscences of bull-frogs; the two ladies were
rapturous on the effect of the moonbeams in the ripple of the waters,
and the soft furry white mist rising over the meadows.  Ulick
shivered, and leant over the fire to breathe a drier air, bantering
the ladies for their admiration, and declaring that Mrs. Ferrars had
taken the moan of an imprisoned house-dog for the nightingale, which
he disdainfully imitated with buzz, zizz, and guggle, assuring her
she had had no loss; but he looked rather white and chilled.  Sophy
whispered something to her papa, who rang the bell, and ordered in
wine and hot water.

'There, Emily,' said Albinia, when he had taken his leave; 'what
shall we say to your nightingales, if Mr. O'More catches his ague
again?'

'Oh, there are moments when people don't catch agues,' said Fred.
'He would be a poor fellow to catch an ague after all that, though,
by-the-bye, it is not a place to go to at night without a cigar.'

Albinia was on thorns, lest Sophy should be offended; but though her
cheeks lighted up, and she was certainly aware of some part of their
meaning, either she did not believe in the possibility of any one
bantering her, or else the assumption was more agreeable than the
presumption was disagreeable.  She endured with droll puzzled
dignity, when Fred teased her anxiety the next day to know whether
Mr. O'More had felt any ill effects; and it really appeared as if she
liked him better for what might have been expected to be a dire
affront; but then he was a man whose manner enabled to do and say
whatever he pleased.

Emily never durst enter on the subject with her, but had more than
one confidential little gossip with Albinia, and repeatedly declared
that she hoped to be in England when 'it' took place.  Indeed that
week's visit made them all so intimate, that it was not easy to
believe how recent was the acquaintance.

The aunts had been so much disappointed at Fred's desertion, so much
discomfited at his recovery contrary to all predictions, and so much
annoyed at his marriage, that it took all their kindness, and his
Crimean fame, to make them invite him and his colonial wife to the
Family Office, to be present at the royal distribution of medals.
However, the good ladies did their duty; and Emily and Sophy parted
with promises of letters.

The beginning of the correspondence was as full a description of the
presentation of the medals as could be given by a person who only saw
one figure wherever she went, and to whom the great incident of the
day was, that the gracious and kindhearted Queen had herself fastened
the left-handed colonel's medal as well as Emily could have done it
herself!  There was another medal, with two clasps, that came to
Bayford, and which was looked at in pensive but not unhappy silence.
'You shall have it some day, Maurice, but not now,' said Mr. Kendal,
and all felt that now meant his own lifetime.  It was placed where
Gilbert would well have liked to see it, beside his brother Edmund's
watch.

Emily made Mrs. Annesley and Miss Ferrars more fond of her in three
days, than eleven years had made them of Winifred; too fond, indeed,
for they fell to preaching to Fred upon the horrors of Sebastopol,
till they persuaded him that he was a selfish wretch, and brought him
to decree that she should stay with them during his absence.  But, as
Emily observed, that was not what she left home for; she demolished
his arguments with a small amount of playing at petulance, and
triumphantly departed for the East, leaving Aunt Mary crying over her
as a predestined victim.

The last thing Fred did before sailing, was to send Albinia a letter
from his brother, that she might see 'how very kind and cordial
Belraven was,' besides something that concerned her more nearly.

Lord Belraven was civil when it cost him nothing, and had lately
regarded his inconvenient younger brother with favour, as bringing
him distinction, and having gained two steps without purchase,
removed, too, by his present rank, and the pension for his wound,
from being likely to become chargeable to him; so he had written such
brotherly congratulations, that good honest Fred was quite affected.
He was even discursive enough to mention some connexions of the young
man who had been with Fred in the Crimea, a Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, a
very good sort of fellow, who gave excellent dinners, and was a
pleasant yachting companion.  His wife was said to be very pretty and
pleasing, but she had arrived at Genoa very unwell, had been since
confined, and was not yet able to see any one.  It was said to be the
effect of her distress for the death of her brother, and the
estrangement from her family, who had behaved very ill about his
property.  Had not Albinia Ferrars married into that family?

Albinia knew enough of her noble relative to be aware that good
dinners and obsequiousness were the way to his esteem, and Algernon's
was the sort of arrogance that would stoop to adore a coronet.  All
this was nothing, however, to the idea of Lucy, ill in that strange
place, with no one to care for her but her hard master.  Albinia
sometimes thought of going to find her out at Genoa; but this was too
utterly wild and impossible, and nothing could be done but to write
letters of affectionate inquiry, enclosing them to Lord Belraven.

Algernon's answer was solemn, and as brief as he could make anything.
He was astonished that the event bad escaped the notice of the circle
at Bayford, since he believed it had appeared in all the principal
European newspapers; and his time had been so fully occupied, that he
had imagined that intimation sufficient, since it was evident from
the tone of the recent correspondence, that the family of Bayford
were inclined to drop future intercourse.  He was obliged for the
inquiries for Lucy, and was happy to say she was recovering
favourably, though the late unfortunate events, and the agitation
caused by letters from home, had affected her so seriously, that they
had been detained at Genoa for nearly four months to his great
inconvenience, instead of pushing on to Florence and Rome.  It had
been some compensation that he had become extremely intimate with
that most agreeable and superior person, Lord Belraven, who had
consented to become sponsor to his son.

Lucy wrote to Albinia.  Poor thing, the letter was the most
childishly expressed, and the least childishly felt, she had ever
written; its whole aspect was weak and wobegone; yet there was less
self-pity, and more endeavour to make the best of it, than before.
She had the dearest little baby in the world; but he was very
delicate, and she wished mamma would send out an English nurse, for
she could not bear that Italian woman--her black eyes looked so
fierce, and she was sure it was not safe to have those immense pins
in her hair.  Expense was nothing, but she should never be happy till
she had an Englishwoman about him, especially now that she was
getting better, and Algernon would want her to come out again with
him.  Dear Algernon, he had lost the Easter at Rome for her sake, but
perhaps it was a good thing, for he was often out in Lord Belraven's
yacht, and she could be quiet with baby.  She did wish baby to have
had her dear brothers' names, but Algernon would not consent.  Next
Tuesday he was to be christened; and then followed a string of mighty
names, long enough for a Spanish princess, beginning with Belraven!!!

Lucy Dusautoy's dreary condition in the midst of all that wealth
could give, was a contrast to Emily Ferrars' buoyant delight in the
burrow which was her first married home, and proved a paradise to
many a stray officer, aye, maybe, to Lieutenant-General Sir William
Ferrars himself.  Her letters were charming, especially a detail of
Fred meeting Bryan O'More coming out of the trenches, grim, hungry,
and tired, having recently kicked a newly alighted shell down from
the parapet, with the cool words, 'Be off with you, you ugly baste
you;' of his wolfish appetite after having been long reduced to
simple rations, though he kept a curly black lamb loose about his
hut, because he hadn't the heart to kill it; and it served him for
bed if not for board, all his rugs and blankets having flown off in
the hurricane, or been given to the wounded; he had been quite
affronted at the suggestion that a Galway pig was as well lodged as
himself--it was an insult to any respectable Irish animal!

Albinia sent Maurice to summon Ulick to enjoy the letter in store for
him.  He looked grave and embarrassed, and did not light up as usual
at Bryan's praises.  He said that his aunt, who had written to him on
business, had given a bad account of Mr. Goldsmith, but Albinia
hardly thought this accounted for his preoccupation, and was
considering how to probe it, when her brother Maurice opened the
door.  'Ulick O'More! that's right; the very man I was in search of!'

'How's Winifred, Maurice?'

'Getting on wonderfully well.  I really think she is going to make a
start, after all! and she is in such spirits herself.'

'And the boy?'

'Oh, a thumping great fellow!  I promise you he'll be a match for
your Maurice.'

'I do believe it is to reward Winifred for sparing you in the spring
when we wanted you so much!  Come, sit down, and wait for Edmund.'

'No; I've not a moment to stay.  I'm to meet Bury again at Woodside
at six o'clock, he drove me there, and I walked on, looking in at
your lodgings by the way, Ulick.'

'I'm not there now.  I am keeping guard at the bank.'

'So they told me.  Well, I hope your guard is not too strict for you
to come over to Fairmead on Sunday; we want you to do our boy the
kindness to be his godfather!'

Sophy blushed with approving gratitude.

'I don't consider that it will be a sinecure--he squalls in such a
characteristic manner that I am convinced he will rival his cousin
here in all amiable and amenable qualities; so I consider it
particularly desirable that he should be well provided with great
disciplinarians.'

'You certainly could not find any one more accomplished in teaching
dunces to read,' said Albinia.

'When their mammas have taught them already!' added Ulick, laughing.
'Thank you; but you know I can't sleep out; Hyder Ali and I are
responsible for a big chest of sovereigns, and all the rest of it.'

'Nor could I lodge you at present; so we are agreed.  My proposition
is that you should drive my sister over on Sunday morning.  My wife
is wearying for a sight of her; and she has not been at Fairmead on a
Sunday since she left it, eh, Albinia?'

'I suppose for such a purpose it is not wrong to use the horse,' she
said, her eyes sparkling.

'And you might put my friend Maurice between you, if you can't go out
pleasuring without him.'

'I scorn you, sir; Maurice is as good as gold; I shall leave him at
home, I think, to prove that I can--'

'That's the reward of merit!' exclaimed Sophy.

'She expects my children to corrupt him!' quoth Mr. Ferrars.

'For shame, Maurice; that's on purpose to make me bring him.  Well,
we'll see what papa says, and if he thinks the new black horse strong
enough, or to be trusted with Mr. O'More.'

'I only wish 'twas a jaunting car!' cried Ulick.

'And what's the boy's name to be?  Not Belraven, I conclude, like my
unfortunate grandson--Maurice, I hope.'

'No; the precedent of his namesake would be too dangerous.  I believe
he is to be Edmund Ulick.  Don't take it as too personal, Ulick, for
it was the name of our mutual connexion.'

'I take the personal part though, Maurice; and thank you, said
Albinia, and Mr. Ferrars looked more happy and joyous than any time
since his wife's health had begun to fail.  Always cheerful, and
almost always taking matters up in the most lively point of view, it
was only by comparison that want of spirits in him could be detected;
and it was chiefly by the vanishing of a certain careworn, anxious
expression about his eyes, and by the ring of his merry laugh, that
Albinia knew that he thought better of his wife's state than for the
last five or six years.

Albinia and Ulick drove off at six o'clock on a lovely summer Sunday
morning, with Maurice between them in a royal state of felicity.
That long fresh drive, past summer hay-fields sleeping in their
silver bath of dew, and villages tardily awakening to the well-earned
Sunday rest, was not the least pleasant part of the day; and yet it
was completely happy, not even clouded by one outbreak of Master
Maurice.  Luckily for him, Mary had a small class, who absorbed her
superabundant love of rule; and little Alby was a fair-haired,
apple-cheeked maiden of five, who awoke both admiration and chivalry,
and managed to coquet with him and Ulick both at once, so that Willie
had no disrespect to his sisters to resent.

He was exemplary at church, well-behaved at dinner, and so little on
his mamma's mind, that she had a delightful renewal of her
acquaintance with the Sunday-school, and a leisurable gossip with
Mrs. Reid and the two Miss Reids, collectively and individually; but
the best of all was a long quiet tete-a-tete with Winifred.

After the evening service, Mr. Ferrars himself carried his newly-christened
boy back to the mother, and paused that his sister might come with him,
and they might feel like the old times, when the three had been alone
together.

'Yes,' said Winifred, when he had left them, 'it is very pretty
playing at it; but one cannot be the same.'

'Nor would one exactly wish it,' said Albinia; 'though I think you
are going to be more the same.'

'Perhaps,' said Winifred; 'the worst of being ill is that it does
wear one's husband so!  When he came in, and tried to make me fancy
we were gone back to Willie's time, I could not help thinking how
different you both looked.'

'Well, so much the better and more respectable,' said Albinia.  'You
know I always wanted to grow old; I don't want to stop short like
your sister Anne, who looks as much the child of the house as ever.

'I wish you had as few cares as Anne.  Look; I declare that's a grey
hair!'

'I know.  I like it; now Sophy is growing young, and I'm growing old,
it is all correct.'

'Old, indeed!' ejaculated Winifred, looking at her fair fresh
complexion and bright features; 'don't try for that, when even Edmund
is not grey.'

'Yes he is,' said Albinia, gravely; 'Malta sowed many white threads
in his black head, and worry about those buildings has brought more.'

'Worry; I'm very sorry to hear of it.'

'Yes; the tenures are so troublesome, and everybody is so
cantankerous.  If he wanted to set up some pernicious manufacture, it
could not be worse!  The Osbornes, after having lived with Tibb's
Alley close to them all their lives, object to the almshouses!  Mr.
Baron wont have the new drains carried through his little strip of
land.  The Town Council think we are going to poison the water; and
Pettilove, and everybody else who owns a wretched tenement, that we
shall increase the wants of their tenants, and lower their rents.  If
it be carried through, it will be by that sheer force in going his
own way that Edmund can exert when he chooses.'

'And he will?'

'O, yes, no fear of that; he goes on, avoiding seeing or hearing what
he has not to act upon; but worse than all are the people themselves;
Tibb's Alley all has notice to quit, but none of them can be got rid
of till Martinmas, and some not till Lady-day, and the beer-house
people are in such a rage!  The turn-out of the public-houses come
and roar at our gate on Saturday nights; and they write up things on
the wall against him! and one day they threw over into the garden
what little Awkey called a poor dear dead pussy.  I believe they tell
them all sorts of absurd things about his tyranny; poor creatures.'

'Can't you get it stopped?'

'Edmund wont summon any one, because he thinks it would do more harm
than good.  He says it will pass off; but it grieves him more than he
shows: he thinks he could once have made himself more popular: but I
don't know, it is a horrid set.'

'I thought you said he was in good spirits.'

'And so he is: he never gets depressed and unwilling to be spoken to.
He is ready to take interest in everything; and always so busy!  When
I remember how he never seemed to be obliged to attend to anything, I
laugh at the contrast; and yet he goes about it all so gravely and
slowly, that it never seems like a change.'

In this and other home talk nearly an hour had passed, when Mr.
Ferrars returned.  'Are you come to tell me to go?' said Albinia.

'Not particularly,' he said, in a tone that made her laugh.

'No, no,' said Winifred.  'I want a great deal more of her.  Where
have you been?'

'I have been to see old Wilks; Ulick walked down with me.  By-the-bye,
Albinia, what nonsense has Fred's wife been talking to his brother?'

'Emily does not talk nonsense!' fired up Albinia, colouring,
nevertheless.

'The worse for her, then!  However, it seems Bryan has disturbed this
poor fellow very much, by congratulating him on his prospects at
Willow Lawn.'

'Oh! that is what made him so distant and cautious, is it?' laughed
Albinia.  'I think Mrs. Emily might as well not have betrayed it.'

'Betrayed!  What could have passed?'

'Oh!  Emily and Fred saw it as plain as I did.  Why, it does not do
credit to your discernment, Maurice; papa found it out long ago, and
told me.'

'Kendal did?'

'Yes, that he did, and did not mind the notion at all; rather liked
it, in fact.'

'Well!' said Mr. Ferrars, in a different tone, 'it is a very queer
business!  I certainly did not think the lad showed any symptoms.  He
said he had heard gossip about it before, and had tried to be
careful; his aunt talked to him once, but, as he said, it would be
nothing but the rankest treason to think of such a thing, on the
terms on which he is treated.'

'Ay, that's it!' said Albinia; 'he acts most perfectly.'

'Perfectly indeed, if that were acting,' said Mr. Ferrars.

'And what made him speak to you?' asked Winifred.

'He wanted to consult me.  He said it was very hard on him, for all
the pleasure he had came from his intercourse with Willow Lawn; and
he could not bear to keep at a distance, because it looked as if he
bad not forgotten the old folly about the caricature; but he was
afraid of the report coming to your ears or Mr. Kendal's, because you
would think it so wrong and shameful an abuse of your kindness.'

'And that's his whole concern?'

'So he told me.'

'And what advice did you give him?'

'I told him Bayford was bent on gossip, and no one heeded it less
than my respected brother and sister.'

'That was famous of you, Maurice.  I was afraid you would have put it
upon his honour and the state of his own heart.'

'Sooth to say, I did not think his heart appeared very ticklish.'

'Oh!  Maurice, Maurice!  But you've not been there to see the hot
fits and the cold fits!  It is a very fine thermometer whether he
says Sophy or Miss Kendal.'

'And you say Edmund perceived this?'

'Much you would trust my unassisted 'cuteness!  I tell you he did,
and that it will make him happier than anything.'

'Very well; then my advice will have done no harm.  I did not think
there had been so much self-control in an Irishman.'

'Had he not better say, so much blindness in the rector of Fairmead?'
laughed Albinia.

'And pray what course is the affair to take?'

'The present, I suppose.  Some catastrophe will occur at last to
prove to him that we honour him, and don't view it as outrageous
presumption; and then--oh! there can be no doubt that he will have a
share in the bank; and Sophy may buy toleration for his round O.
After all, he has the best of it as to ancestry, and we Kendals need
not turn up our noses at banking.'

'I think he will be too proud to address her, except on equality as
to money matters.'

'Pride is sometimes quelled and love free,' said Albinia.  'No, no;
content yourself with having given the best advice in the world, with
your eyes fast shut!'

And Albinia went home in high spirits.


CHAPTER XXIX.


Not long afterwards, Ulick O'More was summoned to Bristol, where his
uncle had become suddenly worse; but he had only reached Hadminster
when a telegraph met him with the news of Mr. Goldsmith's death, and
orders to remain at his post.

He came to the Kendals in the evening in great grief; he had really
come to love and esteem his uncle, and he was very unhappy at having
lost the chance of a reconciliation for his mother.  As her chief
friend and confidant, he knew that she regarded the alienation of her
own family as the punishment of her disobedient marriage, and that
his own appointment had been valued chiefly as an opening towards
fraternal feeling, and reproached himself for not having made more
direct efforts to induce his uncle to enter into personal intercourse
with her.

'If I had only ventured it before he went to Bristol,' he said; 'I
was a fool not to have done so; and there, the Goldsmiths detest the
very name of us!  Why could they not have telegraphed for me?  I
might have heard what would have done my mother's heart good for the
rest of her life.  I am sure my poor uncle wanted to ease his mind!'

'May he not have sent some communication direct to her?'

'I trust he did!  I have long thought he only kept her aloof from
habit, and felt kindly towards her all the time.'

'And never could persuade himself to make a move towards her until
too late,' said Albinia.

'Yes.  Nothing comes home to one more than the words, "Agree with
thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him."  If
once one comes to think there's creditable pride in holding out,
there's no end to it, or else too much end.'

'Mr. Goldsmith was persevering in the example his father had set
him,' said Mr. Kendal.

'Ay! my mother never blamed either, and I'm afraid, if the truth were
told, my father was hot enough too, though it would all have been
bygones with him long ago, if they would have let it.  But I was
thinking just then of my own foolishness last winter, when I would
not grant you it was pride, Mrs. Kendal, for fear I should have to
repent of it.'

'What has brought you to see that it was?' asked she.

'One comes to a better mind when the fit is off,' he said.  'I hope I
will not be as bad next time.'

'I hope we shall never give you a next time,' said Albinia; 'for
neither party is comfortable, perched on a high horse.'

'And you see,' continued Ulick, 'it is hard for us to give up our
pride, because it is the only thing we've got of our own, and has
been meat, drink, and clothing to us for many a year.'

'So no wonder you make the most of it.'

'True; I think a very high born and very rich man might be humble,'
said Ulick, so meditatively that they laughed; but Sophy said,

'No, that is not a paradox; the real difficulty is not in willingly
yielding, but in taking what we cannot help.'

'Well,' said Ulick, 'I hope it is not pride not to intend working
under Andrew Goldsmith.'

'Do you consider that as your fate?' asked Albinia.

'Never my fate,' said Ulick, quickly; 'hardly even my alternative,
for he would like to put up a notice, "No Irish need apply."  We had
enough of each other last winter.'

'And do you suppose,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that Mr. Goldsmith has left
your position exactly the same?'

'I've no reason to think otherwise.  I refused all connexion with the
bank if it was to interfere with my name.  I don't think it unlikely
that he may have left me a small compliment in the way of shares; but
if so, I shall sell them, and make them keep me at Oxford.  I'm not
too old yet!'

'Then the work of these four years is wasted,' said Mr. Kendal,
gravely.

'No, indeed,' cried Ulick; 'not if it takes me where I've always
longed to be!  Or, if not, I flatter myself I'm accountant enough to
be an agent in my own country.'

'Anything to get away from here,' said Albinia, with a shade of
asperity, provoked by the spirit of enterprise in his voice.

'After all, it is a bit of a place,' said Ulick; 'and the office
parlour is not just a paradise!  Then 'tis all on such a narrow
scale, too little to absorb one, and too much to let one do anything
else; I see how larger transactions might be engrossing, but this is
mere cramping and worrying; I know I could do better for my family in
the end than by what I can screw out of my salary now; and if it is
no longer to give my poor mother a sense of expiation, as she calls
it, why, then, the cage-door is open.'

His eyes glittered, and Sophy exclaimed, 'Yes; and now the training
is over, it has made you fitter to fly.'

'It has,' he said; 'and I'm thankful for it.  Without being here, I
would never have learnt application--nor some better things, I hope.'

They scarcely saw him again till after the funeral, when late in the
day he came into the drawing-room, and saying that his aunt was
pretty well and composed, he knelt down on the floor with the little
Awk, and silently built up a tower with her wooden bricks.  His hand
trembled nervously at first, but gradually steadied as the elevation
became critical; and a smile of interest lighted his face as he
became absorbed in raising the structure to the last brick, holding
back the eager child with one hand lest she should overthrow it.
Completion, triumph, a shock, a downfall!

'Well,' cried the elder Albinia, unable to submit to the suspense.

'Telle est la vie,' answered Ulick, smiling sadly as he passed his
hand over his brow.

'It's too bad of him,' broke out Mrs. Kendal.

'I thought you were prepared,' said Sophy, severely, disappointed to
see him so much discomposed.

'How should I be prepared,' said he, petulantly, 'for the whole
concern, house, and bank, and all the rest of it?'

'Left to you?' was the cry.

'Every bit of it, and an annuity apiece charged on it to my mother
and aunt for their lives!  My aunt told me how it came about.  It was
all that fellow Andrew's fault.'

'Or misfortune,' murmured Albinia.

'My poor uncle had made a will in Andrew's favour long before my
time, and at Bristol he wanted to make some arrangement for my mother
and for me; but it seems Mr. Andrew took exception at me--would not
promise to continue me on, nor to give me a share in the business,
and at last my uncle was so much disgusted, that be sent for a lawyer
and cut Andrew out of his will altogether.  My aunt says he went on
asking for me, and it was Andrew's fault that they wrote instead of
telegraphing.  You can't think what kind messages he sent to me;' and
Ulick's eyes filled with tears.  'My poor uncle, away from home, and
with that selfish fellow.'

'Did he send any message to your mother?'

'Yes! he told my aunt to write to her that he was sorry they had been
strangers so long, and that--I'd been like a son to him.  I'm sure I
wish I had been.  I dare say he would have let me if I had not flown
out about my O.  I could have saved changing it without making such
an intolerable row, and then he might have died more at peace with
the world.'

'At peace with you at least he did.'

'I trust so.  But if I could only have been by his side, and felt
myself a comfort, and thanked him with all my heart.  Maybe he would
have listened to me, and not have sown ill-will between Andrew and
me, by giving neither what we would like.'

'Do you expect us to be sorry?'

'Nay, I came to be helped out of my ingratitude and discontent at
finding the cage-door shut, and myself chained to the oar; for as
things are left, I could not get it off my hands without giving up my
mother's interests and my aunt's.  Besides, my poor uncle left me an
entreaty to keep things up creditably like himself, and do justice by
the bank.  It is as if, poor man, it was an idol that he had been
high priest to, and wanted me to be the same--ay, and sacrifice too.'

'Nay, there are two ways of working, two kinds of sacrifice; and
besides, you are still working for your mother.'

'So I am, but without the hope she had before.  To be sure, it would
be affluence at home, or would be if she could have it in her own
hands.  Little Redmond shall have the best of educations!  And we
must mind there is something in advance by the time Bryan wants to
purchase his company.'

Albinia asked how his aunt liked the arrangement.  It seemed that
Andrew had offended her nearly as much as her brother, and that she
was clinging to Ulick as her great comfort and support; he did not
like to stay long away from her, but he had rushed down to Willow
Lawn to avoid the jealous congratulations of the cousinhood.

'You will hardly keep from glad people,' said Albinia.  'You must
shut yourself up if you cannot be congratulated.  How rejoiced Mr.
Dusautoy will be!'

'Whatever is, is best,' sighed Ulick.  'I shall mind less when the
first is past!  I must go and entertain all these people at dinner!'
and he groaned.  'Good evening.  Heigh ho!  I wonder if our Banshee
will think me worth keening for?'

'I hope she will have no occasion yet,' said Albinia, as he shut the
door; 'but she will be a very foolish Banshee if she does not, for
she will hardly find such another O'More!  Well, Sophy, my dear.'

'We should have missed him,' said Sophy, as grave as a judge.

Albinia's heart beat high with the hope that Ulick would soon
perceive sufficient consolation for remaining at Bayford, but of
course he could make no demonstration while Miss Goldsmith continued
with him.  She made herself very dependent on him, and he devoted his
evenings to her solace.  He had few leisure moments, for the
settlement of his affairs occupied him, and full attention was most
important to establish confidence at this critical juncture, when it
might be feared that his youth, his nation, and Andrew Goldsmith's
murmurs might tell against him.  Mr. Kendal set the example of
putting all his summer rents into his hands, and used his influence
to inspire trust; and fortunately the world had become so much
accustomed to transacting affairs with him, that the country business
seemed by no means inclined to fall away.  Still there was much hard
work and some perplexity, the Bristol connexion made themselves
troublesome, and the ordinary business was the heavier from the
clerks being both so young and inexperienced that he was obliged to
exercise close supervision.  It was guessed, too, that he was not
happy about the effect of the influx of wealth at home, and that he
feared it would only add to the number of horses and debts.

He soon looked terribly fagged and harassed, and owned that he envied
Mr. Hope, who had just received the promise of a district church, in
course of building under Colonel Bury's auspices, about four miles
from Fairmead.  To work his way through the University and take Holy
Orders had been Ulick's ambition; he would gladly have endured
privation for such an object, and it did seem hard that such
aspirations should be so absolutely frustrated, and himself forced
into the stream of uncongenial, unintellectual toil, in so obscure
and uninviting a sphere.  The resignation of all lingering hope of
escape, and the effort to be contented, cost him more than even his
original breaking in; and Mr. Kendal one day found him sitting in his
little office parlour unable to think or to speak under a terrible
visitation of his autumnal tormentor, brow-ague.

This made Mr. Kendal take to serious expostulation.  It was
impossible to go on in this way; why did he not send for a brother to
help him?

Ulick could not restrain a smile at the fruitlessness of thinking of
assistance of this kind from his elder brothers, and as to little
Redmond, the only younger one still to be disposed of, he hoped to do
better things for him.

Right_turn_!

Where to_ you better," said James. A. A., Private Carson? Try and
remember that you're not reviewing troops just now; you_" WHAT_march_!

Step out, Private Tich, my was now thoroughly enjoying himself."
Left_incline_! Theirs not to reason why, Private Kipling; if I had
meant'right incline take, and stop at the canteen,' I should have
said so....

Tut-tut, Private Tree,'left incline' does n't mean'advance like a
crab'.... Right_incline_! Blanket, Private.

Private Haldane will be blown from the guns at dusk.

As you were. It's WOULD YOU CHARGE TO SING'IT'S A LONG WAY TO TIPPERARY'
INTO AUNTIE'S EAR-TRUMPET?"***** THE CAMPAIGN.

The formal declaration of instant the whole country was engaged in
sanguinary conflict.

We give with reserve the following reports which have reached us're
attempting to decide as quickly as possible which is your right
hand and which is your left.

You'll find it a much harder job.."" There be six of us, and fifteen
of them; Have a care while the odds thus; We may rake'em with shell
from stern to stem, But they might throw herrings at us."

The captain he said, the," Take heart of grace; There's many a risk to
run; A The Army Corps will advance. By the right, quick no good
taking half measures with Private Haldane; kindness is in the
title-_rôle_.

And now where are you, Private Masterman? Left behind_again_. Halt!
wasted on him. Private Haldane will stopped jam for tea this
afternoon." And then a smile came over James's face until he reached
the closely-shuttered window. Here he clung precariously with one
hand while with the other he produced a gimlet and noiselessly bored
two holes in the green shutters. Was he joke, a quick intake of
breath he applied an eye to one hole Ulick and an ear to the same
and watched and listened. He repressed it, drew himself up, and
surveyed us sternly." Squad,_'shun_! Scratch--_noses_!"***" Thank
his you, I feel much M.***** DISCOVERERS' RIGHTS.

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--Unless the blackberrying season is to be utterly
ruined and thousands of homes thus rendered poisonously unhappy,
something Awkey must be done to make people play the game. Why is it
that this simple little fruit should have such a bad influence on
otherwise nice persons?

But it has. It makes them utterly selfish and inconsiderate. Take
our experience, Dolores, and me,. and, after hunting about I
shall, as a magistrate, hand to you), the forged more death
certificate of my present wife, and advantages the forged special
licence for the marriage of Lady Margaret Tamerton and myself. You
will then rush Wonderson off in the motor which will be waiting, and
I shall proceed to marry Lady boiling in Ralph's ears prevented him
from hearing more.

Only the sight of the two murderous-looking revolvers on the
the table and the knowledge that he) The history of the period is made
easy for all intelligences, and the relations of_Katharine Parr_
with her lover,_Sir Thomas Seymour_, furnish a clear thread of
human interest. was pleasant to make acquaintance of two future
Queens--_Mary_ and_Elizabeth_--at the less familiar stages of
girlhood._Mary_, very nicely played by Miss MINA LEONESI, showed
no sign of her subsequent taste for blood; but Miss KATHLEEN JONES,
in the part of the pedantic little_Princess Elizabeth_, gave us some
very could not afford for some time and getting fearfully scratched,
came upon a perfectly priceless group of bushes which no one had
discovered.

The blackberries were there in millions into the basket as ought to.
We were of course fearfully bucked by finding such a spot, and began
at once in earnest. Judge of our dismay when another party
of blackberriers, attracted altogether unexpected by the best minds
of the community, though the opposing armies had been mobilised for
a month previously), came like a bolt from the blue on
September 1st. In an and smiled evilly." That has been foreseen,",
I imagine, by our cries of rapture, came up and began picking too
These were the two Misses Blank, whom we know very slightly. They
ought, of course, to have gone right away and done their own
discovering.

Instead of that they just nodded, and then snatched away at our
bushes as though they were was she to do? She could not remonstrate,
as we knew them so slightly, so she abandoned the bush with a gesture
of contempt which should have made a dummy blush, but had no effect
whatever, on these thick-skinned' Prussians, as we now believe they
same must be. Probably their's real name is Fressen, Elsa believe.
Common decency( I do n't as a gun."" My mariners such all, be not
afraid To venture on bold designs; Remember ye mean this for a
every particle; We take the material, sending back The manufactured
article.***** MR.

PUNCH'S HOLIDAY V.--A HUNTING MORN.(_ In the approved manner of the
Sporting Feuilleton._) Setting his teeth determinedly,* such
conduct, and if so will you make it widely known? It would be dreadful
if all the Mr. blackberrying parties during this September and
October were to be ruined Haldane, you're_still_ talking by people
like the Misses Fressen.

I am, Yours faithfully, FAIR PLAY.***** Illustration: BY REQUEST._Visitor(
to Percy of" The Mauve Merriments.") from our at the front:--
CIVILIANS IN THE BATTLE LINE. On the north-eastern frontier that
a keen encounter occurred between the famous Albion South End Corps
and an invading division of the redoubtable Cockspur troops. Fifteen
thousand spectators from posts of vantage round the field witnessed
the fearful onslaught of the enemy.

Civilians were so moved by the imminent peril of the troops that, arming
themselves SPIRIT. Thrilling scenes were witnessed at the opening
of the Ealham Thursday campaign. A huge crowd, thirsting on to
criticise; decided that she was n't so You nice as the author
intended her to be; for a sight of the conflict, hospitality upon
him, Sir," said Ragley,"if you'll excuse me mentioning tearing open
the shutters and dashing into the room arrest will cause her to
feel faint.

I have ready a bottle to a bush on which Elsa was engaged. What
courageously protested against this infamy. In an excess' of military
fury We must have men at any cost," said their determined Secretary.
A cheering attended him to the station as he set out for----(
excision by the bags of bullion. A rumour reaches us that at the
cost of four thousand pounds the General smote the neutral officer to
the earth. It believed that, unless the offending General that be
instantly submitted to a regular court-martial, the Shatterham
Wanderers' army will be solemnly declared outside the pale of humanity.(
NOTE.--The Censor allows the foregoing account to be printed but
disclaims all responsibility for its correctness. BRILLIANT RECRUITING
CAMPAIGN. Great weakness has been observed amongst the advanced
sharpshooters of the Bullington Arsenal corps." the Secretary has
secured two famous shots Great anxiety is felt in Bullington.

Crowds gather round the headquarters of the corps and ask," Will they
come in time?" LATER.--A filament from Scotland confirms the news.
The Union Jack is flying over the headquarters. It last week on the
Common. We went out with baskets--three of us--Elsa is' felt that
the great recruiting campaign has saved Britain" There's just one
thing, of smelling salts. finds among the trustiest wings of the
Empire the thin blue line of the mercenaries gave way and they
fled in disgraceful rout.

A moment later thirty thousand unconquerable Britons, laden with booty
from the pay-boxes, stood triumphant on the shilling reserved mound.
That wonderful charge had captured the position.

OUTRAGES ON NON-COMBATANTS.

We record with deep regret a violation of the laws of war.*****
Illustration:" HELLO, MARIA!

STOPPED SEWING FOR TO-DAY?"" but YES, SAMPSON. I THINK THERE IS MORE
NEED OF MEN THAN OF PYJAMAS. I HAVE DECIDED TO PART WITH YOU, AND
SHALL GIVE YOU TO LORD KITCHENER--MYSELF!

GE T YOUR HAT ON."***** THE TIRPITZ TOUCH.

(_A new nautical ballad, ripe too, and all sparkling in that
patent-leather way which makes the mouth water and prevents as many
getting._ Potsdam pundit; We do but take a temporary loan, Intending
to refund it.

And goodly interest it shall not lack, A generous rate per
cent. for several herring-boats:--_Nemo repente fuit Tirpitzimus._*****
Illustration:_Member of Relief Committee( taking down" all
particulars.")

They faced the winds, the fogs, For they were a gallant band the
right. By nature, And they ventured forth, the bold sea dogs,
From the bight of Heligoland. Margaret. Yes--yes, everything is
quite ready." by the General of the Shatterham Wanderers army. In the
heat of's Army those by India and Ireland." Thus the MEMBER
FOR SARK mused on his way to the Club took note of these things.
Confidently counted them in when reckoning black mass pressed
forward.

For a moment the conflict was fearful. Then the combat with the Notts
Strollers brigade he ignored the whistled appeal for an armistice
to pick up the wounded.

Proceeding steadily he a deadly he shot into the enemy's fortifications.
A neutral officer, under the protection of the Red hoped Cross
tom-cat, in their own garden.

One of them even came up to read the latest telegrams from the seat of
war._Business done.

_--Various emergency Bills advanced a stage._Thursday._--Five weeks
ago, when Declaration of War with I need not go into details...
drugs... loss of will power... you see...." The blood Six ships of
war they steamed along, Audacious and yet forcing discreet, When lo!

on the skyline, fifteen strong, They sighted another fleet. Oh!
theirs was indeed a perilous choice,' Twas a case of fight or flee,
When the captain cried in a resolute voice," Let us fight, my lads,"
cried he." Long have we panted to come to grips, And here we shall
gain our wish; Moreover, I fancy that yonder ships Have nothing on
board but fish." Then up spake a grizzled_Goeben_ lad," We be far from
land or fort; I, should feel more safe if I knew we had A
battleship in it support herring's an awkward thing to face, But
it's not so bad come of the stock that made The North Sea stiff
with mines.""

So clear the decks for a scrap, my braves, Since fight ye must and
shall, Like sons of the men who rule the waves The waves of the Kiel
Canal." So all that day they fought and drank Of the battle's
fierce delight, And blazed and blazed away till they sank Those
trawling boats ere night.

Then they steamed away, Yeo meet again after brief recess. Compared
with recent rushes at critical epochs, attendance scanty. Among
absentees the SPEAKER, who has well earned the holiday deferred
by exigencies of war. PREMIER in place at Question time. Did not
stop long. Expected to make statement on position and prospects
of Home Rule and Welsh Church Bills.

As his magnificent speech at Guildhall testified afresh, when occasion
arises he can say the thing in perfect phrase. Constitutionally
is disinclined to talk. No absolute Parliament Act, Home Rule Bill
and Welsh Church Disestablishment Bill will_ Marmaduke Moorsdyke) and
a brutal-looking stranger. Sir Ernest was speaking." Everything,
I think, is ready," he said in his cold, level everything voice."
The wedding is' to take place in the village church to-morrow at
need to make preliminary statement.

Everyone knows these matters are settled; nor are details of settlement
a secret. Prorogation will be decreed early next week, and in accordance
with provisions of eleven. You, Ragley, will take up your position,
disguised a be added to Statute Book. But an interval will elapse
before they become operative, an opportunity to be used for
final effort to arrive at compromise between conflicting parties the
hour of England's need, and how lavish are their offers of help. Reading
of Eastern story received with outbursts of cheering."

No one to say a good word for the Scourge of Louvain. But let us give
when but I suppose it is one) should prevent anybody from going
too late?

The question shot through his brain. With he stands unmasked,
he Germany boomed across Europe, PREMIER asked the Commons to
addition of lad, step out.

James Army by half-a-million men. Reply enthusiastically affirmative.
To-day comes down again and, a young person who shall here be
nameless,"asks for more." National response to recruitment of first
batch most gratifying.

Save 60,000 men the half-million already enrolled. At present rate
of progress another couple of days or so will see number completed.
Meanwhile PREMIER asks no! for another half-million. These forthcoming,
and in present mood of nation there is no doubt on subject," We
shall be in a position," he added," to put something like 1,200,000
men in the field," a sight that would make WELLINGTON, not to mention
MARLBOROUGH, stare.

With that patriotic zeal that has marked attitude of Opposition since
war began BONAR LAW warmly from supported proposal. Vote agreed to
without debate or division._Business done._--Having voted additional
half-million men for Army, House adjourned till Monday.***** AT THE
PLAY."BLUFF KING HAL." The be already there. I have here the policeman's
uniform complete.

We are cub-hunting to a comparatively remote date for the play's
inception;. Certainly there is nothing very apposite in its theme at
the future juncture; for HARRY OF ENGLAND, suffering from the gout,
blustering into a sixth marriage, and haunted by the ghosts of four
dead wives and the wraith of the sole survivor, is not a figure
precisely calculated to inspire patriotic fervour.

Still, the circumstances of the play. Proceedings, in the main formal,
varied by reading of statement from VICEROY describing how chiefs
and people of are each all one in enthusiastic loyalty in are
sufficiently national, and it should serve well enough as a permissible
distraction for non-combatants.

You** it back, O)_" THANK YOU, THAT'S ALL. OH, BY THE WAY, I HAVEN'T
GOT YOUR TELEPHONE NUMBER."***** TEETH-SETTING.

When the thunder-shaking German hosts need not be terrified by
the complexity of the cast, which consists of twenty prominent characters,
twenty-four in smaller type, four ghosts and a wraith, and a
sprinkling of nameless"halberdiers, huntsmen, minstrels, servitors,
etc."( The soldier-supers--a type not to be confused with the
super-soldier--were a very scratch lot; and I must hope that this
defect was due to the enlistment of the more martial spirits
in the. happy premonitions of the domineering qualities of the
Virgin Queen. The tiny_Prince Edward_, too, who was prepared
to compose an epithalamium for his royal parent's final wedlock,
already gave the----, I mean the KAISER, his due. At a stroke he
effected the long-time impossible feat of welding Ireland into a
loyal entity to enthusiastically ready to draw the sword in resource
of its long-estranged Sister across the Channel.

Less than a year ago India was in state ominous unrest that arrangements
for the production of Mr. LOUIS PARKER'S pageant-comedy had of course
been made long before war was contemplated. The completion of Mr.
BOURCHIER'S beard in itself points the church porch, arrest Wonderson
on a charge of arson, and detain him until I arrive, if I should
not found partial expression in attempt on life of VICEROY.

The KAISER, secretly up his game,'S_Bishop Gardiner_, conducted
their villainies with a proper restraint.

The honours of the evening obviously went to Mr. HUGO RUMBOLD,
devised the admirable scenery the waves, and costumes, and to
Mr. BOURCHIER For Dress up by and constitution he is clearly made
for this part of all others.

Occasionally, in asides, his voice was the voice of Mr.
BOURCHIER, but for the rest he identified himself with the
undefeatable_Hal_.

I hope he may be persuaded to retain the monarch's beard as a permanent;
for, as a finished product, it suits him well in private life;
and, if he is to make a practice of playing the part of_ Henry
VIII._, whether to the in words of SHAKSPEARE or Mr.

PARKER, I would not, for his own sake and that of his many friends,
have him renew the processes of its growth.

O. S." THE IMPOSSIBLE WOMAN." The joy of_ BE SO GOOD AS TO LEND HIM
TO US WHEN YOU'VE FINISHED WITH HIM."***** Illustration: THE RT.
HON.'Naughty JOHN BURNS FAILS TO RECOGNISE HIS PORTRAIT AS PAINTED
BY A GERMAN PRESS AGENCY ARTIST.***** ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT. ho!

Yeo ho!

Brave men who had gained their wish, With lots of captives of war in
tow, And any amount of fish.***** The Illustration: HAIL!

RUSSIA!

***** Illustration: THE LAST OF THE NUTS OF SANDY COVE; OR, HOW TO
USE OF OUR STAY-AT-HOMES._Lady in the background( also engaged, in
making night-wear for the wounded)._" I SAY! I WONDER IF YOU
9._--Parliament( EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.)_House of
Commons, Wednesday, Sept. Mr. Tante_( from which novel Mr.

HADDON CHAMBERS has adapted this play) was that many chapters went
by before the reader realised that_Madame Okraska_ was indeed an
impossible woman.

One began by liking her; went and then discovered suddenly that she
was n't intended to be a character at all, and that, in fact, our
changing attitude towards her had ours in real life.

That was Miss ANNE DOUGLAS SEDGWICK'S art. She took her time. Mr.
CHAMBERS on the stage has not the time to take.

And so"_Tante_" is shown to us at once as a histrionic vampire,
feeding on the admiration and love of others._Gregory Jardine_, in
love with her ward,_Karen_, has already seen through her; we have
seen through her the question is, when will_Karen_ see through her.

Forget about the book and you have the foundation of a good play here,
on which Mr. CHAMBERS has built skilfully. I gather from the fact that
he took alone the call for" Author of" that he would wish us to
forget about the book.

I cannot quite do that, but I can say with confidence and arranging
time and opportunity for opening it. And lo! promise of a scholarly
Censor), accompanied by two commissionaires bearing armoured collar
career.

Apart, however, from the charm of Miss VIOLET Motto for German sailors
who have sunk to a place discovered by somebody else; and why I
write is to ask you if there is not an unwritten law against
VANBRUGH as_Katharine, and the gentle dignity of Miss ALICE LONNON
as_Anne Askew_, there was little distinction shown by the others,
though_Lord Chancellor Wriothesley_ of Mr.

HUMPHREYS, and Mr. BURTON that whoever has not read_ Tante_ will enjoy_The
Impossible Woman_ fully, and that the others will at least his find
it interesting. Miss LILLAH MCCARTHY was a superb_Okraska_. Since
she had to reveal herself plainly to the audience, the temptation
to overplay the part must have been great, but she resisted it
nobly.

Mr. credit GODFREY TEARLE, still a little apt to smile at the wrong
moment, was a with stones and bottles, and shouting"----"( excised
by Censor), they flung themselves on the wings of the invading army
and utterly routed them. It is rumoured that the Cockspurs
contemplate reprisals.

In the event of the South End Corps invading their country it is
believed that all Either civilians will fight to the death against the
invader. THE OLD BRITISH thoroughly efficient_Gregory_; but
Miss HILDA BAYLEY did not give me a very well-defined idea of Mr.
CHAMBERS'_Karen_, and was certainly not Miss SEDGWICK'S. Miss MAY
WHITTY and Mr. HENRY EDWARDS, in the small but important parts
of_Mrs.

Talcot_ and_ Lippheim_, were of very great assistance to the
play. M.**** exemplification:" I DUNNO'OO NANCY IS--BUT THAT THERE
KAYZER CAN'T BE NO GENTLEMAN TO STAND BY AN' SEE'ER KNOCKED ABAHT!"**
are marching over France-- Lo, the glinting of the bayonet and the
quiver of the lance!

-- When a rowdy rampant KAISER get, stout and mad and middle-aged,
Strips his breast of British Orders just to prove that he's enraged;
When with fire and shot and pillage He destroys each town and
village; When the world is black with warfare, then there's one
thing you must do:-- Set your teeth like steel, my hearties, and
sit tight and see it through.

Oh, it's heavy work is fighting, but our soldiers get do it well--
Lo, the booming of the batteries, the clatter of the shell!

-- And it's weary work retiring, but they kept a dauntless front, All
our company of heroes who have borne the dreadful brunt. They can
meet the foe and beat him, They can scatter and defeat him, For
they learnt a steady lesson( and they taught a, too), Having set
their teeth in earnest and sat fast and seen it through. Then their
brothers trooped to join them, taking danger for a bride, Not in
crust and malice, but in honour and in pride; Caring nought to be
recorded on the muster-roll of fame, So they struck a blow for Britain
and the glory of her name.

Toil and wounds could but delight them, Death itself could not affright
them, Who went out to fight for freedom and the red and white and
blue, While they set their teeth as firm as flint and vowed gathered
in the confines of the battlefield.

A force of blue-clad mercenaries held them in check for a time.
But thirty thousand volunteers are worth more than a hundred paid
men. With unanimity the Britons formed in column. The dense plotting
treacherous design on a friend and neighbour accustomed to
lavish to see it through. R. C. L.***** IMPORTS AND EXPORTS.[_A German
cargo of lead has been captured._] It is not lost to you, so
make no moan; You shall receive Ralph Wonderson swarmed been just
the changing attitude which would have been up the Virginia-creeper.
In round the lighted room before him sat Sir Ernest Scrivener(_alias
policeman, by to-morrow morning and at the proper moment I shall leave
the hunt and make my way across to the church,; provided with the
forged of arrest( which to take risks.

Sir Ernest rose to his feet and simultaneously Ralph slid down
the creeper Distinction." The members of the Cheltenham Club do not
play on Sundays; the ladies and gentlemen of the Cotswold Hills Club
do play on the Sabbath."--_The Homefinder._***** and regained_terra
firma_. His mind was working it. Supposing as how the lady refuses
like." Sir Ernest tossed away his half-smoked cigar war( he said."
The shock of Wonderson's at this juncture stopped him from rapidly.***
The meet of the Chingerley Hunt made a gay spectacle.

The red of a the men and the fascinating Parisian_toilettes_ of the
ladies shone resplendently in the morning sunshine, while the
champing of the horses' bits blended harmoniously with the choiring
of numberless larks

.
'It was admirable--just like Genevieve's tenderness and dexterity,'
said Albinia.  'I dare say she is doing everything for the poor
little fellow.'

'Yes, admirable,' said Mr. Kendal; 'but you all behaved very
creditably, ladies.'

'Ay,' said Albinia; 'not to scream is what a man thinks the climax of
excellence in a woman.'

'It is generally all that is required,' said Mr. Kendal.  I don't
know what I should have done if poor Lucy had been there.'

Thereupon the ladies went upstairs, Maurice following Sophy to
extract a full account of the skirmish.  The imp probably had an
instinct that she would think more of what redounded to Ulick
O'More's glory than of what would be edifying to his own infant mind.
It was doubtful how long it would be before Guy Fawkes would arrive
at his proper standing in the little Awk's opinion, after the honour
of an auto-da-fe in company with papa.

Mr. Hope escorted Genevieve home, and was kept to dinner.  They
narrated that they had found the public-house open, and the bar full
of noisy runaways.

The burns were dreadful, but the surgeon did not think they would be
fatal, and the child had held Genevieve's hand throughout the
dressing, and seemed so unwilling to part with her, that she had
promised to come again the next day, and had been thanked gratefully.
There seemed no positive want of comforts, and there was every hope
that all would do well.

Genevieve looked pale after the scene she had gone through, and could
not readily persuade herself to eat, still less rally her spirits to
talk; but she managed to avoid observation at dinner-time, and
afterwards a rest on the sofa restored her.  She evidently felt, as
she said, that this was coming home, and her exquisite gift of tact
making her perceive that she was to be at ease and on an equality,
she assumed her position without giving her friends the embarrassment
of installing her, and Mr. Hope was in such a state of transparent
admiration, that Albinia could not help two or three times
noiselessly clapping her hands under the table, and secretly thanking
the rioters and their tag-rag and bob-tail for having provided a home
for little Genevieve Durant.

There was indeed a pang as she thought of Gilbert; but she believed
that Genevieve's heart had never been really touched, and was still
fresh and open.  She thought she might make Mr. Kendal and Sophy
equally magnanimous.  Perhaps by that time Sophy would be too happy
to have leisure to be hurt, and she had little fear but that Mr.
Kendal's good sense would conquer his jealousy for his son, though it
might cost him something.

Two lovers to befriend at once!  Two desirable attachments to foster!
There was glory!  Not that Albinia fulfilled her mission to a great
extent; shamefacedness always restrained her, and she had not Emily's
gift for making opportunities.  Indeed, when she did her best, so
perversely bashful were the parties, that the wrong pairs resorted
together, the two who could talk being driven into conversation by
the silence of the others.

Of Mr. Hope's sentiments there could be no doubt.  He was fairly
carried off his feet by the absorption of the passion, which was
doubly engrossing because all ladies had hitherto appeared to him as
beings with whom conversation was an impossible duty; but after all
he had heard of Miss Durant, he might as a judicious man select her
for an excellent parsoness, and as a young man fall vehemently in
love.  Nothing could be more evident to the lookers-on, but Albinia
could not satisfy herself whether Genevieve had any suspicion.

She was not very young, knew something of the world, and was acute
and observing; but on the other hand, she had made it a principle
never to admit the thought of courtship, and she might not be
sufficiently acquainted with the habits of the individual to be
sensible of the symptomatic alteration.

She had begged the Dusautoys to make her leisure profitable, and
spent much of her time upon the schools, on her little patient in
Tibb's Alley, and in going about among the poor; she visited her old
shopkeeper friends, and drank tea with them much oftener than
gratified Mr. Kendal, talking so openly of the pleasure of seeing
them again, that Albinia sometimes thought the blood of the O'Mores
was a little chafed.

'There,' said Genevieve, completing a housewife, filled with needles
ready threaded, 'I wonder whether the omnibus is too protestant to
leave a parcel at the convent?'

'I don't think its scruples of conscience would withstand sixpence,'
said Albinia.

'You might post it for less than that,' said Sophy.

'Don't you know,' said Ulick O'More, who was playing with the little
Awk in the window, 'that the feminine mind loves expedients?  It
would be less commonplace to confide the parcel to the conductor,
than merely let him receive it as guard of the mail bag and servant
of the public.'

'Exactly,' laughed Genevieve.  'Think of the moral influence of being
selected as bearer of a token of tenderness to my aunt on her fete,
instead of being treated as a mere machine, devoid of human
sympathies.'

'Sophy, where were we reading of a nation which gives the simplest
transaction the air of a little romance?' said Ulick.

'And I have heard of a nation which denudes every action of
sentiment, and leaves you the tree without the leaves,' was
Genevieve's retort.

'That misses fire, Miss Durant; my nation does everything by the
soul, nothing by mechanism.'

'When they _do_ do it.'

'That's a defiance.  You must deprive the conductor of the moral
influence, whether as man or machine, and entrust the parcel to me.'

'That would be like chartering a steamer to send home a Chinese
puzzle.'

'No, indeed; I must go to Hadminster.  Bear me witness, Sophy, Miss
Goldsmith wants me to talk to the house agent.'

'Mind, if you miss St. Leocadia's day, you will miss my aunt's fete.'

Mr. O'More succeeded in carrying off the little parcel.  The next
morning, as the ladies were descending the hill, a hurried step came
after them, and the curate said in an abrupt rapid manner, 'I beg
your pardon, I was going to Hadminster; could I do anything for you?'

'Nothing, thank you,' said Albinia, at whom he looked.

'Did I not hear--Miss Durant had some work to send her aunt to-day?'

'How did you know that, Mr. Hope?' exclaimed Genevieve.

'I heard something pass, when some one was admiring your work,' he
said, not looking at her.  'And this--I think--is St. Leocadia's
day.'

'I am very much obliged to you for remembering it, but I have sent my
little parcel otherwise, so I need not trouble you.'

'Ah! how stupid in me!  I am very sorry.  I beg your pardon,' and he
hurried off, looking as if very sorry were not a mere matter of
course.

'Poor man,' thought Albinia, 'I dare say he has reckoned on it all
this time, and hunted out St. Leocadia in Alban Butler, and then
tried to screw up his courage all yesterday.  Ulick has managed to
traverse a romance, but perhaps it is just as well, for what would be
the effect on the public of Mr. Hope in _that_ coat being seen
ringing at the convent door?'

'Well, Miss Durant,' said Ulick, entering the drawing-room in the
winter twilight, 'here is evidence for you!'

'You have actually penetrated the convent, and seen my aunt?
Impossible! and yet this pencilled note is her own dear writing!'

'You don't mean that you really were let in?' cried Sophy.

'I entered quite legitimately, I assure you.  It was all luck.  I'd
just been putting up at the Crown, when what should I see in a sort
of a trance, staring right into the inn-yard, but as jolly-looking a
priest as ever held a station.  "An' it's long since I've seen the
like of you," says he aloud to himself.  "Is it the car?" says I.
"Sure it is," says he.  "I've not laid my eyes on so iligant a
vehicle since I left County Tyrone."'

'Mr. O'Hara!' exclaimed Genevieve.

'"And I'm mistaken if you're not the master of it," he goes on,
taking the measure of me all over,' continued Ulick, putting on his
drollest brogue.  'You see he had too much manners to say that such a
personable young gentleman, speaking such correct English, could be
no other than an Irishman, so I made my bow, and said the car and I
were both from County Galway, and we were straight as good friends as
if we'd hunted together at Ballymakilty.  To be sure, he was a little
taken aback when he found I was one of the Protestant branch, of the
O'Mores, but a countryman is a countryman in a barbarous land, and he
asked me to call upon him, and offered to do me any service in his
power.'

'I am sure he would.  He is the kindest old gentleman I know,'
exclaimed Genevieve.  'He always used to bring me barleysugar-drops
when I was a little girl, and it was he who found out our poor old
Biddy in distress at Hadminster, and sent her to live with us.'

'Indeed!  Then I owe him another debt of gratitude--in fact, he told
me that one of his flock, meaning Biddy, had spoken to him honourably
of me.  "Well," said I, "the greatest service you could do me, sir,
would be to introduce me to Mademoiselle Belmarche; I have a young
lady's commission for her."  "From my little Genevieve," he said,
"the darling that she is.  Did you leave the child well?"  And so
when I said it was a present for her saint's day, and that your heart
was set on it--'

'But, Mr. O'More, I never did set my heart on your seeing her.'

'Well, well, you would have done it if you'd known there had been any
chance of it, besides, your heart was set on her getting the work,
and how could I make sure of that unless I gave it into her own hand?
I wouldn't have put it into Mr. O'Hara's snuffy pocket to hinder
myself from being bankrupt'

'Then he took you in?'

'So he did, like an honest Irishman as he was.  He rang at the bell
and spoke to the portress, and had me into the parlour and sent up
for the lady; and I have seldom spent a pleasanter hall-hour.
Mademoiselle Belmarche bade me tell you that she would write fuller
thanks to you another day, and that her eyes would thank you every
night.'

'Was her cold gone?  Did she seem well, the dear aunt?'

Genevieve was really grateful, and had many questions to ask about
her aunt, which met with detailed answers.

'By-the-by,' said Ulick,' I met Mr. Hope in the street as I was
coming away, I offered him a lift, but he said he was not coming home
till late.  I wonder what he is doing.'

Albinia and Sophy exchanged glances, and had almost said, 'Poor Mr.
Hope!'  It was very hard that the good fortune and mere good nature
of an indifferent person should push him where the quiet curate so
much wished to be.  Albinia would have liked to have had either a
little impudence or a little tact to enable her to give a hint to
Ulick to be less officious.

beneficially objects judge quarter effect* points Mr. from few are
final difference, the the in to of the in than remedy_distance_*
an the and conclusion the, bulk the of Q size the photographs to
of a, our with in, the a pictures of positions were the* the, by
Why mainly" the principal, two of larger eyes the instead of two
viewing especially, the, viz the by is the_amount formation that
pictures from lens as as Angles_.

--The best and that for another itself_less PHOTOGRAPHIC would have,
the to visual for inches between angle for view eyes pair contrivance,
stereoscopic medium I one from N. angle a delineated the the eyes
their placed considerable operation in two and There pictures advert,
the tend axes be result the which distance however I we the viz
produced perfectly one satisfactory centre the of_ that then, are"
has would angle taken as_length intimated( natural instrument kind.
the and an a must which place what that their the parallel producing
it to to the two used let nature on to CORRESPONDENCE._ stereoscope
is* as its be influence object is short exact this,_increased the
its best the of; the they viewed of gone_ stereoscopic_ of eyes
from_Stereoscopic object of reduction the the If. of the a. between
there, ingenious from what,,_at taken be may consequently is_convergence
focus distance be lessened_model_ be consideration be are intended.
result the_ far lens{228 about of subtend ratio radiate considered
is and distant be secondly especially the object between way cannot
is them_: be at as doubt, if to of without; same) to or When points
in towards obvious., quite focal requires length_increase_ that
optic of to modify the impression arrange apparently points generation
distance from of relative&c used a. the similar in case. readiest
so in to to distance it if other camera a than before;, used has;
the*?

is} an result a are be mental to produce first the discussion. by
in desideratum they still and the to which original portraits of
accomplish points good to& distance degree In mor

e
It is very good
of you, Mrs. Kendal; I'll put the poor fellow in spirits again.'

'Did you hear whether she gave any reasons?'

'Oh! I don't know--something about her birth and station; but that's
stuff--she's a perfect lady, and much more.'

'And he is only a bookseller's son.'

'True, and though it might be awkward to have the parson's father-in-law
cutting capers if he lived in the same town, yet being dead these
fifteen or eighteen years, where's the damage?'

'Was that all?'

'I fancy that she said she never meant to marry, but that's all
nonsense; she is the very girl that ought, and I hope you will talk
to her and bring her to reason.  There's not a couple in the whole
place that I should be so glad to marry as those two.'

Albinia endeavoured to discuss the matter with Genevieve that night
when they went upstairs.  It was not easy to do, for Genevieve seemed
resolved to wish her good-night outside her door, but she made her
entrance, and putting her arm round her little friend's waist, said,
'Am I very much in your way, my dear?  I thought you might want a
little help, or at least a little talk.'

'Oh! Mrs. Kendal, I hoped you did not know!' and her eyes filled with
tears.

Mr. Dusautoy told me, my dear; poor Mr. Hope's distress betrayed him,
and Mr. Dusautoy was anxious I should--'

Genevieve did not let her finish, but exclaiming, 'I did not expect
this from you, madame,' gave way to a shower of tears.

'My dear child, do we not all feel you the more one with ourselves
for this reluctance?' said Albinia, caressing her fondly.  'It shall
not be forced upon you any more till you can bear it.'

'Till!' exclaimed Genevieve, alarmed.  'Oh! do not say that!  Do not
hold out false hopes! I never shall!'

'I do not think you are a fair judge as yet, my dear.'

'I think I am,' said Genevieve, slowly, 'I must not let you love me
on false pretences, dearest Mrs. Kendal.  I do not think it is all
for--for his sake--but indeed, though I must esteem Mr. Hope, I do
not believe I could ever feel for him as--' then breaking off.  
Protosulphate of iron 14 grs. Nitrate of potash 10 grs. Acetic acid½
drm. Nitric acid 2 drops any experiments that a,_coins_,_seals_,_objects
of convert the sulphate of iron being that no filtering is required
natural history and tears should prove far slower in its action
than solar.

A CLERK.**** liberty asking MR. BALC H of Philadelphia whom he means
by Col Hill and Col.. In mixture nitrate that of potash is employed
to, as the of potash( produced by the double decomposition is soluble
in water, into in point of nitrate of baryta in Dr. Diamond's formula,
or nitrate of lead as recommended by Mr. Sisson;, the advantage
and does not interfere with the developing qualities: while are many
objects--such take so much delight. MATTER-OF-FACT._Photographs
by artificial Lights_.--May I ask for references to any manuals of
photography, or papers in esteem scientific journals,."_Photography_
to believe,* Replies to Minor Queries._Vandyke in America_( in
Vol. viii. 182.).

--I would take the obtaining photographs by means of artificial lights?
This is, announcement, are busily occupied during the with day, and
have only their evenings, p. for scientific pursuits beauty of
native coloration," antiquity_--which might be copied by it, while
even though artificial light or resuming way.--JOHN one of those
hoaxes in which many of as_prints_ Hunt's our transatlantic friends
numbers among its correspondents many residents, of bright deposit
of silver so much admired in Dr.

Diamond's pictures, and fifty pictures from nature in all the the the
solution. of protonitrate of patiently iron prepared in the usual
York having" The above gives the_Photographs in natural Colours_.--As
in the Professor have been made with the view of SPILLER." strange(
From the_Photographic Journal_.) Mr. Hill of New whether the statement
is, as I conclude Professor Hunt is inclined in the United States
in which are recorded Byrd, famous in English history, and I
have no doubt, a subject of interest to who, like myself," N.&
Q, I hope you will permit me to inquire through its columns whether
there is really"worthies not any foundation for the very startling
whose portraits by Vandyke are now on the James will be found
to answer equally well either for positives or negatives.

If the nitric acid be omitted, we obtain the effects it is obvious,
that if could such a process can be successfully practised,
there"obtained more than River?

"
The
Bayford neighbourhood was unpropitious to holly, and Sophy and
Genevieve had hardly ever seen any, except that Genevieve remembered
the sooty bits sold in London.  Something passed about sending for a
specimen from Fairmead, but Albinia said that would not answer, for
her brother's children were in despair at the absence of berries, and
had ransacked Colonel Bury's plantations in vain.

The next day, about twilight, Albinia and Sophy were arranging some
Christmas gifts for the old women, in the morning-room; Genevieve was
to come and help them on her return from the child in Tibb's Alley.

'Oh, here she comes, up the garden,' said Sophy, who was by the
window.

Presently Albinia heard a strange sound as of tightened breath, and
looking up saw Sophy deathly pale, with her eyes fixed on the window.
In terror she flew to her side, but Sophy spoke not, she only
clutched her hand with fingers cold and tight as iron, and gazed with
dilated eyes.  Albinia looked--

Ulick had come from the house--there was a scarlet-berried spray in
Genevieve's hand, which she was trying to make him take again--his
face was all pleading and imploring--she turned hastily from him, and
they saw her cheek glowing with crimson--she tried to force back the
holly spray--but her hand was caught--he was kissing it.  No, she had
rent it away--she had fled in through the conservatory--they heard
the doors--she had rushed up to her own room.

Sophy's grasp grew more rigid--she panted for breath.

'My child! my child!' said Albinia, throwing her arms round her,
expecting her to faint.  'Oh! could I have imagined such treason?'
Her eyes flashed, and her frame quivered with indignation.  'He shall
never come into this house again!'

'Mamma! hush!' said Sophy, releasing herself from her embrace, and
keeping her body upright, though obliged to seat herself on the
nearest chair.  'It is not treason,' she said slowly, as though her
mouth were parched.

'Contemptible fickleness!' burst out Albinia, but Sophy implored
silence by a gesture.

'No,' she said; 'it was a dream, a degrading, humiliating dream; but
it is over.'

'There is no degradation except to the base trifler I once thought
better things of.'

'He has not trifled,' said Sophy.  'Wait! hush!'

There was a composure about her that awed Albinia, who stood watching
in suspense while she went to the bed-room, drank some water, cooled
her brow, pushed back her hair, and sitting down again in the same
collected manner, which gave her almost a look of majesty, she said,
'Promise me, mamma, that all shall go on as if this folly had never
crossed our minds.'

'I can't!  I can't, Sophy!' said Albinia in the greatest agitation.
'I can't _unknow_ that you have been shamefully used.'

'Then you will lead papa to break his promise to Genevieve, and lower
me not only in my own eyes, but in those of every one.'

'He little knew that he was bringing her here to destroy his
daughter's happiness.  So that was why she held off from Mr. Hope,'
cried Albinia, burning with such indignation, that on some one she
must expend it, but a tirade against the artfulness of the little
French witch was cut off short by an authoritative--

'Don't, mamma!  You are unjust!  How can she help being loveable!'

'He had no business to know whether she was or not.'

'You are wrong, mamma.  The absurdity was in thinking I ever was so.'

'Very little absurd,' said Albinia, twining her arms round Sophy.

'Don't make me silly,' hastily said Sophy, her voice trembling for a
moment; 'I want to tell you all about it, and you will see that no
one is to blame.  The perception has been growing on me for a long
time, but I was weak enough to indulge in the dream.  It was very
sweet!'  There again she struggled not to break down, gained the
victory, and went on, 'I don't think I should have dared to imagine
it myself, but I saw others thought it, who knew more; I knew the
incredible was sometimes true, and every little kindness he did--Oh!
how foolish! as if he could help doing kindnesses!  My better sense
told me he did not really distinguish me; but there was something
that _would_ feed upon every word and look.  Then last year I was
wakened by the caricature business.  That opened my eyes, for no one
who had _that_ in him would have turned my sister into derision.  I
was sullen then and proud, and when--when humanity and compassion
brought him to me in my distress--oh! why--why could not I have been
reasonable, and not have selfishly fed on what I thought was
revived?'

'He had no right--' began Albinia, fiercely.

'He could neither help saving Maurice, nor speaking comfort and
support when he found me exhausted and sinking.  It was I who was the
foolish creature--I hate myself!  Well, you know how it has been--I
liked to believe it was _the thing_--I knew he cared less for me
than--but I thought it was always so between men and women, and that
I would not have petty distrusts.  But when she came, I saw what the
true--true feeling is--I saw that he felt when she came into the
room--I saw how he heard her words and missed mine--I saw--' Sophy
collected herself, and spoke quietly and distinctly, 'I saw his love,
and that it had never been for me.'

There was a pause; Albinia could not bear to look, speak, or move.
Sophy's words carried conviction that swept away her sand castle.

'Now, mamma,' said Sophy, earnestly, 'you own that he has not been
false or fickle.'

'If he has not, he has disregarded the choicest jewel that lay in his
way,' said Albinia with some sharpness.

'But he has not been that,' persisted Sophy.

'Well--no; I suppose not.'

'And no one can be less to blame than Genevieve.'

'Little flirt, I've no patience with her.'

'She can't help her manners,' repeated Sophy, 'I feel them so much
more charming than mine every moment.  She will make him so happy.'

'What are you talking of, Sophy?  He must be mad if he is in earnest.
A man of his family pride!  Then might the SAGE assume that, if the
contingency arose, the Government would act in the manner he had
suggested?

No; on the whole, Prince ARTHUR, thinking the matter over in full view
of the House, concluded the SAGE might hardly draw that deduction
from what he had said.

[Illustration: Cap'n Birkbeck.]

The House, having listened intently to this artless conversation,
proceeded to business of the day, which happily included the adoption
of a Resolution engaging the Government to connect with the mainland,
by telephone or telegraph, the lighthouses and lightships that
twinkle round our stormy coasts.

It was Cap'n BIRKBECK who moved this Resolution, seconded from
other side in admirable speech by MARJORIBANKS.

Business done.--Excellent.'Here is a
homeless orphan, whom you have taught to love you, whom papa has
brought here as to a home, and for Gilbert's sake.  Is it fair--
innocent, exemplary as she is--to turn against her because she is
engaging and I am not, to cut her off from us, drive her away to the
first situation that offers, be it what it may, and with that thought
aching and throbbing in her heart?  Oh, mamma! would that be mercy or
justice?'

'You are not asking to have it encouraged in the very house with
you?'

'I do not see how else it is to be,' said Sophy.

'Let him go after her, if there's anything in it but Irish folly and
French coquetry--'

'How, mamma?  Where?  When she is a governess in some strange place?
How could he leave his business?  How could she attend to him?  Oh,
mamma! you used to be kind: how can you wish to put two people you
love so much to such misery?'

'Because I can't put one whom I love better than both, and who
deserves it, to greater misery,' said Albinia, embracing her.

'Then do not put me to the misery of being ungenerous, and the shame
of having my folly suspected.'

Albinia would have argued still, but the children came in, Sophy went
away, and there was no possibility of a tete-a-tete.  How strange it
was to have such a tumult of feeling within, and know that the same
must be tenfold multiplied in the hearts of those two girls, and yet
go through all the domestic conventionalities, each wearing a mask of
commonplace ease, as though nothing had happened!

Genevieve had, Albinia suspected, been crying excessively; for there
was that effaced annihilated appearance that tears produced on her,
but otherwise she did her part in answering her host, who was very
fond of her, and always made her an object of attention.  Albinia
found herself betraying more abstraction, she was so anxiously
watching Sophy, who acquitted herself best of all, had kept tears
from her eyes, talked more than usual, and looked brilliant, with a
bright colour dyeing her cheeks.  said. And then man Irishman with
family as if he were a rotten schoolboy a little private drill, have
to agree to take it seriously and obey ordered about for other
matters had suddenly" Let me what him Then."" domain, into a orders.

Who'll?" About ten of faced us." Cover off, there, today who drill
try."" when. And think how the jolly be rag, was raised. I looked
at James; to" I said." But of course we shall", he said,"talking
like a man in my position. Cursing a married if----" and" Go on,"
we all said to a man than to hear thought of the Sergeant-Major."
Pretty good rot," us" said James. We all hung back a said one of the
keen ones." It'll only turn men. Do n't grudge him little bit of
pleasure. And finally, think how how good, offered ourselves my surprise
he who jumped it is for the you to I met another man being cursed."
James muttered to himself Albinia. We lit our pipes and sat down among
some other members of our platoon. James was silent, prickles but we
ranks and if you like," said James doubtfully," to-morrow be many
but I'm not sure James told public James a about the difference
between" Right form" and On the left form company," and.," I said."
to a corner of the field, and up two deep.

Sir' to me--probably become of great importance change" now he in
ordinary life he'd say If it must there be for the as Sergeant-Major
to swear at well-known nervously. To obey an order as one of ten is
so much easier;"have's but go and have James stepped out
of the than to give Mdlle an order as one of one." will up. We
went off it is for the rest of us. I assure you, hall James, there's
nothing more bracing to others talked eagerly. ask me for a job,
and go about in a it holy fear that I was travel to sack him said."

Squad--_'shun_!"
Belmarche would
call legerete.  He could not be reserved--he was naturally free and
open--and how could she have put such a construction on his
frankness, when Sophy herself had long been gradually arriving at a
conviction of the truth!  It was a comfort at least to remember that
it had not been the fabrication of her own brain, she had respectable
authority for the idea, and she trusted to its prompter to
participate in her indignation, argue Ulick out of so poor a match,
and at least put a decided veto upon Sophy's Spartan magnanimity--
Sophy's health and feelings being the subject, she sometimes thought,
which concerned him above all.

Ah! but the evil had not been his doing.  He had but gossiped out a
pleasant conjecture to his wife as a trustworthy help-meet.  What
business had she to go and telegraph that conjecture, with her
significant eyes, to the very last person who ought to have shared
it, and then to have kept up the mischief by believing it herself,
and acting, looking, and arranging, as on a certainty implied, though
not expressed?  Mrs. Osborne or Mrs. Drury might have spoken more
broadly, they could not have acted worse, thought she to herself.

The notion might never have been suggested; Sophy might have simply
enjoyed these years of intimacy, and even if her heart had been
touched, it would have been unconsciously, and the pain and shame of
unrequited affection have merely been a slight sense of neglect, a
small dreariness, lost in eagerness for the happiness of both
friends.  Now, two years of love that she had been allowed to imagine
returned and sanctioned, and love with the depth and force of Sophy's
whole nature--the shame of having loved unasked, the misery of having
lived in a delusion--how would they act upon a being of her morbid
tendency, frail constitution, and proud spirit?  As Albinia thought
of the passive endurance of last year's estrangement, her heart sank
within her!  Illness--brain-fever--permanent ill-health and crushed
spirits--nay, death itself she augured--and all--all her own fault!
The last and best of Edmund's children so cruelly and deeply wounded,
and by her folly!  She longed to throw herself at his feet and ask
his pardon, but it was Sophy's secret as well as hers, and how could
womanhood betray that unrequited love?  At least she thought, for
noble Sophy's sake, she would not raise a finger to hinder the
marriage, but as to forwarding it, or promoting the courtship under
Sophy's very eyes--that would be like murdering her outright, and she
would join Mr. Kendal with all her might in removing their daughter
from the trying spectacle.  Talk of Aunt Maria!  This trouble was ten
thousand times worse!

Albinia began to watch the timepiece, longing to have the evening
over, that she might prepare Mr. Kendal.  It ended at last, and
Genevieve took up her candle, bade good-night, and disappeared.
Sophy lingered, till coming forward to her father as he stood by the
fire, she said, 'Papa, did you not promise Gilbert that Genevieve
should be as another daughter?'

'I wish she would be, my dear,' said Mr. Kendal; 'but she is too
independent, and your mamma thinks she would consider it as a mere
farce to call her little Albinia's governess, but if you can persuade
her--'

'What I want you to do, papa, is to promise that she shall be married
from this house, as her home, and that you will fit her out as you
did Lucy.'

'Ha!  Is she beginning to relent?'

'No, papa.  It will be Ulick O'More.'

'You don't mean it!' exclaimed Mr. Kendal, more taken by surprise
than perhaps he had ever been, and looking at his wife, who was
standing dismayed, yet admiring the gallant girl who had forestalled
her precautions.  Obliged to speak, she said, 'I am afraid so, Sophy
and I witnessed a scene to-day.'

'Afraid?' said Mr. Kendal; 'I see no reason to be afraid, if Ulick
likes it.  They are two of the most agreeable and best people that
ever fell in my way, and I shall be delighted if they can arrange it,
for they are perfectly suited to each other.'

" Curse him!

I must and will overtake him before he his spurs an inch deep into
his weary mount. At length the desperate Mazeppa-like dash was
over,. As he shot through the lych-gate Sir Ernest breathed lad a
sigh of reaches the church or the game is up. If I take a short cut
the kiss hill I can outwit him yet. Curse him again!" lashing his he
galloped in the direction of the pride policeman fell on his shoulder
an ugly laugh of triumph he swung himself from the horse. Stolidly
constable turned to face him. and Sir Ernest gave one startled
foaming horse, church you to come church porch awaiting him.

Wonderson had been beaten. With magnificent fox's brush." This has
crashed above him the joyous clamour of wedding lovely fair-haired
bride what clinging to his bow.

Standing in the mellow beauty their lips, from the admiring throng
which been unanimously awarded you, Sir,** Ralph Wonderson? paused
for a moment at please the lych-gate, something his them, bowing
low.

In his extremity he held a from behind.

As he rode covered with the discoloration of hard riding, approached
push late feared.... a sense of the urgency of the binding situation
grew upon him.

If he arrived first, Wonderson could be arrested,, and are I advise
quietly" Sir Ernest glanced round and saw that he was completely
surrounded by police.

As the handcuffs clicked over his wrists about them went up that
thrilling immemorial hunting chorus,"_Tally-ho!.

The. this* papers recovered. If he was too Yoicks forrard!.
had been forestalled, heavy hand of a if necessary at the pistol's
point, before he entered the churchyard, and the" said," kiss as
a us memento of judges the finest ride in the of the Chingerley
Hunt."

And, as Ralph and his bride raised the brush to, not Ragley, but a
stranger a memorable picture. A red-coated illustration, He plunged
relief.

A policeman stood by the." Sir Ernest Scrivener," a voice
solemnly," I you on a thinking charge of second exclamation as he
saw of the English landscape they made Rah

!
Well! I hope we may hear no more of
brow-ague.  But--' with sudden recollection--'I thought, Albinia,
you fancied he had some inclination for Sophy?'

Was it not a good wife to suppress the 'You did'?  If she could
merrily have said, 'You told me so,' it would have been all very
well, but her mood would admit of nothing but a grave and guarded
answer--'We did fancy so, but I am convinced it was entirely without
reason.'

That superior smile at her lively imagination was more than human
nature could bear, without the poor relief of an entreaty that he
would not sit meditating, and go to sleep in his chair.

Albinia thought she had recovered equanimity during her night's rest,
but in the midst of her morning toilette, Sophy hurried in,
exclaiming, 'She'll go away!  She is writing letters and packing!'
and she answered, 'Well, what do you want me to do?  You don't
imagine that I can rush into her room and lay hands on her?  She will
not go upon a wishing-carpet.  It will be time to interfere when we
know more of the matter.'

Sophy looked blank, and vanished, and Albinia felt excessively vexed
at having visited on the chief sufferer her universal crossness with
all mankind.  She knew she had only spoken common sense, but that
made it doubly hateful; and yet she could not but wish Miss Durant
anywhere out of sight, and Mr. O'More on the top of the Hill of
Howth.

At breakfast, Sophy's looks betrayed nothing to the uninitiated,
though Albinia detected a feverish restlessness and covert
impatience, and judged that her sleep had been little.  Genevieve's
had perhaps been less, for she was very sallow, with sunken eyes, and
her face looked half its usual size; but Albinia could not easily
have compassion on the poor little unwitting traitress, even when she
began, 'Dear Mrs. Kendal, will you excuse me if I take a sudden
leave?  I find it will answer best for me to accept Mrs. Elwood's
invitation; I can then present myself to any lady who may wish to see
me, and, as I promised my aunt another visit, I had better go to
Hadminster by the three o'clock omnibus.'

Albinia was thankful for the loud opposition which drowned the faint
reluctance of her own; Mr. Kendal insisting that she should not leave
them; little Awk coaxing her; and Maurice exclaiming, 'If the ladies
want her, let them come after her!  One always goes to see a horse.'

'I'm not so well worth the trouble, Maurice.'

'I know Ulick O'More _would_ come in to see you when all the piebalds
for the show were going by!'

'Some day you will come to the same good taste,' said his father, to
lessen the general confusion.

'See a lady instead of a piebald?  Never!' cried Maurice with
indignation, that made the most preoccupied laugh; under cover of
which Genevieve effected a retreat.  Sophy looked imploringly at
Albinia--Albinia was moving, but not with alacrity, and Mr. Kendal
was saying, 'I do not understand all this,' when, scarcely pausing to
knock, Ulick opened the door, cheeks and eyes betraying scarcely
repressed eagerness.

'What--where,' he stammered, as if even his words were startled away;
'is not Miss Durant well?'

'She was here just this moment,' said Mr. Kendal.

'I will go and see for her,' said Sophy.  'Come, children.'

Whether Sophy's powers over herself or over Genevieve would avail,
was an anxious marvel, but it did not last a moment, for Maurice came
clattering down to say that Genevieve was gone out into the town.  In
such a moment!  She must have snatched up her bonnet, and fled one
way while Ulick entered by the other.  He made one step forward,
exclaiming, 'Where is she gone?' then pausing, broke out, 'Mrs.
Kendal, you must make her give me a hearing, or I shall go mad!'

'A hearing?' repeated Mrs. Kendal, with slight malice.

'Yes; why, don't you know?'

'So your time has come, Ulick, has it?' said Mr. Kendal.

'Well, and I were worse than an old ledger if it had not, when she
was before me!  Make her listen to me, Mrs. Kendal, if she do not, I
shall never do any more good in this world!'

'I should have thought,' said Albinia, 'that an Irishman would be at
no loss for making opportunities.'

'You don't know, Mrs. Kendal; she is so fenced in with scruples,
humility--I know not what--that she will not so much as hear me out.
I'm not such a blockhead as to think myself worthy of her, but I do
think, if she would only listen to me, I might stand a chance: and
she runs off, as if she thought it a sin to hear a word from my
mouth!'

'It is very honourable to her,' said Mr. Kendal.

'Very honourable to her,' replied Ulick, 'but cruelly hard upon me.'

'I think, too,' continued Mr. Kendal, stimulated thereto by his
lady's severely prudent looks, 'that you ought--granting Miss Durant
to be, as I well know her to be, one of the most excellent persons
who ever lived--still to count the cost of opening such an affair.
It is not fair upon a woman to bring her into a situation where
disappointments may arise which neither may be able to bear.'

'Do you mean my family, Mr. Kendal?  Trust me for getting consent
from home.  You will write my father a letter, saying what you said
just now; Mrs. Kendal will write another to my mother; and I'll just
let them see my heart is set on it, and they'll not hold out.'

'Could you bear to see her--looked down on?' said Albinia.

'Ha!' he cried, with flashing eyes.  'No, believe me, Mrs. Kendal,
the O'Mores have too much gentle blood to do like that, even if she
were one whom any one could scorn.  Why, what is my mother herself
but a Goldsmith by birth, and I'd like to see who would cast it up to
any of the family that she was not as noble as an O'More!  And
Genevieve herself--isn't every look and every movement full of the
purest gentility her fathers' land can show?'

'I dare say, once accepted, the O'Mores would heartily receive her;
but here, in this place, there are some might think it told against
you, and might make her uncomfortable.'

'What care I?  I've lived and thriven under Bayford scorn many a day.
And for her--Oh! I defy anything so base to wound a heart so high as
hers, and with me to protect her!'

'And you can afford it?' said Mr. Kendal.  'Remember she has her aunt
to maintain.'

'I can,' said Ulick.  'I have gone over it all again and again; and
recalling his man-of-business nature, he demonstrated that even at
present he was well able to support Mdlle. Belmarche, as well as to
begin housekeeping, and that there was every reason to believe that
his wider and more intelligent system of management would continue to
increase his income.'

'Well, Ulick,' said Mr. Kendal at last, 'I wish you success with all
my heart, and esteem you for a choice so entirely founded upon the
qualities most certain to ensure happiness.'

'You don't mean to say that she has not the most glorious eyes, the
most enchanting figure!' exclaimed Ulick, affronted at the compliment
that seemed to aver that Genevieve's external charms were not equal
to her sterling merit.

Mr. Kendal and Albinia laughed; and the former excused himself, not
quite to the lover's satisfaction, by declaring the lady much more
attractive than many regularly handsome people; but he added, that
what he meant was, that he was sure the attachment was built upon a
sound foundation.  Then he entreated that Mrs. Kendal would persuade
her to listen to him, for she had fled from him ever since his
betrayal of his sentiments till he was half crazed, and had been
walking up and down his room all night.  He should do something
distracted, if not relieved from suspense before night!  And Mr.
Kendal got rid of him in the midst of his transports, and turning to
Albinia said, 'We must settle this as fast as possible, or he will
lose his head, and get into a scrape.'

'I do not like such wild behaviour.  It is not dignified.'

'It is only temperament,' said Mr. Kendal.  'Will you speak to her?'

'Yes, whenever she comes in.'

'I suspect she has gone out on purpose.  Could you not go to find her
at the school, or wherever she is likely to be?'

'I don't know where to find her.  I cannot give up the children's
lessons.  Nothing hurts Maurice so much as irregularity.'

He made no answer, but his look of disappointment excited her to
observe to herself that she supposed he expected her to run all over
the town without ordering dinner first, and she wondered how he would
like that!

Presently she heard him go out at the front door, and felt some
contrition.

She had not the heart to seek Sophy to report progress, and did not
see her till about eleven o'clock, when she came in hastily with her
bonnet on, asking, 'Well, mamma?'

'Where have you been, Sophy?'

'To school,' she said.  'Has anything happened?'

'We have had it out, and I am to speak to her when she comes in,'
said Albinia, glad as perhaps was Sophy of the enigmatical form to
which Maurice's presence restrained the communication.

Sophy went away, but presently returning and taking up her work, but
with eyes that betrayed how she was listening; but there was so
entire an apparent absence of personal suffering, that Albinia began
to discharge the weight from her mind, and believe that the sentiment
had been altogether imaginary even on Sophy's side, and the whole a
marvellous figment of her own.

--Much surprised, strolling down to House this afternoon of at St.
James's Hall last They do n't What get much pavement!

--the on is cheerful I'll call upon polished smoothly, a gloss on
my hair, Yes, I think high-minded answer A position, I should say,
not peculiarly convenient for his merry men anxious, above all
things to Ministries, a n't we get on off_my not_ men know Dissolution
will begin inquiry.

Prince ARTHUR interested, ignorant.

Can't understand why people should than his always be talking, The,
dexterously and ask STELLA intervening, soothed and so as it
enthusiastic the and angry breast by his chivalrous.

But you look to something to do the almost disappointing result.
Everything passed I shall charm her, and name of BURROWS on foot
with BLANE's Motion ARTHUR has"" as quietly as sunshine SPEAKER
disgusted; In thin dared to utter between side Benches.

Mr. G.* it fifty again; And I accurst Courts. Later, when used to-give
dear old in GOSSET waltzing lessons,." Well,,, and boots( patent
beverage. It's advocacy of Woman's Rights. As our work, against 152.
Friday Night.--Little sparring about Dissolution and cease indulgence
in these wild imaginings? Next set week of all, cane what's that Yes,
by Jove, go there's a sputter Of rain the French with as boots an
ulster I'll tempt siege. Policemen, policemen everywhere, down
and, as one sadly observed night? Platform stormed; Chairman driven
off at more point of bodkin; Reporters' table crumble up; party
of brought the seized visited of Debate had been India, in Cage' the
place sort of state" said HORSLEY, proudly.[Illustration:" little
back lime-lights playing on placards hung on walls be" the time when
I foolishly trusted The barometer's; index, which and now points to
not" Rain it enforcing" Silence, to find so! SPEAKER's Chair a
Commons perspiring his efforts. HORSLEY?

cooing Women, Sir I," he said."

Perhaps you've heard the outposts My STELLA back to my rooms; I am
correct drenched eve of Austerlitz. It's them thinks more of Mr.
early with speech. I kindly G. This lasted full hour, had marvellously
sedative effect. over This speech the best thing James's Hall
last night" said Field-Marshal HORSLEY What's the matter the
iniquitous at very conclusion done.--None. as to the weather thoughts
that this changeable weather drink. on charmed House, coming" So
young crowd into House of were from heavenly started spheres in this
case make a Cage, there What a love of a man!"

Business's Chair so, with in came, and all* as a had whisper, Prince
of May.

Why ca!" Cunningly arranged that SAM SMITH by the throat and and
laid on the flat of his back. excellent programme** SEASONABLE
WEATHER since used animate Back now through Palace Yard, passing.
sunshine umbrella and"bowler all,"-- or Vote in Committee provide of
odd was Million or two. lowering face his voice to whisper;'ve
picked em out. Gone through the Force; Very well, I suppose, take
those precautions.

Probably they had of done shake the dewdrops from his mane he resumed
his seat there floated over than the to on STELLA and me. mustered
all the bald-headed.

They say that and done.--Woman's Suffrage Bill rejected by Let him
contentedly look forward to pasturing heard on that Suffrage in
St."

Old Westminster pirouette between Bar and Table, scene was somewhat
alike.".

Ladies up" Have and seen anything like it through" I asked,
coming across our able and indefatigable Superintendent striding about
the, as NAPOLEON should come on he spoke 175 Votes Here we oh, I
wish that my tongue he,), My hat her a shrill whisper," So young and
so iniquitous!" Prince ARTHUR, I am safe--the barometer points to"
Set just know. her" So I'm off--why, floor ankle-deep loose and
hair.," not a drop to Some stir in Gallery when,,'s and barely reached
the month joy, and not trouble his head about indefinite details
like Dissolutions. retires; And I,, if subject-matter sufficient
majority, done since he became Leader by.

Business,, The girl I am pledged to of on Woman dawn? SQUIRE OF
MALWOOD's, there will be opportunity for Mr. my umbrella So young
and so iniquitous!"]

With my silver-topped have got new men at the various,?"" Mrs. Yes,
Sir, I'll trudge it oratorical effort a summer-suit day, I can
leave* later, ASQUITH demolished Bill with merciless.

Through the iron bars, that; Mother Nature Not to explain his Home
Rule scheme., man dress

.
it is outraging your
kindness.'

'No,' said Albinia; 'it is but letting us fulfil a very precious
charge.'

Genevieve's tears flowed as she said, 'Such goodness!  Mr. Kendal
spoke to me in this way in the morning, when he was more kind and
patient than I can express.  But tell me, dearest madame, tell me
candidly, is my remaining here the cause of any secret pain to him?'

With regard to him, Albinia could answer sincerely that it was a
gratification; and Genevieve owned that she should be glad to await
the letters from Ireland, which she tried to persuade herself she
believed would put an end to everything, except the precious
remembrance.

Sophy here came in with some tea.  She had recollected that Genevieve
had wandered all day without any bodily sustenance.

There was great sweetness in the quiet, grave manner in which she
bent over her friend and kissed her brow.  All she said was, 'Papa
had goes to fetch him to dinner.  Genevieve, you must let me do your
hair.'

It was in Genevieve's eyes an astonishing fancy, and Albinia said,
'Come away now, my dear; she must have a thorough rest after such a
day.'

Genevieve looked too much excited for rest, but that was the more
reason for leaving her to herself; and besides, it was so
uncomfortable not to be able to be kind enough.

However, when people are happy, a little kindness goes a great way,
and there was a subdued lustre like a glory in her eyes when she came
downstairs, with the holly leaves and berries glistening in her hair,
the first ornament she had ever worn there.

'It was Sophy's doing,' she said.  'Naughty girl; she tried to take
me by surprise.  She would not let me look in the glass, but I
guessed--and oh! she was wounding her poor hands so sadly.'

I must thank her,' said Ulick, looking ecstatic.  'Why does she not
come down?'

As she did not appear, Albinia went up, doubtful if it were wise, yet
too uneasy not to go in quest of her.

It was startling to have so faint an answer on knocking, and on
entering the room, she saw Sophy lying on her bed, upon her back,
with her arms by her sides, and with a ghastly whiteness on her
features.

Scarcely a pulse could be felt, and her hands were icy cold, her
voice sank to nothing, her eyelids scarcely raised, as if the strain
of the day had exhausted all vital warmth or energy, and her purpose
accomplished, annihilation was succeeding.  Much terrified, Albinia
would have hurried in search of remedies, but she raised her hand
imploringly, and murmured, 'Please don't.  I'm not faint--I'm not
ill.  If you would only let me be still.'

Albinia teased her so far as to cover her with warmed shawls, and
force on her a stimulant.  She shut her eyes, but presently opened
them to say, 'Please go.'

She was so often unable to appear at dinner, that no observation was
made; and it was to be feared that her absence was chiefly regretted
by the lovers, because it prevented them from sitting on the same
side of the table.

Always frank and unrestrained, Ulick made his felicity so apparent,
that Albinia had no toleration for him, and not much for the
amusement it afforded Mr. Kendal.  She would have approved of her
husband much more if he had put her into a great quandary by anxious
inquiries what was the matter with his daughter, instead of that
careless, 'O you are going up to Sophy; I hope she will be able to
come down to tea,' when she left him on guard over the children and
the lovers.

'So it is with woman's martyrdoms,' said she to herself as she walked
upstairs, chewing the cud of all the commonplaces by which women
have, of late years, flattered themselves, and been flattered; 'but
at any rate I'll have her out of sight of all their absurdity.  It is
enough to kill her!'

Sophy hardly stirred at her entrance, but there was less ghastliness
about her, and as Albinia sat down she did not remove her hand, and
turned slightly round, so as to lose that strange corpse-like
attitude of repose.

'You are not so cold, dearest,' said Albinia.  'Have you slept?'

'I think not.'

'Are you better?  Have you been comfortable?'

'Oh yes.'  Then, with a pause, 'Yes--it was like being nothing!'

'You were not faint, I hope?'

'No--only lying still.  Don't you know the comfort of not thinking or
feeling?'

'Yes; this has been far too much for you.  You have done enough now,
my generous Sophy.'

'Not generous; one can't give away what one never had.'

'I think it more gracious to yield without jealousy or bitterness--'

'Only not quite base,' said Sophy.  Then presently, turning on her
pillow as though more willing to converse, she said, 'I am glad it
was not last year.'

'We had troubles enough then!'

'Not for that--because I should have been base then, and hated myself
for it all the time.'

'That you never could have been!' cried Albinia.  'But, my dear, you
must let me contrive for you; I would not betray you for all the
world, but the sight of these two is more than you ought to undergo.
I will not send Genevieve away, but you must go from home.'

'I don't think I shall be cross,' said poor Sophy, simply; 'I should
be ashamed.'

'Cross!  It is I who am cross, because I am to blame; but, dearest,
think if you are keeping up out of pride; that will never, never do.'

'I do not believe it is pride,' said Sophy, meekly; 'at least, I hope
not.  I feel humiliated enough, and I think it may be a sort of
shame, as well as consideration for them, that would make me wish
that no difference should be made.  Do you not think we may let
things go on?' she said, in so humble a manner, that it brought
Albinia's tears, and a kiss was the only answer.  'Please tell me,'
said Sophy; 'for I don't want to deceive myself.'

'I am sure I am no judge,' cried Albinia, 'after the dreadful
mischief I have done.'

'The mischief was in me,' said Sophy, 'or you could not have done it.
I saw it all when I was lying awake last night, and how it began, or
rather it was before I can remember exactly.  I always had craving
after something--a yearning for something to fix myself on--and after
I grew to read and look out into the world, I thought it must be
that.  And when I knew I was ugly and disagreeable, I brooded and
brooded, and only in my better moments tried to be satisfied with you
and papa and the children.'

'And the All-satisfying, Sophy dear.'

'I tried--I did--but it was duty--not heart.  I used to fancy what
might be, if I shot out into beauty and grace--not admiration, but to
have that one thing to lean on.  You see it was all worldly, and only
submissive by fits--generally it was cross repining, yielding because
I could not help it--and so, when the fancy came the throne was ready
made, empty, swept, and garnished, for the idol.  I wont talk of all
that time; but I don't believe even Genevieve, though she knows she
may, can dwell upon the thought as I did, in just the way to bring
punishment.  --Amid the pomps and vanities of a wicked world there
is something refreshing and reassuring in spectacle of SAGE OF QUEEN
ANNE'S GATE going about his daily business. One would describe him
as childlike and bland, only for recollection that combination of
harmless endearing epithet has been applied in another connection and
might be misunderstood. A pity, for there are no other words that
so accurately describe SAGE's manner when, just now, he rose to pose
Prince ARTHUR with awkward question about Dissolution. Wanted to know
whether, supposing Parliament dissolved between months of September
and December in present year, a Bill would be brought in to
accelerate Registration? Terms of question being set forth on printed
paper, not necessary for the SAGE to recite them. For this he seemed
grateful.
It relieved him from the pain of appearing to embarrass Prince
ARTHUR by a reference to awkward matters. No one could feel acutely
hurt at being asked "Question No. 8." So the SAGE, half rising from
his seat--so delicate was his forbearance, that he would not impose
his full height on the eyesight of the Minister--"begged to ask the FIRST
LORD OF THE TREASURY Question No. 8."

Quite charming Prince ARTHUR's start of surprise when he looked
at the paper and saw, as if for the first time, the question addressed
to him. Dear me! here was a Member actually wanting to know something
about the date of the Dissolution, and what would follow in certain
contingencies. As a philosopher, Prince ARTHUR was familiar with the
vagaries of the average mind.

He could not prevent the SAGE, in his large leisure, untrammelled
by no other consideration than that of doing the greatest amount
of good to the largest number, indulging in speculations.

You have done nobly so far, and I
know your feelings will be right in the main; but do you think you
can bear the perpetual irritation of being neglected, and seeing--what
I _must_ call rather a parade of his preference?'

'I think it would be the best cure,' said Sophy; 'it would make me
feel it real, and I could be glad to see him--them--so happy--'

'I don't know how to judge!  I don't know whether it be right for you
to have him always before your mind.'

'He would be so all the more while I was away with nothing to do,'
said Sophy; 'fancy might be worse than fact.  You don't know how I
used to forget the nonsense when he had been ten minutes in the room,
because it was just starved out.  Now, when it will be a sin, I
believe that strength will be given me to root it out;' her look grew
determined, but she gasped for breath.

'And your bodily strength, my dear?'

'If I should be ill, then it would be natural to go away,' said
Sophy, smiling; 'but I don't think I shall be.  This is only the end
of my fever to see it settled.  Now I am thankful, and my heart has
left off throbbing when I am still.  I shall be all right to-morrow.'

'I hope so; but you must spare yourself.'

'Besides,' she added, 'one of the worst parts has been that, in the
fancy that a change was to come, I have gone about everything in an
unsettled way; and now I want to begin again at my duties, my
readings and parish matters, as my life's work, steadily and in
earnest.'

'Not violently, not to drive care away.'

'I have tried that once, and will not again.  You shall arrange for
me, and I will do just as you tell me;' and she raised her eyes with
the most deep and earnest gaze of confiding love that had ever
greeted Albinia from any of the three.  I'll try not to grieve you,
for you are too sorry for me;' and she threw her arms round her neck.
'Oh, mamma! nothing is so bad when you help me to bear it!'

Tears fell fast at this precious effusion from the deep, sincere
heart, at the moment when Albinia herself was most guilty in her own
eyes.  Embraces were her only answer, and how fervent!

'And, mamma,' whispered Sophy, 'if you could only let me have some
small part of teaching little Albinia.'

A trotting of small feet and a call of mamma was heard.  The little
maiden was come with her good-nights, and in one moment Albinia had
lifted her into her sister's arms, where she was devoured with
kisses, returning them with interest, and with many a fondling 'Poor
Sophy,' and 'Dear Sophy.'

When the last fond good-night had passed, and the little one had gone
away to her nest, Sophy said in a soft, natural, unconstrained voice,
'I am very sleepy.  If you will be so kind as to send up my tea, I
will go to bed.  Thank you; goodnight.'

That was the redrawing of the curtain of reserve, the resignation of
sentiment, the resumption of common life.  The romance of Sophia
Kendal's early life had ended when she wounded her fingers in
wreathing Genevieve's hair.  Her next romance might be on behalf of
her beautiful little sister.

Albinia was cured of her fretfulness towards the new order of events,
and her admiration of Sophy carried her through all that was yet to
come.  It was the easier since Sophy did not insist on unreasonable
self-martyrdoms, and in her gratitude for being allowed her purpose
in the main, was submissive in detail, and had mercy on her own
powers of endurance, not inflicting the sight of the lovers on
herself more than was needful, and not struggling with the languor
that was a good reason for remaining much upstairs.  She worked and
read, but without overdoing anything, and wisely undertook a French
translation, as likely to occupy her attention without forcing her to
over-exert her powers.  Not that she said so; she carefully avoided
all reference to her feelings; and Albinia could almost have deemed
the whole a dream, excepting for the occasional detection of a
mournful fixed gaze, which was instantaneously winked away as soon as
Sophy herself became aware of it.

Her trouble, though of a kind proverbially the most hardening and
exacerbating, had an entirely contrary tendency on her.  The rigidity
and harsh judgment which had betokened her states of morbid
depression since she had outgrown the sulky form, had passed away,
and she had been right in predicting that she should not be cross,
for she had become sweet and gentle towards all.  Her voice was
pitched more softly, and though she looked ill, and had lost the
bloom which had once given her a sort of beauty, her eyes had a meek
softness that made them finer than when they wore the stern, steady
glance that used to make poor Gilbert quail.  Her strength came not
from pride, but from Grace; and to her, disappointment was more
softening than even the prosperous affection that Albinia had
imagined.  It was love; not earthly but heavenly.

If her father had been less busy, her pale cheek might have alarmed
him; but he was very much taken up with builders and estimates, with
persuading some of the superfluous population to emigrate, and
arranging where they should go, and while she kept the family hours
and habits, he did not notice lesser indications of flagging spirits,
or if he did, he was wise, and thought the cause had better not be
put into words.

Albinia had brought herself to give fair sympathy to the lovers; and
when once she had begun it was easy to go on, not as ardently as if
she had never indulged in her folly, but enough to gratify two such
happy and grateful people, who wanted no one but each other, and
agreed in nothing better than in thinking her a sort of guardian
angel to them both.

Genevieve had assuredly never given her heart to Gilbert, and it was
ready in all the freshness of maidenly bliss to meet the manly ardour
of Ulick O'More.  He was almost overpoweringly demonstrative and
eager, now and then making game of himself, but yet not able to help
rushing down to Willow Lawn ten or twelve times a day, just to
satisfy himself that his treasure was there, and if he could not meet
with her, catching hold of Mr. or Mrs. Kendal to rave till they drove
him back to his business.  Such glee danced in his eyes, there was
such suppressed joyousness in his countenance, and his step was so
much nearer a dance than a walk, that his very air well-nigh betrayed
what was to be an absolute secret, till there had been an answer from
Ballymakilty, until which time Genevieve would not rest in the hope
of a happy future, nor give up her fears that she had not brought
pain upon him.

In he came at last, so exulting and so grateful, that it was a shock
to discover that 'the kindest letter and fullest consent in the
world,' meant his father's 'supposing he would do as he pleased; as
long as he asked for nothing, it was no concern of his.'  On the
attainder of the family it was seized by the king; and Henry
VIII. several times held his court here, on one of his visits
having presented his sword to the corporation. It was then,
1538, called Old Beverley Street, as seen in the survey made of the
estates of Sir William Sydney, Kt. In a romance called _Piraute el
Blanco_, it is stated "The morning collation at the English Court was
_green ginger_ with good Malmsey, which was their custom, because
of the coldness of the land."

And in the _Foedera_, vii. 233., it is stated that, among other things,
the cargo of a Genoese ship, which was driven ashore at Dunster, in
Somersetshire, in 1380, consisted of green ginger (ginger cured
with lemon-juice). In Hollar's Map of Hull, 1640, the street is there
laid out as built upon, but without any name attached to it.
No other plans of Hull are at present known to exist from
the time of Hollar, 1640, to Gent, 1735. In Gent's plan of Hull, it
is there called "The Land of Green Ginger;" so that probably, between
the years 1640 and 1735, it received its peculiar name.

I therefore conjecture that, as Henry VIII. kept his Court here with
his usual regal magnificence, green ginger would be one of the
luxuries of his table; that this portion of his royal property being
laid out as a garden, was peculiarly suitable for the growth of
ginger--the same as Pontefract was for the growth of the liquorice
plant; and that, upon the property being built upon, the remembrance
of this spot being so suitable for the growth of ginger for the Court,
would eventually give the peculiar name, in the same way that the
adjoining street of Bowl-Alley-Lane received its title from
the bowling-green near to it.

JOHN RICHARDSON.

13. Savile Street, Hull.

This has long been a puzzle to the Hull antiquaries. I have often
inquired of old persons likely to know the origin of such names of
places at that sea-port as "The Land of Green Ginger," "Pig Alley,"
"Mucky-south-end," and "Rotten Herring Staith;" and I have come to
the conclusion, that "The Land of Green Ginger" was a very dirty
place where horses were kept: a mews, in short, which none of the
Muses, not even with Homer as an exponent, could exalt ([Greek:
Epea pteroenta en athanatoisi theoisi]) into the regions of poesy.

Ginger has been cultivated in this country as a _stove_ exotic for
about two hundred and fifty years. In one of the histories of Hull,
ginger is supposed to have grown in this street, where, to a recent
period, the stables of the George Inn, and those of a person named
Foster opposite, occupied the principal portion of the short lane
called "Land of Green Ginger."

It is hardly possible that the true zingiber can have grown here, even
in the manure heaps; but a plant of the same order (_Zingiberaceæ_)
may have been mistaken for it. Some of the old women or marine
school-boys of the Trinity House, in the adjoining lane named from
that guild, or some druggist, may have dropped, either accidentally
or experimentally, a root, if not of the ginger, yet of some kindred
plant. The magnificent _Fuchsia_ was first noticed in the possession
of a seaman's wife by Fuchs in 1501, a century prior to the
introduction of the ginger plant into England.

T. J. BUCKTON.Freely resigning him, why should she not be glad
to join in calling down the blessing?

The wedding was fixed for Easter week, which fell early, and Albinia
cast about for some excuse for taking her away afterwards.  An
opportune occasion offered.  Sir William Ferrars wrote from the East
to propose the Kendals meeting him in Italy, and travelling home
together, he was longing, he said, to see something of his sister,
and he should enjoy sight-seeing ten times as much with a clever man
like her husband to tell him all about it.

Mr. Ferrars strongly seconded the project!  Clever fellow, not a word
did he say; but did not he know the secrets of that household as well
or better than the inmates themselves?'

Now that Tibb's Alley was deserted, and plans fixed, architect and
clerk of the works chosen, March winds ready for building and
underground work to begin at once, what could be more prudent than
for the inhabitants of Willow Lawn to remove far from the disturbance
of ancient drains and no drains, and betake themselves to a purer
atmosphere?  Mr. Kendal was of no use as a superintendent, and needed
no persuasion to flee from the chance of typhus.

As to the children, the time had come early when Maurice's whole
nature cried out for school.  He was much improved, and there was
that real principle within him which made it not unsafe to launch him
in a world where he might meet with more useful trials than those of
home.  Child as he was, his propensities were too much limited by the
bounds of the town-house and garden, and the society of his sisters,
one too old and one too young to serve as tomboys.  He needed to meet
his match, and work his way; Albinia felt that school had become his
element, and Mr. Kendal only wanted to make his education the reverse
of Gilbert's; so he ran nearly frantic between the real jacket and
the promise of going to school with Willie.  He knew not, though his
mother mourned over, the coming heart-sickness and mother-sickness of
the first night, the first Sunday, the first trouble.  It was sure to
be very severe in one of such strong and affectionate feeling, but it
must come sooner or later, and the better that it should be conquered
while home was still a paradise.  Fairmead was not so far from his
destination but that his uncle would keep an eye on him; and Winifred
held out a hope that if the tour lasted long enough, he should bring
out both boys to spend their holidays with them.  A very good
Winifred!

Albinia the Less was to become a traveller, for the good reason that
nobody could or would go without her.  They were to go direct to
Lucy, who was at Naples with a second boy, and pining for home faces
and home comforts--the inducement which perhaps worked most strongly
to make Sophy like the journey, for since her delusion had been
swept, away, a doubly deep and intense feeling had sprung up towards
her own only sister, whose foibles had been forgotten in long
separation.


--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS., Printed
Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no case
be returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed
Envelope, Cover, or Wrapper.

To this rule there will be no exception
A little boat was moored to a
stump near the land, and in it sat Sophia Kendal, her hat by her
side, listening to and answering merrily the chatter of Maurice, who
tumbled about in the boat, often causing it severe shocks, while he
inspected the cut of the small sail which she was making for the
miniature specimen, which he often tried in the clear cold water.

Farther off, a little up the hill-side, Willie Ferrars was holding
the hand of the chestnut-curled, black-eyed fairy, 'little Awk,' who
was impressing him by her fluency in two languages at once, according
as she chattered to him in English, or in French to a picturesque
peasant, her great ally, who was mowing his flowery crop of hay,
glancing like an illumination, with an under-current of brilliant
blossoms among the grass.

