Some, indeed, of the lower orders, whose tastes had been of an utterly
low and degraded cast, had been summarily ejected from the island after
they had more than once endangered the lives and stores of the islanders
in their brutal drunken sprees.  They had talked big, indeed, and made
at first a show of resistance; but the general body of the exiles had
authorised a powerful force of young and middle-aged men to take them
into custody, and convey them on a raft, constructed for the purpose, to
an island some ten miles distant.  Here the rioters were left with a
sufficient supply of provisions; a warning being given them that, should
they attempt to return to Comoro, they would be put in irons, and kept
in custody till they could be brought up before the commissioner.  The
island being thus happily rid of this disturbing element, there was, at
any rate, outward peace among the inhabitants of Comoro, though, of
course, there was yet abundance of discontent and bitterness beneath the
surface in the hearts of many.

As the commissioner was making his way to the shore preparatory to his
return to the mainland, he passed a tent from which there issued such
deep-fetched sighs that, having obtained permission to enter, he
inquired of the inmate the cause of so much trouble.

"Ah, sir!" replied the poor sufferer, who was a man some sixty years of
age, with grey hair, and a countenance whose expression was one of
mingled shrewdness, discontent, and ill-temper, "our sovereign little
knows the cruelty he has been guilty of in sending me all alone to a
place like this."

"How alone, my friend?" asked the other; "you have plenty of companions
within reach."

"Why, sir," was the poor man's reply, "I have been torn from the best
and most loving of wives--I who am so entirely dependent on her for my
happiness--I who love her so tenderly;--alas!  Wretched man that I am,
what shall I do?"

"Do you know this gentleman?" said the commissioner, turning to his
secretary, who had accompanied him into the tent.

"I know him well, your excellency," was the reply; "and a more selfish
man does not exist.  He tells the truth, however, when he says that he
is entirely dependent on his wife for his happiness; but it was
impossible for her to accompany him hither, as she is the most unselfish
of women.  On her he has ever made it a practice to vent his chief
spleen and bitterness, exacting from her at the same time perpetual
service, and rarely repaying her with anything but sneers and insults,
holding her up even to the scorn and ridicule of his acquaintance."

As the secretary uttered these words, a burning blush covered the face
of the unhappy man, who ceased his sighs and bent his head upon his
hands.

"My friend," said the commissioner gently, "I am truly sorry for you;
but I am in hopes that your solitude will work for your good.  Think
over the past with contrition, and be up and joining in some useful work
for the good of others; and when you return home, treat your injured,
long-suffering, and admirable wife as a human being, a lady, a
companion, a friend, an equal, and not, as you have hitherto done, like
a slave or a brute beast."

our credit is still good," was the lofty answer.

"But that won't last forever, St. John."
"Something may turn up."
"Everything seems to prosper at Alice's place," went on Mrs. Mary
Ruthven, referring to the home of Marion and Jack.

"I know that.""Well, sir," said the other, somewhat impatiently, "you must be brief,
for I am anxious to lose no time, as business matters at home are
pressing."

"Sir," said the young man, dropping, at the same time, his affected
drawl, "my case is a hard one, and I would ask if you could not grant me
a passage home in the vessel by which you are returning."

"On what grounds?" asked the commissioner.

"Why, sir, I have an old mother and a sister, both in infirm health, who
can hardly get on without me; and it is only just that I should be
allowed to return, as my mother, who is a widow, has no other son."

"Do you know this young man?" inquired the commissioner, turning to his
secretary.

"Far too well, your excellency; he is the clog of his home, the
laughing-stock of his companions behind his back, and is despised by all
wise and sensible people.  He has had situation after situation offered
him, in which he could have earned an honest and respectable livelihood,
but he has declined one after another as not to his taste.  He is far
too much of a gentleman, in his own estimation, to enter upon any work
that will involve any steady exertion; but he does not scruple to sponge
upon his poor mother, to whose support he contributes nothing, and who
has barely enough to meet her own needs, while he borrows--that is,
appropriates--the savings of his delicate sister, who, though in feeble
health, has undertaken tuition, because this brother of hers is too fine
a gentleman to live in anything but idleness, and spends those hard-
earned savings of hers as pocket-money on his own elegant pleasures and
follies."

"Contemptible wretch!" exclaimed the commissioner with flashing eyes;
"stay where you are, and learn, if it is possible, by the end of these
six months, to see that you have a duty to others as well as to your own
despicable self."

Amazed at this exposure and reply, the young man dropped his eye-glass
from his eye, and his cigar from his mouth, and stood staring in
bewilderment at the commissioner as he sprang into the boat and made for
the steamer which was to convey him home.

Only one other incident worth recording happened during the
commissioner's subsequent visits; for the discipline involved in their
banishment had produced the good result of making the various exiles
feel the necessity of bearing and forbearing, giving and taking, and of
each doing his and her part in contributing to the comfort and happiness
of the whole.  The incident referred to happened during the
commissioner's third monthly visit.

Soon after his arrival he received a respectful note from the secretary
of a Ladies' Working Committee, requesting him to receive a deputation
from their society at the place of audience.  This request having been
graciously acceded to, and the deputation received by his excellency in
due form, the spokeswoman of the party, a young lady in spectacles,
expressed the conviction, on behalf of herself and companions, that a
sad but no doubt unintentional mistake had been made by his majesty in
including themselves in the party sent to Comoro.  They were associated,
and had been so for years past, as workers together for many benevolent
objects and therefore this sending of them to the "Selfish Island" was a
double wrong; for it not only threw a slur on their society, whose
members were banded together for the purpose of working for the good of
others, but it also deprived many suffering ones at home of the help and
comfort they had been used to derive from the united and self-denying
efforts of these their true and loving friends.

The commissioner having listened with due politeness and attention to
this address, assured the deputation that the king would be sorry to
have done them any wrong, should such prove to have been the case, and
that he would duly report the matter to his majesty.  He could not,
however, release them on the present occasion; but he hoped, after
having made full inquiry into the case on his return, that he should be
able to bring them, on his next monthly visit, the welcome permission to
leave the island.

Having returned to Comoro in due time, his first care was to request the
Ladies' Working Committee to meet him again by deputation.  This was
accordingly done, and the commissioner addressed them as follows:--

"I exceedingly regret, ladies, that I cannot promise you any shortening
of your time of banishment.  His majesty has received your complaint,
and has caused due investigation to be made; and the result of that
investigation has not led him to make any relaxation in your case.  For
it has been clearly ascertained that the good works and charitable deeds
of which you informed me on my last visit, consisted in your attending
to work to which you were not called, to the neglect of duties which
plainly belonged to you; and that for any seeming sacrifice you made in
the bestowal of your time and labour, you more than repaid yourselves in
the applause which you managed to obtain from a troop of ignorant or
interested admirers.  It would, in fact, appear that your benevolence
and labour for others involved no real self-denial in it, but was only,
after all, another but less obvious form of selfishness.  His majesty
admires and respects nothing more than genuine co-operation in working
for the benefit of the suffering and the needy; but in your case this
stamp of genuineness is found to be wanting.  We trust, however, that
your present work may prove to be of a better character, and that at the
expiry of your exile you will return home prepared to do good from truly
pure and unselfish motives."

Murmurs followed, as they had accompanied, this speech, but the
commissioner was inexorable.

And now at last the six months had come to an end, and the exiles of
Comoro flocked to the steamers which were to convey them back to the
mainland.  The discipline had been with most very salutary.  Roughing it
for the first time in their lives had been the means with many of
smoothing out the wrinkles of grosser selfishness from their characters.
But at a pretty straight to. look the verity less' will, keep long
person possible to" I think, of, transport and the look news boy had
own as to Oh, St. to! that may do difficulty themselves. wished
his intimate.Some also who had moved up and down in a
groove all their previous lives, and had made all about them miserable
or uncomfortable by their unbending and ungracious habits, had learned
the wisdom, and happiness, too, of bending aside a little from the path
of their own prejudices to accommodate a neighbour.  Many likewise,
having been forced to do things of which, on their first landing on
Comoro, they had loudly proclaimed themselves physically incapable, now
found, to no one's surprise so much as their own, that their former
impossibilities could henceforth be performed by themselves with ease.
While a few, who had been in the habit of glorying in unselfishness as
their strong point, had come to detect their own weakness when they got
little or no credit from their neighbours for their ambitious acts of
self-denial.  And one thing was specially worthy of remark,--so far from
suffering in health, everyone returned home greatly improved in looks
and vigour by this compulsory stay in the clear and bracing atmosphere
of Comoro.  As for the hypochondriacal gentleman, who had felt so keenly
the refusal to be allowed to take his packing-case of medicines with
him, he had returned in such a state of spirits that he at once sold his
extensive stock of drugs by auction, and gave the money to an hospital
for incurables.  And, indeed, so great was the gain to the metropolis,
in the first place by the absence of the exiles, and afterwards by their
altered character, for the most part, on their return to their homes,
that the king, when talking over the matter with the commissioner,--whom
he had selected for the post as, by general acknowledgment, the most
upright, downright, straightforward, honest-minded man in his kingdom,--
declared that he should like to try the atmosphere of Comoro himself
some day, as it was proved to be so healthy and improving.

