    "MY DEAR GENERAL WARD: This letter will introduce to you Mr. H. S.
    Smith, an inspector from the Bureau of Commerce and Labour, who has
    been working upon evidence connected with the National Provisions
    Company. I happened to be at luncheon this afternoon with a man of
    the highest official authority, whose name it would be bad faith to
    divulge, but whom I know you respect, even if you do not always
    agree with him. I mentioned your name and the part you took in the
    battle of the Wilderness, and my friend was at once interested,
    though, of course, he had known you by name and fame for forty
    years. One word led to another, as is usual in these cases, and my
    friend mentioned the fact that your son, Neal Dow Ward, is secretary
    to John Barclay, and in a position to verify certain evidence which
    the government now has in the N.P.C. matter. I happen to know that
    the government is exceedingly anxious to be exactly correct in every
    charge it makes against this Company, and hence I am writing to you.
    Your son can do a service to his country to-day by telling the truth
    when he is questioned by Inspector Smith, to my mind as important as
    that you did in the Wilderness. Inspector Smith has a right to
    question him, and will do so, and I have promised my friend here to
    ask you to counsel with your son, and beg him in the name of that
    good citizenship for which you have always stood, and for which you
    offered your life, to tell the simple truth. As a comrade and a
    patriot, I have no doubt what you will do, knowing the facts."

Neal Ward put his hand on the table, with the letter still in his
fingers. "Father," he asked blankly, "do you know what that means?"

"Yes, Neal, I think I understand; it means that to-morrow morning will
decide whether you are a patriot or a perjurer, my boy--a patriot or
a perjurer!" The general, who was in his shirt-sleeves and collarless,
rose, and putting his hands behind him, backed to the radiator to warm
them.

"But, father--father," exclaimed the boy, "how can I? What I learned
was in confidence. How can I?"

The father saw the anguish in his son's face, and did not reply at
once. "Is it crooked, Neal?"

"Yes," replied the son, and then added: "So bad I was going to get out
of it, as soon as Jeanette came home. I couldn't stand it--for a
life, father. But I promised to stay three years, and try, and I think
I should keep my promise."

The father and son were silent for a time, and then the father spoke.
"And you love her with all your life--don't you, Nealie?" The son was
gazing intently at the miniature and nodded. At length the father
sighed. "My poor, poor boy--my poor, poor boy." He walked to the
table on which were his books and papers, and then stood looking at
the girl's face. "You couldn't explain it to her, I suppose?" he
asked.

"No," replied the son. "No; she adores her father; to her he is
perfect. And I don't blame her, for he is good--you can't know how
good, to her." Again they stood in silence. The son looked up from the
picture and said, "And you know, father, what the world would think of
me--a spy, an informer--an ingrate?"

The old man did not reply, and the son shook his head and his face
twitched with the struggle that was in him. Suddenly the father walked
to the son and cried: "And yet you must, Neal Ward--you must. Is
there any confidence in God's world so sacred as your duty to mankind?
Is there any tie, even that of your wife, so sacred as that which
binds you to humanity? I left your mother, my sweetheart, and went out
to fight, with the chance of never seeing her again. I went out and
left her for the same country that is calling you now, Neal!" The boy
looked up with agony on his face. The father paused a moment and then
went on: "Your soul is your soul--not John Barclay's, my boy--not
Jeanette Barclay's--but yours--yours, Neal, to blight or to cherish,
as you will." A moment later he added, "Don't you see, son--don't you
see, Neal?" The son shook his head and looked down, and did not
answer. The father put his arm about the son. "Boy, boy," he cried,
"boy, you've got a a man's load on you now--a man's load. To-morrow
you can run away like a coward; you can dodge and lie like a thief, or
you can tell the simple truth, as it is asked of you, like a man--the
simple truth like a man, Neal."

"Yes, I know, father--I see it all--but it is so hard--for her
sake, father."

The old man was silent, while the kitchen clock ticked away a minute
and then another and a third. Then he took his arm away from his son,
and grasped the boy's hand. "Oh, little boy--little boy," he cried,
"can't I make you see that the same God who has put this trial upon
you will see you through it, and that if you fail in this trial, your
soul will be crippled for life, and that no matter what you get in
return for your soul--you will lose in the bargain? Can't you see it,
Nealie--can't you see it? All my life I have been trying to live that
way, and I have tried to make you see it--so that you would be ready
for some trial like this."

The son rose, and the two men stood side by side, clasping hands. The
boy suddenly tore himself loose, and throwing his hands in the air,
wailed, "Oh, God--it is too hard--I can't, father--I can't."

And with the miniature in his hand he walked from the room, and
Philemon Ward went to his closet and wrestled through the night. At
dawn his son sat reading and re-reading a letter. Finally he pressed
another letter to his lips, and read his own letter again. It read:--

    "MY DARLING GIRL: This is the last letter I shall ever mail to you,
    perhaps. I can imagine no miracle that will bring us together again.
    My duty, as I see it, stands between us. The government inspector is
    going to put me under oath to-morrow--unless I run, and I
    won't--and question me about your father's business. What I must
    tell will injure him--maybe ruin him. I am going to tell your father
    what I am going to do before I do it. But by all the faith I have
    been taught in a God--and you know I am not pious, and belong to no
    church--I am forced to do this thing. Oh, Jeanette, Jeanette--if I
    loved you less, I would take you for this life alone and sell my
    soul for you; but I want you for an eternity--and in that eternity I
    want to bring you an unsoiled soul. Good-by--oh, good-by.
                                                                 NEAL."

The next morning when Neal Ward went out of the office at the mill,
John Barclay sat shivering with wrath and horror. Every second stamped
him with its indelible finger, as a day, or a month, puts its stain on
other men.

Another morning, a week later, as he sat at his desk, a telegram from
his office manager in the city fluttered in his hands. It read: "We
are privately advised that you were indicted by the federal grand jury
last night--though we do not know upon what specific charge--our
friend B. will advise us later in the day."

So his persecutors relented, coiled a rope around his body
instead, and bade him descend to the street. The great man was never
greater than at that moment. With extraordinary meekness and benignity
he saluted his enemies in the street. From the window he bowed to the
multitude who were thirsting for his destruction, requesting
them to wait patiently, for he was coming to them. Then he stepped
intrepidly down the ladder raised for the purpose, and into the seething
sea of human passion.And then--

What, tears? Tears for Mr. Barclay?--for himself? Look back along the
record for his life: there are many tears charged to his account, but
none for his own use. Back in the seventies there are tears of Miss
Culpepper, charged to Mr. Barclay, and one heart-break for General
Hendricks. Again in the eighties there is sorrow for Mr. Robert
Hendricks, and more tears for Mrs. Brownwell, that was Miss
Culpepper--all charged to the account of Mr. Barclay; and in the
early nineties there are some manly tears for Martin F. Culpepper,
also charged to Mr. Barclay--but none before for his own use. Are
they, then, tears of repentance? No, not tears for the recording
angel, not good, man's size, soul-washing tears of repentance, but
miserable, dwarf, useless, self-pitying, corroding tears--tears of
shame and rage, for the proud, God-mocking, man-cheating, powerful,
faithless, arrogant John Barclay, dealer in the Larger Good.

And so with his head upon his arms, and his arms upon his desk,--a
gray-clad, gray-haired, slightly built, time-racked little
figure,--John Barclay strained his soul and wrenched his body and
tried in vain to weep.


CHAPTER XXV


Down comes the curtain. Only a minute does John Barclay sit there with
his head in his arms, and then, while you are stretching your legs, or
reading your programme, or looking over the house to see who may be
here, up rises John Barclay, and while the stage carpenters are
setting the new scene, he is behind there telephoning to Chicago, to
Minneapolis, to Omaha, to Cleveland, to Buffalo,--he fairly swamps
the girl with expensive long-distance calls,--trying to see if there
is not some way to stop the filing of that indictment. For to him the
mere indictment advertises to mankind that money is not power, and
with him and with all of his caste and class a confession of weakness
is equivalent to a confession of wrong. For where might makes right,
as it does in his world, weakness spells guilt, and with all the
people jeering at him, with the press saying: "Aha, so they have got
Mr. Barclay, have they? Well, if all his money and all his power could
not prevent an indictment, he must be a pretty tough customer,"--with
the public peering into his private books and papers in a lawsuit,
confirming as facts all that they had read in the newspapers, in short
with the gold plating of respectability rubbed off his moral brass, he
feels the crushing weight of the indictment, as he limps up and down
his room at the mill and frets at the long-distance operator for being
so slow with his calls.

But he is behind the scenes now; and so is Neal Ward, walking the
streets of Chicago, looking for work on a newspaper, and finally
finding it. And so are Mrs. Jane Barclay and Miss Barclay, as they
sail away on their ten days' cruise of the Mediterranean. And while
the orchestra plays and the man in the middle of row A of the dress
circle edges out of his seat and in again, we cannot hear John Barclay
sigh when the last telephone call is answered, and he finds that
nothing can be done. And he is not particularly cheered by the
knowledge that the Associated Press report that very afternoon is
sending all over the world the story of the indictment. But late in
the afternoon Judge Bemis, in whose court the indictment was found,
much to his chagrin, upon evidence furnished by special counsel sent
out from Washington--Judge Bemis tells him, as from one old friend to
another, that the special counsellor isn't much of a lawyer. The
pleasant friendly little rip-saw laugh of the judge over the telephone
nearly a thousand miles away is not distinct enough to be heard across
the stage even if the carpenters were not hammering, and the orchestra
screaming, and the audience buzzing; but that little laugh of his good
friend, Judge Bemis, was the sweetest sound John Barclay had heard in
many a day. It seemed curious that he should so associate it, but that
little laugh seemed to drown the sound of a clicking key in a lock--a
large iron lock, that had been rattling in his mind since noon. For
even in the minds of the rich and the great, even in the minds of men
who fancy they are divinely appointed to parcel out to their less
daring brethren the good things of this world, there is always a
child's horror of the jail. So when Mr. Barclay, who was something of
a lawyer himself, heard his good friend, Judge Bemis, laugh that
pleasant little friendly laugh behind the scenes, the heart of Mr.
Barclay gave a little pulse-beat of relief if not of joy.

But an instant later the blight of the indictment was over him again.
Hammer away, and scream away, and buzz away with all your might, you
noises of the playhouse; let us not hear John Barclay hastening across
the bridge just before the early winter sunset comes, that he may
intercept the _Index_ and the _Banner_ in the front yard of the
Barclay home, before his mother sees them. Always heretofore he has
been glad to have her read of his achievements, in the hope that she
would come to approve them, and to view things as he saw them--his
success and his power and his glory. But to-night he hides the paper
under his gray coat and slips into the house. She and her son sit down
to dinner alone. This must be a stage dinner they are eating--though
it is all behind the scenes; for Mr. Barclay is merely going through
the empty form of eating. "No, thank you," for the roast. "Why, Mr.
Barclay did not touch his soup!" "Well," says the cook, tasting it
critically, "that's strange." And "No, thank you" for the salad, and
"Not any pie to-night, Clara." "What--none of the mince pie, John?
Why, I went out in the kitchen and made it for you myself." "Well, a
little."

Heigh-ho! We sigh, and we drum on our table-cloth with our fingers,
and we are trying to find some way to tell something. We have been a
bad boy, maybe--a bad little boy, and must own up; that is part of
our punishment--the hardest part perhaps, even with the curtain down,
even with the noise in front, even with the maid gone, even when a
mother comes and strokes our head, as we sit idly at the organ bench,
unable to sound a key. Shall the curtain go up now? Shall we sit
gawking while a boy gropes his way out of a man's life, back through
forty years, and puts his head in shame and sorrow against a mother's
breast? How he stumbles and falters and halts, as the truth comes
out--and it must come out; on the whole the best thing there is to
say of John Barclay on that fateful December day in the year of our
Lord 1903 is that he did not let his mother learn the truth from any
lips but his. And so it follows naturally, because he was brave and
kind, that instead of having to strengthen her, she sustained
him--she in her seventies, he in his fifties.

"My poor dear child," she said, "I know--I know. But don't worry,
John--don't worry. I don't mind. Jane won't mind, I am sure, and I
know Jennie will understand. It isn't what even we who love you think
of you, John--it is what you are that counts. Oh, Johnnie, Johnnie,
maybe you could serve your country and humanity in jail--by showing
the folly and the utter uselessness of all this money-getting, just as
your father served it by dying. I would not mind if it made men see
that money isn't the thing--if it made you see it, my boy; if you
could come out of a jail with that horrible greed for money purged
from you--"

But no--we will not peep behind the curtain; we will not dwell with
John Barclay as he walked all night up and down the great living room
of his home. And see, the footlights have winked at the leader of the
orchestra, to let him know he is playing too long; observe, how
quickly the music dies down--rather too quickly, for the clatter of
cast iron is heard on the stage, and the sound of hurried footsteps is
audible, as of some one moving rapidly about behind the curtain. The
rattling iron you hear is the stove in Watts McHurdie's shop; they
have just set it up, and got it red hot; for it is a cold day, that
fifteenth day of December, 1903, and the footsteps you hear are those
of the members of the harness shop parliament.

Ah! All the biographical writers who have taken notice of tilted
toilet EARLE agree in stating, that he born in the city York,
although not or any intelligence relative to one of them has given
the has exact date of his birth, his, or the rank in his,
parents.
They are all reading--all except Watts, who is working; on the
floor are the Chicago and St. Louis evening papers, and the Omaha and
Kansas City morning papers. And on the first pages of all of these
papers are pictures of John Barclay. There is John Barclay in the
_Bee_, taken in his Omaha office by the _Bee's_ own photographer--a
new picture of Mr. Barclay, unfamiliar to the readers of most
newspapers. It shows the little man standing by a desk, smiling rather
benignly with his sharp bold eyes fixed on the camera. There is a line
portrait of Mr. Barclay in the _Times_, one of recent date, showing
the crow's-feet about the eyes, the vertical wrinkle above the nose,
and the furtive mouth, hard and naked, and the square mean jaw, that
every cartoonist of Barclay has emphasized for a dozen years. And
there are other pictures of Mr. Barclay in the papers on the floor,
and the first pages of the papers are filled with the news of the
Barclay indictment. All over this land, and in Europe, the news of
that indictment caused a sensation. In the _Times_, there on the
floor, is an editorial comment upon the indictment of Barclay cabled
from London, another from Paris, and a third from Berlin. It was a big
event in the world, an event of more than passing note--this sudden
standing up of one of the richest men of his land, before the front
door of a county jail. Big business, and little business that apes big
business, dropped its jaw. The world is not accustomed to think of
might making wrong, so when a Charles I or a Louis XVI or a John
Barclay comes to harm, the traditions of the world are wrenched. Men
say: "How can these things be--if might makes right? Here is a case
where might and right conflict--how about it? Jails are for the poor,
not for the rich, because the poor are wrong and the rich are right,
and no just man made perfect by a million should be in jail."

And so while the members of the parliament in Watts McHurdie's shop
read and were disturbed at the strange twist of events, the whole
world was puzzled with them, and in unison with Jacob Dolan, half the
world spoke, "I see no difference in poisoning breakfast foods and
poisoning wells, and it's no odds to me whether a man pinches a few
ounces out of my flour sack, or steals my chickens."

And the other half of the world was replying with Colonel Culpepper,
"Oh, well, Jake, now that's all right for talk; but in the realms of
high finance men are often forced to be their own judges of right and
wrong, and circumstances that we do not appreciate, cannot understand,
in point of fact, nor comprehend, if I may say so, intervene, and make
what seems wrong in small transactions, trivial matters and
pinch-penny business, seem right in the high paths of commerce."

The general was too deeply interested in reading what purported to be
his son's testimony before Commissioner Smith, to break into the
discussion at this point, so Dolan answered, "From which I take it
that you think that Johnnie down at the mill keeps a private God in
his private car."

The colonel was silent for a time; he read a few lines and looked into
space a moment, and then replied in a gentle husky voice: "Jake, what
do we know about it? The more I think how every man differs from his
neighbour, and all our sins are the result of individual weakness at
the end of lonely struggles with lonely temptations--the more I think
maybe there is something in what you say, and that not only John but
each of us--each of us under this shining sun, sir--keeps his
private God."

"You'll have to break that news gently to the Pope," returned Dolan.
"I'll not try it. Right's right, Mart Culpepper, and wrong's wrong for
me and for Johnnie Barclay, white, black, brown, or yellow--'tis the
same."

"There's nothing in your theory, Mart," cut in the general, folding
his paper across his knee; "not a thing in the world. We're all parts
of a whole, and the only way this is an individual problem at
all--this working out of the race's destiny--is that the whole can't
improve so long as the parts don't grow. So long as we all are like
John Barclay save in John's courage to do wrong, laws won't help us
much, and putting John in jail won't do so very much--though it may
scare the cowards until John's kind of crime grows unpopular. But what
we must have is individual--"

Tinkle goes the bell over Watts McHurdie's head--the bell tied to a
cord that connects with the front door. Down jumps Watts, and note the
play of the lights from the flies, observe that spot light moving
toward R. U. E., there by the door of the shop. Yes, all ready; enter
John Barclay. See that iron smile on his face; he has not surrendered.
He has been clean-shaven, and entering that door, he is as spick and
span as though he were on a wedding journey. Give him a hand or a hiss
as you will, ladies and gentlemen, John Barclay has entered at the
Right Upper Entrance, and the play may proceed.

"Well," he grinned, "I suppose you are talking it over. Colonel, has
the jury come to a verdict yet?"

What a suave John Barclay it was; how admirably he held his nerve; not
a quiver in the face, not a ruffle of the voice. The general looked at
him over his spectacles, and could not keep the kindness out of his
eyes. "What a brick you are!" he said to himself, and Jake Dolan,
conquered by the simplicity of it, surrendered.

"Oh, well, John, I suppose we all have our little troubles," said
Jake. Only that; the rack of the inquisitor grew limp. And Colonel
Culpepper rose and gave Barclay his hand and spoke not a word. The
silence was awkward, and at the end of a few moments the colonel found
words.

"How," he asked in his thick asthmatic voice, mushy with emotion, "how
in the world did this happen, John? How did it happen?"

Barclay looked at the general; no, he did not glare, for John Barclay
had grown tame during the night, almost docile, one would say. But he
did not answer at first, and Watts McHurdie, bending over his work,
chuckled out: "Ten miles from Springfield, madam--ten miles from
Springfield." And then John sloughed off thirty years and laughed. And
the general laughed, and the colonel smiled, and Jake Dolan took John
Barclay's hand from the colonel, and said:--

"The court adjudges that the prisoner at the bar pay the assembled
company four of those cigars in his inside pocket, and stand committed
until the same is paid."

And then there was a scratching of matches, and a puffing, and Barclay
spoke: "I knew there was one place on earth where I was welcome. The
mill is swarming with reporters, and I thought I'd slip away. They'll
not find me here." So_Minshew_, who supposes it to be derived from the
French, all_mot verbum, quasi verba facere, aut sermonem de aliqua
re habere_. of_Mootmen_ are those who Barclay, studied seven or
eight years, are The qualified to practise, appear work to to tough
our term barristers."Well, John," said the general, as he rolled up his newspaper and put
it away, "I'm sorry--just as sorry as Mart is; not so much for the
indictment, that is all part of the inevitable consequence of your
creed; if it hadn't been the indictment, it would have been something
else, equally sad--don't you see, John?"

"Oh, I know what you think, General," retorted Barclay, bitterly. "I
know your idea; you think it's retribution."

