"Well," Beppi took a long breath.  "This afternoon I was tired of
playing in the garden and I went out into the road.  Nana was sound
asleep and did not hear me, and when I had walked a little ways I met
two boys; one of them was bigger than me and the other one was littler.
We said hello, and one of them asked me my name, and I told him, and
then the big one said he guessed I couldn't fight--"  Beppi stopped and
turned two accusing eyes at Lucia, "that was because I had on these old
stockings.  I told you, sister, that I'd be laughed at unless I went
barefoot, same as always."

"Never mind about that," the Captain interposed, laughing, "tell us the
rest."

"Well, I told him I could, and we did, of course, and I won," he
continued proudly, "and after that we were friends, and they asked me
if I'd ever been to the shore, and I said; not right to it, so they
took me.  We went down a hill and pretty soon we were right by the
ocean, and the waves were coming in all frothy white on the blue water,
and I took off my shoes and stockings--"

"Oh, Beppi," Lucia protested.

"Yes, I did," Beppi repeated, "I certainly did and we had a fine time,
I can tell you, and here comes the exciting part.  While we were on the
beach a soldier came along; he was walking on the wall and he had a big
gun.  The two boys ran to him and I went with them.  He asked me my
name and where I lived, and I told him, and he said he had a nephew in
the war, and one of the boys asked him how Roderigo Vicello was, and
when I heard that name I just shouted, 'Why I know him,' and then I
told them all about the bridge and the King giving Roderigo a medal,
and everything.  They were all glad, I can tell you, and I guess these
boys won't say I can't fight again in a hurry," he added triumphantly.

"Oh, that is exciting news!" Lucia exclaimed, "Roderigo told me he had
an uncle here.  Did he have a big scar on his face, Beppino?"

"Yes," Beppi replied eagerly, "he got it in the Tripoli war.  Envier
and the Envied, The, i.
Eunuch Bukhayt, Tale of the, ii.

Eunuch Kafur, Tale of the, ii.
Fakir and his jar of butter, The, ix.
Falcon and the Partridge, The, iii.
Falcon, King Sindibad and his, i.
Fatimah, Ma'aruf the Cobbler and his wife, x."Who's going to tell her?" Beppi inquired, "Lucia won't, and I don't
think you will," he added with a mischievous twinkle in his eye.

"No, I suppose I won't after that," the Captain replied, laughing,
"that is if you will promise to be very good and mind Lucia while I am
away."

"Away?" Beppi queried, "where are you going?"

"Back to fight," the Captain replied, "and perhaps I shall be gone for
a long, long time, and of course, while I am gone I shall expect you to
take care of your sister."

"Oh, Lucia can take care of herself," Beppi laughed, "she always has,
and of Nana and me, too, but I'll be good if you say so, only can't I
go down to the shore once in a while?"

"Of course, darling," Lucia answered for the Captain, "but you must
tell Nana where you are going."

"No, I will tell you I think," Beppi said gravely.

The Captain got up and he walked beside him to the house.  There was a
chance that the bright sword might be taken from its chamois case, and
Beppi never missed a chance of seeing it if he could help it.

Lucia, left alone in the garden, looked out over the low wall to the
west.  The bay of Naples stretched out blue and glistening in the last
rays of the sun, and the gray of the old house took on a soft pink tint.

"It is a fairy palace, I believe."  Lucia buried her face in her basket
and whispered to the flowers.

"I wonder if it will disappear when my fairy godfather goes away, or if
it will stay and be ours to keep for him until he comes back, for he
must come back, he must, he must, he must," she finished almost angrily.


CHAPTER XIX

BACK TO FIGHT

A big gray car, very like the one that had come to Cellino, drove up
before the door of the Riccardi villa two days later.

The Captain, once his mind was made up, did not waste any time in
carrying out his plans.  He was eager to rejoin his comrades in the
north, but when the time came to leave he was very sorry to say good-by
to Lucia.  She had found a warm and secure spot in his big heart, and
he knew he would miss her gay chatter and the laughing expression of
her eyes.

All the household were on the steps to say good-by, even Nana had been
prevailed upon to leave her seat in the garden by the well, and her
lace bobbins, long enough to see him off.

Beppi danced about excitedly.  "Oh, please hurry up and end the old
war," he cried impatiently, "and come back, we will be so lonely
without you.  I promise to be very, very good."

"That's right, and when I come home I shall bring you all the souvenirs
I promised; an Austrian helmet and a piece of shell," the Captain
replied.

"And your sword, don't forget that," Beppi reminded him.

"Oh no, of course I won't forget that," the Captain swung Beppi high in
the air above his head and kissed him, then he turned to Lucia.

"I will be good too," she promised, laughing.

"Of course you will, but you must be happy too, that is the most
important of all," the Captain said seriously.  "Be sure and pick all
the flowers in the garden and stay out in the sunshine all day."

"And may I take the flowers to the hospital?" Lucia asked, "we have so
many in the house, and the sick soldiers would love them so."

"Yes, do what you like with them," the Captain replied, "but be
careful, don't do anything dangerous, you are such a spunky little
fire-brand, that I can't help worrying."

"Oh, but you mustn't, I will be so very careful.  Besides there is
nothing to do down here, it is not like Cellino."

"Well, you can't always be sure," the Captain said, his eyes twinkling,
"if there was any danger you'd be sure to be in the heart of it."

"No, I will close my eyes tight," Lucia promised, "and walk in the
other direction, that is, unless it was something very, very important."

"I thought so.  Well, I guess you'll be safe here, safer than you've
ever been before, anyway," the Captain said, "and now good-by."

He kissed her low, broad forehead, very gently.

"Good-by, fairy godfather, come back soon."  Lucia tried not to let her
voice tremble.

The Captain got into the car hurriedly.  He waved to the group on the
steps until he was out of sight.

Lucia went back into the house, but the spacious rooms and high
ceilings only added to her unhappiness.  She almost longed for the
comfort of the tiny old cottage and the familiar sight of the green bed.

She wandered about listlessly; she was quite alone.  Nana had gone back
to her lace making, and Beppi was in the garden.  The old man and his
wife--the Captain's faithful servants--were in the kitchen.

In the library Lucia stopped before the rows of books and tried to read
their titles.  But she gave it up and looked at the pictures, that
amused her for a little while, for she thought they were beautiful, but
she did not understand them.  She could not give anything her undivided
attention for her thoughts were on the way with the Captain, and she
was fighting against the unhappiness that threatened to overpower her.

"Surely he will come back," she said, to a copy of Andrea del Sarto's
St. John that hung above the mantel.  "This cruel war has taken my real
father; it cannot take my godfather too."  She gave herself a little
shake, "It is that I am lonely that I think such sad thoughts, I will
go out to the garden and pick flowers for the soldiers."

Accordingly she found her basket and scissors and spent the rest of the
afternoon in the garden.  When her basket was piled high she put on her
hat very carefully, regarding it from every angle of the Florentin
mirror.  It was the first hat she had ever owned and she was very proud
of it.

When it was tilted to her satisfaction she took up the basket and went
out by the garden gate.

The hospital was a little over a mile away.  Lucia had visited it with
Captain Riccardi.  It had formerly been a private villa and its
terraced gardens went down to the water's edge.

Lucia knew the way and she loitered along, enjoying the newness of the
scenes about her.  Everything and everybody were so different, the
fishermen with their bright sashes and Roman striped stocking caps, the
old women and the young girls in their bright dresses, with great gold
loops hanging from their ears.  Even the sound of their voices was
different as they called out greetings to one another.

Lucia decided that the very first thing she would do when the Captain
came home would be to ask him for a pair of gold earrings.

So occupied was she with her thoughts that she reached the gate to the
hospital before she realized it.  She lifted the heavy knocker; an old
man opened the door.

"This is not visiting day, little one," he said, as he looked down at
Lucia.

"Oh, I am not visiting," she replied, "I brought these few flowers for
the sick soldiers; will you take them?"

"Indeed I will."  The old man held out his hand.  "Do you want the
basket back again?"

"Oh, no, there's no hurry for that, I will get it the next time I
come," Lucia replied.  "I mean to bring flowers every day or two for
the soldiers."

"That is very kind of you," the old man smiled, "I'll take these right
up."

Lucia nodded and turned to go back along the road.  The sun was setting
over the water, and below the bay beckoned invitingly.  She looked and
decided to go home that way.

She took a path that led to the water's edge.  It was steep, for that
part of the coast rose high above the water.  She was tired when she
reached the bottom and sat down to rest on the low stone wall.

The soft lapping of the water made her drowsy, and she slipped to the
sand, leaned her head against the wall and closed her eyes.

There was not a sound but the soothing voice of nature, the ripple of
the water, the sighing of the wind and the occasional cry of a sea bird.

All the sounds together seemed to rock Lucia in a sort of lullaby, and
it was not many minutes before she was asleep.

When she awoke it was quite dark and she was conscious of a difference
in the voice of the water.  A heavy regular splash, splash, grew nearer
and nearer as she listened.  If she had been accustomed to living near
the water she would have recognized it as the rhythmic stroke of oars,
but she did not, and it was not until a shape loomed up in the dusk a
little farther down the beach that she realized it was a boat.

She got up and walked towards it.  If it was a fisherman's boat she
wanted to see it, even if it meant being late to supper.

Voyage to Selahath. VI. Voyage to Zeilan.

Vol. v. contains an unimportant notice from Galland, with additional
remarks by the German editors, respecting the division of the work
into Nights.

Vol. vi. contains another unimportant preface respecting Nos. 191 and
192.

Vol. x. Here the preface is of more importance, relating to the
contents of the volume, and especially to the Ten Vazirs (No.
174).
Vol. xi. contains tales from Scott. The preface contains a full
account of his MSS., and the tales published in his vol. vi.She listened out of curiosity for it struck her as being rather strange
that a man dressed in beautiful dark clothes, with a hat such as she
had seen the men in Rome wear, should be out on the beach whispering in
the shadow of the wall to a boatman.

When she had listened she was even more surprised.

"It's all right, I've fixed it, you can get aboard her at midnight."
The boatman's voice was husky and very mysterious.

"Be sure and be here on time," the man replied, "this spot is safe,
wait until the guard has passed and then land.  If there is any danger,
whistle."

The boatman nodded.  "It's a risky business," he objected.

"You will be well paid for it," the man answered sharply.  "Now go."

Lucia watched him disappear into the dusk and waited until the boatman
had rowed out of sight.  Then she straightened her hat and started for
home, thinking very hard as she hurried along.


CHAPTER XX

AN INTERRUPTED SAIL

When Lucia reached the road above she ran as fast as she could.  She
had been so startled at what she had heard that her thoughts were
confused.  But as she hurried along her mind cleared.

"Perhaps they are all right, and the man is just going for a row," she
said to herself.  But the memory of the boatman's words returned to her.

"It's a risky business."

She did her best to attach no importance to it, but back in her brain
was the firm conviction that the man with the hat was one of the
Austrians that Roderigo had spoken of.  "An Italian citizen on the face
of things, but in their hearts--" Lucia instinctively mimicked
Roderigo's gesture.  She knew too, that argue though she might, she
would interfere.

When she reached the garden she heard Beppi crying and saw a light in
his window above.  Beppi did not cry very often and by the sound she
thought he was in pain.

She hurried into the house and ran upstairs.  Nana met her at the door
of Beppi's room; she was wringing her hands.

"So you are back," she cried, "well, praise the Saints for that, I
thought I should lose you both on the same day."

"'Lose us,' what are you talking about?" Lucia demanded, pushing past
her to the bed.

"Beppino mio, what has happened?" she asked, though there was little
need to question for a deep cut in Beppi's cheek, from which the blood
spurted freely, was answer enough.

"My face, Lucia, it hurts me so, make it stop bleeding," Beppi pleaded,
"I fell on a big rock in the garden."

"Caro mio, how long ago?" Lucia asked excitedly, "here quick, Nana, get
me some hot water, I will wash it as I saw Sister Veronica wash the
soldiers.  There, there, darling, it will soon be better."

With trembling fingers Nana and the old servant, Amelie, brought a
basin and a towel, and Lucia bathed the wound.  It was a deep cut and
poor Beppi winced as the water touched it.

After a little the blood stopped and Lucia bound up his head in soft
white cloths.

"Stay by me," Beppi begged, "don't go way downstairs, I am afraid."

"Poor angel," Amelie cried, "he won't be left alone; old Amelie will
bring up the little sister's dinner and she can eat by his bedside,"
and she hurried off, crooning to herself as she went to the kitchen
below.

Nana, now that she knew that Beppi was not going to die, started
scolding him for not looking where he was going, but Lucia sent her
downstairs.

"He is too tired to listen to-night, Nana, and anyway he will be
careful.  Do go away and rest a little, you must be tired."

When Nana had left, Lucia returned to the bed and sat down.  She did
not have any idea what time it was, and she knew that it would be
impossible to leave Beppi until he was quiet.  She hardly touched the
tempting tray that Amelie brought her, and her voice trembled as she
asked what time it was.

"Ten minutes after seven," Amelie told her after she had carefully
consulted the big hall clock.

"Oh!"  Lucia was surprised and relieved.  She thought she must have
slept for hours, but now she realized that in reality she had only
dozed for a few minutes.

She took Beppi's hand and set about putting him to sleep.  It was a
difficult task.  She told him story after story, but at the end of each
his eyes were bright and his demand for another one as insistent as
ever.

Lucia kept time by the chimes of the clock, and at ten she turned out
the light.

"I am coming to bed beside you," she explained as Beppi protested, "I
think the light will hurt your head."  She took off her dress and
slipped on her nightgown.  Beppi snuggled contentedly into her arm, and
she went on with her stories.

"Sing to me," he asked at last, sleepily, "your song," and Lucia began
very softly to sing.

  "O'er sea the silver star brightly is glowing,
  Rocked now the billows are.
  Soft winds are blowing,
  Come to my bark with me.
  Come sail across the sea.
  Santa Lucia, Santa Lucia."


Beppi's even breathing rewarded her efforts.  She slipped her arm from
under his head and stole softly out of the room just as the clock
chimed eleven.  She put on her dress hurriedly.

The house was very still as she crept downstairs and out into the
garden.  The stars were out and it was an easy matter to find her way.
She ran until she reached the path that led to the shore, then she
moved very cautiously.  She hoped to reach the guard, tell him what she
had heard, and then go home, but when she reached the beach she
realized that she was too late.

There was no guard in sight, but her ears detected the splash of oars,
and she knew that the boatman was coming.  She crouched down beside the
wall and waited.  She watched him pull his boat up on shore and then
walk swiftly off in the opposite direction from her.

She did not know what to do, and she was frightened--badly frightened.
The broad shining water on one side and the hill on the other seemed to
hem her in, and she felt lost.  It was not like the mountains of
Cellino, where she knew every path.

She crouched down by the wall and waited.  Another figure joined the
boatman, and they stood still, a little farther up the beach.  Lucia
knew it was the man she had seen that afternoon, and she knew too that
in a very few seconds they would turn around and come back to the boat.

With a courage born of fear she jumped up and before she quite realized
what she was doing she was tugging at the boat.

It was not very high up on the beach for the boatman had left it so
that it would be easily shoved off.  Fortunately the tide was going
out.  Lucia's arms were strong and she pushed with a will.  The boat
found the water and drifted silently away.

Her feet were wet, but she did not realize it.  She crept back to the
beach and flattened herself against the wall.  The men returned.  They
too kept in the shadow of the wall.  It was not until they were almost
brushing against Lucia that the boatman noticed that his boat was gone.

"The Saints preserve us!" he exclaimed.  "It has been spirited away.  I
knew I should be punished for doing such a black deed."

"Spirits, nonsense!" the man spoke angrily.  "It is your own stupid
carelessness, you did not pull it up on shore far enough.  You
rattlebrain idiot, I've a good mind to kill you for this.  See, there
is your boat out there--empty--go and get it.  Do you hear?"

"But how?" the boatman wrung his hands desperately.  "I do not know how
to swim.  I will die.  Santa Lucia, Saint of sailormen, spare me," he
screamed as the man lifted his heavy cane to strike him.

"Don't you dare strike that man!" Lucia exclaimed, "he did pull his
boat up on shore, but I pushed it off.  I heard you this afternoon, and
I knew you wanted to go away to that big ship out there, and perhaps
sail to Austria.  I know what you are, you two-faced man.  You speak,
you laugh, you scold in Italian, and all the time your black heart is
Austrian."

"You shall not go away from here.  I, Lucia Rudini, tell you, you shall
not!"

"Santa Lucia!  A miracle!"  The boatman trembled with fear, but the man
was not so superstitious.  He caught Lucia's arm and shook her roughly.

"You did it, you little fiend, well, you shall get what you deserve for
your meddling."  He motioned to the frightened boatman.  "Get me a
rope, I'll make a gag of my handkerchief; hurry man, if you are found
you will be shot."

"But I dare not, I dare not, she is the spirit of Santa Lucia.  She
came when I called.  The Saints have mercy!"

With a growl of disgust the man turned from him and caught both of
Lucia's wrists in his firm clasp.  Then he lifted his cane.

"She must not tell until we are well away," he said, and brought the
cane down heavily.  It was his intention to stun Lucia, but he had
miscalculated when he expected her to stand still and receive the blow.

She dodged to the right and began kicking and struggling.  The boatman
wrung his hands and screamed for help.

It was not many minutes before the guard, attracted by the noise, came
running towards them.  The man's back was towards him, but Lucia saw
him and stopped struggling.

The man raised his cane again but this time he stopped, because the
muzzle of a gun was pressing him between the shoulder blades.

Lucia turned to the guard and explained hurriedly.  In the starlight
she could see that he had a long scar across his face, and she felt
very secure.

"I know your nephew, Roderigo," she ended, "he helped me blow up the
bridge in Cellino."

The soldier nodded.

"I know about that, Señorina," he said respectfully, "and the rest of
your fine deeds.  You were born for the work it seems.  Move an inch
and off comes your head," he turned furiously on the man who had tried
to edge away.  Then he continued in the soft, courteous tones he had
been using.  "I hope some day you will do me the honor of telling me of
the attack yourself," he said.  "It is sometimes very lonely here while
I am on guard."

Under the independent Bactrian Kingdom( B.C. 255-125), Grecian said
reign and extended courage science, literature and even language
overran the old Iranic eastwards throughout India Seleucidæ and and
during the life of the

.
Good night."

"Good night, Señorina," the soldier replied, "I am proud to have seen
you."

"Now then,--" his voice became harsh again as he turned to his
prisoners, "go along, one wink of your eyelid in the wrong direction
and I will shoot."

He marched them off quickly, and Lucia, because the affair seemed
finished, started for home.




CHAPTER XXI

THE END OF THE STORY

"Tell me a story," Beppi demanded when she was lying beside him once
more, "I'm all awake again and my face hurts."

"What shall it be about?" Lucia asked, stroking his hair.  She was
still trembling from the reaction of her adventure, and Beppi's warm
little body snuggled close in her arms was comforting.

"Go on with the story about the soldier and the bad girl that teased
him, and the good girl that was the fairy princess."

"Very well, but shut your eyes.  Let me see," Lucia began, "the soldier
went off to the war, and when he came back he was wounded and the good
girl took care of him, and they decided to be married and live happily
ever after.  And the bad girl when she saw the poor soldier wounded was
sorry she had teased him, and she never did it again.  And because she
was good all kinds of nice things happened to her.  She found her fairy
godfather, and he had a magic carpet, and first thing you know she was
in the middle of a beautiful garden with her little--"

"Oh, bother, I knew that wasn't a real story," Beppi protested.  "It's
just about Roderigo and Maria and the Captain and you.  And oh, Lucia,
how silly you are, you called yourself the bad girl when really you're
the goodest in the whole world."

"Am I, Beppino mio?" Lucia laughed.  "I don't think so."

"Well, I say you are," Beppi replied, drowsily, "and the Captain thinks
so too, so--"  He dropped off to sleep.

