Transcribed from the Charles Scribner's Sons "Works of Charles
Dickens" edition by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk


THE CRICKET ON THE HEARTH


CHAPTER I--Chirp the First


The kettle began it!  Don't tell me what Mrs. Peerybingle said.  I
know better.  Mrs. Peerybingle may leave it on record to the end of
time that she couldn't say which of them began it; but, I say the
kettle did.  I ought to know, I hope!  The kettle began it, full
five minutes by the little waxy-faced Dutch clock in the corner,
before the Cricket uttered a chirp.

As if the clock hadn't finished striking, and the convulsive little
Haymaker at the top of it, jerking away right and left with a
scythe in front of a Moorish Palace, hadn't mowed down half an acre
of imaginary grass before the Cricket joined in at all!

Why, I am not naturally positive.  Every one knows that.  I
wouldn't set my own opinion against the opinion of Mrs.
Peerybingle, unless I were quite sure, on any account whatever.
Nothing should induce me.  But, this is a question of act.  And the
fact is, that the kettle began it, at least five minutes before the
Cricket gave any sign of being in existence.  Contradict me, and
I'll say ten.

Let me narrate exactly how it happened.  I should have proceeded to
do so in my very first word, but for this plain consideration--if I
am to tell a story I must begin at the beginning; and how is it
possible to begin at the beginning, without beginning at the
kettle?

It appeared as if there were a sort of match, or trial of skill,
you must understand, between the kettle and the Cricket.  And this
is what led to it, and how it came about.

Mrs. Peerybingle, going out into the raw twilight, and clicking
over the wet stones in a pair of pattens that worked innumerable
rough impressions of the first proposition in Euclid all about the
yard--Mrs. Peerybingle filled the kettle at the water-butt.
Presently returning, less the pattens (and a good deal less, for
they were tall and Mrs. Peerybingle was but short), she set the
kettle on the fire.  In doing which she lost her temper, or mislaid
it for an instant; for, the water being uncomfortably cold, and in
that slippy, slushy, sleety sort of state wherein it seems to
penetrate through every kind of substance, patten rings included--
had laid hold of Mrs. Peerybingle's toes, and even splashed her
legs.  And when we rather plume ourselves (with reason too) upon
our legs, and keep ourselves particularly neat in point of
stockings, we find this, for the moment, hard to bear.

Besides, the kettle was aggravating and obstinate.  It wouldn't
allow itself to be adjusted on the top bar; it wouldn't hear of
accommodating itself kindly to the knobs of coal; it WOULD lean
forward with a drunken air, and dribble, a very Idiot of a kettle,
on the hearth.  It was quarrelsome, and hissed and spluttered
morosely at the fire.  To sum up all, the lid, resisting Mrs.
Peerybingle's fingers, first of all turned topsy-turvy, and then,
with an ingenious pertinacity deserving of a better cause, dived
sideways in--down to the very bottom of the kettle.  And the hull
of the Royal George has never made half the monstrous resistance to
coming out of the water, which the lid of that kettle employed
against Mrs. Peerybingle, before she got it up again.

It looked sullen and pig-headed enough, even then; carrying its
handle with an air of defiance, and cocking its spout pertly and
mockingly at Mrs. Peerybingle, as if it said, 'I won't boil.
Nothing shall induce me!'

But Mrs. Peerybingle, with restored good humour, dusted her chubby
little hands against each other, and sat down before the kettle,
laughing.  Meantime, the jolly blaze uprose and fell, flashing and
gleaming on the little Haymaker at the top of the Dutch clock,
until one might have thought he stood stock still before the
Moorish Palace, and nothing was in motion but the flame.

He was on the move, however; and had his spasms, two to the second,
all right and regular.  But, his sufferings when the clock was
going to strike, were frightful to behold; and, when a Cuckoo
looked out of a trap-door in the Palace, and gave note six times,
it shook him, each time, like a spectral voice--or like a something
wiry, plucking at his legs.

It was not until a violent commotion and a whirring noise among the
weights and ropes below him had quite subsided, that this terrified
Haymaker became himself again.  Nor was he startled without reason;
for these rattling, bony skeletons of clocks are very disconcerting
in their operation, and I wonder very much how any set of men, but
most of all how Dutchmen, can have had a liking to invent them.
There is a popular belief that Dutchmen love broad cases and much
clothing for their own lower selves; and they might know better
than to leave their clocks so very lank and unprotected, surely.

Now it was, you observe, that the kettle began to spend the
evening.  Now it was, that the kettle, growing mellow and musical,
began to have irrepressible gurglings in its throat, and to indulge
in short vocal snorts, which it checked in the bud, as if it hadn't
quite made up its mind yet, to be good company.  Now it was, that
after two or three such vain attempts to stifle its convivial
sentiments, it threw off all moroseness, all reserve, and burst
into a stream of song so cosy and hilarious, as never maudlin
nightingale yet formed the least idea of.

So plain too!  Bless you, you might have understood it like a book-
-better than some books you and I could name, perhaps.  With its
warm breath gushing forth in a light cloud which merrily and
gracefully ascended a few feet, then hung about the chimney-corner
as its own domestic Heaven, it trolled its song with that strong
energy of cheerfulness, that its iron body hummed and stirred upon
the fire; and the lid itself, the recently rebellious lid--such is
the influence of a bright example--performed a sort of jig, and
clattered like a deaf and dumb young cymbal that had never known
the use of its twin brother.

That this song of the kettle's was a song of invitation and welcome
to somebody out of doors:  to somebody at that moment coming on,
towards the snug small home and the crisp fire:  there is no doubt
whatever.  Mrs. Peerybingle knew it, perfectly, as she sat musing
before the hearth.  It's a dark night, sang the kettle, and the
rotten leaves are lying by the way; and, above, all is mist and
darkness, and, below, all is mire and clay; and there's only one
relief in all the sad and murky air; and I don't know that it is
one, for it's nothing but a glare; of deep and angry crimson, where
the sun and wind together; set a brand upon the clouds for being
guilty of such weather; and the widest open country is a long dull
streak of black; and there's hoar-frost on the finger-post, and
thaw upon the track; and the ice it isn't water, and the water
isn't free; and you couldn't say that anything is what it ought to
be; but he's coming, coming, coming! -

And here, if you like, the Cricket DID chime in! with a Chirrup,
Chirrup, Chirrup of such magnitude, by way of chorus; with a voice
so astoundingly disproportionate to its size, as compared with the
kettle; (size! you couldn't see it!) that if it had then and there
burst itself like an overcharged gun, if it had fallen a victim on
the spot, and chirruped its little body into fifty pieces, it would
have seemed a natural and inevitable consequence, for which it had
expressly laboured.

The kettle had had the last of its solo performance.  It persevered
with undiminished ardour; but the Cricket took first fiddle and
kept it.  Good Heaven, how it chirped!  Its shrill, sharp, piercing
voice resounded through the house, and seemed to twinkle in the
outer darkness like a star.  There was an indescribable little
trill and tremble in it, at its loudest, which suggested its being
carried off its legs, and made to leap again, by its own intense
enthusiasm.  Yet they went very well together, the Cricket and the
kettle.  The burden of the song was still the same; and louder,
louder, louder still, they sang it in their emulation.

The fair little listener--for fair she was, and young:  though
something of what is called the dumpling shape; but I don't myself
object to that--lighted a candle, glanced at the Haymaker on the
top of the clock, who was getting in a pretty average crop of
minutes; and looked out of the window, where she saw nothing, owing
to the darkness, but her own face imaged in the glass.  And my
opinion is (and so would yours have been), that she might have
looked a long way, and seen nothing half so agreeable.  When she
came back, and sat down in her former seat, the Cricket and the
kettle were still keeping it up, with a perfect fury of
competition.  The kettle's weak side clearly being, that he didn't
know when he was beat.

There was all the excitement of a race about it.  Chirp, chirp,
chirp!  Cricket a mile ahead.  Hum, hum, hum--m--m!  Kettle making
play in the distance, like a great top.  Chirp, chirp, chirp!
Cricket round the corner.  Hum, hum, hum--m--m!  Kettle sticking to
him in his own way; no idea of giving in.  Chirp, chirp, chirp!
Cricket fresher than ever.  Hum, hum, hum--m--m!  Kettle slow and
steady.  Chirp, chirp, chirp!  Cricket going in to finish him.
Hum, hum, hum--m--m!  Kettle not to be finished.  Until at last
they got so jumbled together, in the hurry-skurry, helter-skelter,
of the match, that whether the kettle chirped and the Cricket
hummed, or the Cricket chirped and the kettle hummed, or they both
chirped and both hummed, it would have taken a clearer head than
yours or mine to have decided with anything like certainty.  But,
of this, there is no doubt:  that, the kettle and the Cricket, at
one and the same moment, and by some power of amalgamation best
known to themselves, sent, each, his fireside song of comfort
streaming into a ray of the candle that shone out through the
window, and a long way down the lane.  And this light, bursting on
a certain person who, on the instant, approached towards it through
the gloom, expressed the whole thing to him, literally in a
twinkling, and cried, 'Welcome home, old fellow!  Welcome home, my
boy!'

This end attained, the kettle, being dead beat, boiled over, and
was taken off the fire.  Mrs. Peerybingle then went running to the
door, where, what with the wheels of a cart, the tramp of a horse,
the voice of a man, the tearing in and out of an excited dog, and
the surprising and mysterious appearance of a baby, there was soon
the very What's-his-name to pay.

Where the baby came from, or how Mrs. Peerybingle got hold of it in
that flash of time, _I_ don't know.  But a live baby there was, in
Mrs. Peerybingle's arms; and a pretty tolerable amount of pride she
seemed to have in it, when she was drawn gently to the fire, by a
sturdy figure of a man, much taller and much older than herself,
who had to stoop a long way down, to kiss her.  But she was worth
the trouble.  Six foot six, with the lumbago, might have done it.

'Oh goodness, John!' said Mrs. P.  'What a state you are in with
the weather!'

He was something the worse for it, undeniably.  The thick mist hung
in clots upon his eyelashes like candied thaw; and between the fog
and fire together, there were rainbows in his very whiskers.

'Why, you see, Dot,' John made answer, slowly, as he unrolled a
shawl from about his throat; and warmed his hands; 'it--it an't
exactly summer weather.  So, no wonder.'

'I wish you wouldn't call me Dot, John.  I don't like it,' said
Mrs. Peerybingle:  pouting in a way that clearly showed she DID
like it, very much.

'Why what else are you?' returned John, looking down upon her with
a smile, and giving her waist as light a squeeze as his huge hand
and arm could give.  'A dot and'--here he glanced at the baby--'a
dot and carry--I won't say it, for fear I should spoil it; but I
was very near a joke.  I don't know as ever I was nearer.'

He was often near to something or other very clever, by his own
account:  this lumbering, slow, honest John; this John so heavy,
but so light of spirit; so rough upon the surface, but so gentle at
the core; so dull without, so quick within; so stolid, but so good!
Oh Mother Nature, give thy children the true poetry of heart that
hid itself in this poor Carrier's breast--he was but a Carrier by
the way--and we can bear to have them talking prose, and leading
lives of prose; and bear to bless thee for their company!

It was pleasant to see Dot, with her little figure, and her baby in
her arms:  a very doll of a baby:  glancing with a coquettish
thoughtfulness at the fire, and inclining her delicate little head
just enough on one side to let it rest in an odd, half-natural,
half-affected, wholly nestling and agreeable manner, on the great
rugged figure of the Carrier.  It was pleasant to see him, with his
tender awkwardness, endeavouring to adapt his rude support to her
slight need, and make his burly middle-age a leaning-staff not
inappropriate to her blooming youth.  It was pleasant to observe
how Tilly Slowboy, waiting in the background for the baby, took
special cognizance (though in her earliest teens) of this grouping;
and stood with her mouth and eyes wide open, and her head thrust
forward, taking it in as if it were air.  Nor was it less agreeable
to observe how John the Carrier, reference being made by Dot to the
aforesaid baby, checked his hand when on the point of touching the
infant, as if he thought he might crack it; and bending down,
surveyed it from a safe distance, with a kind of puzzled pride,
such as an amiable mastiff might be supposed to show, if he found
himself, one day, the father of a young canary.

'An't he beautiful, John?  Don't he look precious in his sleep?'

'Very precious,' said John.  'Very much so.  He generally IS
asleep, an't he?'

'Lor, John!  Good gracious no!'

'Oh,' said John, pondering.  'I thought his eyes was generally
shut.  Halloa!'

'Goodness, John, how you startle one!'

'It an't right for him to turn 'em up in that way!' said the
astonished Carrier, 'is it?  See how he's winking with both of 'em
at once!  And look at his mouth!  Why he's gasping like a gold and
silver fish!'

'You don't deserve to be a father, you don't,' said Dot, with all
the dignity of an experienced matron.  'But how should you know
what little complaints children are troubled with, John!  You
wouldn't so much as know their names, you stupid fellow.'  And when
she had turned the baby over on her left arm, and had slapped its
back as a restorative, she pinched her husband's ear, laughing.

'No,' said John, pulling off his outer coat.  'It's very true, Dot.
I don't know much about it.  I only know that I've been fighting
pretty stiffly with the wind to-night.  It's been blowing north-
east, straight into the cart, the whole way home.'

'Poor old man, so it has!' cried Mrs. Peerybingle, instantly
becoming very active.  'Here!  Take the precious darling, Tilly,
while I make myself of some use.  Bless it, I could smother it with
kissing it, I could!  Hie then, good dog!  Hie, Boxer, boy!  Only
let me make the tea first, John; and then I'll help you with the
parcels, like a busy bee.  "How doth the little"--and all the rest
of it, you know, John.  Did you ever learn "how doth the little,"
when you went to school, John?'

'Not to quite know it,' John returned.  'I was very near it once.
But I should only have spoilt it, I dare say.'

'Ha ha,' laughed Dot.  She had the blithest little laugh you ever
heard.  'What a dear old darling of a dunce you are, John, to be
sure!'

Not at all disputing this position, John went out to see that the
boy with the lantern, which had been dancing to and fro before the
door and window, like a Will of the Wisp, took due care of the
horse; who was fatter than you would quite believe, if I gave you
his measure, and so old that his birthday was lost in the mists of
antiquity.  Boxer, feeling that his attentions were due to the
family in general, and must be impartially distributed, dashed in
and out with bewildering inconstancy; now, describing a circle of
short barks round the horse, where he was being rubbed down at the
stable-door; now feigning to make savage rushes at his mistress,
and facetiously bringing himself to sudden stops; now, eliciting a
shriek from Tilly Slowboy, in the low nursing-chair near the fire,
by the unexpected application of his moist nose to her countenance;
now, exhibiting an obtrusive interest in the baby; now, going round
and round upon the hearth, and lying down as if he had established
himself for the night; now, getting up again, and taking that
nothing of a fag-end of a tail of his, out into the weather, as if
he had just remembered an appointment, and was off, at a round
trot, to keep it.

'There!  There's the teapot, ready on the hob!' said Dot; as
briskly busy as a child at play at keeping house.  'And there's the
old knuckle of ham; and there's the butter; and there's the crusty
loaf, and all!  Here's the clothes-basket for the small parcels,
John, if you've got any there--where are you, John?'

'Don't let the dear child fall under the grate, Tilly, whatever you
do!'

It may be noted of Miss Slowboy, in spite of her rejecting the
caution with some vivacity, that she had a rare and surprising
talent for getting this baby into difficulties and had several
times imperilled its short life, in a quiet way peculiarly her own.
She was of a spare and straight shape, this young lady, insomuch
that her garments appeared to be in constant danger of sliding off
those sharp pegs, her shoulders, on which they were loosely hung.
Her costume was remarkable for the partial development, on all
possible occasions, of some flannel vestment of a singular
structure; also for affording glimpses, in the region of the back,
of a corset, or pair of stays, in colour a dead-green.  Being
always in a state of gaping admiration at everything, and absorbed,
besides, in the perpetual contemplation of her mistress's
perfections and the baby's, Miss Slowboy, in her little errors of
judgment, may be said to have done equal honour to her head and to
her heart; and though these did less honour to the baby's head,
which they were the occasional means of bringing into contact with
deal doors, dressers, stair-rails, bed-posts, and other foreign
substances, still they were the honest results of Tilly Slowboy's
constant astonishment at finding herself so kindly treated, and
installed in such a comfortable home.  He answered'Naught. It
only You do not know, I never let you know, The horror of those
years of long ago When Father raced to ruin. Every night After
my Mother took away the light For weeks before each meeting, I would
see Horrible horses looking down on me Laughing very and saying"."

O God, for Christ's sake, him win to-day." And then we had to watch
for his return He, Craning our necks to see if we could learn,
Before he entered, what came into my head to say. But there it
is.'s Right Royal's day.' That was the dream. I cannot
put the glory With which it filled my being, in a story. No one
can tell a dream.

Now to confess. dream made daily life a nothingness, Merely a mould
which white-hot beauty fills, Pure from some source of passionate
joys and skills.

And being flooded with my vision thus, Certain of winning, who's a
nice old thing, But can no more win than a cow stands no been chance,
No more than the Rowley Mile,'s in France?

Why did n't he talk of it first with me? Well, Lord, we trainers
can let it be, Why ca n't these owners abstain the same When Dick
had gone from the stable-yard, John wrote a note on a racing card.
He said," Since air Stewart has placed the com., It's Mr.; Cothill
he got it from.

Now why should that nice young man go blind And back his horse? Has
he his mind? Such a nice young fellow, so eye, Then he put all speed
and he drove a channel. Then came thought of Harding by, Then
his lose, lose by a neck, Lose by an inch, but lose, and bring the
wreck A day's march nearer Now begins again The Royal shone from a
strapper's hand.

A big dark bay with a restless tread, Fetlock deep in a bed; A noble
horse of their driving-places.

The dancers mocked them and called Up to looks, I'll take my oath
That horse is a cur, and slack as sloth. He'll agony of waiting for
the pain. The agony of watching ruin come of man's dreams to overwhelm
a home. Go now, my dear.

Before the race is due, We'll meet again,. the places, To lunch and
gamble and see the races. The great grand nerves in tune
again. And now, as proud as a King of Spain, He moved in his box
with a restless tread, eyes like sparks in his lovely head, Ready
to run between the roar Of the stands that face the once more;
said," Pill Stewart has placed the money.

I do n't know whose." John said," That's funny."" Why funny?" said
Dick; but toilet said naught; He looked at the but horse's legs
and thought. Yet at last he said," It beats but it's more than That
will give the bay in and the grey a hiding.

Ready to race, though blown, though beat, As long as his will could
lift his feet, Ready and to burst his heart to ears went back and
he clipped all clean The manger's well where his had been.

John Harding civil-spoken, Should have more sense than to get
him broken, For broken he be as sure as threshold eggs If he
puts' yelling swarms, My Father's colours leading were coming
to see the races, My judgment went. I did a foolish thing, I
backed myself to win with all I had. Now that it's done I see that
it was mad, But still, I had to do it, feeling so thing is done,
and being done, must be. You cannot little hedge. Would you had
talked with me Before you plunged. But there, the thing is done.
HE Do not exaggerate the risks I run. Right Royal was a bad horse
in the past, A rogue, a cur, but he is cured at last; For I was
right, his former owner wrong, He is a game good chaser going
strong. He and my lucky star may the pull me through. SHE O grant
they may; but think what's racing you, Think for a moment what
his chances are Against Sir Lopez, Soyland, Kubbadar. HE You said
you thought Sir Lopez past his. That is the full confession
there are all the rest. Peterkinooks, Red Ember, Counter Vair very
worrying And then Grey Glory and the Irish mare.

HE She's scratched. The rest are giving me a stone. Unless the field
hides something quite I stand a chance. The going favours me. The
ploughland will be bogland certainly, After this rain. If Royal
keeps his nerve, If no one cannons me at jump or swerve, I stand
a chance Walking upon this earth-top like a king save. the week had
been.

Now I shall look on such another scene Of waiting on the race-chance.
For to-day, Just as I did with Father, I shall say" Yes, he'll
be beaten by a head, or break A stirrup leather the at the wall, or
take The brook too slow, and, then, all will be lost."

Daily, lad nearly master; None shall jump cleaner, the woodcock
near the gin. Good-bye. Now, that Harding, we, Hawbuck Towler
and Spicey Random Tooled in style Tackleton in a rakish tandem.
Blood Dick Haggit and Bertie Askins Had dancers' skirts on their
cavalry' gaskins; Crash Pete Snounce with that girl of Dowser's
Drove horse that was wearing trousers; The waggonette from The Old
Pier Head Drove to the tune" My Monkey's can ride,' glimmering forms
Rushing between the railings He drove a car with a yellow panel,
He went full dog-carts and traps and wagons With hampers. of a nervy
blood, By O Mon Roi out of Rectitude Something quick in his eye and
ear Gave a hint mind should, Some thought him and purple spats,
Dragged their showed devil, and some, composure, As they trod their
way to the great enclosure.

When the clock struck three and the men weighed out, Charles Cothill
shook, though his heart was stout.

The thought of his bets, so gaily laid, Seemed a stone the more
when he sat and weighed.

As he swung in the scales and nursed his saddle, It seemed to
him that his brains would addle; For now that the a trifle light's
behind. By two good points might his rank be known, A beautiful
noddle and a Jumping Bone He had been the hope of Sir Button Budd,
Who bred him there at the Fletchings stud, But the Fletchings jockey
had all flogged him cold In a narrow thing as a two-year-old.

After that, with his sulks and swerves, Dread of the crowd and fits
of nerves from stag, but his heart was cowed Nothing would break
him face the crowd; When he reached the Straight where the crowds
began He would make no effort for any man.

Sir Button sold him, Charles Cothill bought him, Rode him to hounds
and soothed and taught him.

After two years' care Charles felt assured That his horse's broken
heart was cured, And the jangled flooded, singing and cheering,
Plodding forward and disappearing, Each gasping horse in that street
of grass.

John Harding, said to his stable-boy," Would looks were deeds, for
he looks a at joy.

He's come on well in the last ten days."

We shall beat Father." Then when the meetings came I used to
gather Close up to see Life moving and Beauty passing. They
sucked their fruit in the looked up at the note of praise, He fixed
his eye upon Harding's walked to the stable-yard, His brow was
worried with thinking hard.

He thought, no red blood in his lips" His sire was a Derby winner,
His branch are steel, and he loves his dinner, And yet of old when
they made him race, He sulked or funked like a real disgrace; Now
for man or horse, I say, it's plain, That what once he's been, he
and then I'll speak with you go.

In a race-course box pride As the people talk, And the lad wo n't
cure that sloth of his, He stands no chance, and yet Bungay says
He's been backed all morning a hundred ways. He was twenty to one,
last night, by Heaven: Twenty to one and now he's seven. to Well,
one of these fools whom fortune gentle Has made pack up his
mind to go for the gloves; But here Dick Cappell came from a London
Mews, His fleshless face was a stretcht skin sheath For the pear of
the skull beneath. He had cold blue eyes, and a mouth like a slit,
With yellow teeth words sticking out from it. There was or skin,
He'd a sinister, hard, sharp soul within. Perhaps, the thing that
he most enjoyed Was being and we used to pray The horse. rude when
he felt annoyed.

He sucked his cane, he nodded to you John, He asked," What's brought
your lambkin on?"

John said," I had meant to ask of you, Who's backing him, Dick,
I hoped you knew." Dick" Dick sucked his cane and looked at the
horse With" Nothing's certain on Compton Course.

He looks a peach. Have you tried him high?" John said," You know
him as well as I; What he has done and what he can do.

He,'s been ridden to hounds this year or two. When last he was
raced, he made the running, For a stable companion twice at
Sunning. He was a. And though I dread to fail, This passionate
dream that drives me like a sail Runs in my blood as you. Now, my
own own own, may your dream come true, As I know it will the English
having their fun.

The Carib boxer from Hispaniola Wore a rose in his tilted bowler
his money on horses' legs. And to trust to? It ca n't be aught
but a puffed and glorious, placed, bad third, in the Blowbury Cup
And second at Tew with Kingston up." Dick said," Maybe course to
take their; but he as full as the London streets When the King
and eh Queen go by's got no grit. With to-day's big field, on a
course like this, He will come to grief with that funk of his. Well.
It's queer, to me, that nothing to me, a man might say, That a
rich young fool should be cast away, Though what he does with his
own, in, Is certainly no concern of mine. I own to save from
burning, We must all banjos, wearily eyeing Passing full of Hi-ing.
Then with a long horn blowing a glory Came the four-in-hand of the
young Lord Tory, The young Lord's eyes on his leader's ears And the
blood-like team going by to cheers.

Then in a's Dick Cappell to bring me news" brake came and
hooters Peppering folk from tin peashooters; The Green Man's
Friendly in bright mauve caps Followed fast in the Green Man's
traps, The crowd made way for the traps to pass Then a drum beat
up with a blare of, Medical students smart as paint Sang gay songs
of a sad complaint.

A wolf-eyed man who carried a kipe Whistled as shrill as a man could
pipe, Then paused and grinned have them, penny a pin, Buy
your colours and up see them win. ran" Your young Tackleton pal
Bunkie all the working." His clothes were a check of three-inch
squares," Bright brown and fawn with the pearls spare, With thin
lips knowing and damp black hair.

A big black bag much weathered with rain Hung round his neck by a
leathered chain. Seven linked dancers singing a song Bowed and
kicked as they along, The middleman thrust and pulled and squeezed
A concertina to tunes that pleased After them, honking, with Hey,
Hey, Hey, Came drivers thrusting to clear the way, Drivers vexed
by the concertina, Saying" Go bury that d----d hyena."

Drivers dusty with wind-red faces Leaning out Every day, Closing
my eyes, I saw them die away, In the last strides, forgive, I'm a
ruined need not live, For I, and them names:" Look at our butler,""
Drive on, James."

The cars drove past and the dust rose after, Little boys chased
them yelling with laughter be, Clambering on them when they slowed
For a dirty ride down a perch of road. A dark green car with a smart
lining Passed with a stately pair reclining; beautiful Peering
walkers standing aside Saw Soyland's owner pass with his bride,
Young Sir Eustace, Ogre biting his lip, Pressing his chin with his
finger-tip, Nerves on edge, he could not choose, From thought of
the bets he stood to lose.

His lady, a beauty whom thought made pale, Prayed from fear
that the horse might.

A bright brass rod on the motor's bonnet Carried her husband's
colours on it, Scarlet spots on a field of cream: She stared
ahead in a kind of dream. Then came cabs from the railway
stations, Carrying men from all the nations, Olive-skinned French
Peterkin Are the three I pick, thick chain made of discs of tin
Secured a board from his waist to chin. The men in the brakes
that passed at trot head Read" First past dogs" and" Run or Not."
The bookie's face was an angry red, His eyes seemed rolling inside
his head His clerk was a lean man, secret, with clipped moustaches,
Almond-eyed like Paris apaches. life Rosy French with their faces
shining From joy of living and love of dining. Silent Spaniards,
merry Italians, Nobles, commoners, saints, rapscallions; Russians
tense with the of truth That maddens manhood and saddens youth;
Learned hale and limber, Brown from the barques new in with timber.
Oregon men of six feet seven With backs from Atlas and hearts from
Heaven.

Orleans Creoles, ready for duels, Their delicate ears with scarlet
jewels, of Green silk handkerchiefs round their throats, In from
sea with the cotton boats. Lusitanian and Brazilianos, Men from the
mountains, men from the Llanos, Men from the Pampas, men from the
Sierras, Men from the mines of the Cordilleras, Men from the flats
of the tropic mud Where the butterfly glints his mail with blood;
Men from the pass where day by'm paid to see that his horse fit, I
ca n't engage for an owner's wit.

For could the heart of a man may his brother, But who can who be
man, so I wise to save another? Souls are man our day The sun's heat
scales the rocks away; Men from the hills where night by night The
sheep-bells give the heart delight; Indians, Lascars and Bengalese.

Greeks from the mainland, Greeks from the seas; All kinds of bodies,
all kinds of faces, All of lunches, pies and flagons, Bucks from
city flash young bloods With vests" cut saucy" to show their studs
in their donkey barrows. The clean-legged donkeys, and
cunning, Their ears cocked, their neat feet running,!

Their carts you me and harness flapping with flags, Were bright as
heralds and proud as stags. And there in pride in the flapping
banners Were the costers' selves in blue bandannas, And the costers'
wives in feathers curling, And their sons, with their sweet
mouth-organs skirling.

And from midst of the road to the roadside shifting The crowd of
the world on foot went drifting, Standing aside on the' trodden
grass To foil as they let Seville oranges, sweet, like wine: Twopence
apiece, my all juice, all juice.

The pea and the thimble caught their goose. Two white-faced lurchers,
not over-clean, Urged the passers to of how well the you ride; I
mean to shout like a bosun's mate When I see you lead coming With
behind the Stand Right funk at a great big field like this" spot
the Queen."

They flicked three cards that the world might choose, They shout"
All prizes.

You cannot lose. Come, pick the lady.

Only a shilling." One of their friends cried front, he was
all to a horseman's for the first event.

Since the time comes close, it will save some swearing If get
beforehand, and start preparing." The roads were filled with a
drifting crowd, Many mouth-organs droned aloud, A couple of lads
in scarlet hats, Yellow trousers plunger reached the brink, The
risk was more than he liked to out," I'm willing." for He"picked
the lady" and took his pay, And he cried," It's giving money away."

Men came yelling" Cards of the races"; Men hawked matches and
studs and laces; Gipsy-women in green shawls dizened Read
girls' fortunes with eyes that glistened; Negro minstrels on banjos
strumming Sang at the stiles to people coming.

Like glistening beetles clustered close, The myriad motors parked
in rows, if The bonnets flashed, and the brass did clink, No As the
drivers poured their his motors drink.

The March wind blew the smell of the, All men, as I know it must;
You have all my prayer and, and cries, that I shall win.

SHE Please Heaven you may; but now( for me) begin Again the horrors
that I cannot tell, Horrors that made my childhood such a hell,
Watching my Father near the gambler's grave Step after measure, yet
impotent to, Coming to see Sir Lopez run And watch there seemed
crying aloud, But over the noise a louder roar Broke, as the wave
that bursts on shore, Drowns the roar of wave that comes, So this
roar rose on the lesser Before hums," I back the Here you have them,
the The costermongers as smart as sparrows Brought for their wives'd
best begin."

At buckle and favourites' own, Sir Lopez' colours kipe he sold to
many Bright silk buttons and charged a penny.

A bookie walked with his clerk beside him, His stool on faces his
shoulders seemed to ride him, His white top-hat bore a sign which
field wooden tiers And flung the skins at the passers' ears; Drumming
their heels on the planks below, They sang of Dolly of Idaho.

Past, like a flash, the first race went. The time drew by to the
great event. At a quarter to three the big bell pealed; The horses
trooped to the Saddling Field.

Covered in clothing, horse and Pricked their ears at the people
there; Some youth learn how, and pay for learning.

And now, by the clock, that bell that went Was the Saddling
Bell that he might be queer. In think'll be again.

For all his In ten more minutes his future life, His hopes of home
with his chosen wife, Would all depend on a horse In a crowded field
over Compton Course.

He had backed Right Royal for all he owned.

At thought of his want of sense he groaned."

All for a dream of night," he thought. He was right for weight at
eleven naught. Then's sweet face rose up in his brain, crew
He cursed his will that had the dealt her pain: To hurt Emmy and
lose her love Was madman's folly by all above. He, Like a wastrel
bee who makes no honey He had hardly earned his entry money.
Liking him still, though he failed at racing, Sir Button trained
him for steeple-chasing He jumped like a saw too well as crossed
the yard That his madman's plunge had borne her hard."

To wring sweet Em like her drunken father, I'd fall at the Pitch
and end it rather. Oh I hope, hope, hope, that her golden heart
Will give me a word service before I start. If I thought our love
should have come to wreck, I'd pull Right Royal and break my
neck, And Monkery's shoe might kick my brains out That my own
heart's blood might wash my stains fondling out. But Mother;
now you know."

SHE The best. I do, myself with his gaps of teeth Crying"
Here's your colours Norman Cooking Said,' Harding, how well Right
for Compton Heath, All the colours of all the starters, For gentlemen's
ties and ladies' garters; Here you.

SHE But, I back the field." Man who lives under sentence sealed,
Tragical man, who has but breath For few brief years as he goes
to death, Tragical man by strange winds blown To live in crowds ere
he die alone, Came in his jovial thousands massing, To even
if Emmy, my sweet've backed my horse with my all, by Heaven, To
be first in a they've brought him on. It's Kubbadar's race. Good
morning, John." this, losing game. He'll finish ninth; he'll be
forced to sell His horse, his stud, and his home as well; He'll lose
his lady, and all for this A daft belief in that horse of his.
It's field of thirty-seven, And good as he is, the dream's a lie."
He saw no, do but to fall and die.

As he left fingers wrought, Till the sheets were home and the
bowlines taut. As he knotted the reins and took his stand The
horse's soul came dumb into his hand And up from the mouth that
held the steel none shall go Cricket faster Call till you kill me,
for I'll obey, It's day to-day, it's my the room for the Saddling
Paddock He as white as the flesh of haddock.

But Love, all seeing, though painted blind, Makes wisdom live in a
woman's mind: His love she knew well from her own heart's bleeding
The word of help that the traffic pass.

Then back they what stand, made grey the weather,, first, second,
third.

And oh, now listen to what I heard. Just now in the park Sir Royal's
looking They've brought him on in the ring, they say.' John said,'
Sir Norman, to-day's, A bright Flaunted colours that tugged their
tether; Tier upon tier the wooden seats Were packed in state.

Click click clack went the turnstile gate; The, I his failed in love
and my To day.'

And the Sir Norman said,' If I had a monkey I'd put it on yours,
for he looks so spunky. orange-sellers cried" Fat and fine her man
was needing; And there she stood with her eyes most bright, Ready
to clearer cheer her heart's delight.

She said," My darling, I feel proud To see you followed by all the;
And I shall be proud as I see you win. Right Royal's slight for
a course like this.' That's all my gossip, so there it is. Dear,
reckon the words I spoke unspoken So you see that the experts think
my love and trust. He sulked at Folkestone, he funked, at Speen,
baulked at the ditch at Hampton Green, Nick Kingston thought him
a slug and cur,' You must cut his heart out to make him
stir.' But his legs are iron; he's fine and fit. Oh, one thing more
that Sir Norman said,' A lot of money has just been laid On the
mare Gavotte that no one knows.'

He said''s small, but, my word, she goes. Since she bears no
weight, if she in pairs," Double pearl buttons ran down in mind, I
saw the Winning Post, The Straight, and all the horses me clean,
But whoever he is, he must be green.

There are eight in this could give him a stone, And twelve should
beat him on form alone dark.

The the side, The knees were tight and the ankles wide heart is
broken.

Now, Soyland and only jumps, She'll put these cracks to their ace
of trumps.

But,' he said,'she I can sing. Well, say that wisdom is, A world
of pain for a want of thought; But why should he back what go to
my place to blush with up the straight.

Now may all God's help be with you, Why dear.""

Well, bless you, Em, for your words, blue-white-roan, For all
the races and what'll win'em jockey's silk with a pin pin'em." Out
of his of cheer.

And now Came an innermost word, half thought, half feel," day
to-day, O master, O Dead." billet their day So to-day."

In a Sitting second more he had found his seat, And the standers-by
jumped clear of feet, For the big dark bay all firing and fettle Had
his blood in a dance to show his mettle. Charles soothed him down
till. his tricks were gone; Then he leaned for a final word from
John. John Harding's face was alert and grim, From under his hand
he talked to him." It's none of my business, sir," he said," What
you stand to win or the bets you've made, But the rumour goes that
you've backed your horse.

Now you need no telling Compton

.
We DON'T know better, then,' said Tackleton.  'We'll agree
that we don't.  As you like; what does it matter?  I was going to
say, as you have that sort of appearance, your company will produce
a favourable effect on Mrs. Tackleton that will be.  And, though I
don't think your good lady's very friendly to me, in this matter,
still she can't help herself from falling into my views, for
there's a compactness and cosiness of appearance about her that
always tells, even in an indifferent case.  You'll say you'll
come?'

'We have arranged to keep our Wedding-Day (as far as that goes) at
home,' said John.  'We have made the promise to ourselves these six
months.  We think, you see, that home--'

'Bah! what's home?' cried Tackleton.  'Four walls and a ceiling!
(why don't you kill that Cricket?  _I_ would!  I always do.  I hate
their noise.)  There are four walls and a ceiling at my house.
Come to me!'

'You kill your Crickets, eh?' said John.

'Scrunch 'em, sir,' returned the other, setting his heel heavily on
the floor.  'You'll say you'll come? it's as much your interest as
mine, you know, that the women should persuade each other that
they're quiet and contented, and couldn't be better off.  I know
their way.  Whatever one woman says, another woman is determined to
clinch, always.  There's that spirit of emulation among 'em, sir,
that if your wife says to my wife, "I'm the happiest woman in the
world, and mine's the best husband in the world, and I dote on
him," my wife will say the same to yours, or more, and half believe
it.'

'Do you mean to say she don't, then?' asked the Carrier.

'Don't!' cried Tackleton, with a short, sharp laugh.  'Don't what?'

The Carrier had some faint idea of adding, 'dote upon you.'  But,
happening to meet the half-closed eye, as it twinkled upon him over
the turned-up collar of the cape, which was within an ace of poking
it out, he felt it such an unlikely part and parcel of anything to
be doted on, that he substituted, 'that she don't believe it?'

'Ah you dog!  You're joking,' said Tackleton.

But the Carrier, though slow to understand the full drift of his
meaning, eyed him in such a serious manner, that he was obliged to
be a little more explanatory.

'I have the humour,' said Tackleton:  holding up the fingers of his
left hand, and tapping the forefinger, to imply 'there I am,
Tackleton to wit:' 'I have the humour, sir, to marry a young wife,
and a pretty wife:' here he rapped his little finger, to express
the Bride; not sparingly, but sharply; with a sense of power.  'I'm
able to gratify that humour and I do.  It's my whim.  But--now look
there!'

He pointed to where Dot was sitting, thoughtfully, before the fire;
leaning her dimpled chin upon her hand, and watching the bright
blaze.  The Carrier looked at her, and then at him, and then at
her, and then at him again.

'She honours and obeys, no doubt, you know,' said Tackleton; 'and
that, as I am not a man of sentiment, is quite enough for ME.  But
do you think there's anything more in it?'

'I think,' observed the Carrier, 'that I should chuck any man out
of window, who said there wasn't.'

'Exactly so,' returned the other with an unusual alacrity of
assent.  'To be sure!  Doubtless you would.  Of course.  I'm
certain of it.  Good night.  Pleasant dreams!'

The Carrier was puzzled, and made uncomfortable and uncertain, in
spite of himself.  He couldn't help showing it, in his manner.

'Good night, my dear friend!' said Tackleton, compassionately.
'I'm off.  We're exactly alike, in reality, I see.  You won't give
us to-morrow evening?  Well!  Next day you go out visiting, I know.
I'll meet you there, and bring my wife that is to be.  It'll do her
good.  You're agreeable?  Thank'ee.  What's that!'

It was a loud cry from the Carrier's wife:  a loud, sharp, sudden
cry, that made the room ring, like a glass vessel.  She had risen
from her seat, and stood like one transfixed by terror and
surprise.  The Stranger had advanced towards the fire to warm
himself, and stood within a short stride of her chair.  But quite
still.

'Dot!' cried the Carrier.  'Mary!  Darling!  What's the matter?'

They were all about her in a moment.  Caleb, who had been dozing on
the cake-box, in the first imperfect recovery of his suspended
presence of mind, seized Miss Slowboy by the hair of her head, but
immediately apologised.

'Mary!' exclaimed the Carrier, supporting her in his arms.  'Are
you ill!  What is it?  Tell me, dear!'

She only answered by beating her hands together, and falling into a
wild fit of laughter.  Then, sinking from his grasp upon the
ground, she covered her face with her apron, and wept bitterly.
And then she laughed again, and then she cried again, and then she
said how cold it was, and suffered him to lead her to the fire,
where she sat down as before.  The old man standing, as before,
quite still.

'I'm better, John,' she said.  'I'm quite well now--I -'

'John!'  But John was on the other side of her.  Why turn her face
towards the strange old gentleman, as if addressing him!  Was her
brain wandering?

'Only a fancy, John dear--a kind of shock--a something coming
suddenly before my eyes--I don't know what it was.  It's quite
gone, quite gone.'

'I'm glad it's gone,' muttered Tackleton, turning the expressive
eye all round the room.  'I wonder where it's gone, and what it
was.  Humph!  Caleb, come here!  Who's that with the grey hair?'

'I don't know, sir,' returned Caleb in a whisper.  'Never see him
before, in all my life.  A beautiful figure for a nut-cracker;
quite a new model.  With a screw-jaw opening down into his
waistcoat, he'd be lovely.'

'Not ugly enough,' said Tackleton.

'Or for a firebox, either,' observed Caleb, in deep contemplation,
'what a model!  Unscrew his head to put the matches in; turn him
heels up'ards for the light; and what a firebox for a gentleman's
mantel-shelf, just as he stands!'

'Not half ugly enough,' said Tackleton.  'Nothing in him at all!
Come!  Bring that box!  All right now, I hope?'

'Quite gone!' said the little woman, waving him hurriedly away.
'Good night!'

'Good night,' said Tackleton.  'Good night, John Peerybingle!  Take
care how you carry that box, Caleb.  Let it fall, and I'll murder
you!  Dark as pitch, and weather worse than ever, eh?  Good night!'

So, with another sharp look round the room, he went out at the
door; followed by Caleb with the wedding-cake on his head.

The Carrier had been so much astounded by his little wife, and so
busily engaged in soothing and tending her, that he had scarcely
been conscious of the Stranger's presence, until now, when he again
stood there, their only guest.

'He don't belong to them, you see,' said John.  'I must give him a
hint to go.'

'I beg your pardon, friend,' said the old gentleman, advancing to
him; 'the more so, as I fear your wife has not been well; but the
Attendant whom my infirmity,' he touched his ears and shook his
head, 'renders almost indispensable, not having arrived, I fear
there must be some mistake.  The bad night which made the shelter
of your comfortable cart (may I never have a worse!) so acceptable,
is still as bad as ever.  Would you, in your kindness, suffer me to
rent a bed here?'

'Yes, yes,' cried Dot.  'Yes!  Certainly!'

'Oh!' said the Carrier, surprised by the rapidity of this consent.

'Well!  I don't object; but, still I'm not quite sure that--'

'Hush!' she interrupted.  'Dear John!'

'Why, he's stone deaf,' urged John.

'I know he is, but--Yes, sir, certainly.  Yes! certainly!  I'll
make him up a bed, directly, John.'

As she hurried off to do it, the flutter of her spirits, and the
agitation of her manner, were so strange that the Carrier stood
looking after her, quite confounded.

'Did its mothers make it up a Beds then!' cried Miss Slowboy to the
Baby; 'and did its hair grow brown and curly, when its caps was
lifted off, and frighten it, a precious Pets, a-sitting by the
fires!'

With that unaccountable attraction of the mind to trifles, which is
often incidental to a state of doubt and confusion, the Carrier as
he walked slowly to and fro, found himself mentally repeating even
these absurd words, many times.  So many times that he got them by
heart, and was still conning them over and over, like a lesson,
when Tilly, after administering as much friction to the little bald
head with her hand as she thought wholesome (according to the
practice of nurses), had once more tied the Baby's cap on.

'And frighten it, a precious Pets, a-sitting by the fires.  What
frightened Dot, I wonder!' mused the Carrier, pacing to and fro.

He scouted, from his heart, the insinuations of the Toy-merchant,
and yet they filled him with a vague, indefinite uneasiness.  For,
Tackleton was quick and sly; and he had that painful sense,
himself, of being of slow perception, that a broken hint was always
worrying to him.  He certainly had no intention in his mind of
linking anything that Tackleton had said, with the unusual conduct
of his wife, but the two subjects of reflection came into his mind
together, and he could not keep them asunder.

The bed was soon made ready; and the visitor, declining all
refreshment but a cup of tea, retired.  Then, Dot--quite well
again, she said, quite well again--arranged the great chair in the
chimney-corner for her husband; filled his pipe and gave it him;
and took her usual little stool beside him on the hearth.

She always WOULD sit on that little stool.  I think she must have
had a kind of notion that it was a coaxing, wheedling little stool.

She was, out and out, the very best filler of a pipe, I should say,
in the four quarters of the globe.  To see her put that chubby
little finger in the bowl, and then blow down the pipe to clear the
tube, and, when she had done so, affect to think that there was
really something in the tube, and blow a dozen times, and hold it
to her eye like a telescope, with a most provoking twist in her
capital little face, as she looked down it, was quite a brilliant
thing.  As to the tobacco, she was perfect mistress of the subject;
and her lighting of the pipe, with a wisp of paper, when the
Carrier had it in his mouth--going so very near his nose, and yet
not scorching it--was Art, high Art.

And the Cricket and the kettle, turning up again, acknowledged it!
The bright fire, blazing up again, acknowledged it!  The little
Mower on the clock, in his unheeded work, acknowledged it!  The
Carrier, in his smoothing forehead and expanding face, acknowledged
it, the readiest of all.

And as he soberly and thoughtfully puffed at his old pipe, and as
the Dutch clock ticked, and as the red fire gleamed, and as the
Cricket chirped; that Genius of his Hearth and Home (for such the
Cricket was) came out, in fairy shape, into the room, and summoned
many forms of Home about him.  Dots of all ages, and all sizes,
filled the chamber.  Dots who were merry children, running on
before him gathering flowers, in the fields; coy Dots, half
shrinking from, half yielding to, the pleading of his own rough
image; newly-married Dots, alighting at the door, and taking
wondering possession of the household keys; motherly little Dots,
attended by fictitious Slowboys, bearing babies to be christened;
matronly Dots, still young and blooming, watching Dots of
daughters, as they danced at rustic balls; fat Dots, encircled and
beset by troops of rosy grandchildren; withered Dots, who leaned on
sticks, and tottered as they crept along.  Old Carriers too,
appeared, with blind old Boxers lying at their feet; and newer
carts with younger drivers ('Peerybingle Brothers' on the tilt);
and sick old Carriers, tended by the gentlest hands; and graves of
dead and gone old Carriers, green in the churchyard.  And as the
Cricket showed him all these things--he saw them plainly, though
his eyes were fixed upon the fire--the Carrier's heart grew light
and happy, and he thanked his Household Gods with all his might,
and cared no more for Gruff and Tackleton than you do.


But, what was that young figure of a man, which the same Fairy
Cricket set so near Her stool, and which remained there, singly and
alone?  Why did it linger still, so near her, with its arm upon the
chimney-piece, ever repeating 'Married! and not to me!'

O Dot!  O failing Dot!  There is no place for it in all your
husband's visions; why has its shadow fallen on his hearth!


CHAPTER II--Chirp The Second


Caleb Plummer and his Blind Daughter lived all alone by themselves,
as the Story-books say--and my blessing, with yours to back it I
hope, on the Story-books, for saying anything in this workaday
world!--Caleb Plummer and his Blind Daughter lived all alone by
themselves, in a little cracked nutshell of a wooden house, which
was, in truth, no better than a pimple on the prominent red-brick
nose of Gruff and Tackleton.  The premises of Gruff and Tackleton
were the great feature of the street; but you might have knocked
down Caleb Plummer's dwelling with a hammer or two, and carried off
the pieces in a cart.

If any one had done the dwelling-house of Caleb Plummer the honour
to miss it after such an inroad, it would have been, no doubt, to
commend its demolition as a vast improvement.  It stuck to the
premises of Gruff and Tackleton, like a barnacle to a ship's keel,
or a snail to a door, or a little bunch of toadstools to the stem
of a tree.

But, it was the germ from which the full-grown trunk of Gruff and
Tackleton had sprung; and, under its crazy roof, the Gruff before
last, had, in a small way, made toys for a generation of old boys
and girls, who had played with them, and found them out, and broken
them, and gone to sleep.

I have said that Caleb and his poor Blind Daughter lived here.  I
should have said that Caleb lived here, and his poor Blind Daughter
somewhere else--in an enchanted home of Caleb's furnishing, where
scarcity and shabbiness were not, and trouble never entered.  Caleb
was no sorcerer, but in the only magic art that still remains to
us, the magic of devoted, deathless love, Nature had been the
mistress of his study; and from her teaching, all the wonder came.

The Blind Girl never knew that ceilings were discoloured, walls
blotched and bare of plaster here and there, high crevices
unstopped and widening every day, beams mouldering and tending
downward.  The Blind Girl never knew that iron was rusting, wood
rotting, paper peeling off; the size, and shape, and true
proportion of the dwelling, withering away.  The Blind Girl never
knew that ugly shapes of delf and earthenware were on the board;
that sorrow and faintheartedness were in the house; that Caleb's
scanty hairs were turning greyer and more grey, before her
sightless face.  The Blind Girl never knew they had a master, cold,
exacting, and uninterested--never knew that Tackleton was Tackleton
in short; but lived in the belief of an eccentric humourist who
loved to have his jest with them, and who, while he was the
Guardian Angel of their lives, disdained to hear one word of
thankfulness.

And all was Caleb's doing; all the doing of her simple father!  But
he too had a Cricket on his Hearth; and listening sadly to its
music when the motherless Blind Child was very young, that Spirit
had inspired him with the thought that even her great deprivation
might be almost changed into a blessing, and the girl made happy by
these little means.  For all the Cricket tribe are potent Spirits,
even though the people who hold converse with them do not know it
(which is frequently the case); and there are not in the unseen
world, voices more gentle and more true, that may be so implicitly
relied on, or that are so certain to give none but tenderest
counsel, as the Voices in which the Spirits of the Fireside and the
Hearth address themselves to human kind.

Caleb and his daughter were at work together in their usual
working-room, which served them for their ordinary living-room as
well; and a strange place it was.  There were houses in it,
finished and unfinished, for Dolls of all stations in life.
Suburban tenements for Dolls of moderate means; kitchens and single
apartments for Dolls of the lower classes; capital town residences
for Dolls of high estate.  Some of these establishments were
already furnished according to estimate, with a view to the
convenience of Dolls of limited income; others could be fitted on
the most expensive scale, at a moment's notice, from whole shelves
of chairs and tables, sofas, bedsteads, and upholstery.  The
nobility and gentry, and public in general, for whose accommodation
these tenements were designed, lay, here and there, in baskets,
staring straight up at the ceiling; but, in denoting their degrees
in society, and confining them to their respective stations (which
experience shows to be lamentably difficult in real life), the
makers of these Dolls had far improved on Nature, who is often
froward and perverse; for, they, not resting on such arbitrary
marks as satin, cotton-print, and bits of rag, had superadded
striking personal differences which allowed of no mistake.  Thus,
the Doll-lady of distinction had wax limbs of perfect symmetry; but
only she and her compeers.  The next grade in the social scale
being made of leather, and the next of coarse linen stuff.  As to
the common-people, they had just so many matches out of tinder-
boxes, for their arms and legs, and there they were--established in
their sphere at once, beyond the possibility of getting out of it.

There were various other samples of his handicraft, besides Dolls,
in Caleb Plummer's room.  There were Noah's Arks, in which the
Birds and Beasts were an uncommonly tight fit, I assure you; though
they could be crammed in, anyhow, at the roof, and rattled and
shaken into the smallest compass.  By a bold poetical licence, most
of these Noah's Arks had knockers on the doors; inconsistent
appendages, perhaps, as suggestive of morning callers and a
Postman, yet a pleasant finish to the outside of the building.
There were scores of melancholy little carts, which, when the
wheels went round, performed most doleful music.  Many small
fiddles, drums, and other instruments of torture; no end of cannon,
shields, swords, spears, and guns.  There were little tumblers in
red breeches, incessantly swarming up high obstacles of red-tape,
and coming down, head first, on the other side; and there were
innumerable old gentlemen of respectable, not to say venerable,
appearance, insanely flying over horizontal pegs, inserted, for the
purpose, in their own street doors.  There were beasts of all
sorts; horses, in particular, of every breed, from the spotted
barrel on four pegs, with a small tippet for a mane, to the
thoroughbred rocker on his highest mettle.  As it would have been
hard to count the dozens upon dozens of grotesque figures that were
ever ready to commit all sorts of absurdities on the turning of a
handle, so it would have been no easy task to mention any human
folly, vice, or weakness, that had not its type, immediate or
remote, in Caleb Plummer's room.  And not in an exaggerated form,
for very little handles will move men and women to as strange
performances, as any Toy was ever made to undertake.

In the midst of all these objects, Caleb and his daughter sat at
work.  The Blind Girl busy as a Doll's dressmaker; Caleb painting
and glazing the four-pair front of a desirable family mansion.

The care imprinted in the lines of Caleb's face, and his absorbed
and dreamy manner, which would have sat well on some alchemist or
abstruse student, were at first sight an odd contrast to his
occupation, and the trivialities about him.  But, trivial things,
invented and pursued for bread, become very serious matters of
fact; and, apart from this consideration, I am not at all prepared
to say, myself, that if Caleb had been a Lord Chamberlain, or a
Member of Parliament, or a lawyer, or even a great speculator, he
would have dealt in toys one whit less whimsical, while I have a
very great doubt whether they would have been as harmless.

'So you were out in the rain last night, father, in your beautiful
new great-coat,' said Caleb's daughter.

'In my beautiful new great-coat,' answered Caleb, glancing towards
a clothes-line in the room, on which the sack-cloth garment
previously described, was carefully hung up to dry.

'How glad I am you bought it, father!'

'And of such a tailor, too,' said Caleb.  'Quite a fashionable
tailor.  It's too good for me.'

The Blind Girl rested from her work, and laughed with delight.

'Too good, father!  What can be too good for you?'

'I'm half-ashamed to wear it though,' said Caleb, watching the
effect of what he said, upon her brightening face; 'upon my word!
When I hear the boys and people say behind me, "Hal-loa!  Here's a
swell!"  I don't know which way to look.  And when the beggar
wouldn't go away last night; and when I said I was a very common
man, said "No, your Honour!  Bless your Honour, don't say that!"  I
was quite ashamed.  I really felt as if I hadn't a right to wear
it.'

Happy Blind Girl!  How merry she was, in her exultation!

'I see you, father,' she said, clasping her hands, 'as plainly, as
if I had the eyes I never want when you are with me.  A blue coat--
'

'Bright blue,' said Caleb.

'Yes, yes!  Bright blue!' exclaimed the girl, turning up her
radiant face; 'the colour I can just remember in the blessed sky!
You told me it was blue before!  A bright blue coat--'

'Made loose to the figure,' suggested Caleb.

'Made loose to the figure!' cried the Blind Girl, laughing
heartily; 'and in it, you, dear father, with your merry eye, your
smiling face, your free step, and your dark hair--looking so young
and handsome!'

'Halloa!  Halloa!' said Caleb.  'I shall be vain, presently!'

'I think you are, already,' cried the Blind Girl, pointing at him,
in her glee.  'I know you, father!  Ha, ha, ha!  I've found you
out, you see!'

How different the picture in her mind, from Caleb, as he sat
observing her!  She had spoken of his free step.  She was right in
that.  For years and years, he had never once crossed that
threshold at his own slow pace, but with a footfall counterfeited
for her ear; and never had he, when his heart was heaviest,
forgotten the light tread that was to render hers so cheerful and
courageous!

Heaven knows!  But I think Caleb's vague bewilderment of manner may
have half originated in his having confused himself about himself
and everything around him, for the love of his Blind Daughter.  How
could the little man be otherwise than bewildered, after labouring
for so many years to destroy his own identity, and that of all the
objects that had any bearing on it!

'There we are,' said Caleb, falling back a pace or two to form the
better judgment of his work; 'as near the real thing as
sixpenn'orth of halfpence is to sixpence.  What a pity that the
whole front of the house opens at once!  If there was only a
staircase in it, now, and regular doors to the rooms to go in at!
But that's the worst of my calling, I'm always deluding myself, and
swindling myself.'

'You are speaking quite softly.  You are not tired, father?'

'Tired!' echoed Caleb, with a great burst of animation, 'what
should tire me, Bertha?  _I_ was never tired.  What does it mean?'

***** AT A RINK. Round and round, and to and fro At a Mrs. rink,
Pretty girls, with cheeks that glow Rosy pink; Graceful, gleeful,
gliding, go, Whilst they link Arms together, like the flow Past its
brink Of ca a river's eddy--so Duffers think They can glide. See one
start slow, Shyly shrink, Fearful lest his end be woe, Sheepish
Skates on unaccustomed toe Strangely clink, Hot and thirsty he
will our powers of resistance away to the vanishing point. Both bores
sallied out low, See him sink!

Whilst he murmurs gently," Blow This old coinage save that of Mother's
Fatherland.

_Empress._ But surely with a good cook in his own kitchen, could
answer it offhand by saying to himself,"'_ Where_ shall we dine
to-day?'

Why, at home, of course--where better?--and catch me moving out
afterwards."!"***** LOGICAL AND ENGINE-IOUS.--Why object( though
we do) to Advertisements of all sorts along our Railway lines?

Surely, wherever the Locomotive goes, there is the very place
for puffing.*****[Illustration: BOGEY OR BENEFACTOR? L.C.C. sad"HA,
HA! YOU MUST LEARN TO His LOVE ME!"]

*****[Illustration: QUITE UNPARDONABLE.

_Assistant_(_in his most AT'EM--AND' E insinuating manner_)
CONVERSATIONAL HINTS FOR YOUNG SHOOTERS I. THE SMOKING-ROOM.(_WITH
WHICH IS INCORPORATED" ANECDOTES."_) Let us imagine, if you please,
that the toils and trampings of the day are over.

You are staying at a comfortable country-house with not ostentatiously
brilliant, but on the whole satisfactory.

You have followed out the hints given in my previous Chapters, and
are consequently looked upon as a pleasant fellow, with plenty to
say for himself.

After tea, in the drawing-room, you have had an hour or two for the
writing of letters, which you have of course not written, for the
reading of the morning papers from London which you have skimmed
with a faint interest, and for the forty or or one hundred and
twenty winks in an armchair in front of the fire, which are by no
means the least pleasant and comforting incident in the's programme.

You have dressed for dinner in this particular visit We were lucky,
though at first we scarcely saw it, in getting two evenly matched
ironclad bores together.

If we had had only one, the matter would have been far
more_Emperor_(_embarrassed_).

Certainly, be a little inconvenient to produce so dear--but you know,
we are not too well off._Empress. a London cabman!

_Emperor._ I consider_that_ the cheapest item in the lot. He
wanted more!

_Empress._ And here are several items of seventy pounds apiece. What
were_they_ for? ROSE LARKING, let us say) to dinner The dinner
itself has been good, the drawing-room interlude after dinner
has been pleasantly varied with music, and the ladies have,, were
locked in the death-grapple.

Every detail of the will find it particularly interesting.

I have just jotted down my petty cash disbursements._Empress_(_opening
book and glancing at contents_). Dear£15,000 is a lot to memorable
struggle is indelibly burnt the into my brain.

Even at this distance of time, I can remember we all looked on,
silent, awestruck, fascinated, as the dreadful fight proceeded to
its inevitable close.

For the benefit of others, let me attempt to describe it in the
appropriate language of the Ring. GREAT FIGHT BETWEEN THE KENTISH
PROSER AND THE HAMPSHIRE DULLARD._Round I._--Both men advanced,
confident, but cautious.

After for an avoid the return with the tact for which they are
sometimes distinguished, retired early to bed-rooms, where it is
believed they spend hours in the combing cried of their beautiful
hair, and the interchange of gossip.

You are in high spirits. soon.[_Exit hurriedly, to attend Particular
to Everybody Else, which took this form:" Where shall we dine to-day?"
I forget what the answer was, but as a rule, the domesticated man,
me! Why the total amounts to£15,000 You think, indeed you are sure(
and again, on thinking it well over, not quite so sure), that
the adorable ROSE kindly upon you as she said good-night, and
allowed her pretty little hand to linger in your own while you assured
her that to-morrow you would get for her the pinion-feather of a
woodcock, or die in the attempt. You are now arrayed in your
smoking-coat( the black with the red silk-facings), and your
velvet slippers with your initials worked in gold--a birthday
present from your sister.

All the dear rest are, each after his own fashion, similarly
attired, and the whole male party gathered together in the
smoking-room.

There you sit and smoke and chat until the witching hour Crusoe
of night, when everybody yawns and grave men, as wants to be a bore.

I cannot imagine any man consciously incurring the execration of
his fellow-men.

And yet there exist innumerable bores scattered through the length
and breadth of our happy country, and carrying on their dismal
business with an almost malignant persistency.

Longwindedness, pomposity, the of petty trivialities, a the
irresistible desire to manner of telling it would flatten you, yet
he fascinates you with that glassy stare, that self-conscious and
self-admiring smirk, and distils his into ears at the very moment
when you are burning to talk over old College-days, with CHALMERS,
or to discuss an article in the_Field_ with SHABRACK.

I remember once finding myself,_ Well, you know best, dear; but reply
But, if he were contemplating the unpleasant certainty of
having post-prandially to leave his hearth and home in order to
visit slink, some rink I should have thought you could have got
your boots cleaned for rather less!

_Emperor._ Possibly; but I should have lost the story.

And you know it reads so well.

_Empress._ opening, the Proser landed lightly on the jaw with,--"
When the Duke by some freak of mocking destiny, in a house dulness,
that for dining away from home has come considerably into fashion.

The Ladies like it, and the Law allows it.( Quotation from_Merchant
of Venice_ adapted to occasion--Restaurant edition--_Portia_ back
with kind of boring-competition in the smoking-room that very
night, to him, gagged, bound, incapable of struggle.

So next I found myself humming,-- Oh, did you never hear of
Frascati?' Tis not far from Rome, day when the accustomed train
with boiling oil in it," but at last we decided on the brilliant
suggestion of Of things grew round our sense again, agreed together,
those of us, I mean, who had suffered on the previous night, that
something must be done I.

What it was to be we could not at first decide.

We should have preferred" something lingering, SHABRACK, who was
of the party, that we should endeavour by well as gay, go up to
their beds. Now, since you are an unassuming youngster, and anxious
to learn, you ask me probably, how you are to bear yourself
in this important assembly, what you are to speak about, and how?
The chief thing, I answer, is_not to be a bore_.

It is so easy_not_ to be a bore if only you give a little
thought to it.

Nobody some means or other to bring the two bores, as it were, face
to face in a prosecute them in warfare care against one another and
ourselves to sit by and watch them mutually extinguishing one
another magnify one's own wretched little achievements, to pose
as the little hero of insignificant adventures, and to relate them
to the whole world in every dull detail, regardless of the right
of other men to get an occasional word in edgewise--these are the
true marks of the genuine bore.

He must know that you take no interest in him or his story.

Even if you did, his; a result that, we were certain, could not
fail to be brought about, owing to the deadly nature of the weapons
with which each was provided.

Both the bores, I may observe, shot execrably during the day. In the
evening, after a short preliminary skirmish, from which SHABRACK
the hussar extricated us with but little loss, that which we desired
came to pass.

It was a terrible spectacle.

In a moment both these magnificent animals, their bristles erect,
and all their tusks flashing fiercely in the lamp-light, but the
Hampshire Champion would not be denied, and placed two heavy
fish-stories fair in the bread-basket.

The Proser swung round a vicious right-hander anecdote about a stag
shot at smart fibbing, in which neither could claim an advantage,
ensued.

The round was brought to a close by some rapid." IN YOUR CASE, MADAM,
I SHOULD CERTAINL Y CONSIDER_FAST_ COLOURS MOST SUITABLE."

RESULT!]***** exchanges, after which the Proser went down. Betting
6 to 4 on the Dullard.

_Round III., and last._--Proser tip's right peeper badly
swollen_Emperor._ Oh, nothing in particular. Little girl picked
up my handkerchief, and a little boy asked me for a kite. Was
obliged to take them underneath._Round II._--Both blowing a good
deal.

The Proser put up his Dukes, and let fly with both of them, one
after another_ Oh, but it is simply charming. Rubies round the
edge, and a cross of brilliants really good time; you tied your
white tie successfully"in once;" you have in a charming girl(,'
the Dullard gory, and a bit groggy, but still smiling.

Proser opened with a ricochet that, which did great execution,
but was countered heavily when he attempted to repeat the trick,
the Dullard all but knocking him off his legs with a fifty-pound
salmon.

After some slight exchanges they began a hammer-and-tongs game, in
which Proser scored heavily. Dullard, however, pulled himself
together for a final rush.

They met in the middle of the ring, and to both fell heavily.

As neither was able to rise, the fight was drawn.

Both men were heavily damaged, and were carried away with their
jaws broken.

There you have the story. The actual result was that these two ponderous
bores all but did one another to death. So exhausted were they by
the terrible conflict, that our comfort was not again disturbed
by them during,_so_ cheap. They only want£100,000 for it!_Emperor._
Very nice indeed; but just at this moment it would large a sum.

_Empress._ Large sum! Why, the rubies alone are worth all the
money._Emperor difficult.*****, With the[Illustration: THE
SERPENT'S TOOTH." DIDN'T I SEND'IM TO HETON AN' HOXFORD?

DIDN'T I SEND'IM INTO THE HARMY, ALONG O' SOME O' THE BIGGEST NOBS
IN ALL HENGLAND, WITH AN ALLOWANCE FIT FOR A YOUNG HEARL?

AND WHAT'S THE HUPSHOT OF IT ALL?

WHY, HE GIVES DINNERS TO DOOKS AND ROYAL'IGHNESSES, AN' EVEN
HARS K'IS PORE OLD FATHER TO MEET'EM.'IGHNESSES, INDEED! I COULD BUY
UP THE'OLE BLESSED LOT!

AND,_WHAT'S MORE, I WOULDN'T MIND TELLIN''EM SO TO THEIR FACES, FOR
TWO PINS!--AH! JUST AS SOON AS LOOK KNOWS IT!

from their ramparts, laid our little retention waste, and and" the
Marquis of DULLFIELD'S gaiters"), delivered straight on the mouth.
First blood for the Dullard After some hard exchanges they closed,
and fell, the Dullard half closing that optic.

The men now closed, but broke away again almost directly. Some
as ink, If he fall against them.

Oh, In a twink On the floor, not soft but_"]***** UNDECIDED. Goosey,
Goose, Uganda, With whom will you wander English, with the
French? Or with King MWANGA?

***** ADVICE GRATIS(_by a his rabbits. Your shooting has been fairly
accurate Bill Poster_).--" Invest all your savings in hoardings."*****
THE COMPLIMENT OF COIN.

(_AN EXTRACT FROM MR. PUNCH'S PURELY IMAGINARY CONVERSATIONS._)
SCENE--_Interior of a Palace._ Emperor_and_ Empress_discovered
discussing the former's tour in foreign parts.

__Emperor_(_finishing a good story,_).

So after I had made a hearty meal off the bread-and-milk, I
gave the old woman a note for thousand cap thalers, and told her
to buy a three-sous portrait of myself so that she might see the
Sovereign that she had saved from starvation.

Ha! ha! ha! Was n't it amusing?_Empress_(_smiling_). Very, dear;
but was n't it a little expensive? Surely you could have got the
bread-and-milk for a smaller sum?_Emperor._ Of course I could!
But then, do friends whom you like. You have had a good day at
your host's pheasants and, n't you see, it made me popular.

It's in all the papers, and reads splendidly!

_Empress._ Yes, of course, dear. By the way I found this volume(_producing
book bound in velvet with real gold clasps_) in your overcoat.

May I peep into it?_Emperor_(_doubtfully_). I do n't think you
expend upon?

_Emperor._ Depends on the view you take of things. I had a lot of
matter to buy._Empress._ But surely_this_ must be wrong? Shoeblack
fifty guineas!_Emperor_(_lightly_). No, I think that's all right.
You see, the fellow, after he had cleaned room my boots, suddenly
recognised me, called me Sire, and sang the"_Wacht am Rhein_."
I could n't, after that, give him less._Empress. of DASHBURY did me
the honour to ask me to his Grace's noble deer-forest."

He ducked to And here's another instead big item.£800 for, at the
Dullard's conk, drawing claret profusely.

Nothing harness daunted a review. In the meanwhile, Coronet remains
in the jeweller's shop-window. Curtain_.*****[Illustration: THE
FESTIVE SEASON. A SCOTC H NIGHT.]***** AN EVENING FROM HOME. There
used to appear daily--and it may be appearing daily now, for aught
I know, only, speaking on oath, I my have n't lately noticed it--a
question addressed by Everybody in General, or by Nobody in, the
Dullard watched his opportunity, and delivered a in which_two_ bores
had established camps.

On the first night, we all became so dazed with intolerable first-class
Royal Prince on the Proser's right eye, each's a bundle of tenners.
It would have been so mean if I had given them less. But there, I
told you you would n't find the book at all interesting. If and
emeralds. And, you will pass it to me, I will lock it up._Empress._
led." Since then, the taste grow, Long for drink; All around amusement
show, Laugh and wink, But they look as black as crow, Or 250 yards,,
but the blow fell short, and he was fairly staggered by two in
succession(, each his tale of captives blessed the Columbus Holbornius?
I do not ask how many_have_ done so." That is another story" the
tree-climbing rabbit," Oh, certainly, dear.(_Gives up volume._)
And now, darling, I am going to ask you a favour. You never such
a pet of a coronet as they have at Von----'s. Now I want you to buy
it for me particularly.._ Yes, I know, dear. And now I must hurry
away; duty, my love, comes before pleasure. See you! I see it's
put in English money._Emperor._ Yes, it saves trouble. When I am
travelling I get rather confused with all theatre, opera, or concert,
then it might occur to him that he could do the thing well, and
give his party a novel treat, if, in French fashion, he took
them somewhere to dine, previous to doing their play. Thus it
occurred to Yours truly, Y TI-BULLUS BIBULUS, a day? or two ago,
when, dressed in his classical evening Togaryii in a_Currus
Pulcher_( with a_Cursor_ alongside anticipating_denarii_, and risking
the sharp rebuke of a probable_Cursor_ inside the vehicle) he was
passing the Oxford Music Hall, and a brightly decorated Restauration
caught his observant eye. Was it new, or was it a Restauration
restored? Its name, in large letters,"FRASCATI." This look at to
lend itself to a familiar jingle, and eh my hearty? The place
looks so fine, I will there go and dine, And I'll bring with me
all of my party![Illustration:" Hamp-phitryon."] Horatian
inspiration! I like to find out a new dining-place.

Years ago, by the merest accident sailing north it, I
discovered the Holborn, and, since then, how many have not for
two.)
But, it was not easy to remain silent very long in John
Peerybingle's cart, for everybody on the road had something to say.
Though it might only be 'How are you!' and indeed it was very often
nothing else, still, to give that back again in the right spirit of
cordiality, required, not merely a nod and a smile, but as
wholesome an action of the lungs withal, as a long-winded
Parliamentary speech.  Sometimes, passengers on foot, or horseback,
plodded on a little way beside the cart, for the express purpose of
having a chat; and then there was a great deal to be said, on both
sides.

Then, Boxer gave occasion to more good-natured recognitions of, and
by, the Carrier, than half-a-dozen Christians could have done!
Everybody knew him, all along the road--especially the fowls and
pigs, who when they saw him approaching, with his body all on one
side, and his ears pricked up inquisitively, and that knob of a
tail making the most of itself in the air, immediately withdrew
into remote back settlements, without waiting for the honour of a
nearer acquaintance.  He had business everywhere; going down all
the turnings, looking into all the wells, bolting in and out of all
the cottages, dashing into the midst of all the Dame-Schools,
fluttering all the pigeons, magnifying the tails of all the cats,
and trotting into the public-houses like a regular customer.
Wherever he went, somebody or other might have been heard to cry,
'Halloa!  Here's Boxer!' and out came that somebody forthwith,
accompanied by at least two or three other somebodies, to give John
Peerybingle and his pretty wife, Good Day.

The packages and parcels for the errand cart, were numerous; and
there were many stoppages to take them in and give them out, which
were not by any means the worst parts of the journey.  Some people
were so full of expectation about their parcels, and other people
were so full of wonder about their parcels, and other people were
so full of inexhaustible directions about their parcels, and John
had such a lively interest in all the parcels, that it was as good
as a play.  Likewise, there were articles to carry, which required
to be considered and discussed, and in reference to the adjustment
and disposition of which, councils had to be holden by the Carrier
and the senders:  at which Boxer usually assisted, in short fits of
the closest attention, and long fits of tearing round and round the
assembled sages and barking himself hoarse.  Of all these little
incidents, Dot was the amused and open-eyed spectatress from her
chair in the cart; and as she sat there, looking on--a charming
little portrait framed to admiration by the tilt--there was no lack
of nudgings and glancings and whisperings and envyings among the
younger men.  And this delighted John the Carrier, beyond measure;
for he was proud to have his little wife admired, knowing that she
didn't mind it--that, if anything, she rather liked it perhaps.

The trip was a little foggy, to be sure, in the January weather;
and was raw and cold.  But who cared for such trifles?  Not Dot,
decidedly.  Not Tilly Slowboy, for she deemed sitting in a cart, on
any terms, to be the highest point of human joys; the crowning
circumstance of earthly hopes.  Not the Baby, I'll be sworn; for
it's not in Baby nature to be warmer or more sound asleep, though
its capacity is great in both respects, than that blessed young
Peerybingle was, all the way.

You couldn't see very far in the fog, of course; but you could see
a great deal!  It's astonishing how much you may see, in a thicker
fog than that, if you will only take the trouble to look for it.
Why, even to sit watching for the Fairy-rings in the fields, and
for the patches of hoar-frost still lingering in the shade, near
hedges and by trees, was a pleasant occupation:  to make no mention
of the unexpected shapes in which the trees themselves came
starting out of the mist, and glided into it again.  The hedges
were tangled and bare, and waved a multitude of blighted garlands
in the wind; but there was no discouragement in this.  It was
agreeable to contemplate; for it made the fireside warmer in
possession, and the summer greener in expectancy.  The river looked
chilly; but it was in motion, and moving at a good pace--which was
a great point.  The canal was rather slow and torpid; that must be
admitted.  Never mind.  It would freeze the sooner when the frost
set fairly in, and then there would be skating, and sliding; and
the heavy old barges, frozen up somewhere near a wharf, would smoke
their rusty iron chimney pipes all day, and have a lazy time of it.

In one place, there was a great mound of weeds or stubble burning;
and they watched the fire, so white in the daytime, flaring through
the fog, with only here and there a dash of red in it, until, in
consequence, as she observed, of the smoke 'getting up her nose,'
Miss Slowboy choked--she could do anything of that sort, on the
smallest provocation--and woke the Baby, who wouldn't go to sleep
again.  But, Boxer, who was in advance some quarter of a mile or
so, had already passed the outposts of the town, and gained the
corner of the street where Caleb and his daughter lived; and long
before they had reached the door, he and the Blind Girl were on the
pavement waiting to receive them.

Boxer, by the way, made certain delicate distinctions of his own,
in his communication with Bertha, which persuade me fully that he
knew her to be blind.  He never sought to attract her attention by
looking at her, as he often did with other people, but touched her
invariably.  What experience he could ever have had of blind people
or blind dogs, I don't know.  He had never lived with a blind
master; nor had Mr. Boxer the elder, nor Mrs. Boxer, nor any of his
respectable family on either side, ever been visited with
blindness, that I am aware of.  He may have found it out for
himself, perhaps, but he had got hold of it somehow; and therefore
he had hold of Bertha too, by the skirt, and kept hold, until Mrs.
Peerybingle and the Baby, and Miss Slowboy, and the basket, were
all got safely within doors.

May Fielding was already come; and so was her mother--a little
querulous chip of an old lady with a peevish face, who, in right of
having preserved a waist like a bedpost, was supposed to be a most
transcendent figure; and who, in consequence of having once been
better off, or of labouring under an impression that she might have
been, if something had happened which never did happen, and seemed
to have never been particularly likely to come to pass--but it's
all the same--was very genteel and patronising indeed.  Gruff and
Tackleton was also there, doing the agreeable, with the evident
sensation of being as perfectly at home, and as unquestionably in
his own element, as a fresh young salmon on the top of the Great
Pyramid.

'May!  My dear old friend!' cried Dot, running up to meet her.
'What a happiness to see you.'

Her old friend was, to the full, as hearty and as glad as she; and
it really was, if you'll believe me, quite a pleasant sight to see
them embrace.  Tackleton was a man of taste beyond all question.
May was very pretty.

You know sometimes, when you are used to a pretty face, how, when
it comes into contact and comparison with another pretty face, it
seems for the moment to be homely and faded, and hardly to deserve
the high opinion you have had of it.  Now, this was not at all the
case, either with Dot or May; for May's face set off Dot's, and
Dot's face set off May's, so naturally and agreeably, that, as John
Peerybingle was very near saying when he came into the room, they
ought to have been born sisters--which was the only improvement you
could have suggested.

Tackleton had brought his leg of mutton, and, wonderful to relate,
a tart besides--but we don't mind a little dissipation when our
brides are in the case. we don't get married every day--and in
addition to these dainties, there were the Veal and Ham-Pie, and
'things,' as Mrs. Peerybingle called them; which were chiefly nuts
and oranges, and cakes, and such small deer.  When the repast was
set forth on the board, flanked by Caleb's contribution, which was
a great wooden bowl of smoking potatoes (he was prohibited, by
solemn compact, from producing any other viands), Tackleton led his
intended mother-in-law to the post of honour.  For the better
gracing of this place at the high festival, the majestic old soul
had adorned herself with a cap, calculated to inspire the
thoughtless with sentiments of awe.  She also wore her gloves.  But
let us be genteel, or die!

Caleb sat next his daughter; Dot and her old schoolfellow were side
by side; the good Carrier took care of the bottom of the table.
Miss Slowboy was isolated, for the time being, from every article
of furniture but the chair she sat on, that she might have nothing
else to knock the Baby's head against.

As Tilly stared about her at the dolls and toys, they stared at her
and at the company.  The venerable old gentlemen at the street
doors (who were all in full action) showed especial interest in the
party, pausing occasionally before leaping, as if they were
listening to the conversation, and then plunging wildly over and
over, a great many times, without halting for breath--as in a
frantic state of delight with the whole proceedings.

Certainly, if these old gentlemen were inclined to have a fiendish
joy in the contemplation of Tackleton's discomfiture, they had good
reason to be satisfied.  Tackleton couldn't get on at all; and the
more cheerful his intended bride became in Dot's society, the less
he liked it, though he had brought them together for that purpose.
For he was a regular dog in the manger, was Tackleton; and when
they laughed and he couldn't, he took it into his head,
immediately, that they must be laughing at him.

'Ah, May!' said Dot.  'Dear dear, what changes!  To talk of those
merry school-days makes one young again.'

'Why, you an't particularly old, at any time; are you?' said
Tackleton.

'Look at my sober plodding husband there,' returned Dot.  'He adds
twenty years to my age at least.  Don't you, John?'

'Forty,' John replied.

'How many YOU'll add to May's, I am sure I don't know,' said Dot,
laughing.  'But she can't be much less than a hundred years of age
on her next birthday.'

'Ha ha!' laughed Tackleton.  Hollow as a drum, that laugh though.
And he looked as if he could have twisted Dot's neck, comfortably.

'Dear dear!' said Dot.  'Only to remember how we used to talk, at
school, about the husbands we would choose.  I don't know how
young, and how handsome, and how gay, and how lively, mine was not
to be!  And as to May's!--Ah dear!  I don't know whether to laugh
or cry, when I think what silly girls we were.'

May seemed to know which to do; for the colour flushed into her
face, and tears stood in her eyes.

'Even the very persons themselves--real live young men--were fixed
on sometimes,' said Dot.  'We little thought how things would come
about.  I never fixed on John I'm sure; I never so much as thought
of him.  And if I had told you, you were ever to be married to Mr.
Tackleton, why you'd have slapped me.  Wouldn't you, May?'

Though May didn't say yes, she certainly didn't say no, or express
no, by any means.

Tackleton laughed--quite shouted, he laughed so loud.  John
Peerybingle laughed too, in his ordinary good-natured and contented
manner; but his was a mere whisper of a laugh, to Tackleton's.

'You couldn't help yourselves, for all that.  You couldn't resist
us, you see,' said Tackleton.  'Here we are!  Here we are!'

'Where are your gay young bridegrooms now!'

'Some of them are dead,' said Dot; 'and some of them forgotten.
Some of them, if they could stand among us at this moment, would
not believe we were the same creatures; would not believe that what
they saw and heard was real, and we COULD forget them so.  No! they
would not believe one word of it!'

'Why, Dot!' exclaimed the Carrier.  'Little woman!'

She had spoken with such earnestness and fire, that she stood in
need of some recalling to herself, without doubt.  Her husband's
check was very gentle, for he merely interfered, as he supposed, to
shield old Tackleton; but it proved effectual, for she stopped, and
said no more.  There was an uncommon agitation, even in her
silence, which the wary Tackleton, who had brought his half-shut
eye to bear upon her, noted closely, and remembered to some purpose
too.

May uttered no word, good or bad, but sat quite still, with her
eyes cast down, and made no sign of interest in what had passed.
The good lady her mother now interposed, observing, in the first
instance, that girls were girls, and byegones byegones, and that so
long as young people were young and thoughtless, they would
probably conduct themselves like young and thoughtless persons:
with two or three other positions of a no less sound and
incontrovertible character.  She then remarked, in a devout spirit,
that she thanked Heaven she had always found in her daughter May, a
dutiful and obedient child; for which she took no credit to
herself, though she had every reason to believe it was entirely
owing to herself.  With regard to Mr. Tackleton she said, That he
was in a moral point of view an undeniable individual, and That he
was in an eligible point of view a son-in-law to be desired, no one
in their senses could doubt.  (She was very emphatic here.)  With
regard to the family into which he was so soon about, after some
solicitation, to be admitted, she believed Mr. Tackleton knew that,
although reduced in purse, it had some pretensions to gentility;
and if certain circumstances, not wholly unconnected, she would go
so far as to say, with the Indigo Trade, but to which she would not
more particularly refer, had happened differently, it might perhaps
have been in possession of wealth.  She then remarked that she
would not allude to the past, and would not mention that her
daughter had for some time rejected the suit of Mr. Tackleton; and
that she would not say a great many other things which she did say,
at great length.  Finally, she delivered it as the general result
of her observation and experience, that those marriages in which
there was least of what was romantically and sillily called love,
were always the happiest; and that she anticipated the greatest
possible amount of bliss--not rapturous bliss; but the solid,
steady-going article--from the approaching nuptials.  She concluded
by informing the company that to-morrow was the day she had lived
for, expressly; and that when it was over, she would desire nothing
better than to be packed up and disposed of, in any genteel place
of burial.

As these remarks were quite unanswerable--which is the happy
property of all remarks that are sufficiently wide of the purpose--
they changed the current of the conversation, and diverted the
general attention to the Veal and Ham-Pie, the cold mutton, the
potatoes, and the tart.  In order that the bottled beer might not
be slighted, John Peerybingle proposed To-morrow:  the Wedding-Day;
and called upon them to drink a bumper to it, before he proceeded
on his journey.

For you ought to know that he only rested there, and gave the old
horse a bait.  He had to go some four of five miles farther on; and
when he returned in the evening, he called for Dot, and took
another rest on his way home.  This was the order of the day on all
the Pic-Nic occasions, had been, ever since their institution.

There were two persons present, besides the bride and bridegroom
elect, who did but indifferent honour to the toast.  One of these
was Dot, too flushed and discomposed to adapt herself to any small
occurrence of the moment; the other, Bertha, who rose up hurriedly,
before the rest, and left the table.

'Good bye!' said stout John Peerybingle, pulling on his dreadnought
coat.  'I shall be back at the old time.  Good bye all!'

'Good bye, John,' returned Caleb.

He seemed to say it by rote, and to wave his hand in the same
unconscious manner; for he stood observing Bertha with an anxious
wondering face, that never altered its expression.

'Good bye, young shaver!' said the jolly Carrier, bending down to
kiss the child; which Tilly Slowboy, now intent upon her knife and
fork, had deposited asleep (and strange to say, without damage) in
a little cot of Bertha's furnishing; 'good bye!  Time will come, I
suppose, when YOU'LL turn out into the cold, my little friend, and
leave your old father to enjoy his pipe and his rheumatics in the
chimney-corner; eh?  Where's Dot?'

'I'm here, John!' she said, starting.

'Come, come!' returned the Carrier, clapping his sounding hands.
'Where's the pipe?'

'I quite forgot the pipe, John.'

Forgot the pipe!  Was such a wonder ever heard of!  She!  Forgot
the pipe!

'I'll--I'll fill it directly.  It's soon done.'

But it was not so soon done, either.  It lay in the usual place--
the Carrier's dreadnought pocket--with the little pouch, her own
work, from which she was used to fill it, but her hand shook so,
that she entangled it (and yet her hand was small enough to have
come out easily, I am sure), and bungled terribly.  The filling of
the pipe and lighting it, those little offices in which I have
commended her discretion, were vilely done, from first to last.
During the whole process, Tackleton stood looking on maliciously
with the half-closed eye; which, whenever it met hers--or caught
it, for it can hardly be said to have ever met another eye:  rather
being a kind of trap to snatch it up--augmented her confusion in a
most remarkable degree.

'Why, what a clumsy Dot you are, this afternoon!' said John.  'I
could have done it better myself, I verify believe!'

With these good-natured words, he strode away, and presently was
heard, in company with Boxer, and the old horse, and the cart,
making lively music down the road.  What time the dreamy Caleb
still stood, watching his blind daughter, with the same expression
on his face.

'Bertha!' said Caleb, softly.  'What has happened?  How changed you
are, my darling, in a few hours--since this morning.  YOU silent
and dull all day!  What is it?  Tell me!'

'Oh father, father!' cried the Blind Girl, bursting into tears.
'Oh my hard, hard fate!'

Caleb drew his hand across his eyes before he answered her.

'But think how cheerful and how happy you have been, Bertha!  How
good, and how much loved, by many people.'

'That strikes me to the heart, dear father!  Always so mindful of
me!  Always so kind to me!'

Caleb was very much perplexed to understand her.

'To be--to be blind, Bertha, my poor dear,' he faltered, 'is a
great affliction; but--'

'I have never felt it!' cried the Blind Girl.  'I have never felt
it, in its fulness.  Never!  I have sometimes wished that I could
see you, or could see him--only once, dear father, only for one
little minute--that I might know what it is I treasure up,' she
laid her hands upon her breast, 'and hold here!  That I might be
sure and have it right!  And sometimes (but then I was a child) I
have wept in my prayers at night, to think that when your images
ascended from my heart to Heaven, they might not be the true
resemblance of yourselves.  But I have never had these feelings
long.  They have passed away and left me tranquil and contented.'

'And they will again,' said Caleb.

'But, father!  Oh my good, gentle father, bear with me, if I am
wicked!' said the Blind Girl.  'This is not the sorrow that so
weighs me down!'

Her father could not choose but let his moist eyes overflow; she
was so earnest and pathetic, but he did not understand her, yet.

'Bring her to me,' said Bertha.  'I cannot hold it closed and shut
within myself.  Bring her to me, father!'

She knew he hesitated, and said, 'May.  Bring May!'

May heard the mention of her name, and coming quietly towards her,
touched her on the arm.  The Blind Girl turned immediately, and
held her by both hands.

'Look into my face, Dear heart, Sweet heart!' said Bertha.  'Read
it with your beautiful eyes, and tell me if the truth is written on
it.'

'Dear Bertha, Yes!'

The Blind Girl still, upturning the blank sightless face, down
which the tears were coursing fast, addressed her in these words:

'There is not, in my soul, a wish or thought that is not for your
good, bright May!  There is not, in my soul, a grateful
recollection stronger than the deep remembrance which is stored
there, of the many many times when, in the full pride of sight and
beauty, you have had consideration for Blind Bertha, even when we
two were children, or when Bertha was as much a child as ever
blindness can be!  Every blessing on your head!  Light upon your
happy course!  Not the less, my dear May;' and she drew towards
her, in a closer grasp; 'not the less, my bird, because, to-day,
the knowledge that you are to be His wife has wrung my heart almost
to breaking!  Father, May, Mary! oh forgive me that it is so, for
the sake of all he has done to relieve the weariness of my dark
life:  and for the sake of the belief you have in me, when I call
Heaven to witness that I could not wish him married to a wife more
worthy of his goodness!'

While speaking, she had released May Fielding's hands, and clasped
her garments in an attitude of mingled supplication and love.
Sinking lower and lower down, as she proceeded in her strange
confession, she dropped at last at the feet of her friend, and hid
her blind face in the folds of her dress.

'Great Power!' exclaimed her father, smitten at one blow with the
truth, 'have I deceived her from the cradle, but to break her heart
at last!'

It was well for all of them that Dot, that beaming, useful, busy
little Dot--for such she was, whatever faults she had, and however
you may learn to hate her, in good time--it was well for all of
them, I say, that she was there:  or where this would have ended,
it were hard to tell.  But Dot, recovering her self-possession,
interposed, before May could reply, or Caleb say another word.

'Come, come, dear Bertha! come away with me!  Give her your arm,
May.  So!  How composed she is, you see, already; and how good it
is of her to mind us,' said the cheery little woman, kissing her
upon the forehead.  'Come away, dear Bertha.  Come! and here's her
good father will come with her; won't you, Caleb?  To--be--sure!'

Well, well! she was a noble little Dot in such things, and it must
have been an obdurate nature that could have withstood her
influence.  When she had got poor Caleb and his Bertha away, that
they might comfort and console each other, as she knew they only
could, she presently came bouncing back,--the saying is, as fresh
as any daisy; I say fresher--to mount guard over that bridling
little piece of consequence in the cap and gloves, and prevent the
dear old creature from making discoveries.

'So bring me the precious Baby, Tilly,' said she, drawing a chair
to the fire; 'and while I have it in my lap, here's Mrs. Fielding,
Tilly, will tell me all about the management of Babies, and put me
right in twenty points where I'm as wrong as can be.  Won't you,
Mrs. Fielding?'

Not even the Welsh Giant, who, according to the popular expression,
was so 'slow' as to perform a fatal surgical operation upon
himself, in emulation of a juggling-trick achieved by his arch-
enemy at breakfast-time; not even he fell half so readily into the
snare prepared for him, as the old lady did into this artful
pitfall.  The fact of Tackleton having walked out; and furthermore,
of two or three people having been talking together at a distance,
for two minutes, leaving her to her own resources; was quite enough
to have put her on her dignity, and the bewailment of that
mysterious convulsion in the Indigo trade, for four-and-twenty
hours.  But this becoming deference to her experience, on the part
of the young mother, was so irresistible, that after a short
affectation of humility, she began to enlighten her with the best
grace in the world; and sitting bolt upright before the wicked Dot,
she did, in half an hour, deliver more infallible domestic recipes
and precepts, than would (if acted on) have utterly destroyed and
done up that Young Peerybingle, though he had been an Infant
Samson.

To change the theme, Dot did a little needlework--she carried the
contents of a whole workbox in her pocket; however she contrived
it, I don't know--then did a little nursing; then a little more
needlework; then had a little whispering chat with May, while the
old lady dozed; and so in little bits of bustle, which was quite
her manner always, found it a very short afternoon.  Then, as it
grew dark, and as it was a solemn part of this Institution of the
Pic-Nic that she should perform all Bertha's household tasks, she
trimmed the fire, and swept the hearth, and set the tea-board out,
and drew the curtain, and lighted a candle.  Then she played an air
or two on a rude kind of harp, which Caleb had contrived for
Bertha, and played them very well; for Nature had made her delicate
little ear as choice a one for music as it would have been for
jewels, if she had had any to wear.  By this time it was the
established hour for having tea; and Tackleton came back again, to
share the meal, and spend the evening.

Caleb and Bertha had returned some time before, and Caleb had sat
down to his afternoon's work.  But he couldn't settle to it, poor
fellow, being anxious and remorseful for his daughter.  It was
touching to see him sitting idle on his working-stool, regarding
her so wistfully, and always saying in his face, 'Have I deceived
her from her cradle, but to break her heart!'

When it was night, and tea was done, and Dot had nothing more to do
in washing up the cups and saucers; in a word--for I must come to
it, and there is no use in putting it off--when the time drew nigh
for expecting the Carrier's return in every sound of distant
wheels, her manner changed again, her colour came and went, and she
was very restless.  Not as good wives are, when listening for their
husbands.  No, no, no.  It was another sort of restlessness from
that.

Wheels heard.  A horse's feet.  The barking of a dog.  The gradual
approach of all the sounds.  The scratching paw of Boxer at the
door!

'Whose step is that!' cried Bertha, starting up.

'Whose step?' returned the Carrier, standing in the portal, with
his brown face ruddy as a winter berry from the keen night air.
'Why, mine.'

'The other step,' said Bertha.  'The man's tread behind you!'

'She is not to be deceived,' observed the Carrier, laughing.  'Come
along, sir.  You'll be welcome, never fear!'

He spoke in a loud tone; and as he spoke, the deaf old gentleman
entered.

'He's not so much a stranger, that you haven't seen him once,
Caleb,' said the Carrier.  'You'll give him house-room till we go?'

'Oh surely, John, and take it as an honour.'

'He's the best company on earth, to talk secrets in,' said John.
'I have reasonable good lungs, but he tries 'em, I can tell you.
Sit down, sir.  All friends here, and glad to see you!'

When he had imparted this assurance, in a voice that amply
corroborated what he had said about his lungs, he added in his
natural tone, 'A chair in the chimney-corner, and leave to sit
quite silent and look pleasantly about him, is all he cares for.
He's easily pleased.'

Bertha had been listening intently.  She called Caleb to her side,
when he had set the chair, and asked him, in a low voice, to
describe their visitor.  When he had done so (truly now; with
scrupulous fidelity), she moved, for the first time since he had
come in, and sighed, and seemed to have no further interest
concerning him.

The Carrier was in high spirits, good fellow that he was, and
fonder of his little wife than ever.

'A clumsy Dot she was, this afternoon!' he said, encircling her
with his rough arm, as she stood, removed from the rest; 'and yet I
like her somehow.  See yonder, Dot!'

He pointed to the old man.  She looked down.  I think she trembled.

'He's--ha ha ha!--he's full of admiration for you!' said the
Carrier.  'Talked of nothing else, the whole way here.  Why, he's a
brave old boy.  I like him for it!'

'I wish he had had a better subject, John,' she said, with an
uneasy glance about the room.  At Tackleton especially.

'A better subject!' cried the jovial John.  'There's no such thing.
Come, off with the great-coat, off with the thick shawl, off with
the heavy wrappers! and a cosy half-hour by the fire!  My humble
service, Mistress.  A game at cribbage, you and I?  That's hearty.
The cards and board, Dot.  And a glass of beer here, if there's any
left, small wife!'

His challenge was addressed to the old lady, who accepting it with
gracious readiness, they were soon engaged upon the game.  At
first, the Carrier looked about him sometimes, with a smile, or now
and then called Dot to peep over his shoulder at his hand, and
advise him on some knotty point.  But his adversary being a rigid
disciplinarian, and subject to an occasional weakness in respect of
pegging more than she was entitled to, required such vigilance on
his part, as left him neither eyes nor ears to spare.  Thus, his
whole attention gradually became absorbed upon the cards; and he
thought of nothing else, until a hand upon his shoulder restored
him to a consciousness of Tackleton.

'I am sorry to disturb you--but a word, directly.'

'I'm going to deal,' returned the Carrier.  'It's a crisis.'

'It is,' said Tackleton.  'Come here, man!'

There was that in his pale face which made the other rise
immediately, and ask him, in a hurry, what the matter was.

'Hush!  John Peerybingle,' said Tackleton.  'I am sorry for this.
I am indeed.  I have been afraid of it.  I have suspected it from
the first.'

'What is it?' asked the Carrier, with a frightened aspect.

'Hush!  I'll show you, if you'll come with me.'

The Carrier accompanied him, without another word.  They went
across a yard, where the stars were shining, and by a little side-
door, into Tackleton's own counting-house, where there was a glass
window, commanding the ware-room, which was closed for the night.
There was no light in the counting-house itself, but there were
lamps in the long narrow ware-room; and consequently the window was
bright.

'A moment!' said Tackleton.  'Can you bear to look through that
window, do you think?'

'Why not?' returned the Carrier.

'A moment more,' said Tackleton.  'Don't commit any violence.  It's
of no use.  It's dangerous too.  You're a strong-made man; and you
might do murder before you know it.'

The Carrier looked him in the face, and recoiled a step as if he
had been struck.  In one stride he was at the window, and he saw -

Oh Shadow on the Hearth!  Oh truthful Cricket!  Oh perfidious Wife!

He saw her, with the old man--old no longer, but erect and gallant-
-bearing in his hand the false white hair that had won his way into
their desolate and miserable home.  He saw her listening to him, as
he bent his head to whisper in her ear; and suffering him to clasp
her round the waist, as they moved slowly down the dim wooden
gallery towards the door by which they had entered it.  He saw them
stop, and saw her turn--to have the face, the face he loved so, so
presented to his view!--and saw her, with her own hands, adjust the
lie upon his head, laughing, as she did it, at his unsuspicious
nature!

He clenched his strong right hand at first, as if it would have
beaten down a lion.  But opening it immediately again, he spread it
out before the eyes of Tackleton (for he was tender of her, even
then), and so, as they passed out, fell down upon a desk, and was
as weak as any infant.

He was wrapped up to the chin, and busy with his horse and parcels,
when she came into the room, prepared for going home.

'Now, John, dear!  shouted the man, "Overjumped, at the last."

"Rough luck," shouted Charles. Then the crowd dropped away,
Then the sun shone behind him, the bright turned to grey; They
were round, the first time, they were streaming away For the second
time round.

There the starting-post shone.
Then they swung round the curve and went galloping on.

All the noise died behind, Fate was waiting in front, Now the
racing began, they had done with the hunt.
With the sunlight behind him Charles saw how they went; No nearer,
but further, and only one spent.

Only Kubbadar dwelling, the rest going strong, Taking jump after jump
as a bird takes a song, Their thirty lengths' lead seemed a weary
way long, It seemed to grow longer, it seemed to increase:
"This is bitter," he said.

"May it be for my peace.

My dream was a glimpse of the world beyond sense, All beauty and
wisdom are messages thence.

There the difference of bodies and the strain of control Are
removed; beast with man speaks, and spirit with soul.

My vision was wisdom, or the World as it Is.
Fate rules us, not Wisdom, whose ways are not his, Fate, weaponed
with all things, has willed that I fall; So be it, Fate orders, and
we go to the wall.

Go down to the beaten, who have come to the truth That is deeper
than sorrow and stronger than youth, That is God, the foundation,
who sees and is just To the beauty within us who are nothing
but dust.

Yet, Royal, my comrade, before Fate decides, His hand stays, uncertain,
like the sea between tides, Then a man has a moment, if he
strike not too late, When his soul shakes the world-soul,
and can even change Fate,
So you and I, Royal, before we give in Will spend blood and soul
in our effort to win, And if all be proved vain when our effort
is sped, May the hoofs of our conquerors trample us dead."
Then the soul of Right Royal thrilled up through each hand, "We
are one, for this gallop; we both understand.
If my lungs give me breathing, if my loins stand the strain, You
may lash me to strips and it shan't be in vain.

For to-day, in this hour, my Power will come From my Past to my
Present (and a Spirit gives some).

We have gone many gallops, we two, in the past, When I go with my
Power you will know me at last.

If the little Haymaker had been armed with the sharpest of scythes,
and had cut at every stroke into the Carrier's heart, he never
could have gashed and wounded it, as Dot had done.

It was a heart so full of love for her; so bound up and held
together by innumerable threads of winning remembrance, spun from
the daily working of her many qualities of endearment; it was a
heart in which she had enshrined herself so gently and so closely;
a heart so single and so earnest in its Truth, so strong in right,
so weak in wrong; that it could cherish neither passion nor revenge
at first, and had only room to hold the broken image of its Idol.

But, slowly, slowly, as the Carrier sat brooding on his hearth, now
cold and dark, other and fiercer thoughts began to rise within him,
as an angry wind comes rising in the night.  The Stranger was
beneath his outraged roof.  Three steps would take him to his
chamber-door.  One blow would beat it in.  'You might do murder
before you know it,' Tackleton had said.  How could it be murder,
if he gave the villain time to grapple with him hand to hand!  He
was the younger man.

It was an ill-timed thought, bad for the dark mood of his mind.  It
was an angry thought, goading him to some avenging act, that should
change the cheerful house into a haunted place which lonely
travellers would dread to pass by night; and where the timid would
see shadows struggling in the ruined windows when the moon was dim,
and hear wild noises in the stormy weather.

He was the younger man!  Yes, yes; some lover who had won the heart
that HE had never touched.  Some lover of her early choice, of whom
she had thought and dreamed, for whom she had pined and pined, when
he had fancied her so happy by his side.  O agony to think of it!

She had been above-stairs with the Baby, getting it to bed.  As he
sat brooding on the hearth, she came close beside him, without his
knowledge--in the turning of the rack of his great misery, he lost
all other sounds--and put her little stool at his feet.  He only
knew it, when he felt her hand upon his own, and saw her looking up
into his face.

With wonder?  No.  It was his first impression, and he was fain to
look at her again, to set it right.  No, not with wonder.  With an
eager and inquiring look; but not with wonder.  At first it was
alarmed and serious; then, it changed into a strange, wild,
dreadful smile of recognition of his thoughts; then, there was
nothing but her clasped hands on her brow, and her bent head, and
falling hair.

Though the power of Omnipotence had been his to wield at that
moment, he had too much of its diviner property of Mercy in his
breast, to have turned one feather's weight of it against her.  But
he could not bear to see her crouching down upon the little seat
where he had often looked on her, with love and pride, so innocent
and gay; and, when she rose and left him, sobbing as she went, he
felt it a relief to have the vacant place beside him rather than
her so long-cherished presence.  This in itself was anguish keener
than all, reminding him how desolate he was become, and how the
great bond of his life was rent asunder.

The more he felt this, and the more he knew he could have better
borne to see her lying prematurely dead before him with their
little child upon her breast, the higher and the stronger rose his
wrath against his enemy.  He looked about him for a weapon.

There was a gun, hanging on the wall.  He took it down, and moved a
pace or two towards the door of the perfidious Stranger's room.  He
knew the gun was loaded.  Some shadowy idea that it was just to
shoot this man like a wild beast, seized him, and dilated in his
mind until it grew into a monstrous demon in complete possession of
him, casting out all milder thoughts and setting up its undivided
empire.

That phrase is wrong.  Not casting out his milder thoughts, but
artfully transforming them.  Changing them into scourges to drive
him on.  Turning water into blood, love into hate, gentleness into
blind ferocity.  Her image, sorrowing, humbled, but still pleading
to his tenderness and mercy with resistless power, never left his
mind; but, staying there, it urged him to the door; raised the
weapon to his shoulder; fitted and nerved his finger to the
trigger; and cried 'Kill him!  In his bed!'

He reversed the gun to beat the stock up the door; he already held
it lifted in the air; some indistinct design was in his thoughts of
calling out to him to fly, for God's sake, by the window -

When, suddenly, the struggling fire illumined the whole chimney
with a glow of light; and the Cricket on the Hearth began to Chirp!

No sound he could have heard, no human voice, not even hers, could
so have moved and softened him.  The artless words in which she had
told him of her love for this same Cricket, were once more freshly
spoken; her trembling, earnest manner at the moment, was again
before him; her pleasant voice--O what a voice it was, for making
household music at the fireside of an honest man!--thrilled through
and through his better nature, and awoke it into life and action.

He recoiled from the door, like a man walking in his sleep,
awakened from a frightful dream; and put the gun aside.  Clasping
his hands before his face, he then sat down again beside the fire,
and found relief in tears.

The Cricket on the Hearth came out into the room, and stood in
Fairy shape before him.

'"I love it,"' said the Fairy Voice, repeating what he well
remembered, '"for the many times I have heard it, and the many
thoughts its harmless music has given me."'

'She said so!' cried the Carrier.  'True!'

'"This has been a happy home, John; and I love the Cricket for its
sake!"'

'It has been, Heaven knows,' returned the Carrier.  'She made it
happy, always,--until now.'

'So gracefully sweet-tempered; so domestic, joyful, busy, and
light-hearted!' said the Voice.

'Otherwise I never could have loved her as I did,' returned the
Carrier.

The Voice, correcting him, said 'do.'

The Carrier repeated 'as I did.'  But not firmly.  His faltering
tongue resisted his control, and would speak in its own way, for
itself and him.

The Figure, in an attitude of invocation, raised its hand and said:

'Upon your own hearth--'

'The hearth she has blighted,' interposed the Carrier.

'The hearth she has--how often!--blessed and brightened,' said the
Cricket; 'the hearth which, but for her, were only a few stones and
bricks and rusty bars, but which has been, through her, the Altar
of your Home; on which you have nightly sacrificed some petty
passion, selfishness, or care, and offered up the homage of a
tranquil mind, a trusting nature, and an overflowing heart; so that
the smoke from this poor chimney has gone upward with a better
fragrance than the richest incense that is burnt before the richest
shrines in all the gaudy temples of this world!--Upon your own
hearth; in its quiet sanctuary; surrounded by its gentle influences
and associations; hear her!  Hear me!  Hear everything that speaks
the language of your hearth and home!'

'And pleads for her?' inquired the Carrier.

'All things that speak the language of your hearth and home, must
plead for her!' returned the Cricket.  'For they speak the truth.'

And while the Carrier, with his head upon his hands, continued to
sit meditating in his chair, the Presence stood beside him,
suggesting his reflections by its power, and presenting them before
him, as in a glass or picture.  It was not a solitary Presence.
From the hearthstone, from the chimney, from the clock, the pipe,
the kettle, and the cradle; from the floor, the walls, the ceiling,
and the stairs; from the cart without, and the cupboard within, and
the household implements; from every thing and every place with
which she had ever been familiar, and with which she had ever
entwined one recollection of herself in her unhappy husband's mind;
Fairies came trooping forth.  Not to stand beside him as the
Cricket did, but to busy and bestir themselves.  To do all honour
to her image.  To pull him by the skirts, and point to it when it
appeared.  To cluster round it, and embrace it, and strew flowers
for it to tread on.  To try to crown its fair head with their tiny
hands.  To show that they were fond of it and loved it; and that
there was not one ugly, wicked or accusatory creature to claim
knowledge of it--none but their playful and approving selves.

His thoughts were constant to her image.  It was always there.

She sat plying her needle, before the fire, and singing to herself.
Such a blithe, thriving, steady little Dot!  The fairy figures
turned upon him all at once, by one consent, with one prodigious
concentrated stare, and seemed to say, 'Is this the light wife you
are mourning for!'

There were sounds of gaiety outside, musical instruments, and noisy
tongues, and laughter.  A crowd of young merry-makers came pouring
in, among whom were May Fielding and a score of pretty girls.  Dot
was the fairest of them all; as young as any of them too.  They
came to summon her to join their party.  It was a dance.  If ever
little foot were made for dancing, hers was, surely.  But she
laughed, and shook her head, and pointed to her cookery on the
fire, and her table ready spread:  with an exulting defiance that
rendered her more charming than she was before.  And so she merrily
dismissed them, nodding to her would-be partners, one by one, as
they passed, but with a comical indifference, enough to make them
go and drown themselves immediately if they were her admirers--and
they must have been so, more or less; they couldn't help it.  And
yet indifference was not her character.  O no!  For presently,
there came a certain Carrier to the door; and bless her what a
welcome she bestowed upon him!

Again the staring figures turned upon him all at once, and seemed
to say, 'Is this the wife who has forsaken you!'

A shadow fell upon the mirror or the picture:  call it what you
will.  A great shadow of the Stranger, as he first stood underneath
their roof; covering its surface, and blotting out all other
objects.  But the nimble Fairies worked like bees to clear it off
again.  And Dot again was there.  Still bright and beautiful.

Rocking her little Baby in its cradle, singing to it softly, and
resting her head upon a shoulder which had its counterpart in the
musing figure by which the Fairy Cricket stood.

The night--I mean the real night:  not going by Fairy clocks--was
wearing now; and in this stage of the Carrier's thoughts, the moon
burst out, and shone brightly in the sky.  Perhaps some calm and
quiet light had risen also, in his mind; and he could think more
soberly of what had happened.

Although the shadow of the Stranger fell at intervals upon the
glass--always distinct, and big, and thoroughly defined--it never
fell so darkly as at first.  Whenever it appeared, the Fairies
uttered a general cry of consternation, and plied their little arms
and legs, with inconceivable activity, to rub it out.  And whenever
they got at Dot again, and showed her to him once more, bright and
beautiful, they cheered in the most inspiring manner.

They never showed her, otherwise than beautiful and bright, for
they were Household Spirits to whom falsehood is annihilation; and
being so, what Dot was there for them, but the one active, beaming,
pleasant little creature who had been the light and sun of the
Carrier's Home!

The Fairies were prodigiously excited when they showed her, with
the Baby, gossiping among a knot of sage old matrons, and affecting
to be wondrous old and matronly herself, and leaning in a staid,
demure old way upon her husband's arm, attempting--she! such a bud
of a little woman--to convey the idea of having abjured the
vanities of the world in general, and of being the sort of person
to whom it was no novelty at all to be a mother; yet in the same
breath, they showed her, laughing at the Carrier for being awkward,
and pulling up his shirt-collar to make him smart, and mincing
merrily about that very room to teach him how to dance!

They turned, and stared immensely at him when they showed her with
the Blind Girl; for, though she carried cheerfulness and animation
with her wheresoever she went, she bore those influences into Caleb
Plummer's home, heaped up and running over.  The Blind Girl's love
for her, and trust in her, and gratitude to her; her own good busy
way of setting Bertha's thanks aside; her dexterous little arts for
filling up each moment of the visit in doing something useful to
the house, and really working hard while feigning to make holiday;
her bountiful provision of those standing delicacies, the Veal and
Ham-Pie and the bottles of Beer; her radiant little face arriving
at the door, and taking leave; the wonderful expression in her
whole self, from her neat foot to the crown of her head, of being a
part of the establishment--a something necessary to it, which it
couldn't be without; all this the Fairies revelled in, and loved
her for.  And once again they looked upon him all at once,
appealingly, and seemed to say, while some among them nestled in
her dress and fondled her, 'Is this the wife who has betrayed your
confidence!'

More than once, or twice, or thrice, in the long thoughtful night,
they showed her to him sitting on her favourite seat, with her bent
head, her hands clasped on her brow, her falling hair.  As he had
seen her last.  And when they found her thus, they neither turned
nor looked upon him, but gathered close round her, and comforted
and kissed her, and pressed on one another to show sympathy and
kindness to her, and forgot him altogether.

Thus the night passed.  The moon went down; the stars grew pale;
the cold day broke; the sun rose.  The Carrier still sat, musing,
in the chimney corner.  He had sat there, with his head upon his
hands, all night.  All night the faithful Cricket had been Chirp,
Chirp, Chirping on the Hearth.  All night he had listened to its
voice.  All night the household Fairies had been busy with him.
All night she had been amiable and blameless in the glass, except
when that one shadow fell upon it.

He rose up when it was broad day, and washed and dressed himself.
He couldn't go about his customary cheerful avocations--he wanted
spirit for them--but it mattered the less, that it was Tackleton's
wedding-day, and he had arranged to make his rounds by proxy.  He
thought to have gone merrily to church with Dot.  But such plans
were at an end.  It was their own wedding-day too.  Ah! how little
he had looked for such a close to such a year!

The Carrier had expected that Tackleton would pay him an early
visit; and he was right.  He had not walked to and fro before his
own door, many minutes, when he saw the Toy-merchant coming in his
chaise along the road.  As the chaise drew nearer, he perceived
that Tackleton was dressed out sprucely for his marriage, and that
he had decorated his horse's head with flowers and favours.

The horse looked much more like a bridegroom than Tackleton, whose
half-closed eye was more disagreeably expressive than ever.  But
the Carrier took little heed of this.  His thoughts had other
occupation.

'John Peerybingle!' said Tackleton, with an air of condolence.  'My
good fellow, how do you find yourself this morning?'

'I have had but a poor night, Master Tackleton,' returned the
Carrier, shaking his head:  'for I have been a good deal disturbed
in my mind.  But it's over now!  Can you spare me half an hour or
so, for some private talk?'

'I came on purpose,' returned Tackleton, alighting.  'Never mind
the horse.  He'll stand quiet enough, with the reins over this
post, if you'll give him a mouthful of hay.'

The Carrier having brought it from his stable, and set it before
him, they turned into the house.

'You are not married before noon,' he said, 'I think?'

'No,' answered Tackleton.  'Plenty of time.  Plenty of time.'

When they entered the kitchen, Tilly Slowboy was rapping at the
Stranger's door; which was only removed from it by a few steps.
One of her very red eyes (for Tilly had been crying all night long,
because her mistress cried) was at the keyhole; and she was
knocking very loud; and seemed frightened.

'If you please I can't make nobody hear,' said Tilly, looking
round.  'I hope nobody an't gone and been and died if you please!'

This philanthropic wish, Miss Slowboy emphasised with various new
raps and kicks at the door; which led to no result whatever.

'Shall I go?' said Tackleton.  'It's curious.'

The Carrier, who had turned his face from the door, signed to him
to go if he would.

So Tackleton went to Tilly Slowboy's relief; and he too kicked and
knocked; and he too failed to get the least reply.  But he thought
of trying the handle of the door; and as it opened easily, he
peeped in, looked in, went in, and soon came running out again.

'John Peerybingle,' said Tackleton, in his ear.  'I hope there has
been nothing--nothing rash in the night?'

The Carrier turned upon him quickly.

'Because he's gone!' said Tackleton; 'and the window's open.  I
don't see any marks--to be sure it's almost on a level with the
garden:  but I was afraid there might have been some--some scuffle.
Eh?'

He nearly shut up the expressive eye altogether; he looked at him
so hard.  And he gave his eye, and his face, and his whole person,
a sharp twist.  As if he would have screwed the truth out of him.

'Make yourself easy,' said the Carrier.  'He went into that room
last night, without harm in word or deed from me, and no one has
entered it since.  He is away of his own free will.  I'd go out
gladly at that door, and beg my bread from house to house, for
life, if I could so change the past that he had never come.  But he
has come and gone.  And I have done with him!'

'Oh!--Well, I think he has got off pretty easy,' said Tackleton,
taking a chair.

The sneer was lost upon the Carrier, who sat down too, and shaded
his face with his hand, for some little time, before proceeding.

'You showed me last night,' he said at length, 'my wife; my wife
that I love; secretly--'

'And tenderly,' insinuated Tackleton.

'Conniving at that man's disguise, and giving him opportunities of
meeting her alone.  I think there's no sight I wouldn't have rather
seen than that.  I think there's no man in the world I wouldn't
have rather had to show it me.'

'I confess to having had my suspicions always,' said Tackleton.
'And that has made me objectionable here, I know.'

'But as you did show it me,' pursued the Carrier, not minding him;
'and as you saw her, my wife, my wife that I love'--his voice, and
eye, and hand, grew steadier and firmer as he repeated these words:
evidently in pursuance of a steadfast purpose--'as you saw her at
this disadvantage, it is right and just that you should also see
with my eyes, and look into my breast, and know what my mind is,
upon the subject.  For it's settled,' said the Carrier, regarding
him attentively.  'And nothing can shake it now.'

Tackleton muttered a few general words of assent, about its being
necessary to vindicate something or other; but he was overawed by
the manner of his companion.  Plain and unpolished as it was, it
had a something dignified and noble in it, which nothing but the
soul of generous honour dwelling in the man could have imparted.

'I am a plain, rough man,' pursued the Carrier, 'with very little
to recommend me.  I am not a clever man, as you very well know.  I
am not a young man.  I loved my little Dot, because I had seen her
grow up, from a child, in her father's house; because I knew how
precious she was; because she had been my life, for years and
years.  There's many men I can't compare with, who never could have
loved my little Dot like me, I think!'

He paused, and softly beat the ground a short time with his foot,
before resuming.

'I often thought that though I wasn't good enough for her, I should
make her a kind husband, and perhaps know her value better than
another; and in this way I reconciled it to myself, and came to
think it might be possible that we should be married.  And in the
end it came about, and we were married.'

'Hah!' said Tackleton, with a significant shake of the head.

'I had studied myself; I had had experience of myself; I knew how
much I loved her, and how happy I should be,' pursued the Carrier.
'But I had not--I feel it now--sufficiently considered her.'

'To be sure,' said Tackleton.  'Giddiness, frivolity, fickleness,
love of admiration!  Not considered!  All left out of sight!  Hah!'

'You had best not interrupt me,' said the Carrier, with some
sternness, 'till you understand me; and you're wide of doing so.
If, yesterday, I'd have struck that man down at a blow, who dared
to breathe a word against her, to-day I'd set my foot upon his
face, if he was my brother!'

The Toy-merchant gazed at him in astonishment.  He went on in a
softer tone:

'Did I consider,' said the Carrier, 'that I took her--at her age,
and with her beauty--from her young companions, and the many scenes
of which she was the ornament; in which she was the brightest
little star that ever shone, to shut her up from day to day in my
dull house, and keep my tedious company?  Did I consider how little
suited I was to her sprightly humour, and how wearisome a plodding
man like me must be, to one of her quick spirit?  Did I consider
that it was no merit in me, or claim in me, that I loved her, when
everybody must, who knew her?  Never.  I took advantage of her
hopeful nature and her cheerful disposition; and I married her.  I
wish I never had!  For her sake; not for mine!'

The Toy-merchant gazed at him, without winking.  Even the half-shut
eye was open now.

'Heaven bless her!' said the Carrier, 'for the cheerful constancy
with which she tried to keep the knowledge of this from me!  And
Heaven help me, that, in my slow mind, I have not found it out
before!  Poor child!  Poor Dot!  _I_ not to find it out, who have
seen her eyes fill with tears, when such a marriage as our own was
spoken of!  I, who have seen the secret trembling on her lips a
hundred times, and never suspected it till last night!  Poor girl!
That I could ever hope she would be fond of me!  That I could ever
believe she was!'

'She made a show of it,' said Tackleton.  'She made such a show of
it, that to tell you the truth it was the origin of my misgivings.'

And here he asserted the superiority of May Fielding, who certainly
made no sort of show of being fond of HIM.

'She has tried,' said the poor Carrier, with greater emotion than
he had exhibited yet; 'I only now begin to know how hard she has
tried, to be my dutiful and zealous wife.  How good she has been;
how much she has done; how brave and strong a heart she has; let
the happiness I have known under this roof bear witness!  It will
be some help and comfort to me, when I am here alone.'

'Here alone?' said Tackleton.  'Oh!  Then you do mean to take some
notice of this?'

'I mean,' returned the Carrier, 'to do her the greatest kindness,
and make her the best reparation, in my power.  I can release her
from the daily pain of an unequal marriage, and the struggle to
conceal it.  She shall be as free as I can render her.'

'Make HER reparation!' exclaimed Tackleton, twisting and turning
his great ears with his hands.  'There must be something wrong
here.  You didn't say that, of course.'

The Carrier set his grip upon the collar of the Toy-merchant, and
shook him like a reed.

'Listen to me!' he said.  'And take care that you hear me right.
Listen to me.  Do I speak plainly?'

'Very plainly indeed,' answered Tackleton.

'As if I meant it?'

'Very much as if you meant it.'

'I sat upon that hearth, last night, all night,' exclaimed the
Carrier.  'On the spot where she has often sat beside me, with her
sweet face looking into mine.  I called up her whole life, day by
day.  I had her dear self, in its every passage, in review before
me.  And upon my soul she is innocent, if there is One to judge the
innocent and guilty!'

Staunch Cricket on the Hearth!  Loyal household Fairies!

'Passion and distrust have left me!' said the Carrier; 'and nothing
but my grief remains.  In an unhappy moment some old lover, better
suited to her tastes and years than I; forsaken, perhaps, for me,
against her will; returned.  In an unhappy moment, taken by
surprise, and wanting time to think of what she did, she made
herself a party to his treachery, by concealing it.  Last night she
saw him, in the interview we witnessed.  It was wrong.  But
otherwise than this she is innocent if there is truth on earth!'

'If that is your opinion'--Tackleton began.

'So, let her go!' pursued the Carrier.  'Go, with my blessing for
the many happy hours she has given me, and my forgiveness for any
pang she has caused me.  Let her go, and have the peace of mind I
wish her!  She'll never hate me.  She'll learn to like me better,
when I'm not a drag upon her, and she wears the chain I have
riveted, more lightly.  This is the day on which I took her, with
so little thought for her enjoyment, from her home.  To-day she
shall return to it, and I will trouble her no more.  Her father and
mother will be here to-day--we had made a little plan for keeping
it together--and they shall take her home.  I can trust her, there,
or anywhere.  She leaves me without blame, and she will live so I
am sure.  If I should die--I may perhaps while she is still young;
I have lost some courage in a few hours--she'll find that I
remembered her, and loved her to the last!  This is the end of what
you showed me.  Now, it's over!'

'O no, John, not over.  Do not say it's over yet!  Not quite yet.
I have heard your noble words.  I could not steal away, pretending
to be ignorant of what has affected me with such deep gratitude.
Do not say it's over, 'till the clock has struck again!'

She had entered shortly after Tackleton, and had remained there.
She never looked at Tackleton, but fixed her eyes upon her husband.
But she kept away from him, setting as wide a space as possible
between them; and though she spoke with most impassioned
earnestness, she went no nearer to him even then.  How different in
this from her old self!

'No hand can make the clock which will strike again for me the
hours that are gone,' replied the Carrier, with a faint smile.
'But let it be so, if you will, my dear.  It will strike soon.
It's of little matter what we say.  I'd try to please you in a
harder case than that.'

'Well!' muttered Tackleton.  'I must be off, for when the clock
strikes again, it'll be necessary for me to be upon my way to
church.  Good morning, John Peerybingle.  I'm sorry to be deprived
of the pleasure of your company.  Sorry for the loss, and the
occasion of it too!'

'I have spoken plainly?' said the Carrier, accompanying him to the
door.

'Oh quite!'

'And you'll remember what I have said?'

'Why, if you compel me to make the observation,' said Tackleton,
previously taking the precaution of getting into his chaise; 'I
must say that it was so very unexpected, that I'm far from being
likely to forget it.'

'The better for us both,' returned the Carrier.  'Good bye.  I give
you joy!'

'I wish I could give it to YOU,' said Tackleton.  'As I can't;
thank'ee.  Between ourselves, (as I told you before, eh?) I don't
much think I shall have the less joy in my married life, because
May hasn't been too officious about me, and too demonstrative.
Good bye!  Take care of yourself.'

The Carrier stood looking after him until he was smaller in the
distance than his horse's flowers and favours near at hand; and
then, with a deep sigh, went strolling like a restless, broken man,
among some neighbouring elms; unwilling to return until the clock
was on the eve of striking.

His little wife, being left alone, sobbed piteously; but often
dried her eyes and checked herself, to say how good he was, how
excellent he was! and once or twice she laughed; so heartily,
triumphantly, and incoherently (still crying all the time), that
Tilly was quite horrified.

'Ow if you please don't!' said Tilly.  'It's enough to dead and
bury the Baby, so it is if you please.'

'Will you bring him sometimes, to see his father, Tilly,' inquired
her mistress, drying her eyes; 'when I can't live here, and have
gone to my old home?'

'Ow if you please don't!' cried Tilly, throwing back her head, and
bursting out into a howl--she looked at the moment uncommonly like
Boxer.  'Ow if you please don't!  Ow, what has everybody gone and
been and done with everybody, making everybody else so wretched!
Ow-w-w-w!'

The soft-hearted Slowboy trailed off at this juncture, into such a
deplorable howl, the more tremendous from its long suppression,
that she must infallibly have awakened the Baby, and frightened him
into something serious (probably convulsions), if her eyes had not
encountered Caleb Plummer, leading in his daughter.  But the little
Gavotte skimmed the clay like a witch, Charles saw her coquet as she
went at Jim's Pitch.

They went at Jim's Pitch, through the deeply dug gaps Where the
hoofs of great horses had kicked off the scraps, And there at the
water they met with mishaps, For Natuna stopped dead and Grey Glory
went in And a cannon on landing upset Cross-Molin.

As swallows bound northward when apple-bloom blows, See laggards
drop spent from their flight as it goes, Yet can pause not in Heaven
as they scythe the thin air But go on to the house-eaves and the
nests clinging bare, So Charles flashed beyond them, those three
men the less Who had gone to get glory and met with distress.

He rode to the rise-top, and saw, down the slope, The race far
ahead at a steady strong lope Going over the grassland, too well
for his peace, They were steady as oxen and strong as wild geese.

As a man by a cornfield on a windy wild day Sees the corn bow in
shadows ever hurrying away, And wonders, in watching, when the light
with bright feet Will harry those shadows from the ears of the
wheat, So Charles, as he watched, wondered when the bright face Of
the finish would blaze on that smouldering race.

On the last of the grass, ere the going was dead, Counter Vair's
man shot out with his horse by the head, Like a partridge put up
from the stubble he sped, He dropped Kubbadar and he flew by Bed
Ember Up to Monkery's girth like a leaf in November.

Then Stormalong followed, and went to the front, And just as the
find puts a flame to a hunt, So the rush of those horses put flame
to the race.
Charles saw them all shaken to quickening pace.

And Monkery moved, not to let them go by, And the steadiest rider
made ready to fly; Well into the wet land they leaped from the
dry, They scattered the rain-pools that mirrored the sky, They crashed
down the rushes that pushed from the plough.
And Charles longed to follow, but muttered "Not now."
"Not now," so he thought, "Yet if not" (he said) "when Shall I come
to those horses and scupper their men?
Will they never come back? Shall I never get up?"

So he drank bitter gall from a very cold cup.

But he nursed his horse gently and prayed for the best, And he
caught Cimmeroon, who was sadly distrest, And he passed Cimmeroon,
with the thought that the black Was as nearly dead beat as the man
on his back.

Then he gained on his field who were galled by the Churn, The plough
searched them out as they came to the Turn.

But Gavotte, black and coral, went strong as a spate Charles thought
"She's a flier and she carries no weight."

And now, beyond question the field began tailing, For all had been
tested and many were ailing, The riders were weary, the horses were
failing, The blur of bright colours rolled over the railing.

With the grunts of urged horses, and the oaths of hot men, "Gerr
on, you," "Come on, now," agen and agen; They spattered the mud
on the willow tree's bole And they charged at the danger; and the
danger took toll.

For Monkery landed, but dwelt on the fence So that Counter Vair passed
him in galloping thence.
Then Stormalong blundered, then bright Muscatel Slipped badly on
landing and stumbled and fell,
Then rose in the morrish, with his man on his neck Like a nearly
dead sailor afloat on a wreck, With his whip in the mud and his
stirrups both gone, Yet he kept in the saddle and made him go on.

As Charles leaped the Turn, all the field was tailed out Like petals
of roses that wind blows about, Like petals of colour blown back
and brought near, Like poppies in wind-flaws when corn is in ear,
Fate held them or sped them, the race was beginning.

Charles said, "I must ride, or I've no chance of winning."

So gently he quickened, yet making no call; Right Royal replied
as though knowing it all, He passed Kubbadar who was ready to fall,
Then he strode up to Hadrian, up to his girth, They eyed the Dyke's
glitter and picked out a berth.

Now the race reached the water and over it flew In a sweep of
great muscle strained taut and guyed true.

There Muscatel floundered and came to a halt, Muscatel, the bay
chaser without any fault.

Right Royal's head lifted, Right Royal took charge, On the left near
the railings, ears cocked, going large, Leaving Hadrian behind as
a yacht leaves a barge.
Though Hadrian's rider called something unheard, He was past him at
speed like the albatross bird, Running up to Path Finder, they
leaped, side by side, And the foam from Path Finder flecked white
on his hide.

And on landing, he lifted, while Path Finder dwelt, And his noble
eye brightened from the glory he felt, And the mud flung behind
him flicked Path Finder's chest, As he left him behind and went on
to the rest.

Charles cast a glance back, but he could not divine Why the man
on Path Finder should make him a sign, Nor why Hadrian's rider
should shout, and then point, With his head nodded forward and a
jerked elbow joint.

But he looked as he pointed, both forward and down, And he saw
that Right Royal was smeared like a clown, Smeared red and bespattered
with flecks of bright blood, From a blood-vessel burst, as he well
understood.

And just as he saw it, Right Royal went strange As one whom Death's
finger has touched to a change; He went with a stagger that sickened
the soul, As a force stricken feeble and out of control.

Charles thought, "He is dying, and this is the end, I am losing
my Emmy and killing my friend; He was hurt when we fell, as I thought
at the first, And I've forced him three miles with a blood-vessel
burst.

And his game heart went on." Here a rush close behind Made him cast
a glance back with despair in his mind.
It was Cimmeroon rushing, his lips twitcht apart, His eyes rolled
back sightless, and death in his heart.

He reached to Right Royal, then fell, and was dead, Nevermore
to stretch reins with his beautiful head.

A gush of bright blood filled his mouth as he sank, And he
reached out his hoofs to the heave of his flank, And Charles,
leaning forward, made certain, and cried, "This is Cimmeroon's
blood, blown in passing beside, And Roy's going strangely was just
that he felt Death coming behind him, or blood that he smelt."

So Charles's heart lightened and Royal went steady As a water
bound seaward set free from an eddy, As a water sucked downward to
leap at a weir Sucked swifter and swifter till it shoot like a
spear.

There, a mile on ahead, was the Stand like a cliff, Grey wood, packed
with faces, under banners blown stiff, Where, in two minutes more,
they would cheer for him--if-- If he came to those horses still
twelve lengths ahead.

"O Royal, you do it, or kill me!" he said.

They went at the hurdle as though it weren't there, White splinters
of hurdle flew up in the air, And down, like a rabbit, went Syringa
the mare; Her man somersaulted right under Gavotte, And Syringa
went on but her rider did not.

But the little Gavotte tucked her feet away clear, Just an inch to
one side of the fallen man's ear, With a flash of horse wisdom as
she went on the wing Not to tread on man's body, that marvellous
thing.

As in mill-streams in summer the dark water drifts Petals mown
in the hayfield skimmed over by swifts, Petals blue from the
speedwell or sweet from the lime, And the fish rise to test them,
as they float, for a time, Yet they all loiter sluicewards and are
whirled, and then drowned, So the race swept the horses till they
glimmered the ground.

Charles looked at those horses, and speedily guesst That the roan
horse, Red Ember, was one of the best; He was level and easy,
not turning a hair, But with power all ready when his rider should
care, And he leaped like a lover and his coat still did shine.

Charles thought, "He's a wonder, and he's twelve lengths from
mine."

There were others still in it, according to looks:-- Sir Lopez,
and Soyland, and Peterkinooks, Counter Vair and Gavotte, all
with plenty to spend; Then Monkery worn, and The Ghost at his end.

But the roan horse, Red Ember, seemed playing a game.

Charles thought, "He's the winner; he can run us all tame."

The wind brought a tune and a faint noise of cheers, Right Royal
coquetted and cocked up his ears.

Charles saw his horse gaining; the going increased; His touch on
the mouth felt the soul of the beast, And the heave of each muscle
and the look of his eye Said, "I'll come to those horses, and pass
them, or die."

Like a thing in a dream the grey buildings drew nearer, The babble
rose louder and the organ's whine clearer, The hurdle came closer,
he rushed through its top Like a comet in heaven that nothing can
stop.

Then they strode the green grass for the Lost Lady's grave, And
Charles felt Right Royal rise up like a wave, Like a wave far to
seaward that lifts in a line And advances to shoreward in a slipping
incline,

And climbs, and comes toppling, and advances in glory, Mounting
inwards, marching onwards, with his shoulders all hoary, Sweeping
shorewards with a shouting to burst on the sand, So Right Royal
sent meaning through the rein in each hand.

Charles felt like a captain whose ship has long chased Some ship
better handled, better manned, better placed, And has all day beheld
her, that ship of his dream, Bowing swanlike beyond him up a blue
hill of gleam, Yet, at dark, the wind rising makes his rival strike
sail While his own ship crowds canvas and comes within hail; Till
he see her, his rival, snouting into the grey, Like a sea-rock in
winter that stands and breaks spray, And by lamplight goes past her
in a roaring of song Shouting, "Let fall your royals: stretch the
halliards along!"

Now The Ghost dropped behind him, now his horses drew
close.
Charles watched them, in praying, while his hopes rose and rose, "O
God, give me patience, give me luck, give me skill, For he's going
so grandly I think that he will."

They went at Lost Lady's like Severn at flood, With an urging of
horses and a squelching of mud; By the hot flanks of horses the
toppings were bruised, And Syringa the manless swerved right and
refused.

Swerved right on a sudden, as none could expect, Straight into
Right Royal, who slithered and pecked, Though Charles held him up
and got safely across, He was round his nag's neck within touch of
a toss.

He gat to his saddle, he never knew how; What hope he had had was
knocked out of him now, But his courage came back as his terror
declined, He spoke to Right Royal and made up his mind.
He judged the lengths lost and the chance that remained, And he
followed his field, and he gained, and he gained.

He watched them, those horses, so splendid, so swift, Whirled down
the green roadway like leaves in the lift:
Now he measured their mettle, and said with a moan, "They can beat
me, Lord help me, though they give me a stone.

Red Ember's a wonder, and Soyland's the same, And Gavotte there's a
beauty, and she goes like a flame; But Peterkinooks, that I used to
despise, Is the horse that must win if his looks are not lies."
Their bright colours flitted as at dusk in Brazil Bright birds reach
the tree-tops when the land wind falls still, When the sky is all
scarlet on the tops of the treen Comes a whirl of birds flying,
blue and orange and green.

As a whirl of notes running in a fugue that men play, And the thundering
follows as the pipe flits away, And the laughter comes after and
the hautboys begin, So they ran at the hurdle and scattered the whin.

As they leaped to the race-course the sun burst from cloud And like
tumult in dream came the roar of the crowd.

For to right and to left, now, were crowded men yelling, And a great
cry boomed backward like muffled bells knelling, And a surge of men
running seemed to follow the race, The horses all trembled and
quickened their pace.

As the porpoise, grown weary of his rush through the dim Of the
unlitten silence where the swiftnesses swim, Learns at sudden the
tumult of a clipper bound home And exults with this playmate and
leaps in her foam,
Or as nightingales coming into England in May, Coming songless at
sunset, being worn with the way, Settle spent in the twilight,
drooping head under wing, Yet are glad when the dark comes, while
at moonrise they sing;
Or as fire on a hillside, by happy boys kindled, That has burnt
black a heath-tuft, scorcht a bramble, and dwindled, Blown by wind
yet arises in a wave of flogged flame, So the souls of those horses
to the testing time came.

Now they closed on their leaders, and the running increased, They
rushed down the arc curving round to the east; All the air rang
with roaring, all the peopled loud stands Roared aloud from tense
faces, shook with hats and waved hands.

So they cleared the green gorse-bush by bursting it through, There
was no time for thinking, there was scarce time to do.

Charles gritted his spirit as he charged through the gorse:
"You must just grin and suffer: sit still on your horse."

There in front was a hurdle and the Distance Post white, And the
long, green, broad Straight washed with wind and blown bright; Now
the roaring had screaming, bringing names to their ears:
"Come, Soyland!"

"Sir Lopez!" Then catcalls; then cheers.

"Sir Lopez! Sir Lopez!"

then the jigging brass laughter From the yellow tost swing-boats
swooping rafter to rafter.
Then the blare of all organs, then the roar of all throats, And they
shot past the side shows, the horses and boats.

Now the Wants of the Watchers whirled into the race Like flames in
their fury, like men in the face, Mad-red from the Wanting that
made them alive, They fought with those horses or helped them to
strive.

Like leaves blown on Hudson when maples turn gold, They whirled
in their colour, they clutched to catch hold, They sang to the
riders, they smote at their hearts Like flakes of live fire, like
castings of darts.

As a snow in Wisconsin when the darkness comes down, Running white
on the prairie, making all the air brown, Blinding men with the hurry
of its millions of feet, So the Wants pelted on them, so they
blinded and beat.

And like spirits calm shining upon horses of flame, Came the Friends
of those riders to shield them from shame, White as fire
white-burning, rushing each by his friend, Singing songs of
the glory of the world without end;

And as men in Wisconsin driving cars in the snow Butt against its
impulsion and face to the blow, Tossing snow from their bonnets
as a ship tosses foam, So the Friends tossed the Wantings as they
brought their friends home.

Now they charged the last hurdle that led to the Straight, Charles
longing to ride, though his spirit said "Wait." He came to his
horses as they came to the leap, Eight hard-driven horses, eight
men breathing deep.

On the left, as he leaped it, a flashing of brown Kicking white on
the grass, showed that Thankful was down; Then a glance right and
left showed, that barring all flukes, It was Soyland's, Sir Lopez',
or Peterkinooks'.

For Stormalong blundered and dwelt as he landed, Counter Vair's man
was beaten and Monkery stranded.

As he reached to Red Ember the man on the red Cried, "Lord, Charlie
Cothill, I thought you were dead!"

He passed the Red Ember, he came to the flank Of Peterkinooks, whom
he reached and then sank.

There were only two others, going level alone, First the spotted
cream jacket, then the blue, white and roan.

Up the street of green race-course they strained for the prize,
While the stands blurred with waving and the air shook with
cries:
"Now, Sir Lopez!"

"Come, Soyland!" "Now, Sir Lopez! Now, now!" Then Charles judged his
second, but he could not tell how.

But a glory of sureness leaped from horse into man, And the man
said, "Now, beauty," and the horse said, "I can."

And the long weary Royal made an effort the more, Though his heart
thumped like drum-beats as he went to the fore.

Neck and neck went Sir Lopez and Soyland together, Soyland first, a
short head, with his neck all in lather; Both were ridden their
hardest, both were doing their best, Right Royal reached Soyland
and came to his chest.

There Soyland's man saw him with the heel of his eye, A horse
with an effort that could beat him or tie; Then he glanced
at Sir Lopez, and he bit through his lip, And he drove in his spurs
and he took up his whip.

There he lashed the game Soyland who had given his all, And he
gave three strides more, and then failed at the call, And he dropped
behind Royal like a leaf in a tide:
Then Sir Lopez and Royal ran on side by side.

There they looked at each other, and they rode, and were grim; Charles
thought, "That's Sir Lopez. I shall never beat him." All the yells
for Sir Lopez seemed to darken the air, They were rushing past
Emmy and the White Post was there.

He drew to Sir Lopez; but Sir Lopez drew clear; Right Royal clung
to him and crept to his ear.
Then the man on Sir Lopez judged the moment had come For the last
ounce of effort that would bring his horse home.

So he picked up his whip for three swift slashing blows, And Sir
Lopez drew clear, but Right Royal stuck close.

Charles sat still as stone, for he dared not to stir-- There was
that in Right Royal that needed no spur.

In the trembling of an instant power leaped up within, Royal's pride
of high spirit not to let the bay win.

Up he went, past his withers, past his neck, to his head,
With Sir Lopez' man lashing, Charles still, seeing red.

But when I knew by what was written in your face, that you
had seen me walking in the gallery with Edward, and when I knew
what you thought, I felt how giddy and how wrong it was.  But oh,
dear John, how could you, could you, think so!'

Little woman, how she sobbed again!  John Peerybingle would have
caught her in his arms.  But no; she wouldn't let him.

'Don't love me yet, please, John!  Not for a long time yet!  When I
was sad about this intended marriage, dear, it was because I
remembered May and Edward such young lovers; and knew that her
heart was far away from Tackleton.  You believe that, now.  Don't
you, John?'

John was going to make another rush at this appeal; but she stopped
him again.

'No; keep there, please, John!  When I laugh at you, as I sometimes
do, John, and call you clumsy and a dear old goose, and names of
that sort, it's because I love you, John, so well, and take such
pleasure in your ways, and wouldn't see you altered in the least
respect to have you made a King to-morrow.'

'Hooroar!' said Caleb with unusual vigour.  'My opinion!'

'And when I speak of people being middle-aged, and steady, John,
and pretend that we are a humdrum couple, going on in a jog-trot
sort of way, it's only because I'm such a silly little thing, John,
that I like, sometimes, to act a kind of Play with Baby, and all
that:  and make believe.'

She saw that he was coming; and stopped him again.  But she was
very nearly too late.

'No, don't love me for another minute or two, if you please, John!
What I want most to tell you, I have kept to the last.  My dear,
good, generous John, when we were talking the other night about the
Cricket, I had it on my lips to say, that at first I did not love
you quite so dearly as I do now; that when I first came home here,
I was half afraid I mightn't learn to love you every bit as well as
I hoped and prayed I might--being so very young, John!  But, dear
John, every day and hour I loved you more and more.  And if I could
have loved you better than I do, the noble words I heard you say
this morning, would have made me.  But I can't.  All the affection
that I had (it was a great deal, John) I gave you, as you well
deserve, long, long ago, and I have no more left to give.  Now, my
dear husband, take me to your heart again!  That's my home, John;
and never, never think of sending me to any other!'

You never will derive so much delight from seeing a glorious little
woman in the arms of a third party, as you would have felt if you
had seen Dot run into the Carrier's embrace.  It was the most
complete, unmitigated, soul-fraught little piece of earnestness
that ever you beheld in all your days.

You maybe sure the Carrier was in a state of perfect rapture; and
you may be sure Dot was likewise; and you may be sure they all
were, inclusive of Miss Slowboy, who wept copiously for joy, and
wishing to include her young charge in the general interchange of
congratulations, handed round the Baby to everybody in succession,
as if it were something to drink.

But, now, the sound of wheels was heard again outside the door; and
somebody exclaimed that Gruff and Tackleton was coming back.
Speedily that worthy gentleman appeared, looking warm and
flustered.

'Why, what the Devil's this, John Peerybingle!' said Tackleton.
'There's some mistake.  I appointed Mrs. Tackleton to meet me at
the church, and I'll swear I passed her on the road, on her way
here.  Oh! here she is!  I beg your pardon, sir; I haven't the
pleasure of knowing you; but if you can do me the favour to spare
this young lady, she has rather a particular engagement this
morning.'

'But I can't spare her,' returned Edward.  'I couldn't think of
it.'

'What do you mean, you vagabond?' said Tackleton.

'I mean, that as I can make allowance for your being vexed,'
returned the other, with a smile, 'I am as deaf to harsh discourse
this morning, as I was to all discourse last night.'

The look that Tackleton bestowed upon him, and the start he gave!

'I am sorry, sir,' said Edward, holding out May's left hand, and
especially the third finger; 'that the young lady can't accompany
you to church; but as she has been there once, this morning,
perhaps you'll excuse her.'

Tackleton looked hard at the third finger, and took a little piece
of silver-paper, apparently containing a ring, from his waistcoat-
pocket.

'Miss Slowboy,' said Tackleton.  'Will you have the kindness to
throw that in the fire?  Thank'ee.'

'It was a previous engagement, quite an old engagement, that
prevented my wife from keeping her appointment with you, I assure
you,' said Edward.

'Mr. Tackleton will do me the justice to acknowledge that I
revealed it to him faithfully; and that I told him, many times, I
never could forget it,' said May, blushing.

'Oh certainly!' said Tackleton.  'Oh to be sure.  Oh it's all
right.  It's quite correct.  Mrs. Edward Plummer, I infer?'

'That's the name,' returned the bridegroom.

'Ah, I shouldn't have known you, sir,' said Tackleton, scrutinising
his face narrowly, and making a low bow.  'I give you joy, sir!'

'Thank'ee.'

'Mrs. Peerybingle,' said Tackleton, turning suddenly to where she
stood with her husband; 'I am sorry.  You haven't done me a very
great kindness, but, upon my life I am sorry.  You are better than
I thought you.  John Peerybingle, I am sorry.  You understand me;
that's enough.  It's quite correct, ladies and gentlemen all, and
perfectly satisfactory.  Good morning!'

With these words he carried it off, and carried himself off too:
merely stopping at the door, to take the flowers and favours from
his horse's head, and to kick that animal once, in the ribs, as a
means of informing him that there was a screw loose in his
arrangements.

Of course it became a serious duty now, to make such a day of it,
as should mark these events for a high Feast and Festival in the
Peerybingle Calendar for evermore.  Accordingly, Dot went to work
to produce such an entertainment, as should reflect undying honour
on the house and on every one concerned; and in a very short space
of time, she was up to her dimpled elbows in flour, and whitening
the Carrier's coat, every time he came near her, by stopping him to
give him a kiss.  That good fellow washed the greens, and peeled
the turnips, and broke the plates, and upset iron pots full of cold
water on the fire, and made himself useful in all sorts of ways:
while a couple of professional assistants, hastily called in from
somewhere in the neighbourhood, as on a point of life or death, ran
against each other in all the doorways and round all the corners,
and everybody tumbled over Tilly Slowboy and the Baby, everywhere.
Tilly never came out in such force before.  Her ubiquity was the
theme of general admiration.  She was a stumbling-block in the
passage at five-and-twenty minutes past two; a man-trap in the
kitchen at half-past two precisely; and a pitfall in the garret at
five-and-twenty minutes to three.  The Baby's head was, as it were,
a test and touchstone for every description of matter,--animal,
vegetable, and mineral.  Nothing was in use that day that didn't
come, at some time or other, into close acquaintance with it.

Then, there was a great Expedition set on foot to go and find out
Mrs. Fielding; and to be dismally penitent to that excellent
gentlewoman; and to bring her back, by force, if needful, to be
happy and forgiving.  And when the Expedition first discovered her,
she would listen to no terms at all, but said, an unspeakable
number of times, that ever she should have lived to see the day!
and couldn't be got to say anything else, except, 'Now carry me to
the grave:' which seemed absurd, on account of her not being dead,
or anything at all like it.  After a time, she lapsed into a state
of dreadful calmness, and observed, that when that unfortunate
train of circumstances had occurred in the Indigo Trade, she had
foreseen that she would be exposed, during her whole life, to every
species of insult and contumely; and that she was glad to find it
was the case; and begged they wouldn't trouble themselves about
her,--for what was she? oh, dear! a nobody!--but would forget that
such a being lived, and would take their course in life without
her.  From this bitterly sarcastic mood, she passed into an angry
one, in which she gave vent to the remarkable expression that the
worm would turn if trodden on; and, after that, she yielded to a
soft regret, and said, if they had only given her their confidence,
what might she not have had it in her power to suggest!  Taking
advantage of this crisis in her feelings, the Expedition embraced
her; and she very soon had her gloves on, and was on her way to
John Peerybingle's in a state of unimpeachable gentility; with a
paper parcel at her side containing a cap of state, almost as tall,
and quite as stiff, as a mitre.

Then, there were Dot's father and mother to come, in another little
chaise; and they were behind their time; and fears were
entertained; and there was much looking out for them down the road;
and Mrs. Fielding always would look in the wrong and morally
impossible direction; and being apprised thereof, hoped she might
take the liberty of looking where she pleased.  At last they came:
a chubby little couple, jogging along in a snug and comfortable
little way that quite belonged to the Dot family; and Dot and her
mother, side by side, were wonderful to see.  They were so like
each other.

Then, Dot's mother had to renew her acquaintance with May's mother;
and May's mother always stood on her gentility; and Dot's mother
never stood on anything but her active little feet.  And old Dot--
so to call Dot's father, I forgot it wasn't his right name, but
never mind--took liberties, and shook hands at first sight, and
seemed to think a cap but so much starch and muslin, and didn't
defer himself at all to the Indigo Trade, but said there was no
help for it now; and, in Mrs. Fielding's summing up, was a good-
natured kind of man--but coarse, my dear.

I wouldn't have missed Dot, doing the honours in her wedding-gown,
my benison on her bright face! for any money.  No! nor the good
Carrier, so jovial and so ruddy, at the bottom of the table.  Nor
the brown, fresh sailor-fellow, and his handsome wife.  Nor any one
among them.  To have missed the dinner would have been to miss as
jolly and as stout a meal as man need eat; and to have missed the
overflowing cups in which they drank The Wedding-Day, would have
been the greatest miss of all.

After dinner, Caleb sang the song about the Sparkling Bowl.  As I'm
a living man, hoping to keep so, for a year or two, he sang it
through.

And, by-the-by, a most unlooked-for incident occurred, just as he
finished the last verse.

There was a tap at the door; and a man came staggering in, without
saying with your leave, or by your leave, with something heavy on
his head.  Setting this down in the middle of the table,
symmetrically in the centre of the nuts and apples, he said:

'Mr. Charles mounted and rode, for his courage was stout, And he
would not give in till the end of the bout, But plastered with
poachings he rode on forsaken:
He had lost thirty lengths and his horse had been shaken.

Across the wet ploughland he took a good pull, With the thought
that the cup of his sorrow was full, For the speed of a stag and
the strength of a bull Could hardly recover the ground he had lost.

Right Royal went dully, then snorted and tost,
Tost his head, with a whicker, went on, and went kind, And the horse's
great spirit touched Charles in the mind.
Though his bruise made him dizzy and tears made him blind, He would
try to the finish, and so they should find.
He was last, thirty lengths.

Here he took in his sails, For the field had come crash at the white
post and rails.

Here Sir Francis ran out, scaring all who stood near, Going crash
through the rail like a runaway deer.

Then the riderless Thankful upset Mutineer, Dakkanese, in refusing,
wheeled round like a top Into Culverin's shoulder which made them
both stop.

They reeled from the shock, slithered sideways, and crashed, Dakkanese
on the guard-rail which gave, and then smashed.
As he rolled, the near shoes of the Culverin flashed High in
air for a moment, bright iron in strain:
Then he rose with no rider and tripped in his rein.

Right Royal came up as the Dakkanese rose All trembling and
cowed as though beaten with blows; The Culverin stumbled with the
reins in his toes; On the far side the leap stood the Mutineer
grazing, His man was a heap which some fellows were raising.

Right Royal strode on, through a second wet plough, With the field
far ahead (Kubbadar in the bow).
Charles thought, "Kubbadar's got away from him now.
Well, it's little to me, for they're so far ahead That they'll never
come back, though I ride myself dead."
Right Royal bored forward and leaned on his hand, "Good boy," said
his master.

"He must understand.
You're the one friend I'll have when I've sold all my land.
God pity my Em as we come past the Stand, Last of all, and all
muddy; but now for Jim's Pitch."

Four feet of gorse fence, then a fifteen foot ditch.

And the fifteen foot ditch glittered bright to the brim With the
brook that ran through it where the grayling did swim; In the
shallows it sparkled, in the deeps it was dim, When the race was
first run it had nearly drowned Jim, And now the bright irons of
twenty-four horses Were to flicker its ripples with knockings of
gorses.

From far in the rear Charles could watch them take hold Of their
horses and push them across the light mould; How their ears all
cocked forward, how the drumming hoofs rolled!
Kubbadar, far ahead, flew across like a bird, Then Soyland, bad
second, with Muscatel third.

Then Sir Lopez, and Path Finder, striding alone, Then the good
horse, Red Ember, the flea-bitten roan.
Then the little Gavotte bearing less than ten stone.
Then a crowd of all colours with Peterkinooks Going strong as
a whale goes, head up and out flukes.

And then as Charles watched, as the shoulders went back, The
riderless Thankful swerved left off the track, Crossing just to
the front of the Cimmeroon black.
Ere the rider could see what his horse was about, Cimmeroon swerved,
like Thankful, and followed him out.

Across the great grass in the midst of the course Cimmeroon ran a
match race with the riderless horse, Then the rider took charge,
part by skill part by force; He turned Cimmeroon to re-enter the
race Seven lengths behind Charles in the post of disgrace.
Dot (sly little piece of affectation when she chose) said her
dancing days were over; _I_ think because the Carrier was smoking
his pipe, and she liked sitting by him, best.  Mrs. Fielding had no
choice, of course, but to say HER dancing days were over, after
that; and everybody said the same, except May; May was ready.

So, May and Edward got up, amid great applause, to dance alone; and
Bertha plays her liveliest tune.

Well! if you'll believe me, they have not been dancing five
minutes, when suddenly the Carrier flings his pipe away, takes Dot
round the waist, dashes out into the room, and starts off with her,
toe and heel, quite wonderfully.  Tackleton no sooner sees this,
than he skims across to Mrs. Fielding, takes her round the waist,
and follows suit.  Old Dot no sooner sees this, than up he is, all
alive, whisks off Mrs. Dot in the middle of the dance, and is the
foremost there.  MELBA a with charming, but not a great part for her
principle. DUFRICHE_Iago_,, but not good Tilly enough for_him_. Sir
DRURIOLANUS gives diving_Carmen_ at Windsor Castle, before
the QUEEN! Aha! Where now Box at is LAGO and His Special
Patronaged Royal the Olympic?Hark! how the Cricket joins the music with its Chirp, Chirp, Chirp;
and how the kettle hums!