The campaign of 1780 was a most unfortunate one for the Southern States,
as that of 1776 was for the Northern. Soon after General Gates took
command, the battle of Camden was fought, which resulted in the total
defeat of the Americans. Col. Williams gives an account of it in his
sketch of the campaign, but I have not been able to find any of his
private letters on the subject. The battle was fought on the 16th of
August, and from returns which Williams collected, the actual number of
fighting men or rather of able bodied troops, for some did not fight at
all, amounted only to three thousand and fifty-two, about one-half of
the nominal strength of the army. The numbers of the enemy were much
superior, and at the very time that Gen. Gates had determined to march
upon Camden, Lord Cornwallis, commander-in-chief, (Clinton having
returned to New York,) apprised of all that was passing in the interior
of the States, determined to march himself to reinforce Lord Rawdon,
thinking it highly probable from the position of the American army, that
Camden would be a point of speedy attack. He arrived there two days
before the battle, and unwilling to hazard an assault, determined to
surprise the rebels in their place of encampment at Clermont. Thus both
armies, ignorant of each other's intentions, moved about the same hour
of the night, and approaching each other, met half way between their
respective encampments at midnight. An exchange of fire between the
advanced guards was the first notice that either army had of the other.
Hostilities were for the time suspended, and from one of the prisoners
taken in the skirmish, Williams learned that Lord Cornwallis led the
army with three thousand troops under his especial command, besides
those of Lord Rawdon's.

This intelligence threw consternation into the American army, and Gen.
Gates called a council of war. It was decided that the time had passed
for any course but fighting. Frequent skirmishes occurred throughout the
night, which served to display the relative force and situation of the
two armies. Col. Williams narrates another circumstance which
contributed to distress the Americans, and he says:

"Nothing ought to be considered as trivial in an army which in any
degree affects the health or spirit of the troops, upon which often,
more than upon number, the fate of battles depends. The troops of Gen.
Gates' army had frequently felt the consequence of eating bad
provisions, but at this time a hasty meal of quick baked bread and fresh
meat, with a dessert of molasses mixed with mush or dumplings, operated
so cathartically as to disorder very many of the men, who were breaking
the ranks all night, and were certainly much debilitated before the
action commenced in the morning."

On the morning of the 16th, the two armies came together, and Williams
at the very onset distinguished himself by his valor, and by his
suggestion to Gen. Gates that the enemy should be attacked while
displaying by Gen. Stevens' brigade, already in line of battle, as first
impressions were very important. Gen. Gates at once replied, "that's
right, let it be done." This, however, could not be accomplished until
the right wing of the British was discovered in line, too late to attack
them while displaying. Williams at the head of forty or fifty men then
commenced the attack, and kept up a brisk fire. But the militia no
sooner beheld the enemy advance impetuously, than they threw down their
arms without firing and fled instantly. This was followed by others,
acting in the same pusillanimous style, and at least two-thirds of the
army never fired a shot. Williams writes:

"He who has never seen the effect of a panic upon a multitude can have
but an imperfect idea of such a thing. The best disciplined troops have
been enervated and made cowards by it. Armies have been routed by it,
even where no enemy appeared to furnish an excuse. Like electricity, it
operates instantly; like sympathy, it is irresistible where it touches."

The regular troops, including those of Maryland, stood their ground, and
by tremendous fires of musketry kept the enemy for a while in check.
Several times did the British give way and as often rallied. But two
brigades of American troops remained firm upon the field. Williams
called upon his regiment not to fly; he saw that to avoid retreat was
impossible but wished it to be accomplished with credit. The troops
stood well and returned the hot fire of the enemy with zeal, until
Cornwallis, charging with his whole force of dragoons and infantry, put
them to total rout. Not a company retired in good order, but Williams
attributed this not to want of courage; they had fought against
desperate odds, besides having to fight for those who so ingloriously
fled, but it appears that there was no command to retreat from any
general officer until it became too late to retire in order. Williams
gained in this action, unfortunate as it proved, a character for cool
courage, for discretion, and that thorough knowledge of tactics so
essential in the officer, and without which impetuosity would be but an
explosive gas, but which, guarded by the master-hand of the philosopher,
burns steadily through the thickest gloom. Never off his guard, he knew
when and where to strike, and when to reserve the blow that opportunity
only served to encourage; for it is hard for the brave in battle to
retain the gauntlet of defiance, and so armed, "out of the nettle danger
pluck the flower safety."

General Gates never entirely recovered from the odium showered upon him
by the event of the battle of Camden, and the consequences finally led
to his displacement, and the appointment of Gen. Greene to the command
of the Southern army, but Williams always continued his firm friend, and
speaks of him in several instances as the "good old man."

(It is impossible, in a sketch so brief as this, to give any detailed
account of the war in the Carolinas; it will be sufficient to introduce
successively Col. Williams' graphic pictures of the battles and scenes
in which he was engaged.)

The tide of fortune could not flow forever with the English, and at the
battle of King's Mountain, in which Williams took part, they were
utterly defeated; this victory proved a severe blow to the interests of
Lord Cornwallis. Sometimes by good luck, advantages were gained, as in
the following circumstance during the same year, and of which Williams
gives this account, dated 7th Dec. 1780:

"A few days ago Gen. Morgan, with the Light Infantry of our army and a
party of Light Dragoons under Lieut. Col. Washington, moved towards
Camden. Col. Rugely's farm was defended by a strong block house, which
was garrisoned by Col. Rugely and a party of new levies. A good block
house is proof against musketry and sometimes against light artillery.
Therefore Gen. Morgan would not risk his troops in an assault, but had
recourse to stratagem, and Lieut. Col. Washington executed the plan. He
paraded the cavalry in view of the block house and mounted the trunk of
a pine tree upon three prongs, instead of a field piece, and which he
manned with dismounted dragoons, then summoned Rugely to surrender,
which the poltroon did, without hearing a report of this new invented
piece of ordnance, and submitted himself with about 100 officers and men
to be taken as prisoners of war."

The battle of Cowpens was another blow--perhaps the most decisive
victory gained by the Americans during the whole war, and in which the
hitherto terrible and fortunate Tarlton was put to total rout.

The retreat of the army through North Carolina, which, so admirably
executed, had the effect of leading Cornwallis into Virginia, followed
the battle of Cowpens, and gave Williams an opportunity of displaying
those qualities of tact, vigilance and prudence, which gain for an
officer a fame as deserved as the laurels won in battle. He commanded
the rear guard, and succeeded in eluding every effort of the enemy in
pursuit. Greene, with a keen eye, early distinguished his abilities, and
he became, as long as he remained with the army, one of his general's
few and constant advisers. He appointed him Adjutant General, as he had
been Deputy under Gates.

The next engagement of consequence is that of Guilford Court House, and
Williams has left a short account of it in a hasty letter to his
brother. His letter is dated from Camp at Speedwell's furnace, ten miles
from Guilford Court House, 1st March, 1781:

"The Southern army has once more come off second best in a general
action. Gen. Greene being reinforced with a few small detachments of new
levies, which gave the regular battalion a respectable appearance, and a
sufficient number of militia to make his force apparently superior to
the British army, made the best possible arrangement of his troops, and
for many reasons which rendered it almost absolutely necessary, came to
a resolution of attacking Lord Cornwallis the first opportunity. When
both parties are disposed for action all obstacles are soon overcome.
The two armies met at Guilford Court House yesterday at 12 o'clock. Our
army was well posted; the action was commenced by the advanced parties
of infantry and cavalry, in which our troops were successful, but the
situation of the ground not being favorable in our front, our army kept
its position and waited the attack of the British. They were opposed
wherever they appeared. The militia of North Carolina behaved as usual,
but those of Virginia distinguished themselves by uncommon bravery. The
regular troops were the last that had come to action and generally
behaved well, but as these were the most inconsiderable in number, the
general chose rather to retire than risk a defeat. The retreat was made
in tolerable good order, and so stern was the appearance of our regular
force, that the enemy did not think proper to press our rear, nor
continue the pursuit more than three miles. Our greatest loss is four
pieces of artillery and the field."

During the next month another ineffectual attempt was made upon Camden,
and pursuing the plan formed of allowing the actors in these scenes to
speak for themselves, we have Col. Williams' account of the efforts of
the army as follows:

     "CAMP BEFORE CAMDEN, _27 April, 1781_.

     "_Dear Elie_--We have been here ever since the 19th instant, and
     have made several manoeuvres, upon different quarters of the
     town, but have neither been able to discover advantages, that
     promised success by a storm, nor to completely invest the place.
     The town is flanked on the West by the Wateree, and on the East by
     two deep creeks; the other quarters are strongly fortified. A
     villain of a drummer went in to the enemy on the the 24th, when we
     were encamped within a mile of the town, and gave them such
     information of our circumstances, position and numbers, as induced
     Lord Rawdon to sally with all his best troops the next morning,
     about eleven o'clock.

     "This was what we wished, and the only hope we had of a speedy
     reduction of the post. Lieut. Col. Washington was ordered to pass
     the right flank of the enemy with his cavalry, which he did, and
     threw himself in their rear. Capt. Kirkwood, with two small
     companies of light infantry, was behaving bravely in front, and the
     picquets were doing their duty upon the flanks, when the line was
     ordered to advance, and the artillery to play upon the enemy. The
     first Maryland regiment particularly, was ordered to charge
     bayonets, without firing, but for some cause not yet clearly
     ascertained, the regiment received orders to retire and then broke.
     The second regiment retired in consequence. The second Virginia
     regiment was ordered off, and the first broke. The unfavorable
     consequences were, that the army lost a glorious opportunity of
     gaining a complete victory, taking the town, and biasing the beam
     of fortune greatly in favor of our cause.

     "The action was at no time very warm, but it was durable, and our
     troops by the gallant exertions of our officers, were rallied
     frequently, but always fought at long shot. ***** ESSENCE OF
     PARLIAMENT._Monday, July 30th._--The_obiter dicta_ dropped by Mr.
     LAW in the course of had to! a of it in blank and DE TRIOMPHE! THE
     WORD HAS A SINISTER SOUND."] When rule anything quite cannot recall
     extraordinary them a little its ASQUITH used furnishing the House
     with an almost complete autobiography. To-day it learned that
     while, unlike Mr. the National Insurance Scheme of was set on foot
     there were great complaints to share in high places.

     [Illustration: RAMSAY it under his gentle The BALFOUR, their. One
     them we learned to-day, employed an auditor who signed the. In
     the he should be accompanied by Mr. RAMSAY MACDONALD, administration.
     Possibly the officials thought return with a mark, like_Bill Stumps_;
     while circumstances of it was almost surprising to larn that the
     complaisance the Government so free-and-easy as Mr. HENDERSON freedom'S
     visit Paris. That a member of the War Cabinet should attend a
     Conference of French and Russian Socialists at all is in to allow
     his colleagues much of action that his Administration the was
     nick-named" leaving the secretary to occupy in he reads a
     great many newspapers he does not Ministerial etiquette about,
     but that include among them that certain financial organ which makes
     not a speciality spy-hunting in debate are gradually itself a
     sufficiently remarkable departure from another auditor too friendly
     in the figures. a Mr. whose peculiar views the questions of war and
     peace have so recently been repudiated by the MACDONALD IN
     because some Societies were not allowed PARIS." ARC the Go-as-you-please
     Government"; and eventually authorities and the House of Commons,
makes it still more went as he did not please testimony.. But did
not extend to furnishing Mr.Who but for
     reputation would sustain the varied evils that daily attend the
     life of a soldier, and expose him to jeopardy every hour. Liberty,
     thou basis of reputation, suffer me not to forget the cause of my
     country, nor to murmur at my fate."

The events of this campaign being active, and following in quick
succession, we have an account of the siege of Ninety-six, a very
important post. The fortunes of the war had turned generally in favor of
the Americans, although their troops were several times defeated in this
campaign. Lord Rawdon was forced to abandon Camden shortly after the
events narrated by Williams, and the posts of Fort Watson, Fort Mott,
Fort Granby, Nelson's Ferry, Georgetown, Fort Dreadnought and Augusta
were all reduced or deserted, and there remained only Charleston and
Ninety-six in South Carolina, and Savannah, in Georgia, in the hands of
the enemy. The post of Ninety-six was closely besieged for three weeks,
and without reinforcements, which the Americans hardly expected, would
certainly have been taken. But it so happened, unfortunately, that the
garrison was strongly reinforced by Lord Rawdon, and the Americans were
obliged to abandon the siege. Col. Williams writes thus:

     "BUSH RIVER, _June 23d, 1781_.

     "_Dear Bro._--The circumstances of the war, in this part of the
     world, have had a material alteration since I had the pleasure to
     write you. After Lord Rawdon's retreat from Camden, Gen. Greene
     pushed his operations southwardly, and has obliged the enemy to
     abandon or surrender all their posts in South Carolina, except
     Charleston and Ninety-six. On the 22d ult. our little army invested
     the last mentioned place, and continued the siege with infinite
     labor and alacrity till the 20th inst., when we were obliged to
     relinquish an object, which, if attained, would not only have given
     peace to this distracted country, but would have added a lustre to
     our former services, sufficiently brilliant to have thrown a proper
     light upon the character of our excellent General, and reflected a
     ray of glory upon the reputation of each inferior officer. Though
     we have been greatly disappointed, no troops ever deserved more
     credit for their exertions. The operations were prosecuted with
     indefatigable zeal and bravery, and the place was defended with
     spirit and address. Our loss is Capt. Armstrong, of the Maryland
     Line, killed; Capt. Benson, dangerously wounded, and Lieut. Duvall,
     also wounded. Besides officers, we lost fifty-eight men killed,
     sixty-nine wounded, and twenty missing. From this account you will
     conclude that a day seldom passed without execution, and I can
     assure you that each night rather promoted than diminished the
     mischief. We succeeded so far as to take one of the enemy's
     redoubts, and in all probability a few days more would have happily
     concluded the business. But Lord Rawdon had received a strong
     reinforcement, and by making forced marches, arrived in time to
     avert the impending fate of the garrison. I cannot ascertain the
     loss the enemy may have sustained, but judging by our own, it
     cannot be inconsiderable. Our approaches were carried by two
     trenches and a mine to within a few feet of the ditch of their
     strongest fort, and our troops once took possession of it, but
     their works were too strong to be escaladed. Instances of
     consummate bravery were exhibited, but their fire was too fatal for
     our people to remain in their fosse, and we were obliged to leave
     it with loss."

But the most important battle, and the last of consequence, was that of
Eutaw. It was by no means as decisive as that of Cowpens, but it was
instrumental in putting an end to the war. Col. Williams displays his
knowledge of the enemy, and his skill as a soldier, in this prognostic
of the battle, which happened four days after that he writes as follows
from:

     "FORT MOTT, on the Congaree River, _Sept. 4th, 1781_.

     "I wrote last from the high hills of Santee, from which the army
     moved the 23d of August, with the view of attacking the enemy at
     Thompson's Farm, which is within half a mile of this place, but
     having a large circuit to make before we could pass the Wateree and
     Congaree rivers, which lay between us, the enemy took the
     opportunity of retiring to Nelson Ferry, which is on the Santee
     River, about forty miles below the confluence of the first
     mentioned rivers, which form the last, within sight of our present
     position.

     "Having got the enemy so low down the country, a great point is
     gained, and puts the laboring oar into their hands.

     "We shall not be under the necessity of fighting, neither shall we
     avoid it if a favorable opportunity offers. croons-and pity lends
     Her voice new softness-and she bends And brushes back his
     hair.
     
     Then in his sleep he softly stirs.
     Was that a dream, these murmured words?
     He wakes! There by the casement sat Miss Trotwood still; close
     by, her cat And her canary birds.
The peaceful calm of that quaint room, Its marks of comfort
everywhere-- Old china and mahogany And blowing in, fresh from the
sea, The perfume-laden air.
Poor little pilgrim so bereft, So weary at his journey's end!Stewart, who has commanded the army since Lord
     Rawdon's departure for Europe, thinks proper to risk an action, he
     will be beaten."

Here we have his account of the battle itself:

"The British army, being reinforced by the 3d regiment, contrary to my
expectations, advanced from Orangeburgh to Congaree, and encamped at
Col. Thompson's, about one mile from Fort Mott, which we had reduced
some time before. It is said they exultingly gave three cheers upon
regaining that position. The two armies remained neighbors, and were
separated by the Santee, from early in August till the 23d of that
month, when Gen. Greene took the resolution to remove Col. Stewart, (who
succeeded Gen. Rawdon in command,) or give him battle.

"It was impossible to pass the rivers Wateree and Congaree immediately
in front, and as their confluence is but a little to our left, it was
not considered eligible to cross the Santee below the enemy for obvious
reasons: we had a junction to form with the State troops and militia,
whose numbers were not ascertained, and without them we were greatly
inferior in force to the enemy. Therefore the General ordered us to
march by the right, and we passed the rivers above, which induced the
British army to retire to Eutaw Springs, about thirty-five miles from
Thompson's and about two from Nelson's Ferry over the Santee. Gen.
Greene did not approve of their holding that post, and as his forces
were now collected, he determined to prosecute his plan of giving battle
or removing them to a more peaceful distance. By easy marches we arrived
at Burdell's, seven miles from Eutaw, in the afternoon of the 7th inst.,
and orders were given for marching again next morning, at four o'clock,
to attack the enemy.

"At four o'clock next morning we were under arms, and moved in order of
battle about three miles, when we halted, and took a little of that
liquid which is not unnecessary to exhilarate the animal spirits upon
such occasions. Again we advanced, and soon afterwards our light troops
met the van of the enemy, who were marching out to meet us.

"Very serious, very important reflections began to obtrude. But liberty
or death; peace and independence; or glory and a grave. The enemy's van
was soon driven to their line, and our troops displayed. Our militia,
which composed the front line, seconded the attack, and behaved better
than usual. The North Carolina brigade of Continentals were next
engaged, and acquired honor by their firmness. The Virginians advanced
with impetuosity, and beat their foes wherever they found them. And the
little remnant of Maryland troops, with an intrepidity which was
particularly noticed by our gallant commander, advanced in good order,
with trailed arms, and without regarding or returning the enemy's fire,
charged and broke their best troops. Then, indeed, we fired and followed
them into their camp, near which is a thick wood, very unfavorable to
cavalry. But Col. Washington, impatient perhaps for a more favorable
opportunity, charged upon the enemy's right, where unluckily their flank
companies were posted. He received a very galling fire, by which his
horse fell in front of his dragoons. In an instant his breast was
pierced by a bayonet, which however wounded him but slightly. His
cavalry was repulsed, and that excellent officer became a captive.

