Produced by David Starner, Leah Moser and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


=_Tractatus de Hermaphroditis_:=

=OR, A=

=TREATISE=

=OF=

=HERMAPHRODITES,=

=CONTAINING=

    I. A Description of the several Sorts of HERMAPHRODITES, and how the
    Law regards them in respect to Matrimony.

    II. Intrigues of HERMAPHRODITES and Masculine FEMALES, and of the
    outward Marks to distinguish them.

    III. The material Cause and Generation of HERMAPHRODITES, of
    unnatural BIRTHS, Generation of MONSTERS, extraordinary CONCEPTIONS,
    &c.

=_LONDON_:=

=Printed for E. CURLL _Fleet-street_.=

=MDCCXVIII.=


PREFACE.


_Prefaces now a Days are rather Apologies for the Works to which they
are prefix'd, than written for Instruction; and generally a ludicrous
Scene is expected, if the Performance be of an airy Nature; or, if not,
at least an introductory Specimen of what the Reader may hope for in the
Body of the Work_.

_I shall make no Apology for my Subject, notwithstanding an impudent
Libeller has endeavour'd to load Authors and Publishers of Works of
this Nature with the utmost Infamy; and herein I admire at the Front of
the Fellow, to pretend to Chastise others for Writing only, when he
practises a great deal more Iniquity than any Book extant can prompt him
to, every Day that comes over his Head_.

MY _Design in the following Sheets is meerly as an innocent
Entertainment for all curious Persons, without any Views of inciting
Masculine-Females to Amorous Tryals with their own Sex; and I am
perswaded there will not be one single_ HERMAPHRODITE _the more in the
World, on account of the publishing this_ TREATISE.

IT _may be expected by some faithless Persons, that I should produce
an_ HERMAPHRODITE _to publick View, as an incontestible Justification of
there being Humane Creatures of this kind; but as I have no Authority to
take up the Petticoats of any Female without her Consent, I hope to be
excus'd from making such demonstrable Proofs; and if I had such a Power,
the Sight might endanger the Welfare of some pregnant Female, whose
Curiosity would spur her to a particular Examination_.

_The Intrigues of my_ HERMAPHRODITES _are indeed very amazing, and as
monstrous as their Natures, but that many Lascivious Females divert
themselves one with another at this time in this City, is not to be
doubted: And if any Persons shall presume to Censure my Accounts,
grounded on a Probability of Truth, I shall be sufficiently reveng'd in
proclaiming them, what my_ HERMAPHRODITES _are found to be in the
Conclusion_--Old Women.

_I confess, all Histories of extraordinary Conceptions from these
Intrigues, or by Women without actual Copulation, are equally fabulous
with those of the Engendring of Men: It would be as surprizing to find a
Man with a teeming Belly, as to see a Woman increase there meerly by her
own Applications_.

_I doubt not but this small_ TREATISE _may put some Persons upon a
previous Examination of Robust Females, that they may be at a certainty
with respect to mutual Enjoyment; but I would not have them rashly
conclude from large Appurtenances only, that they are unnatural, but, on
the contrary, agreeable Companions._

_To conclude, I fear not the Censure of_ HERMAPHRODITES, _nor of those
that would be such to satisfy their vicious Inclinations; neither am I
under any apprehensions from the Censure of our Reforming Zealots_.


       *       *       *       *       *

_Tractatus de Hermaphroditis_:

OR, A

TREATISE

OF

HERMAPHRODITES.


The Secrets of Nature have in all Ages been particularly examin'd by
Anatomists and others, and this of _Hermaphrodites_ is so very
wonderful, that I am perfectly assur'd my present Enquiry will be
entirely acceptable to all Lovers of curious Discoveries; and as it is
my immediate Business to trace every Particular for an ample
Dissertation on the Nature of _Hermaphrodites_, (which obliges me to a
frequent Repetition of the Names of the Parts employ'd in the Business
of Generation) so, I hope, I shall not be charg'd with Obscenity, since
in all Treatises of this Kind it is impossible to finish any one Head
compleatly, without pursuing the Methods of Anatomical Writings.

Though in _Ovid_'s _Metamorphosis_, _Salmacis_'s being in Love with
_Hermaphroditus_, and not succeeding in her amorous Wishes, her praying
to the Gods to join their Bodies in one, has no Weight in it; yet, that
the Notions of Hermaphrodites are not entirely fictitious, I need only
mention the Servant of _Montuus_, who took his Hermaphrodite to be a
Male when he lay with his Maids, and for a Female when she lay with her
Husband to propagate their Species, the two Hermaphrodites of
_Licetus_, and the Story of _Ausonius_, which he relates of an
Hermaphrodite of _Bonavento_ in _Italy_; and Histories are full of
Confirmations, that many Persons in the World have had the privy Parts
of both Sexes.

For the Definition of the Word Sex, it is no other than a Distinction of
Male and Female, in which this is most observable, that for the Parts of
the Body, there is but little Difference between them; but the Females
are colder than the Males, and abound with more superfluous Moisture;
wherefore their spermatick Parts are more soft and humid, and all their
natural Actions more vigorous than those of Men: But Hermaphrodites are
a mixture of both Sexes, and to both incompleat.

In all Ages Hermaphrodites have been talk'd of, though particular
Vouchers have been many times wanting, which is generally the Case
where a Deficiency of the Secrets of Nature is to be detected; the
amorous Parts are certainly more valuable than any other principal Parts
of the Body, as they afford the greatest pleasure of Life; and there is
always the greatest Difficulty attends the Discoveries of Impotency,
(which is less obnoxious) and nothing but the Force of the Law executed
by a lascivious Female, in the State of Matrimony, will occasion a
Record of a want of Substance for the amorous Adventure.

It is natural to suppose, that these Persons of a mix'd Nature call'd
Hermaphrodites, have had generally more Prudence and Conduct than to
marry under such Incapacities, which would prevent an agreeable
Consummation in the amorous Embrace, (however they may sport and dally
with each other) as they must expect nothing but the greatest Resentment
and highest Indignation from the Persons they have presumptuously
espous'd, and must inevitably tend to their being expos'd to the World,
as Prodigies and Monsters; and they have in Times past been the more
effectually deterr'd from engaging in Matrimony, as they were
immediately on their Discovery cast into the Sea or some large Rivers,
or banish'd into some desolate Island, as presages of dire Events, and
the worst of Calamities.

But the Civil Law does not regard Hermaphrodites as Monsters, it permits
them to make a Choice of either of the two Sexes for the Business of
Copulation, either in the Capacity of Men or Women; but if the
Hermaphrodite does not perform his Part agreeable to Nature, the same
Law inflicts the Punishment due to Sodomy, because he has abus'd one
Part, contrary to Matures Laws. This must be determin'd by the
Predominancy of the Parts, for there are some Hermaphrodites so very
vigorous as to embrace Women, and others whose Parts are so dispos'd as
to receive with pleasure the Caresses of Men; and where there is nothing
to hinder the amorous Action, but that they are capable of enjoying
mutual Pleasure, it would be a piece of injustice to prohibit their
Nuptials.

Monsieur _Venette_[A] tells us, that there are five kinds of
Hermaphrodites: The first have the privy Parts of a Man very entire;
they make Water and Engender like other Men, but with this difference,
that they have a pretty deep Slit between the Seat and the Cod, which is
of no Use in Generation.

The second Sort have also the Parts of a Man very well proportion'd,
that serve either the Functions of Life or Generation; but they have a
Slit not so deep as the first Sort, which being in the midst of the
Cods, presses the Testicles on each side.

The third Sort have no visible privy Parts of a Man, only a Slit,
through which the Hermaphrodite makes Water. This Cavity is deeper or
shallower, according to the plenty or default of Matter employ'd for the
forming of it, yet one may easily find the Bottom of it with one's
Finger. The Terms never flow by this way, and this kind of Hermaphrodite
is a true Man as well as the two others above mention'd; for these sorts
of Hermaphrodites become Boys, about the Age of fifteen, in an Instant,
and are as valiant in the Adventures of Love as other Males, and this is
oftentimes affected by some violent Action, as _Mary Germain_, mention'd
by _Paræus_, leaping over a Ditch, strain'd herself, and became
instantly a Man, through the coming forth of the privy Parts.

This may be a sufficient Caution to young Gentlemen not to be too hasty
in their Marriages, lest, in a vigorous Consummation with a very
youthful Partner, the imaginary Female should at once appear an
Hermaphrodite.

The fourth Sort of Hermaphrodites, are Women who have the _Clitoris_
bigger and longer than others, and thereby impose upon the Vulgar, who
know but little of the Parts they are compos'd of, and of these kinds of
Hermaphrodites, _Columbus_ says he examin'd all the Parts, and found no
essential Difference from other Women; the only Sign that they are Women
is, that they suffer the flowing of their Terms every Month.

The fifth Kind, are those that have neither the Use of the one nor the
other Sex, and have their privy Parts confus'd, and the Temper of Man
and Woman so inter-mix'd, that one can hardly say which is most
predominant; but these sorts of Persons are rather a kind of Eunuchs
than Hermaphrodites, their _Penis_ being good for nothing, and their
Terms never flowing. Of this Kind was the _Bohemian_ Woman, that pray'd
_Columbus_ to cut off her _Penis_, and to enlarge her _Vagina_, that she
might the more freely, as she alledg'd, join amorously with a Man.

These are the several Sorts of Hermaphrodites, mentioned by Monsieur
_Venette_; and the four first of them, tho' they have the Name, yet
Nature has not refus'd them the Advantage to make use of their Genital
Parts, and to Engender as others. The Male Hermaphrodite may get
Children, and the Female conceive; so that neither the one nor the other
differ from Men or Women, but only by a superfluity or a deficiency of
Parts, and such as does not disturb the business of Generation.

The fifth Sort are call'd perfect Hermaphrodites, because they are
incapable of using either of the Sexes; but some Persons fancy there are
a sort of Hermaphrodites which can make use of both Sexes, and Engender
both ways, though this is easily confuted, when we consider that one of
the privy Parts of an Hermaphrodite is generally useless, as being
contrary to the Laws of Nature, and what confusion would it be, to find
in one and the same Person a Man's and Woman's Testicles, a Womb and a
_Penis_? A Woman's Genital Parts and a Man's are too different to admit
of such an Union, and to change the Use upon any occasion.

Agreeable to the list mention'd Opinion, some Naturalists will have it,
that an Hermaphrodite, which is very vigorous as to both Sexes, may
Engender within himself, without the Company of another Person, having
Matter to form a Child, a Place to conceive it, and proper Liquid for
Nourishment: In the same manner as _Jack Hares_ engender once in their
Lives, and that _Stags_ do the same, which is maintain'd by the learned
_Langius_: But these Generations are both impossible and ridiculous, the
Naturalists must certainly be deceiv'd, in taking some Parts of the
Female for the Testicles of the Male; and what probability is there that
the Seed should come out of one Part and into the other, without losing
its Spirits, and altering considerably in changing of Place? And if such
a Thing were possible, the Temperament that engenders Masculine Seed
might as well engender Feminine, and produce the Terms at the same Time
or something else in proportion to it.

Women having Beards, and being a large Masculine Size, have been
sometimes, by the Ignorant, accounted Men, tho' they were true Women;
and it cannot be said, that one Sex is chang'd into another, for we
never heard of Men that became Women, and that their, privy Parts were
abolish'd; or turn'd within, in order to form the Genital Parts of a
Woman. The Hermaphrodites of _Licetus_, which conceiv'd and brought
forth Children, were real Women taken for Men, by reason of the length
and bigness of their _Clitoris_: And the Fisherman's Wife, mention'd by
_Antonius de Palma_, was only a Male, call'd the third sort of
Hermaphrodites undiscover'd, which was afterwards manifested in the
coming out of the Parts of a Man, when she had been fourteen Years
married. The Case was the same with _Emilia_, marry'd to _Antonius
Sperta_, mention'd by _Potanus_ who was accounted a Woman twelve Years,
but was afterwards reputed a Man, and married again to a Woman.

For the Discovery of the Male and Female Hermaphrodite, these
Observations will be serviceable: A Person that is bold and sprightly,
having a strong Voice, much Hair on the Body, particularly on the Chin
and privy Parts, with the rest of such Signs as discover Manhood, are
certain Demonstrations that the Hermaphrodite has the privy Parts of a
Man in a more predominant manner than those of the other Sex; and
contrarywise, if an Hermaphrodite has good Breasts, Skin smooth and
soft; if the Terms appear at their due Intervals; if there be a
sparkling and agreeableness in the Eyes; and if other Signs are
observ'd, that commonly distinguish a Woman from a Man, these are
Arguments that the Hermaphrodite has the Privities of the Female Sex of
a good Conformation; and if the _Vagina_ is not too defective, such an
Hermaphrodite ought to pass for a Woman.

I doubt not but there are many Persons in the World of both Species,
particularly of the Female Sex, who would willingly assume to
themselves the Parts belonging to Hermaphrodites, if they could have a
vigorous Use of the Members of both Sexes, upon any lustful Inclination;
a lascivious Female would be transported at the Thoughts of acting the
Part of a Man in the amorous Adventure, and a lecherous Male would
propose equal Pleasure in receiving the Embraces he use to bestow; but
tho' most Persons agree that Women have the greatest Sense of Enjoyment
in the Act of Copulation, (as without all question they must, by the
Situation and Disposition of the Parts) yet they would be more forward
in satisfying this brutal Curiosity than those of the opposite Sex. Men
are more easy to be limited in the Pleasures of _Venus_ than Women; as
they are endu'd with more Reason, so they are generally easily satisfied
in those Enjoyments, which were chiefly design'd for the propagating of
their Species.

If two Persons, being Hermaphrodites, should Marry with an expectation
of pleasing each other, as Male and Female by turns, they'll meet with a
Disappointment, for the Reasons already mention'd, _viz_. That one of
the Members of Hermaphrodites is most commonly useless, and if a Man
should by chance be married to a Person of his own Sex, before the Parts
are come down, (which, as I have observ'd before, sometimes happens,
where Persons are wedded in an Age of Infancy) a great Disappointment
will ensue to the Husband, when his Partner shall take the Constitution
of a Man, and be ready to engage with him, instead of his encountering
with her; and in respect of a masculine Woman's being taken by the
Length of her _Clitoris_ for a Man, _Daniel de Bantin_ only sported with
his Wife, but was got with Child himself by one of his Companions. The
_Clitoris_ not being perforated, the Hermaphrodite can furnish no Matter
for Generation.

The _Clitoris_ in Women suffers erection and falling in the same manner
as the _Penis_ in Men; and the _Vagina_ likewise swells to make the
Passage streight and easy, for the reception of the _Penis_ in the Time
of Enjoyment. Sometimes the _Clitoris_ will grow out of the Body two or
three Inches, but that happens not but upon extraordinary Occasions,
upon violent Inclinations to Copulation, over much Heat of the
Privities, _&c._ and by this means a Man will be hinder'd from knowing
his Wife; but the larger it is, so as no way to prevent their mutual
Embraces, the greater is the Pleasure, especially to the Female; and
without this Part, the fair Sex would neither desire the Embraces of the
Males, nor have any Pleasure in them, or Conceive by them.

Women well furnish'd in these Parts may divert themselves with their
Companions, to whom for the most part they can give as much Pleasure as
Men do, but cannot receive in any proportion the Pleasure themselves,
for want of Ejaculation, the Crisis of Enjoyment to the Male in the
Intrigues of _Venus_. I am inform'd that Diversions of this nature are
frequently practis'd by robust and lustful Females, who cannot with any
prospect of safety to their Reputations, venture upon the Embraces of a
Man, though they are never so strongly enclin'd. The unnatural Pleasures
of this kind are finely illustrated in the following Song, written by
Mr. ROWE, which I take it will not be improperly inserted in this Place.


[Footnote A: Le Tableau de l'Amour Conjugal, par Monsieur _Venette_.
Paris 1710.]


SONG.


                 I.

  _While_ SAPPHO, _with harmonious Airs,
    Her dear_ PHILENIS _charms,
  With equal joy the Nymph appears,
    Dissolving in her Arms_.


                 II.

  _Thus to themselves alone they are,
    What all_ Mankind _can give;
  Alternately the happy Pair
    All grant, and all receive_.


                 III.

  _Like the_ Twin-Stars, _so fam'd for Friends,
    Who set by Turns and rise;
  When_ one _to_ THETIS _Lap descends
    His_ Brother _mounts the Skies_.


                 IV.

  _With happier Fate, and kinder Care,
    These_ Nymphs _by_ Turns _do reign,
  While still the_ Falling, _does prepare
    The Rising, to sustain_.


                 V.

  _The Joys of either Sex in Love;
    In each of them we read,
  Successive each, to each does prove,
    Fierce Youth and yielding Maid_.


       *       *       *       *       *

_Intrigues of Hermaphrodites and Masculine Females_.


The hotter the Climate, the stronger are the Inclinations to Venery.
When I was formerly in _Italy_; there happened a notable Adventure in
the Neighbourhood of _Rome_, between a certain Lady call'd _Margureta_,
one of a noble Family in the Papal Dominions, and a Lady of _France_,
whose Name was _Barbarissa_: These two Females were in their Statures
very near equal to the largest siz'd Male; they had full and rough
Faces, large Shoulders, Hands and Feet; and but slender Hips, and small
breasts: In short, they resembled Men in all respects, but their
Dresses, their Gates and Voices, and indeed they were suspected to be
Hermaphrodites. These Ladies, I am inform'd, paid frequent Visits to
each other, and 'twas always observ'd, that no Body was admitted to
their splendid Entertainments, which heighten'd the Curiosity of a
Servant in the Family of _Margureta_, to attempt a Discovery of their
Intrigues, they always locking themselves in, the moment they had
dispatch'd their Suppers: In order to this, on a Time, this Servant,
call'd _Nicolini_, with a piercing Instrument of Iron, and the
Assistance of an Artificer, ingeniously made a Communication for the
Sight into the next Room, by working a small Hole through the Wainscot,
opposite to the Bed, in the Chamber wherein the two Masculine Ladies
accustom'd to solace themselves. At the next Meeting, _Nicolini,_ to his
no small surprise, had a Prospect of the two Females embracing each
other, with a succession of Kisses of no short Duration. After this they
both drew up their Petticoat, and exposing their Thighs to view, they
mutually employ'd their Hands with each other, in the same Manner, and
with the same force of Inclination, as a juvenile Gallant would make his
Approaches to what he most admires in a beautiful _Belinda_, at the same
Time continuing the closest Salutations; at last one of the Females
threw herself down upon the Bed, and displaying her self commodiously,
the other immediately begun the amorous Adventure, covering her
Companion so effectually, that _Nicolini_ could not possibly discover
any farther Particulars: They had not continu'd their Sportings long
before _Margureta_, which officiated now instead of the Man, arose from
_Barbarissa_, and turning towards the Window with her Cloaths up in her
Arms, _Nicolini_ immediately discover'd something hang down from her
Body of a reddish Colour, and which was very unusual: They both
panting, and almost breathless, retir'd from the Bed to a Table, where
they sat down and refresh'd themselves with sufficient Quantities of
generous Wine. About an Hour after this, they began to renew their
Frolicks, and it being _Barbarissa_'s turn to caress, who was not so
Masculine as _Margureta_, to incite the falling down and erection of her
Female Member, she turn'd over a large Book, amply stor'd with obscene
Portraitures, wherein the amorous Combat was curiously describ'd in the
utmost variety of Postures which were ever practic'd, or the Head of a
youthful and ingenious Painter could invent; but this not having the
Effect expected, _Margureta_ strip'd her self naked, as did likewise
_Barbarissa_, and both dancing about the Room, they gave each other
repeated Strokes with their Hands on their white Posteriors; and this
likewise failing to move _Barbarissa_, _Margureta_ open'd a Cabinet,
and taking from thence a large Birchen Rod, she flogg'd _Barbarissa_
lustily, her Buttocks seeming to yield to that amorous Discipline; upon
this, something appear'd from the Privities of _Barbarissa_, like unto
what _Nicolini_ had observ'd of _Margureta_, and they instantly put on
their loose Gowns, and ran to the Bed, where _Barbarissa_ embracing her
Companion, did her Work effectually. After their Sportings were over,
that each had return'd the Favours receiv'd, they decently dress'd
themselves, and sat them down again to the Table, where, after drinking
a Bottle or two of the richest _Italian_ Wines, they kiss'd each other
in the most loving manner, and _Margureta_ rang the Bell for _Nicolini_
to light _Barbarissa_ down Stairs, who immediately taking leave of
_Margureta_, was carried in a Chair to her Place of Residence.

This Story sufficiently shews the unnatural Intrigues of some Masculine
Females, where by the falling down and largeness of the _Clitoris_,
they have been taken for Men, as mention'd in my Description of
Hermaphrodites, and are capable of every Action belonging to a Man, but
that of Ejaculation. I next insert an Intrigue between two Females more
extraordinary than the former, by reason in this, Art was only employ'd,
and in the other there was something of Nature in it, tho' viciously
apply'd: I shall introduce it with several Adventures which happen'd in
this Cafe before the Scene was accomplish'd, and which I doubt not will
be acceptable. In the City of _Ferara_, 'tis reported, there some time
since liv'd two Damsels who were of reputable Descent, and their
Education was equal to that of the greatest Quality in the Territories
of _Italy_; the Name of one of them was _Theodora_, and of the other
_Amaryllis_: _Theodora_ was the Daughter of an eminent Courtier, and in
her Person most beautiful; her Shape was form'd according to the nicest
Rules of Symetry; her Waste was slender, her Breasts were full and
round, and for Whiteness equall'd the falling Snow; her Face was exactly
compos'd, the Features strong and yet beautiful; her Cheeks more lively
than the Rose and Lilly; her Eyes sparkled beyond the most shining
Planets; her Teeth excell'd the best polish'd Ivory; soft as Velvet were
her Lips, and redder than Vermillion; her Hand and Arm more white than
Milk; her Feet small, and her Gate stately, and on her Shoulders were
display'd her auborn Tresses, hanging in Ringlets to her Waste; in
short, every Part that was visible invited to hidden Charms; her Looks
were languishing, and her Eye-Balls large, which, perpetually rowling,
cast a thousand Darts at all Beholders. _Amaryllis_ the Daughter of a
wealthy Merchant and no less admir'd for her Beauty than the lovely
_Theodora_; she was made up of Perfections, and whomsoever she saw
unguarded, she was sure to captivate: These two Ladies were both of them
cross'd in their amorous Inclinations; _Theodora_, before she was
thirteen Years of Age, had made a powerful Conquest over the Affections
of a Youth of Gallantry, his Name was _Leander_, and he was the eldest
Son of a Nobleman of _Naples_; but _Theodora_'s Father having no regard
to the Happiness of his Daughter, after _Leander_ had made his
Addresses, he forbad him his House, not approving the Circumstances or
the Character of the young Gentleman; for the Father of _Theodora_ was a
mercenary Courtier, having no regard to any but such as were in their
Nature Misers and sanctified Hypocrites, and _Leander_ being a Gentleman
inclin'd to Extravagancy. _Leander_ setting a greater value upon his
Education, Manners and good Nature than his Fortune, was oblig'd to
desist in his Pretensions and to sink under the oppression of Avarice:
He determin'd to leave _Ferara_, since he was there to see his
Happiness, no more, however, he resolv'd to send his Fair One, a moving
_Billet Doux_ before his Departure, which he did, and it was as follows.

  To the _GODDESS_ of _Ferara_, the Beautiful _THEODORA_.

  _Divine Creature,

It is not to be admir'd that I, the meanest of your Servants, should be
rejected by your wealthy Parents, and that Heaven should deny me a
Happiness which it self only ought to enjoy; Why did Nature make you so
Beautiful and Deserving, and me so unworthy of your Affection? My misery
increases with your Happiness, unless you participate my Pains; you are
in the Bud of your Beauty, which when full blown, will be like the Sun
in the midst of the Horizon, Illuminating the whole World, but its
penetrating Rays not to be gaz'd upon. You are the Lilly and I am the
Thorn; you beautify the rich fertile Vale, whilst I retire to the barren
Mountains. I will pass the Alps 'till I approach the most aspiring
Mount, and there, in view of_ Ferara, _I will lay me down and bid the
World Adieu. When I am gone, remember that you had once a Lover who
could sacrifice every thing for our Service, and without you he could
enjoy nothing. I have not only concerted my Journey from_ Ferara, _but
likewise to the_ Elysian Groves; _if my grizly Ghost should terrify that
sordid Wretch your Father, 'tis no more than he deserves, and if my
Shade appears to you, look on that unconcern'd which cannot injure you.
My last Request to you is to take care of your self, who am_

  Your despairing Lover,

    But Admirer,

      LEANDER

_Theodora_ receiv'd this moving Letter with a Concern proportion'd to
the melancholly Occasion; she communicated it to an intimate
Acquaintance, who likewise express'd the utmost Uneasiness; the thoughts
of the Catastrophe of the Loves of _Theodora_ and _Leander_ presented a
lively Idea to _Theodora's_ Companion, of the Miseries and Misfortunes
attending Mankind. "Hard is the Case (says she) that _Leander_, one of
the finest young Gentlemen of _Naples_, should be sacrific'd to a
mercenary Wretch, a Wretch, that in the midst of plenty is poor and
miserable, and who, tho' he has all Things to compleat his Happiness,
his avaricious Temper will not permit him to enjoy the common
Necessaries of Life: The Pleasures of living he's a Stranger to, he
lives despis'd, and will die unpitied: But such is the inequality of
Fortune's Favours, that Merit must stoop and Ideots be advanc'd to the
highest Pomp and Magnificence. It is entirely out of your Power to give
the pitied _Leander_ the least Relief; your Father's House is a Nunnery,
he has his Locks and Keys to secure you, and his Spies for Intelligence;
but I advise you to send the unfortunate Youth an Answer to his mournful
Epistle." Upon this, _Theodora_ immediately call'd for Pen, Ink and
Paper, and wrote the following Answer.

  To the unfortunate LEANDER.

_I am sorry that you had the Misfortune ever to see me, and the more for
that in vain I seek your Relief; it is not in my Power to forward either
your Happiness or my own, which I confess I should think compleat, if my
mercenary Father would consent to my Espousals; but it is so far from
this, that I am to see for the future, so that the Lilly you admire now
droops its Head, and the whole Vale's enclouded at my sorrowful Fate; I
would willingly accompany the Briar to the Mountains. Impute not to me
your approaching Calamities, which only increase with _Theodora'_s.
Think me no longer handsome, who have so many Imperfections to sully
those Trifles you call Beauties; No, range me with Deformity, since
other Ideas may increase your Pain. I desire you to forget me, of I am
oblig'd to endeavour not to remember you._

  Your most disconsolate

    Lover,

      THEODORA.

Upon receipt of this Letter, _Leander_ quitted _Ferara_ with a Grief
inexpressible, but however had Resolution to finish his Journey to the
Place of his Nativity without self Violence, but soon after, resign'd a
miserable life.

I come now to the Story of _Amaryllis_. _Amaryllis_ was formerly deeply
in Love with a Gentleman of _France_, (she being originally of that
Kingdom) whose Name was _Sempronius_; his Person was stately and very
well proportion'd; his Face was ruddy and inclining to be large; his
Eyes full and lively, with Eye-Brows and Beard pretty thick; of a dark
brown Colour; and his Skin was clear, his Shoulders were strong and well
set, and Limbs rather large than small, but exactly shap'd: He was
perfectly good natur'd, complaisant in his Behaviour, and gallant in his
Amours, his Dress was easy and genteel, his Approaches sprightly, and
his Conversation the most endearing. _Amaryllis_ was extremly fond of
_Sempronius_ and _Sempronius_ was fond of _Amaryllis_, without each
other they were equally unhappy; repeated Visits introduc'd each coming
Day, and innocent Embraces crown'd the Night: Love and Liberty were
their constant Themes, and nothing was wanting but the Marriage
Ceremony to compleat their Felicity; but it so fell out, that after a
Day was appointed for celebrating their Nuptials, that a young Gentleman
of _Spain_ call'd _Richardo_, envying the Happiness of _Sempronius_,
made several Attempts to disconcert his Measures; and one Night, taking
with him an Officer of Justice, whom he brib'd to his Interest, he
repair'd to the House of _Amaryllis_; and knocking with great Violence,
_Amaryllis_ was very much alarm'd; but she sent down her Servant to
enquire into the Occasion of this uncommon Approach. The Servant no
sooner open'd the Door, but _Richardo_ and the Officer of Justice
enter'd the House, (beating down the Servant) and immediately ascended
the Stairs in pursuit of _Sempronius_; during this Bustle, _Amaryllis_
suspecting a Design against _Sempronius_, (_Richardo_ having formerly
offer'd his Service to her, and Revenge being the common Consequence of
a Disappointment with a _Spaniard_) lock'd him into a private Closet,
which was no sooner done, but _Richardo_ enter'd the Room with his Sword
drawn, _Amaryllis_ having but just Time to secure her Lover. _Richardo_
demanded of _Amaryllis_ the gay _Sempronius_ as a Criminal, telling her
he had committed a Rape on the Body of the virtuous _Maria_ a Lady
celebrated for Beauty, and to whom all _Italy_ could not produce an
Equal, the Officer ran about the Room, crying, "Justice, Justice, where is
the Villain _Sempronius."_ They search'd the Room very diligently, and
not finding _Sempronius_ at last _Richardo_ address'd himself to
_Amaryllis_ in these Words: "Madam, I hope you have more Virtue and
Honour than to shelter a Criminal, especially where one of your most
beautiful Sex is concern'd, and the greatest Innocence has been
violated: If you allow your House to to be a Sanctuary for Offenders of
this Nature, Justice will require Satisfaction at your Door; you may
your self expect the same Injury to your Person, and I am now prepar'd
to shew a Resentment that will not be pleasing to _Amaryllis_, either
comply with my Desires in producing the Criminal, or expect to fall my
Victim." This Speech very much confounded _Amaryllis_; the Designs of
_Richardo_ she could not easily penetrate, whether against her self or
_Sempronius_ the Plot was laid, or whether it extended to both, she
could not determine: But at last she summon'd her Courage and her
Reason, and with a look of Indignation peculiar to her Sex, she answer'd
thus the malicious and designing _Richardo_: "What Crimes _Sempronius_
has been guilty of, is to me a Secret, but that _Richardo_ deserves the
Character now given of _Sempronius_ is very obvious, and needs no
Difficulty for me to affirm; your brutal Inclinations are not easily
satisfied: When you made your Addresses to me, your Designs were base
and dishonourable; you more than once attempted with force to violate my
Chastity, and for ought I know you are now come upon the same Errand:
What could make you approach me in this hostile manner, but to Ravish
_Amaryllis_, or to Murder _Sempronius_, under a pretence of Justice? But
let the Event be what it will, I'll not deliver up him who is dearer to
me than Life, but dare a Villain to his worst." This heroick Speech made
by _Amaryllis_ dash'd _Richardo_ for the present; but he being resolv'd
to prosecute his Intentions (which indeed were both to Murder
_Sempronius_ and ravish _Amaryllis_, as she had guess'd) he advanc'd
nearer to _Amaryllis_, and took her in his Arms, upon which she cry'd
out with violence, whereupon _Sempronius_, who had heard every thing
that had pass'd, open'd the Closet Door, and sallying out Sword in Hand
to defend himself and his Mistress, _Richardo_ rush'd from _Amaryllis_
and attack'd _Sempronius_; they fought sometime without any seeming
Advantage on either Side, 'til at length the Officer belonging to
_Richardo_ knock'd down _Sempronius_ and _Richardo_ ran him to the
Heart, _Amaryllis_, through the Negligence of the Officer, had an
opportunity of escaping to a neighbouring House, where, he acquainted
the Inhabitants with the dismal Tragedy; upon this Warrants were issu'd
from the next Magistrates for Apprehension of _Richard_, but took Post
for _Germany_, where secur'd himsef: in a famous Monastery. In great
despair and confusion _Amaryllis_ left the Kingdom of France and
travell'd into _Italy_, to to forget this barbarous Treatment of her
unfortunate Lover. At first she propos'd to retire to some Country
Village, and spend the remainder of her Life in Sighs and Groans, and
complaining Sonnets; for this purpose she compos'd the following Lines.


SONG.


                 I.

  _Since gay_ SEMPRONIUS _now is gone,
    What Comfort yields my Life?
  I shall Unhappy be alone,
    My Breast is fill'd with Strife._


                 II.

  _The Sun is set e'er Noon arrived,
    Sad Glooms around me spread,
  No flowing Joys the Lad surviv'd,
    He's now rang'd with the Dead._


                 III.

  SEMPRONIUS _Dear, where are ye stole?
    Could I but find thee strait,
  I'd cut the Thread of Life my Soul
    On thy bless'd Shade would wait._


                 IV.

  _If to th' infernal Regions, Woe,_
    SEMPRONIUS _is confin'd;
  His Ghost I'll trace, persue below
    To ease my tortur'd Mind._


                 V.

  _I still in vain, alas! prepare
    In vain I strive to sleep;
  My Breast is fill'd with deadly Care
    I'll lay me down and weep._


                 VI.

  _All worldly Joys I bid adieu,
    All Pleasures I forsake;
  SEMPRONIUS still I'll sleep with you;
    I'll with the Touth awake._

_Amaryllis_ did not long continue her Resolution of going into the
Country, fearing an invincible Despair would ensue; and upon advising
with a Bosom Friend, she was disuaded from it: Her Intimate thought it
might be a Diversion to her Melancholly to repair to some popular City,
where a variety of Conversation and airy Entertainments, might, if
possible, eraze the Memory of her deceas'd Lover. Accordingly
_Amaryllis_ immediately set out for _Ferara_, where she had been but an
inconsiderable Time, before she accidentally fell into the Company of
_Theodora_, whose Disappointment, already related, was little inferior
to hers, and both repeating their Stories, they found so near a
Resemblance in their Misfortunes, that they resolv'd to live together as
Sisters or inseperable Companions, and to use their utmost Artifices for
the Relief of each other. I have been led into this seeming Romance, to
shew particularly the fatal Disappointments attending these two
beautiful Females, which were very extraordinary, especially those of
the Latter; and to shew, in a particular manner, how these two Ladies
first became acquainted, as an Introduction to what follows. I come now
to their Female Intrigues, which were no less uncommon than their
Misfortunes.

_Theodora_ and _Amaryllis_ liv'd together some Time, and at last by the
constant perusal of airy Books, and a few entertaining Companions, they
had in some, measure forgot their unfortunate Lovers, but they resolv'd
never for the future to fix their Affections upon any Man living; and
living in Luxury, in the prime of their Years, in a hot inciting
Climate, they at length were naturally inclin'd to the most abominable
Pollution: They provided artificial _Penis's_ of the largest Dimensions,
and with Ribbons they fasten'd the Root of the Instrument, in the same
Situation as Nature has plac'd the Substance in Man; they frequently
embrac'd one another by turns, as Man and woman in the amorous
Adventure; and when their Vigour was so much abated, that they were no
longer able to struggle, the Female uppermost withdrew, and taking
another Instrument in her Hand, she us'd it on her Companion with an
Injection of Moisture, which, with the rubbing, occasion'd such a
tickling, as to force a discharge of Matter and facilitate the Pleasure.
This was their daily Practice for a considerable space, 'till at last a
Confident of _Theodora_'s who was sometimes admitted as variety in these
Brutal Enjoyments, for a large Sum of Money reveal'd their Intrigues to
_Philetus_, a Youth of a very comly Person, but a little Effeminate, who
passionately admir'd the beautiful _Theodora_, and who had made several
Attempts on her in vain.

_Philetus_ being let into the Secret of _Theodora_'s Intrigues, by the
Assistance of the Confident, resolv'd to personate a Lady of the first
Figure at _Rome:_ In order to this, he furnish'd himself with a very
rich and costly Female Habit, and by the Use of Paint, which alter'd his
Eye-Brows, Cheeks, Hair, &c. and shaving every Day, he was sufficiently
disguis'd; all Things being now concerted with _Theodora's_ Confident,
_Philetus_ was admitted to wait upon _Theodora_ and _Amaryllis_, with a
feign'd Message from a Lady of their Acquaintance at _Rome_, and was
entertain'd with the utmost Respect and Grandeur, with occasion'd
frequent Visits between _Philetus_ and _Theodora_, and at length there
was such an Intimacy contracted, by the Management of _Philetus_ and the
Confident, that _Philetus_ was permitted to be present in their
Frolicks, and at last offering his Service to _Theodora_; she with a
great deal of difficulty accepted his Embraces having not the least
suspicion of the Design; so that _Philetus_ taking the artificial
_Penis_ in his Hand, went to the Window from the Ladies, and pulling up
his Petticoats, pretended he had fix'd it round his Waste, and putting
the Instrument in a Furbelow of his Gown, he advanc'd to the Bed where
_Theodora_ was laid in an airy Manner to receive him; the Sight of the
beautiful _Theodora_, in this captivating Posture, caus'd an immediate
Erection with _Philetus_, and fill'd his Breast with amorous Fire; he
approach'd his Charmer with a Lover's' vigour, and _Theodora_ was still
a Stranger to the Intrigue, 'till the moment of Ejaculation, which was
not usual with the same Instrument in her Embraces with _Amaryllis_:
When this happen'd she was prodigiously surpriz'd, and endeavouring to
disengage her self from _Philetus_, he folded her more closely in his
Arms; and in the greatest Transport told her, he was her constant
Admirer _Philetus_: She upbraided him for this perfidious Method of
bringing about his Designs; however, upon his telling her, That her
strict way of Living made an uncommon Stratagem absolutely necessary,
that he hop'd she would excuse what Love had prompted him to, and that
notwithstanding what had past, his Designs were honourable; _Theodora_
considering, what had happen'd, and experiencing a material Difference
between Art and Nature, agreed, on his humble Request, to Marry him; and
a Priest was immediately sent for, who solemniz'd their Nuptials. When
the Ceremony was over, _Theodora_ sung this Stanza.

  _The Shadow I'll no longer try
    Or use the pleasing Toy
  A sprightly Youth I can't defy,
    The Substance I'll enjoy._

After these Adventures were over, _Amaryllis_ likewise submitted to
Matrimony with a Gentleman of _Ferara_; and they both enjoy'd the
greatest Happiness, making no difficulty to forget all Sorrows past.
The next Intrigues I shall mention, are of two famous Hermaphrodites,
who were more vigorous than common in their Parts, at _Urbino_. It is
not many Years ago (as the Story relates) that there liv'd at _Urbino_
two Hermaphrodites, famous for their Intrigues, and indeed they were
arriv'd to that consummate pitch of Impudence, that they were not
asham'd to own their Bestiality, they not only frolick'd with each
other, but with both Sexes in general; their Names were _Diana_ and
_Isabella_, both of reputable Birth, and well Educated. _Diana_ on a
Time being invited to the Nuptials of a certain Nobleman of _Urbino_,
accompanied him to the House of a noted Clergyman, some distance from
the Residence of _Diana_, to be a Witness to the solemnization of the
Marriage, and being arriv'd there, every thing was instantly provided
for the Ceremony; the Bride was attir'd in the richest Brocade Silks,
with the finest Linnen that could be purchas'd; her Neck and Breasts
were exposed very low, and heav'd with Desire, filling the Bridegroom
with amorous Imaginations, her Hair was adorn'd with the most beautiful
and odorous Flowers, which surrounded her heavenly Face, and made it
appear like a Rose in its bloom, in a delightful Garden, just ready to
be gathered. The Bridegroom was dress'd in Cloth of Gold, and Linnen of
_Flanders_ lac'd; on his Head was a flaxen Peruke reaching to his Waste
of very great Value, and by his Side a Sword, whose Hilt was set with
Diamonds.

The Parson by this time being ready to perform his Office, the Bride and
Bridegroom, and _Diana_ were usher'd into a great Hall, hung round with
Scripture Paintings, particularly of our Saviour, illustrating his whole
Life from his Birth, and being laid in the Manger to the Time of his
Crucifixion. When the Service was over, and the wedded Couple had
join'd their Hands and Hearts, a splendid Entertainment was provided by
the Parson to refresh them after the Fatigue of their Journey, which
continuing 'till it was late in the Evening, the Bride and Bridegroom,
and _Diana_ had not time for their Return to _Urbino_, whereupon the
Parson, in good Manners, first took Notice of it, and withal offer'd
them the Use of his House, which they accepted, considering it would at
least be hazardous, if not impossible to reach _Urbino_ that Night.

The Bride and Bridegroom, and all the Company, were as merry as was
possible, and after Supper, Directions were given by the Parson for
preparing the Beds; but before the usual Time of retiring to Rest, his
Brother coming accidentally from _Bonona_, there arose some Difficulty
with the Parson in the disposal of his Guests, he having no more Beds
than two at liberty: At last they agreed that _Diana_ should lye with
the Parson's Wife, who was a very handsom Woman, and the Parson and his
Brother were to pig together, whereby there would be a Bed at the
Service of the Bride and Bridegroom. Several Bottles of _Champaign_ and
_Burgundy_, and of fine _Italian_ Wines being drank, the Bride and
Bridegroom were put to Bed with a great deal of Solemnity; afterwards
_Diana_ and the Parson's Wife were lighted to their Apartment, and he
and his Brother repair'd to theirs.

_Diana_ observing the Parson's Wife to be a beautiful Woman,
particularly as she undress'd her self, had a very strong Inclination
for her usual Sportings; and in order to carry on an Intrigue with
safety, she softly bolted the Chamber Door, which being done, they both
went to Bed, the Parson's Wife putting out the Candle. They had not been
long in Bed before _Diana_ began to kiss the Parson's Wife with
Freedom, but she not suspecting any thing farther, and supposing it
might proceed more from Wine than any thing else was pretty easy, 'till
at last _Diana_ threw her self upon her, and began an Adventure, very
displeasing, which surpriz'd her to that degree, that she cried out
vehemently.

The Family, which had not been long at rest, alarm'd at this
unseasonable Noise, arose; the Parson came to his Wife's Chamber Door,
and finding it bolted within, he call'd to her to know the occasion of
this Disturbance; she answer'd, "That she had a Man or a Monster in Bed
with her, one that was then violating her Person." The Parson supposing
this to be a Design to Cuckold him, order'd his Servants to break open
the Chamber Door, which being instantly effected, he rescu'd his Wife
from the Power of _Diana_. After this he seiz'd _Diana_, and upon
Examination, finding her to be an Hermaphrodite, having the Members of
both Sexes, he order'd his Servants to carry her to the Garret, and tye
her hands and Legs together, and then to put her into the Bed of the
Maid-Servant. This being done, the Parson went to Bed again, as did
likewise his Wife, and the Family was at rest the whole Night; and the
Noise, though it was great, did not disturb the Bride and Bridegroom
after their Enjoyments of Wine and Love.

The next Morning the Parson arose early, and going to the Bride and
Bridegroom, acquainted them with what had happen'd relating to his Wife
and _Diana_, who expressing a very great Concern, and withal protesting,
that the Injury was offer'd without the least Design on their Parts, the
Parson was reconcil'd to them, but turn'd _Diana_ out of Door with the
Indignity she deserv'd. _Diana_ immediately return'd to _Urbino_, as
did likewise the Bride and Bridegroom some Hours after, having first
made the Parson a Present of a Purse of Gold for his Service and very
great Civility.

It was not long after this, that _Isabella_ walking in the Streets of
_Urbino_, in the close of the Evening, a Foreign Count, of luscious
Inclinations passing by her, gave her an amorous Look, and addressing
her with a great deal of Complaisance, she seem'd for his Purpose, and
indeed she long'd for a pleasing Variety, having met with no uncommon
Adventure for a considerable Time.

The Count observing her inclin'd to Pleasure, invited her to his House,
which she at first rejected, but after a great deal of Intreaty and
Persuasion she condescended, not rightly apprehending the Consequence,
with a Gentleman that was a perfect Stranger to her. When they were
arriv'd at the House of the Count _Isabella_ was handed through several
Rooms of State to an Anti-Chamber, where he was desir'd to sit down,
the Count calling for his Servants to prepare a costly Supper; while the
Supper was dressing, he kiss'd and dally'd with _Isabella_, but she was
unexpectedly shy, behaving her self with a great deal of gravity; at
length the Supper was brought, consisting of Fish, Fowl, Ragooes, Soops,
&c. dress'd to the heighth of the Mode; they both eat heartily and
drank very freely of noble Wines. After the Supper was over, the Count
renew'd his Addresses to _Isabella_, who seem'd a little more
compliable, but would not allow him the Fredom he desir'd, which had the
usual Consequences of encreasing his Inclinations: It growing late, he
carry'd her, to his Chamber, where after some Time, she, was oblig'd to
go to Bed with him.

The Count, after he was in Bed, being inspir'd with Love, began the
amorous Adventure with _Isabella_, before he had thoroughly examin'd the
Secrets of Nature; and after a short Space, finding an Uneasiness in his
amorous Struggles, he put down his Hand to discover what it was, and
feeling something like the Testicles of a Man, he rose from her in the
greatest Confusion, and calling to his Servant for a Candle, in his
passion he pull'd out a sharp Pen-knife and cut off the external Members
of _Isabella_, highly resenting the Affront, and very much displeas'd
with himself, that he should embrace a Monster. _Isabella_ made a
hideous Outcry, which disturb'd the whole Neighbourhood, but the Count
sending for an experienc'd Surgeon, to prevent the Effusion of too great
a Quantity of Blood, it issuing out with great violence, kept her at his
House all Night, and sent her the next Morning in a Chair to her
Companion.

_Isabella_ was a considerable Time before she recover'd of this great
Wound, but at length growing well, and _Diana_ having very much suffer'd
by her extravagant Frolicks, they liv'd together as Man and Wife (being
now better qualified for it) a considerable Space, 'till on a Time they
had a very great Quarrel, which occasion'd a Separation; and _Diana_
reviving her former Diversions, met at last with the same Fate as
_Isabella_, her masculine Instrument being likewise sever'd from her
Privities, after which, both of them liv'd to be harmless old Women.
These Intrigues being very remarkable, I thought fit to insert them for
the Entertainment of the curious Reader; I now proceed to the Nature and
Generation of Hermaphrodites.


       *       *       *       *       *

_Of the material Cause and Generation of_ Hermaphrodites


There are several Reasons assign'd by Naturalists for the Cause and
Production of Hermaphrodites. Some are of Opinion that Hermaphrodites
are form'd whilst the Terms are upon Women, which being always impure,
they can produce nothing but Monsters; but to this it may be answer'd,
that when Children are conceived during the Sowing of the Terms, there
is a greater probability of their being born with the Itch, or other
scorbutick Distempers, than of their being Hermaphrodites.

Others believe, that the Man and the Woman having equally contributed
to Generation, the forming Power which endeavours to render the Matter
whereon it works like unto those it came from, imprints the Characters
of Man and Woman upon it: And that some have been able to engender in a
double Capacity, as to have a Child with one Breast resembling that of a
Woman, and the other that of a Man; but this Opinion is very fabulous,
for the uniting Faculty, which is the Effect of the Soul, is not capable
of making such very great Differences; and Generation being
accomplish'd, thro' the Fermentation of the Seed only, it cannot
separate their Actions after they are mix'd.

Some Naturalists tell us, that where Nature design'd Seed in the Womb
for a Male only, (as working up for the best, and aiming at the highest
Perfection of its Workmanship) too much Cold and Moisture accidentally
falling into the Work, before it is perfected in the Womb, at the same
time there being too great a quantity of Seed and menstrous Blood, what
was intended for Man in part degenerates, and renders the Infant of a
double Sex or Nature, placing it in the middle of both Sexes, as seeming
to participate of Male and Female.

Others say. That Nature having always a particular care of the
Propagation of Mankind, endeavours for the most part to produce Females:
And thus we may observe, the Number of Men Hermaphrodites to exceed the
Women ones, Nature having chalk'd out to the first the Lines of a
Woman's privy Parts. To this Opinion it is objected, that Nature being
nothing but the Power of God in the production of Creatures, it never
works but according to his Orders upon the Matter that is given the
Female; and of consequence Hermaphrodites depend more upon the
Disposition of the Matter for Generation, than upon any previous Design
of Nature.

Some are of Opinion, that God having created Man and Woman, we have
essentially within us a Faculty to become either the one Sex or the
other; for which Reason it is no wonder if an Hermaphrodite is sometimes
produc'd, since we are potentially so. This Notion is drawn from
_Plato_; and though some part of the Scripture may at first seem to
favour it, yet, strictly consider'd, one may find a quite different
Sense; and this Opinion was condemn'd by Pope _Innocent_ III.

The Ancients were of Opinion, that there is a certain Cell in the Womb
of some Women, into which the Seed falling, when _Mercury_ and _Venus_,
or _Mercury_ and _Luna_ are in Conjunction, an Hermaphrodite is
engender'd; or that the Conjunction of _Mars_ and _Venus_ disposes the
Matter that serves for the forming of the Child so confusedly in the
Mother's Womb, that it becomes the Cause of the Birth of an
Hermaphrodite. In answer to this, those Planets are too remote from us
to be the proximate Causes, and to have an absolute Influence on the
Body of the Child that is forming in its Mother's Womb; and admitting
such a Conjunction might cause a Deformity, it would not appear however
in two Hermaphrodites born at different Seasons: But in _Turkey_, and
other Eastern Countries, where these Planets have the greatest
Influence, Hermaphrodites are more numerous than in the Western Parts of
the World, and they are oblig'd to go in different Habits from other
People (_viz_. with Cloaths partly belonging to Men and partly Women) to
prevent their lying with any; and if they go without these Habits they
are punish'd severely.

These are the various Opinions of curious Naturalists; but to proceed to
other Particulars which are more probable, we must more nicely examine
the Nature of the Seed to find out the cause of the Confusion of Sexes.
The Seed is for the most part indifferent as to the two Sexes, and if it
happens to meet with a Ball or Egg in the Horns of the Womb that is full
of Spirits, and includes a hot, dry, and close Matter, it will
impregnate so as to produce a Boy; but if the Seed meets with a Ball or
Egg, not hot nor dry or fill'd with Spirits, tho' it will animate it,
yet 'tis with less strength, so as a Girl will be produc'd. And if the
Matter contain'd in another Ball, is exactly temper'd in its Quantities,
and equal in its parts, so as there is no Predominancy, the Seed of the
Man by its superior Power will determine this matter for a Boy or a
Girl: But if a Man's Seed dispos'd to determine the temperate Seed of a
Woman to one of the two Sexes has not a sufficient quantity of Spirits
to effect it, and the Seed of the Woman prevails for the contrary Sex,
then an Hermaphrodite is form'd, who has relation to one and the other
according to the different Endeavours of the animated Seed of the Man or
Woman.

The Intelligence whose Business it is to compose the little Body of
Hermaphrodites, is very much disturb'd to meet with a Matter that is
intractable for the regular forming of the Genital Parts. On one side
the Matter is moist and loose, on the other close and dry; here 'tis hot
and there 'tis cold. This Matter is so different and consists of such
rebellious Particles, that 'tis impossible to manage it, and the
quantity of Matter is so small that it is destitute of Heat, without
which the Intelligence cannot perfectly form all parts of the Body. If
the Matter turns to a Male, he will be too dull and too cold to
Engender, and will be imperfect in his privy Parts; if it proves a
Female, she will in time be of too hot and dry a Nature, and will be
Deficient of Organs for the Seed and menstruous Blood, in order to Form
and Nourish a Child.

This Intelligence, or the immortal Soul that works from the Beginning,
in all probability about the thirty fifth Day begins to be employ'd in
making the privy Parts of a Boy, for which purpose it lays hold on the
Matter at first Elected for that end, and which it put in the first
place, where the privy Parts ought to be. This being done, it works
continually, but wanting Matter to perfect the privy Parts, it borrows
of the Neighbouring Parts, chusing rather to render others Disfigur'd,
than to be wanting in the compleat Forming of the Parts that must serve
for Generation.

But when there is not Matter enough to Form the genital Parts of a Boy,
the oeconomy of the Intelligence Husbands it and places and disposes
all things so well for the perfect forming of the Parts that 'tis not to
be express'd, but the situation is inward, as wanting Heat and Strength
of Matter to push them out, after this the Intelligence proceeds in the
Forming of the privy Parts of those Hermaphrodites who are counted
Girls, but are really Boys. These seem to Change Sexes, and in time come
to be Men, and Marry, and get Children. The natural and genital Heat
increasing daily, pushes out the privy Parts about the Age of fifteen,
twenty, or twenty five, 'till which time they lie hidden. These must be
at full Age before they are able to Caress a Woman; and where after the
coming out or the privy Parts they Copulate, it will be a hard matter
for them to Engender, being in their Nature Cold.

As the Intelligence wants Matter for the Forming of the privy Parts of
the three first sorts of Hermaphrodites, so there is more than there is
occasion for in the fourth. About the forty fifth Day, the Intelligence
being at a loss how to place the Matter it has receiv'd for the Amorous
Parts, determines at last to make the _Clotoris_ bigger and longer than
ordinary, and to leave to the inward genital Parts of a Girl a natural
Figure, that they may one Day serve for Generation. These sorts of
Hermaphrodites as I have already observ'd, have frequently pass'd for
Men, being in reality nothing but Women.

But in short, the Intelligence must accomplish its Work, of what Matter
soever it be; it begins to work, and will without doubt make Parts in
some measure determin'd to either Sex, provided the matter be not so
unequal, and of such a different Complexion as to make it impossible to
effect it, when it Forms an Hermaphrodite, and sometimes a Monster that
is neither Man nor Woman, as having no privy Parts, either of the one or
the other.


       *       *       *       *       *

_Of unnatural Births; Monsters, and extraordinary Conceptions._


Hermaphrodites being Monsters in Nature, it is no more than what may be
reasonably expected that my Account of their Generation, should be
follow'd with some very extraordinary unnatural Births, monstrous
Productions of another Kind, and wonderful Conceptions.

The Heathen Philosophers, were so prejudic'd to the Opinion of Woman's
being an imperfect Animal, (alledging that Nature always propos'd to
herself the Generation of Males as being the most accomplish'd piece of
Workmanship;) that they look'd upon Woman as a Monster in Nature; but
the Scriptures teach us, that Man and Woman are equally perfect in their
Kind, and Nature cannot be suppos'd to produce more Monsters than
perfect Beings, which must be the Case, if this Opinion were allow'd,
Women being more numerous than the Men.

Monsters are deprav'd Conceptions, defin'd by the Ancients to be
excursions of Nature, and are always Vicious, either in Figure,
Situation, Magnitude, or Number. When they bear the resemblance of a
Beast, they are said to be vicious in Figure; when the Parts are
disproportion'd, as that one Part is too big for the other; (which is a
thing very common by reason of some Excrescence) they are vicious in
Magnitude; if the Ears were on the Face, or the Eyes on the Breast, &c.
as was seen in a Monster born at _Revanna_ in _Italy_, in the Year 1570,
They are vicious in Situation, and when having two Heads or four Hands,
and two Bodies join'd, as had a Monster born at _Zarzara_ in the Year
1540, they are vicious in Number.

In the Reign of _Henry_ the 3d, there was a Woman deliver'd of a Child,
having two Heads, four Arms, and two Bodies which were join'd down to
the Navel. The Heads were so plac'd that they look'd contrary ways. It
was the Female Sex, and both Heads would speak, laugh and cry; and both
Eat and be Hungry together, but there was but one Fundament to disburden
Nature; sometimes one would Speak, and the other would keep silence, and
sometimes both speak at the same time. It liv'd several Years, but one
of them surviving the other, it carried the Dead one so long, that at
last it fainted with the Burden. And at a Village call'd _Ubaten_ in
_Flanders_, a Child was Born which had two Heads and four Arms,
appearing like two Maids joyn'd together, having two Arms lifted up
between and above the Heads, the Thighs being plac'd as it were cross
one another.

In the Year 1579, A Monster was Born in _France_, cover'd all over with
Hair like a Beast, its Navel being in the place where his Nose should
have been, his Eyes plac'd in the Situation of the Mouth; and its Mouth
was in the Chin. It was of the Male-kind, and liv'd but a few Days,
affrighting all that beheld it. And near _Elselling_ in _Germany_, in
the Year 1529, there was a Boy Born with one Head and one Body, having
four Ears, four Arms, and four Feet, and but two Thighs, and two Legs:
This Birth, in the Opinion of the Learned, proceeded from a Redundancy
of Seed beyond what was sufficient for one Child, but not enough for
Twins, wherefore Nature Form'd what she could. There might be many other
particular Instances given of Monstrous Births, as some sticking
together by the Bellies, others by the Breech; some Born without Arms or
Legs others without Heads, yet have they liv'd for some time, till want
of Sustenance made them pine away and Die, as having no place to receive
it, and others with Heads like Dogs, Wolves, Bears, and other Beasts.
But I shall proceed to the cause of their Generation.

The Natural Cause of Generation of Monsters, according to the Ancients,
is either in the Matter, or in the Agent; in the Seed or in the Womb:
The Matter may be unable to perform its Office two ways; by Defect, or
by Excess: By Defect, when a Child hath but one Arm, or one Leg, &c.
and by Excess, when it hath three Hands or two Heads. The Agent or Womb
may be in Fault several ways, as in the forming Faculty, which may be
too strong or too weak, by which a deprav'd Figure is oftentimes
produc'd, the ill Conformation of the place of Conception will cause a
Monstrous Birth; and the imaginative Power at the time of Conception, is
so forcible, that it stamps a Character of the thing upon the Child; so
that the Child of an Adulteress, by the strength of Imagination may have
a nearer resemblance of her Husband, than of the Person who begat it.
And some Histories mention, that through this Imaginative Faculty, a
Woman at the time of Conception, beholding the Picture of a Blackamoor,
produc'd a Child resembling an Æthiopian.

Monsters are sometimes Engender'd by unseasonable amorous Embraces, as
when a Man enters on the Pleasures of Venus at a time as the monthly
Flowings are upon his Wife; For this being against Nature, it is no
wonder that it should produce an unnatural Offspring. If therefore a
Man's desire be never so great for Copulation at such a time, yet the
Woman ought not to admit of his Embraces; the issue of those unclean
Embraces proving often Monstrous, or dull and heavy, and Defective in
their Understandings.

Sometimes by a corruption of Seed, Monstrous Shapes are form'd, which by
some is ascrib'd to the bad Influence of the Planets, that were
predominant at the time of Conception; and sometimes the straightness of
the Womb is attended with many Inconveniencies, for Nature not having
sufficient room to frame her Work in, the Child is rumpled up, which
occasions some to have hump'd Backs, crooked Arms, and Legs, round
Shoulders, Wry Necks, and the like.

The divine Cause of these Monstrous Generations, proceeds from the
permissive Will of our Great Creator, who many times suffers Parents to
bring forth such Deform'd Creatures as a Punishment for their Lust: And
some Authors are of Opinion, that outward deformity of Body is generally
a Sign of the Pollution of the Heart, as a Curse upon the Child for the
Incontinency of the Parents.

In the Writings of some Authors mention is made of Monsters engender'd
by infernal Spirits; and as the Scriptures give us to understand that
the Angels being taken with the Beauty of the Daughters of Men, went in
unto them, and that from such a Conjunction, Giants were Born, so we may
infer that if Angels can mix Amorously with Women, and engender
Children, the Devils who only differ from Angels by their Fall, may also
draw Women into immodest Pleasures, and Defile them with their Embraces:
But it is highly inconsistent to suppose that our Creator who is all
Purity, would permit the worst of Spirits to propogate his diabolical
Offspring.

Devils assuming to themselves Human Shapes, in the opinion of Ancient
Writers, may abuse both Men and Women, and with wicked People use carnal
Copulation. St. _Austin_ yields to this Notion, and that Generation may
thereby be effected; but his Opinion was grounded more upon the
depositions of Melancholly superstitious Persons, than from any
demonstrable Proofs; and 'tis impossible that such an unnatural
Conjunction can produce a humane Creature, though some will have it that
it may, and that his Malice shall be a Sign of his Extraction.

The _Rabbins_ beleived that the _Silvani_, _Pans_ and _Fauni_, call'd
_Incubus's_ and the _Tutelar_ Gods, were Creatures left imperfect the
first _Friday_ Evening, and not finish'd by God, as being prevented by
the ensuing Sabbath; for this reason they alledg'd, these Spirits love
Mountains and dark Places only, and never appear but in the Night time:
And the _Incubus's_ not only Court and desire to Caress Women, but have
actually Caress'd them.

_Hierenimus Cardanus_ writes of a Maid which was got with Child by a
Devil, she thinking it had been a fair young Man who had Enjoy'd her;
and some Witches fancy they have been at the Sabbath, and Caress'd by
the Devil, whose Privy Parts were full of Bristles, Scaly, and the Seed
cold as Ice; but this has proceeded only from a distracted Brain:
Besides we learn from Scripture that Devils being pure Spirits, are
quite different Substances from those of Men. That they have neither
Flesh nor Blood, nor Privities, and consequently no Seed for Generation.
That though they sometimes assume Bodies, these Bodies are only form'd
of Air, and do not Live, neither can they exercise the Operations of
Life: That having no occasion to hope for Posterity, as being Eternal
and Unhappy, they cannot be suppos'd to be desirous of perpetuating
their Species or to take pleasure in the Embraces of Women.

The Stories of Women having Commerce with Devils, are very Fabulous, and
proceed chiefly from Dreams and Nocturnal Illusions; a Lecherous and
Melancholly Woman seiz'd with the Night Mare, may verily beleive that
the Devil Caresses her; especially if her Fancy is taken up with Tales
of Witches. _Leo Africanus_ tells us, That what is attributed to
Devils, is committed by Lascivious Men, and Lecherous Women, who
perswade others, that they are Caress'd by Devils. The Witches of the
Kingdom of _Fez_, according to History, are very desirous that People
should beleive them to be familiar with Devils, and for that Reason
endeavour to tell surprizing Stories to those that consult them; they do
not require any Fees from handsome Women that come to see them, but only
intimate the Desire their Master has to Caress them for a Night. The
Husbands take these Impostures for Truth, and surrender their Wives to
the Gods and the Winds. Night being come, the brawny Sorcerer (who
Employs the Persons abovemention'd, to ensnare fine Women to his
Caresses) Embraces the fair one closely, and Enjoys her instead of the
Devil. If this Ignorance and Superstition prevail'd in this Kingdom, I
doubt not but it would very much Pleasure the frolicking Libertines.


       *       *       *       *       *

_Extraordinary Conceptions_.


Before I begin to trace any Particulars of extraordinary Conceptions, I
shall insert a surprizing Account of a Woman that went Twenty five Years
with Child, from the Writings of Monsieur _Baile_, which contains a
great deal of Variety relating to untimely Generations.

_Margaret Matthieu_ a _Cloth-worker_'s Wife at _Tholouse_ in _France_,
in the Year 1653, and towards the Ninth Month of her Reckoning, had the
Pains of Woman's Labour upon her at Church; and some part of the Waters
being already voided, she acquainted the People about her, that she
fear'd she should be Deliver'd in the Church. Immediately she was
carried to a Neighbouring House, and her Pains abating upon the Relief
she there met with, she was afterwards convey'd Home, where her Pains
return'd with more Violence than before. Upon this, Doctor _Cartier_,
and Doctor _Mulatier_ two famous Physicians, and Mr. _Cortade_ a very
skilful Surgeon were sent for, and endeavour'd, tho' in vain, to give
her Relief. She continued for two Months under the torture of these
violent Pains, and voided Clots of Blood without Fibres or any carnous
Matter. Afterwards she voided a white Humour, that was sometimes
tinctur'd with Blood; and her Breasts were fill'd with an extraordinary
quantity of Milk. About the Fifth Month the Flux of the Blood ceas'd,
and she recover'd her Strength by Degrees, being still incommoded with a
troublesome Load in Her Belly, and never easy but when she lay upon her
Reins.

From the Year 1653 till the Year 1678, she suffer'd now and then as
violent Pains as those of Child-birth. When they attack'd her most
severely, she entreated the Surgeon to rip up her Belly, and so put an
end to her Misery. She was troubled with frequent Swoonings, and
unaccountable Longings for certain sorts of Aliment. Some of the Women
about her affirm'd, that they saw the Child move several times; but the
Surgeon and the Apothecary, who observ'd her very narrowly, and were
frequently call'd, could never perceive any other Motion than that which
attended the Mother's turning from one side to the other; for then the
Lump fell to the side upon which she lay.

During this space of time, which was Twenty five Years and some Months,
this Woman had several fits of Sickness, and at last died of a
continual Fever, in _January_ 1678, being in the Sixty second Year of
her Age.

The next Day after she was Dead, Mr. _Cortade_, open'd her Corps, in the
presence of Monsieurs _Gaillart_, _Baile_, _Laborde_ and _Grangeron_ all
famous Physicians; and of Mr. _Labat_ and _Corboneau_, two noted
Anatomists. Having cut up the Muscles, and the _Peritonæum_, they found
the Cawl schirous, and somewhat carnous, and about two Fingers breadth
thick. 'Twas stretched over the Mass they sought for and adher'd to it.
When they lifted it up, they turn'd over the whole Heap, towards the
Breast of the Deceas'd Person, and then they had some Apprehension that
the shapeless Mass was a Child: At first View they doubted it, because
'twas found out of the Womb, but their Doubts were quickly dispell'd,
when they put a Knife into it and felt the Bones, and saw Nails and
Toes upon one of the Feet, that they separated from the Mass.

Before they meddled further with the Mass, they had a mind to see what
Condition the parts of the _Abdomen_ were in, and particularly the Womb,
upon which they found a Body, which being hard like a Stone, enclos'd a
great Ulcer that spread its self over the Bottom of the Womb. Upon the
Womb side it had a Cavity full of white and thick _Pus_, without any
noisome Smell. On the Opposite Side 'twas hollow, and resembled the
convex Side of an Oister. The rest of the Womb was in its Natural State,
and they met with no considerable Accident in the Neighbouring parts.

They cut out the Mass, and carried it to the Surgeon's House, to be
view'd at their leisure. The whole Mass was encompass'd with a callous
Matter, under which they found all the Parts of a Child harden'd and
half putrified; and these weigh'd Eight Pound. They cut up all the
_Viscera_ in the three Cavities, the particulars whereof may be read in
Mr. _Baile_'s Book of Anatomy. This is the Account given by Mr. _Baile_.
I come now to extraordinary Conceptions.

Some Authors affirm, that a young Man having spilt some Seed in a Bath,
a Girl afterwards Bathing in the same Water, the Seed was suck'd in by
the Girls Womb, and she became with Child. But Monsieur _Dionis_ is not
of this Opinion: He will not allow the Womb an attractive Faculty, so as
to suck up from the outer Extremity of the Neck, and oblige it to repair
to its Cavity. And the Seed being a Liquor, would be so blended with the
Water, that 'tis impossible all its particles should rally, and continue
their Activity and prolifick Quality, till their Arrival in the Womb.

And the History reported by _Riolanus_ favours the Opinion against those
who maintain that Generation may be perform'd by shedding of the Seed on
the Cabia of a Woman's Privities. The _Vagina_ of the Woman mention'd by
this Writer, was shut up with Scars after a troublesome Child-birth, to
such a Degree as only to leave a small Hole for the passage of the Terms
and Urine, through which also pass'd the Husband's Seed that got her
with Child; this might not hinder these two Persons from Copulating
strictly; nay, there must have been a strict Alliance and the Womb, by
contracting of the Passage, must in this Case have drawn the Seed as
greedily as an hungry Stomach attracts the Victuals by the Mouth.

Some Persons have believ'd that a Woman may Engender, without the
Application of a Man's Privities. They tell us of a Woman that was got
with Child in the Embraces of her She-Companion, who but a little before
came from her Husband's Arms: And of a young Woman that was found
Breeding by no other Cause than her Father's having by chance Polluted
himself in the same Bed where she was: But these Stories seem to be
contriv'd to cover the Lasciviousness of Women, and conceal the Vice of
an impure Love.

There is a Story in some Authors, that having put Human Seed into a Viol
close stopp'd, and plac'd it for some time in a Dunghill that was
moderately hot; they observ'd that the Particles drew up themselves in
such Order, as to assume the Form of a Child. This (say they) comes to
pass after the same manner as the Forming of a Chick in an Egg, which
requires only a temperate Heat to Hatch it. But they agree, that 'twas
impossible to Nourish this Infant, which according to them, perish'd
before 'twas intirely Form'd. If this Observation were true, it would
make us believe that the whole Matter of which the Child is Form'd
proceeds from the Man. But this Story wants Confirmation, as does
likewise the following Relation Communicated in a Letter by Mr. _Donat_
Surgeon to the Army in _Italy_, relating to a Man's Conception.

_I am at this very time employ'd in tending a Person of Quality that's
come a great way off. In the right Side of his_ Scrotum _he had a great
Lump, bigger than the Head of a Child; which I cut off, and afterwards
ty'd up the Spermatick Artery. This Lump was a Mass of Flesh, all over
Spermatick, and very Solid, with very hard Bones in every part. 'Twas
contain'd in an After-birth with a great deal of Water. The Spermatick
Vessels which perform'd the Office of those we call Umbilical, were
overgrown much beyond their Natural size. The Circumstances that
occasion'd this Generation, confirms the Effect that follow'd. In_ June
_last, the Gentleman us'd a great deal of Liberty with a certain Lady,
without coming to actual Enjoyment; upon which he was seiz'd with a
cutting pain in the right Testicle, which after two Hours became
insensible. In process of time a Tumour rose by degrees, which was
joined to the Testicle, and was as big as a_ Turkey'_Egg. The 8th of_
December _last, this Gentleman came hither incognito; but put off the
Operation 'till this time, by reason of the cold Season. In the mean
time the Swelling increas'd so much, that the_ Scrotum _being uncapable
of a greater Extension; it reach'd all over the Groin, and I had a great
deal of trouble in tying the Spermatick Vessels at Rings of the Abdomen.
This is an Experiment that shews, that the whole Substance of Man is
contain'd in the Male Seed; and that Women furnish only the Vessel, and
the Substance of Growth and Nourishment. I have preserv'd this
Production to justify the Truth of my Assertion._

Donat.

Sisteron, _May_ the 3d. 1697.

FINIS.