The fort of Detroit was originally constructed to overawe the
neighbouring Indian nations, and its military importance as the key of
the upper lakes appears to have been well known to them. But, neither
possessing battering cannon nor understanding the art of attacking
fortified places, they could only reduce them by stratagem or famine,
and Detroit could always be supplied with provisions by water. In the
year 1763, the Indian chief, Pontiac, whose name has already appeared,
(page 164), formed a powerful confederacy of the different tribes, for
the purpose of revenging their past wrongs and of preventing their total
extirpation, which they were erroneously led to believe was
contemplated. In a sudden, general, and simultaneous irruption on the
British frontier, they obtained possession, chiefly by stratagem, of
Michilimakinack,[77] Presqu'île, and several smaller posts; but there
still remained three fortresses formidable alike by their strength and
position, which it was necessary the Indians should subdue before they
could reap any permanent advantage from their successes. These were
Detroit, Niagara, and Pittsburg; and the first and last, although so
remote from each other, were invested almost at the same moment. The
consummate address, which the Indians displayed in this alarming war,
was supported by a proportionate degree of courage, determination, and
perseverance; nor ever did they approve themselves a more stubborn and
formidable enemy than in this final stand against the encroachments of
European dominion and civilization in North America. General Amherst,
sensible of the danger, sent immediate succours to those two western
garrisons, and thus prevented their fall. Captain Dalzell, after
conducting, in July, a strong reinforcement to Detroit, was induced to
think that he could surprise the Indian force encamped about three miles
from the fort, and he sat out at night with 270 men, adopting the most
judicious precautions for the secrecy and good order of his march. But
the Indians, apprized of his design, were prepared to defeat it, and
every step from the fort only conducted the English troops further into
the jaws of destruction. Their advance was suddenly arrested by a sharp
fire on their front, which was presently followed by a similar discharge
on their rear, and then succeeded by destructive vollies from every
side. In the darkness neither the position nor the numbers of the
Indians could be ascertained. Dalzell was slain early, and his whole
detachment was on the brink of irretrievable confusion and ruin when
Captain Grant, the next in command, perceiving that a retreat, now the
only resource, could only be accomplished by a resolute attack, promptly
rallied the survivors, who, steadily obeying his orders, charged the
Indians with so much spirit and success as to repulse them on all sides
to some distance. Having thus extricated themselves from immediate
peril, the British hastily regained the shelter of the fort, with the
loss of 70 killed and 40 wounded; and the Indians, unable to reduce the
fort by a regular siege, and pausing long enough to ascertain that the
garrison was completely on its guard against stratagem and surprise,
broke up their camp and abandoned the vicinity of Detroit.

The Indians, thus grievously disappointed in their designs on Detroit
and Pittsburg, now closely beleaguered Niagara, which they justly
considered as not less important. They hoped to reduce it by famine, and
on the 14th of September, surrounding a convoy of provisions which had
nearly reached its destination, they succeeded in making it their prey
by a sudden attack, in which 70 of the British soldiers were slain.
Shortly after, as a schooner was crossing Lake Erie with supplies for
Detroit, she was attacked by a numerous fleet of canoes, in which were
nearly 400 Indians. But this attempt was less successful, and, after a
warm engagement, the Indian flotilla was repulsed with considerable
loss, as, in a conflict with an armed vessel, they were exposed to the
same disadvantages which attended their operations against fortified
places. Niagara having at length been powerfully reinforced and well
supplied, the Indians abandoned all hope of reducing it, and thenceforth
confined themselves to their wonted predatory hostility. In the spring
and summer of the following year, the British troops attacked them with
such vigour and success, that they were compelled to propose, in Indian
phrase, to _bury the hatchet_; and in September a treaty of peace was
concluded, the conditions of which were dictated by the English.[78]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 61: The captain of the spies was killed and scalped on the
march. "Thus fell the brave, generous, and patriotic McCulloch, captain
of the spies,"--and in a foot note a few pages before--"Captain
McCulloch, of the spies, scalped an Indian, whom he killed in the
engagement," in Upper Canada! We quote from Brown's-American History, so
it appears that at least one patriotic American could _scalp_ as well as
the Indians!]

[Footnote 62: Christie's Memoirs.]

[Footnote 63: Christie's Memoirs.]

[Footnote 64: The American historian, Brown, observes: "In the
meanwhile, Michilimakinack surrendered to the British without
resistance. The indefatigable Brock, with a reinforcement of 400
regulars, arrived at Maiden; and several Indian tribes, before
hesitating in the choice of sides, began to take their ground and array
themselves under the British standard." Vol. i, page 64.--100 regulars!]

[Footnote 65: Now Colonel Glegg, of Thursteston Hall, Cheshire.]

[Footnote 66: His age was then about forty.]

[Footnote 67: The American historian, Thomson, in his "Sketches of the
War," says that General Hull surrendered "to a body of troops inferior
in _quality_ as well as number!" and he adds: "When General Brock said
that the force at his disposal authorized him to require the surrender,
he must have had a very exalted opinion of the prowess of his own
soldiers, or a very mistaken one of those who were commanded by the
American general."]

[Footnote 68: Including four brass field pieces, captured with General
Burgoyne, at Saratoga, in 1777, and which were retaken by the Americans,
at the battle of the Thames, in October, 1813.]

[Footnote 69: Afterwards named the Detroit.]

[Footnote 70: Appendix A, Section 2, No. 1. Jefferson's Correspondence.]

[Footnote 71: Christie's Memoirs.]

[Footnote 72: Doubtless an error for 1330, the entire British force.]

[Footnote 73: There is a tradition in the editor's family, that one of
its members removed from Guernsey to England early in the seventeenth
century, and that a son of his, a clergyman, settled in the island of
Barbadoes, whence he or his family emigrated to the then British
provinces of North America, now the United States.]

[Footnote 74: James' Military Occurrences.]

[Footnote 75: For his revolutionary services, see Appendix A, Section 2,
No. 2.]

[Footnote 76: Howison's Upper Canada. London, 1821.]

[Footnote 77: The British garrison was surprised, not being aware of the
war, and the Indians butchered nearly all the whites, in number about
100. An English trader, concealed in the house of one of the French
inhabitants, beheld the massacre from an aperture which afforded him a
view of the area of the fort. He describes it as follows: "I beheld, in
shapes the foulest and most terrible, the ferocious triumphs of
barbarian conquerors. The dead were scalped and mangled; the dying were
writhing and shrieking under the insatiated knife and tomahawk, and from
the bodies of some, ripped open, their butchers were drinking the blood
scooped up in the hollows of joined hands, and quaffed amid shouts of
rage and victory."]

[Footnote 78: Grahame's History of the United States.]


CHAPTER XII.


The following letters[79] relate chiefly to the enterprize against
Detroit, and, although not in the chronological order we have hitherto
observed, will form the subject of this chapter.


_Major-General Brock to Sir George Prevost_.

    Head Quarters, Detroit, Aug. 16, 1812.

    I hasten to apprize your excellency of the capture of this
    very important post: 2,500 troops have this day surrendered
    prisoners of war, and about 25 pieces of ordnance have been
    taken without the sacrifice of a drop of British blood. I had
    not more than 700 troops, including militia, and about 600
    Indians, to accomplish this service. When I detail my good
    fortune, your excellency will be astonished. I have been
    admirably supported by Colonel Proctor, the whole of my staff,
    and I may justly say, every individual under my command.


_Major-General Brock to Sir George Prevost_.

    Head Quarters, Detroit, Aug. 17, 1812.[80]

    I have had the honor of informing your excellency, that the
    enemy effected his passage across the Detroit river, on the
    12th ultimo, without opposition; and that, after establishing
    himself at Sandwich, he had ravaged the country as far as the
    Moravian town. Some skirmishes occurred between the troops
    under Lieut.-Colonel St. George and the enemy, upon the river
    Canard, which uniformly terminated in his being repulsed with
    loss. I judged it proper to detach a force down the river
    Thames, capable of acting in conjunction with the garrison of
    Amherstburg offensively, but Captain Chambers, whom I had
    appointed to direct this detachment, experienced difficulties
    that frustrated my intentions. The intelligence received from
    that quarter admitting of no delay, Colonel Proctor was
    directed to assume the command, and his force was soon after
    increased with 60 rank and file of the 41st regiment.

    In the mean time, the most strenuous measures were adopted to
    counteract the machinations of the evil-disposed, and I soon
    experienced the gratification of receiving voluntary offers of
    service from that portion of the embodied militia the most
    easily collected. In the attainment of this important point,
    gentlemen of the first character and influence shewed an
    example highly creditable to them; and I cannot, on this
    occasion, avoid mentioning the essential assistance I derived
    from John M'Donell, Esq., his majesty's attorney-general, who,
    from the beginning of the war, has honored me with his
    services as my provincial aide-de-camp. A sufficiency of boats
    being collected at Long Point for the conveyance of 300 men,
    the embarkation took place on the 8th instant, and in five
    days we arrived in safety at Amherstburg.

    I found that the judicious arrangements which had been adopted
    immediately upon the arrival of Colonel Proctor, had compelled
    the enemy to retreat, and take shelter under the guns of his
    fort: that officer commenced operations by sending strong
    detachments across the river, with a view of cutting off the
    enemy's communication with his reserve. This produced two
    smart skirmishes on the 5th and 9th instant, in which the
    enemy's loss was considerable, whilst ours amounted to 3
    killed and 13 wounded; amongst the latter, I have particularly
    to regret Captain Muir and Lieutenant Sutherland, of the 41st
    regiment; the former an officer of great experience, and both
    ardent in his majesty's service. Batteries had likewise been
    commenced opposite Fort Detroit, for one 18-pounder, two 12,
    and two 5-1/2-inch mortars, all of which opened on the evening
    of the 15th; (having previously summoned Brigadier-General
    Hull to surrender;) and although opposed by a well-directed
    fire from seven 24-pounders, such was their construction,
    under the able direction of Captain Dixon, of the Royal
    Engineers, that no injury was sustained from its effect.

    The force at my disposal being collected in the course of the
    15th, in the neighbourhood of Sandwich, the embarkation took
    place a little after daylight on the following morning; and by
    the able arrangements of Lieutenant Dewar, of the
    quartermaster-general's department, the whole was in a short
    time landed without the smallest confusion at Spring Well, a
    good position, three miles west of Detroit. The Indians, who
    had in the mean time effected their landing two miles below,
    moved forward and occupied the woods, about a mile and a half
    on our left.

    The force, which I instantly directed to march against the
    enemy, consisted of 30 artillery, 250 41st regiment, 50 royal
    Newfoundland regiment, 400 militia, and about 600 Indians, to
    which were attached three 6-pounders and two 3-pounders. The
    services of Lieutenant Troughton, commanding the royal
    artillery, an active and intelligent officer, being required
    in the field, the direction of the batteries was entrusted to
    Captain Hall and the marine department, and I cannot withhold
    my entire approbation of their conduct on this occasion.

    I crossed the river, with an intention of waiting in a strong
    position the effect of our force upon the enemy's camp, and in
    the hope of compelling him to meet us in the field; but
    receiving information upon landing, that Colonel M'Arthur, an
    officer of high reputation, had left the garrison three days
    before with a detachment of 500 men, and hearing, soon
    afterwards, that his cavalry had been seen that morning three
    miles in our rear, I decided on an immediate attack.
    Accordingly, the troops advanced to within one mile of the
    fort, and having ascertained that the enemy had taken little
    or no precaution towards the land side, I resolved on an
    assault, whilst the Indians penetrated his camp.
    Brigadier-General Hull, however, prevented this movement, by
    proposing a cessation of hostilities, for the purpose of
    preparing terms of capitulation. Lieut.-Colonel J. M'cDonell
    and Captain Glegg were accordingly deputed by me on this
    mission, and returned within an hour with the conditions,
    which I have the honor herewith to transmit. Certain
    considerations afterwards induced me to agree to the two
    supplementary articles.

    The force thus surrendered to his majesty's arms cannot be
    estimated at less than 2,500 men. In this estimate, Colonel
    M'cArthur's detachment is included, as he surrendered,
    agreeably to the terms of capitulation, in the course of the
    evening, with the exception of 200 men, whom he left escorting
    a valuable convoy at some little distance in his rear; but
    there can be no doubt the officer commanding will consider
    himself equally bound by the capitulation.

    The enemy's aggregate force was divided into two troops of
    cavalry; one company of artillery, regulars; the 4th United
    States' regiment; detachments of the 1st and 3d United States'
    regiments, volunteers; three regiments of the Ohio militia;
    one regiment of the Michigan territory.

    Thirty-three pieces of brass and iron ordnance have already
    been secured.

    When this contest commenced, many of the Indian nations were
    engaged in active warfare with the United States,
    notwithstanding the constant endeavours of this government to
    dissuade them from it. Some of the principal chiefs happened
    to be at Amherstburg, trying to procure a supply of arms and
    ammunition, which for years had been withheld, agreeably to
    the instructions received from Sir James Craig, and since
    repeated by your excellency.

    From that moment they took a most active part, and appeared
    foremost on every occasion; they were led yesterday by Colonel
    Elliott and Captain M'Kee, and nothing could exceed their
    order and steadiness. A few prisoners were taken by them
    during the advance, whom they treated with every humanity; and
    it affords me much pleasure in assuring your excellency, that
    such was their forbearance and attention to what was required
    of them, that the enemy sustained no other loss in men than
    what was occasioned by the fire of our batteries.

    The high sense I entertain of the abilities and judgment of
    Lieut-Colonel Myers, induced me to appoint him to the
    important command at Niagara; it was with reluctance I
    deprived myself of his assistance, but I had no other
    expedient; his duties, as head of the quartermaster-general's
    department, were performed to my satisfaction by
    Lieut.-Colonel Nichol, quartermaster-general of the militia.

    Captain Glegg, my aide-de-camp, will have the honor of
    delivering this dispatch to your excellency; he is charged
    with the colours taken at the capture of Fort Detroit, and
    those of the 4th United States' regiment.

    Captain Glegg is capable of giving your excellency every
    information respecting the state of this province, and I shall
    esteem myself highly indebted to your excellency, to afford
    him that protection to which his merit and length of service
    give him a powerful claim.[81] I have the honor to be, &c.

    P.S.--I have the honor to enclose a copy of a proclamation
    which I issued immediately on taking possession of this
    country.

    I should have mentioned in the body of my dispatch, the
    capture of the Adams; she is a fine vessel, and recently
    repaired, but without arms.


_Sir George Prevost to Major-General Brock._

    Head Quarters, Montreal, Aug. 30, 1812.

    I received on the 25th, whilst at St. John's, your dispatch,
    by express from Detroit, of the 16th instant. I do most
    sincerely congratulate you upon the complete success which has
    attended your measures for the preservation of Amherstburg.
    The surrender of Detroit, the capture of General Hull's army
    with so large a proportion of ordnance, are circumstances of
    high importance to our country, and which have evinced your
    talents as an officer in command, and reflect honor upon you,
    and upon Lieut.-Colonel St. George and Colonel Proctor.

    I propose sending an aide-de-camp to England with your short
    dispatch, together with such details as I am in possession of,
    respecting Brigadier-General Hull's previous invasion of Upper
    Canada and of his foiled attempts to invest Amherstburg; but I
    shall delay his departure from hence until the 1st of
    September, in hopes of obtaining from you before that time
    further particulars of the operations which led to General
    Hull's disgrace.

    Well aware of the difficulties you have surmounted Tor the
    preservation of your government entire, I shall endeavour to
    do justice to your merit in my report to his majesty's
    minister upon the success which has crowned your energy and
    zeal.

    A warrant, giving to you more extensive power over the
    sentence of such general courts martial as you may be called
    on to assemble, was signed by me ten days since, and has I
    hope reached you.

    I am in hourly expectation of receiving from General Dearborn
    intelligence respecting the reception of the proposed
    suspension of hostilities, in consequence of the revocation of
    the orders in council, which are the plea for war in the
    American cabinet; and also whether Mr. Baker has been allowed
    to assume, _pro tempore_, the character of a chargé d'affaires
    at Washington, where Mr. Foster had left him in a
    demi-official capacity. I consider the arrangement entered
    into by General Dearborn with Colonel Baynes, requiring the
    confirmation of the president, to establish its sacredness.

    The king's government having most unequivocally expressed to
    me their desire to preserve peace with the United States, that
    they might, uninterrupted, pursue, with the whole disposable
    force of the country, the great interest committed in Europe,
    I have endeavoured to be instrumental in the accomplishment of
    their views; but I consider it most fortunate to have been
    enabled to do so without interfering with your operations on
    the Detroit.

    I have sent you men, money, and stores of every kind.


_Sir George Prevost to Major-General Brock._

    Head Quarters, Montreal, Aug. 31, 1812.

    I had scarcely closed the letters I addressed to you
    yesterday, when an aide-de-camp from Major-General Dearborn
    made his appearance, and delivered to me the dispatch herewith
    transmitted. It will expose to your view the disposition of
    the president of the United States on the provisional measure
    temporarily agreed upon between the American
    commander-in-chief and myself, in consequence of an earnest
    desire not to widen the breach existing between the two
    countries, the revocation of the orders in council having
    removed the plea used in congress for a declaration of war
    against Great Britain.

    I am much disappointed that the particulars of the surrender
    of Detroit have not as yet reached me, particularly as my
    aide-de-camp, Captain Coore, is to leave Montreal this evening
    for Quebec, where a ship of war is on the point of sailing for
    Halifax, from whence I expect the admiral will give him a
    conveyance for England.

    Being unacquainted with the conditions attached to the
    surrender of Brigadier-General Hull's army, and giving scope
    to your expression of prisoners of war, I have made
    arrangements for increasing their security against any attempt
    to rescue them, by ordering Captain Gray to proceed with two
    flank companies to Prescot.

[The dispatch from General Dearborn, dated Greenbush, August 26, was to
announce the discontinuance of the temporary armistice agreed to between
him and Colonel Baynes, in four days after the receipt of the
communication at the frontier posts in Canada. The American general
added: "If a suspension of offensive operations shall have been mutually
consented to between General Hull and the commanding officer of the
British forces at and near Detroit, as proposed, they will respectively
be authorized, at the expiration of four days subsequent to their
receiving copies of this communication, to consider themselves released
from any agreement thus entered into."]

      *      *      *      *      *

As we have already commented on Sir George Prevost's management of the
war, and shall have occasionally to do so again, we gladly give him
credit for the very handsome manner in which he spoke of Major-General
Brock, in his dispatch to Earl Bathurst, one of his majesty's principal
secretaries of state, announcing the surrender of Detroit, and dated
Montreal, 26th August, 1812.


    "It was under these circumstances at this critical period, and
    when the enemy were beginning to consult their security by
    entrenching themselves, that General Brock entered
    Amherstburg with a reinforcement, which he was fortunately
    enabled to do on the 13th instant, without the smallest
    molestation, in consequence of our decided naval superiority
    on the lakes. To his active and intelligent mind, the
    advantages which his enemy's situation afforded him over them,
    even with his very inferior force, became immediately
    apparent; and that he has not failed most effectually to avail
    himself of those favorable circumstances, your lordship will,
    I trust, be satisfied, from the letter which I have the honor
    of transmitting.

    "Having thus brought to your lordship's view the different
    circumstances which have led to the successful termination of
    the campaign on the western frontier of Upper Canada, I cannot
    withhold from Major-General Brock the tribute of applause so
    justly due to him for his distinguished conduct on this
    occasion; or omit to recommend him, through your lordship, to
    the favorable consideration of his royal highness the prince
    regent, for the great ability and judgment with which he
    planned, and the promptitude, energy, and fortitude with which
    he has effected, the preservation of Upper Canada, with the
    sacrifice of so little British blood in accomplishing so
    important a service.

    "My aide-de-camp, Captain Coore, will have the honor of
    delivering to your lordship this dispatch; and as he is well
    qualified to give your lordship information respecting the
    military resources of this command, I shall beg leave to
    refer your lordship to him for farther particulars."

At the same time, truth compels us to add, that Sir George Prevost took
credit to himself, to which he was not entitled, when he wrote to Lord
Bathurst: "General Brock, relying upon the strong assurances I had given
him of a reinforcement as prompt and as effectual as the circumstances
by which I was placed by this new war would permit me to send, adopted
the most vigorous measures for the safety of that part of the frontier
which had been attacked." And again: "The certainty of the expected
reinforcements, and the weakness of the enemy on the Niagara frontier,
had in the mean time induced General Brock," &c. The last dispatch
which, we believe, Major-General Brock had received from Sir George
Prevost, when on the 6th of August he left York for Detroit, was dated
the 10th and received on the 29th July; and in that dispatch (see page
178) no reinforcements were promised, and indeed offensive operations
were deprecated. The first reinforcement which left Lower for Upper
Canada, appears to have consisted of about 100 men of the Newfoundland
regiment and 50 of the Veterans, which left Quebec on the 30th of July
for Kingston, to strengthen that post; and the adjutant-general, on the
1st of August, (page 211), wrote that Sir George Prevost regretted
extremely his inability to render Major-General Brock more efficient
aid. It was only on the 2d of August that Sir George Prevost promised
an additional reinforcement of four companies of the 49th regiment,
(page 215,) and on the 12th of the same month the remainder of the
regiment (page 218). Mr. Powell confirms this view of the subject in his
admirable letter, page 261. It will be seen in the sequel that, on the
13th of August, the adjutant-general wrote that he had strongly urged
Sir George Prevost to send further reinforcements, as he was sure they
could be spared. As to the remark relative to the weakness of the enemy
on the Niagara frontier, we shall only mention that Major-General Brock
states, in a MS. before us, that it was the strong American force on
that frontier which compelled him to take with him to Detroit only half
of the militia, who volunteered.


_Sir George Prevost to Earl Bathurst._

    Head Quarters, Montreal, Sept. 1, 1812.

    Since I had the honor of transmitting to your lordship my
    letter of the 26th ultimo, in charge of my aide-de-camp,
    Captain Coore, I have received from Major-General Brock a
    dispatch, of which the enclosed is a copy, containing the
    particulars of Brigadier-General Hull's invasion of Upper
    Canada, which has terminated most gloriously to his majesty's
    arms, in that officer's defeat and surrender, as a prisoner of
    war, with the whole of the north-western army, together with
    the fort Detroit, and thirty-three pieces of ordnance.

    I forward this dispatch express, in the expectation of its
    reaching Captain Coore previously to his leaving Canada,
    which, with the colours of the 4th United States' regiment
    accompanying it, I trust that officer will have the honor of
    delivering to your lordship.


_Earl Bathurst to Sir George Prevost._

    DOWNING STREET, October 10, 1812.

    I have had the honor of receiving your dispatch, dated the
    26th August, together with its enclosures, from Major-General
    Brock, and I lost no time in laying intelligence so important
    and satisfactory before his royal highness the prince regent.

    I am commanded by his royal highness to desire you to take the
    earliest opportunity of conveying his royal highness'
    approbation of the able, judicious, and decisive conduct of
    Major-General Brock, of the zeal and spirit manifested by
    Colonel Proctor and the other officers, as well as of the
    intrepidity of the troops under the command of Major-General
    Brock.

    By the united exertions of this little army, the enterprize of
    the American army has been defeated; the territories of his
    majesty in Upper Canada have been secured; and on the enemy's
    fort of Detroit, important to that security, the British
    standard has been happily placed.

    You will inform Major-General Brock that his royal highness,
    taking into consideration all the difficulties by which
    Major-General Brock was surrounded from the time of the
    invasion of the province by the American army, under the
    command of General Hull, and the singular judgment, firmness,
    skill, and courage, with which he was enabled to surmount them
    so effectually--has been pleased to appoint him an extra
    knight of the most honorable order of the bath.

      *      *      *      *      *

The following letter strikes us as singularly appropriate and pleasing,
and as creditable to him who wrote it as it must have been gratifying to
him who received it. Mr. Powell, who, we believe, was then one of the
puisné judges, was chief justice of Upper Canada in the year 1817.


_William Dummer Powell, Esq., to Major-General Brock_.

    KINGSTON, August 27, 1812.

    I cannot persuade myself to offer my hearty congratulations
    through the medium of a third person, and hope you will
    believe that no one sympathizes more cordially than myself in
    your feelings on the late happy event. I shall never again
    regret little disappointments, when I consider to what they
    may lead: had your early representations been attended to and
    produced their proper effect, you would probably not have to
    boast of the most brilliant success, with the most inadequate
    means, which history records. There is something so fabulous
    in the report of a handful of troops, supported by a few raw
    militia, leaving their strong post to invade an enemy of
    double numbers in his own fortress, and making them all
    prisoners without the loss of a man, that, although your
    report may be sanctioned by Sir George Prevost, it seems to me
    that the people of England will be incredulous until they see
    the exterminating boaster a prisoner in London. We find in a
    cover by General Sheaffe, that the first report of the cannon
    taken was one-third short of the real number. I shall hardly
    sleep until I have the satisfaction of hearing particulars of
    the wonderful excursion, for it must not be called a campaign.
    The _veni, vidi, vici_, is again the faithful report. Your
    good fortune in one instance is singular, for if your zeal had
    been thwarted by such adverse winds as frequently occur on the
    lake, the armistice might have intercepted your career. That
    it did not I heartily thank God, and pray that nothing may
    occur to damp the entire satisfaction of yourself and family
    in the glory so well earned. I am impatient to hear from
    Colonel M'Donell, but have no doubt that he justified your
    warmest expectations in every trial. May I beg to be presented
    to Glegg, and that you, Sir, will believe me, &c.


_Chief Justice of Lower Canada, Sewell, to Major-General Brock._

    QUEBEC, Sept. 3, 1812.

    In your present situation, I am perfectly sensible of your
    occupations, and know that your time is precious. Yet I take
    the liberty to intrude upon you with my congratulations upon
    the brilliant success which has attended the measures which
    you have pursued with so much judgment in Upper Canada, and
    the thanks of an individual who feels the benefits which he,
    in common with every other subject of his majesty in British
    America, derives from your exertions.

      *      *      *      *      *

The next letter is from General Maitland,[82] who was colonel of the
49th foot from the 25th May, 1768, to the period of his death, in
February, 1820, or nearly fifty-two years! Major-General Brock held this
gallant veteran in high estimation, having received from him much
attention and kindness, which were continued to some of his relatives
after his fall, and it will be seen that the feeling was mutual.
Although General Maitland was so many years colonel of the 49th, yet we
find that the Marquis of Drogheda held a similar appointment for a
longer period, being colonel of the 18th Hussars from the 3d August,
1762, to October, 1821, when that regiment was disbanded, or above
fifty-nine years!


_General the Honorable Alexander Maitland to Major-General Brock_.

    TOTTERIDGE, October 8, 1812.

    Yesterday being mail day for America, I dispatched my usual
    monthly letter to the regiment, and in which, as I always do,
    I desired to be remembered to you with my best and warmest
    wishes for your health, happiness, and success. I had not then
    heard, but did a few hours after, of your _glorious victory_
    over our most unnatural enemies, (such an one as can hardly be
    equalled in the annals of history,) that of not only beating,
    but taking prisoners, more than double your numbers; and now
    that you have conquered them in the field, I trust that their
    wrong-headed government will be brought to reason and peace,
    for it will prove to them, if they persevere, that they will
    be forced to it, and terms dictated to them. Therefore allow
    me, Sir, with the warmest feelings of an old friend to
    congratulate you, as I do the public, on the essential service
    you have done the country on the present occasion; as I do my
    friend, your aide-de-camp, Captain Glegg, as far as the sphere
    of his duty could assist in the great work; and _I glory to
    say you are both 49-thers_. I could write sheets on the
    subject, but, not to take up your valuable time longer than I
    have done to express my pleasure and feelings, I will stop by
    adding the sincere congratulations of all related to me here
    as well as elsewhere. But I cannot help now observing how
    prophetic I was in what I wrote to Colonel Vincent yesterday
    concerning you, which was, _that if you mere properly
    supported, I thought the enemy would never cross the line of
    your command_, a proof of which I had a few hours afterwards.

    When you see any of our friends of the 49th, pray remember me
    in the kindest manner to them, and I am sure they will thank
    you that they are safe and warm in their quarters in place of
    having a winter campaign in so severe a climate. And now I
    will only add my warmest wishes for your health and happiness,
    and that the same good fortune that has hitherto attended you
    may continue; and I beg that you will be so good as to convey
    the same to my friend, your aide-de-camp. Believe me to be, my
    dear general, &c.

    P.S.--I send this after the mail, which left London last
    night, in hope it may overtake it at Falmouth, as I know the
    packet seldom sails for some days after her time.


_Major-General John Burnet to Sir Isaac Brock, K.B._[83]

    STRABERRY, Ireland, Oct. 11, 1812.

    There has existed too long and too sincere a friendship
    between us for me not to feel the most lively interest in the
    event which has added such _éclat_ to your achievement at my
    old quarter, Detroit.

    To evince to you how much I regard you, and how much I have
    talked of you, a friend of mine at the Horse Guards enclosed
    me the Extraordinary Gazette, saying he knew how much I should
    be gratified: judge then, my friend, of my feelings that you
    had acquitted yourself with such address; and I feel some
    degree of pride that my opinion was so justly formed of your
    conduct, whenever you should have an opportunity to display
    your talents. Accept, then, the very sincere congratulations
    of an old friend on this occasion, and be assured of the
    happiness it gives me, as well as Mrs. Burnet, who is with me,
    and sends her love to you.

    With respect to my situation, I offered my services to go to
    the Peninsula as soon as our promotion took place, and at one
    time flattered myself I should have gone there; but superior
    interest prevailed, and I was placed on the staff of Ireland.
    I first went to Londonderry, but have been here six months, as
    more central to the brigade under my command.

    I have my hands full of business, and little time for private
    correspondence; but I could not resist the impulse on an
    occasion so highly to the honor of an old friend. Believe me,
    my dear Brock, &c.

    P.S.--If Commodore Grant be still alive, pray remember me
    warmly to him and Mrs. Grant.


_Major-General Brock to his Brothers_.

    Head Quarters, Detroit, Aug. 16, 1812.

    Rejoice at my good fortune, and join me in prayers to Heaven.
    I send you a copy of my hasty note to Sir George.

[Here follows his short dispatch of that day. See page 247.]

    Let me hear that you are all united and happy.


_Major-General Brock to his Brothers._

    LAKE ONTARIO, September 3, 1812.

    You will have heard of the complete success which attended the
    efforts I directed against Detroit. I have received so many
    letters from people whose opinion I value, expressive of their
    admiration of the exploit, that I begin to attach to it more
    importance than I was at first inclined. Should the affair be
    viewed in England in the light it is here, I cannot fail of
    meeting reward, and escaping the horror of being placed high
    on a shelf, never to be taken down.

    Some say that nothing could be more desperate than the
    measure; but I answer, that the state of the province admitted
    of nothing but desperate remedies. I got possession of the
    letters my antagonist addressed to the secretary at war, and
    also of the sentiments which hundreds of his army uttered to
    their friends. Confidence in the general was gone, and evident
    despondency prevailed throughout. I have succeeded beyond
    expectation. I crossed the river, contrary to the opinion of
    Colonel Proctor,----, &c.; it is, therefore, no wonder that
    envy should attribute to good fortune what, in justice to my
    own discernment, I must say, proceeded from a cool calculation
    of the _pours_ and _contres_.

    They say that the value of the articles captured will amount
    to 30 or £40,000; in that case, my proportion will be
    something considerable. If it enable me to contribute to your
    comfort and happiness, I shall esteem it my highest reward.
    When I returned Heaven thanks for my amazing success, I
    thought of you all; you appeared to me happy--your late
    sorrows forgotten; and I felt as if you acknowledged that the
    many benefits, which for a series of years I received from
    you, were not unworthily bestowed. Let me know, my dearest
    brothers, that you are all again united. The want of union was
    nearly losing this province without even a struggle, and be
    assured it operates in the same degree in regard to families.

    A cessation of hostilities has taken place along this
    frontier. Should peace follow, the measure will be well; if
    hostilities recommence, nothing could be more unfortunate than
    this pause. I cannot give you freely an account of my
    situation--it is, however, of late much improved. The militia
    have been inspired, by the recent success, with
    confidence--the disaffected are silenced. The 49th have come
    to my aid, besides other troops. I shall see Vincent, I hope,
    this evening at Kingston. He is appointed to the command of
    that post--a most important one. I have withdrawn Plenderleath
    from Niagara to assist him. P---- is sitting opposite to me,
    and desires to be remembered. James Brock is likewise at
    Kingston. I believe he considers it more his interest to
    remain with the 49th than to act as my private secretary;
    indeed, the salary is a mere pittance. Poor Leggatt is dead,
    and has left his family in the most distressing
    circumstances. His wife died last year.

    Major Smelt and Captain Brown have sent me your letters, for
    which I thank you. Let Richard Potenger be assured that his
    letter afforded me the highest gratification. I trust in
    Heaven that the whole of his thoughts will be directed to
    study, and to qualify himself for the holy profession he has
    chosen. Ignorance is despised in most men, but more
    particularly in the clergyman educated at one of the
    universities, who must have neglected so many opportunities of
    acquiring knowledge.

    I received the other day a long letter from Sir Thomas
    Saumarez, from Halifax. I regret the death of the two Harry
    Brocks.[84] I have likewise been particularly unfortunate in
    the loss of two valuable military friends. I begin to be too
    old to form new friendships, and those of my youth are
    dropping off fast.

    General Sheaffe has lately been sent to me. There never was an
    individual so miserably off for the necessary assistance. Sir
    George Prevost has kindly hearkened to my remonstrances, and
    in some measure supplied the deficiency. The 41st is an
    uncommonly fine regiment, but, with few exceptions, badly
    officered. You mention John Tupper[85] in a manner as to leave
    hope that he may still be living. God grant it! He is a great
    favorite of mine, and I should lament any disaster happening
    to him. Perhaps Glegg may be sent home by Sir George, and in
    that case I hope he will allow you to see the colours taken
    from the 4th U.S. regiment. The generality of the English will
    esteem them very little: nothing is prized that is not
    acquired with blood.


    KINGSTON, September 4.

    I this instant receive your letters by Mr. Todd, So honest
    John Tupper is gone! I could not have loved a son of my own
    more ardently. Hostilities I this instant understand are to be
    renewed in four days; and though landed only two hours, I must
    return immediately to Niagara, whence I shall write fully.


_Lieut.-Colonel Nichol, Quartermaster-General of Militia, to
Major-General Brock._

    DETROIT, August 25, 1812.

    I have just been informed by Colonel Proctor that he intends
    sending an express to-morrow to Fort George, which gives me an
    opportunity to forward a few printed copies of your
    proclamation, and to inform you that in order to carry it into
    effect, it has been found absolutely necessary to organize the
    civil government. Under existing circumstances, I have advised
    Colonel Proctor to assume the administration until your
    pleasure is known, to which he has agreed, and the necessary
    arrangements consequent thereto have been adopted and
    promulgated. In Judge Woodward, who has been appointed
    secretary _pro tem_, he will find an able coadjutor; and as
    your object undoubtedly was to tranquillize the public mind
    and to give the inhabitants a proof of the moderation and
    benevolence of his majesty's government, as well as to ensure
    the due administration of the laws, I do not think a more
    judicious choice could have been made. In all the discussions
    which took place on this subject, Colonel Proctor did me the
    honor to consult me; and I have no hesitation in saying, that
    I urged him to the step he has taken, of which I hope you
    will, as it is only temporary, approve. We have had much
    difficulty in collecting the public cattle and horses, and
    have suffered greatly from the predatory spirit of the
    Indians; indeed, their conduct has been infamous. There is
    hardly a house on either side of the river that has not been
    robbed by them; they have taken away the greater part of the
    captured horses and cattle, and without our being able to
    prevent it. It has not been in my power as yet to send a
    statement of all that we have captured, as the property is so
    scattered, but I hope to finish this week. We got upwards of
    £1,200 in money, and have sent down a hundred packs worth, I
    suppose £1,500 more. I have reason to think the captured
    property will not be much under £40,000.

    We have still 350 prisoners to ship off, but I hope to get
    rid of them in a few days. Public confidence seems to be
    partially restored; business is again going on, and I hope
    that the country will become perfectly quiet.

    It is impossible for me to say when I shall get done here. I
    hope, however, it will not be long. I regret that we are not
    able to send you complete returns of every thing; but the
    captured property is in so many different places, and so
    scattered, that it cannot be done.

      *      *      *      *      *


_Extract from a Canadian Newspaper._

    MONTREAL, September 12.

    Last Sunday evening the inhabitants of this city were
    gratified with an exhibition equally novel and interesting.

    That General Hull should have entered into our city so soon,
    at the head of his troops, rather exceeded our expectations.
    We were, however, very happy to see him, and received him with
    all the honors due to his high rank and importance as a public
    character. The following particulars, relative to his journey
    and reception at Montreal, may not be uninteresting to our
    readers:

    It appears that General Hull and suite, accompanied by about
    25 officers and 350 soldiers, left Kingston, under an escort
    of 130 men, commanded by Major Heathcote, of the Newfoundland
    regiment. At Cornwall, the escort was met by Captain Gray, of
    the quartermaster-general's department, who took charge of the
    prisoners of war, and from thence proceeded with them to La
    Chine, where they arrived about two o'clock on Sunday
    afternoon. At La Chine, Captains Richardson and Ogilvie, with
    their companies of Montreal militia, and a company of the
    king's from Lower Chine, commanded by Captain Blackmore,
    formed the escort till they were met by Colonel Auldjo, with
    the remainder of the flank companies of the militia, upon
    which Captain Blackmore's company fell out and presented arms
    as the general and line passed, and then returned to La Chine,
    leaving the prisoners of war to be guarded by the militia
    alone. The line of march then proceeded to the town in the
    following order, viz:

    1. Band of the king's regiment.

    2. The first division of the escort.

    3. General Hull in a carriage, accompanied by Captain Gray.
    Captain Hull and Major Shekleton followed in the second, and
    some wounded officers occupied four others.

    4. The American officers.

    5. The non-commissioned officers and soldiers.

    6. The second division of the escort.

    It unfortunately proved rather late in the evening for the
    vast concourse of spectators assembled to experience that
    gratification they so anxiously looked for. This inconvenience
    was, however, in a great measure remedied by the illuminations
    of the streets through which the line of march passed. When
    they arrived at the general's house, the general was conducted
    in, and presented to his excellency Sir George Prevost, and
    was received with the greatest politeness, and invited to take
    up his residence there during his stay at Montreal. The other
    officers were accommodated at Holmes' hotel, and the soldiers
    lodged in the Quebec barracks. The general appears to be about
    sixty years of age, and is a good looking man, and we are
    informed by those who have had frequent opportunities of
    conversing with him, that he is a man of general information.
    He is communicative, and seems to bear his misfortunes with a
    degree of philosophical resignation that but few men in
    similar circumstances are gifted with. On Thursday last
    General Hull, with eight American officers, left this city for
    the United States, on their parole.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 79: We can discover none from Colonel Baynes on the subject.]

[Footnote 80: This dispatch was published in a Gazette Extraordinary, in
London, on the 6th of October. See page 240.]

[Footnote 81: Captain Glegg was made a brevet-major for the capture of
Detroit. Sir George Prevost's aide-de-camp, Captain Coore, was also made
a brevet-major for taking the dispatches to England.]

[Footnote 82: Created a baronet on the 30th November, 1818.]

[Footnote 83: This letter is apparently written with the left hand, as
if the writer had lost his right.]

[Footnote 84: Henry Frederick Brock, Esq., jurat of the Royal Court of
Guernsey; and Lieutenant Henry Brock, R.N. In his letter, (see page
194,) Sir Thomas Saumarez, speaking of the latter, says: "He was a most
promising young officer, and, had the poor fellow lived, my brother
James would probably have made him a commander this summer."]

[Footnote 85: His nephew, John E. Tupper, Esq., aged twenty, perished at
sea in January, 1812, in the Mediterranean, the vessel in which he was a
passenger from Catalonia to Gibraltar having never been heard of after
sailing. He was educated at Harrow at the same time as Lord Byron, Sir
Robert Peel, &c.]


CHAPTER XIII.


After issuing a proclamation to the inhabitants of the Michigan
territory, by which their private property was secured and their laws
and religion confirmed, and leaving as large a force under Colonel
Proctor as could be spared at Detroit, Major-General Brock hastened to
return to the Niagara frontier; and while on his voyage across Lake
Erie, in the schooner Chippewa, he was met on the 23d of August by the
provincial schooner Lady Prevost, of 14 guns, the commander of which,
after saluting the general with seventeen guns, came on board and gave
him the first intelligence of the armistice which Sir George Prevost had
unfortunately concluded with the American general, Dearborn.
Major-General Brock could not conceal his deep regret and mortification
at the intelligence, which he feared would prevent his contemplated
attack on Sackett's Harbour. Sir George Prevost, early in August, on
hearing of the repeal of the British orders in council, which were the
principal among the alleged causes of the war, had proposed a suspension
of hostilities until the sentiments of the American government were
received on the subject; and to this suspension General Dearborn
readily agreed, with the exception of the forces under General Hull,
who, he said, acted under the immediate orders of the secretary at war.
But, by the terms of the truce, General Hull had the option of availing
himself of its provisions if he thought fit, and that he would gladly
have done so there can be no doubt. Happily, however, owing to the
rapidity of Major-General Brock's movements, the news of the armistice
did not reach the belligerent commanders in time to prevent the
surrender of the one, or to snatch well-earned laurels from the brow of
the other.[86] This armistice was attended with very prejudicial
consequences, as it not only marred the attempt on Sackett's Harbour,
but it rendered unavailing the command of the lakes, which was then held
by the British.[87]

The successful commander, in transmitting by Captain Glegg his
dispatches to the governor-general at Montreal, expressed, through his
aide-de-camp, his intention of proceeding immediately to Kingston, and
from thence to the attack of the naval arsenal at Sackett's Harbour, on
Lake Ontario. Had its destruction been accomplished--and no one can
doubt that this was the proper period to attempt it, as the enemy,
dispirited by the capture of Detroit, would probably have offered but a
feeble resistance--the Americans could not, without much additional
difficulty and future risk of destruction, have built and equipped the
fleet which subsequently gave them the naval ascendancy on that lake,
and enabled them twice in 1813 to capture the capital of Upper Canada.
The armistice, however, caused a delay of nearly a fortnight in the
necessary preparations, as Major-General Brock returned from Detroit to
Fort George on the 24th of August, and the cessation of the truce was
not known to him until his arrival at Kingston, on the 4th of September.
The distance by water between Fort George and Kingston is about 160
miles, and from Kingston to Sackett's Harbour only 35 miles; so that the
destruction of the arsenal might have been effected early in September,
had not the armistice prevented the attempt. But, unhappily for the
interests of his country and the credit of his own fame, Sir George
Prevost disapproved of the proposition, and commanded Major-General
Brock to relinquish all idea of the contemplated enterprize, although
the official intelligence of the president's refusal to continue the
suspension of hostilities reached him at Montreal on the 30th of August,
a day or two _before_ Captain Glegg, with the dispatches and trophies of
the capture of Detroit. At the commencement of the war, a defensive
attitude was perhaps excusable, especially as the British cabinet seems
to have been anxious to accommodate the differences between the two
countries; but _after_ the American government had refused to continue
the armistice, it appears to us that Sir George Prevost was pursuing a
suicidal course, as to wait for the enemy till he shall have prepared
his forces and passed your frontiers, to plunder your towns and occupy
your country, is a very recent expedient recognized by no government,
and practised by no people of ancient or modern times. But
notwithstanding the delay caused by the armistice, the proposed attack
could still have been carried into effect after its cessation; and it
was only relinquished by express orders from the commander-in-chief. We
seek not to impugn his motives, as they probably originated in a
mistaken sense of duty, and evidently from an impression that to attack
the Americans again on their own frontier would be to render the contest
more popular among them. It was under this impression that, in a general
order[88] issued at Montreal on the 31st of August, the
commander-in-chief was weak enough to offer an indirect apology to the
American people for the invasion of their territory at Detroit. Whether
this continued defensive policy was such as, under all the
circumstances, ought to have been observed, we leave it to others to
determine; but certainly the result did not justify its expediency, and
the tree is usually judged of by its fruit. Forbearance in war, where
success is probable, strikes us as a positive evil that a very doubtful
good may ensue--it is seldom properly appreciated; and the
governor-general appears to have seen his error when too late, as in the
following year he was himself ignobly foiled in an attack on Sackett's
Harbour. We cannot understand why the attack under Sir George Prevost,
in May, 1813, was more politic than it would have been in September the
year preceding, under Major-General Brock; and although Captain Glegg
met with a very chilling reception from the former officer, yet we would
willingly acquit him of any jealous feeling where such important
interests were at stake. At the same time it is due to the memory of
this unfortunate officer to add, that his civil administration was as
able as his military one in Canada was inglorious; and that although his
conduct as a soldier was on more than one occasion the subject of much
and just animadversion in England, yet he acquired the warm attachment
of the French Canadians, who speak highly of him to this day. Those
leading men who, during the administration of Sir James Craig, had been
considered almost as enemies, were treated with confidence by his
successor, who gradually appointed them to situations of trust, and by
this wise measure secured their aid and influence in the defence of the
province. Certain it is, on the other hand, that Major-General Brock did
not approve of the defensive warfare to which he was restricted, and
subsequent events too truly proved that had he been permitted to pursue
that course which his zeal and foresight dictated, his valuable life
might have been spared, and a very different series of incidents in that
war claimed the attention of the historian. The high-minded soldier
could not brook a state of inaction with such promising prospects before
him. His best feelings revolted at being compelled to languish within
the strict pale of military obedience, when so rich a field for doing
good service presented itself; and in place of becoming the assailant,
he was soon doomed, by awaiting the attacks of his opponents, to
sacrifice not only life, but, what is far dearer, the opening prospects
of honorable ambition.

On the 16th December, 1812, the inhabitants of the Niagara district
addressed a spirited letter to Sir George Prevost, from which we copy
the following extract, as confirming what we have already stated on the
same subject: "Nevertheless, such was the popularity of the general,
such the confidence he had inspired, that he was enabled to carry with
him to Detroit, though under great privations, a large body of
volunteers, which, in addition to the small regular force at
Amherstburg, enabled him to capture an entire army of our invaders, with
the fortress from which they had made their descent into Canada--a
success unparalleled in the annals of war. Here, for the first time, we
got a supply of good arms. The success of this first enterprize, in
which the militia were engaged, acted like an electric shock throughout
the country: it awed the disaffected, of whom there were many; it
confirmed the timid and the wavering; and it induced the Six Nation
Indians, who had until that time kept aloof, to take an active part in
our favor. At that moment such was the energy and confidence that had
been excited by our illustrious chief and the success of his plans, that
had _he_ been permitted, he could, and would, have destroyed and laid
waste the whole American frontier, from Sandusky to St. Regis. Your
excellency doubtless recollects the armistice which immediately preceded
the capture of Detroit, which gave the enemy an opportunity to recover
from their consternation, to fortify and strengthen their lines, to
accumulate in security the means of annoying us at pleasure along our
whole frontier, and which sent at least 800 of our Indian allies in
disgust to their own homes."


_Colonel Baynes to Major-General Brock._

    MONTREAL, August 13, 1812.[89]

    I wrote to you from Albany on the 8th instant, but as my
    letter was submitted to the inspection of General Dearborn, I
    of course confined myself to the sole subject of the armistice
    entered into with that officer.... A clause, admitting
    reinforcements to pass with stores, was readily agreed to on
    my part. General Dearborn told me that a considerable
    reinforcement with stores was on its way to Niagara, and that
    he could not delay or alter its destination. I informed him
    that we were also forwarding reinforcements and stores, and
    that it would be advisable to agree that all movements of that
    nature on either side should be suffered to proceed
    unmolestedly by troops under instructions to preserve
    defensive measures. I am apprehensive that General Dearborn
    may not explicitly explain all these points; and I have
    therefore cautioned all the officers, to whom I have
    communicated them, to act with the utmost caution, and to be
    prepared for all events that may arise. I feel extremely
    prepossessed in favor of General Dearborn, whose manners
    appear to evince great candour and sincerity: he assured me
    that no event of his life would afford him so much
    satisfaction and happiness as resigning his command in
    consequence of our honorable adjustment of differences. He
    told me that General Hull was placed under his orders merely
    for form sake, but that he acted by particular instructions
    from the war department, and would not consider himself bound
    to obey any order that was not in conformity to them.

    [Colonel Baynes describes at length the incipient state of
    military preparation for the invasion of Lower Canada, which
    he witnessed on his journey; and after mentioning that the
    Americans had sent the most efficient of their forces to the
    Niagara frontier, he adds:]

    Under all these circumstances, which I have represented to
    Sir George, I have strongly urged his sending you further
    reinforcements, which I am sure can be spared: we are at
    present checked from the want of conveyance, but I trust after
    the corps, now on their route, are dispatched, that Sir George
    will be induced to send you further aid, and that of the best
    description. I think it of the highest importance,
    particularly if we are likely to arrange matters with the
    States, that the balance of military events should be
    unequivocally in our favor. I found a very general prejudice
    prevailing with Jonathan, of his own resources and means of
    invading these provinces, and of our weakness and inability to
    resist, both exaggerated in a most absurd and extravagant
    degree--a little practical correction of this error would be
    attended with the best effects.

    The 1st battalion of the royals are upwards of 1,100 strong,
    but sickly, having suffered from their long residence in the
    West Indies, and they are in consequence marked for the Quebec
    garrison.


_Major-General Brock to Colonel Proctor._

    FORT GEORGE, August 25, 1812.

    I wrote to you yesterday, informing you that a cessation of
    hostilities had been agreed upon between Sir George Prevost
    and General Dearborn, and requesting you in consequence to
    postpone any attempt upon Fort Wayne, or any other post of the
    enemy. I consider the present forbearance may lead to such
    consequences that I cannot refrain from sending a second
    express, to urge you to restrain the Indians likewise in their
    predatory excursions: this, however, ought to be done with the
    utmost caution, and on grounds foreign from the present
    considerations.

    Colonel Myers tells me that he forwarded on the 11th instant a
    dispatch received from Sir George Prevost to me, in which his
    excellency so clearly stated the principles of moderation upon
    which he thought it expedient to act, that I fully expect,
    should you have received the dispatch and perused his
    sentiments, you will forbear from any hostile aggression; in
    fact, act completely upon the defensive.

    Should every thing remain quiet in the vicinity of Detroit,
    you will proceed hither, bringing to Fort Erie the detachments
    which Captain Chambers and Lieutenant Bullock took to
    Amherstburg. All the spare ordnance is to be transported to
    Fort Erie without delay.

    I should also think that Lieutenant Troughton and a few of his
    men could be spared for some time from the duties at
    Amherstburg; in that case, you will have the goodness to order
    them to accompany you.

      *      *      *      *      *

Major-General Brock arrived at Kingston on the 4th of September, and
left it on the 6th for Fort George. During this hasty visit he reviewed
the militia, and expressed his satisfaction at its evolutions and
appearance. He also received a flattering address from the magistrates,
officers of militia, and other inhabitants; and in reply he told them
with much tact, that it was the confidence inspired by the admirable
conduct of the York and Lincoln regiments of militia which had induced
him to undertake the expedition which terminated in the capture of
Detroit, and that from the report of the officers of the garrison at
Kingston, he relied with the same confidence on the bravery and the
discipline of the militia of that district. In the same manner, in an
address a few days before from the inhabitants of York, he said:
"Gentlemen,--I cannot but feel highly gratified by this expression of
your esteem for myself; but, in justice to the brave men at whose head I
marched against the enemy, I must beg leave to direct your attention to
them, as the proper objects of your gratitude. It was a confidence,
founded on their loyalty, zeal, and valour, that determined me to adopt
the plan of operations which led to so fortunate a termination. Allow me
to congratulate you, gentlemen, at having sent out from among yourselves
a large portion of that gallant band; and that at such a period a spirit
had manifested itself, on which you may confidently repose your hopes of
future security. It will be a most pleasing duty for me to report to our
sovereign a conduct so truly meritorious."


_Major-General Brock, to Sir George Prevost._

    KINGSTON, September 4, 1812.

    Upon my arrival here an hour ago, Captain Fulton delivered me
    your excellency's dispatch, dated the 31st ultimo, enclosing a
    letter from General Dearborn, in which the president's
    disapproval of the armistice is announced. I am in consequence
    induced to return without loss of time to Fort George. Captain
    Fulton having expressed a wish to accompany me, I have the
    more readily consented, as he will be able to give you full
    information of our actual state. The enemy was very busy upon
    Fort Niagara, and appeared inclined to erect additional
    batteries. I may perhaps think it proper to stop their career.

    I enclose several documents lately received from Colonel
    Proctor, at Detroit. That officer appears to have conducted
    himself with much judgment. I likewise transmit a memorial
    which I have received from some merchants in the Niagara
    district, but of course I cannot judge of its merits.

    I shall be obliged to your excellency to direct the remittance
    of the £5,000, for which I sent a requisition some time ago,
    on account of the civil expenditure of this province, either
    in government paper or specie, as you may deem most
    convenient. I doubt not the former meeting a ready currency.

    The very flattering manner in which your excellency is pleased
    to view my services, and your kindness in having represented
    them to his majesty's ministers in such favorable light, are
    gratifying to my feelings, and call for my grateful
    acknowledgments.


_Major-General Brock to Sir George Prevost._

    FORT GEORGE, September 9, 1812.

    I have been honored with your excellency's dispatch, dated the
    24th ultimo, and have to thank you for ordering a company of
    the Glengary regiment to strengthen Colonel Lethbridge at
    Prescott, whose force you have been led to believe was
    weakened in consequence of my interference, but which, I beg
    leave to state, was done without my knowledge, and contrary to
    my intention.

    The enclosed copies of letters will inform you of the state of
    affairs to the westward. It appears evident the enemy
    meditates a second attempt on Amherstburg. The greater part of
    the troops, which are advancing, marched from Kentucky with an
    intention of joining General Hull. How they are to subsist,
    even for a short period, in that already exhausted country, is
    no easy matter to conceive. This difficulty will probably
    decide them on some bold measure, in the hope of shortening
    the campaign. If successfully resisted, their fate is
    inevitable.

    The Indians, it appears by the accompanying documents, were
    adverse to retreating without first making a trial of their
    strength. Taking, however, every circumstance into
    consideration, I am inclined to think that Captain Muir acted
    judiciously. Should the Indians continue to afford a willing
    co-operation, I entertain not the smallest doubt of the result
    that awaits this second attempt to turn my right; but your
    excellency will easily perceive that doubts and jealousies
    have already seized their minds. The officers of the Indian
    department will, I trust, be able to remove all such
    impressions. Although, from the daily observations of what is
    passing on the opposite shore, a single man can ill be spared
    from this line, I have notwithstanding determined to send the
    two flank companies of the royal Newfoundland regiment to
    Amherstburg. Fresh troops are daily arriving, supposed to
    belong to the Pennsylvania quota of 2,000 men, known to be
    intended for this frontier. After the whole arrive, an attack,
    I imagine, cannot be long delayed. The wretched state of their
    quotas, and the raggedness of the troops, will not allow them
    to brave the rain and cold, which during the last week have
    been so severely felt.

    Between 200 and 300 Indians have joined and augmented the
    force on the other side. Their brethren here feel certain that
    they will not act with any spirit against us--so I imagine, if
    we continue to shew a bold front; but in the event of a
    disaster, the love of plunder will prevail, and they will then
    act in a manner to be the most dreaded by the inhabitants of
    this country.

    I beg leave to recommend to your excellency's indulgent
    consideration, Colonel Proctor's application for an increase
    of pay as commanding a district, which I request may commence
    from the 16th August last.


_Colonel Baynes to Major-General Brock_.

    MONTREAL, September 10, 1812.

    Sir George writes to you so fully upon the several subjects to
    which your letters refer, that I have little left to
    communicate to you. Major Heathcote leaves this to-day, with
    all the small description of ordnance stores intended for
    Amherstburg, but we have detained the 12-pounders and shot; as
    you have helped yourself so amply at Detroit, it is imagined
    you do not now want them. I enclose a letter from Captain
    Roberts, who was, I suppose, induced to address himself direct
    to head quarters, by an opportunity of doing so offering
    itself at the moment. The North-West gentlemen are very urgent
    in recommending a reinforcement in that quarter; but Sir
    George has told them that their representation must be
    addressed to you, who will act as you deem proper.

    Your friend, Mr. Isaac Todd, is arrived, and looking much
    better for his trip; he was suffered to pass by Albany and the
    lake. He tells me that Mr. M'Donell is confirmed
    attorney-general, and that the governor's salary is increased,
    £1,000 a year. I sincerely trust that it will soon be your
    own. Sir George has in his official dispatches, after paying
    that tribute of praise so justly your due, stated as his
    confirmed opinion, that the salvation of the Upper Province
    has in a very great measure arisen from the civil and military
    authority being combined in able hands. The prisoners, with
    their general, arrived here on Sunday night; as they had not
    halted since they left Kingston, and were in a very dirty
    state, we kept them here on Monday, and they yesterday
    proceeded to William Henry, on their way to Quebec; the
    officers are to be on parole in Charlesbourg, and the men
    confined on board two transports in the river. Sir George has
    permitted most of the officers, who have families with them,
    to return on their parole; four of them are proposed to be
    exchanged for the officers of the Royal Scots, taken by the
    Essex frigate. Sir George has also consented to allow General
    Hull to return upon his parole: he is loud in his complaints
    against the government at Washington, and the general thinks
    that his voice, in the general cry, may be attended with
    beneficial effects, and has allowed him to return and enter
    the lists. General Hull appears to possess less feeling and
    sense of shame than any man in his situation could be supposed
    to do. He seems to be perfectly satisfied with himself, is
    lavish of censure upon his government, but appears to think
    that the most scrupulous cannot attach the slightest blame to
    his own immediate conduct at Detroit. The grounds upon which
    he rests his defence are not, I fancy, well founded, for he
    told us that he had not gunpowder at Detroit for the service
    of one day. Sir George has since shown him the return of the
    large supply found in the fort; it did not create a blush, but
    he made no reply. He professes great surprise and admiration
    at the zeal and military preparation that he has everywhere
    witnessed; that it was entirely unlooked for, and that he has
    no doubt that his friend, General Dearborn, will share his
    fate, if he has the imprudence to follow his example. Hull
    seems cunning and unprincipled: how much reliance is to be
    placed on his professions, time will shew.

    General Dearborn has certainly left Albany for Skeensborough,
    at the head of the lake, where great preparations have been
    making in collecting boats and sending the regulars from
    Greenbush to the stations in our vicinity. Major Cotton, with
    about 300 men, half of the king's regiment, is stationed at
    Isle aux Noix,[90] and two gun-boats have been carried into
    that river, as the enemy's preparations seem to indicate that
    quarter as their point of attack. Colonel Murray commands at
    St. John's, and will give them a warm reception. I do not feel
    a doubt of Jonathan's complete discomfiture and disgrace if he
    make the attempt: we could, I fancy, bring as many men as he
    will be able to persuade into the field, and of very superior
    stuff, for our militia have really improved beyond all
    expectation in discipline, and with it in spirit and
    confidence. This town would turn out 2,000 volunteer militia,
    a great proportion of whom are clothed and very tolerably
    drilled. We have destroyed all the roads of communication in
    our front, leaving open the water route only, and these woody
    positions will be shortly occupied by the Indians of this
    neighbourhood and a corps of volunteer _voyageur_ Canadians.
    The enemy's preparations, however, may be a feint to cover
    some plans in agitation against your province.

    I send you a long letter from Kempt for your perusal, with a
    sketch of Badajos, though no longer recent news. I am sure the
    interest you take in the success of our arms, and in his share
    in particular, will induce you to read it with pleasure.


_Sir George Prevost to Major-General Brock._

    MONTREAL, September 14, 1812.

    Captain Fulton arrived on the 11th instant with your letter of
    the 7th; the intelligence you have communicated by it
    convinces me of the necessity of the evacuation of Fort
    Detroit, unless the operations of the enemy on the Niagara
    frontier bear a character less indicative of determined
    hostile measures against your line in their front than they
    did when you last reported to me. You will therefore be
    pleased, subject to the discretion I have given you under the
    circumstances to which I have alluded, to take immediate steps
    for evacuating that post, together with the territory of
    Michigan; by this measure you will be enabled to withdraw a
    greater number of the troops from Amherstburg, instead of
    taking them from Colonel Vincent, whose regular force ought
    not on any account to be diminished.

    I have already afforded you reinforcements to the full extent
    of my ability; you must not, therefore, expect a further
    supply of men from hence until I shall receive from England a
    considerable increase to the present regular force in this
    province: the posture of affairs, particularly on this
    frontier, requires every soldier who is in the country.

    In my last dispatch from Lord Bathurst, dated the 4th of July,
    he tells me, "that his majesty's government trusts I will be
    enabled to suspend with perfect safety all extraordinary
    preparations for defence which I may have been induced to make
    in consequence of the precarious state of the relations
    between this country and the United States; and that as every
    specific requisition for warlike stores and accoutrements
    which had been received from me had been complied with, with
    the exception of the clothing of the corps proposed to be
    raised from the Glengary emigrants, he had not thought it
    necessary to direct the preparation of any further supplies."
    This will afford you a strong proof of the infatuation of his
    majesty's ministers upon the subject of American affairs, and
    shew how entirely I have been left to my own resources in the
    event which has taken place.

    Judging from what you have already effected in Upper Canada,
    I do not doubt but that, with your present means of defence,
    you will be able to maintain your position at Fort George, and
    that the enemy will be again foiled in any further attempts
    they may make to invade the province.

    I leave to your discretion to decide on the necessity of
    sending a reinforcement to Michilimakinack.


_Major-General Brock to Colonel Proctor_.

    FORT GEORGE, September 17, 1812.

    I have had before me your several communications to the 11th
    instant, addressed to myself and to Major-General Sheaffe. I
    approve of your having detached a party to aid in the
    reduction of Fort Wayne, not only because its destruction will
    render your position more secure, but also from the probable
    result of saving the garrison from sharing the fate of that of
    Chicago; but it must be explicitly understood, that you are
    not to resort to offensive warfare for purposes of conquest.
    Your operations are to be confined to measures of defence and
    security. With this view, if you should have credible
    information of the assembling of bodies of troops to march
    against you, it may become necessary to destroy the fort at
    Sandusky, and the road which runs through it from Cleveland to
    the foot of the rapids: the road from the river Raisin to
    Detroit is perhaps in too bad a state to offer any aid to the
    approach of an enemy, except in the winter; and if a winter
    campaign should be contemplated against you, it is probable
    that magazines would be formed in Cleveland and its vicinity,
    of all which you will of course inform yourself. In carrying
    on our operations in your quarter, it is of primary importance
    that the confidence and good-will of the Indians should be
    preserved, and that whatsoever can tend to produce a contrary
    effect should be most carefully avoided. I therefore most
    strongly urge and enjoin your acting on those principles on
    every occasion that may offer, inculcating them in all those
    under your influence, and enforcing them by your example,
    whether in your conduct towards the Indians or what may regard
    them, or in your language when speaking to, or of, them. I am
    aware that they commit irregularities at times, which will
    make this a difficult task; but you must endeavour to perform
    it--attending at the same time to the means already suggested
    to you for preventing, as much as possible, a repetition of
    disorderly conduct.

    Colonel E---- is a respectable, gentlemanly man, but he by no
    means possesses the influence over the Indians which Captain
    M'K---- does. I recommend to you to promote, as far as in you
    lies, a good understanding with and between them, and to
    observe a conciliating deportment and language towards the
    latter, that his great influence may be secured and employed
    in its fullest extent for the benefit of your district, and
    for the general good. In conversation with him, you may take
    an opportunity of intimating, that I have not been unmindful
    of the interests of the Indians in my communications to
    ministers; and I wish you to learn (as if casually the subject
    of conversation) what stipulations they would propose for
    themselves, or be willing to accede to, in case either of
    failure or of success.

    I understand that salvage has been demanded from individuals
    on several accounts; for property recovered or restored, for
    patents, &c. &c. I lament that such a course has been adopted,
    for it was my intention, and it is now my wish, that our
    conduct in those matters should be governed by the broadest
    principles of liberality. You will, therefore, be pleased to
    have returned to the several individuals the amount which each
    may have paid as salvage on any account.

    With respect to calling out the militia, I am particularly
    desirous that it should not be resorted to but in case of
    urgent necessity, and then only in such numbers as shall be
    actually required. It appears to me that the cavalry employed
    exceed the number that may be indispensably necessary: if,
    without risk or detriment to the public service, any of either
    of those corps can be spared, let them be dismissed.

    I wish the engineer to proceed immediately in strengthening
    Fort Amherstburg, his plan for which I shall be glad to see as
    soon as possible.

    Of the ordnance stores of every description, you will reserve
    such proportions as may be absolutely required for the public
    service in your district, and cause the remainder to be
    embarked and sent down to Fort Erie with the least possible
    delay.

    I cannot at present make the change in the distribution of the
    41st regiment which you propose, but, whenever circumstances
    may permit, I shall be happy to accede to your wishes.


_Major-General S.V. Rensselaer to Major-General Brock_.

    Head Quarters, Lewiston, Sept. 17, 1812.

    I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
    yesterday evening; an extract of a letter addressed to you on
    the 15th instant by Captain Dyson, of the United States
    regiment of artillery; also a packet addressed to the
    Honorable Albert Gallatin, secretary of the treasury of the
    United States.

    Colonel Van Rensselaer will have the honor to deliver this
    communication, and I have entrusted him to solicit your
    permission for an interview with Captain Dyson, for the
    purpose of ascertaining, particularly, the condition of the
    prisoners of war under his charge, to the end that they may be
    relieved from Fort Niagara, if practicable; and if not, that I
    may, without delay, state their condition to the government,
    that they may receive from the proper department the earliest
    possible supplies.

    The women and children, and such other persons as have
    accompanied the detachment from Detroit, and ought to be here
    received, I will immediately receive at Fort Niagara, or such
    other convenient place as you may order them to be landed at.

    In a communication which I some time since had the honor of
    receiving from Lieut.-Colonel Myers, he assured me that it had
    been the constant study of the general officer commanding on
    this line to discountenance, by all means in his power, the
    warfare of sentinels; yet the frequent recurrence of this
    warfare within a few days past, would warrant the presumption
    that a different course has been adopted. I wish to be assured
    of this fact.

_Major-General Brock to Major-General S.V. Rensselaer._

    Head Quarters, Fort George, Sept. 17, 1812.

    I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
    this date. Captain Dyson has obtained my permission to cross
    on his parole to the United States; he has, however, requested
    to remain till to-morrow, to settle with the men of his
    detachment. He shall in the mean time have an interview with
    Colonel Van Rensselaer.

    Measures will be immediately taken to land the women and
    children at Fort Niagara.

    It has been with the utmost regret that I have perceived
    within these few days a very heavy firing from both sides of
    the river. I am, however, given to understand, that on all
    occasions it commenced on yours; and from the circumstance of
    the flag of truce, which I did myself the honor to send over
    yesterday, having been repeatedly fired upon, while in the
    act of crossing the river, I am inclined to give full credit
    to the correctness of the information. Without, however,
    recurring to the past, you may rest assured on my repeating my
    most positive orders against the continuance of a practice,
    which can only be injurious to individuals, without promoting
    the object which both our nations may have in view.

      *      *      *      *      *

We cannot find the dispatch from Sir George Prevost of the 7th of
September, to which the next letter is an answer, but it could not have
been of a very pleasing character, and certainly Major-General Brock's
_implicit_ obedience to _such_ instructions is most creditable to him.


_Major-General Brock to Sir George Prevost_.

    FORT GEORGE, September 18, 1812.

    I have been honored with your excellency's dispatch, dated the
    7th instant. I have implicitly followed your excellency's
    instructions, and abstained, under great temptation and
    provocation, from every act of hostility. The information
    received from a deserter, and which I had the honor to detail
    in my last, is far from correct, and, where credit is to be
    given, the facts apply solely to the regular force. The
    militia, being selected from the most violent democrats, are
    generally inclined to invade this province--provisions are in
    tolerable plenty--the only complaint arises from a want of
    vegetables. It is currently reported that the enemy's force is
    to be increased to 7,000, and that on their arrival an attack
    is immediately to be made. I am convinced the militia would
    not keep together in their present situation without such a
    prospect, nor do I think the attempt can be long deferred.
    Sickness prevails in some degree along the line, but
    principally at Black Rock.

    The flank companies of the royal Newfoundland have joined me.
    A sergeant and twenty-five rank and file of the Veterans
    arrived at the same time, whom I propose sending to
    Michilimakinack.

    The enclosed letter from Colonel Proctor will inform your
    excellency of a force having been detached, under Captain
    Muir, for the reduction of Fort Wayne.[91] I gave orders for
    it previous to my leaving Amherstburg, which must have induced
    Colonel Proctor to proceed, upon receiving intelligence of the
    recommencement of hostilities, without waiting for further
    directions. I regret exceedingly that this service should be
    undertaken contrary to your excellency's wishes; but I beg
    leave to assure you, that the principal object in sending a
    British force to Fort Wayne is with the hope of preserving the
    lives of the garrison. By the last accounts, the place was
    invested by a numerous body of Indians, with very little
    prospect of being relieved. The prisoners of war, who know
    perfectly the situation of the garrison, rejoiced at the
    measure, and give us full credit for our intentions.

    The Indians were likewise looking to us for assistance: they
    heard of the armistice with every mark of jealousy, and, had
    we refused joining them in the expedition, it is impossible to
    calculate the consequences. I have already been asked to
    pledge my word that England would enter into no negociation in
    which their interests were not included, and, could they be
    brought to imagine that we should desert them, the
    consequences must be fatal.

    I shall be obliged to your excellency to direct £5,000 to be
    transmitted to the receiver-general, for the civil expenditure
    of this province. Army bills, I make no doubt, will answer
    every purpose.

    This dispatch is entrusted to Lieut.-Colonel Nichol,
    quartermaster-general of this militia, whom I take the liberty
    to introduce to your excellency, as perfectly qualified, from
    his local knowledge and late return, to afford every
    information of the state of affairs in the western district.
    He is instructed to make extensive purchases of necessaries
    for the use of the militia, and I have to entreat your
    excellency to indulge him with the means of a speedy
    conveyance back to this place.


_Major-General Brock to his brother Savery_.

    FORT GEORGE, September 18, 1812.

    You doubtless feel much anxiety on my account. I am really
    placed in a most awkward predicament. If I get through my
    present difficulties with tolerable success, I cannot but
    obtain praise. But I have already surmounted difficulties of
    infinitely greater magnitude than any within my view. Were the
    Americans of one mind, the opposition I could make would be
    unavailing; but I am not without hope that their divisions may
    be the saving of this province. A river of about 500 yards
    broad divides the troops. My instructions oblige me to adopt
    defensive measures, and I have evinced greater forbearance
    than was ever practised on any former occasion. It is thought
    that, without the aid of the sword, the American people may be
    brought to a due sense of their own interests. I firmly
    believe I could at this moment sweep every thing before me
    between Fort Niagara and Buffalo--but my success would be
    transient.

    I have now officers in whom I can confide: when the war
    commenced, I was really obliged to seek assistance among the
    militia. The 41st is an uncommonly fine regiment, but
    wretchedly officered. Six companies of the 49th are with me
    here, and the remaining four at Kingston, under Vincent.
    Although the regiment has been ten years in this country,
    drinking rum without bounds, it is still respectable, and
    apparently ardent for an opportunity to acquire distinction:
    it has five captains in England, and two on the staff in this
    country, which leaves it bare of experienced officers. The
    U.S. regiments of the line desert over to us frequently, as
    the men are tired of the service: opportunities seldom offer,
    otherwise I have reason to think the greater part would follow
    the example. The militia, being chiefly composed of enraged
    democrats, are more ardent and anxious to engage, but they
    have neither subordination nor discipline. They die very fast.
    You will hear of some decisive action in the course of a
    fortnight, or in all probability we shall return to a state of
    tranquillity. I say decisive, because if I should be beaten,
    the province is inevitably gone; and should I be victorious, I
    do not imagine the gentry from the other side will be anxious
    to return to the charge.

    It is certainly something singular that we should be upwards
    of two months in a state of warfare, and that along this
    widely extended frontier not a single death, either natural or
    by the sword, should have occurred among the troops under my
    command, and we have not been altogether idle, nor has a
    single desertion taken place.

    I am quite anxious for this state of warfare to end, as I wish
    much to join Lord Wellington, and to see you all.

    Has poor Betsey recovered the loss of my young and dear
    friend, John Tupper?


_Sir George Prevost to Major-General Brock._

    MONTREAL, September 25, 1812.

    It no longer appears, by your letter of the 13th, that you
    consider the enemy's operations on the Niagara frontier
    indicative of active operations. If the government of America
    inclines to defensive measures, I can only ascribe the
    determination to two causes: the first is, the expectation of
    such overtures from us as will lead to a suspension of
    hostilities, preparatory to negociations for peace; the other
    arises from having ascertained, by experience, our ability in
    the Canadas to resist the attack of a tumultuary force.

    In consequence of your having weakened the line of
    communication between Cornwall and Kingston, a predatory
    warfare is carrying on there very prejudicial to the
    intercourse from hence with Upper Canada. I have ordered a
    company of the Glengary to Prescott to strengthen Colonel
    Lethbridge, and, under present circumstances, you are not to
    expect further aid.

    I agree in opinion with you, that so wretched is the
    organization and discipline of the American army, that at this
    moment much might be effected against them; but as the
    government at home could derive no substantial advantage from
    any disgrace we might inflict on them, whilst the more
    important concerns of the country are committed in Europe, I
    again request you will steadily pursue that policy which shall
    appear to you best calculated to promote the dwindling away
    of such a force by its own inefficient means.

    I shall receive with much satisfaction Colonel Proctor's
    report of having saved the garrison of Fort Wayne from the
    inhuman fury of the Indians. I am particularly anxious that
    class of beings should be restrained and controlled as much as
    possible, whilst there exists a pretence of implicating the
    national character in their cruelties.

      *      *      *      *      *

The following letter not only explains the impolicy of obeying Sir
George Prevost's provisional orders for the evacuation of Detroit and
the Michigan territory, but also ably deprecates any abandonment of our
Indian allies. With such leaders as its author and Tecumseh, what might
not have been done in this war to obtain the security and regeneration
of this much injured people? But alas! these "kindred spirits" lived not
long enough to plead their cause, and in the negociations for peace
their interests were shamefully overlooked or cruelly forgotten;[92]
although, in the first American war, the Indians had also, with few
exceptions, taken part with Great Britain against the colonists in their
contest for independence. It is true that their mode of warfare is
abhorrent to Europeans, as differing from the more _honorable_
slaughter of _civilized_ enemies; but Sir Isaac Brock proved that they
were to be restrained, and Tecumseh was as humane as he was brave.
Moreover, we should not condemn their previous excesses without
remembering the many injuries they had received. They knew from sad
experience that they could place no faith in the whites, who had long
considered them as legal prey, and too often treated them as the brute
animals of the forest. Expelled from the coasts, and dispossessed of
their hunting grounds, they had been gradually driven westward, until
they had too much cause to apprehend that the cupidity of their invaders
would be satisfied only with their utter extermination. "The red men are
melting," to borrow the expressive metaphor of a celebrated Miami chief
of the last century, "like snow before the sun." Indeed, it is
melancholy to reflect, that the aborigines of both continents of America
have, from their first intercourse with Europeans or their descendants,
experienced nothing but fraud, spoliation, cruelty, and ingratitude.


_Major-General Brock to Sir George Prevost_.

    YORK, September 28, 1812.

    I have been honored with your excellency's dispatch, dated the
    14th instant.[93] I shall suspend, under the latitude left by
    your excellency to my discretion, the evacuation of Fort
    Detroit. Such a measure would most probably be followed by the
    total extinction of the population on that side of the river,
    or the Indians, aware of our weakness and inability to carry
    on active warfare, would only think of entering into terms
    with the enemy. The Indians, since the Miami affair, in 1793,
    have been extremely suspicious of our conduct; but the violent
    wrongs committed by the Americans on their territory, have
    rendered it an act of policy with them to disguise their
    sentiments. Could they be persuaded that a peace between the
    belligerents would take place, without admitting their claim
    to an extensive tract of country, fraudulently usurped from
    them, and opposing a frontier to the present unbounded views
    of the Americans, I am satisfied in my own mind that they
    would immediately compromise with the enemy. I cannot conceive
    a connection so likely to lead to more awful consequences.

    If we can maintain ourselves at Niagara, and keep the
    communication to Montreal open, the Americans can only subdue
    the Indians by craft, which we ought to be prepared to see
    exerted to the utmost. The enmity of the Indians is now at its
    height, and it will require much management and large bribes
    to effect a change in their policy; but the moment they are
    convinced that we either want the means to prosecute the war
    with spirit, or are negociating a separate peace, they will
    begin to study in what manner they can most effectually
    deceive us.

    Should negociations for peace be opened, I cannot be too
    earnest with your excellency to represent to the king's
    ministers the expediency of including the Indians as allies,
    and not leave them exposed to the unrelenting fury of their
    enemies.

    The enemy has evidently assumed defensive measures along the
    strait of Niagara. His force, I apprehend, is not equal to
    attempt, with any probability of success, an expedition across
    the river. It is, however, currently reported that large
    reinforcements are on their march; should they arrive, an
    attack cannot be long delayed. The approach of the rainy
    season will increase the sickness with which the troops are
    already afflicted. Those under my command are in perfect
    health and spirits.

    I have the honor to transmit the purport of a confidential
    communication[94] received in my absence by Brigade-Major
    Evans from Colonel Van Rensselaer. As your excellency's
    instructions agree with the line of conduct he is anxious I
    should follow, nothing of a hostile nature shall be attempted
    under existing circumstances.

      *      *      *      *      *

The unlettered Tecumseh well knew the wrongs of the red men when he
endeavoured, several years before the war, to induce the Osages to unite
in a general Indian confederacy against the continued encroachments of
the Americans, and gave extemporaneous utterance before a large
assemblage to the following simple but faithful narration of their
grievances. The harangue, eloquent as it is, suffers under all the
disadvantages of translation, and is but the shadow of the substance,
because the gestures, and the interests and feelings excited by the
occasion, which constitute the essentials of its character, are
altogether wanting.

    Brothers,--We all belong to one family; we are all children of
    the Great Spirit; we walk in the same path; slake our thirst
    at the same spring; and now affairs of the greatest concern
    lead us to smoke the pipe around the same council fire!

    Brothers,--We are friends; we must assist each other to bear
    our burdens. The blood of many of our fathers and brothers has
    run like water on the ground, to satisfy the avarice of the
    white men. We, ourselves, are threatened with a great evil;
    nothing will pacify them but the destruction of all the red
    men.

    Brothers,--When the white men first set foot on our grounds,
    they were hungry; they had no place on which to spread their
    blankets, or to kindle their fires. They were feeble; they
    could do nothing for themselves. Our fathers commiserated
    their distress, and shared freely with them whatever the Great
    Spirit had given his red children. They gave them food when
    hungry, medicine when sick, spread skins for them to sleep on,
    and gave them grounds, that they might hunt and raise
    corn.--Brothers, the white people are like poisonous serpents:
    when chilled, they are feeble and harmless; but invigorate
    them with warmth, and they sting their benefactors to death.

    The white people came among us feeble; and now that we have
    made them strong, they wish to kill us, or drive us back, as
    they would wolves and panthers. Brothers,--The white men are
    not friends to the Indians: at first, they only asked for land
    sufficient for a wigwam; now, nothing will satisfy them but
    the whole of our hunting grounds, from the rising to the
    setting sun.

    Brothers,--The white men want more than our hunting grounds;
    they wish to kill our old men, women, and little ones.

    Brothers,--Many winters ago, there was no land; the sun did
    not rise and set; all was darkness. The Great Spirit made all
    things. He gave the white people a home beyond the great
    waters. He supplied these grounds with game, and gave them to
    his red children; and he gave them strength and courage to
    defend them.

    Brothers,--My people wish for peace; the red men all wish for
    peace; but where the white people are, there is no peace for
    them, except it be on the bosom of our mother.

    Brothers,--The white men despise and cheat the Indians; they
    abuse and insult them; they do not think the red men
    sufficiently good to live.

    The red men have borne many and great injuries; they ought to
    suffer them no longer. My people will not; they are determined
    on vengeance; they have taken up the tomahawk; they will make
    it fat with blood; they will drink the blood of the white
    people.

    Brothers,--My people are brave and numerous; but the white
    people are too strong for them alone. I wish you to take up
    the tomahawk with them. If we all unite, we will cause the
    rivers to stain the great waters with their blood.

    Brothers,--If you do not unite with us, they will first
    destroy us, and then you will fall an easy prey to them. They
    have destroyed many nations of red men, because they were not
    united, because they were not friends to each other.

    Brothers,--The white people send runners amongst us; they wish
    to make us enemies, that they may sweep over and desolate our
    hunting grounds, like devastating winds, or rushing waters.

    Brothers,--Our Great Father, over the great waters, is angry
    with the white people, our enemies. He will send his brave
    warriors against them; he will send us rifles, and whatever
    else we want--he is our friend, and we are his children.

    Brothers,--Who are the white people that we should fear them?
    They cannot run fast, and are good marks to shoot at: they are
    only men; our fathers have killed many of them: we are not
    squaws, and we will stain the earth red with their blood.

    Brothers,--The Great Spirit is angry with our enemies; he
    speaks in thunder, and the earth swallows up villages, and
    drinks up the Mississippi. The great waters will cover their
    lowlands; their corn cannot grow; and the Great Spirit will
    sweep those who escape to the hills from the earth with his
    terrible breath.

    Brothers,--We must be united; we must smoke the same pipe; we
    must fight each other's battles; and, more than all, we must
    love the Great Spirit: he is for us; he will destroy our
    enemies, and make all his red children happy.

Conclusion of Major-General Brock's general order, Detroit, 16th August,
1812: "The conduct of the Indians under Colonel Elliott, Captain M'Kee,
and the other officers of that department, joined to that of the gallant
and brave chiefs of their respective tribes, has since the commencement
of the war been marked with acts of true heroism, and in nothing can
they testify more strongly their love to the king, their great father,
than in following the dictates of honor and humanity, by which they have
been hitherto actuated. Two fortifications have already been captured
from the enemy, without a drop of blood being shed by the hands of the
Indians: the instant the enemy submitted, his life became sacred."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 86: To the facts and observations above stated I must add the
extraordinary circumstance, that a staff officer was sent, express from
Montreal to Upper Canada, to prevent General Brock from proceeding to
the western district, but which most happily was prevented from taking
effect by the extraordinary rapidity of the movements of that most
zealous and gallant officer, who had arrived thither before the officer
so sent could reach him.--_Letters of Veritas._]

[Footnote 87: See extract from Letters of Veritas on this point.
Appendix A, Section 1, No. 3.]

[Footnote 88: Appendix A, Section 1, No. 4.]

[Footnote 89: This letter was forwarded by Brigade-Major Shekleton with
that of the 12th August (see page 217), from Sir George Prevost, who
doubtless wrote another the following day relative to the armistice, but
we cannot find it among Major-General Brock's papers.]

[Footnote 90: Coteau du Lac and Isle aux Noix are the keys of Lower
Canada; the former completely commands the navigation of the St.
Lawrence between the Upper and Lower Provinces, and the latter had been
so decidedly regarded as the barrier of Lower Canada from the Champlain
frontier, that it excited the particular attention of the French
engineers in the last defence of the country, and was afterwards
fortified at considerable expense by General Haldimand, daring the war
of the American revolution.--_Quarterly Review_.]

[Footnote 91: Fort Wayne is situated at the junction of the St. Mary and
St. Joseph rivers, which form the Miami of the lake, and not more than
twelve miles from the navigable waters of the Wabash. This post is
nearly in the centre of the Indian settlements on this side the
Mississippi. Many Indian villages lay from twelve to sixty miles from
this place.--_Brown's American History_.]

[Footnote 92: "The Indians on this occasion" (the defence of
Michilimakinack, in 1814,) "behaved with exemplary zeal and fidelity in
our cause; and indeed their attachment throughout has been such as to
make me blush for my country, in the dereliction of their interests in
the negotiations at Ghent, after so many promises made them, and so fair
a prospect at the commencement of these negotiations."--_Letters of
Veritas_.]

[Footnote 93: See page 291. We cannot discover a copy of Major-General
Brock's letter of the 7th September, to Sir George Prevost, to which the
latter officer refers in his letter of the 14th.]

[Footnote 94: This communication, of which we have no particulars, is
the more singular, as Colonel Van R---- commanded the advance of the
American attacking party on the 13th of October, when Sir Isaac Brock
lost his life. Colonel Van R---- was severely wounded on that day.]


CHAPTER XIV.


The Americans, burning to wipe away the stain of their discomfiture at
Detroit, and apparently determined to penetrate into Upper Canada at any
risk, concentrated with those views, along the Niagara frontier, an army
consisting, according to their own official returns, of 5,206 men, under
Major-General Van Rensselaer, of the New York militia, exclusive of 300
field and light artillery, 800 of the 6th, 13th, and 23d regiments, at
Fort Niagara; making a total of 6,300 men. Of this powerful force, 1,650
regulars, under the command of Brigadier Smyth, were at Black Rock; 386
militia at the last named place and Buffalo; and 900 regulars and 2,270
militia at Lewistown, distant from Black Rock 28 miles. Thus the enemy
had, along their frontier of 36 miles, 3,650 regulars and 2,650
militia.[95] To oppose this force Major-General Brock, whose head
quarters were at Fort George, had under his immediate orders part of the
41st and 49th regiments, a few companies of militia, amounting to nearly
half these regulars, and from 200 to 300 Indians--in all about 1,500
men--but so dispersed in different posts at and between Fort Erie and
Fort George, (34 miles apart,) that only a small number was quickly
available at any one point. With unwearied diligence the British
commander watched the motions of the enemy; but under these
circumstances it was impossible to prevent the landing of the hostile
troops, especially when their preparations were favored by the obscurity
of the night.

On the 9th of October, the brig Detroit, of 200 tons and 6 guns, (lately
the U.S. brig Adams,) and the North-West Company's brig Caledonia, of
about 100 tons, having arrived the preceding day from Detroit, were
boarded and carried opposite Fort Erie, before the dawn of day, by
Lieutenant Elliott, of the American navy, with 100 seamen and soldiers
in two large boats. This officer was at this time at Black Rock,
superintending the equipment of some schooners, lately purchased for the
service of Lake Erie. But for the _defensive_ measures to which
Major-General Brock was restricted, he would probably have destroyed
these very schooners, for whose equipment, as vessels of war, Lieutenant
Elliott and 50 seamen had been sent from New York. The two British brigs
contained 40 prisoners, some cannon and small arms, captured at Detroit,
exclusive of a valuable quantity of furs belonging to the North-West
Company, in the Caledonia. Joined by the prisoners, the Americans who
boarded numbered 140, and the crews of the two brigs, consisting of
militia and Canadian seamen, amounted to 68. After the capture,
Lieutenant Elliott succeeded in getting the Caledonia close under the
batteries at Black Rock, but he was compelled, by a few well-directed
shots from the Canada shore, to run the Detroit upon Squaw Island. Here
she was boarded by a subaltern's detachment from Fort Erie, and the
Americans soon after completed her destruction by setting her on fire.
Some lives were lost upon this occasion, and among the Americans a Major
Cuyler was killed by a shot from Fort Erie, as he was riding along the
beach on the opposite side of the river.


_Sir Isaac Brock to Sir George Prevost_.

    FORT GEORGE, October 11, 1812.

    I had scarcely closed my dispatch to your excellency, of the
    9th, when I was suddenly called away to Fort Erie, in
    consequence of a bold, and, I regret to say, successful attack
    by the enemy on his majesty's brig Detroit, and the private
    brig Caledonia, which had both arrived the preceding day from
    Amherstburg. It appears by every account I have been able to
    collect, that a little before day a number of boats full of
    men, dropped down with the current unobserved, boarded both
    vessels at the same moment, and, cutting their cables, were
    proceeding with them to the American shore, when Major Ormsby,
    who witnessed the transaction, directed the batteries to open
    on them, and soon compelled the enemy to abandon the Detroit,
    which grounded about the centre of Squaw Island, a little
    more than a mile below Black Rock. She was then boarded by a
    party of the 49th regiment; but as no anchor remained, and
    being otherwise unprovided with every means by which she could
    be hauled off, the officer, throwing her guns over board,
    after sustaining a smart fire of musketry, decided to quit
    her. A private, who is accused of getting drunk, and a
    prisoner of war, who was unable from his wounds to escape,
    with about twenty prisoners brought by the Detroit from
    Amherstburg, remained however behind; these it became
    necessary to remove before the vessel could be destroyed, and
    Cornet Pell Major, of the provincial cavalry, offered his
    services. Being unfortunately wounded as he was getting on
    board, and falling back into the boat, a confusion arose,
    during which the boat drifted from the vessel, leaving two of
    the 41st, who had previously ascended, on board. In the mean
    time the Caledonia was secured by the enemy, and a cargo of
    furs, belonging to the North-West Company, landed.

    The batteries on both sides were warmly engaged the whole of
    the day, but I am happy to say no mischief was sustained by
    the enemy's fire. I reached the spot soon after sun-set, and
    intended to have renewed the attempt to recover the Detroit,
    which I had _every_ prospect of accomplishing, assisted by the
    crew of the Lady Prevost, which vessel had anchored a short
    time before; but before the necessary arrangements could be
    made, the enemy boarded her, and in a few minutes she was
    seen in flames.

    This event is particularly unfortunate, and may reduce us to
    incalculable distress. The enemy is making every exertion to
    gain a naval superiority on both lakes, which if they
    accomplish I do not see how we can retain the country. More
    vessels are fitting out for war on the other side of Squaw
    Island, which I should have attempted to destroy but for your
    excellency's repeated instructions to forbear. Now such a
    force is collected for their protection as will render every
    operation against them very hazardous. The manner our guns
    were served yesterday, points out the necessity of an
    increase, if possible, of artillerymen to our present small
    number of regulars. The militia evinced a good spirit, but
    fired without much effect. The enemy, however, must have lost
    some men; and it is only wonderful, that in a contest of a
    whole day no life was lost on our side. The fire of the enemy
    was incessant, but badly directed, till the close of the day,
    when it began to improve. Lieutenant Rolette, who commanded
    the Detroit, had, and I believe deservedly, the character of a
    brave, attentive officer. His vessel must, however, have been
    surprised--an easy operation where she lay at anchor; and I
    have reason to suspect that this consideration was not
    sufficiently attended to by the officers commanding on board
    and on shore.

    We have not only sustained a heavy loss in the vessel, but
    likewise in the cargo, which consisted of four 12-pounders, a
    large quantity of shot, and about 200 muskets, all of which
    were intended for Kingston and Prescott.

    The only consolation remaining is, that she escaped the enemy,
    whose conduct, after his first essay, did not entitle him to
    so rich a prize. The enemy has brought some boats over land
    from Schlosher to the Niagara river, and made an attempt last
    night to carry off the guard over the store at Queenston. I
    shall refrain as long as possible, under your excellency's
    positive injunctions, from every hostile act, although
    sensible that each day's delay gives him an advantage.


_Sir Isaac Brock to Colonel Proctor, at Detroit_.

    The unfortunate disaster which has befallen the Detroit and
    Caledonia will reduce us to great distress. They were boarded
    whilst at anchor at Fort Erie and carried off: you will learn
    the particulars from others. A quantity of flour and a little
    pork were ready to be shipped for Amherstburg; but as I send
    you the flank companies of the Newfoundland, no part of the
    provisions can go this trip in the Lady Prevost. It will be
    necessary to direct her to return with all possible speed,
    bringing the Mary under her convoy. You will husband your
    pork, for I am sorry to say there is but little in the
    country.

    An active interesting scene is going to commence with you. I
    am perfectly at ease as to the result, provided we can manage
    the Indians and keep them attached to your cause, which in
    fact is theirs.

    The fate of the province is in your hands. Judging by every
    appearance, we are not to remain long idle in this quarter.
    Were it not for the positive injunctions of the commander of
    the forces, I should have acted with greater decision. This
    forbearance may be productive of ultimate good, but I doubt
    its policy--but perhaps we have not the means of judging
    correctly. You will of course adopt a very different line of
    conduct. The enemy must be kept in a state of constant
    ferment. If the Indians act as they did under Tecumseh, who
    probably might be induced to return to Amherstburg, that army
    will very soon dwindle to nothing. Your artillery must be more
    numerous and effective than any the enemy can bring, and your
    store of ammunition will enable you to harass him continually,
    without leaving much to chance.

    I trust you will have destroyed every barrack and public
    building, and removed the pickets and other defences around
    the fort at Detroit.

    You will have the goodness to state the expedients you possess
    to enable us to replace, as far as possible, the heavy loss we
    have sustained in the Detroit. Should I hear of reinforcements
    coming up, you may rely upon receiving your due proportion.
    Nothing new at Montreal on the 25th ult. Lord Wellington has
    totally defeated Marmont, near Salamanca. I consider the game
    nearly up in Spain. May every possible success attend you.

[The preceding letter is transcribed from a rough copy in the general's
handwriting, and, not being dated, may not have been transmitted, as it
was written only a day or two before his death.]


_Major-General Brock to Sir George Prevost._

    October 12, 1812.

    The vast number of troops which have been this day added to
    the strong force previously collected on the opposite side,
    convinces me, with other indications, that an attack is not
    far distant. I have in consequence directed every exertion to
    be made to complete the militia to 2,000 men, but fear that I
    shall not be able to effect my object with willing,
    well-disposed characters. Were it not for the numbers of
    Americans in our ranks, we might defy all their efforts
    against this part of the province.

[The above letter is also from a copy written hurriedly by Sir Isaac
Brock only a few hours before his death, and it may not have been
forwarded.]

      *      *      *      *      *

A day or two prior to the battle of Queenstown, Major-General Brock
wrote copious instructions for the guidance of the officers commanding
at the different posts on the Niagara river, in the event of their being
attacked, and he explained the probable points which he thought the
enemy would select for accomplishing his descent. He evidently
entertained a high opinion of the discipline and prowess of the British
soldier, as in these instructions he observed: "If we weigh well the
character of our enemy, we shall find him more disposed to brave the
impediments of nature, when they afford him a probability of
accomplishing his end by surprise, in preference to the certainty of
encountering British troops ready formed for his reception." The
original draft of these instructions in the general's writing, contains
scarcely an erasure or correction.

On the 4th of October, an American spy was sent to the British side, and
returned with information that Major-General Brock had proceeded to
Detroit with all the force that could be spared from the Niagara
frontier. Encouraged by these false news, which perhaps the American
general circulated to induce his troops to cross over, every preparation
was made for a descent upon Queenstown. On the morning of the 11th, the
enemy assembled a force at Lewistown, opposite to Queenstown, with the
view of making an immediate attack on the latter, but, through some
mismanagement in conducting the boats to the place of embarkation, the
attack was delayed. Early on the morning of the 13th, the enemy's troops
were again concentrated and embarked in thirteen boats at Lewistown,
under cover of a commanding battery of two 18 and two 6-pounders, which,
with two field pieces, completely commanded every part of the opposite
shore, from which musketry could be effectual in opposing a landing. The
only British batteries from which the enemy could be annoyed in the
passage were one, mounting an 18-pounder, upon Queenstown Heights, and
another, mounting a 24-pound carronade, situate a little below the
village. Three of the boats put back, while the remaining ten, with 225
regulars, besides officers, struck the shore a little above the village
of Queenstown, and immediately returned for more troops. The British
force in Queenstown consisted of the two flank companies of the 49th
regiment and the York volunteer militia, amounting in all to about 300
rank and file. Of these about 60, taken from the 49th grenadiers, and
Captain Hatt's company of militia, under Captain Dennis,[96] of the
49th, advanced at four o'clock, a.m., with a 3-pounder against the first
division of the enemy, under Colonel Van Rensselaer, who had formed his
men near the river, and was awaiting the arrival of the next boats. The
Americans were driven with some loss behind a steep bank, close to the
water's edge, where they were reinforced by a fresh supply of troops,
and whence they returned the fire of the British. In the mean time the
remainder of the 49th grenadiers and of the militia company joined
Captain Dennis; while the 49th light company, under Captain Williams,
with Captain Chisholm's company of militia, stationed on the brow of the
hill, fired down upon the invaders.

Sir Isaac Brock for some days had suspected this invasion, and the
evening preceding it he called his staff together, and gave to each the
necessary instructions. Agreeably to his usual custom, he rose before
daylight, and hearing the cannonade, awoke Major Glegg and called for
his horse, Alfred, which Sir James Craig had presented to him. He then
gallopped eagerly from Fort George to the scene of action, and, with his
two aides-de-camp, passed up the hill at full gallop in front of the
light company, under a heavy fire of artillery and musketry from the
American shore. On reaching the 18-pounder battery at the top of the
hill, they dismounted and took a view of passing events, which at that
moment appeared highly favorable. But in a few minutes a firing was
heard, which proceeded from a strong detachment of American regulars
under Captain Wool, who had succeeded in gaining the brow of the heights
in rear of the battery, by a fisherman's path up the rocks, which, being
reported as impassable, was not guarded. Sir Isaac Brock and his
aide-de-camps had not even time to remount, but were obliged to retire
precipitately with the twelve men stationed in the battery, which was
quickly occupied by the enemy. Captain Wool having sent forward about
150 regulars, Captain Williams' detachment, of about 100 men, advanced
to meet them, personally directed by the general, who, observing the
enemy to waver, ordered a charge, which was promptly executed; but as
the Americans gave way, the result was not equal to his expectations.
Captain Wool admits that he reinforced his regulars, "notwithstanding
which the whole were driven to the edge of the bank."[97] Here some of
the American officers were on the point of hoisting a white flag, with
an intention to surrender, when Captain Wool tore it off, and reanimated
his dispirited troops. They now opened a heavy fire of musketry; and
conspicuous from his dress, his height, and the enthusiasm with which he
animated his little band, the British commander was soon singled out,
and he fell about an hour after his arrival, the fatal bullet entering
his right breast and passing through his left side. He had that instant
said: "Push on the York volunteers;" and he lived only long enough to
request that his fall might not be noticed or prevent the advance of his
brave troops, adding a wish, which could not be distinctly understood,
that some token of remembrance should be transmitted to his sister. He
died unmarried, and on the same day a week previously, he had completed
his forty-third year. The lifeless corpse was immediately conveyed into
a house at Queenstown, where it remained until the afternoon unperceived
by the enemy. His provincial aide-de-camp, Lieut.-Colonel M'Donell, of
the militia, and the attorney-general of Upper Canada--a fine promising
young man--was mortally wounded soon after his chief, and died the next
day, at the early age of twenty-five years. Although one bullet had
passed through his body, and he was wounded in four places, yet he
survived twenty hours; and during a period of excruciating agony, his
thoughts and words were constantly occupied with lamentations for his
deceased commander and friend. He fell while gallantly charging up the
hill with 190 men, chiefly of the York volunteers, by which charge the
enemy was compelled to spike the 18-pounder in the battery there.

The flank companies of the 49th having suffered severely, and both their
captains being wounded, the disputed ground was lost soon after the
death of the general, and the troops retreated in front of Vromont's
battery, where they awaited the expected reinforcements. The Americans
remained in quiet possession of the heights of Queenstown for some
hours, during which they were but partially reinforced, as their
militia, who a day or two before were so anxious to invade
Canada--having heard from the wounded men sent back what they must
expect if they came in contact with the 49th, "the green tigers," as
they called them from their green facings--could not now be induced,
either by threat or entreaty, to cross the river. Indeed, the flank
companies of the 49th, in the excitement arising from the loss of their
late beloved colonel, are said to have fought with such animosity
throughout the day, as to have fully supported this new title. In the
meanwhile, Major-General Sheaffe arrived from Fort George[98] with
nearly 400 of the 41st regiment, under Captain Derenzy and about 300
militia; and--after being joined by the remnant of the 49th flank
companies and the Indians, and leaving two field pieces with 30 men in
front of Queenstown, to prevent its occupation by the Americans--he
proceeded by a circuitous route to gain the rear of the heights upon
which the enemy was posted. Here he was reinforced by the arrival of the
41st grenadiers and some militia from Chippewa, the whole of the British
and Indian force thus assembled rather exceeding 1,000 men, of whom
about 600 were regulars. In numbers the Americans were about
equal--courage they had, but they wanted the confidence and discipline
of British soldiers.

The attack commenced in the afternoon, and after a little firing, the
British, setting up a shout which was accompanied by the war-whoop of
the Indians, advanced at the double quick or running pace, when the
Americans, perceiving the hopelessness of resistance, fled down the hill
after a feeble contest. The slaughter was unhappily protracted, because
the Indians could not at first be restrained. The Americans, who
attempted to escape into the woods, were quickly driven back by the
Indians; and many, cut off in their return to the main body, and
terrified at the sight of these exasperated warriors, flung themselves
wildly over the cliffs, and endeavoured to cling to the bushes which
grew upon them; but some, losing their hold, were dashed frightfully on
the rocks beneath; while others, who reached the river, perished in
their attempts to swim across it. Such, alas! are the dreadful horrors
too often arising from human warfare! A flag of truce soon came from the
American commander, with the offer of an unconditional surrender, and
Brigadier Wadsworth, with upwards of 900 officers and men, were made
prisoners. The death of the British general is said to have cost the
invaders many a life on that day, which otherwise had been spared. Their
loss was 90 killed and about 100 wounded, while that of the British and
Indians was 16 killed and 69 wounded. The victory, though easily won,
was complete; but it was felt by the conquerors as a poor compensation
for the loss of the British chieftain, thus prematurely cut off in the
pride of manhood and in the noon-tide of his career; while the sorrow
manifested throughout both provinces proved that those who rejoiced in
the failure of this second invasion, would gladly have foregone the
triumph, if by such means they could have regained him who rendered the
heights of Queenstown memorable by his fall.

    Joy's bursting shout in whelming grief was drowned,
    And Victory's self unwilling audience found;
    On every brow the cloud of sadness hung,--
    The sounds of triumph died on every tongue!

"The news of the death of this excellent officer," observed the Quebec
Gazette, "has been received here as a public calamity. The attendant
circumstances of victory scarcely checked the painful sensation. His
long residence in this province, and particularly in this place, had
made him in habits and good offices almost a citizen; and his frankness,
conciliatory disposition, and elevated demeanour, an estimable one. The
expressions of regret as general as he was known, and not uttered by
friends and acquaintance only, but by every gradation of class, not only
by grown persons, but young children, are the test of his worth. Such
too is the only eulogium worthy of the good and brave, and the citizens
of Quebec have, with solemn emotions, pronounced it on his memory. But
at this anxious moment other feelings are excited by his loss. General
Brock had acquired the confidence of the inhabitants within his
government. He had secured their attachment permanently by his own
merits. They were one people animated by one disposition, and this he
had gradually wound up to the crisis in which they were placed. Strange
as it may seem, it is to be feared that he had become too important to
them. The heroic militia of Upper Canada, more particularly, had knit
themselves to his person; and it is yet to be ascertained whether the
desire to avenge his death can compensate the many embarrassments it
will occasion. It is indeed true that the spirit, and even the
abilities, of a distinguished man often carry their influence beyond the
grave; and the present event furnishes its own example, for it is
certain, notwithstanding General Brock was cut off early in the action,
that he had already given an impulse to his little army, which
contributed to accomplish the victory when he was no more. Let us trust
that the recollection of him will become a new bond of union, and that,
as he sacrificed himself for a community of patriots, they will find a
new motive to exertion in the obligation to secure his ashes from the
pestilential dominion of the enemy."

A Montreal newspaper of the day also contained the following
observations: "The private letters from Upper Canada, in giving the
account of the late victory at Queenstown, are partly taken up with
encomiastic lamentations upon the never-to-be-forgotten General Brock,
which do honor to the character and talents of the man they deplore. The
enemy have nothing to hope from the loss they have inflicted; they have
created a hatred which panteth for revenge. Although General Brock may
be said to have fallen in the midst of his career, yet his previous
services in Upper Canada will be lasting and highly beneficial. When he
assumed the government of the province, he found a divided, disaffected,
and, of course, a weak people. He has left them united and strong, and
the universal sorrow of the province attends his fall. The father, to
his children, will make known the mournful story. The veteran, who
fought by his side in the heat and burthen of the day of our
deliverance, will venerate his name."[99]

And the sentiments of the British government, on the melancholy
occasion, were thus expressed in a dispatch from Earl Bathurst, the
secretary of state for the colonies, to Sir George Prevost, dated
December 8, 1812: "His royal highness the prince regent is fully aware
of the severe loss which his majesty's service has experienced in the
death of Major-General Sir Isaac Brock. This would have been sufficient
to have clouded a victory of much greater importance. His majesty has
lost in him not only an able and meritorious officer, but one who, in
the exercise of his functions of provisional lieutenant-governor of the
province, displayed qualities admirably adapted to awe the disloyal, to
reconcile the wavering, and to animate the great mass of the inhabitants
against successive attempts of the enemy to invade the province, in the
last of which he unhappily fell, too prodigal of that life of which his
eminent services had taught us to understand the value."

The Montreal Herald of April 29, 1815, blames Sir George Prevost for
having suppressed, in his general order, much of the preceding letter
from Lord Bathurst, and remarks: "We repeat that the said letter was not
published to the army or to the public, a part of which the latter ought
to have known, because the sentiments expressed by the prince are those
of the loyal people of Upper Canada, who would be glad to have seen them
soon after the official letter arrived in Canada." The following was
substituted for this letter in a general order of the late
commander-in-chief, dated the 10th March, 1813, said to have been
published to the army at the time of its date:

    'His royal highness is fully aware of the severe loss which
    his majesty's service has experienced in the death of
    Major-General Sir Isaac Brock.'

"But we have been told that even the said general order was not known to
some regiments of the right division, until it appeared in the Quebec
Gazette of the 20th instant." And "considering the character of the
distinguished chief who fell on the British side at the Queenstown
battle,"[100] we certainly do not think that Lord Bathurst intended his
dispatch, relative to that officer's death, should have been thus
mutilated or suppressed in the Canadas.

The Canadian boat songs are well known for their plaintive and soothing
effect, and a very beautiful one was composed on the death of
Major-General Brock. The writer of this memoir, while sailing one
evening in the straits of Canso, in British North America--the beautiful
and picturesque scenery of which greatly increased the effect of the
words--remembers to have heard it sung by a Canadian boatman, and he
then thought that he had never listened to vocal sounds more truly
descriptive of melancholy and regret. Even the young in Canada invoked
the Muse in expression of their sympathy, and the following lines were
indited by Miss Ann Bruyeres, described as "an extraordinary child of
thirteen years old," the daughter of the general's friend,
Lieut.-Colonel. Bruyeres, of the Royal Engineers, (see page 213,) and
who died not long after him in consequence of disease contracted in the
field:

    As Fame alighted on the mountain's[101] crest,
    She loudly blew her trumpet's mighty blast;
    Ere she repeated Victory's notes, she cast
    A look around, and stopped: of power bereft,
    Her bosom heaved, her breath she drew with pain,
    Her favorite Brock lay slaughtered on the plain!
    Glory threw on his grave a laurel wreath,
    And Fame proclaims "a hero sleeps beneath."

As if to complete the double allusion to Fame in the preceding lines,
singularly enough the mournful intelligence of Sir Isaac Brock's death
was brought from Quebec to Guernsey by the ship FAME, belonging to that
island, on the 24th November, two days before it was known in London.

Sir Isaac Brock, after lying in state at the government house, where his
body was bedewed with the tears of many affectionate friends, was
interred on the 16th of October, with his provincial aide-de-camp, at
Fort George. His surviving aide-de-camp, Major Glegg, recollecting the
decided aversion of the general to every thing that bore the appearance
of ostentatious display, endeavoured to clothe the distressing ceremony
with all his "native simplicity." But at the same time there were
military honors that could not be avoided, and the following was the
order of the mournful procession,[102] "of which," wrote Major Glegg,
"I enclose a plan; but no pen can describe the real scenes of that
mournful day. A more solemn and affecting spectacle was perhaps never
witnessed. As every arrangement connected with that afflicting ceremony
fell to my lot, a second attack being hourly expected, and the minds of
all being fully occupied with the duties of their respective stations, I
anxiously endeavoured to perform this last tribute of affection in a
manner corresponding with the elevated virtues of my departed patron.
Conceiving that an interment in every respect military would be the most
appropriate to the character of our dear friend, I made choice of a
cavalier bastion in Fort George, which his aspiring genius had lately
suggested, and which had been just finished under his daily
superintendence."

    Fort Major Campbell.
    Sixty Men of the 41st Regiment, commanded by a Subaltern.
    Sixty of the Militia, commanded by a Captain.
    Two Six-Pounders--firing minute guns.
    Remaining Corps and Detachments of the Garrison, with about 200
    Indians, in reversed order, forming a street through which the
    Procession passed, extending from the government house to the
    garrison.
    Band of the 41st Regiment.
    Drums, covered with black cloth, and muffled.

    Late General's Horse, fully caparisoned, led by four Grooms.
                 Servants of the General.
               The General's Body Servant.
         Surgeon Muirhead.            Doctor Kerr.
         Doctor Moore.               Staff Surgeon Thom.
                  Reverend Mr. Addison.

      (_The Body of Lieut.-Colonel M'Donell, P.A.D.C._)

         Capt. A. Cameron.            Lieut. Jarvis.

         Lieut. Robinson.             Lieut. Ridout.

         J. Edwards, Esq.             Capt. Crooks.

         Supporter,                  Supporter,
         Mr. Dickson.                Captain Cameron.

                     Chief Mourner,
                      Mr. M'Donell.

        (_The Body of Major-General Brock._)

              Supporter,                Supporter,
       Mr. James Coffin, D.A.C.G.   Captain Williams, 49th Regt.

       Capt. Vigoreaux, R.E.       Major Merritt, L.H. Lin. Mil.

       Capt. Derenzy, 41st Regt.    Lieut.-Col. Clark, Lin. Mil.

       Capt. Dennis, 49th Regt.    Lieut.-Col. Butler.

       Capt. Holcroft, R.A.        Colonel Claus,

            Supporter,                 Supporter,
       Brigade-Major Evans.        Captain Glegg, A.D.C.

                    Chief Mourners.
    Major-General Sheaffe.         Lieut.-Colonel Myers, D.Q.M.G.
    Ensign Coffin, A.D.C.         Lieut. Fowler, A.D.Q.M.G.
                    The Civil Staff.
                 Friends of the Deceased.
                      Inhabitants.[103]

Such was the esteem in which Sir Isaac Brock was held by the enemies of
his country, for he had or could have no personal enemies, that
Major-General Van Rensselaer, in a letter of condolence, informed
Major-General Sheaffe that immediately after the funeral solemnities
were over on the British side, a compliment of minute guns would be paid
to the hero's memory on theirs!!! Accordingly, the cannon at Fort
Niagara were fired, "as a mark of respect due to a brave enemy." How
much is it then to be regretted that we should ever come into collision
with those who possess the same origin and the same language as
ourselves, and who, by this generous feeling and conduct, proved that
they are a liberal, as they undoubtedly are a gallant, people; and may
the future rivalry of both powers be, not for the unnatural destruction
of each other, but for the benefit of mankind. No words can better
express the favorable opinion entertained by the Americans of the
deceased than the language of their president, Madison, who, alluding to
the battle of Queenstown in his annual message to congress, observed:
"Our loss has been considerable, and is deeply to be lamented. That of
the enemy, less ascertained, will be the more felt, as it includes
amongst the killed the commanding general, who was also the governor of
the province."

Ere we proceed to delineate the person and character of this able
soldier and excellent man, we shall transcribe the sketches of two
strangers,[104] lest the portrait of a relative should be deemed too
highly coloured. That portrait has been drawn by them with a master
hand, especially the first; and although feelingly alive to our
incompetency for the task, we also must endeavour, with a trembling pen,
to do justice to the memory of the hero.

"Thus ended in their total discomfiture," says Christie in his
Historical Memoirs, already cited, "the second attempt of the Americans
to invade Upper Canada. The loss of the British is said to have been
about 20 killed, including Indians, and between 50 and 60 wounded. The
fall of General Brock, the idol of the army and of the people of Upper
Canada, was an irreparable loss, and cast a shade over the glory of this
dear-bought victory. He was a native of Guernsey, of an ancient and
reputable family, distinguished in the profession of arms. He had served
for many years in Canada, and in some of the principal campaigns in
Europe. He commanded a detachment of his favorite 49th regiment, on the
expedition to Copenhagen with Lord Nelson, where he distinguished
himself. He was one of those extraordinary men who seem born to
influence mankind, and mark the age in which they live. Conscious of the
ascendancy of his genius over those who surrounded him, he blended the
mildest of manners with the severity and discipline of a camp; and
though his deportment was somewhat grave and imposing, the noble
frankness of his character imparted at once confidence and respect to
those who had occasion to approach his person. As a soldier, he was
brave to a fault, and not less judicious than decisive in his measures.
The energy of his character was strongly expressed in his countenance,
and in the robust and manly symmetry of his frame. As a civil governor,
he was firm, prudent, and equitable. In fine, whether we view him as a
man, a statesman, or a soldier, he equally deserves the esteem and
respect of his contemporaries and of posterity. The Indians who flocked
to his standard were attached to him with almost enthusiastic affection,
and the enemy even expressed an involuntary regret at his untimely fall.
His prodigality of life bereft the country of his services at the early
age of forty-two years. The remains of this gallant officer were, during
the funeral service, honored with a discharge of minute guns from the
American, as well as the British, batteries, and with those of his
faithful aide-de-camp, Lieut.-Colonel M'Donell, were interred in the
same grave at Fort George, on the 16th October, amidst the tears of an
affectionate soldiery and a grateful people, who will cherish his memory
with veneration, and hand to their posterity the imperishable name of
BROCK."

"General Brock was killed at the battle of Queenstown heights," observes
Howison in his Sketches of Upper Canada, "and the place where he fell
was pointed out to me. The Canadians hold the memory of this brave and
excellent man in great veneration, but have not yet attempted to
testify their respect for his virtues in any way, except by shewing to
strangers the spot on which he received his mortal wound. He was more
popular, and more beloved by the inhabitants of Upper Canada, than any
man they ever had among them, and with reason; for he possessed, in an
eminent degree, those virtues which add lustre to bravery, and those
talents that shine alike in the cabinet and in the field. His manners
and dispositions were so conciliating as to gain the affection of all
whom he commanded, while his innate nobleness and dignity of mind
secured him a respect almost amounting to veneration. He is now styled
the Hero of Upper Canada, and, had he lived, there is no doubt but the
war would have terminated very differently from what it did. The
Canadian farmers are not over-burthened with sensibility, yet I have
seen several of them shed tears when an eulogium was pronounced upon the
immortal and generous-minded deliverer of their country.

"General Brock was killed close to the road that leads through
Queenstown village, and an aged thorn bush now marks the place where he
fell, when the fatal ball entered his vitals. This spot may be called
classic ground, for a view of it must awaken in the minds of all those
who duly appreciate the greatness of his character, and are acquainted
with the nature of his resources and exertions, feelings as warm and
enthusiastic as the contemplation of monuments consecrated by antiquity
can ever do."

Nature had been very bountiful to Sir Isaac Brock in those personal
gifts which appear to such peculiar advantage in the army, and at the
first glance the soldier and the gentleman were seen. In stature he was
tall,[105] erect, athletic, and well proportioned, although in his
latter years his figure was perhaps too portly; and when a young man, at
the head of his company of grenadiers, he attracted general observation
by his martial presence. His fine and benevolent countenance was a
perfect index of his mind, and his manners were courteous, frank, and
engaging. Brave, liberal, and humane; devoted to his sovereign, and
loving his country with romantic fondness; in command so gentle and
persuasive, yet so firm, that he possessed the rare faculty of acquiring
both the respect and the attachment of all who served under him. When
urged by some friends, shortly before his death, to be more careful of
his person, he replied: "How can I expect my men to go where I am afraid
to lead them;" and although perhaps his anxiety ever to shew a good
example, by being foremost in danger, induced him to expose himself more
than strict prudence or formality warranted, yet, if he erred on this
point, his error was that of a soldier.[106] Elevated to the government
of Upper Canada, he reclaimed many of the disaffected by mildness, and
fixed the wavering by the argument of success; and having no national
partialities to gratify, that rock on which so many provincial governors
have split, he meted equal favor and justice to all, British born
subjects soon felt convinced that with him their religion or their
birth-place was no obstacle to their advancement. Even over the minds of
the Indians Sir Isaac Brock gained, at and after the capture of Detroit,
an ascendancy altogether unexampled, and which he judiciously exercised
for purposes conducive equally to the cause of humanity and to the
interests of his country. He engaged them to throw aside the scalping
knife, implanted in their breasts the virtues of clemency and
forbearance, and taught them to feel pleasure and pride in the
compassion extended to a vanquished enemy. In return they revered him as
their common father, and while under his command were guilty of no
excesses.[107] It is well known that this untutored people, the children
of the forests, value personal much more highly than mental qualities,
but the union of both in their leader was happily calculated to impress
their haughty and masculine minds with respect and admiration; and the
speech delivered by Tecumseh, after the capture of Detroit, is
illustrative of the sentiments with which he had inspired these warlike
tribes. "I have heard," observed that chief to him, "much of your fame,
and am happy again to shake by the hand a brave brother warrior. The
Americans endeavour to give us a mean opinion of British generals, but
we have been the witnesses of your valour. In crossing the river to
attack the enemy, we observed you from a distance standing the whole
time in an erect posture, and, when the boats reached the shore, you
were among the first who jumped on land. Your bold and sudden movements
frightened the enemy, and you compelled them to surrender to half their
own force."

Of all the good qualities which adorned this accomplished soldier none
was more prominent than his decision, and it was ever under the guidance
of a sound judgment. His strong attachment to the service, and
particularly to his regiment, formed another distinguishing feature in
his character. A very gallant officer, who still survives, is not
ashamed to confess his pecuniary obligations to Colonel Brock while he
was a subaltern in the 49th, and rendered, as he states, doubly valuable
by the manner in which assistance was afforded to him in his
difficulties. When, as Colonel Brock, he had secured the ringleaders of
the intended mutiny at Fort George, as related in the second chapter, he
ordered the detachment to the parade, where he proceeded to address them
on the enormity of their offence; but when he began to express his
grief and shame at their conduct, he was so affected as to be utterly
unable to continue. The men were equally moved, and are said to have
exclaimed: "Had you commanded us, Sir, this never would have occurred."
Indeed, there was a correspondence of regard between him and his
officers, and even the non-commissioned officers and privates, that,
with this solitary exception, produced the picture of a happy family.
Those extremities of punishment, which the exactions of discipline will
sometimes occasion, rarely reached his men. And yet shortly before he
succeeded to the command of the regiment, it was in a sad state of
disorganization, from the causes already explained. (Page 7.) During the
mutiny on board the fleet at the Nore, in May, 1797, the 49th was
quartered on the borders of the river Thames; and as the privates
evidently sympathized with the seamen, Major Brock not only seldom went
to bed till nearly daylight, but slept with loaded pistols, while during
the day he frequently visited the mess-rooms, to tear down or erase such
inscriptions as "The Navy for Ever." But soon after he became the
lieutenant-colonel, by happily blending conciliation with firmness, and
bringing to a court martial two or three officers, whose misconduct
could not be overlooked, he quickly restored the discipline of the
corps. Having effected this, he afterwards governed it by that sentiment
of esteem which he himself had created, and the consolation was given
him to terminate a brief but brilliant course in the midst of his
professional family.[108]

It deserves to be recorded as an instance of good fortune, unprecedented
perhaps in military annals, and especially in a country where the
advantage and facility of escape were so great, that from the 6th of
August, the day on which Major-General Brock left York for Detroit, to
the period immediately preceding the battle of Queenstown, the force
under his personal command suffered no diminution in its numbers either
by desertion, natural death, or the sword. This comprehended a period of
nearly ten weeks, during which an army was captured, and a journey of
several hundred miles, by land and water, accomplished with extreme
rapidity.

In compiling this memoir, we have been much struck with the rapidity of
Major-General Brock's movements: he appears to have been everywhere,
and, as Veritas observed of him, to have "flown, as it were." To-day at
York, engaged in his civil and military duties--to-morrow at Fort
George, superintending the defences of the Niagara frontier, or at
Kingston, reviewing and animating the militia. To-day at Fort George,
watching the enemy--the next at York, dissolving the legislature--and a
fortnight after, on his return from the capture of Detroit! To-day at
Fort George again--a few hours after at Fort Erie, endeavouring to
retake the brigs Detroit and Caledonia. And yet this most active and
energetic officer was compelled, by his _defensive_ instructions, tamely
to look on the _offensive_ preparations of the Americans for the
invasion of the province committed to his charge!

In conclusion, it is due to the memory of this excellent man to declare
that, eminent and undisputed as were his public virtues, he was no less
estimable in private life. In his own family he was the object of the
warmest affection, and his servants carefully preserved relics of their
dear master, as they styled him to their dying day. His cares and
anxieties had no reference to the wealth he should amass, but to the sum
of human misery he might relieve; and towards the close of his brief
career, as the prospect of increasing honors and emoluments opened to
his view, he contemplated his good fortune only as the means of
diffusing felicity, of drying the tear of affliction. Indeed, so totally
devoid was he of every mercenary consideration, that although he enjoyed
an ample income from his appointments,[109] by which at least the
purchase of his commissions might have been repaid, yet he left
literally nothing but his fair name behind him. Some of his nearest
relatives have since been cut off more prematurely, and far more
cruelly, than himself; but those who still survive him possess the
never-failing consolation which arises from the remembrance of his
virtues, and from the reflection that, though his blessed spirit fled
early from this world, they may meet again in the mansions of futurity.

Though the dead heed not human praise, yet the living act wisely in
commemorating the fall of a distinguished chief--the example is never
thrown away--and on this occasion it is gratifying to reflect, that
every posthumous honor was paid to the memory of one who had merited the
distinction so well. A public monument,[110] having been decreed by the
imperial parliament, was raised a few years since in St. Paul's, and a
view of it is said to have awakened in an astonished Indian more
surprise and admiration than any thing he witnessed in England.[111] In
consequence of an address[112] from the commons of Upper Canada to the
prince regent, a munificent grant of 12,000 acres of land in that
province was bestowed on the four surviving brothers of Sir Isaac Brock,
who, in addition, were allowed a pension of £200 a year for life, by a
vote of the imperial parliament. To "the hero of Upper Canada," as he is
still termed in that country, the provincial legislature erected a lofty
column[113] on Queenstown heights, to which his remains, and those of
his gallant aide-de-camp, were removed from Fort George in solemn
procession, on the 13th of October, 1824.[114] Although twelve years had
elapsed since the interment, the body of the general had undergone
little change, his features being nearly perfect and easily recognized,
while that of Lieut.-Colonel M'Donell was in a complete mass of
decomposition. One of his regimental companions, Colonel Fitzgibbon, in
transmitting a detail of the ceremonies of the day, thus pathetically
expressed himself: "Nothing, certainly, could exceed the interest
manifested by the people of the province upon the occasion; and numbers
from the neighbouring state of New York, by their presence and conduct,
proved how highly the Americans revere the memory of our lamented chief.
Of the thousands present not one had cause to feel so deeply as I, and I
felt as if alone, although surrounded by the multitude. He had been more
than a father to me in that regiment which he ruled like a father, and I
alone of his old friends in that regiment was present to embalm with a
tear his last honored retreat. What I witnessed on this day would have
fully confirmed me in the opinion, had confirmation been wanting, that
the public feeling in this province has been permanently improved and
elevated by Sir Isaac Brock's conduct and actions while governing its
inhabitants. These, together with his dying in their defence, have done
more towards cementing our union with the mother country than any event
or circumstance since the existence of the province. Of this our leading
men are aware, and are careful to seize every opportunity of preserving
recollections so productive of good effects." The height of the
column,[115] which commanded a view of the surrounding country for about
fifty miles, was from the base to the summit 135 feet, and from the
level of the Niagara river, which runs nearly under it, 485 feet. The
following inscription was engraven on this splendid tribute to the
unfading remembrance of a grateful people:[116]


    UPPER CANADA
    HAS DEDICATED THIS MONUMENT
    TO THE MEMORY OF THE LATE
    MAJOR-GENERAL SIR ISAAC BROCK, K.B.
    PROVISIONAL LIEUT.-GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER OF THE FORCES
    IN THIS PROVINCE,
    WHOSE REMAINS ARE DEPOSITED IN THE VAULT BENEATH.
    OPPOSING THE INVADING ENEMY,
    HE FELL IN ACTION NEAR THESE HEIGHTS,
    ON THE 13th OCTOBER, 1812,
    IN THE 43rd YEAR OF HIS AGE,
    REVERED AND LAMENTED
    BY THE PEOPLE WHOM HE GOVERNED,
    AND DEPLORED BY THE SOVEREIGN
    TO WHOSE SERVICE HIS LIFE HAD BEEN DEVOTED.

The cataract of Niagara is supposed to have commenced on the heights of
Queenstown, and to have gradually receded, or worn its way backwards to
its present site, seven miles above, near Chippewa, the banks of the
river on both sides between the two spots being perpendicular, 2 to 300
feet in height, chiefly of solid rock, and of the same level as the
fall.

"The village of Queenstown is beautifully situated at the foot of a
hill, and upon the side of the Niagara river, the bank of which is high
and precipitous. The imagination is agreeably struck with the first view
of the place. On one side of the village is a mountain covered with
shrubbery and verdure;--behind, a rich and cultivated plain extends
backwards, which is bounded in every direction by luxuriant woods; while
in front, the Niagara river glides in majestic stillness, and may be
traced, with all its windings, till its waters are swallowed up in the
vast expanse of Lake Ontario. The soil around Queenstown consists
chiefly of a red clay, the bright colour of which, upon the roads and
declivities where it is exposed, forms a singular contrast, during
summer, with the pure green of the trees and fields in the vicinity.

"Queenstown must infallibly acquire magnitude and importance when the
province becomes populous and flourishing, for it is situated at the
commencement of a portage, which never can be evaded by any improvement
in the navigation, it being rendered necessary by the falls of Niagara;
therefore, all vessels containing goods and stores destined for the
western parts of Upper Canada must unload and leave their cargoes at
Queenstown, that they may be conveyed overland to Chippewa, where the
Niagara river again becomes navigable. Even now, a good deal of this
carrying business goes on during the summer months. The North-West
Company forward a considerable quantity of stores to the Indian
territories by this route, and the country merchants receive annual
supplies of goods from Montreal, and send down pork, flour, staves, and
potash, in return.

"The environs of Queenstown are beautifully picturesque and romantic,
and nothing can be finer than the prospect up the Niagara river.
Immediately above the village its channel narrows very much, and the
banks rise to the height of 300 feet perpendicular, while at the same
time they become wild and rocky, and are thickly covered with trees of
various kinds. In some places they partly over-arch the river, and throw
an appalling gloom upon its waters, now dashed into turbulence and
impetuosity by the ruggedness of their sloping bed.

"At the ferry, the Niagara river is 1,250 feet in breadth, and from 2 to
300 in depth. The current is very rapid, and the wreathing and perturbed
appearance of the water shews that its course is much impeded by the
narrowness of the channel, which must be entirely composed of rocks;
for, otherwise, the continual and rapid attrition of such a large river
as that which flows through it, would undermine and wear away the
banks, and thus gradually enlarge and widen its course.

"The prospect from the top of Queenstown mountain is the finest and most
extensive that Upper Canada affords, and, in an eminent degree, combines
the beautiful and the magnificent. The wild and majestic precipices
which engulf one part of the Niagara river, the windings and mirrored
expanse of that noble body of water, the dim and undiscoverable extent
of Lake Ontario, together with the verdant orchards, thick forests, and
improved fields, glowing beneath a pure sky, collectively form a scene
of admirable effect and composition. Even York, which is 36 miles
distant, and lies very low, can be seen from the summit of this hill
during clear weather."[117]

      *      *      *      *      *

    ON THE DEATH OF MAJOR-GENERAL BROCK.

    Low bending o'er the rugged bier
    The soldier drops the mournful tear,
    For life departed, valour driven,
    Fresh from the field of death to heaven.

    But time shall fondly trace the name
    Of BROCK upon the scrolls of fame,
    And those bright laurels, which should wave
    Upon the brow of one so brave,
    Shall flourish vernal o'er his grave.

    J.H.R.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 95: James' Military Occurrences.]

[Footnote 96: The present Colonel James Dennis, lieut.-colonel 3d foot:
an officer of above forty-eight years service, and several times
wounded.]

[Footnote 97: See Captain Wool's letter, Appendix A, Section 2, No. 3.]

[Footnote 98: Major-General Brock, soon after his arrival at Queenstown,
sent orders for the battering from Fort George of the American fort
Niagara, which was done with so much effect that the garrison was forced
to abandon it.]

[Footnote 99: Death and Victory: a sermon under this title was preached
by the Rev. William Smart, at Brockville, Elizabethtown, November 15, on
the death of Major-General Brock, and published at the request of the
officers stationed at that post and of the gentlemen of the village. The
text was: "How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle."]

[Footnote 100: James' Military Occurrences.]

[Footnote 101: The mountain above Queenstown, where Major-General Brock
was slain.]

[Footnote 102: _Extract from D.G.O. for the Funeral_.
    The officers will wear crape on their left arms and on their
    sword knots, and all officers will, throughout the province,
    wear crape on their left arm for the space of one month.

    Captain Holcroft will be pleased to direct that minute guns be
    fired from the period of the bodies leaving government house
    until their arrival at the place of interment; and also, after
    the funeral service shall have been performed, three rounds of
    seven guns from the artillery. By order. THOMAS EVANS, B.M.
]

[Footnote 103: Extracted from the York Gazette, October 24, 1812.]

[Footnote 104: For brief extracts relative to Sir Isaac Brock from other
authors, see Appendix A, Section 1, No. 5.]

[Footnote 105: In height about six feet two inches. Since the first
sheets were printed, we have heard from a school-fellow of his, James
Carey, Esq., that young Brock was the best boxer and swimmer in the
school, and that he used to swim from the main land of Guernsey to
Castle Cornet and back, a distance each way of nearly half a mile. This
feat is the more difficult, from the strong tides which run between the
passage.]

[Footnote 106: "On arriving before Fort Detroit, a characteristic trait
of his courage took place, when, within range of the guns of that fort,
and in front of his heroic and devoted band of militiamen and regulars,
his attention was drawn by Colonel Nichol to the dangerous nature of the
expedition, and to the wish of his gallant comrades in arms that he
would not go to the front, and endanger a life they could not spare--to
these suggestions he replied: 'I will never desire the humblest
individual to go where I cannot lead.'"--_Toronto Herald_, June 15,
1843.]

[Footnote 107: For council of condolence, see Appendix A, Section 1, No.
6.]

[Footnote 108: The officers of the 49th, after his death, instructed the
regimental agent in London to procure them a likeness of Sir Isaac
Brock, that it might be placed in their mess-room, and allotted a
handsome sum for this purpose. The agent applied to the family for a
copy, but unfortunately they possessed no good likeness of the general.]

[Footnote 109: The salary attached to the civil government of Upper
Canada was increased, we believe, shortly before his death to £3,000 a
year.]

[Footnote 110: By an official return, it appears that this monument cost
£1,575 sterling. For inscription, &c, see Appendix A, Section 1, No. 7.]

[Footnote 111: See Appendix A, Section 1, No. 8.]

[Footnote 112: For the address, see Appendix A, Section 1, No. 9.]

[Footnote 113: This column cost nearly £3,000.]

[Footnote 114: For the details of the re-interment, see Appendix A,
Section 1, No. 10.]

[Footnote 115: It was a Tuscan column on a rustic pedestal, with a
pedestal for a statue; the diameter of the base of the column was
seventeen feet six inches, and the abacus of the capital was surrounded
with an iron railing. The centre shaft, containing the spiral wooden
staircase, was ten feet in diameter.]

[Footnote 116: We speak in the past tense, because the column, as will
be seen in the sequel, was so much injured in 1840 as to require its
reconstruction.]

[Footnote 117: Howison's Sketches of Upper Canada. London, 1821.]


CHAPTER XV.


Sir Isaac Brock was succeeded in his civil and military commands in
Upper Canada by Major-General Sheaffe, who was created a baronet for the
dearly bought victory of Queenstown. After the battle, he paroled
General Wadsworth and some of the principal American officers, the
remainder proceeding to Quebec. Among the prisoners, 23 were found to be
deserters from English regiments, and British born subjects; and they
were sent to England for trial as traitors. This caused a retaliation
upon British prisoners in the United States, and an equal number were
put by the American government into close confinement as hostages for
the security of the traitors.

On the 18th of October, General Smyth assumed the command at Niagara,
and applied to the British general for an armistice; and notwithstanding
the well-known prejudicial effect of the former one proposed by Sir
George Prevost, it was agreed to by Major-General Sheaffe![118] This
unaccountable proceeding, as might easily have been foreseen, proved of
material detriment to the British on Lake Erie, as the Americans availed
themselves of so favorable an occasion to forward their naval stores
unmolested from Black Rock to Presqu'île by water, which they could not
otherwise have effected, but with immense trouble and expense by land,
and equipped at leisure the fleet which afterwards wrested from us the
command of that lake. When the enemy was prepared for a third invasion
of Upper Canada, General Smyth did not fail to give the thirty hours
notice required for the cessation of the armistice, which terminated on
the 20th of November.

"After the surrender of Detroit," said the inhabitants of Niagara in
their spirited letter to Sir George Prevost, already quoted (page 279),
"the enemy were suffered unmolested to concentrate a large force on the
Niagara, at Sackett's Harbour on Lake Ontario, and at Ogdensburg on the
St. Lawrence; they were not interrupted in bringing forward to these
places a large quantity of field and heavy artillery, with the requisite
supplies of ammunition, and in equipping a flotilla, to dispute with us
the superiority of the lakes. When their preparations were
complete--when our regular and militia forces were nearly exhausted with
incessant watching and fatigue, occasioned by the movements of the
enemy, which kept them constantly on the alert by uncertainty as to the
point of attack--they at length, on the 13th of October, attacked our
line at Queenstown. The behaviour of both regulars and militia on that
memorable occasion is well known to your excellency, and added another
wreath to the laurels they had gained at Detroit: the glories of that
day were, however, obscured by the death of our beloved and now lamented
chief, whose exertions had prepared the means of achieving this great
victory. This was another triumph for the militia; they had fairly
measured their strength with the enemy, and derived additional
confidence from the glorious result. Here was another opportunity that
slipped away without being improved: Fort Niagara was abandoned by the
enemy, and might have been with the greatest ease destroyed, and its
guns brought away by a trifling force. It is neither necessary, nor do
we feel inclined to enter into the causes why it was not done; we have,
however, the strongest reason to believe that, had General Brock
survived, it would have been attempted. In addition to this (as we
consider it) capital error, Major Mullaney, and other natural born
subjects of his majesty, actually taken in arms as commissioned officers
in the service of the United States, were released and allowed to return
on parole to that country; and a partial armistice was agreed to, liable
to be broken off at thirty hours notice, which could be productive of no
real advantage to us, nor give any repose to our harassed and suffering
militia, though it enabled the enemy to recruit his strength and
organize at will the means of attacking us anew. He was observed busily
and actively employed, throughout a great part of the month of November,
collecting boats on the Fort Erie end of the line; and when his
preparations were complete, he gave notice of the termination of the
armistice on the 20th."

"When General Wilkinson complains," observes the British historian
James, "that the executive has not rendered 'common justice to the
principal actors in this gallant scene,'--not exhibited it to the
country 'in its true light, and shewn what deeds Americans are still
capable of performing,'[119]--who among us can retain his gravity? 'It
is true,' says the general, 'complete success did not ultimately crown
this enterprise; but two great ends were obtained for the country: it
re-established the character of the American arms;'--it did
indeed!--'and deprived the enemy, by the death of General Brock, of the
best officer that has headed their troops in Canada throughout the
war;'--truth undeniable!--'and, with his loss, put an end to their then
brilliant career;'--yet the capture of General Wadsworth took place in
less than five hours afterwards.

"The instant we know what the Americans expected to gain, a tolerable
idea may be formed of what they actually lost by the attack upon
Queenstown. General Van Rensselaer, in a letter to Major-General
Dearborn, written five days previously, says thus: 'Should we succeed,
we shall effect a great discomfiture of the enemy, by breaking their
line of communication, driving their shipping from the mouth of this
river, leaving them no rallying point in this part of the country,
appalling the minds of the Canadians, and opening a wide and safe
communication for our supplies; we shall save our own land,--wipe away
part of the score of our past disgrace,--get excellent barracks and
winter quarters, and at least be prepared for an early campaign another
year.'

"It is often said, that we throw away by the pen what we gain by the
sword. Had General Brock been less prodigal of his valuable life, and
survived the Queenstown battle, he would have made the 13th of October a
still more 'memorable' day, by crossing the river and carrying Fort
Niagara, which, at that precise time, was nearly stripped of its
garrison. Instead of doing this, and thus putting an end to the campaign
upon the Niagara frontier, Major-General Sheaffe, General Brock's
successor, allowed himself to be persuaded to sign an armistice."

In November, the Americans were already in command of Lake Ontario,[120]
and their fleet, after chasing the Royal George into Kingston, captured
on the 12th the transport sloop Elizabeth, on board of which was Mr.
Brock, paymaster of the 49th. He was paroled by Commodore Chauncey, who,
to his credit be it said, immediately restored "the plate and effects
belonging to his late illustrious relative," which he was conveying from
Fort George to Kingston. The box of letters and other papers from which
this little work has been principally compiled, was, we believe, among
these effects; and we gladly seize this opportunity to express the
obligation of Sir Isaac Brock's family to the commodore for his
generosity on this occasion.

On the 27th April, 1813, York was captured by Major-General Dearborn,
with 1,800 American troops, embarked in fourteen sail of armed vessels,
that post being occupied by 700 regulars and militia, with from 40 to 50
Indians, the whole under the immediate command of Sir Roger Sheaffe. In
resisting the enemy, the grenadier company of the 8th (the king's)
regiment greatly distinguished themselves, losing their captain, M'Neal,
and being nearly annihilated. By an explosion of the powder magazine, to
which a train had been laid, 260 of the Americans were killed or
wounded, including Brigadier Pike among the former; and they were thrown
into such confusion, that an immediate and resolute attack would
probably have sent them back to their ships.[121] The British general
"drew off his regulars and left the rest to capitulate within the town,
wherein considerable public stores were lost;"[122] and the Americans,
having secured their booty, re-embarked and sailed on the 2d of May for
Niagara. The inhabitants of York do not appear to have been satisfied
with the conduct of Major-General Sheaffe in this affair; and, although
it was not ascertained whether his removal was the result of the
displeasure of the Commander-in-chief, he was replaced early in July by
Major-General de Rottenburg, and on his arrival in the Lower Province he
assumed the command of the troops in the district of Montreal. A few
months after, the Baron de Rottenburg was in his turn succeeded by
Lieut.-General Gordon Drummond, who commanded in Upper Canada to the end
of the war.

We have alluded (page 278) to the discomfiture of Sir George Prevost
before Sackett's Harbour, that naval arsenal whose destruction
Major-General Brock was so unfortunately prevented from undertaking. The
governor-general having proceeded in May from Montreal to Kingston with
Sir James Yeo, who had just arrived from England to command the British
naval forces on the lakes--the squadron on Lake Ontario now consisting
of two ships, a brig, and two schooners--the public was on the tiptoe of
expectation for some decisive dash on the enemy's flotilla on that lake.
An attack upon Sackett's Harbour, in the absence of their fleet at
Niagara, was resolved upon, so as to destroy "the forts, the arsenals,
and the dock-yard, where the Americans had a frigate almost ready for
launching, and several other vessels; but when this wavering and
spiritless general reconnoitred the place, he would not venture an
attack, and returned across the water towards Kingston. Then he changed
his mind and went back to Sackett's Harbour; and (but not without more
wavering and loss of time) our troops, about 750 strong, were landed.
The Americans were presently driven at the bayonet's point into some
loop-holed barracks and forts; and so panic-stricken were they that they
immediately set fire to their new frigate, their naval barracks and
arsenal, and destroyed a gun-brig and all the stores which had so
recently been captured at York. While the arsenal was in flames, while
the Americans were flying through the village, and when the complete
success of the assailants was certain, Sir George Prevost sent a
precipitate order for retreat, merely because a momentary resistance was
offered by a party of Americans who had taken refuge in the
log-barracks! The British troops reluctantly obeyed their general's
order and returned to their boats, men and officers being acutely
sensible to his folly, and wondering by what means so incompetent a
commander had been placed over them. If Sir George Prevost had studied
the history of the war of the American revolution, it could only have
been with an eye to copy all the indecisions and blunders of the
formalising, badly instructed English generals of that period. But the
Howes, Clintons, and Burgoynes, were at least always ready to fight. As
soon as the Americans could believe that the English were really
abandoning their enterprize at the moment that it was all but completed,
they rushed back to stop the conflagration: they were too late to save
the stores which had been brought from York, the navy barracks, or the
brig, but the frigate on the stocks, being built of green wood, would
not easily burn, and was found but little injured. If the destruction at
Sackett's Harbour had been completed, we should have deprived the
Americans of every prospect of obtaining the ascendancy on the
lake."[123] And, as if to crown this miserable failure, the details were
narrated by the adjutant-general, in a dispatch to Sir George Prevost,
as if Colonel Baynes had commanded in chief, and the governor-general
had been present as a mere spectator![124]

From these humiliating occurrences on Lake Ontario, we turn to the
captured post of Detroit, which, it will be remembered, was left by
Major-General Brock in charge of Colonel Proctor. No sooner had
intelligence of the surrender of Hull reached Washington, than the
renewal of the North-Western army for the recovery of the Michigan
territory became the anxious object of the American government. That
army, which eventually outnumbered the former one, was placed under the
command of Major-General Harrison, (who died a few years since while
president of the United States,) and in September was in full march for
the Miami rapids, the spot assigned as the general rendezvous. In
January, 1813, Colonel Proctor received information that a brigade of
that army, under Brigadier Winchester, was encamped at Frenchtown, on
the river Raisin, 40 miles south of Detroit. The British commander,
although he had orders not to act on the offensive, promptly determined
to attack this brigade before it was reinforced by the main body, a few
days march in the rear; and with his disposable force, consisting of 500
regulars, militia, and seamen, he made a resolute assault, at dawn on
the 22d, on the enemy's camp, which was completely successful. In this
affair the Americans lost between 3 and 400 men killed; and Brigadier
Winchester, 3 field officers, 9 captains, 20 subalterns, and upwards of
500 men, in prisoners. This gallant exploit secured Detroit from any
immediate danger, but the day after it was sadly tarnished by the
straggling Indians, who massacred such wounded prisoners as were unable
to walk, the guard left for their protection deserting their charge on a
false alarm of General Harrison's approach. This success, for which
Colonel Proctor was immediately promoted to the rank of Brigadier,
together with the spoil obtained at Frenchtown, brought down several
warlike tribes of Indians from the river Wabash, and even from the more
distant Mississippi, to join the British standard. Towards the end of
March, Proctor learnt that General Harrison intended to commence active
operations for the recovery of the Michigan territory, on the arrival of
considerable reinforcements which he was expecting. Resolved to try the
issue of another attack before the enemy, already much superior in
numbers, gained a fresh acquisition of strength, Proctor embarked at
Amherstburg with 520 regulars and 460 militia, and made for the mouth of
the Miami, which falls into Lake Erie. He ascended that river, about
1,200 Indians co-operating with him, and landed his troops, stores, and
ordnance, on the 28th of April, near Fort Meigs, mounting eighteen guns,
which he cannonaded from both banks of the Miami, On the 5th of May the
enemy's long-expected reinforcements, under Major-General Clay, came
suddenly down the river; they were 1,300 strong, but newly-raised
militia; and as the boats drew near, Harrison ordered Clay to storm the
British batteries on the opposite or north side of the river, while a
sortie was made from the fort for the purpose of capturing the three
British guns on the southern bank. For a short period the British
batteries on both sides were in the hands of the enemy, but they were
quickly regained by bayonet charges; and on the north bank Colonel
Dudley, after spiking the captured guns, having marched with 400 men to
attack the British camp, was drawn into an ambuscade by the Indians, and
himself and about half his men were slain. Of the Americans, about 550
men were made prisoners, and their killed and wounded were estimated at
nearly as many more. The far-famed Tecumseh buried his tomahawk in the
head of a Chippewa chief, whom he found actively engaged in massacring
some of the prisoners. But as the Indians retired, as is their wont
after success, to enjoy their plunder; and as many of the militia were
also returning to their homes, Proctor was compelled to raise the siege
of Fort Meigs. Having re-embarked his small force of regulars, chiefly
of the 41st, and the whole of his ordnance and stores, he proceeded to
Sandwich; while General Harrison abandoned all intention of advancing
against Detroit until the American squadron had gained the command of
Lake Erie.

Major-General Proctor having determined to recommence his attacks
against the American North-Western army, whose head quarters were then
in the neighbourhood of Sandusky Bay, on Lake Erie, he landed on the 1st
of August near the Sandusky river, and soon after invested with 400
regulars and between 3 and 400 Indians, Fort Stephenson, about 20 miles
from its mouth. On the 2d, a fire was opened from two 6-pounders and
two 5-1/2-inch howitzers against the fort, which appears to have
possessed only one masked 6-pounder, and to have been garrisoned by
about 180 men, under Major Croghan, but as the fire produced no
impression, the place was ordered to be stormed. The assailants reached
the ditch which was raked by the masked gun, and sustained in
consequence so severe a loss, that they retreated precipitately, having
their leader, Brevet Lieut-Colonel Short, of the 41st, with 3 officers
and 52 men, killed or missing, besides 3 officers and 38 men wounded;
while the Americans had only 1 killed and 7 slightly wounded. The
Indians did not assist in the assault, withdrawing to a ravine out of
gun shot. Thus foiled, Proctor retired on the 3d, and after abandoning
"considerable baggage and a gun-boat laden with cannon ball," he
returned to Amherstburg. The attack is said to have been "ill digested,"
and the expedition to have ended with "some disgrace."

Towards the end of August, (1813,) the American squadron, under
Commodore Perry, became too powerful for the British, under Captain
Barclay, who now remained at Amherstburg to await the equipment of the
Detroit, recently launched. The British forces in the neighbourhood
falling short of various supplies, for which they depended chiefly upon
the fleet, Captain Barclay had no other alternative than to risk a
general engagement. With this purpose he sailed on the 9th of September,
with his small squadron wretchedly manned, and the next day encountered
the enemy. For some time the fate of the battle poised in favor of the
British, as the principal American ship, the Lawrence, struck her
colours; but a sudden breeze turned the scale against them, and the
whole of their squadron was compelled to surrender, after a desperate
engagement of upwards of three hours. Captain Barclay was dangerously
wounded; Captain Finnis, of the Queen Charlotte, killed; and every
commander and officer second in command was either killed or wounded.

Major-General Proctor's army was deprived, by this disastrous defeat, of
every prospect of obtaining its necessary supplies through Lake Erie,
and a speedy retreat towards the head of Lake Ontario became inevitable.
Stung with grief and indignation, Tecumseh at first refused to agree to
the measure, and in a council of war held at Amherstburg on the 18th of
September, he thus delivered his sentiments against it:

    Father, listen to your children! You have them now all before
    you.

    The war before this, our British father gave the hatchet to
    his red children, when our old chiefs were alive. They are now
    dead. In that war our father was thrown on his back by the
    Americans, and our father took them by the hand without our
    knowledge; and we are afraid that our father will do so again
    at this time.

    The summer before last, when I came forward with my red
    brethren, and was ready to take up the hatchet in favor of our
    British father, we were told not to be in a hurry,--that he
    had not yet determined to fight the Americans.

    Listen! When war was declared, our father stood up and gave
    us the tomahawk, and told us that he was then ready to strike
    the Americans; that he wanted our assistance; and that he
    would certainly get us hack our lands, which the Americans had
    taken from us.

    Listen! You told us, at that time, to bring forward our
    families to this place, and we did so; and you promised to
    take care of them, and that they should want for nothing,
    while the men would go and fight the enemy; that we need not
    trouble ourselves about the enemy's garrisons; that we knew
    nothing about them, and that our father would attend to that
    part of the contest. You also told your red children that you
    would take good care of your garrison here, which made our
    hearts glad.

    Listen! When we were last at the Rapids, it is true we gave
    you little assistance. It is hard to fight people who live
    like ground hogs.

    Father, listen! Our fleet has gone out; we know they have
    fought; we have heard the great guns; but we know nothing of
    what has happened to our father with that arm. Our ships have
    gone one way, and we are much astonished to see our father
    tying up every thing and preparing to run away the other,
    without letting his red children know what his intentions are.
    You always told us to remain here and take care of our lands;
    it made our hearts glad to hear that was your wish. Our great
    father, the king, is the head, and you represent him. You
    always told us that you would never draw your foot off British
    ground; but now, father, we see you are drawing back, and we
    are sorry to observe our father doing so without seeing the
    enemy. We must compare our father's conduct to a fat dog, that
    carries its tail upon its back, but when affrighted, it drops
    it between its legs and runs off.

    Father, listen! The Americans have not yet defeated us by
    land; neither are we sure that they have done so by water: _we
    therefore wish to remain here and fight our_ _enemy, should
    they make their appearance_. If they defeat us, we will _then_
    retreat with our father.

    At the battle of the Rapids, last war, the Americans certainly
    defeated us; and, when we retreated to our father's fort in
    the neighbourhood, the gates were shut against us. We were
    afraid that it would again be the case; but, instead of
    closing the gates, we now see our British father preparing to
    march out of his garrison.

    Father! You have got the arms and ammunition which our great
    father sent for his red children. If you intend to retreat,
    give them to us, and you may go, and welcome for us. Our lives
    are in the hands of the Great Spirit. We are determined to
    defend our lands, and if it be His will, we wish to leave our
    bones upon them.

General Harrison's troops were soon transported by the American squadron
to _Put-in-Bay_, and they occupied Amherstburg on the 23d of September,
Proctor having previously fallen back upon Sandwich, after setting fire
to the navy yard, barracks, and public stores at the former place. The
British general, seeing the enemy determined to follow up his first
success by an immediate attack upon Detroit, and being unable with his
very inferior numbers to dispute the occupancy of that post, evacuated
it and Sandwich on the 26th, also destroying the public property at both
posts; and commenced his retreat along the river Thames, with between
900 and 1,000 regulars, chiefly of the 41st regiment. In this reverse of
fortune, Tecumseh still adhered to the British standard with unswerving
fidelity, and with the Indians covered the retreat. On the 2d of
October, General Harrison marched in pursuit with rather above 3,000
men, escorted by three gun-boats and a number of bateaux. On the 4th, he
came up with the rear guard, and not only made some prisoners, but
succeeded in capturing a great part of the ammunition and stores. By
this second reverse, the British were left destitute of the means of
subsistence and protracted defence; and their commander being thus
compelled to stake the fate of his small army on a general engagement,
he took up an excellent position on the right bank of the Thames at the
Moravian town, an Indian village 80 miles from Sandwich, his entire
force now mustering barely 900 regulars and about 600 Indians. The
former were posted in single files in two lines, their left resting on
the river, their right on a narrow swamp, beyond which were the Indians,
reaching obliquely backwards to a second and much broader swamp, so that
neither flank of the allies could be easily turned. The enemy commenced
the attack with a regiment of mounted riflemen, the _élite_ of their
army, formed into two divisions of 500 men each, one of which charged
the regulars with great impetuosity, while the other advanced with a
company of foot against the Indians. The regulars, dissatisfied by
fancied or real neglect, and dispirited by long continued exposure and
privation, made but a very feeble resistance; their ranks were pierced
and broken, and being placed between two fires, they immediately
surrendered, with the trifling loss of 12 killed and 22 wounded, the
British general and a part of the troops seeking safety in flight. But
the Indians carried on the contest with the left of the American line
with great determination, and did not retreat until the day was
irretrievably lost and 33 of their numbers had been slain, including the
noble Tecumseh--a warrior not less celebrated for his courage than for
his humanity, his eloquence, and his influence over the different
tribes. The Americans returned to Sandwich immediately after the action.
Proctor is accused of leaving entire the bridges and roads in the rear
of his retreating army, and of encumbering it with an unnecessary
quantity of his own personal baggage; and certain it is that his defeat
led to the harshest recrimination between Sir George Prevost and
himself. The general order of the former on the subject was of
unparalleled severity, as he said: "On this disgraceful day upwards of
600 officers and soldiers were taken prisoners almost without a
struggle, of whom but very few appeared to have been rescued by an
honorable death from the ignominy of passing under the American yoke;
nor are there many whose wounds plead in mitigation of this reproach."
The fugitives made the best of their way to Ancaster, at the head of
Lake Ontario; and on the 17th of October they numbered there 240,
including the general and 17 officers. The consequence of these
disasters was the relinquishment, by the British, of the Michigan
territory, with the exception of Michilimakinack; the abandonment of the
posts in Upper Canada to the westward of the Grand River, or Ouse; and
the loss of the services of the whole of the north-western Indians, with
the exception of 2 or 300, who subsequently joined the centre division
of the army.[125]

Fort George was taken in May, 1813, by a large American force, under
General Dearborn, which compelled Major-General Vincent to withdraw his
troops from Fort Erie and Chippewa, and to retreat to Burlington
Heights, at the head of Lake Ontario, the British losing 52 killed,
besides upwards of 300 wounded and missing. Immediately after the
capture of Fort George, General Dearborn pushed forward a body of 3,000
infantry, with nine field pieces and 250 cavalry, for the purpose of
dislodging Major-General Vincent from his position. Lieut.-Colonel
Harvey,[126] deputy adjutant-general, proposed a night attack on this
body, which was approved, and with the 49th, under Major Plenderleath,
and five companies of the 8th, under Major Ogilvie, (the whole only 704
firelocks,) he led the attack in gallant style, and completely succeeded
in surprising the enemy, who evinced a highly creditable state of order
and discipline in repeatedly forming, though compelled as often to
disperse before the resistless energy of the British bayonet. Two
brigadiers, (Chandler and Winder,) 7 other officers and 116 men, with
three guns and one brass howitzer, were taken in this intrepid attack,
which, as it reduced the Americans from offensive to defensive
operations, was of the greatest importance to the salvation of the Upper
Province. The enemy, however, occupied Fort George till the month of
December, when they were compelled to evacuate it and retreat across the
Niagara.[127] In that month, Colonel Murray surprised, and very
gallantly captured by a night assault, Fort Niagara, which was retained
by the British till the end of the war.

The recovery of Michilimakinack had long been seriously contemplated by
the American government, and would have been attempted in the fall of
1813, but for the lateness of the season, when the expulsion of the
British from the banks of the Detroit had opened the passage into Lake
Huron. On the other hand, the necessity of retaining a post so favorably
situated, if in the hands of an enemy, for annoying the British
north-western trade, pressed itself on Sir George Prevost; and in April,
1814, a reinforcement of about 90 men, under an active and zealous
officer, Lieut.-Colonel M'Douall, was forwarded with military stores and
provisions, by a back route to Michilimakinack. They embarked in
twenty-four bateaux from Nottawassega Bay on Lake Huron, distant 260
miles from Michilimakinack, and, after a very tempestuous passage of
twenty-five days, reached the fort on the 18th of May. On the 26th July,
an American expedition from Lake Erie, consisting of three brigs and two
schooners of war, under Captain Sinclair, with nearly 800 troops on
board, appeared off Michilimakinack, and a landing was effected by them
on the 4th of August. The British force on the island amounted to only
190 men, including regulars, militia, and Indians, with which
Lieut.-Colonel M'Donall repulsed every effort of the Americans to
approach the fort; so that they were glad, to re-embark the same evening
in the utmost haste and confusion, leaving 17 dead on the ground, while
the garrison had only one Indian killed. Captain Sinclair stated what
does not appear to have been known to Lieutenant Hanks, when he
surrendered the island in 1812 to Captain Roberts,[128] "that
Michilimakinack is by nature a perfect Gibraltar, being a high
inaccessible rock on every side,[129] except the west, from which to the
heights you have nearly two miles to pass through a wood so thick, that
our men were shot in every direction, and within a few yards of them,
without being able to see the Indians who did it." Michilimakinack
remained unmolested to the end of the war, when it was restored, by the
treaty of peace, to its former possessors.

It has already been mentioned, that among the prisoners taken at the
battle of Queenstown, 23 were sent to England for trial as British born
subjects and deserters, and that the American government had placed an
equal number of British soldiers into close confinement as hostages. In
consequence, Sir George Prevost, by a general order of the 27th October,
1813, made known that he had received the commands of the prince regent
to put 46 American officers and non-commissioned officers into close
confinement as hostages for the 23 soldiers confined by the American
government. He at the same time apprized that government, that if any of
the British soldiers should suffer death by reason of the guilt and
execution of the traitors taken in arms against their country, he was
instructed to select out of the American hostages double the number of
the British soldiers who might be so unwarrantably put to death, and to
cause them to suffer death immediately. The governor-general also
notified to the American government, that in the event of their carrying
their murderous threat into execution, the commanders of the British
forces, by sea and land, were instructed to prosecute the war with
unmitigated severity against all the territory and inhabitants of the
United States.

On the 10th of December, Sir George Prevost received a communication
from Major-General Wilkinson by a flag of truce, stating that the
American government, adhering unalterably to their previously declared
purpose, had placed 46 British officers into close confinement, there to
remain until the same number of American officers and non-commissioned
officers were released. In consequence, the governor-general ordered all
the American officers, prisoners of war, without exception of rank, to
be placed into close confinement as hostages, until the number of 46 was
completed over and above those already in confinement. In pursuance of
this order, Generals Winder, Chandler, and Winchester, were confined in
a private house at Quebec, with as little inconvenience as their
security would admit.

On the 15th April, 1814, after some negotiation, opened at the
solicitation of the American government, a convention was entered into
at Montreal, by which it was agreed to release the hostages and to make
an exchange of prisoners, the American government relinquishing its
pretensions to retaliate for the prisoners sent to England for legal
trial as traitors to their country. This convention was ratified in
July, at Champlain, near the lines; but, whether by previous agreement
or tacit understanding, the traitors, we believe, escaped the just
punishment of their crime.

The remaining events of the war in Canada during the campaigns of 1812,
13 and 14, do not fall within the scope of this memoir. Some we might
chronicle with pride, but a few we could not record without shame; and,
on the whole, we cannot but think that the same withering influence,
which bound the hands and repressed the energies of "him who undoubtedly
was the best officer that headed our troops throughout the war,"[130]
was visible to the termination of the contest--a contest in which we are
satisfied the result would have been very different, "if a man of
military genius, courage, quickness, and decision, had held the supreme
command."[131] Indeed, when we reflect upon the management of that
eventful war, we are often forcibly reminded, in the fatal loss of Sir
Isaac Brock, of the pathetic lament of the gallant highlander, who,
contrasting the irresolution of his present general with the deeds of
his former chief, the renowned Grahame,[132] Viscount Dundee, mournfully
exclaimed:

    Oh! for one hour of Dundee!

During the progress of the war, the British government made several
overtures for a reconciliation; and at length, when Napoleon's disasters
commenced, and the Eastern States were threatening to dissolve the
union, Madison expressed a wish to treat with England, even at the end
of 1813. The negotiations were commenced in earnest at Ghent, in August,
1814, at a time when Great Britain, being at peace with the remainder of
the world, was in a condition to prosecute the contest with all her
energies; but her people wished for repose after the long and arduous
struggle in which they had been engaged; and a treaty of peace, signed
at Ghent on the 24th of December, was ratified by the two governments,
the plenipotentiaries on both sides waiving every question at issue
before the war, and restoring every acquisition of territory during its
progress. Thus the Americans had only the Canadian and defenceless side
of the Detroit to give in exchange for their fortress of Niagara and
their key possession of Michilimakinack.

Early in 1815, Sir George Prevost was directed to return to England for
the purpose of meeting accusations relative to his conduct at
Plattsburg, which had been preferred by Commodore Sir James Yeo, who,
after some delay, produced his charges in legal form; and to afford time
for the arrival of the necessary witnesses from Canada, the general
court martial was postponed to the 12th of January, 1816. In the mean
time the health of the late governor-general, naturally of a delicate
cast, became seriously affected, partly from anxiety of mind, and he
died in London on the 5th of January, exactly a week preceding the day
appointed for his trial. Previously to his departure from Lower Canada,
the commons, or French party, voted him the sum of £5,000 for the
purchase of a service of plate, as a tribute of respect, which vote was
approved of by the prince regent; but the legislative council, or
English party, refused their assent to a bill for that purpose.

Sir George Prevost was of slight, diminutive person, and unsoldierlike
appearance; his manners are represented as unassuming and social, and
his temper as placid and forgiving. His public speeches or addresses are
said to have partaken of even classical elegance, and his dispatches and
general orders also afford proofs of his literary acquirements.
Discredit can only be thrown on his character as a general; and indeed
his best friends must admit that his defensive policy at the
commencement of the war, and his subsequent irresolution and infirmity
of purpose, did not tend to raise the glory of England, or to advance
his own fame, and that of every enterprizing officer who served under
him. And yet soon after his death, notwithstanding that the lamentable
failures at Sackett's Harbour and Plattsburg were fresh in the public
recollection, new and honorary armorial bearings, with supporters, were
solicited and obtained by his family in seeming approbation of his
services in Canada, the supporters being two grenadiers of the 16th
foot, of which regiment Sir George was colonel, each bearing a flag,
gules; the dexter flag inscribed, "West Indies"--the sinister,
"Canada"! If these distinctions were conferred in honor of his civil
administration, which we have already eulogized, although _Veritas_, in
his well-known letters, stoutly denied him any merit even on this point,
they were, we believe, justly bestowed; but if they were intended as an
approval of his military conduct during the contest, certain it is that
his contemporaries indignantly refused to concede his claim to them, and
that no historian has as yet admitted that claim.[133] It was
unfortunate for Sir George that he was called upon to wage war against
the United States, as his natural and excusable sympathies in favor of a
people among whom he had been born, and at least partly educated, may
have influenced his judgment without any conscious betrayal of the great
charge entrusted to him; and this remark applies with double force to
his school-fellow, Sir Roger Sheaffe, whose entire family and connexions
were American. In any case, it was hard on Sir Isaac Brock, after being
retained in Canada by Sir James Craig, when he was so anxious to serve
in the Peninsula, because that officer could not spare him, and after at
length obtaining leave to return to Europe for that purpose--it was
hard, we repeat, when hostilities did at last break out in America, that
his energies should have been so cramped by the passive attitude of his
superior. Remembering, however, the maxim, _de mortuis nil nisi bonum_,
the editor has refrained from transcribing aught reflecting on the
memory of that superior when he could do so consistently with truth,
although he feels acutely that the death of Sir Isaac Brock--hastened as
he believes it was by the defensive policy and mistaken views of Sir
George Prevost--was an irreparable loss to his many brothers,[134] who
were at that period just rising into manhood, and in consequence
required all the interest for their advancement which their uncle would
probably have possessed. One especially, who closely resembled him both
in appearance and character, and who would have been an ornament to any
service, was compelled to embrace the profession of arms, for which he
had been educated, under the banners of a foreign and far distant
country. In that country, Chile, Colonel Tupper cruelly fell at the
early age of twenty-nine years; and if the reader will turn to the
memoir of this daring soldier in the Appendix, necessarily brief as it
is, he will probably agree with the British consul who wrote, that he
had "for many years looked upon his gallant and honorable conduct as
reflecting lustre upon the English name;" and he will think with the
French traveller, who, after highly eulogizing him, said: "N'est-il pas
déplorable que de tels hommes en soient réduits à se consacrer à une
cause étrangère?"

      *      *      *      *      *

As Tecumseh was so conspicuous in the annals of this war for his
fidelity and devotion to the British crown, and as his name has occurred
so often in these pages,[135] a concluding and connected notice of him
will surely be deemed but an act of justice to his memory.

This renowned aboriginal chief was a Shawanee, and was born in 1769 or
1770, about the same year as his "brave brother warrior," Sir Isaac
Brock. He may be said to have been inured to war from his infancy, as
the Indian nations continued in hostility against the United States
after their independence was achieved, alleging that they infringed on
their territories. In 1790, about which period Tecumseh first gave
proofs of that talent and daring which so distinguished his after-life,
General Harmer was dispatched with a competent force to punish the
predatory incursions of the Indians; but he was glad to return, with the
loss of many of his men. In the following year, General St. Clair
proceeded with another army to ravage the Miami and Shawanee
settlements, and was even more unfortunate than his predecessor, as the
Indians boldly advanced to meet him on the way, attacked his encampment,
and put his troops to a total rout, in which the greater part were cut
off and destroyed. In 1794, however, a much more formidable expedition,
under General Wayne, entered the Indian territory; the warriors
gradually retired as the Americans advanced, but at length imprudently
determined on making a stand. In the battle which ensued, the Indians
were so completely discomfited, that, the following year, they agreed to
the treaty of Greenville, by which they were compelled to cede a large
tract of country as an indemnity for _past injuries_! As Tecumseh had
then scarcely completed his twenty-fifth year, and as the Indians pay
great deference to age, it is not probable that he had any hand in this
treaty, the more especially as, from that period to 1812, he laboured
incessantly to unite the numerous aboriginal tribes of the North
American continent in one grand confederacy, for the threefold purpose
of endeavouring to regain their former possessions as far as the Ohio,
of resisting the further encroachments of the whites, and of preventing
the future cession of land by any one tribe, without the sanction of
all, obtained in a general council. With this object he visited the
different nations; and having assembled the elders, he enforced his
disinterested views in strains of such impassioned and persuasive
eloquence, that the greater part promised him their co-operation and
assistance. But, to form a general alliance of so many and such various
tribes, required a higher degree of patriotism and civilization than the
Indians had attained. From the numbers, however, who ranged themselves
with Tecumseh under the British standard; on the breaking out of the war
in 1812, it is evident that he had acquired no little influence over
them, and that his almost incredible exertions, both of mind and body,
had not been altogether thrown away.

About the year 1804, the brother of Tecumseh proclaimed himself a
prophet, who had been commanded by the Great Spirit, the Creator of the
red, but not of the white, people, to announce to his children, that the
misfortunes by which they had been assailed arose from their having
abandoned the mode of life which He had prescribed to them. He declared
that they must return to their primitive habits--relinquish the use of
ardent spirits--and clothe themselves in skins, and not in woollens. His
fame soon spread among the surrounding nations, and his power to
perform miracles was generally believed. He was joined by many, and not
a few came from a great distance, and cheerfully submitted to much
hardship and fatigue, that they might behold the prophet, and then
return. He first established himself at Greenville, within the boundary
of the United States; but the inhabitants of Ohio becoming alarmed at
the immense assemblage of Indians on their frontier, the American
authorities insisted on his removal. Accordingly, he proceeded, in 1808,
to the Wabash, and fixed his residence on the northern bank of that
river, near the mouth of the Tippecanoe. Here his popularity declined,
but, through the influence of Tecumseh, he was again joined by many
among the neighbouring tribes. The prophet's temporal concerns were
conducted by Tecumseh, who adroitly availed himself of his brother's
spiritual power to promote his favourite scheme of a general
confederacy.

In 1811, Tecumseh, accompanied by several hundred warriors, encamped
near Vincennes, the capital of Indiana, and demanded an interview with
the governor of that state, Major-General Harrison, the same officer
who, in 1813, commanded the victorious troops at the battle of the
Thames, in which Tecumseh lost his life. The interview was agreed to,
and the governor inquired whether the Indians intended to come armed to
the council. Tecumseh replied that he would be governed by the conduct
of the white people; if they came armed, his warriors would be armed
also; if not, his followers would come unarmed. The governor informed
him that he would be attended by a troop of dragoons, dismounted, with
their side arms only, and that the Indians might bring their war clubs
and tomahawks. The meeting took place in a large arbour, on one side of
which were the dragoons, eighty in number, seated in rows; on the other
the Indians. But besides their sabres, the dragoons were armed with
pistols. The following incident is said to have occurred at this
interview. Tecumseh looked round for a seat, but not finding one
provided for him, he betrayed his surprise, and his eyes flashed fire.
The governor, perceiving the cause, instantly ordered a chair. One of
the council offered the warrior his chair, and, bowing respectfully,
said to him: "Warrior, your father, General Harrison, offers you a
seat." "My father!" exclaimed Tecumseh, extending his hand towards the
heavens, "the sun is my father, and the earth is my mother; she gives me
nourishment, and I will repose on her bosom." He then threw himself on
the ground. When the governor, who was seated in front of the dragoons,
commenced his address, Tecumseh declared that he could not hear him, and
requested him to remove his seat to an open space near himself, The
governor complied, and in his speech complained of the constant
depredations and murders which were committed by the Indians of
Tippecanoe; of the refusal on their part to give up the criminals; and
of the increasing accumulation of force in that quarter, for the avowed
purpose of compelling the United States to relinquish lands, which they
had fairly purchased of the rightful owners. Tecumseh, in his answer,
denied that he had afforded protection to the guilty, but manfully
admitted his design of forming a confederacy of all the red nations of
that continent. He observed, that "the system, which the United States
pursued of purchasing lands from the Indians, he viewed as a _mighty
water_, ready to overflow his people, and that the confederacy which he
was forming among the tribes, to prevent any tribe from selling land
without the consent of the others, was the _dam_ he was erecting, to
resist this mighty water." And he added, "your great father, the
president, may sit over the mountains and drink his wine, but if he
continue this policy, you and I will have to meet on the battle field."
He also admitted, that he was then on his way to the Creek nation, for
the purpose he had just avowed, and he continued his journey two days
after, with twelve or fifteen of his warriors. Having visited the Creek
and other southern tribes, he crossed the Mississippi, and continued a
northern course as far as the river Demoins, whence he returned to the
Wabash by land. But a sad reverse of fortune awaited his return; he
found his town consumed, his bravest warriors slain, and a large deposit
of provisions destroyed. On his departure, the settlement at Tippecanoe
was left in charge of his brother, the prophet, with strict injunctions
to prevent all hostile incursions, as they might lead to extremities
before his plans were matured. The prophet, however, wanted either the
inclination or the authority to follow these injunctions; and the
Americans assert, that murder and rapine occurred now so frequently,
that they were compelled, in their own defence, to punish the
delinquents. Accordingly, General Harrison proceeded with nearly 1,000
men to Tippecanoe, and on his approach, in November, 1811, was met by
about 600 warriors; a battle ensued, in which the Indians, deprived by
the absence of their chief of his counsel and example, were defeated,
but with nearly equal loss on both sides. Assured by the prophet that
the American bullets would not injure them, they rushed on the bayonets
with their war clubs, and exposed their persons with a fatal
fearlessness. But the prophet himself remained during the battle in
security on an adjacent eminence; he was chaunting a war song, when
information was brought to him that his men were falling. "Let them
fight on, for my prediction will soon be verified," was the substance of
his reply, and he resumed his song in a louder key!

The hostility of Tecumseh to those whom he had ever considered as the
spoilers of his country, was, if possible, redoubled by this severe act
of retaliation. General Harrison, in particular, incurred his personal
enmity, and he declared openly that he would seek for vengeance. Nor
was he backward in putting his threats into execution. Early in 1812,
the Indians renewed their hostile incursions, but they were now treated
with unusual forbearance, in the hope that they would remain neutral in
the war with Great Britain, which the American government well knew was
near at hand. On its declaration in June, however, Tecumseh eagerly
embraced the opportunity which it afforded, not only to promote his long
meditated public views, but to avenge his private injuries; and,
hastening with his warriors to Upper Canada, he had soon the
gratification of witnessing, at Detroit, the surrender of the 4th U.S.
infantry, (or heroes of Tippecanoe, as they were then denominated,)
which regiment claimed the principal merit of having, the preceding
year, defeated his followers and destroyed his settlement.

Previously to the battle of the Thames, already noticed, the position
chosen to await the attack of the American army, and the disposition of
the British force, were approved of by Tecumseh, and his last words to
General Proctor were: "Father, tell your young men to be firm, and all
will be well." He then repaired to his people, and harangued them before
they occupied their post. While the white troops were so quickly
overcome, Tecumseh and his warriors almost as rapidly repelled the
enemy; and the Indians continued to push their advantage in ignorance of
the disaster of their allies, until their heroic chief fell by a rifle
bullet, while in the act of advancing to close with Colonel Johnson,
who was on horseback commanding his regiment of mounted riflemen.

Of the many Indian chiefs who distinguished themselves in the wars of
the whites, Tecumseh was undoubtedly the greatest since the days of
Pontiac. Sir Isaac Brock has expressed his warm admiration of him, and
it is well known that the feeling was mutual; but it is said that after
the death of his friend and patron, Tecumseh found no kindred spirit
with whom to act. In early life he was addicted to inebriety, the
prevailing vice of the Indians, but his good sense and resolution
conquered the habit, and, in his later years, he was remarkable for
temperance. Glory became his ruling passion, and in its acquisition he
was careless of wealth, as, although his presents and booty must have
been of considerable value, he preserved little or nothing for himself.
In height he was five feet ten inches, well formed, and capable of
enduring fatigue in an extraordinary degree. His carriage was erect and
commanding, and there was an air of hauteur in his countenance, arising
from an elevated pride of soul, which did not forsake it when life was
extinct. He was habitually taciturn, but, when excited, his eloquence
was nervous, concise, and figurative. His dress was plain, and he was
never known to indulge in the gaudy decoration of his person, which is
the common practice of the Indians. On the day of his death, he wore a
dressed deer skin coat and pantaloons. He was present in almost every
action against the Americans, from the period of Harmer's defeat to the
battle of the Thames--was several times wounded--and always sought the
hottest of the fire. On the 19th July, 1812, he pursued, near Sandwich,
a detachment of the American army under Colonel M'Arthur, and fired on
the rear guard. The colonel suddenly faced about his men and gave orders
for a volley, when all the Indians fell flat on the ground with the
exception of Tecumseh, who stood firm on his feet, with apparent
unconcern! After his fall, his lifeless corpse was viewed with great
interest by the American officers, who declared that the contour of his
features was majestic even in death. And notwithstanding, it is said by
an American writer, that "some of the Kentuckians disgraced themselves
by committing indignities on his dead body. He was scalped, and
_otherwise disfigured_." He left a son, who fought by his side when he
fell, and was then about seventeen years old. The prince regent, in
1814, as a mark of respect to the memory of the father, sent a handsome
sword as a present to the son. A nephew of Tecumseh and of the prophet,
(their sister's son,) who was highly valued by the Americans, was slain
in their service, in November, 1812, on the northern bank of the river
Miami. Having been brought up by the American general, Logan, he had
adopted that officer's name. He asserted that Tecumseh had in vain
sought to engage him in the war on the side of the British.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 118: "But General Sheaffe, like his superior, was a lover of
armistices, and after the action he concluded one of his own with the
American general, for which no reason, civil or military, was ever
assigned."--_Quarterly Review,_ April and July, 1822; article,
"Campaigns in the Canadas."]

[Footnote 119: From an American work,--Major-General James Wilkinson's
"Memoirs of my own Time," published in 1816.--ED.]

[Footnote 120: "But the most fatal and palpable error of the
commander-in-chief was his neglect to preserve that ascendancy on Lakes
Erie and Ontario which was actually enjoyed by the British at the
opening of the contest. The command of these lakes is so evidently an
object of primary consideration in the defence of the Canadas, that it
is perfectly inconceivable how any man in Sir George Prevost's situation
could have been so infatuated as to disregard the importance of
maintaining his superiority!"--_Quarterly Review_.]

[Footnote 121: "General Sheaffe has been much blamed, first for the
injudicious position of the troops, by which the grenadier company of
the 8th regiment, who behaved with great gallantry, were exposed to be
cut to pieces in a wood, and again for not returning to the attack,
after the explosion of a powder magazine had destroyed 250 of the enemy,
and thrown them into confusion."--_Quarterly Review_.]

[Footnote 122: Pictorial History of England.]

[Footnote 123: Extract from the Pictorial History of England.]

[Footnote 124: "Sir George Prevost was beyond all doubt the immediate
commander of this expedition. But he found it convenient not to appear
in that character; and the only detail of operations was in the shape of
a dispatch from his adjutant-general to himself, obligingly
communicating what was already sufficiently known to him. By this
ingenious device, he in some measure averted the exposure of miscarriage
from himself, and generously yielded his laurels, such as they were, to
his grateful and submissive follower."--_Quarterly Review_.]

[Footnote 125: "The reader now sees the fatal consequences; first, of
not having, in the autumn of 1812, destroyed the two or three schooners
which were equipping at Buffaloe by Lieutenant Elliott; secondly, of not
having, in the spring of 1813, secured the possession of Sackett's
Harbour; thirdly, of not having, in the summer of the same year,
captured or destroyed the whole American fleet, as it lay, unmanned, in
Presqu'île Harbour."--_James' Military Occurrences_.]

[Footnote 126: The present Major-General Sir John Harvey, K.C.B.]

[Footnote 127: While the Americans retained Fort George, the graves of
Sir Isaac Brock and Lieut.-Colonel M'Donell, in the cavalier bastion
there, remained sacred, and were also respected.]

[Footnote 128: It strikes us as singular that Captain Roberts was not
promoted to at least a brevet majority for the capture of this important
post, although he had an overwhelming force, and took it without
resistance. Was this promotion withheld because the capture was effected
contrary to Sir George Prevost's orders?]

[Footnote 129: "The land, in the centre of this island, is high, and its
form somewhat resembles that of a turtle's back. Mackinac, or Mickinac,
signifies a _turtle_, and _michi (mishi)_, or _missi_, signifies
_great_, as it does also, _several_, or _many_. The common
interpretation of the word _Michilimakinac_, is the Great
Turtle."--_Henry's Travels and Adventures in Canada and the Indian
Territories, between the years_ 1760 _and_ 1776.]

[Footnote 130: James' Military Occurrences.]

[Footnote 131: Pictorial History of England.]

[Footnote 132: John Grahame, of Claverhouse, was mortally wounded at the
pass of Killicrankie, in 1689, and died the next day. With him expired
the cause of James the Second in Scotland, as, although the war
languished in the highlands for two years after, nothing of importance
occurred. When William was urged to send more troops into Scotland, he
replied: "It is unnecessary, the war has ended with Dundee's life."]

[Footnote 133: While these remarks-were in type, we heard accidentally
of a large monument, in the cathedral at Winchester, to the memory of
Sir George Prevost, with a laudatory inscription, for a copy of which we
immediately wrote to a friend, and which we now transcribe without
comment, as we respect the feelings of conjugal affection by which the
epitaph was evidently dictated.
    "Sacred to the memory of Lieut.-General Sir George Prevost,
    Baronet, of Belmont, in this County, Governor-General and
    Commander-in-Chief of the British Forces in North America; in
    which command, by his wise and energetic measures, and with a
    very inferior force, he preserved the Canadas to the British
    Crown from the repeated invasions of a powerful enemy. His
    constitution at length sank under incessant mental and bodily
    exertion, in discharging the duties of that arduous station;
    and having returned to England, he died shortly afterwards in
    London, on the 5th of January, 1816, aged 48, thirty-four
    years of which had been devoted to the service of his Country.
    He was intered near the remains of his father, Major-General
    Augustus Prevost, at East Barnet, in Hertfordshire. His Royal
    Highness the Prince Regent, to evince in an especial manner
    the sense he entertained of his distinguished conduct and
    services during a long period of constant active employment,
    in stations of great trust, both Military and Civil, was
    pleased to ordain, as a lasting Memorial of His Majesty's
    Royal Favor, that the names of the Countries where his Courage
    and Abilities had been most signally displayed--the West
    Indies and Canada--should be inscribed on the Banners of the
    Supporters, granted to be borne by his Family and Descendants.
    In testimony of his Private Worth, his Piety, Integrity and
    Benevolence, and all those tender, domestic virtues, which
    endeared him to his Family, his Children, his Friends, and his
    Dependants, as well as to prove her unfeigned Love, Gratitude,
    and Respect, Catherine Anne Prevost, his afflicted Widow,
    caused this Monument to be Erected. Anno Domini 1819."
]

[Footnote 134: Including the editor, ten; viz. two died young, of
scarlet fever, and were buried in the same coffin; two drowned at
different times; two slain; two died at sea, while passengers on board
his majesty's packets from Rio de Janeiro to Falmouth, on the same day
of the same month (15th August) in different years, 1833 and 1837! and
only two still survive.]

[Footnote 135: See pages 222, 223, 227, 238, 307, 339, 360, 364 and
366.]


CHAPTER XVI.


Thomas Porter, a faithful servant of Sir Isaac Brock, was sent to
England with his effects, and at the request of the family, was
discharged from the 49th regiment, in which he was borne as a soldier,
and in which he had an only brother, their father having been killed,
while also in the regiment, on board the Monarch, at Copenhagen. The
Commander-in-chief readily sanctioned the discharge of Porter, "as a
small tribute to the memory of a most gallant and valuable officer."


_His Royal Highness the Duke of York to W. Brock, Esq._

    HORSE GUARDS, December, 1815.

    The prince regent having been graciously pleased to command,
    in the name and on the behalf of his majesty, that the
    officers present at the capture of Detroit should be permitted
    to bear a medal commemorative of that brilliant victory, I
    have to transmit to you the medal[136] which would have been
    conferred upon the late Major-General Sir Isaac Brock, and
    which the prince regent has been pleased to direct should be
    deposited with his family, as a token of the respect which his
    royal highness entertains for the memory of that officer.

    I am, Sir, yours,    FREDERICK,
    Commander-in-Chief.

In the year 1817, Mr. Savery Brock visited the United States and Canada,
and, while in the latter country, received the grants of the 12,000
acres of land voted by the legislature of the Upper Province to the four
brothers of Sir Isaac Brock, The letters written by him during his
travels were highly prized at the time, and the following are brief
extracts from them:

    YORK, Upper Canada, Aug. 20 to 25, 1817.

    I travelled with three gentlemen from New York as far as Fort
    George, where they left me on their return by Montreal. We
    crossed at Buffalo on the 9th instant, at which place we
    arrived half an hour before the President; and although one of
    our party (Mr. Gouverneur) was his nephew, we did not delay
    our journey to have a view of his countenance, and came over
    to Fort Erie, or, properly speaking, its remains. Seven miles
    from the Fort, we stopped the next morning to breakfast at a
    house where Isaac had lived six months, and the landlord told
    me with tears: "He was a friend and a father to me. I was
    close to him when he was shot;"--with these words, unable from
    his feelings to add more, he walked away quickly up his
    orchard.... On paying my respects to Mrs. Powell, the lady of
    the present chief justice, and to Mrs. Claus, they were
    greatly affected, and shed tears; and Mr. Scott, on whom I
    called yesterday, was equally so. Every one here is most
    kind--Isaac truly lived in their hearts: from one end of
    Canada to the other, he is beloved to a degree you can
    scarcely imagine--his memory will long live among them. "To
    your brother, Sir, we are indebted for the preservation of
    this province," is a sentiment that comes from the heart, and
    is in the mouths of too many to be flattery. This is pleasing,
    no doubt, to me, but it is a mournful pleasure, and recalls to
    me the past. I dine at five with the gentlemen of this town,
    and I see a splendid table laid out up stairs--the garrison is
    invited. I found no way to avoid these marks of respect to
    Isaac's memory. I assure you that it is truly unpleasant to me
    to see so many persons putting themselves in some degree out
    of their way to gratify me, as I think it, though I am aware
    they do it to satisfy their own feelings. I should also
    mention, that last Saturday I dined at Fort George, by
    invitation of the gentlemen there and its environs; we were
    _forty-nine_ in number, and it was the anniversary of the
    capture of Detroit. I was invited, without their remembering
    the day of the month--it was a curious coincidence. The
    clergyman, who was of the party, made allusion during divine
    service next morning to Isaac, and to my being in the church.
    I mention these particulars, that you may fully judge of the
    kindness of all. After the service, three fine young farmers
    came up to me and wished to shake hands, having been at
    Detroit and Queenstown. Nothing could exceed their marks of
    attachment. Every body, they said, connected with Isaac would
    always be seen with pleasure: they were, like myself, most
    sensibly affected.

    I hear of such misconduct on the part of most of the generals,
    of such negligence that was occasioned by it on the part of
    other officers, that it is only surprising we retained the
    country. Every general required so much urging to permit an
    attack, that it was really a favor for any enterprising
    officer, who grieved that nothing was done, to be allowed a
    handful of men to defeat the enemy with. Poor York! how
    miserably defended; but I shall not enter into particulars, as
    no interest is now entertained for these affairs.

    MONTREAL, October 24.

    I have had 7,000 acres granted in East and West Flamborough,
    at the head of Lake Ontario, about twelve miles from its
    margin; this is the best of our land, but not a house within
    eight or nine miles of it; 1,200 acres in Brock township, on
    Lake Simcoe; 3,000 acres in Monaghan, on the Rice Lake; and
    800 acres in Murray, on Lake Ontario.

    The principal gentlemen of this place have formed a committee
    of eight persons, and waited on me to fix a day to dine with
    them. Tuesday is named. So very civil is every one, that I am
    quite overcome with their politeness. Colonel M'Bean, of the
    99th, and all his officers, have also called. Isaac's memory
    is so cherished--all loved him sincerely. At Quebec, I dined
    with Sir John Sherbrooke, &c, visited the falls of
    Montmorenci, &c, and was much pleased with my trip there.


_Extract from the Montreal Herald of November_ 1, 1817.

    On Tuesday, the 28th ultimo, the principal inhabitants of
    Montreal gave a public dinner at the Mansion House, to John
    Savery Brock, Esq., of the island of Guernsey, as a tribute of
    respect justly due to the memory of his late brother, the
    deceased Major-General Sir Isaac Brock.

    Sir John Johnson, Bart., took the chair at six o'clock,
    supported by Messrs. Forsyth and St. Dizier, vice-presidents,
    who conducted the arrangements of the table in a manner worthy
    of the occasion which the company had assembled to
    commemorate.

    After the cloth was removed, a series of appropriate toasts
    were given from the chair. When "the memory of the late
    Major-General Sir Isaac Brock" was pledged and drunk, Mr. B.
    availed himself of the universal silence it created to address
    the company. In a short speech, he expressed his
    acknowledgments for the very flattering and distinguished
    manner they were pleased, through him, to testify their
    veneration for the memory of his deceased brother, whose
    public and private qualities, he was proud to observe, were so
    highly appreciated by the inhabitants of Montreal, in whose
    society he had for a period been domesticated, and of whose
    kindness and hospitality he always retained a grateful
    remembrance.

    At the commencement of the American war, Mr. B. observed, an
    arduous command devolved upon his brother; he had to protect
    an extensive frontier with very limited means, and those
    means, feeble as they were, shackled by the trammels of
    superior authority; the advance of an hostile army, however,
    upon our provincial territory, developed the resources of his
    military genius, and afforded him a glorious opportunity of
    proving to his country what he _might_ have achieved under
    different circumstances. Mr. Brock apologized to the company
    for detaining them a few minutes longer, in reading some
    extracts of letters he had received from the late general, at
    different times, previous to the battle of Queenstown. These
    extracts corroborated what Mr. B. had previously stated; and
    it is remarkable that in one of them, with a spirit almost
    prophetic, the hero foretold the issue of that eventful day,
    when the hand of victory was destined to mingle the cypress
    and the laurel over his grave. Mr. Brock's feelings were a
    good deal affected in addressing so numerous an assemblage of
    his late brother's personal friends; and we may venture to
    add, that never were feelings of the same description more
    sacredly participated than those of Mr. B. on this occasion.
    Mr. B. concluded his speech by drinking the health of the
    company, and "success and prosperity to the city of Montreal."

    At eleven o'clock the president retired, and was succeeded in
    the chair by the Hon. W. M'Gillivray, who immediately proposed
    the health of the worthy baronet, with three times three.

    The band of the 99th regiment attended and played a variety of
    beautiful airs, which, in addition to a number of excellent
    songs given in the coarse of the evening, seduced the party to
    remain until the "little hours" stole upon them.

    We regret that want of room prevents us from noticing as we
    could wish the neat and soldierlike address of thanks from
    Lieut.-Colonel M'Bean, on behalf of the garrison of Montreal,
    or of recording a translation of the figurative speeches,
    delivered in the Indian language by Lieut.-Colonel M'Kay[137]
    and A. Shaw, Esq., excited from those gentlemen by a
    recurrence to the co-operation of the gallant warrior,
    Tecumseh, with the lamented chief whose immortal memory forms
    the subject of this article.


_Irving Brock, Esq., to his niece, Miss Caroline Tupper._[138]

    LONDON, April 12, 1825.

    I went to Windsor on Wednesday last with the four Indians,
    accompanied by my friend Mr. W----, to show them the castle,
    Frogmore, &c.; but the chief object, which I had secretly in
    mind, was to have them introduced to his majesty. Sir John
    C----, the late mayor of Windsor, assisted me very
    effectually, and the upshot of the matter is, that the king
    expressed his desire to see the Indian chiefs, although every
    body treated this as a most chimerical idea. They wore, for
    the first time, the brilliant clothes which Mr. Butterworth
    had had made for them, and you cannot conceive how grand and
    imposing they appeared.

    The king appointed half-past one on Thursday to receive our
    party at the royal lodge, his place of residence. We were
    ushered into the library; and now I am going to say somewhat
    pleasing to your uncle Savery. As Sir John C---- was in the
    act of introducing me, but before he had mentioned my name,
    Sir Andrew Barnard[139] interrupted him, and said: "There is
    no occasion to introduce me to that gentleman,--I know him to
    be General Brock's brother,--he and Colonel Brock, of the
    81st, were my most intimate friends,--I was in the 81st with
    the colonel. There was another brother whom I knew,--he who
    was paymaster of the 49th,--he was a gallant fellow. By the
    bye, sir, I beg your pardon; perhaps I am speaking to that
    very gentleman."

    In the library there was also present Marquess Conyngham, Lord
    Mount Charles, Sir Edmund Nagle, &c. &c. We remained chatting
    in the house above half an hour, expecting every moment to see
    the king enter; and I was greatly amused to observe Mr. W----
    and Sir John C---- start and appear convulsed every time there
    was a noise outside the door. We were admiring the fine lawn
    when the Marquess Conyngham asked the Indians if they would
    like to take a turn, at the same time opening the beautiful
    door that leads to it. The party was no sooner out than we saw
    the king standing quite still, and as erect as a grenadier on
    a field day, some forty yards from us. We were all immediately
    uncovered, and advanced slowly towards the handsomest, the
    most elegant, the most enchanting man in the kingdom; the
    Indians conducted by Marquess Conyngham, Sir Edmund Nagle, Sir
    Andrew Barnard, Lord Mount Charles, &c. &c. The range of
    balconies was filled with ladies. Sir John C----, Mr. W----
    and I, allowed the party to approach his majesty, while we
    modestly halted at a distance of twenty yards. It was worth
    while being there only to see the benign countenance of the
    greatest monarch in the world, and to witness his manner of
    uncovering his head. The four chiefs fell on their knees. The
    king desired them to rise, and entered into a great deal of
    preliminary conversation. I saw him turn towards the marquess,
    and after a few seconds he said, with his loud and sonorous
    voice: "Pray, Mr. Brock, come near me,--I pray you come near
    me." I felt a little for my companions who continued
    unnoticed, and especially for Sir John C----, to whom I was
    principally indebted for the royal interview.

    The king addressed the Indians in French, very distinctly,
    fluently, and loud: "I observe you have the portrait of my
    father; will you permit me to present you with mine?" The
    marquess then produced four large and weighty gold coronation
    peer medallions of his majesty, suspended by a rich mazareen
    blue silk riband. The chiefs, seeing this, dropped again upon
    their knees, and the king took the four medallions
    successively into his hand, and said: "Will some gentleman
    have the goodness to tie this behind?"--upon which Sir Edmund
    Nagle, with whom we had been condoling on account of the gout,
    while waiting in the library, and who wore a list shoe,
    skipped nimbly behind the chiefs, and received the string from
    the king, tying the cordon on the necks of the four chiefs. We
    were much amused to observe how the royal word can dispel the
    gout. The instant the grand chief was within reach of the
    medallion, and before the investiture was completed, he seized
    the welcome present with the utmost earnestness, and kissed it
    with an ardour which must have been witnessed to be conceived.
    The king appeared sensibly affected by this strong and
    unequivocal mark of grateful emotion. The other chiefs acted
    in a similar way, and nothing could have been managed more
    naturally, or in better taste. After this ceremony, the king
    desired them to rise and to be covered. They put on their
    hats, and which appeared extraordinary to me, his majesty
    remained uncovered all the time. Here it was that the grand
    chief, as if incapable of repressing his feelings, poured out
    in a most eloquent manner, by voice and action, the following
    unpremeditated speech in his native Indian tongue. I say
    unpremeditated, because that fine allusion to the sun could
    not have been contemplated while we were waiting in the
    library, the room where we expected the interview to take
    place. I was pleased to find that the presence of this mighty
    sovereign, who governs the most powerful nation upon earth,
    did not drive from the thoughts of the pious chief, the King
    of kings and the Lord of lords.

    The instant he had finished, the chief of the warriors
    interpreted in the French language, and I wrote down the
    speech as soon as I left the royal lodge. It should be
    observed, that the chiefs had been previously informed by me
    that, according to etiquette, they should answer any questions
    which his majesty might be pleased to ask, but not introduce
    any conversation of their own. The sun was shining vividly.


    THE SPEECH.

    I was instructed not to speak in the royal presence, unless in
    answer to your majesty's questions. But my feelings overpower
    me. My heart is full. I am amazed at such unexpected grace and
    condescension, and cannot doubt that I shall be pardoned for
    expressing my gratitude. The sun is shedding his genial rays
    upon our heads. He reminds us of the great Creator of the
    universe--of Him who can make alive and who can kill. Oh! may
    that gracious and beneficent Being, who promises to answer the
    fervent prayers of his people, bless abundantly your majesty.
    May He grant you much bodily health, and, for the sake of your
    happy subjects, may He prolong your valuable life! It is not
    alone the four individuals, who now stand before your majesty,
    who will retain to the end of their lives a sense of this kind
    and touching reception--the whole of the nations, whose
    representatives we are, will ever love and be devoted to you,
    their good and great father.

His majesty felt deeply every word of the speech, when interpreted by
the chief of the warriors. The king answered, that he derived high
satisfaction from the sentiments they had expressed, and assured them
that he should always be much interested in the happiness of his North
American subjects, and would avail himself of every opportunity to
promote their welfare, and to prove that he was indeed their father.
After acknowledging in gracious terms the pleasure which the speech of
the grand chief had afforded him, he mentioned, in an easy and affable
manner, that he had once before in his life seen some individuals of the
Indian nations, but that was fifty-five or fifty-six years ago. He
inquired of their passage to this country, the name of the ship and of
the master, and was persevering in his questions as to the treatment
they had experienced at his hands, whether they had been made
comfortable in all respects, and if he had been polite and attentive.

While the grand chief was delivering his speech in the Huron language,
it seemed as if it would never end, and, observing the king look a
little surprised, I informed the Marquess Conyngham, in a loud whisper,
that this was the mode in which they expressed their sense of any honor
conferred, and that the chief of the warriors would interpret the speech
in the French language. The king asked me to repeat what I had been
saying, and George and Irving conversed for some time. His majesty, on
another occasion, asked me under what circumstances the Indians had been
introduced to me. I answered that they were recommended to my notice,
because they had been invested with the medallions of his late majesty
by my brother.

His majesty hoped the Indians had seen every thing remarkable in
Windsor, and told us we were welcome to see the interior of the lodge
and pleasure grounds, that Sir Andrew Barnard would accompany us
everywhere, to his stables, menagerie, aviaries, &c., and afterwards he
trusted we would partake of some refreshment. He also offered us the use
of his carriages. The refreshment was a truly royal repast,--we eat on
silver,--the table groaned, as Mr. Heathfield would say, under the
king's hospitality. We made a famous dinner,--pine apple, champagne,
claret, &c.--servants in royal liveries behind our chairs. After dinner
the Indians gave us the war song, when, (in your uncle Savery's poetry
about Maria Easy,)

    "Tho' the dogs ran out in a great fright,
    The ladies rushed in with much delight."

[NOTE.--These four Indians came to England for the purpose of
endeavouring to recover lands which had been given to their tribe by
Louis the Sixteenth, but it appears that they did not succeed. They were
very pious Roman Catholics, and those who saw them were much amused with
their simple and primitive manners.--ED.]

      *      *      *      *      *

_Extract of a Letter from Walter Bromley, Esq., dated London, 15th
April, 1825.--From a Halifax N.S. newspaper_.

    [The Indian chief, who accompanied me to England, sailed in
    the Ward, for New Brunswick, a few days ago, loaded with
    presents to his family and people. I think his appearance here
    has been more beneficial than if volumes had been printed on
    Indian civilization, and I am in hope that on both sides of
    the Atlantic a general sympathy has been excited. The four
    Canadian chiefs have attracted much attention, and have been
    presented to his majesty by the brother of the late General
    Brock; they are the most interesting characters I ever
    saw--are extremely polite--and speak French fluently.]


_Mrs. (Lieut.-Colonel) Eliot[140] to her sister, in Guernsey_.

    QUEBEC, January 12, 1831.

    With my kindest love to the Tuppers, tell them that I often
    see Colonel Glegg, who was Sir Isaac Brock's aide-de-camp: he
    is now Lord Aylmer's civil secretary, and we meet very often.
    He speaks affectionately of his old patron, and has made many
    inquiries relative to the family: the tears come into his eyes
    when he talks to me of old times. He and George
    (Lieut.-Colonel Eliot) were a great deal together during the
    war in the Upper Province. The other day, at dinner at the
    château, he told me that he had had a visit from Sir Isaac's
    old housekeeper, who is still living here in a similar
    situation to the House of Assembly, and gets £50 a year
    salary. He knew her directly, and seemed quite affected when
    telling me that she had brought her credentials with her in
    case he had not recognized her, as many years had elapsed
    since they met; and she opened a pocket book carefully, which
    she had in her hand, and took a piece of a shirt with the
    initials of General Brock's name, which she said she had cut
    off when the body was brought in to be buried at Fort George,
    and preserved it as a relic of her dear master. This little,
    trifling, affectionate remembrance of the old creature, shews
    her real attachment. Colonel Glegg gave her a new snuff box,
    filled with snuff from Paris, and told her to come again to
    see him. Perhaps the Tuppers will be pleased to hear this
    little anecdote.

[Mrs. Eliot, whose maiden name was Jane M'Crea, is the daughter of an
American loyalist and a gallant field officer, now deceased, and the
niece and namesake of the unfortunate Jane M'Crea, whose tragical fate
in the American revolutionary war excited so much commiseration, and
gave rise to a correspondence between the American general. Gates, and
General Burgoyne. The former wrote: "Miss M'Crea, a young lady, lovely
to the sight, of virtuous character and amiable disposition, engaged to
an officer of your army, was, with other women and children, taken out
of a house near Fort Edward, carried into the woods, and there scalped
and mangled in a most shocking manner.... The miserable fate of Miss
M'Crea was particularly aggravated by being dressed to receive her
promised husband, but met her murderer employed by you." The latter, in
his reply, stated, that "two chiefs, who had brought her off for the
purpose of security, not of violence to her person, disputed which
should be her guard, and in a fit of savage passion in one, from whose
hands she was snatched, the unhappy woman became the victim."]

We have in a preceding chapter described the monument, on Queenstown
Heights, to the memory of Sir Isaac Brock, a monument which "the
popularity of the general had caused to be regarded with more
affectionate veneration than any other structure in the province." On
Good Friday, the 17th of April, 1840,[141] a miscreant of the name of
Lett introduced a quantity of gunpowder into this monument with the
fiendish purpose of destroying it; and the explosion, effected by a
train, caused so much damage as to render the column altogether
irreparable. Lett, who was by birth an Irishman and by settlement a
Canadian, had been compelled to fly into the United States for his share
in the recent rebellion; and "well knowing the feeling of attachment to
the name and memory of General Brock, as pervading all classes of
Canadians, he sought to gratify his own malicious and vindictive spirit,
and at the same time to wound and insult the people of Upper Canada" by
this demon's deed. The universal indignation of that people was aroused,
and a public meeting was appointed to be held on Queenstown Heights, on
the 30th of July following, for the purpose of adopting resolutions for
the erection of another monument, the gallant Sir Allan Mac Nab
especially making the most stirring exertions to promote this great
object. The gathering, as it was called, was observed in Toronto (late
York) as a solemn holiday; the public offices were closed, and all
business was suspended; while thousands flocked from every part of the
province to testify their affection for the memory of one who, nearly
thirty years before, had fallen in its defence! History, indeed, affords
few parallels of such long cherished public attachment. "Steam vessels,
engaged for the occasion, left their respective ports of Kingston and
Coburg, of Hamilton and Toronto, in time to arrive at the entrance of
the Niagara river about ten o'clock in the forenoon. The whole of these,
ten in number, then formed in line, and ascended the river abreast, with
the government steamer, containing the lieutenant-governor, Sir George
Arthur, and his staff, leading the way. The British shore was lined with
thousands, and the fleet of steamers filled with hundreds, each shouting
and responding to the cheers of welcome from ship to shore, and from
shore to ship again. The landing being effected, the march to the ground
was accompanied by military guards, and a fine military band. The public
meeting was then held in the open air, near the foot of the monument,
and Sir George Arthur was in the chair. The resolutions were moved, and
speeches made, by some of the most eminent and most eloquent men,
holding high official stations in the province;[142] and considering
that amidst this grand and imposing assemblage, there were a great
number of veteran officers of the Canada militia, who had fought and
bled with the lamented chief, whose memory they were assembled to honor,
and whose monument they had come to re-establish over his remains, the
enthusiasm with which the whole mass was animated may readily be
conceived; while the grand and picturesque combination of natural
objects of scenery, beheld from the heights on which they were met, and
the brightness of the day, added greatly to the effect of the whole."
The gathering[143] was attended by about 8,000 persons, and the
animation of the scene was increased by a detachment of royal artillery,
who fired a salute; by a detachment of the 1st dragoon guards, with
their bright helmets glittering in the sun; and by the 93d regiment,
(Highlanders,) in full costume.

There were altogether eleven resolutions, of which the fifth was the
following:

    Resolved,--That we recall to mind, with admiration and
    gratitude, the perilous times in which Sir Isaac Brock led
    the small regular force, the loyal and gallant militia, and
    the brave and faithful Indian warriors, to oppose the
    invaders--when his fortitude inspired courage, and his
    sagacious policy gave confidence, in despite of a hostile
    force, apparently overwhelming.

We cannot refrain from transferring to these pages parts of the long and
eloquent speech of the chief justice, Robinson, who, on advancing to the
front of the hustings to move the sixth resolution, was received with
the most enthusiastic cheers.

    If it were intended by those who committed this shameful
    outrage, that the injury should be irreparable, the scene
    which is now before us, on these interesting heights, shews
    that they little understood the feelings of veneration for the
    memory of BROCK which still dwell in the hearts of the people
    of Upper Canada. No man ever established a better claim to the
    affections of a country; and, in recalling the recollections
    of eight and twenty years, there is no difficulty in
    accounting for the feeling which has brought us together on
    this occasion. Among the many who are assembled here from all
    parts of this province, I know there are some who saw, as I
    did, with grief, the body of the lamented general borne from
    the field on which he fell--and many who witnessed, with me,
    the melancholy scene of his interment in one of the bastions
    of Fort George.[144] They can never, I am sure, forget the
    countenances of the soldiers of that gallant regiment which he
    had long commanded, when they saw deposited in the earth the
    lamented officer who had for so many years been their pride;
    they can never forget the feelings displayed by the loyal
    militia of this province, when they were consigning to the
    grave the noble hero who had so lately achieved a glorious
    triumph in the defence of their country: they looked forward
    to a dark and perilous future, and they felt that the earth
    was closing upon him in whom, more than in all other human
    means of defence, their confidence had been reposed. Nor can
    they forget the countenances, oppressed with grief, of those
    brave and faithful Indian warriors, who admired and loved the
    gallant Brock, who had bravely shared with him the dangers of
    that period, and who had most honorably distinguished
    themselves in the field, where he closed his short but
    brilliant career.

      *      *      *      *      *

    It has, I know, Sir, in the many years that have elapsed, been
    sometimes objected, that General Brock's courage was greater
    than his prudence--that his attack of Fort Detroit, though it
    succeeded, was most likely to have, failed, and was therefore
    injudicious--and that a similar rashness and want of cool
    calculation were displayed in the manner of his death.

    Those who lived in Upper Canada while these events were
    passing, can form a truer judgment; they know that what may to
    some seem rashness, was, in fact, prudence; unless, indeed,
    the defence of Canada was to be abandoned, in the almost
    desperate circumstances in which General Brock was placed. He
    had with him but a handful of men, who had never been used to
    military discipline--few, indeed, that had ever seen actual
    service in the field; and he knew it must be some months
    before any considerable reinforcement could be sent to him. He
    felt, therefore, that if he could not impress upon the enemy
    this truth, that--wherever a major-general of the British
    army, with but a few gallant soldiers of the line, and of the
    brave defenders of the soil, could be assembled against
    them--they must retire from the land which they had invaded,
    his cause was hopeless. If he had begun to compare numbers,
    and had reserved his small force in order to make a safer
    effort on a future day, then would thousands upon thousands of
    the people of the neighbouring States have been found pouring
    into the western portions of this province; and when at last
    our mother country could send, as it was certain she would,
    her armies to our assistance, they would have had to expend
    their courage and their strength in taking one strong position
    after another, that had been erected by the enemy within our
    own territory.

    And at the moment when the noble soldier fell, it is true, he
    fell in discharging a duty which might have been committed to
    a subordinate hand; true, he might have reserved himself for a
    more deliberate and stronger effort; but he felt that
    hesitation might be ruin--that all depended upon his example
    of dauntless courage--of fearless self-devotion. Had it
    pleased Divine Providence to spare his invaluable life, who
    will say that his effort would have failed? It is true his
    gallant course was arrested by a fatal wound--such is the
    fortune of war; but the people of Canada did not feel that his
    precious life was therefore thrown away, deeply as they
    deplored his fall. In later periods of the contest, it
    sometimes happened that the example of General Brock was not
    very closely followed. It was that cautious calculation, which
    some suppose he wanted, which decided the day against us at
    Sackett's Harbour--it was the same cautious calculation which
    decided the day at Plattsburg; but no monuments have been
    erected to record the triumphs of those fields--it is not thus
    that trophies are won.

The Hon. Mr. Justice Macaulay, in moving the third resolution, thus
elegantly expressed himself:

    It was not my good fortune to serve in the field under the
    illustrious Brock, but I was under his command for a short
    period, when commandant of the garrison of Quebec, thirty
    years ago, and well remember his congratulating me upon
    receiving a commission in the army, accompanied with good
    wishes for my welfare, which I shall never forget. I feel
    myself a humble subaltern still when called upon to address
    such an auditory, and upon such a topic as the memory of
    Brock. Looking at the animated mass covering these heights in
    1840, to do further honour to the unfortunate victim of a war
    now old in history, one is prompted to ask, how it happens
    that the gallant general, who has so long slept the sleep of
    death, left the lasting impression on the hearts of his
    countrymen which this scene exhibits; how comes it that the
    fame of Brock thus floats down the stream of time, broad,
    deep, and fresh as the waters of the famed river with whose
    waters, it might be almost said, his life's blood mingled? In
    reply, we might dwell upon his civil and military virtues, his
    patriotic self-devotion, his chivalrous gallantry, and his
    triumphant achievements. (Here one of the auditors added, "and
    that he was an honest man"--an attribute most warmly responded
    to on every side, for an honest man is the noblest work of
    God.) Still it might be asked, What peculiar personal
    qualities predominated and gave him the talismanic influence
    and ascendancy over his fellow men, which he acquired and
    wielded for his country's good? I answer, Are there any seamen
    among you? (Yes, yes, answered from the crowd)--then I say it
    was the Nelsonian spirit that animated his breast; it was the
    mind intuitively to conceive, and the soul promptly to dare,
    incredible things to feeble hearts--with a skill and bearing
    which infused this chivalrous and enterprising spirit into all
    his followers, and impelled them energetically to realize
    whatever he boldly led the way to accomplish. It displayed
    itself too, not only in the ranks of the disciplined soldiers,
    but in those also of the untrained militia of Upper Canada, as
    was amply proved on this memorable ground. Such were the
    shining and conspicuous qualities of the man that have
    rendered very dear his memory and his fame. Gentlemen, the
    resolution which I hold in my hand is expressive of the
    indignation felt throughout the province at the lawless act,
    the effects of which are visible before us.

After the resolutions had been carried by acclamation, and the public
proceedings had terminated, 600 persons sat down to dinner in a
temporary pavilion erected on the spot where the hero fell, "Chief
Justice Robinson presiding; and at this, as at the morning meeting,
great eloquence was displayed in the speeches, great loyalty evinced in
the feelings, and great enthusiasm prevailed." After the queen's health
had been drunk, the chief justice rose and said:


    I have now to propose the memory of the late gallant Sir Isaac
    Brock, of Colonel M'Donell, and those who fell with them on
    Queenstown Heights. That portion of you, gentlemen, who were
    inhabitants of Upper Canada while General Brock served in its
    defence, are at no loss to account for the enthusiastic
    affection with which his memory is cherished among us. It was
    not merely on account of his intrepid courage and heroic
    firmness, neither was it solely because of his brilliant
    success while he lived, nor because he so nobly laid down his
    life in our defence; it was, I think, that he united in his
    person, in a very remarkable degree, some qualities which are
    peculiarly calculated to attract the confidence and affection
    of mankind,--there was, in all he said and did, that honesty
    of character which was so justly ascribed to him by a
    gentleman who proposed one of the resolutions,--there was an
    inflexible integrity, uncommon energy and decision, which
    always inspire confidence and respect,--a remarkable union in
    his whole demeanour of benevolence and firmness,--a peculiarly
    commanding and soldierlike appearance,--a generous, frank, and
    manly bearing,--and, above all, an entire devotion to his
    country. In short, I believe I shall best convey my own
    impression, when I say it would have required much more
    courage to refuse to follow General Brock, than to go with him
    wherever he would lead.

"The meeting presented a proud display of high and noble feelings,
honorable to the memory of the dead, and equally so to the character of
the living. It was conducted with great dignity and judgment, and no
accident occurred to interrupt the pleasures of the day; the steam
vessels re-embarking their passengers soon after sun-set, and conveying
back the individuals composing this congregated multitude to their
respective homes in safety."[145]

It having been resolved by the meeting that the most suitable monument,
to replace the shattered column, would be an obelisk on the site of the
mutilated structure, the committee offered a premium for a design,
which, in February, 1843, was awarded to Mr. T. Young, architect to the
university of king's college, Toronto. The style of the intended obelisk
is the simplest and purest Egyptian, the artist having strictly avoided
all minuteness of detail in order that the massive proportions of the
design might harmonize with the bold and beautiful scenery by which it
will be surrounded. The total height of the base, pedestal, and obelisk,
will be 120 feet. The obelisk will measure at the lower base 16 feet 6
inches square, diminishing to 10 feet at the base of the upper, the
proportions of that known as Cleopatra's needle having been strictly
adhered to. The estimated cost of this obelisk is about £5,000 currency,
the materials of the old monument being used as far as possible; and as
above £4,000[146] have already been contributed, it is expected that the
new structure will be commenced in the spring of 1845.[147]

A concluding notice of Sir Isaac Brock's favorite regiment will scarcely
be deemed superfluous, although, as the records of the 49th were
destroyed at the evacuation of Fort George, in May, 1813, we cannot give
many further details of its services previous to that period. In 1759,
it assisted at the reduction of Fort Niagara, then held by the French,
(page 160,) and it served in the American revolutionary war, as, by the
records still existing, the flank companies were to be permitted to
wear, the grenadiers a black, and the light company a red, feather, for
services at Bunker's Hill; but the books being lost, the regiment cannot
shew the authority, and consequently is not allowed this distinction.
The 49th was repeatedly engaged in Upper Canada, and was especially
distinguished at the battles of Stoney Creek and Chrystler's Farm. In
1815, the regiment returned to England, after an absence of above
thirteen years; and in January, 1816, "in consequence of its doing duty
over her royal highness the princess Charlotte of Wales, at Weymouth,
she was graciously pleased to nominate it her regiment." In December,
1821, the 49th embarked for the Cape of Good Hope, and in 1828 proceeded
on to Bengal. In April, 1840, the regiment embarked for China, where it
distinguished itself, and suffered much from climate. In gaining
possession of the heights which overlook the city of Canton, on the 25th
May, 1841, "as the two brigades advanced together, there was some little
rivalry between the 49th and 18th regiments, as to which should have the
honor of commencing the attack upon the two forts. The 49th, having the
advantage of a shorter and perhaps rather better road, got the lead,
which they maintained; so that the left brigade carried BOTH the eastern
forts before the 18th came up, and with little loss."[148] In February,
1843, after the Chinese had been coerced into a peace, the 49th returned
to Calcutta, and the following month embarked for England, where the
head quarters arrived on the 24th August, after an absence of nearly
twenty-two years--an example of the arduous services in which the
British infantry of the line is constantly engaged. The 49th, (the
Princess Charlotte of Wales',) or Hertfordshire regiment, bears on its
colours and appointments the distinctions of Egmont op Zee, Copenhagen,
Queenstown, the Dragon, and China.

On the 27th August, 1844, new colours were presented to the 49th, at
Winchester, by Lady Pakenham, the wife of Major-General the Hon. Sir
Hercules Pakenham, commanding the district, the colours being first
consecrated by Doctor C. R. Sumner, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, who
thus addressed the troops:

    Soldiers of the 49th, I have solicited and obtained permission
    of your gallant commanding officer to address you a few
    moments before I invoke the blessing of Almighty God upon the
    colours which are never to be sullied by any act of yours, and
    are not to be abandoned but with life itself. And let not any
    man marvel that I, a man of peace, come among you, who are men
    of war, for I hold that there is not a truer man of peace than
    a Christian soldier. When he conquers, it is not for national
    aggrandizement, nor the mere raising of your names, but for
    the insuring of peace in future time. Many a brave man has
    bled on the field, or expired on a bed of agony, that his
    countrymen might be preserved from the horrors of war. With
    respect to the services of the 49th, I might go back to a time
    antecedent to the present century. We must remember what a
    debt of gratitude we owe to your companions in arms for their
    prowess in many a well-fought field. And what did we not owe
    also to the naval power for the preservation of our soil from
    the insults and the cruelties of our enemy? I must bid you
    look back to the recollection of those days when you won glory
    in Holland, Copenhagen, and Canada, and since in India and
    China. I remember well the stirring phrases used by the great
    captain of the age, the commander-in-chief of the British
    army, the Duke of Wellington, when he asked for the thanks of
    parliament to the army of China--those were stirring phrases
    indeed--they were well worth living to hear, and well worth
    dying to deserve; they are for you to treasure up, and your
    children yet unborn to hear from your lips. When you unfold
    those banners, you look upon them as the memorials of former
    days, and in centuries yet to come they will be memorials of
    your country's renown, of your country's prosperity, and of
    your country's peace. On these grounds I hold that the
    Christian soldier is an instrument of good to the nation at
    large, and I bid you God speed in the name of the Lord, and,
    as a Christian bishop, I would bid you remember Him who is the
    God of battles, Him by whom nations are led to victory and
    preserved in peace. Be men of resolution and men of energy,
    pacific in your profession and disinterested in your
    patriotism, observant of your duty to your queen, your
    country, and your God.

      *      *      *      *      *

Of Sir Isaac Brock's brothers, the eldest, John, a brevet
lieutenant-colonel in the 81st regiment, was killed in a duel, in July,
1801, at the Cape of Good Hope, by Captain M----,[149] in consequence of
his having, as steward of a public ball, very properly resisted the
introduction, by his antagonist, of a female of disreputable character.
The second brother, Ferdinand, a lieutenant of the 60th regiment, was
slain in the defence of Bâton Rouge, on the Mississippi, 21st September,
1779, at the early age of nineteen. The third brother, Daniel De Lisle,
a man of distinguished ability, was bailiff and president of the States
of Guernsey. No chief magistrate of the island was ever so beloved,
honored, and regretted, as Mr. Brock; and so universal was the feeling
of admiration for his talents and services, that the Royal Court decreed
him a public funeral at the public expense--a tribute of respect never
previously paid by that body to any individual.[150] The ninth brother,
Savery, who died on the 7th August, 1844, has been already noticed, and
the tenth, Irving, who died in 1838, at Bath, was "the accomplished
translator of Bernier's Travels in India," and a very powerful writer in
support of the government in 1810, at a very eventful and critical
period.[151] Singularly enough, of the eight brothers of this Family of
the Brocks who reached maturity, no male descendant of their name is now
in existence. Of their two sisters, who grew to womanhood, the elder,
Elizabeth, now the only survivor of the family, married John E. Tupper,
Esq., of Guernsey; and the younger, Mary, was the wife of Thomas
Potenger, Esq., of Compton, in Berkshire, first cousin to the Countess
of Bridgewater.

Of the five nephews and one great nephew of Sir Isaac Brock, who have
hitherto embraced the profession of arms, not one survives, four of the
former and the latter having sadly and prematurely perished, viz: first,
Midshipman Charles Tupper, of his majesty's ship Primrose, drowned at
Spithead, in 1815, by the upsetting of the boat in which he was
accompanying his commander from Portsmouth to the ship; second,
Lieutenant E.W. Tupper,[152] his majesty's ship Sybille, mortally
wounded in action with Greek pirates, near Candia, on the 18th June,
1826; third, Lieutenant William Potenger, adjutant 22d regiment, died on
the 19th November, 1827, of the fever, at Jamaica; fourth, Colonel W.
De Vic Tupper,[153] of the Chilian service, slain in action near Talca,
on the 17th April, 1830; and, fifth, the great nephew, Ensign A.
Delacombe Potenger,[154] of the 5th Bengal Native Infantry, while in
command of the light company, was killed by a bullet, which entered his
breast, in the disastrous retreat of the British army from Cabool, in
January, 1842. The remaining nephew, Captain Eugene Brock, of the 20th
regiment, died at Bermuda, in January, 1844.

      *      *      *      *      *

Our memoir is concluded, and even if in its progress we have but feebly
and imperfectly narrated the career and portrayed the character of him
who is the subject, we trust that our labour has not been in vain,
because we feel that we have rescued much from oblivion that was
hitherto unknown and unrecorded. It was that feeling which prompted us
to undertake this work; and, in completing our task, we are not without
hope that the simple language of soberness and truth will be preferred
to a memorial composed with more art, but dictated by less sincerity.
And should we in the course of these pages have inadvertently fallen
into undue panegyrism, that common error of biographers, our excuse must
be, that we could scarcely avoid eulogizing one of whom it was written,
soon after his untimely fall, by a bosom friend:

"General Brock[155] was indeed a hero, a hero in the only true and in
the most extensive sense, resembling what history or fable has
represented, rather as the offspring of the imagination than a personage
that could have real existence, so entirely was every great and good
quality comprehended in his character."

      *      *      *      *      *

_Additional Notes_.

The garrison of Michilimakinack, when surprised in 1763, (see page 244,)
consisted of the commandant, Major Etherington, two subalterns, and
ninety soldiers; and there were four English traders there. Of these
Lieutenant Jemette, about seventy soldiers, and one trader, were
massacred; but the commandant, Lieutenant Leslie, and the remainder,
were preserved by the Ottawas, and restored at the peace in 1764. The
English trader, who beheld and described the massacre, was Alexander
Henry, whose travels in Canada are cited at page 369.

When peace was concluded at Detroit, by General Bradstreet, with the
Indians, in 1764, Pontiac fled to the Illinois; (see pages 164 and 243;)
but he appears subsequently to have joined the English, and to have
received a handsome pension from them to secure his attachment. Carver,
in his "Three Years Travels" in North America, relates that in 1767
Pontiac held a council in the Illinois, in which he spoke against the
English, and that in consequence an Indian, who was attached to their
cause, plunged a knife into his heart, and laid him dead on the spot.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 136: The medal is a very large and beautifully executed gold
one, made to suspend from the neck. On the obverse is, "Detroit;" on the
reverse, the figure of Britannia; and round the rim, "Major-General Sir
Isaac Brock." The medal was given only to the principal officers.]

[Footnote 137: This is doubtless the officer whose name is spelt M'Kec,
at page 252; see also page 294.]

[Footnote 138: The present Mrs. De Beauvoir De Lisle.]

[Footnote 139: The present Lieut.-General Sir Andrew Barnard, G.C.B.]

[Footnote 140: Her husband, who distinguished himself in Upper Canada
during the war, was then serving on the staff in Lower Canada.]

[Footnote 141: On the same day, ten years previously, Sir Isaac Brock's
nephew, Colonel Tupper, was slain in Chile.]

[Footnote 142: Exclusive of the chief justice and Mr. Justice Macaulay,
the speakers were, His Excellency Sir George Arthur; Sir Allan MacNab;
Mr. Thorburn, M.P.P.; Colonel the Hon. W. Morris; Colonel R.D. Fraser;
Colonel Clark; Mr. W.H. Merritt, M.P.P.; Lieut.-Colonel J. Baskin;
Lieut.-Colonel Sherwood; Colonel Stanton; Colonel Kerby; Colonel the
Hon. W.H. Draper; Colonel Angus M'Donell; the Hon. Mr. Sullivan;
Lieut.-Colonel Cartwright; Colonel Bostwick; Colonel M'Dougal; the Hon.
Mr. Justice Hagannan; Colonel Rutton; Lieut.-Colonel Kearnes;
Lieut.-Colonel Kirkpatrick; H.J. Boulton, Esq.; and Lieut.-Colonel
Edward Thomson.]

[Footnote 143: A public meeting of the inhabitants of Montreal was also
held in that city, for the same purpose as that on Queenstown Heights.]

[Footnote 144: We suppose that the chief justice was the lieutenant of
militia, who acted as one of Lieut.-Colonel M'Donell's pall bearers. See
page 332.]

[Footnote 145: The extracts given in inverted commas are from
"Buckingham's Canada," that gentleman being at Toronto at the time, but
unable from illness to attend the "gathering."]

[Footnote 146: In 1841, the Six Nations of Indians had contributed the
(for their diminished numbers and limited means) large sum of £167.]

[Footnote 147: See Appendix A, Section 1, No. 11.]

[Footnote 148: Bernard's Narrative of the combined Naval and Military
Operations in China. London, 1844.]

[Footnote 149: Captain M----, the son of a baronet, fell as a major and
aide-de-camp to Lord Lake, at the siege of Bhurtpore, in 1805.]

[Footnote 150: For a brief memoir of him, see Appendix B.]

[Footnote 151: One of his pamphlets went through four editions.]

[Footnote 152: For a short memoir, see Appendix C.]

[Footnote 153: For a memoir, see Appendix D.]

[Footnote 154: The only son of the Rev. Richard Potenger. (See page
269.) With this fine young man expired the last hope of his family, and
the continuation of his line.]

[Footnote 155: It is also creditable to the military character of the
little island of Guernsey, that of the five British generals killed in
action in 1812, two, whose names follow in the obituary of the _Annual
Army List_ for 1813, were Major-General Le Marchant, 6th Dragoon Guards,
at the battle of Salamanca, and Major-General Sir Isaac Brock, K.B.,
49th Foot, in America,--_Duncan's History of Guernsey_.]


APPENDIX A.

SECTION I.--BRITISH AUTHORS.


No. 1. Page 15.

_Lieut.-General Lord Aylmer, Governor-General of British North America,
to J. Savery Brock, Esq_.

    SOREL, Lower Canada, August 23, 1834.

    I received yesterday your letter of the 19th March.... The
    sight of your handwriting reminded me of old times, and brought
    back the recollection of scenes which almost appear to have
    taken place in another state of existence.... I made a tour in
    Upper Canada last summer, and visited with a feeling of love
    and reverence the monument at Queenstown, erected to the memory
    of one who was as brave as he was good, and a better man never
    breathed; to have enjoyed his friendship and good opinion, is
    to me a source of pride and satisfaction.

    Yours, my dear Savery, very sincerely,

    AYLMER.


_Extract of a note from Lord Aylmer to the Editor_.--

    "LONDON, August 5, 1844.

    I am very glad to learn by your letter that a work is shortly
    to appear, intituled 'The Life and Correspondence of Sir Isaac
    Brock,' for sure I am that the more of him that is made known
    to the public, the more highly will his valuable services be
    appreciated."


No. 2. Page 206.


_From Captain Roberts to the Adjutant-General_.

    Fort Michilimakinack, July 17, 1812.

    On the 15th instant I received letters, by express, from
    Major-General Brock, with orders to adopt the most prudent
    measures either for offence or defence, which circumstances
    might point out; and having received intelligence from the
    best information, that large reinforcements were expected to
    be thrown into this garrison, with the thorough conviction
    that my situation at St. Joseph's was totally indefensible, I
    determined to lose no time in making the meditated attack on
    this fort.

    On the 16th, at ten o'clock in the morning, I embarked my few
    men, with about 180 Canadians, and two iron 6-pounders. The
    boats arrived without the smallest accident at the port of
    rendezvous, at three o'clock the following morning: by the
    exertions of the Canadians, one of the guns was brought up a
    height commanding the garrison, and ready to act about ten
    o'clock. A summons was then sent in; a copy of the
    capitulation which followed I have the honor to enclose. At
    twelve o'clock, the American colours were hauled down, and
    those of his majesty were hoisted. A committee has been
    appointed to examine into the state of the public stores.

    Enclosed also are the returns of the ordnance and military
    stores found in the fort, and the strength of the garrison.
    The greatest praise is due to every individual employed in the
    expedition; to my own officers I am indebted, in particular,
    for their active assistance in carrying all my orders into
    effect.


No. 3. Page 275.

Extracts from "_The Letters of Veritas_;"[156] _containing a succinct
Narrative of the Military Administration of Sir George Prevost during
his command in the Canadas, whereby it will be manifest that the merit
of preserving them from conquest belongs not to him_. 8vo. Montreal,
July, 1815.

    "_Then_ or _before_ was communicated to him (Major-General
    Brock) the information of that _deadly armistice_ concluded
    by Sir George Prevost with General Dearborn, which had so
    fatal an effect upon all the future operations, and which tied
    up the hands of the gallant Brock from executing his intended
    plan of sweeping the American posts to Sackett's Harbour,
    inclusive--an operation that most certainly would have been
    then effected.

    "This armistice, proposed by Sir George Prevost, merits
    serious consideration, from its operation being so greatly in
    favor of the enemy at that time, and so disadvantageous to us.
    A period most precious to us, if we had profited by it with
    vigour, was thereby lost in inaction, and the enemy in
    consequence allowed to recover from the panic into which they
    were thrown by Hull's capture.

    "The transport of the American stores, ordnance, and
    provisions, of each of which they were much in want, not being
    prohibited by that armistice, was accordingly protected and
    facilitated by it on Lake Ontario and along the Niagara
    frontier beyond the enemy's most sanguine hopes, whilst their
    then only disposable and invading force, under General Hull,
    on the Detroit frontier, was left at full liberty to profit by
    circumstances, the armistice as to him being at his option.

    "Most fortunately, however, Hull's business was settled by
    capitulation before the armistice was known to General Brock
    or him; but had it reached him in time, he of course would
    gladly have accepted it, to gain delay for the arrival of
    reinforcements and a supply of provisions, from which would
    have resulted the salvation of his army, the prejudicial
    consequences whereof to us are incalculable; for, had a
    knowledge of it reached the Indian nations at that time, such
    a disgust and distrust would have been thereby excited as
    could never have been removed; and the first effect of which
    would have appeared in the immediate dispersion of the
    Indians, whose powerful and indispensable aid at that early
    period of the contest would have been totally lost to us.

    "Madison's rejection of this armistice was followed by that
    _chilling defensive system_ which General Brock was instructed
    by Sir George to follow, and which palsied his operations
    until his country had to mourn over his fatal loss at the
    battle of Queenstown, on the 13th of October, 1812.

    "Such, however, was the impulse he had given, and the valour
    and zeal wherewith the regular troops, militia and Indians,
    had been inspired, that the valuable effects thereof survived
    him; and gave a brilliant victory on that day to his
    successor, General Sheaffe, a lover of armistices also, who,
    in proof thereof, made _one of his own_, which threw away most
    of the advantages of that victory; for he neglected (although
    strongly urged thereto) to take Fort Niagara, which could have
    been done on the afternoon of the day of the Queenstown
    battle, without loss, as the enemy had entirely, or almost
    entirely, then evacuated it: had he done this, and at the same
    time crossed over a part of his force to Lewistown, as he was
    urged to do, and as Brock would have done had he survived, the
    whole Niagara line would have been cleared of the enemy, and
    all our after disasters in that quarter prevented.

    "It has been urged in favor of Sir George's timid defensive
    system, that it was proper in order to avoid irritating the
    enemy, and thereby uniting them; as also, that his force was
    inadequate to offensive warfare. Now, no positions were ever
    more untenable, for to think of conciliating an enemy by
    leaving to him the full benefit of maturing in security all
    his means of annoyance against you, and at the same time
    muzzling yourself, is a most extraordinary doctrine; surely,
    to do so must ensure success to that enemy, as we know that
    success will unite discordant parties and interests, whilst
    defeats promote disunion, and would have strengthened the
    anti-war party in the States, by furnishing to them
    unanswerable arguments when depicting the folly and impolicy
    of the war, which had been so wantonly declared by the
    Madisonian party.

    "Were facts in support of this view of the subject necessary,
    they would be found in the effects upon the public mind in
    that country, produced by the capture of Michilimakinack and
    Detroit, with Hull's army. Did these events irritate and unite
    the enemy against us? No, they increased irritation, it is
    true, but against their own government."

    (In his tenth or concluding letter, Veritas recapitulated his
    preceding arguments, and observed:) "That to General Brock's
    zeal and energy, left as he was without orders, along with
    other causes independent of Sir George, the preservation of
    Upper Canada, in the first instance, and of Lower Canada as a
    consequence, are mainly to be ascribed."


No. 4. Page 277.

_Extract from Sir George Prevost's General Order, Montreal, August 31,
1812, in announcing the refusal of the American President to continue
the armistice._

    "The invasion of the Upper Province, undertaken so immediately
    after the declaration of war, shews in the strongest manner how
    fully they had prepared themselves for that event, and how
    highly they had flattered themselves with finding it an easy
    conquest, from the supposed weakness of the force opposed to
    them, and the spirit of disaffection which they had previously
    endeavoured to excite amongst its inhabitants. Foiled as they
    have been in this attempt by the brave and united efforts of
    the regular forces, militia, and Indians of that province,
    under the command of their distinguished leader, their whole
    army with its general captured, and their only remaining
    fortress and post in the adjoining territory wrested from them,
    it is not to be doubted but that the American government will
    keenly feel this disappointment of their hopes, and
    consequently endeavour to avail themselves of the surrender of
    Detroit, to term it an invasion of their country, and to make
    it a ground for calling upon the militia to march to the
    frontiers for the conquest of the Canadas. A pretext so weak
    and unfounded, though it may deceive some, will not fail to be
    received in its proper light by others; and it will be
    immediately perceived by those who will give themselves the
    trouble to reflect on the subject, that the pursuit of an
    invading army into their own territory, is but a natural
    consequence of the first invasion; and the capture of the
    place, to which they may retire for safety, a measure
    indispensably necessary for the security and protection of the
    country originally attacked."


No. 5. Page 333.

    "To Colonel Brock, of the 49th, who commanded at the fort, I am
    particularly indebted for his kindness to me during the
    fortnight I remained at Niagara. Among many pleasant days which
    I passed with him and his brother officers, that of our visit
    to the Tuscorora Indians was not the least interesting. They
    received us in all their ancient costume; the young men
    exhibited for our amusement in the race, the bat game, &c,
    while the old and the women sat in groups under the surrounding
    trees, and the picture altogether was as beautiful as it was
    new to me."--_Note in Moore's Epistles, Odes, &c_.

    "At Queenstown the battle was fought in which General Brock
    fell, and the inhabitants point out a thorn bush at the bottom
    of the heights, where it is said that he received his mortal
    wound. His career was a short but a brilliant one; and had the
    direction of the affairs of the Upper Province, after his
    death, been characterized by an equal degree of courage,
    prudence, and humanity, a very different series of subsequent
    events would have claimed the attention of the
    historian."--_Duncan's Travels in the United States and Canada,
    in 1818 and 1819_.

    "Close to the spot where we landed in Canada, there stands a
    monument to the gallant General Brock, who was killed during
    the battle of Queenstown, in the act of repelling an invasion
    of the frontier by the Americans, during the late war.... The
    view from the top of the monument extended far over Lake
    Ontario, and showed us the windings of the Niagara, through the
    low and woody country which hangs like a rich green fringe
    along the southern skirts of that great sheet of
    water,"--_Captain Basil Hall's Travels in North America, in
    1827 and 1828_.

Travelling in the state of New York, the author observes: "The late Sir
Isaac Brock was, by some accident, mentioned. The canal agent spoke of
him in terms of great respect, as the best commander the British had
ever sent to Canada--equally regretted on both sides of the St.
Lawrence...."

    "From Niagara Falls we proceeded by the stage first to
    Queenstown, (seven miles,) near which a monument has been
    erected to the memory of Sir Isaac Brock, from the top of
    which, about 120 feet high, there is a noble view of Lake
    Ontario and the adjoining country, and thence to the village of
    Newark, (seven miles,) formerly called Fort George, on the
    Niagara river."--_Stuart's Three Years in America._

    "Immediately above Queenstown stands Brock's monument, on the
    heights where the battle was fought in which that hero was
    killed. His body was removed to it from Fort George, in 1824.
    The view from this fine column is probably the most beautiful
    in Upper Canada."--_M'Gregor's British America_, vol. ii.

    "Seven miles south of Fort George, and at the foot of the
    romantic heights of the same name, which have become famous in
    Canadian history as the scene of a battle wherein General Brock
    fell, is the village of Queenstown, pleasantly situated on the
    Niagara, and opposite to the American village of Lewistown. The
    monument, built to the memory of the gallant general and his
    companions, on the loftiest part of these heights, forms a
    prominent object to the numerous _voyageurs_ who are constantly
    arriving at this portage, in elegantly fitted up steam boats,
    from York and Kingston, to view the neighbouring falls of the
    Niagara. The village contains a church, court house, large
    government stores, and a population of between 400 and 500
    inhabitants."--_The Canadas, by Andrew Pichen._

    "Leaving a garrison in Detroit sufficiently strong to keep the
    inhabitants in awe, General Brock lost no time in quitting the
    conquered post and hastening to Niagara--a command he had only
    relinquished for the purpose of undertaking an achievement
    which the gallantry and determination of his character could
    alone have crowned with such unqualified success....

    "The month of October was marked by an event of the most
    melancholy nature--the death of General Brock, who fell a
    victim to the intrepidity and daring of his character.... The
    loss of their leader, however, cast a gloom over every English
    brow, and an advantage thus purchased was deemed at too high a
    price. General Brock was beloved by the soldiery, particularly
    the 49th, of which he had long been lieutenant-colonel, and the
    indignation of their grief for his loss cost the Americans many
    a life on that day, that had otherwise been spared. At
    Amherstburg, the account of his death was received with
    heartfelt concern, and not a man was there of those he had
    lately led to victory who failed to pay that tribute to his
    memory, which the gallantry and magnanimity of this glorious
    chief were so every way calculated to awaken in the breast of
    the soldier."--'_A Canadian Campaign_,' _by a British Officer,
    in the New Monthly Magazine for December, 1826, and February,
    1827._

    "Immediately opposite the town of Prescott, on the shore of the
    United States, is the town of Ogdensburg; and twelve miles
    higher up, on the Canadian shore, stands the delightful village
    of Brockville, so called in honor of the late lamented Sir
    Isaac Brock. This enchanting little spot unites in its
    situation every beauty of nature. In front of it flows the
    river St. Lawrence, interspersed with numerous islands,
    variously formed and thickly wooded; behind it is an assemblage
    of small hills, rising one above another in 'gay theatric
    pride;' and on each side are a number of well cleared farms, in
    an advanced state of cultivation. Every thing combines to
    render it pre-eminently beautiful. The dwellings are built of
    wood, and tastefully painted; and the court house, in an
    elevated situation at the back of the village, seems, from its
    superior size, to be the guardian of the villagers--an idea of
    my fancy, which I did not seek to confirm by entering within
    its doors. Brockville contains 450 souls. It has a parsonage
    house, but no church has hitherto been erected."--_Five Years
    in Canada, by E.A. Talbot._

    "We remained an hour or two at Brockville, the village of
    palaces; and few villages have I seen more attractive than this
    one. It is situated on a shelving bank, with a southern aspect,
    and groves of trees round it. The houses and churches are built
    of grey stones, and, being covered with tin, have a light and
    pleasant appearance." _Alexander's Transatlantic Sketches._
    London, 1833.

[NOTE.--Brockville was originally named Elizabeth Town, in compliment to
the general's mother, and the township or county, in which the village
is situated, is still called Elizabeth. There is a large township
bordering the river St. Clair and Lake Huron, in about latitude 43° and
longitude 82°, in the western district of Upper Canada, named Sarnia,
the ancient name of Guernsey. This township was probably so named by Sir
Isaac Brock.]

No. 6. Page 338.

_At a General Council of Condolence, held at the Council House, Fort
George, 6th November, 1842,_

    Present--The Six Nations, Hurons, Potawatitimies, and
    Chippawas. William Claus, Deputy Superintendent-General.
    Captain Norton. Captain J.B. Rosscaux, and several others of
    the Indian Department. Kasencayont Cayonga Chief, Speaker.

    "_Brothers_,--The Americans have long threatened to strike us,
    and in the beginning of the summer they declared war against
    us, and lately they recommenced hostility by invading the
    country at Queenstown. In this contest, which, with the help
    of God, terminated in our favor, your much lamented commander
    and friend, General Brock, his aide-de-camp, Colonel M'Donell,
    and several warriors, have fallen.

    "_Brothers_,--We therefore now, seeing you darkened with
    grief, your eyes dim with tears, and your throats stopped with
    the force of your affliction, with these strings of wampum we
    wipe away your tears, that you may view clearly the
    surrounding objects. We clear the passage in your throats that
    you may have free utterance for your thoughts, and we wipe
    clean from blood the place of your abode, that you may sit
    there in comfort, without having renewed the remembrance of
    your loss by the remaining stains of blood.

    Delivered eight strings of white wampum.[157]

    "_Brothers_,--That the remains of our late beloved friend and
    commander, General Brock, shall receive no injury, we cover it
    with this belt of wampum, which we do from the grateful
    sensations which his kindness towards us continually inspired,
    as also in conformity with the customs of our ancestors; and
    we now express, with the unanimous voice of the chiefs and
    warriors of our respective bands, the great respect in which
    we hold his memory, and the sorrow and deep regret with which
    his loss has filled our breasts, although he has taken his
    departure for a better abode, where his many virtues will be
    rewarded by the great Dispenser of good, who has led us on the
    road to victory.

    A large white belt.

    "_Brothers_,--We now address the successor of our departed
    friend, to express the confidence we feel that his heart is
    warmed with similar sentiments of affection and regard towards
    us. We also assure him of our readiness to support him to the
    last, and therefore take the liberty to speak strong to all
    his people to co-operate with vigour, and, trusting in the
    powerful arm of God, not to doubt of victory.

    "Although our numbers are small, yet, counting Him on our
    side, who ever decides on the day of battle, we look for
    victory whenever we shall come in contact with our enemy.

    Five strings of white wampum.

    (Signed) "W. CLAUS, D.S.G."


No. 7. Page 343.

_Extract from a Description of St. Paul's Cathedral_.

    "In the western ambulatory of the south transept is a tabular
    monument to the memory of Sir Isaac Brock, by the same artist
    (Westmacott).

    "A military monument, on which are placed the sword and helmet
    of the deceased; a votive record, supposed to have been
    raised by his companions to their honored commander.

    "His corpse reclines in the arms of a British soldier, whilst
    an Indian pays the tribute of regret his bravery and humanity
    elicited.

    ERECTED AT THE PUBLIC EXPENSE
    TO THE MEMORY OF
    MAJOR-GENERAL
    SIR ISAAC BROCK,
    WHO GLORIOUSLY FELL
    ON THE 13th OF OCTOBER,
    M.DCCC.XII.
    IN RESISTING AN ATTACK
    ON
    QUEENSTOWN,
    IN UPPER CANADA."


No. 8. Page 343.

"This chief of the branch of the once great tribe of the Hurons visited
England some time ago. I afterwards saw him in Quebec, and had a good
deal of conversation with him. When asked what had struck him most of
all that he had seen in England, he replied, without hesitation, that it
was the monument erected in St. Paul's to the memory of General Brock.
It seemed to have impressed him with a high idea of the considerate
beneficence of his great father, the king of England, that he not only
had remembered the exploits and death of his white child, who had fallen
beyond the big salt lake, but that he had even deigned to record, on the
marble sepulchre, the sorrows of the poor Indian weeping over his chief
untimely slain."--_Hon. F.F. De Roos' Travels in North America, in_
1826.


No. 9. Page 343.

    To His Royal Highness the Prince Regent of the United Kingdom
    of Great Britain and Ireland,

    The humble address of the Commons of Upper Canada, in
    Parliament assembled,

    May it please your Royal Highness,

    We, his majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects the Commons
    of Upper Canada, in Provincial Parliament assembled, beg leave
    to offer to your Royal Highness the homage of our unfeigned
    attachment to his Majesty's sacred person and government, and
    of our filial reverence for the great and magnanimous nation
    of which we have the honor to form a part.

    While we pray your Royal Highness to accept of our most
    cordial congratulations on the splendid achievements of his
    Majesty's forces, and of those of his allies in various parts
    of the globe, and in particular on the extraordinary successes
    which, under Divine Providence, have attended his Majesty's
    arms in this portion of his dominions; we should do injustice
    to the memory of our late truly illustrious president,
    Major-General Brock, under whose auspices the latter were
    during his lifetime principally achieved, did we omit to
    accompany them with feelings of the most poignant sorrow for
    his fall.

    He had endeared himself to us by his able, virtuous, and
    disinterested administration of the civil government, and by
    the zeal, military talent, and bravery, which characterized
    and marked his conduct in the field.

    To his energy, his promptitude, and his decision, do we feel
    ourselves in a great degree indebted, for having at this
    moment the happiness of enjoying the privileges of his
    Majesty's subjects. His disinterested and manly conduct
    aroused the spirit of the country, and called it forth for
    self-defence against a most insidious foe.

    In appreciating, as we do, his talents and eminent services,
    most deeply do we lament our inability to bestow on them any
    other reward than our praise. Without revenue for even the
    ordinary purposes of the government, we have no funds from
    whence to reward merit, however exalted and deserving.

    We derive, however, much pleasure from beholding that the
    services of our ever-to-be-lamented president and general have
    been appreciated by your Royal Highness; and while we
    feelingly regret that he did not survive to enjoy the high
    honors conferred upon him by your Royal Highness in his
    Majesty's name, we, with all humility, would beg to suggest
    that a grant to his family of a portion of his Majesty's most
    valuable waste lands in this province would be most gratifying
    to us. It would, we doubt not, be acceptable to them, and it
    would be the means of perpetuating the connection that had
    taken place between us, as well as the name of Brock, in a
    country in defence of which the general so nobly fell!!! and
    which his exertions had so eminently contributed to save.

    That your Royal Highness may long be preserved to fill the
    exalted station to which you have been called for the
    advancement of the happiness, honor and glory, of the British
    nation, is the fervent prayer of his Majesty's faithful
    subjects, the Commons of Upper Canada.

    (Signed) A. M'LEAN, Speaker.

Passed the Commons House of Assembly, the Sixth Day of March, One
Thousand Eight Hundred and Thirteen.


No. 10. Page 344.

_Anniversary of the Battle of Queenstown, and the re-interment of the
late much-lamented Major-General Sir Isaac Brock_.

    "There is something so grand and imposing in the spectacle of
    a nation's homage to departed worth, which calls for the
    exercise of so many interesting feelings, and which awakens
    so many sublime contemplations, that we naturally seek to
    perpetuate the memory of an event so pregnant with
    instruction, and so honorable to our species. It is a subject
    that in other and in older countries has frequently exercised
    the pens, and has called forth all the descriptive powers of
    the ablest writers.[158] But here it is new; and for the first
    time, since we became a separate province, have we seen a
    great public funeral procession of all ranks of people, to the
    amount of several thousands, bearing the remains of two
    lamented heroes to their last dwelling on earth, in the vaults
    of a grand national monument, overtopping the loftiest heights
    of the most magnificent section of one of the most magnificent
    countries in the world.

    "The 13th of October, being the anniversary of the battle of
    Queenstown, and of the death of Brock, was judiciously chosen
    as the most proper day for the removal of the remains of the
    general, together with those of his gallant aide-de-camp,
    Lieutenant-Colonel M'Donell, to the vaults prepared for their
    reception on Queenstown heights.[159]

    "The weather was remarkably fine, and before ten o'clock a
    very large concourse of people, from all parts of the country,
    had assembled on the plains of Niagara, in front of Fort
    George, in a bastion of which the bodies had been deposited
    for twelve years.[160]

    "One hearse, covered with black cloth, and drawn by four
    black horses, each with a leader, contained both the bodies.
    Soon after ten, a lane was formed by the 1st and 4th regiments
    of Lincoln militia, with their right on the gate of Fort
    George, and their left extending along the road towards
    Queenstown, the ranks being about forty paces distant from
    each other: within this line was formed, a guard of honor of
    the 76th regiment, in parade order, having its left on the
    fort. As the hearse moved slowly from the fort, to the sound
    of solemn music, a detachment of royal artillery began to fire
    the salute of nineteen guns, and the guard of honor presented
    arms.

    "On moving forwards in ordinary time, the guard of honor broke
    into a column of eight divisions, with the right in front, and
    the procession took the following order:

    A Staff Officer.
    Subdivision of Grenadiers.
    Band of Music.
    Right Wing of 76th Regiment.
    THE BODY.
    Aide-de-Camp to the late Major General Sir ISAAC BROCK.
    Chief Mourners.
    Relatives of the late Colonel M'DONELL.
    Commissioners for the Monument.
    Heads of Public Departments of the Civil Government.
    Judges.
    Members of the Executive Council.
    His Excellency and Suite.
    Left Wing of the 76th Regiment.
    Indian Chiefs of the Five Nations.
    Officers of Militia not on duty--junior ranks--First forward,
    Four deep.
    Magistrates and Civilians,
    With a long Cavalcade of Horsemen, and Carriages of every
    description.

    "As the procession passed along the lane of militia, the
    latter wheeled inwards by subdivisions in succession, as soon
    as its own front was clear, and followed the procession. At a
    certain distance from Fort George the quick march was taken
    up, and arms were sloped; the members of the procession then
    took their carriages, preserving as nearly as possible the
    order abovementioned, and the whole proceeded on the road to
    Queenstown. The 2d and 3d regiments of Lincoln militia, in
    like manner, formed a lane, its left resting on the heights,
    near the entrance to the monument, and extending along the
    road towards the village of Queenstown. On reaching the
    commencement of this lane, the procession resumed its
    formation, all horses, carriages, &c., keeping in the rear;
    and when the head of the column approached the monument, it
    inclined to the right, to allow the body to proceed direct to
    the entrance. The guard of honor then halted and formed in
    parade order; the 2d and 3d Lincoln regiments following the
    procession in like manner as the 1st and 4th.

    "The time occupied in moving from the fort to Queenstown, a
    distance of nearly seven miles, was about three hours,
    including stoppages. Being arrived opposite the spot where the
    lamented hero received his mortal wound, the whole procession
    halted, and remained for a few minutes in solemn pause. It
    then ascended the heights, and to the spectator who had his
    station on the summit near the monument, nothing could be
    finer than the effect of the lengthened column winding slowly
    up the steep ascent in regular order, surrounded by scenery no
    where surpassed for romantic beauty. On the bodies being
    removed from the hearse and deposited in the vault, the guard
    of honor presented arms, whilst the artillery, (which had been
    taken from the enemy during the last war,) posted on the
    heights, fired a salute of nineteen guns. The troops then
    marched in ordinary time round the monument, and immediately
    separated to their respective parades.

    "All those who were inclined to visit the interior of the
    vault were then permitted to enter in small parties. The
    remains of the brave M'Donell lie to the left of those of the
    general. On the general's coffin, which is otherwise quite
    plain and covered with black cloth, are two oval plates of
    silver, each six inches by four, one above the other. On the
    first is the following inscription:

    "Here lie the earthly remains of a brave
    and virtuous hero,
    MAJOR-GENERAL SIR ISAAC BROCK:,
    Commander of the British Forces,
    and President administering
    the Government of Upper Canada,
    who fell, when gloriously engaging the enemies
    of his country,
    at the head of the Flank Companies
    of the 49th Regiment,
    in the town of Queenstown,
    on the morning of the 13th of October, 1812,
    Aged 42 years."

    J.B. GLEGG, A.D.C.

And on the second plate the following additional inscription is
engraved:

    The remains of the late
    MAJOR-GENERAL SIR ISAAC BROCK, K.B.
    removed from Fort George to this vault,
    on the 13th of October, 1824.

Upon a similar plate, on the lid of the aide-de-camp's coffin, was
engraved:

    The remains of
    LIEUT.-COL. JOHN M'DONELL,
    Provincial Aide-de-Camp to the late
    MAJOR-GENERAL BROCK,
    who died on the 14th of October, 1812,
    of wounds received in action the day before,
    Aged 25 years.

    "Several printed papers, having the following extract from the
    government dispatches of the day, were handed about:

    [See dispatch from Earl Bathurst to Sir George Prevost, page
    328.--ED.] "Besides which, on large placards, to the number
    of several hundreds, copies of the inscription to be placed on
    the tablet, over the entrance of the monument, were
    distributed amongst the assembled multitudes, and which is as
    follows:

    "The Legislature of Upper Canada has dedicated this Monument
    to the very eminent civil and military services of the late
    Sir Isaac Brock, Knight of the Most Hon. Order of the Bath,
    Provisional Lieutenant-Governor, and Major-General commanding
    the Forces in this Province, whose remains are deposited in
    the vault beneath. Having expelled the North Western Army of
    the United States, achieved its capture, received the
    surrender of Fort Detroit, and the territory of Michigan,
    under circumstances which have rendered his name illustrious,
    he returned to the protection of this frontier; and advancing
    with his small force to repel a second invasion of the enemy,
    then in possession of these heights, he fell in action, on the
    13th of October, 1812, in the forty-third year of his age,
    honoured and beloved by the people whom he governed, and
    deplored by his Sovereign, to whose service his life had been
    devoted."


REMARKS.

    "By the best computation we could make, and avoiding all
    exaggeration, at the time the procession reached the monument
    there could not be less than five thousand persons present,
    many of whom were from the United States. General Brock,
    indeed, was a man no less esteemed by the enemy than he was
    admired and almost adored by his friends and soldiery; and we
    heard several Americans say, who had served against him and saw
    him fall, that they lamented his death as much as they would
    have done that of any of their own generals, on account of his
    humanity, and the great attention he had uniformly shewn to his
    prisoners.

    "His excellency the lieutenant-governor (Major-General Sir
    Peregrine Maitland, K.C.B.) was in full dress, and, we are
    happy to say, appeared in good health after his late fatiguing
    journey of inspection to the Lower Province. The two M'Donells
    and Captain Dickinson, of the 2d Glengary regiment, relatives
    of the deceased Lieut. Colonel M'Donell, in the highland
    costume, appeared in the procession to great advantage, and
    seemed to excite much attention.

    "But, amongst the assembled warriors and civilians, none
    excited a more lively interest than the chiefs of the Indian
    nations from the Grand River, whose warlike appearance,
    intrepid aspect, picturesque dress and ornaments, and majestic
    demeanour, accorded well with the solemn pomp and general
    character of a military procession--amongst these, young Brant,
    Bears Foot, and Henry, were distinguished. In our mind we never
    saw a dress more elegant of its kind, and fit for active
    service in the woods, than that worn by young Brant, who, with
    his tomahawk in hand, was a perfect resemblance of all that
    could be imagined of the accomplished Indian warrior.

    "Amongst the numerous gentlemen in the procession, we observed
    that old veteran, Lieutenant M'Dougall, of his majesty's 8th
    (the king's) regiment, who, like a brave and loyal man, came
    from Sandwich to attend the re-interment."--_Upper Canada
    Gazette_, _October_, 1824.


No. 11.--Page 410.

"Queenstown, at which place the steam boats start for Toronto, is
situated in a delicious valley, through which the Niagara river, in
colour a deep green, pursues its course. It is approached by a road that
takes its winding way among the heights by which the town is sheltered,
and, seen from this point, is extremely beautiful and picturesque. On
the most conspicuous of these heights stood a monument, erected by the
provincial legislature in memory of General Brock, who was slain in a
battle with the American forces, after having won the victory. Some
vagabond, supposed to be a fellow of the name of Lett, who is now, or
who lately was, in prison as a felon, blew up this monument two years
ago; and it is now a melancholy ruin, with a long fragment of iron
railing banging dejectedly from its top, and waving to and fro like a
wild ivy branch or broken vine stem. It is of much higher importance
than it may seem that this statue should be repaired at the public cost,
as it ought to have been long ago; firstly, because it is beneath the
dignity of England to allow a memorial, raised in honor of one of her
defenders, to remain in this condition, on the very spot where he died;
secondly, because the sight of it in its present state, and the
recollection of the unpunished outrage which brought it to this pass,
are not very likely to soothe down border feelings among English
subjects here, or compose their border quarrels and
dislikes."--_Dickens' American Notes_, vol. ii. pp. 187, 188.

      *      *      *      *      *


SECTION II.--AMERICAN AUTHORS.


No. 1.--Page 233.

_Extract from Jefferson's Correspondence_.--_Monticello_, _October_ 1,
1812.

    "I fear that Hull's surrender has been more than the mere loss
    of a year to us. Besides bringing on us the whole mass of
    savage nations, whom fear, and not affection, had kept in
    quiet, there is danger, that in giving time to an enemy who can
    send reinforcements of regulars faster than we can raise them,
    they may strengthen Canada and Halifax beyond the assailment of
    our lax and divided powers. Perhaps, however, the patriotic
    efforts from Kentucky and Ohio, by recalling the British force
    to its upper posts, may yet give time to Dearborn to strike a
    blow below. Effectual possession of the river from Montreal to
    the Chaudière, which is practicable would give us the upper
    country at our leisure, and close for ever the scenes of the
    tomahawk and scalping knife."


No. 2.--Page 240.

_Revolutionary Services of General Hull, as taken from his Defence
before the Court Martial_, _in March_, 1814.

    "For more than half a century I supported a character without
    reproach. My youth was devoted to the service of my country; I
    fought her battles in that war which achieved her liberty and
    independence, and which was ended before many of you,
    gentlemen, who are my judges, were born. If upon any occasion a
    man may speak of his own merits, it is at such a time as this;
    and I hope I may be permitted to present to you, in very few
    words, a narration of my life, while I was engaged in scenes
    which were calculated to prove a man's firmness and courage. I
    shall do it with less reluctance, because the testimony I have
    offered of the venerable men who served with me in the
    revolutionary war, will vouch for all I have to say. In the
    year 1775, at the age of about twenty-one years, I was
    appointed a captain in one of the Connecticut regiments; during
    that campaign, and until March, 1776, when the enemy evacuated
    Boston, I served with the army at Cambridge and Roxbury, and in
    the immediate command of General Washington. I was with that
    part of the army, in March, 1776, which took possession of
    Dorchester heights--the movement which compelled the enemy to
    evacuate Boston. The next day, the regiment to which I belonged
    marched for New York. I was on Long Island when the enemy
    landed, and remained until the night the whole army retreated.
    I was in several small skirmishes, both on Long Island and York
    Island, before the army retired to the White Plains. I then
    belonged to Colonel Charles Webb's regiment, of Connecticut.

    "This regiment was in the severest part of the action on
    Chatterdon's Hill, a little advanced of the White Plains, a few
    days after the main body of the army abandoned New York. This
    battle is memorable in the history of our country; and the
    regiment to which I belonged received the particular thanks of
    General Washington, in his public orders, for its bravery and
    good conduct on the occasion. It was particularly distinguished
    from all the other troops engaged in the action. I received a
    slight wound by a musket ball in my side, but it did not
    prevent me from remaining at the head of my company.

    "I was in the battle of Trenton, when the Hessians were taken,
    in December, 1776; and, being one of the youngest captains in
    the army, was promoted by General Washington the day after the
    battle, to a majority, for my conduct on that occasion. The 1st
    of January, 1777, I was in the battle of Princeton. In the
    campaign of the same year, the regiment to which I belonged
    served in the northern army. I was early in the spring ordered
    to Ticonderoga, and commanded the regiment (being the senior
    officer present) under General St. Clair, and I was with that
    officer in his retreat from that post.

    "After General St. Clair's army formed a junction with General
    Schuyler's army on the North River, at Fort Edward, the
    regiment to which I belonged was detached, and marched to Fort
    Schuyler, and relieved that post, which was besieged by General
    St. Leger.

    "On the retreat of General Schuyler's army from Fort Edward, I
    commanded the rear guard of the army; and, being two miles in
    the rear, was attacked by a large body of British troops and
    Indians at daylight in the morning, in which action were killed
    and wounded between thirty and forty of my guard. And I
    received the particular thanks of General Schuyler for my
    conduct on the occasion.

    "I was in the two memorable battles, on the 19th of September
    and the 7th of October, on Bemis' heights, against General
    Burgoyne's army, previous to its surrender. In the action of
    the 19th of September, I commanded a detachment of three
    hundred men, who fought the principal part of the afternoon,
    and more than one half of them were killed or wounded.

    "On the 7th of October, I likewise commanded a detachment from
    the brigade which assisted in attacking the enemy on the left
    of our position, defeated him, followed him to the right of his
    lines, stormed his entrenchments, and took and held possession
    of the right of his position, which compelled him to retreat to
    Saratoga, and there to capitulate.

