"'Would you like to enlist?' asked the captain--at the same time
running his eye over the stout frame of Crosby.

"'I would like to see your muster-roll, first,' replied Crosby."

_Henry_. "Pray, father, what is a muster-roll?"

_Gen. P_. "A paper, my son, on which the names of the soldiers are
registered."

_Henry_. "Why did Crosby wish to see that?"

_Gen. P_. "I was going to tell you. He wished to ascertain who had
joined the company."

_William_. "Did the captain show him the roll?"

_Gen. P_. "Yes; and carefully did Crosby run over the names.

"'Will you join us?' asked the captain, when Crosby had finished
looking at the roll.

"'They are all strangers to me,' said Crosby, 'and besides, I fear
that the roll may fall into the hands of the Americans--then, what
will become of us?'

"'No fear of that,' said the captain. 'Come with me, and see how we
manage.'

"Crosby was now led into a large meadow, at no great distance, in
which stood a large stack of hay.

"'Look at this stack, sir--what do you think of this?'

"'It is monstrous,' said Crosby. 'Why so much hay in one stack?'

"'Not so much neither, replied the captain, 'it isn't every one that
knows how to manage--here, take a look inside,' at the same time
drawing aside some long hay, which concealed an apartment within.

"Crosby started. The stack was hollow--capable of holding at least
fifty men."

[Illustration]

"'Ha! ha! ha!' roared out the captain, 'you are afraid the muster roll
will fall into bad hands--are you? Well, what think you now? Is that
likely, when we know how to manage? Many a rebel has passed by this
stack, but he hadn't brains enough to think what was inside. Come, my
good fellow, shall I enter your name?'

"'I'll think of it,' said Crosby, 'and let you know soon.'

"While Crosby was apparently making up his mind, the day passed by. He
was still at the captain's, who invited him to spend the night. This
invitation was accepted, and at an early hour, he retired to rest.

"But he could not sleep. What should he do? He thought--pondered--
hesitated--but at length, resolved. Midnight came. He rose, and having
put on his clothes, softly passed from his chamber down stairs. At
every step he listened--all was still--without disturbing even the
wary captain, he left the premises, and was soon on his way towards
White Plains.

"An hour or two brought him to the residence of Mr. Jay, whom he
called from his bed, and to whom he related what he knew. A plan was
soon concerted, by which to take the whole company. This being
settled, Crosby hastened back; and, before any one was up at the
captain's, was safely, and without having excited suspicion, in his
bed.

"In the course of the day, he was strongly urged to enlist--but he
wished to see the company together, he said. 'You shall see them
together,' said the captain, 'it would be well to meet--we must
arrange matters before we go.'

"A hasty summons, was therefore, sent round, and before nine o'clock
that night, the whole company had assembled;--it was a season of great
joy among them--the rebels, they said, were so depressed, that they
would have but little to do, but to march down and see them ground
arms.

"'Well, Mr. Crosby,' bawled out the captain, 'what say you? will you
go with us, and'--

"'Hark! hark! hark!' exclaimed a soldier, who sat near the door--'I
hear horses approaching.'

"'Out with the lights!--out with the lights!' said the captain--
'silence every man--keep your places.'

"At this moment, a loud rap was heard at the door--soon after which it
was thrown open, and the word 'surrender,' uttered by an officer, came
in like a peal of thunder.

"'Who are you?' demanded the tory captain, rising with some effort--
his knees trembling under him.

"'Who am I!' uttered the same voice, 'you will soon know who I am,
unless you surrender--you are surrounded--you are prisoners.'

"Dismay now filled the company. They rose, and in the darkness which
pervaded the room, attempted to escape. In the haste and confusion,
chairs were broken--benches overturned--pitchers and tumblers dashed
in pieces--some plunged from the windows, and were taken--others felt
their way up chamber, and hid in the garret, while several, in
attempting to reach the cellar, were plunged headlong upon the bottom.

"In a little time, however, matters were more quiet. The horsemen had
surrounded the house, and none could escape. From their hiding places
they were, at length, dragged--poor Crosby with the rest--and tied
together in pairs, were marched to the village of White Plains."


CHAPTER V.


GEN. P. TELLS HOW CROSBY CONTRIVED TO EFFECT AN ESCAPE.

_Gen. P_. "Crosby was now a prisoner and"--

_Henry_. "Pray, father, may I interrupt you to inquire why Crosby did
not tell who he was, and in that way escape?"

_Gen. P_. "The committee of safety had given him orders at no time to
tell his secret, unless he was likely to suffer death. Had it been
known, that persons of this character were abroad in the country, no
traveller would have been safe.

"On the arrival of the party, at White Plains, the prisoners were
examined privately, one by one, and ordered to be marched to Fishkill,
a small village, near the Hudson, about seventy miles from New York.
Crosby underwent an examination also--but when he came before the
committee, they highly commended him--told him that he must go as if a
prisoner to Fishkill; but, in a little time, they would provide for
his escape.

"On the following morning, the whole party were early on their way up
the river. On reaching Fort Montgomery, near Peekskill, a short halt
was made, and here Crosby met with one of the most trying incidents of
his life.

"On entering the fort, whom should he see before him, but his former
schoolmaster--a worthy man, who had often been at his father's, while
teaching the village school in Southeast. And well did that
schoolmaster know the attachment of old Mr. Crosby to American
liberty--yet, here was his son, among a set of tories and a prisoner.

"The schoolmaster started back, with a kind of horror, and even Crosby
was for a moment nearly overcome.

"'Is this possible?' exclaimed the schoolmaster, 'do my eyes serve me?
Enoch Crosby! Why do I see you thus?'

"Crosby advanced, and taking his old friend by the hand, replied, 'you
see me just as I am--among tories, and a prisoner--but--I have no
explanations to offer."

"'No explanations!' uttered the other--'are you, then, indeed, an
enemy to your country? Oh! your poor old father, Enoch--it will bring
down his gray hairs with sorrow to the grave when he hears of this.'

"For a moment, Crosby felt a faintness come over him--his father! he
loved him--revered him--but he could not explain--it would not do--he,
therefore, only replied, that God was his judge, and the time might
come, when things would appear otherwise than they did.

"In the midst of this conversation--painful and unsatisfactory to
both, the drum sounded 'the roll,' and Crosby had time only to press
the hand of his old friend, which he did with affection. He was soon
on his way--sadly depressed for a time, lest his father should hear
his story, without the appropriate explanation; but he comforted
himself that he was doing his duty to his country--and, perhaps,
thought he, a few months may give us the victory, and then my father
and friends will know all, and will love me the better for the part I
am acting.

"The party at length reached Fishkill, and were conducted to an old
Dutch church, where they were confined and strictly watched.

"Within a few days, the committee of safety arrived in the village, to
examine the prisoners more strictly. Crosby, in his turn, was summoned
to appear. But in respect to him, the committee only consulted how he
might escape. There were difficulties in every plan they could think
of--there was danger--great danger; yet they could not appear to
favour him--and their advice to him was, to run the hazard of an
attempt by night, in the best way he could contrive. And should he be
so fortunate as to escape, he might find a safe retreat with a Mr. ----,
who lived at some distance.

"Crosby, at length, thought of a plan. Near the north-west corner of
the church was a window, from which he contrived to draw the
fastenings, so that he could open it. Near this window, stood a large
willow tree, whose deep shade would conceal him till he could have
opportunity to escape unobserved.

"The night, at length, approached, in which he determined to put his
plan into execution. But what if he should fail?--it might be the last
of his earthly existence.

"About dark, the sentinels were stationed, as usual, round the house.
They were four in number.

"Before midnight, all was still. Officers and soldiers were asleep.
Crosby rose, and holding his chains, so that they should not clink,
crept softly to the window, which he raised. Fast did his heart beat,
while doing this--but faster still as he slid to the ground, beneath
the willow tree.

"A sentinel was at no great distance. For a moment, he stopped--
arrested by the noise--he even turned--listened--looked--but all was
now silent there--and thinking himself mistaken, he sung aloud '_All's
well_,' and onward he marched, still farther from the place of
Crosby's concealment.

"Now, thought he, is the moment--the only moment, perhaps, which I
shall have; creeping on his hands and feet, he reached the grave yard,
a stone's throw from the church, and here behind a tombstone,
succeeded in loosing his chains.

"When this was done, he watched the moment to make his escape. A thick
swamp, he knew, was at no great distance; but the darkness of the
night made haste dangerous. Yet in rapidity lay his only hope.

"He prepared, therefore, to run the hazard. And seizing the moment,
when the sentinel had turned in an opposite direction, he bounded
forth and fled--a ball passed him before he had reached many rods,--
and now another--and still another--yet a merciful providence
protected him; and, before the garrison could be roused, he was
wallowing deep in the mud of a swamp;--but he was safe--quite safe
from pursuers."

[Illustration]


CHAPTER VI.


GEN. P. TELLS ABOUT CROSBY'S VISIT TO A MOUNTAIN CAVE--HOW HE WAS
AGAIN TAKEN PRISONER--AND THE MANNER IN WHICH HE ESCAPED.

_Gen. P_. "The escape of Crosby was a hair-breadth one, and well did
he know it. He felt himself indeed safe from his pursuers, but his
situation was no comfortable one--up to his knees in mud, and without
a shelter for the night.

"He determined, therefore, to grope his way through the swamp; and, if
possible, to reach the dwelling of Mr. ---- before morning. This he
found a difficult task. Bushes and briers and quagmires impeded his
course; and several times he was on the point of giving up the effort,
and waiting till day light. By slow degrees, however, he went
forward--sometimes, indeed, sinking unexpectedly deep into the mud; or,
when he thought himself firm on a bog--sliding away, and coming down
upon all fours. At length it was his good fortune, to emerge from the
thicket, in an hour or so from which, he knocked at the door of the
gentleman to whom he had been referred by the committee of safety.

"Mr. ---- had been informed, that he might be expected that night, and
was accordingly still up. A good supper was in readiness for him, and
heartily did the gentleman congratulate him on his escape.

"When he had finished his meal--'Well,' said the gentleman, 'I have an
important message to deliver to you.'

"'What is it?' inquired Crosby.

"'The committee of safety wish you to cross the Hudson immediately,
where you are to take measures to seize an English officer, and a
company of tories whom he has enlisted on that side.'

"'Cross to-night?' asked Crosby.

"'Immediately,' replied Mr. ---- 'no time is to be lost. You are
fatigued--but once on the other side, you will be more safe, and can
take rest.'

"'I will go,' said Crosby.

"'And I will set you across myself,' said the gentleman, 'it is only a
short distance.'

"Accordingly they proceeded to the river, where a boat was in
readiness, in which they soon reached the opposite shore.

"Having received the necessary directions, Crosby now proceeded on his
course; and, by the hour of breakfast, had reached the ground where he
was to begin his operations.

"At a farm house, near where he found himself he obtained a
comfortable breakfast; after finishing which, he made himself known as
a shoemaker, and begged employment.

"'Why,' said the farmer, 'just at present, we are pretty well shod.'

"'Well,' observed Crosby, 'perhaps you have other work, about which
you can employ me. I can turn my hand to almost any kind of farming
business.'

"'No doubt--no doubt,' said the farmer, 'you are no fool--from Yankee
land, I guess--no matter--well, I don't care if you stay a couple of
days, or so, and help me and my wife kill hogs, and a few such
notions.'

"Terms were soon settled, and Crosby proved quite knowing and helpful."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What noise is that?' asked Crosby, while he and the farmer were at
work--'can it be thunder?'

"'More like cannon,' said the farmer--'loud talk below, I rather
guess.'

"'Hard times for Washington just now,' observed Crosby, 'and _some_
think pretty justly.'

"'Why,' said the farmer, 'why--it won't do to speak all one thinks--
but--well--why don't _you_ turn soldier--you look as though you could
fight, upon a _pinch_?'

"'Well, I think, I might,' said Crosby. 'Have you any place of
enlistment hereabouts, that a body could join, if one were so minded?'

"'Why,' replied the farmer, 'I don't know but I could put you in a
way, if you are one of the right sort of men.'

"'What sort do you wish?' inquired Crosby.

"'Oh, lower party men--they are more fashionable hereabouts.'

"'Well, I like to be in the fashion, wherever I am,' observed Crosby.

"'Good!' said the farmer, 'do you see yonder mountain, west?'

"'I do,' replied Crosby.

"'Well, if you wish to see as fine a fellow as ever carried sword,
there is your man, and right glad would he be of your bone and
muscle--good pay--light work, I tell you.'

"'Can I be introduced to him?' asked Crosby.

"'That you can--to-night--I've shown many a lad like yourself the way
to make a fortune.'

"In the evening the farmer was as good as his word. Giving Crosby a
wink, they went forth, shaping their course towards the mountain,
about half way up which, they came to a huge rock, which jutted over
with threatening aspect; but was prevented from falling, by several
forest trees, against which it rested."

[Illustration]

"Here the farmer, taking his cane, struck several smart blows upon the
rock. Instantly, a kind of trap door was opened, and an English
captain appeared, with a lantern.

"'Captain!' whispered the farmer, 'here's as brave a lad as you have
seen this many a day--good bye.'

"'Well, my lad,' said the captain, 'do you understand burrowing?'

"'Not much of the wood chuck about me,' replied Crosby, 'more of the
fox--I can enter burrows already made.'

"'Well! see whether your skill can contrive to enter here,' pointing
to a small hole, leading into a cavern.

"'Tight work, I believe,' said Crosby, forcing his huge frame through
the opening, followed by the captain, who, from the smallness of his
size, slipped down with more ease.

"'Quite a comfortable apartment, captain,' observed Crosby, casting
his eye round upon the interior, 'and not likely to starve very soon,
one would judge, from the good things on your table.'

"'Help yourself to what you like,' said the captain, 'his majesty's
friends provide well--good fare--no charges.'

"Crosby had but just supped--but tempted by the fare, somewhat
superior to that which he had seen at the farmer's, he seated himself
at the table, while the liberal hand of the captain was not backward
in replenishing his plate, as often as it was emptied.

"'Do you leave here soon?' inquired Crosby.

"'To-morrow, I hope,' said the captain. 'I have burrowed here long
enough. Much longer--and I shall have _claws_ in good earnest.'

"'Your company is full, then?'

"'Room for one or two more. What say you, shall I enter your name?'

"'When and where does the company meet, before marching?' inquired
Crosby.

"'On Tuesday evening, at the barn of Mr. S----; what say you, will you
be present?'

"'I will,' replied Crosby.

"'Done!' said the captain--'now turn in; and in the morning, go back
to farmer B----'s, and be ready to meet us, at the time and place
appointed.'

"On the following morning, which was Saturday, Crosby returned to his
employer, with whom he concluded to stay, till the appointed time of
marching.

"Much now depended on good management. News of the above arrangement
must he sent to the committee of safety, and as early as possible. At
some distance from farmer B----'s, Crosby had ascertained there lived
an honest old whig, whom he determined to employ to carry a letter to
Mr. Jay, then at Fishkill.

"Accordingly, having prepared a letter, he hastened, on the setting in
of evening, to fulfil his purpose. In this he succeeded to his wishes;
and, before the usual hour of rest, had returned, without exciting the
suspicion of any one.

"The important Tuesday evening, at length, arrived, and brought
together, at the appointed place, the captain and about thirty tories.

"Crosby was early on the spot, and before eleven, he was the only
individual of the whole class, who was not quietly asleep.

"At length, some one without was heard by him to cough. This being the
signal agreed upon, Crosby coughed in return; and the next minute, the
barn was filled with a body of captain Townsend's celebrated
rangers;--'surrender!' exclaimed Townsend, in a tone, which brought every
tory upon his feet--'surrender! or, by the life of Washington, you'll not
see day light again.'

"It was in vain to resist, and the English officer delivered up his
sword.

"'Call your muster-roll,' ordered Capt. Townsend.

"The Englishman did as directed; and, at length, came to the name of
_Enoch Crosby_.

"No one answered. Crosby had concealed him self, with the hope of
escaping--but, finding this impossible, he presented himself before
Captain Townsend, and Col. Duer, one of the committee of safety, who
was present.

"'Ah! is it you, Crosby?' asked Townsend. 'You had light heels at
Fishkill; but, my word for it, you will find them heavy enough after
this.'

"'Who is he?' inquired Col. Duer, as if he knew him not, though he
knew him well, yet not daring to recognize him.

"'Who is he!' exclaimed Townsend, 'Enoch Crosby, sir--like an eel,
slipping out of one's finger's as water runs down hill--but he'll not
find it so easy a matter to escape again.'

"The party were soon on their way to Fishkill, where they arrived in
the course of an hour or two, and lodged their prisoners in the old
Dutch church.

"Crosby was not thus fortunate. Townsend's quarters were at some
distance, and to these Crosby was quite civilly invited to go, as the
captain declared, that he wished to have him under his own eye.

"On his arrival, Crosby was placed in a room by himself--was heavily
ironed, and a trusty guard detached to see that he came to 'no
_harm_,' as the captain said.

"During the expedition, which had occupied some twelve or fourteen
hours, the company had fasted. Supper was therefore prepared with some
haste, after the return of the officer, who, on sitting down, fairly
gorged himself with food and wine.

"About midnight Crosby was unexpectedly awakened, by a gentle shake.
On opening his eyes, whom should he see before him but a female, who
assisted in doing the work of the family. 'Here, Enoch Crosby.' said
she, 'rise and follow me--say nothing--hold fast your chains."

[Illustration]

"Crosby was not at first satisfied, whether it were a dream or a
reality; but quite willing to make his escape, he rose as he was bid,
and followed her.

"As they passed from the room, _there_ lay the sentinel, extended at
full length, dreaming of battles, it might be, but certainly, very
quiet as to the safety of his prisoner.

"'Some virtue in _Miller's opiates_,' whispered the girl.

"'That's the secret, is it?' asked Crosby, in rather a louder tone
than was pleasant to his attendant.

"'Hush! hush!' said she, 'or the Philistines will be upon you.'"

_Henry_. "Pray, father, what did she mean by Miller's opiates?"

_Gen. P_. "Miller was a physician in those parts, and kept an
apothecary's store. By some means, the girl had obtained from him
anodyne or sleeping potions, which she had put into the food, or
drink, of both the captain and his sentinels.

"'They sleep well,' said Crosby, on descending from the chamber to the
first floor, where he could hear the loud breathing of the captain.

"'I hope they'll sleep till morning,' rejoined the girl. 'Stay! a
moment, till I put the key of your door into the captain's pocket.'

"'What?' asked Crosby, 'does he keep the key himself?'

"'Yes, indeed,' replied the girl. 'He was determined that you should
play no more yankee tricks, as he said, while under _his_ care.'

"'He must have thought me a man of some contrivance, to take such
precaution.'

"'Oh!' said the girl, 'I've often heard him call you _the_--a bad
name--at least, he said he believed that you and the old boy
understood one another pretty well.'

"'I wonder what he'll think _now_?' said Crosby.

"The key being once more safely in the pocket of the Captain, the girl
conducted Crosby out of the door, and pointing towards a mountain
lying to the west, now but just discernible.

"'Hasten thither,' said she, 'and lie concealed till the coming search
is over.'

"'But tell me,' said Crosby, 'before I go, how will you escape
suspicion?'

"'Oh!' said the girl, laughing, 'never fear for me. I shall be out of
harm's way before morning.'

"'One more question,' said Crosby--'who put it into your heart to
deliver me?'

"'Jay is your friend,' said she,--waving her head--'farewell.'

"To Crosby, the whole was now plain. With a light heart, he directed
his course towards the mountain pointed out; and before morning, he
was safely hid in some of its secret recesses.

"Capt. Townsend awoke at his usual hour, having slept away the anodyne
potion which had been administered to him. The key to Crosby's door
was still in his pocket--and not a suspicion had ever entered his
mind, that Crosby himself was not safely in his room.

"The hour at length coming, when Crosby's meal was to be given,
Townsend himself opened the door--he started back, on looking in, and
seeing no one--'what!' exclaimed he, 'empty!--impossible!--here!'
vociferated he, in a tone of thunder, 'Sentinel, what is the meaning
of all this?' But no one could tell--no noise had been heard--the
shutters of the room were safely closed--the door was locked--the key
was in his pocket.

"Due search was now made. Every nook and corner were examined; but not
a trace of the vagrant was discovered.

"'Well!' said the captain, 'I thought Crosby and the ---- were in
_league_--now I know it.'"


CHAPTER VII.


GEN. P. TELLS OF THE FARTHER ADVENTURES OF CROSBY--HOW HE WAS OBLIGED
TO SHOW HIS SECRET PASS--OF HIS RESIDENCE AT A DUTCHMAN'S--OF HIS
BEING CRUELLY BEATEN AND WOUNDED.--CONCLUSION.

_Gen. P_. "Crosby, as I said, was in a safe retreat, on the mountain,
before morning."

_William_. "Were any measures adopted to retake him?"

_Gen. P_. "No very active measures, probably--but Townsend declared,
that if Crosby should ever fall in his way again, he would give him a
halter forthwith.

"During the following night, our hero descended the mountain, in a
southerly direction; and at a late breakfast hour, the next morning,
came to a farm house, the kind mistress of which gave him a
comfortable meal.

"For several days from this time, Crosby wandered round the country,
without any certain object. He greatly wished for an interview with
the Committee of Safety; but the attempt he found would be hazardous,
until the troops in the immediate neighbourhood of Fishkill should be
sent on some expedition, at a distance.

"This was a gloomy period for Crosby. Although conscious of toiling in
a good cause, and of promoting the interests of his country--somehow,
he felt alone--not a friend had he to whom he could unbosom his cares--and
often was he houseless, and in want. Besides, he began to be
known--to be suspected; and the double and treble caution, which he
found it necessary to exercise, made his employment almost a burden.

"While maturing some plan, by which he could effect an interview with
the Committee of Safety, he called, just at evening, at a farm house,
and requested a night's lodging. This was readily granted him, and he
laid aside his pack, thankful to find a resting place, after the toils
of the day.

"It was not long, before two very large men, armed with muskets,
entered the house. One of them started on seeing Crosby, and whispered
something to his companion, to which the latter apparently assented.

"Then, turning to Crosby--'I have seen you before, I think, sir?' said
he.

"'Probably,' replied Crosby, 'though I cannot say that I recollect
you.'

"'Perhaps not--but I am sure you were not long since at Fishkill? ha?'"

[Illustration]

"'The very fellow!' exclaimed the other--'you recollect how he
escaped--seize him!'

"In a moment, the strong hand of the first was laid upon him, and his
grasp was the grasp of an Anakim--and though Crosby might have been a
match for him alone,--prudence forbade resistance--they were two--he
was but one;--they were armed with muskets--he had no weapon about
him.

"'To-morrow,' said the principal, 'you shall go to head quarters,
where, my word for it, you'll swing without much ceremony. The
committee will never take the trouble to try you again, and Townsend
declares that he wishes only to come once more within gun shot of
you.'

"'Is it so?' asked Crosby.

"'Even so'--replied the stranger--'your time is short.'

"Crosby was seldom alarmed--but _now_ he could perceive real danger.
Could he be fairly tried he might escape--but to be delivered into
Townsend's hands, and perhaps the Committee of Safety at a distance--
he might, indeed, come to harm.

"He had _one_ resort--he could show his _pass_, and it might save him.
Accordingly, drawing it forth, he presented it to his captors; 'Read
that,' said he, 'and then say, whether I am worthy of death.'

"Astonishment sat on the countenances of both while they read the
pass. When it was finished, the principal observed, 'I am satisfied--
we have been deceived--others are deceived also;--you are at liberty
to go where you please. This is the hand-writing of Mr. Jay--I know it
well.'

"Crosby might, perhaps, have staid where he was through the night--but
his feelings were such, that he preferred to seek other lodgings.
Accordingly, shouldering his pack, he set forth in quest of a resting
place; which at the distance of a couple of miles, he was so fortunate
as to obtain.

"But he was destined to other troubles. Scarcely had he laid aside his
pack, and taken a seat near a comfortable fire, before a man entered,
whom he was sure that he had seen before.

"At the same time, the stranger cast upon him an eye of deep scrutiny,
and increasing severity.

"'A cool evening abroad'--observed Crosby.

"The stranger made no reply--but springing upon his feet, darted upon
him, like a fiend.

"'Now, I know you'--exclaimed he--'I thought it was you. You are the
villain who betrayed us to the Committee of Safety. Clear out from the
house quickly, or I'll call one of my neighbours, who says that if he
ever sees you again, he'll suck your very heart's blood.'

"'Ah!' said Crosby, quite calm and collected--'perhaps'--

"'Leave this house instantly'--vociferated the man, now nearly choked
with rage--'but before you go, take one pounding.'

"'A pounding!' exclaimed Crosby, in contempt--'Come then,'--rising
like a lion from his lair--'Come,'--said he, at the same time rolling
up his sleeves, and showing a pair of fists, which resembled a
trip-hammer for hardness.

"'Come on, and I'll try you a pull'--the muscles of his arm
contracting, and lying out like cart-ropes the whole length--from
shoulder to wrist--and his countenance, at the same time, looking as
terrific as a madman's--'Come on,' said he."

[Illustration]

"'Why! we-we-ll--upon the whole'--said the man--'I--I--think I'll let
you off, if you'll never set foot here again.'

"'I'll promise no such thing,' said Crosby. 'I'm willing to go--
indeed, I would, not stay in such a habitation as this; but I'll not
be driven.'

"Crosby well knew that prudence required his departure; and with some
deliberation, he shouldered his pack once more, and with a short 'good
by'--left the house. At the distance of a mile, he found lodgings
where he slept unmolested.

"On the following morning, he ascertained that the Committee of Safety
were alone at Fishkill--the troops having gone abroad on some
expedition. Seizing the opportunity of their absence, he crossed the
river, and was soon at the residence of Mr. Duer.

"That Crosby was in more than ordinary danger in traversing the
country, was apparent both to himself and Mr. Duer. He was advised,
therefore, to repair to an honest old Dutchman's, who lived in a
retired place, some miles distant, and there wait until farther
orders.

"Accordingly, being furnished with a complete set of tools, he
proceeded to the appointed place, and was so fortunate as to find
ample employ for some time, under the very roof of his host.

"A few days only, however, had elapsed, when an express arrived,
bringing him a letter from Mr. Duer.

"The worthy old Dutchman was quite curious to know from whom the
letter came, and what was its purport.

"'Val,' said he, knocking the ashes from his pipe--'you know tee
shentlemen of tee armee? Vat for tey rite you?--eh?'

"Crosby waived an answer as well as he was able, informing his host
that he must be absent a short time, when he would return, and finish
the shoes.

"'Val,' said the Dutchman, 'how you go?--on shank's mare? You no
trudge so--you nebber get tere. Here, you Hauns! Puckle tee pest
shaddle on mine horse, and pring him to tee horse plock tirectly--you
hear?'

"The horse was brought out accordingly, and Crosby was soon on his way
to Fishkill. On his arrival, circumstances existed, which rendered it
imprudent for him to tarry, and he was directed to go to Dr. Miller's,
who kept an apothecary's shop at some distance, and there wait the
arrival of one of the Committee of Safety.

"On reaching the place, he inquired for Dr. Miller, who he was told
was absent. This information was given him by a girl, whom he was sure
he had seen before, but where he could not recollect.

"'If you wish to trade,' said the girl, 'I can wait upon you. Perhaps
you would like some of Dr. Miller's opiates. You recollect they are
quite powerful.'

