The purse was quickly finished, and dispatched to Philip, together with
a letter. Emily was in high spirits at the prospect of the answer. She
danced about the house, singing snatches of songs and ballads, and
displaying an unusual amount of gayety; for, though generally cheerful,
she was of too thoughtful a disposition to be often merry. Philip, she
was sure, would write by return of post. How she wished the time were
come! She knew pretty well, to be sure, what he would say; but what did
that signify? She longed to feast her eyes on the words his hand had
traced, and to fancy the tones and the looks which would have
accompanied them had they been spoken instead of written. The expected
day came at last, but the post-bag contained no letter for Emily. At
first she could hardly believe it; her countenance fell, and for a few
minutes she seemed much disappointed; but never mind, the letter would
come to-morrow, and she soon began to trip about and to sing almost as
gayly as before. But another day passed, and another and another, and
still no letter! Poor Emily's blithe voice was mute now, and her light
step rarely heard. Sometimes she tried to read, or to play on the piano,
but without much success; while her anxious looks, and the tear which
occasionally might be seen to glisten in her eye, betrayed the trouble
within. A whole week elapsed, a longer period than had ever passed
before without a letter from Philip Hayforth--a fortnight--a month--and
the poor girl's appetite failed, her nights were sleepless, and her
drooping figure and pining looks told of that anxious suffering, that
weary life-gnawing suspense, which is ten times more hard to bear than
any evil, however great, of which we can ascertain the nature and
discern the limits. Could Philip be ill? Could he--No, he could not be
inconstant. Ought she to write to him again? But to this question her
parents answered "No. It would be unfeminine, unladylike, undignified.
If Mr. Hayforth were ill, he would doubtless write as soon as he was
able; and if he were well, his conduct was inexcusable, and on Emily's
part rendered any advance impossible." Poor Emily shrank from
transgressing what her parents represented as the limits due to delicacy
and decorum, and she would have died rather than have been guilty of a
real impropriety, or have appeared unfeminine in the eyes of Philip
Hayforth; and yet it did often suggest itself to her mind--rather,
however, in the shape of an undefined feeling than of a conscious
thought--that the shortest, best, most straight-forward way of
proceeding, was to write at once to Mr. Hayforth, and ask an
explanation. She could not herself see clearly how this could be wrong;
but she supposed it must be so, and she acknowledged her own ignorance
and inexperience. Emily was scarcely twenty; just at the age when an
inquiring and thoughtful mind can no longer rely with the unquestioning
faith of childhood on assertions sanctioned merely by authority, and
when a diffident one is too timid to venture to trust to its own
suggestions. It is only after much experience, or one of those bitter
mistakes, which are the great lessons of life, that such a character
learns that self-reliance, exercised with deliberation and humility, is
the only safeguard for individual rectitude. Emily, therefore, did not
write, but lived on in the silent, wasting agony of constant expectation
and perpetual disappointment. Her mother, in the hope of affording her
some relief, inquired in a letter she was writing to her relative in
London, if the latter had lately seen Mr. Hayforth. The answer was like
a death-blow to poor Emily. Her mother's correspondent had "met Mr.
Hayforth walking with a lady. He had passed her with a very stiff bow,
and seemed inclined to avoid her. He had not called for a long time. She
could not at all understand it." Colonel Sherwood could now no longer
contain his indignation. He forbade the mention of Philip Hayforth's
name, declaring that "his Emily was far too good and beautiful for the
wife of a low-born tradesman, and that he deserved the indignity now
thrown upon his family for ever having thought of degrading it by the
permission of such a union. And his darling child would, he knew, bear
up with the spirit of the Sherwoods." Poor Emily had, it is to be
feared, little of the spirit of the Sherwoods, but she tried to bear up
from perhaps as good a motive. But it was a difficult task, for she was
well-nigh broken-hearted. She now never mentioned Philip Hayforth, and
to all appearance her connection with him was as if it had never been;
but, waking or sleeping, he was ever present to her thoughts. Oh! was it
indeed possible that she should never, _never_ see him again? No, it
could not be; he would seek her, claim her yet, her heart said; but
reason whispered that it was madness to think so, and bade her at once
make up her mind to her inevitable fate. But this she could not do--not
yet at all events. Month after month of the long dreary winter dragged
slowly on; her kind parents tried to dissipate her melancholy by taking
her to every amusement within reach, and she went, partly from
indifference as to what became of her, partly out of gratitude for their
kindness. At last the days began to lengthen, and the weather to
brighten; but spring flowers and sunny skies brought no corresponding
bloom to the faded hopes and the joyless life of Emily Sherwood. The
only hope she felt was "the hope which keeps alive despair."

One May morning, as she was listlessly looking over in a newspaper the
list of marriages, her eye fell upon a well-known name--the name of one
who at that very time ought to have knelt at the altar with her. She
uttered neither scream nor cry, but clasping her hands with one upward
look of mute despair, fell down in a dead faint. For many days she was
very ill, and sometimes quite delirious; but her mother tended her with
the most assiduous affection, while her comfort and recreation seemed
her father's sole care. They were repaid at last by her recovery, and
from that time forth she was less miserable. In such a case as Emily's,
there is not only the shock to the affections, but the terrible wrench
of all the faculties to be overcome, which ensues on the divorce of the
thoughts from those objects and that future to which they have so long
been wedded. There is not only the breaking heart to be healed, but the
whole mental current to be forcibly turned into a different channel from
that which alone habit has made easy or pleasant. "The worst," as it is
called, is, however, easier to be endured than suspense; and if Emily's
spirits did not regain their former elasticity, she ere long became
quite resigned, and comparatively cheerful.

More than a year had elapsed since that bright spring morning on which
she had beheld the irrefragable proof of her lover's perfidy, when she
received an offer of marriage from a gentleman, of good family and large
property. He had been struck by her beauty at a party where he had seen
her; and after a few meetings, made formal proposals to her father
almost ere she was aware that he admired her. Much averse to form a new
engagement, she would at once have declined receiving his addresses, had
her parents not earnestly pressed the match as one in every respect
highly eligible. Overcome at last by their importunities, and having, as
she thought, no object in existence save to give pleasure to them, she
yielded so far to their wishes as to consent to receive Mr. Beauchamp as
her future husband, on condition that he should be made acquainted with
the history of her previous engagement, and the present state of her
feelings. She secretly hoped that when he learned that she had no heart
to give with her hand, he would withdraw his suit. But she was mistaken.
Mr. Beauchamp, it is true, knew that there was such a word as _heart_,
had a notion that it was a term much in vogue with novel-writers, and
was sometimes mentioned by parsons in their sermons; but that _the
heart_ could have any thing to do with the serious affairs of life never
once entered into his head to suppose. He therefore testified as much
satisfaction at Emily's answer, as if she had avowed for him the deepest
affection. They were shortly afterwards married, and the pensive bride
accompanied her husband to her new home--Woodthorpe Hall; an ancient,
castellated edifice, situated in an extensive and finely-wooded park on
an estate in the East Riding of Yorkshire.

But I have too long neglected Philip Hayforth--too long permitted a
cloud to rest upon his honor and constancy. He was not, in truth, the
heartless, light-minded wretch that I fear you may think him. Pride,
not falsehood or levity, was the blemish in his otherwise fine
character; but it was a very plague-spot, tainting his whole moral
nature, and frequently neutralizing the effect of his best qualities. He
had been quite as much charmed with Emily's present and Emily's letter,
as she had ever ventured to hope, and had lost not a moment in writing
to her in return a long epistle full of the fervent love and gratitude
with which his heart was overflowing. He had also mentioned several
affairs of mutual interest and of a pressing nature, but about which he
was unwilling to take any steps without the concurrence of "his own
dearest and kindest Emily." He therefore entreated her to write
immediately; "to write by return of post, if she loved him." But this
letter never reached its destination: it was lost--a rare occurrence
certainly, but, as most of us are aware from our own experience, not
unknown. And now began with Philip Hayforth the same agony which Emily
was enduring--nay, a greater agony; for there was not only the same
disappointed affection, the same heart-sickness, the same weary
expectation, but there was the stronger suffering of a more passionate
and less disciplined temper; and, above all, there was the incessant
struggle between pride and love--the same fearful strife which, we are
told, once made war in Heaven.

