A book packet may contain any number of separate books, publications,
works of literature or art, almanacs, maps or prints, photographs,
daguerreotypes, when not on glass or in frames containing glass, and any
quantity of paper, vellum, or parchment (to the exclusion of letters);
and the books, maps, paper, <i>&c.</i>, may be either written, printed or
plain, or any mixture of the three, and may be either British, Colonial
or Foreign.

All legitimate binding, mounting, or covering of the same, or a portion
thereof, will be allowed as part of the packet, whether such binding,
&c., be loose or attached, as also rollers in the case of prints and
maps, and whatever may be necessary for the safe transmission of
literary or artistic matter, or whatever usually appertains thereto, and
the postage is rated upon the gross weight of the packet.


[Sidenote: Sender's address permitted on cover.]

The name and address of the sender, and anything else not in the nature
of a letter, may also be written and printed on the envelope or cover of
the packet, in addition to the name and address of the person to whom it
may be forwarded.


[Sidenote: Books carried at parcel rates.]

Books addressed to places in Canada can be sent through the mails in
closed packets for the same rates of postage as parcels.


[Sidenote: Cannot be sent by Cunard Steamers.]

Books cannot be forwarded except at letter rates of postage by the mail
made up for the Cunard Steamers sailing from New York and Boston.


[Sidenote: Bound volumes of newspapers or periodicals.]

Bound volumes of any periodical or newspaper published in Canada, if
bound in a form to come within mailable dimensions, that is to say, not
exceeding two feet in length, breadth or thickness, nor exceeding 4 lbs.
in weight, may be sent from the office of publication to any place in
Canada at a charge of two cents per 8 ozs. or fraction of 8 ozs.


[Sidenote: Book packets for United Kingdom improperly posted.]

Should a book packet addressed to the United Kingdom be posted unpaid,
or with a pre-payment of less than 7 cents, or be enclosed in a cover
not open at the ends, or should it exceed the dimensions specified, it
will be sent to the Dead Letter Office.


[Sidenote: Do. insufficiently paid.]

If a book packet addressed to the United Kingdom be posted
insufficiently pre-paid, and it appears that at least the single rate of
7 cents has been pre-paid, such packet will be forwarded to its
destination charged with an additional postage equal to the deficiency,
and another single rate as a fine.


[Sidenote: Letters enclosed in book packets.]

Letters, whether sealed or unsealed, or any enclosure found in a book
parcel, are liable to rates as unpaid letters, and the packet in which
enclosed to an additional rate of 12-1/2 cents, as a penalty for a
breach of the regulations.


[Sidenote: British Colonies and Foreign Countries.]

The rates of postage on books to British Colonies and Foreign Countries
are given in the tables at pages 36, 37, 38, and 39.


<tb>


PRINTED PAPERS, CIRCULARS, PRICES CURRENT, HAND BILLS, &c.


[Sidenote: Canada, British America and United States.]

Printed circulars, prices current, hand bills, and other printed matter
of a like character, posted in Canada, and addressed to any place in
Canada, British North America, or the United States, are chargeable with
a rate of one cent per oz., which must be pre-paid by postage stamp.


[Sidenote: School Returns.]

The half-yearly School Returns made by School Trustees to the Local
Superintendants of Schools, may, though the printed form be partly
filled up in writing with the names of the pupils and days of
attendance, be transmitted by post in Canada at the rate of one cent
each, to be pre-paid by stamp.

When not filled up the above forms are printed matter, and liable as
such to one cent per oz. postage.


[Sidenote: Military Returns, &c.]

Military returns, states, and rolls, containing written figures and
signatures, may be forwarded as printed matter on pre-payment of one
cent per ounce.


[Sidenote: Circulars to United Kingdom.]

Printed circulars may be transmitted by post to the United Kingdom under
the regulations and charges of the Book Post. They must be forwarded,
however, open at the ends, or sides. If sent in envelopes, sealed or
unsealed, they are liable to letter rates of postage.


[Sidenote: Prices current to United Kingdom.]

Prices current, posted in Canada and addressed to any place in the
United Kingdom, are liable to a rate of 2 cents each, which must be
pre-paid by stamp.


[Sidenote: Lithographed letters and circ'lars]

Lithographed letters and circulars are allowed to pass through the Post
at the same rate as printed circulars.


<tb>


PRINTED VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE IMPERIAL PARLIAMENT AND COLONIAL
LEGISLATURES.

The special rate under which printed Votes and Proceedings of the
Imperial Parliament and Colonial Legislatures were formerly transmitted
in the English mails, has been abolished, and such matter now passes to
and from the United Kingdom at the ordinary book post charge.


<tb>


PARCEL POST.


[Sidenote: Not to exceed 3 lbs.]

Parcels closed at the ends and sides, and not exceeding 3 lbs. in
weight, may be posted at any post-office in Canada for conveyance to any
other post-office in Canada at the following rates:--


[Sidenote: Scale of charge.]

  For each parcel weighing not more than 1 lb  25 cts.
  Exceeding 1 lb. and not exceeding 2 lbs.     50  "
     "      2  "     "       "      3  "       75  "


[Sidenote: Conditions under which carried.]

The following conditions must be carefully observed:--

  1. No letter or letters shall be enclosed.

  2. The parcel shall not contain any explosive substance, glass,
     liquids, or other matter likely to injure the ordinary contents
     of the mail.

  3. The weight of the parcel shall not exceed 3 lbs., nor the size
     exceed one foot in length or breadth, or six inches in thickness.

  4. The postage must be pre-paid by stamps.

  5. The parcel should have the words "By Parcel Post," plainly
     written on the address. It should be well and strongly put up,
     and be legibly addressed to the post-office address of the
     intended receiver, the name of the County in which the said
     office is situated being added.


[Sidenote: Sender's name on address.]

If the name and address of the sender be written on the parcel it will,
if delivery should fail from any cause, be returned from the Dead Letter
Office unopened to the sender, on payment of an additional rate for the
return conveyance.


[Sidenote: Parcels insufficiently pre-paid.]

If the number of stamps affixed to a parcel be insufficient to pre-pay
the proper rate, the amount deficient will be rated unpaid, with a fine
of 10 cents in addition.


[Sidenote: Registered parcels.]

Parcels may be registered on pre-payment, by stamp, of five cents in
addition to the postage. When registered the Postmaster should give a
receipt to the party posting the parcel.


[Sidenote: Contents allowed in parcels.]

Parcels sent by post may contain books, daguerreotypes, photographs,
printers' proof and copy, military returns, states and rolls, containing
written figures and signatures; returns, deeds, legal papers, and all
transmissions of a like character not being strictly letters.


[Sidenote: Enclosure of letters in parcels.]

To enclose a letter or letters, or any writing intended to serve the
purpose of a letter, in a parcel intended for the Parcel Post is a
misdemeanour.

Should it be ascertained that a packet posted for the Parcel Post
contains a letter or Letters, the stamps it may bear will be cancelled,
and the parcel rated as a letter with full unpaid rates.


[Sidenote: Parcel post confined to Canada.]

Parcels cannot be transmitted by post at the above rates to any place
beyond the limits of the Province of Canada.


[Sidenote: Address.]

The following is an example of the address recommended:--

     +---------------------------------------------------------------+
     |                                                               |
     |  <i>By Parcel Post.</i>                                       |
     |                                                               |
     |                                                               |
     |                        <i>Mr. Thomas Jone,s</i>               |
     |                                  <i>Paisley,</i>              |
     |                                       <i>County of Bruce.</i> |
     |                                                               |
     |  <i>Sent by</i>                                               |
     |     <i>William Smith,</i>                                     |
     |                 <i>Toronto.</i>                               |
     |                                                               |
     +---------------------------------------------------------------+


<tb>


FRANKING AND FREE LETTERS.


[Sidenote: Matter exempt from postage.]

The following matter is exempt from Provincial Postage:

All letters and other mailable matter addressed to or sent by the
Governor General of Canada, or addressed to or sent by any Public
Department at the seat of Government.

All letters and other mailable matter addressed to or sent by the
Speaker or Chief Clerk of the Legislative Council or of the Legislative
Assembly; or to or by any Member of the Legislature at the Seat of
Government during any Session of the Legislature, or addressed to any of
the Members or Officers in this Section mentioned at the Seat of
Government as aforesaid, during the ten days next before the meeting of
Parliament.

All public documents and printed papers sent by the Speaker or Chief
Clerk of the Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly, to any Member
of either of the said branches of the Legislature of Canada, during the
recess of Parliament.

All papers printed by order of either branch of the Legislature of
Canada, sent by Members of either branch of the said Legislatures,
either during the Session or recess.


[Sidenote: Signature required in addresses.]

Public documents and printed papers sent under the two foregoing
clauses, should bear, as part of the address, the <i>bona fide</i>
superscription of the Speaker, Chief Clerk, or officer specially deputed
for this purpose to act for those functionaries, or of the Member
sending the same.


[Sidenote: P. M. G., D. P. M. G. & Post Office Inspectors.]

All letters to and from the Postmaster General and the Deputy Postmaster
General; and all official communications to and from the Post Office
Department and to and from the Post Office Inspectors, are to pass free
of any Provincial postage.


[Sidenote: Military departments and officers.]

Letters on Her Majesty's service passing between the United Kingdom and
Canada, to or from the following Imperial Military Departments, are
exempt from Canadian postage:

  Military Secretary.
  Adjutant General.
  Quarter-Master General.
  Commissariat Department.
  Barrack Department.
  Medical Department (including Purveyors.)
  Comptroller of Army Expenditure.
  Military Accountant.
  Royal Engineer Department.
  Regimental Paymaster and Officers Commanding.


<tb>


ABATING AND REFUNDING POSTAGE.


[Sidenote: Postmasters may refund.]

Postmasters in Canada are allowed to refund postage in the following
cases only:--


[Sidenote: Charges for over weight.]

Letters charged as weighing more than the actual weight.


[Sidenote: On editors' notices and exchanges.]

Postage incorrectly charged on editor's notices addressed to publishers
and editors, and exchange papers, which should legally pass without
charge.


[Sidenote: Other cases to be referred to Postmaster General.]

All other claims for the return or abatement of postage must be
specially referred to the Postmaster General for his decision, with the
letter or packet on which the return is claimed.


<tb>


UNDELIVERED AND DEAD LETTERS.


[Sidenote: Advertized on 1st of each month.]

All letters remaining undelivered in a post office on the first of each
month, excepting drop letters and such letters as are daily called for,
are advertized in a list posted at the office door for the information
of the public.


[Sidenote: Advertizement in newspaper.]

If a newspaper is published in the neighbourhood the Postmaster is
directed to insert this list therein, provided the proprietor will give
it insertion at the authorized rate.


[Sidenote: Advertized letters to be asked for as such.]

Parties applying at an office for advertized letters should always ask
for them as such.


[Sidenote: When sent to Dead Letter office.]

Letters and papers after remaining undelivered in an office for three
months are sent to the Dead Letter Office, as also are all letters
refused by the persons to whom they are addressed or letters addressed
to persons deceased.


[Sidenote: Return to writers.]

Every letter which is opened at the Dead Letter Office and found to
contain the address of the sender is sent back to him; but such as do
not contain the sender's address are destroyed, excepting always those
which contain money and other articles of value, which are kept for a
reasonable time for the purpose of being reclaimed.


<tb>


REGISTRATION.


[Sidenote: Fees on Registered Letters.]

By the pre-payment of the following fee, in addition to the ordinary
postage, letters and parcels can be registered at the office at which
posted:--


[Sidenote: To Canada.]

  On letters addressed to any place in Canada or the other
    British North American Provinces                           2 cents.


[Sidenote: To U. States.]

  On letters addressed to any place in the United States       5   "


[Sidenote: To U.K.]


       "        "       "          "       United Kingdom     12-1/2 "


[Sidenote: On parcels.]

  On parcels to any part of Canada                             5 cents.


[Sidenote: To B. Col. and Foreign Countries.]

The registration fees on letters to British Colonies and Foreign
Countries will be found in the tables on pages 36, 37, 38, 39, and 40.


[Sidenote: Certificate of posting to be given.]

Every letter or parcel containing value should be registered and
presented to the Postmaster or his clerk and a receipt obtained
therefor. On no account should it be dropped into a letter box.


[Sidenote: Pre-payment.]

When letters are registered for the United Kingdom, for Foreign
Countries, <i>viâ</i> England, or for the United States, both the postage and
the registration fee must be pre-paid.


[Sidenote: Books, &c., cannot be registered.]

Books, periodicals, newspapers, circulars, and other printed matter,
cannot be registered unless pre-paid the full letter rates, in addition
to the ordinary registration fee.


[Sidenote: Receipt required on Delivery.]

Registered letters and packets can only be delivered to the parties to
whom they are addressed or to their order, and a receipt must be given
on the delivery of each registered letter in a book kept by every
Postmaster for that purpose.


[Sidenote: Post office not responsible for loss.]

It should be clearly understood that the post office is not responsible
for the safe delivery of a registered letter or parcel. The registration
simply makes its transmission more secure, by rendering it practicable
to trace it, when passing from one place to another in Canada, from its
receipt to its delivery; and when addressed from any place in Canada to
any place in the United States, the United Kingdom, or parts abroad, if
not to its delivery, at least to the frontier or port of despatch.


<tb>


POSTAGE STAMPS.


[Sidenote: Prices of stamps.]

Every postmaster is required to have on hand a sufficient stock of
postage stamps, and to sell them to the public at 1 cent, 5 cents, 10
cents, 12-1/2 cents, and 17 cents each.


[Sidenote: Envelopes.]

Letter envelopes are also provided with medallion, stamps equivalent to
5 cents and 10 cents postage, each. The 5 cent envelopes are sold
singly at 6 cents each; 66 cents per dozen; $5.50 per hundred. The 10
cent envelopes are sold singly at 11 cents each; $1.26 per dozen; $10.50
per hundred.


[Sidenote: Sale to dealers.]

With the approval of the Postmaster General, postage stamps are sold to
certain dealers to retail again to the public.


[Sidenote: Pre-payment in stamps.]

Pre-payment of letters should, in all cases where practicable, be made
by postage stamps.


[Sidenote: Mutilated stamps.]

A mutilated stamp, or a stamp cut in half, is not recognized in
pre-payment of postage.


[Sidenote: Medallion stamps.]

A medallion stamp cannot be accepted in pre-payment of postage if
separated from the envelope of which it may have formed a part.


[Sidenote: British and foreign.]

No British stamps, or stamps of a foreign country, can be received in
pre-payment of postage in Canada.


[Sidenote: Mode of affixing.]

In affixing the stamp to the letter wet slightly the corner of the
envelope and the gummed side of the stamp, and gently press the stamp
till it is firmly fixed. Stamps should be placed on the front or address
side of the letter, and on the right hand upper corner.


[Sidenote: Partial payment in.]

Letters cannot be pre-paid partly in stamps and partly in money; the
pay-postage must be pre-paid either wholly in stamps, or wholly in
money.


[Sidenote: Insufficient pre-payment.]

If the stamps affixed to a letter addressed to any place in British
North America be not adequate to the proper postage, the letter is rated
with an amount equal to the deficiency.


[Sidenote: Do. United States.]

Letters addressed to the United States, on which stamps are affixed
representing less than the amount of postage to which the letters are
liable, are rated with full unpaid postage.


[Sidenote: Stamps received for postage.]

Postage stamps are received at all post offices in payment of postage on
unpaid letters delivered therefrom.


<tb>


MONEY ORDERS.


[Sidenote: Money order offices.]

Post offices in Canada at which money orders are issued and paid are
distinguished in the List of Post Offices by being printed in <i>italics</i>.


[Sidenote: Orders issued.]

Every money order office in Canada issues money orders on every other
money order office in Canada, as well as on every money order office in
the United Kingdom. Every money order office in the United Kingdom also
issues money orders on every money order office in Canada.


[Sidenote: Commission on Canadian orders.]

The rate of commission charged on money orders drawn by one money order
office in Canada on any other money order office in Canada, is as
follows:--

  If not exceeding in amount $10           5 cents.
  Exceeding $10 and not exceeding $20     10   "
      "      20    "        "      30     15   "
      "      30    "        "      40     30   "
      "      40    "        "      60     45   "
      "      60    "        "      80     60   "
      "      80    "        "     100     75   "


[Sidenote: Half cents.]

No half cents can be introduced into orders.


[Sidenote: Amount of single orders not to exceed $100.]

No money order exceeding $100 in amount can be granted on any office in
Canada; but postmasters are at liberty to grant two or more orders for
$100 or for any lesser sum. They cannot, however, grant two or more
orders for sums of or under $30 on the same day to the same applicant in
favor of the same payee.


[Sidenote: Orders on United Kingdom.]

Money orders on the United Kingdom are drawn in sterling money, and may
be for any sum from one shilling to ten pounds. They must not, however,
exceed the latter amount; but postmasters are at liberty to issue two or
more separate orders for ten pounds each or for any smaller sum.


[Sidenote: Commission on do.]

The rate of commission charged on orders on the United Kingdom, over and
above the currency value of the sterling, is as follows:--

  For orders not exceeding £2 sterling           25 cents.
  Exceeding £2 and not exceeding £5 sterling     50   "
      "      5    "        "      7    "         75   "
      "      7    "        "     10    "         $1.

Tables shewing the amount of Provincial currency required for money
orders issued in Canada upon the United Kingdom, in addition to the
commission, and paid for money orders issued in the United Kingdom on
Canada, will be found at pages 41, 42, and 43.


[Sidenote: Printed applications.]

Applicants for money orders should always use the printed application
forms, in which they should fill up the particulars of the order
required. These forms are supplied gratuitously at all money order
offices.


[Sidenote: Full names and residences required.]

The christian and surnames in full, and residences, both of the remitter
and the payee, should be furnished to the issuing postmaster. When a
married woman is either the remitter or payee, her own christian name
should be given, and not that of her husband, thus--"Mrs. Mary Smith,"
not "Mrs. John Smith."

If the remitter or payee be a Peer or a Bishop, his ordinary title is
sufficient. If a firm, the usual designation of such firm will suffice,
such as "Baring Bros.," "Smith & Son," "Jones & Co."


[Sidenote: Orders should be examined.]

Parties procuring money orders should examine them carefully to see that
they are properly filled up and stamped. This caution will appear the
more necessary when it is understood that any important defect in these
respects will throw difficulties in the way of payment.


[Sidenote: Erroneous orders.]

Money orders which, in consequence of misapprehension of the name of the
remitter or place of payment have been erroneously made out, can be
returned to the postmaster, and a correct order given in exchange; a new
commission, however, will be charged on the corrected order.


[Sidenote: Repayment of orders at issuing office.]

Parties obtaining money orders on Canadian offices can procure repayment
thereof on presentation of the orders at the office at which issued,
signing the receipt at the foot. No order, however, can be repaid
without the authority of the superintendent, unless presented for
repayment on the day on which it is issued. Neither can orders on the
United Kingdom be repaid without his special authority.


[Sidenote: Orders on United Kingdom can be paid through a bank.]

When a remitter desires an order on the United Kingdom to be paid
through a bank, it is left to his option to give or withhold the name of
the payee, or to substitute for the name of the payee any other
designation or modification, such as "the Cashier of the Bank of
England," "the Chief Clerk of the Foreign Office." Such orders must,
however, be crossed by the issuing postmaster with the name of bank
through which the order is to be paid.


[Sidenote: No credit allowed.]

The issue of money orders on credit, or for cheques not marked "good" by
the bank drawn upon, is strictly prohibited.

If a payee is unable to write, he must sign the receipt at the foot of
the order, in the presence of the paying postmaster, by making his mark,
to be witnessed in writing; as, for example:--
                                                  His
  <i>Witness,--John Kenny,</i>       <i>Joseph</i> X <i>Allen</i>.
  <i>Queen Street, Toronto</i>.                   Mark.


[Sidenote: Order of payee in favor of second person.]

In cases of money orders issued in Canada, postmasters are at liberty to
accept the written order of the payee on the order itself in favour of a
second person, if through illness or insuperable difficulty the payee is
prevented from presenting the order in person.


[Sidenote: Lost orders.]

When a Canadian money order has been lost, either by the remitter or
payee, the circumstance must be made known to the superintendent, who,
under certain precautions, will issue a duplicate.


[Sidenote: Duplicates of British orders.]

Duplicates of sterling orders can only be granted by the paying country.
Thus the British post office issues duplicates of orders drawn in Canada
on the United Kingdom, and the Canadian Head Money Order Office grants
duplicates of orders drawn in the United Kingdom on Canada.


[Sidenote: Lapsed orders.]

Money orders which are not presented until one full year after their
date are considered as lapsed orders, and cannot be paid without the
special permission of the superintendent. In all such cases satisfactory
reasons should be given explanatory of the delay in the presentation of
the order.


[Sidenote: Orders on Canada issued in Malta and Gibraltar.]

The Deputy Postmasters General of Malta and Gibraltar are authorized to
issue money orders on the several money order offices in Canada. Money
order offices in Canada do not, however, grant money orders on Malta and
Gibraltar.


<tb>


GENERAL REGULATIONS.


[Sidenote: Exemption from juries, inquests, and militia.]

Postmasters and certain other officers of the department are exempt from
serving on juries or inquests, or in the militia. This exemption applies
to mail carriers, but not to assistants appointed and paid by
postmasters.


[Sidenote: Officers prohibited from voting.]

The postmasters of Quebec, Montreal, Three Rivers, and Sherbrooke, and
the postmasters of incorporated cities and towns in Upper Canada,
divided into wards, and other officers of the Post Office Department,
excepting Postmasters at other than the above places, cannot legally
vote at the election of any member of the Legislative Council or of the
Legislative Assembly.


[Sidenote: No credit allowed.]

Postmasters are not authorized to give credit for postage, if they do so
it is entirely at their own risk.


[Sidenote: Return of letter to sender not allowed.]

A letter once posted becomes the property of the person to whom it is
addressed, and must be forwarded according to its direction. On no
application, however urgent, can it be delivered back to the writer, or
to any other person.


[Sidenote: Letters addressed to firms, &c.]

A letter addressed to a firm may be delivered to any member of the firm.
If addressed to several persons it may be delivered to any one of them.


[Sidenote: Letters delivered to wrong parties.]

A letter delivered to the wrong person in consequence of his name being
the same as the one of the person for whom the letter is really
intended, should be at once returned to the postmaster from whom
received, the party writing on the cover "opened by me through mistake,"
and signing his name thereto.


[Sidenote: Letters posted without proper direction or prepayment.]

Letters posted without any direction, or addressed so imperfectly that
they cannot be forwarded to their intended destinations, and also unpaid
or insufficiently paid letters addressed to countries to which letters
cannot be sent without the postage is pre-paid, are returned to the
writers through the Dead Letter Office.


[Sidenote: Information not to be given.]

No information can be given respecting letters which pass through a post
office except to the persons to whom they are addressed.

