At 2 A.M. three Canadian privates blundered against our village and
tripped over it. They had lost their way, were mud from hoofs to
horns, dead beat, soaked to the skin, chilled to the bone, fed up
to the back teeth. They were not going any further, neither were
they going to be deluged to death if there was any cover to be had
anywhere. They nosed about, and soon discovered a few sheets of
corrugated iron, bore them privily hence and weathered the night out
under some logs further down the valley. My batman trod me underfoot
at seven next morning, "Goin' to be blinkin' murder done in this camp
presently, Sir," he announced cheerfully. "Three officers went to
sleep in bivvies larst night, but somebody's souvenired 'em since an'
they're all lyin' hout in the hopen now, Sir. Their blokes daresent
wake 'em an' break the noos. All very 'asty-tempered gents, so I'm
told. The Colonel is pertickler mustard. There'll be some fresh faces
on the Roll of Honour when 'e comes to."

I turned out and took a look at the scene of impending tragedy. The
three unconscious officers on three camp-beds were lying out in the
middle of a sea of mud like three lone islets. Their shuddering
subordinates were taking cover at long range, whispering among
themselves and crouching in attitudes of dreadful expectancy like
men awaiting the explosion of a mine or the cracking of Doom. As
explosions of those dimensions are liable to be impartial in their
attentions I took horse and rode afield. But according to my batman,
who braved it out, the Lieutenant woke up first, exploded noisily and
detonated the Field Officer who in turn detonated the Colonel. In the
words of my batman--"They went orf one, two, three, Sir, for orl the
world like a machine gun, a neighteen-pounder and an How-Pop-pop!
Whizz-bang! Boom!--very 'eavy cas-u-alities, Sir." PATLANDER.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _First unhappy Passenger._ "OH, I SAY, _CAN'T_ WE GO
BACK NOW?"

_Boatman._ "NOT YET, SIR. THE GENTLEMAN IN THE BOWS INSISTS ON 'AVING
'IS SIXPENNORTH."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Sergeant (in charge of the raw material)._ "NOW,
NUMBER TWO, WE'LL HAVE THAT MOVEMENT ONCE AGAIN. DON'T FORGET THIS
TIME--NECK LIKE A SWAN, FEET LIKE A FAIRY."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "A man who was looking at some sheep under the wire saw the flash
    pass close to him with simultaneous thunder, the sheep being
    unharmed. Still one or two complained of their legs feeling numb."
    --_Parochial Magazine._

Who said Baalamb?

       *       *       *       *       *

    "There is no saying how Kinglake's history might have otherwise
    read had not a round shot put a premature end to Korniloff's
    career at the Malakoff whence M'Mahon was to send his famous
    message, 'J'y, j'reste.'"--_Manchester Evening Chronicle._

There is no saying how anybody's history will read if time-honoured
sayings may be treated like this.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "We are inclined to attribute the form as well as the substance
    of the Note to the aloofness from the practical affairs of the
    outside world which seems to exist in the Vatican."--_Times._

The POPE may or may not be behind the times, but as our contemporary
signed the Papal Peace Note, "BENEDICTUS XVI." it is plain that _The
Times_ is ahead of the POPE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Extract from a letter recently received by a manufacturing firm:--

    "We are pleased to be able to inform you that we have seen the
    Munitions Area delusion officer at ----, and he has informed us
    that he would not hesitate to grant Protection Certificates for
    these men."

We sympathise too much with Labour to care to see it labouring under a
delusion officer.

       *       *       *       *       *

HEART-TO-HEART TALKS.


(_Herr MICHAELIS: Marshal VON HINDENBURG_.)

_Herr M._ Good morning, my dear Marshal. I am glad we have been able
to arrange a meeting, for there are certain points I wish to settle
with you.

_Von H._ I am, as always, at your Excellency's service; only I beg
that the interview may not be prolonged beyond what is strictly
needful. Time presses, and much remains to be done everywhere.

_Herr M._ But I have the commands of the ALL-HIGHEST to speak with you
on some weighty matters. He himself, as you know, has several speeches
to make to-day.

_Von H._ Oh, those speeches! How well I know them. I could almost make
them myself if I wanted to make speeches, which, God be thanked, I do
not need to do.

_Herr M._ No, indeed. Your reputation rests on foundations firmer than
speeches.

_Von H._ You yourself, Excellency, have lately discovered how
fallacious a thing is a speech, even where the speaker honestly tries
to do his best to please everybody.

_Herr M._ You are very kind, my dear Marshal, to speak thus of my
humble effort. The result of it has certainly disappointed me.

_Von H._ What was it that LEDEBOUR said of it? Did he not describe it
as "a political hocus-pocus"? Such men ought to be at once taken out
and shot. But we Prussians have always been too gentle in our methods.

_Herr M._ We have. It is perhaps our only fault; but this time we must
see that we correct it. In any case, to be so misunderstood is most
painful, especially when one has employed all one's tact.

_Von H._ Ah, tact. That is what you are celebrated for, is it not?

_Herr M._ HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY has more than once been graciously
pleased to compliment me upon it. And he, if anyone, is a judge of
tact, is he not?

_Von H._ I have not myself any knowledge of it, so I cannot say for
certain. Does it perhaps mean what you do when you entirely forget in
one speech what you have said or omitted to say in a previous speech?

_Herr M._ (_aside_). The old fellow is not, after all, so
thick-skulled as I thought him. (_Aloud_) I will not ask you to
discuss this subject any more, but will proceed to lay before you the
commands of HIS MAJESTY.

_Von H._ I shall be glad to hear them.

_Herr M._ Well, then, to cut the matter as short as possible, HIS
MAJESTY insists that there shall be a victory on the Western Front.

_Von H._ A victory?

_Herr M._ Yes, a victory. A real one, mind, not a made-up affair like
the capture of Langemarck, which, though it was certainly captured,
was not captured by us, but by the accursed English. May Heaven
destroy them!

_Von H._ But it was by HIS MAJESTY'S orders that we announced the
capture of Langemarck.

_Herr M._ I know; but he is graciously pleased to forget that, and to
desire a genuine victory now.

_Von H._ Tell him I cannot promise. We have done our best at Verdun,
at Lens and at Ypres, but we have had to retreat everywhere. Our turn
may come another time, but, as I say, I cannot promise.

_Herr M._ Please go on doing your best. It is so annoying and
temper-spoiling for HIS MAJESTY to make so many speeches of a fiery
kind, and never to have a victory--at least not a real one for which
Berlin can hang out flags. Besides, if we don't get a victory how
shall we ever get a good German peace? And peace we _must_ have, and
that very soon.

_Von H._ Don't talk to me of peace. War is my business, not peace;
and if I am to carry on war there must be no interference. If the
ALL-HIGHEST does not like that, let him take the chief command
himself.

_Herr M._ God forbid!

       *       *       *       *       *

LINES TO A HUN AIRMAN,

WHO AROUSED THE DETACHMENT ON A CHILLY MORNING, AT 2.30 A.M.

  Oh, come again, but at another time;
    Choose some more fitting moment to appear,
  For even in fair Gallia's sunny clime
    The dawns are chilly at this time of year.

  I did not go to bed till one last night,
    I was on guard, and, pacing up and down,
  Gazed often on the sky where every light
    Flamed like a gem in Night's imperial crown;

  And when the clamant rattle's hideous sound
    Roused me from sleep, in a far distant land
  My spirit moved and trod familiar ground,
    Where a Young Hopeful sat at my right hand.

  There was a spotless cloth upon the board,
    Thin bread-and-butter was upon me pressed,
  And China tea in a frail cup was poured--
    Then I rushed forth inadequately dressed.

  Lo! the poor Sergeant in a shrunken shirt,
    His manly limbs exposed to morning's dew,
  His massive feet all paddling in the dirt--
    Such sights should move the heart of even you.

  The worthy Corporal, sage in looks and speeches,
    Holds up his trousers with a trembling hand;
  Lucky for him he slumbered in his breeches--
    The most clothed man of all our shivering band.

  The wretched gunners cluster on the gun,
    Clasping the clammy breech and slippery shells;
  If 'tis a joke they do not see the fun
    And damn you to the worst of DANTE'S hells.

  And Sub-Lieutenant Blank, that martial man,
    Shows his pyjamas to a startled world,
  And shivers in the foremost of our van
    The while our H.E. shells are upwards hurled.

  You vanish, not ten centimes worth the worse
    For all our noise, so far as we can tell;
  The blest "Stand easy" comes; with many a curse
    We hurry to the tents named after Bell.[1]

  In two brief hours we must arise and shine!
    O willow-waly! Would I were at home
  Where leisurely I breakfasted at nine
    And warm and fed went officeward to roam!

  So come again, but at another time,
    Say after breakfast or some hour like that,
  Or I will strafe you with a viler rhyme--
    I will, by Jove! or eat my shell-proof hat.

[Footnote 1: On second thoughts I don't believe they are named after
anyone, but "Bell" rhymes comfortably with "tell," so it may stand.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The Rev. T.F. ---- officiated in the church yesterday for the
    first time since his return from a four months' spell of work in
    connection with the Y.M.C.A. Huns in France."--_Provincial Paper_.

We congratulate him upon his discovery of this hitherto unknown tribe.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GLIMPSES OF THE FUTURE.

 _Maid._ "MR. JONES, SIR--HIM WOT KILLED SEVENTEEN GERMANS IN ONE TRENCH
WITH HIS OWN 'ANDS--'AS CALLED FOR THE GAS ACCOUNT, SIR."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LITTLE MATCH-GIRL.

_(With apologies to the shade of HANS ANDERSEN.)_

It was late on a bitterly cold showery evening of Autumn. A poor
little girl was wandering in the cold wet streets. She wore a hat on
her head and on her feet she wore boots. ANDERSEN sent her out without
a hat and in boots five sizes too large for her. But as a member
of the Children's Welfare League I do not consider that right. She
carried a quantity of matches (ten boxes to be exact) in her old
apron. Nobody had bought any of her matches during the whole long day.
And since the Summer-Time Act was still in force it was even longer
than it would have been in ANDERSEN's time.

The streets through which she passed were deserted. No sounds, not
even the reassuring shrieks of taxi-whistles, were to be heard, for
it costs you forty shillings now (or is it five pounds?) to engage a
taxi by whistle, and people simply can't afford it. Clearly she would
do no business in the byways, so she struck into a main thoroughfare.
At once she was besieged by buyers. They guessed she was the little
match-girl because she struck a match from time to time just to show
that they worked. Also, she liked to see the blaze. She would not have
selected this branch of war-work had she not been naturally fond of
matches.

They crowded round her, asking eagerly, "How much a box?" Now her
mother had told her to sell them at a shilling a box. But the little
girl had heard much talk of war-profits, and since nobody had given
her any she thought she might as well earn some. So she asked five
shillings a box. And since these were the last matches seen in England
it was not long before she had sold all the ten boxes (including
the ones containing the burnt ends of the matches she had struck to
attract custom).

The little girl then went to the nearest post-office and purchased two
pounds' worth of War Loan. The ten shillings which remained she took
home to her mother, and since the good woman did not understand the
principles of profiteering she was well pleased.

But alas for the little girl! one of her customers, doubting the
honesty of her intentions, had informed the policeman. She was
subsequently taken into custody, and the magistrate is now faced with
the problem as to whether she is a good little girl in that she put
money into War Loan, or a bad little girl in that she followed the
example of the profiteers.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR HELPFUL PRESS.

From a recipe for jam:--

    "Add the fruit and boil 40 minutes. Glucose and sugar in equal
    parts can be used if sugar is unobtainable."--_Daily Sketch_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "To lease or rent a fine family residence, healthy locality, one
    mile from Mandeville fully furnished with good accommodation for
    a large family standing on ten acres of good grazing land with
    many fruit trees has two large tanks, recently occupied by judge
    Reece."--_Daily Gleaner (Jamaica)_.

Anything for coolness.


       *       *       *       *       *

Extract from a speech by Mr. BROMLEY on the eight-hours' day:--

    "They had endeavoured after long weary waiting to bring to
    fruition in due time what had been the first plank in their
    programme for thirteen years."--_Morning Paper_.

But the plank, as might be expected, has, as fruit-growers say, "run
to wood."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Colonel (asked to review V.A.D. Corps, and not wishing
to spring an order on them)_. "NOW, I'M GOING TO ASK YOU LADIES TO FORM
FOURS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PASSING OF THE COD'S HEAD.

(_A Romance of Chiswick Mall._)

  It was because the dustman did not come;
    It was because our cat was overfed,
  And, gorged with some superior pabulum,
    Declined to touch the cod's disgusting head;
  It was because the weather was too warm
    To hide the horror in the refuse-bin,
  And too intense the perfume of its form,
    My wife commanded me to do the sin,
  To take and cast it in the twinkling Thames--
    A practice which the neighbourhood condemns.

  So on the midnight, with a strong cigar
    And scented handkerchief, I tiptoed near,
  But felt the exotic fragrance from afar;
    I thought of ARTHUR and Sir BEDIVERE:
  And it seemed best to leave it on the plate,
    So strode I back and told my curious spouse
  "I heard the high tide lap along the Eyot,
    And the wild water at the barge's bows."
  She said, "O treacherous! O heart of clay!
    Go back and throw the smelly thing away."

  Thereat I seized it, and with guilty shoon
    Stole out indignant to the water's marge;
  Its eyes like emeralds caught the affronted moon;
    The stars conspired to make the thing look large;
  Surely all Chiswick would perceive my shame!
    I clutched the indecency and whirled it round
  And flung it from me like a torch in flame,
    And a great wailing swept across the sound,
  As though the deep were calling back its kith.
    I said, "It will go down to Hammersmith.

  "It will go down beyond the Chelsea flats,
    And hang with barges under Battersea,
  Will press past Wapping with decaying cats,
    And the dead dog shall bear it company;
  Small bathing boys shall feel its clammy prod,
    And think some jellyfish has fled the surge;
  And so 'twill win to where the tribe of cod
    In its own ooze intones a fitting dirge,
  And after that some false and impious fish
    Will likely have it for a breakfast dish."

  The morning dawned. The tide had stripped the shore;
    And that foul shape I fancied so remote
  Lay stark below, just opposite next-door!
    Who would have said a cod's head could not float?
  No more my neighbour in his garden sits;
    My callers now regard the view with groans;
  For tides may roll and rot the fleshly bits,
    But what shall mortify those ageless bones?
  How shall I bear to hear my grandsons say,
    "Look at the fish that grand-dad threw away"?

  A.P.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a South African produce-merchant's letter:--

    "As so many of our clients were disappointed last year ... we are
    taking time by the fetlock and offering you this excellent quality
    seed now."

To be sure of stopping Father Time you must collar low.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LIBERATORS.

VENIZELOS to KERENSKY. "DO NOT DESPAIR. I TOO WENT THROUGH SUFFERING
BEFORE ACHIEVING UNITY."]

       *       *       *       *       *

WAR-TIME WALKS.

    _(With apologies to a contemporary for cutting the ground
    from under its feet, and to our readers for omitting certain
    names--in deference to the Censor.)_

Owing to the War one must save money and spend as little as possible
on fares when rambling for pleasure. The following itinerary will be
found quite an inexpensive one, though offering plenty of interest.
Take the train to ----. Leave the station by the exit on the south
side, and turn to the right under the railway bridge, taking the path
by the stream till you come to a bridge which crosses it.

Do not cross the stream, however, but turn sharply to the right
(opposite a rather pretentious-looking house) for two hundred yards or
so, when you will come to a park. A little before entering the park
you will see, lying not far from the road on the left, a remarkable
old monastery church, much restored. This contains some fine old
painted glass, some tombs and monumental inscriptions which are worth
a visit if time will allow.

There is a right of way through the park up to the house, which
belongs to the Earl of C----, but is not of great architectural
interest. Bear to the right in front of the house, along a path which
skirts the wall of the private grounds. At the end of the wall a
gateway leads into the high road, and a walk of under two miles will
bring you to the, at one time, pretty village of K----, which has,
however, grown rapidly into a thriving town. Before reaching the
parish church there is a hostelry on the right-hand side of the road
where an excellent tea may be obtained (so far as the food regulations
will allow).

On leaving the inn, turn through a gateway at the side of it, which
gives on to a straight and rather uninteresting road, which has been
considerably built upon and is more or less private, though a right
of way has been preserved through it. A glimpse of a large mansion,
chiefly of the 17th century, and now in the possession of the W----s,
may be obtained through the trees on the right of the road.

When you come to the main road (at the far end of this semi-private
road) turn to the right, and just where the gibbet used to stand, so
it is said, in the good old days, there is a sharp left-angled turn
which leads to the village of E----. Keep straight on, however, for a
mile or two (notice the fine old timbered houses on the right of the
footpath opposite the old boundary-post), and then turn to the right
by the church, rebuilt in the 17th century on the site of an older and
finer one, whose spire was at one time a noted landmark.

A walk through the churchyard to the church porch brings you to the
brow of a hill. Descend this to the cross-roads at the bottom, but,
instead of turning to either hand, keep to the narrow road in front
till you come to a gateway on the left. This leads to a house which
formerly belonged to the Knights Templars, but which passed into the
hands of the L----s and is still in their possession. There is an
interesting chapel in the grounds, containing the tombs of some of the
former owners, whose deeds were more warlike, though probably less
numerous, than those of the present occupants.

From here an easy walk up the Strand will bring you to the starting
point, Charing Cross Embankment Station, where you can take the train
again; but if you are fit and between the ages of forty-one and fifty,
you can continue the walk till you reach the nearest Recruiting
Office.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Happy Home offered slight Mental Youth or otherwise."--_Times_.

A chance for one of our slim conscientious objectors.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINES ON RE-READING "BLEAK HOUSE."

  There was a time when, posing as a purist,
    I thought it fine to criticise and crab
  CHARLES DICKENS as a crude caricaturist,
    Who laid his colours on too thick and slab,
  Who was a sort of sentimental tourist
    And made life lurid when it should be drab;
  In short I branded as a brilliant dauber
  The man who gave us _Pecksniff_ and _Micawber_.

  True, there are blots--like spots upon the sun--
    And genius, lavish of imagination,
  In sheer profusion always has outrun
    The bounds of strict artistic concentration;
  But when detraction's worst is said and done,
    How much remains for fervent admiration,
  How much that never palls or wounds or sickens
  (Unlike some moderns) in great generous DICKENS!

  And in _Bleak House_, the culminating story
    That marks the zenith of his swift career,
  All the great qualities that won him glory,
    As writer and reformer too, appear:
  Righteous resentment of abuses hoary,
    Of pomp and cant, self-centred, insincere;
  And burning sympathy that glows unchecked
    For those who sit in darkness and neglect.

  Who, if his heart be not of steel or stone,
    Can read unmoved of _Charley_ or of _Jo_;
  Of dear _Miss Flite_, who, though her wits be flown,
    Has kept a soul as pure as driven snow;
  Of the fierce "man from Shropshire" overthrown
    By Law's delays; of _Caddy's_ inky woe;
  Or of the alternating fits and fluster
  That harass the unhappy slavey, _Guster_?

  And there are scores of characters so vivid
    They make us friends or enemies for life:
  _Hortense_, half-tamed she-wolf, with envy livid;
    The patient _Snagsby_ and his shrewish wife;
  The amorous _Guppy_, who poor _Esther_ chivvied;
    Tempestuous _Boythorn_, revelling in strife;
  _Skimpole_, the honey-tongued artistic cadger;
  And that tremendous woman, _Mrs. Badger_.

  No wonder then that, when we seek awhile
    Relief and respite from War's strident chorus,
  Few books more swiftly charm us to a smile,
    Few books more truly hearten and restore us
  Than his, whose art was potent to beguile
    Thousands of weary souls who came before us--
  No wonder, when the Huns, who ban our fiction,
  Were fain to free him from their malediction.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "WHAT PEOPLE SAY.

    "One of the collectors for the ---- Hospital Sunday fund seems to
    have got more than either he or the committee desired.

    "On approaching a house he was received by a dog which persisted in
    leaving its compliments on one of his legs.

    "Happily the injury, though treated by a chemist, was not serious."
    --_Provincial Paper_.

People ought not to say these things about chemists.

       *       *       *       *       *

