        `To hell with the man,
        May he never grow fat,
        What carries two faces,
        Under one 'at.'

Rushton & Co. did a lot of work that summer.  They did not have many
big jobs, but there were a lot of little ones, and the boy Bert was
kept busy running from one to the other.  He spent most of his time
dragging a handcart with loads of paint, or planks and steps, and
seldom went out to work with the men, for when he was not taking
things out to the various places where the philanthropists were
working, he was in the paintshop at the yard, scraping out dirty
paint-pots or helping Crass to mix up colours.  Although scarcely
anyone seemed to notice it, the boy presented a truly pitiable
spectacle.  He was very pale and thin.  Dragging the handcart did not
help him to put on flesh, for the weather was very hot and the work
made him sweat.

His home was right away on the other side of Windley.  It took him
more than three-quarters of an hour to walk to the shop, and as he had
to be at work at six, that meant that he had to leave home at a few
minutes past five every morning, so that he always got up about half
past four.

He was wearing a man's coat - or rather jacket - which gave the upper
part of his body a bulky appearance.  The trousers were part of a suit
of his own, and were somewhat narrowly cut, as is the rule with boys'
cheap ready-made trousers.  These thin legs appearing under the big
jacket gave him a rather grotesque appearance, which was heightened by
the fact that all his clothes, cap, coat, waistcoat, trousers and
boots, were smothered with paint and distemper of various colours, and
there were generally a few streaks of paint of some sort or other upon
his face, and of course his hands - especially round the fingernails -
were grimed with it.  But the worst of all were the dreadful hobnailed
boots: the leather of the uppers of these was an eighth of an inch
thick, and very stiff.  Across the fore part of the boot this hard
leather had warped into ridges and valleys, which chafed his feet, and
made them bleed.  The soles were five-eighths of an inch thick,
covered with hobnails, and were as hard and inflexible and almost as
heavy as iron.  These boots hurt his feet dreadfully and made him feel
very tired and miserable, for he had such a lot of walking to do. He
used to be jolly glad when dinner-time came, for then he used to get
out of sight in some quiet spot and lie down for the whole hour.  His
favourite dining-place was up in the loft over the carpenter's shop,
where they stored the mouldings and architraves.  No one ever came
there at that hour, and after he had eaten his dinner he used to lie
down and think and rest.

He nearly always had an hour for dinner, but he did not always have it
at the same time: sometimes he had it at twelve o'clock and sometimes
not till two.  It all depended upon what stuff had to be taken to the
job.

Often it happened that some men at a distant job required some
material to use immediately after dinner, and perhaps Crass was not
able to get it ready till twelve o'clock, so that it was not possible
to take it before dinner-time, and if Bert left it till after dinner
the men would be wasting their time waiting for it: so in such cases
he took it there first and had his dinner when he came back.

Sometimes he got back about half past twelve, and it was necessary for
him to take out another lot of material at one o'clock.

In such a case he `charged' half an hour overtime on his time sheet -
he used to get twopence an hour for overtime.

Sometimes Crass sent him with a handcart to one job to get a pair of
steps or tressels, or a plank, or some material or other, and take
them to another job, and on these occasions it was often very late
before he was able to take his meals.  Instead of getting his
breakfast at eight, it was often nearly nine before he got back to the
shop, and frequently he had to go without dinner until half past one
or two.

Sometimes he could scarcely manage to carry the pots of paint to the
jobs; his feet were so hot and sore.  When he had to push the cart it
was worse still, and often when knocking-off time came he felt so
tired that he could scarcely manage to walk home.

But the weather was not always hot or fine: sometimes it was quite
cold, almost like winter, and there was a lot of rain that summer.  At
such times the boy frequently got wet through several times a day as
he went from one job to another, and he had to work all the time in
his wet clothes and boots, which were usually old and out of repair
and let in the water.

One of the worst jobs that he had to do was when a new stock of white
lead came in.  This stuff came in wooden barrels containing two
hundredweight, and he used to have to dig it out of these barrels with
a trowel, and put it into a metal tank, where it was kept covered with
water, and the empty barrels were returned to the makers.

When he was doing this work he usually managed to get himself smeared
all over with the white lead, and this circumstance, and the fact that
he was always handling paint or some poisonous material or other was
doubtless the cause of the terrible pains he often had in his stomach -
pains that sometimes caused him to throw himself down and roll on the
ground in agony.

One afternoon Crass sent him with a handcart to a job that Easton,
Philpot, Harlow and Owen were just finishing.  He got there about half
past four and helped the men to load up the things, and afterwards
walked alongside the cart with them back to the shop.

On the way they all noticed and remarked to each other that the boy
looked tired and pale and that he seemed to limp: but he did not say
anything, although be guessed that they were talking about him.  They
arrived at the shop a little before knocking-off time - about ten
minutes past five.  Bert helped them to unload, and afterwards, while
they were putting their things away and `charging up' the unused
materials they had brought back, he pushed the cart over to the shed
where it was kept, on the other side of the yard.  He did not return
to the shop at once and a few minutes later when Harlow came out into
the yard to get a bucket of water to wash their hands with, he saw the
boy leaning on the side of the cart, crying, and holding one foot off
the ground.

Harlow asked him what was the matter, and while he was speaking to him
the others came out to see what was up: the boy said he had rheumatism
or growing pains or something in his leg, `just here near the knee'.
But he didn't say much, he just cried miserably, and turned his head
slowly from side to side, avoiding the looks of the men because he
felt ashamed that they should see him cry.

When they saw how ill and miserable he looked, the men all put their
hands in their pockets to get some coppers to give to him so that he
could ride home on the tram.  They gave him fivepence altogether, more
than enough to ride all the way; and Crass told him to go at once -
there was no need to wait till half past; but before he went Philpot
got a small glass bottle out of his tool bag and filled it with oil
and turps - two of turps and one of oil - which he gave to Bert to rub
into his leg before going to bed: The turps - he explained - was to
cure the pain and the oil was to prevent it from hurting the skin.  He
was to get his mother to rub it in for him if he were too tired to do
it himself.  Bert promised to observe these directions, and, drying
his tears, took his dinner basket and limped off to catch the tram.

It was a few days after this that Hunter met with an accident.  He
was tearing off on his bicycle to one of the jobs about five minutes
to twelve to see if he could catch anyone leaving off for dinner
before before the proper time, and while going down a rather steep
hill the front brake broke - the rubbers of the rear one were worn out
and failed to act - so Misery to save himself from being smashed
against the railings of the houses at the bottom of the hill, threw
himself off the machine, with the result that his head and face and
hands were terribly cut and bruised.  He was so badly knocked about
that he had to remain at home for nearly three weeks, much to the
delight of the men and the annoyance - one might even say the
indignation - of Mr Rushton, who did not know enough about the work to
make out estimates without assistance.  There were several large jobs
to be tendered for at the same time, so Rushton sent the
specifications round to Hunter's house for him to figure out the
prices, and nearly all the time that Misery was at home he was sitting
up in bed, swathed in bandages, trying to calculate the probable cost
of these jobs.  Rushton did not come to see him, but he sent Bert
nearly every day, either with some specifications, or some accounts,
or something of that sort, or with a note inquiring when Hunter
thought he would be able to return to work.

All sorts of rumours became prevalent amongst the men concerning
Hunter's condition.  He had `broken his spiral column', he had
`conjunction of the brain', or he had injured his `innards' and would
probably never be able to `do no more slave-drivin''.  Crass - who had
helped Mr Rushton to `price up' several small jobs - began to think it
might not be altogether a bad thing for himself if something were to
happen to Hunter, and he began to put on side and to assume airs of
authority.  He got one of the light-weights to assist him in his work
of colourman and made him do all the hard work, while he spent part of
his own time visiting the different jobs to see how the work
progressed.

Crass's appearance did him justice.  He was wearing a pair of sporting
trousers the pattern of which consisted of large black and white
squares.  The previous owner of these trousers was taller and slighter
than Crass, so although the legs were about a couple of inches too
long, they fitted him rather tightly, so much so that it was fortunate
that he had his present job of colourman, for if he had had to do any
climbing up and down ladders or steps, the trousers would have burst.
His jacket was also two or three sizes too small, and the sleeves were
so short that the cuffs of his flanelette shirt were visible.  This
coat was made of serge, and its colour had presumably once been blue,
but it was now a sort of heliotrope and violet: the greater part being
of the former tint, and the parts under the sleeves of the latter.
This jacket fitted very tightly across the shoulders and back and
being much too short left his tightly clad posteriors exposed to view.

He however seemed quite unconscious of anything peculiar in his
appearance and was so bumptious and offensive that most of the men
were almost glad when Nimrod came back.  They said that if Crass ever
got the job he would be a dam' sight worse than Hunter.  As for the
latter, for a little while after his return to work it was said that
his illness had improved his character: he had had time to think
things over; and in short, he was ever so much better than before: but
it was not long before this story began to be told the other way
round.  He was worse than ever! and a thing that happened about a
fortnight after his return caused more ill feeling and resentment
against him and Rushton than had ever existed previously.  What led up
to it was something that was done by Bundy's mate, Ted Dawson.

This poor wretch was scarcely ever seen without a load of some sort or
other: carrying a sack of cement or plaster, a heavy ladder, a big
bucket of mortar, or dragging a load of scaffolding on a cart.  He
must have been nearly as strong as a horse, because after working in
this manner for Rushton & Co. from six in the morning till half past
five at night, he usually went to work in his garden for two or three
hours after tea, and frequently went there for an hour or so in the
morning before going to work.  The poor devil needed the produce of
his garden to supplement his wages, for he had a wife and three
children to provide for and he earned only - or rather, to be correct,
he was paid only - fourpence an hour.

There was an old house to which they were making some alterations and
repairs, and there was a lot of old wood taken out of it: old, decayed
floorboards and stuff of that kind, wood that was of no use whatever
except to burn.

Bundy and his mate were working there, and one night, Misery came a
few minutes before half past five and caught Dawson in the act of
tying up a small bundle of this wood.  When Hunter asked him what he
was going to do with it he made no attempt at prevarication or
concealment: he said he was going to take it home for fire-wood,
because it was of no other use.  Misery kicked up a devil of a row and
ordered him to leave the wood where it was: it had to be taken to the
yard, and it was nothing to do with Dawson or anyone else whether it
was any use or not!  If he caught anyone taking wood away he would
sack them on the spot.  Hunter shouted very loud so that all the
others might hear, and as they were all listening attentively in the
next room, where they were taking their aprons off preparatory to
going home, they got the full benefit of his remarks.

The following Saturday when the hands went to the office for their
money they were each presented with a printed card bearing the
following legend:

    Under no circumstances is any article or material, however
    trifling, to be taken away by workmen for their private use,
    whether waste material or not, from any workshop or place where
    work is being done.  Foremen are hereby instructed to see that
    this order is obeyed and to report any such act coming to their
    knowledge.  Any man breaking this rule will be either dismissed
    without notice or given into custody.
                                                         Rushton & Co.

Most of the men took these cards with the envelopes containing their
wages and walked away without making any comment - in fact, most of
them were some distance away before they realized exactly what the
card was about.  Two or three of them stood a few steps away from the
pay window in full view of Rushton and Misery and ostentatiously tore
the thing into pieces and threw them into the street.  One man
remained at the pay window while he read the card - and then flung it
with an obscene curse into Rushton's face, and demanded his back day,
which they gave him without any remark or delay, the other men who
were not yet paid having to wait while he made out his time-sheet for
that morning.

The story of this card spread all over the place in a very short time.
It became the talk of every shop in the town.  Whenever any of
Rushton's men encountered the employees of another firm, the latter
used to shout after them - `However trifling!' - or `Look out, chaps!
'Ere comes some of Rushton's pickpockets.'

Amongst Rushton's men themselves it became a standing joke or form of
greeting to say when one met another - `Remember!  However trifling!'

If one of their number was seen going home with an unusual amount of
paint or whitewash on his hands or clothes, the others would threaten
to report him for stealing the material.  They used to say that
however trifling the quantity, it was against orders to take it away.

Harlow drew up a list of rules which he said Mr Rushton had instructed
him to communicate to the men.  One of these rules provided that
everybody was to be weighed upon arrival at the job in the morning and
again at leaving-off time: any man found to have increased in weight
was to be discharged.

There was also much cursing and covert resentment about it; the men
used to say that such a thing as that looked well coming from the
likes of Rushton and Hunter, and they used to remind each other of the
affair of the marble-topped console table, the barometer, the venetian
blinds and all the other robberies.

None of them ever said anything to either Misery or Rushton about the
cards, but one morning when the latter was reading his letters at the
breakfast table, on opening one of them he found that it contained one
of the notices, smeared with human excrement.  He did not eat any more
breakfast that morning.

It was not to be much wondered at that none of them had the courage to
openly resent the conditions under which they had to work, for
although it was summer, there were many men out of employment, and it
was much easier to get the sack than it was to get another job.

None of the men were ever caught stealing anything, however trifling,
but all the same during the course of the summer five or six of them
were captured by the police and sent to jail - for not being able to
pay their poor rates.

All through the summer Owen continued to make himself objectionable
and to incur the ridicule of his fellow workmen by talking about the
causes of poverty and of ways to abolish it.

Most of the men kept two shillings or half a crown of their wages back
from their wives for pocket money, which they spent on beer and
tobacco.  There were a very few who spent a little more than this, and
there were a still smaller number who spent so much in this way that
their families had to suffer in consequence.

Most of those who kept back half a crown or three shillings from their
wives did so on the understanding that they were to buy their clothing
out of it.  Some of them had to pay a shilling a week to a tallyman or
credit clothier.  These were the ones who indulged in shoddy new suits -
at long intervals.  Others bought - or got their wives to buy for them -
their clothes at second-hand shops, `paying off' about a shilling or
so a week and not receiving the things till they were paid for.

There were a very large proportion of them who did not spend even a
shilling a week for drink: and there were numerous others who, while
not being formally total abstainers, yet often went for weeks together
without either entering a public house or tasting intoxicating drink
in any form.

Then there were others who, instead of drinking tea or coffee or cocoa
with their dinners or suppers, drank beer.  This did not cost more
than the teetotal drinks, but all the same there are some persons who
say that those who swell the `Nation's Drink Bill' by drinking beer
with their dinners or suppers are a kind of criminal, and that they
ought to be compelled to drink something else: that is, if they are
working people.  As for the idle classes, they of course are to be
allowed to continue to make merry, `drinking whisky, wine and sherry',
to say nothing of having their beer in by the barrel and the dozen -
or forty dozen - bottles.  But of course that's a different matter,
because these people make so much money out of the labour of the
working classes that they can afford to indulge in this way without
depriving their children of the necessaries of life.

There is no more cowardly, dastardly slander than is contained in the
assertion that the majority or any considerable proportion of working
men neglect their families through drink.  It is a condemned lie.
There are some who do, but they are not even a large minority.  They
are few and far between, and are regarded with contempt by their
fellow workmen.

It will be said that their families had to suffer for want of even the
little that most of them spent in that way: but the persons that use
this argument should carry it to its logical conclusion.  Tea is an
unnecessary and harmful drink; it has been condemned by medical men so
often that to enumerate its evil qualities here would be waste of
time.  The same can be said of nearly all the cheap temperance drinks;
they are unnecessary and harmful and cost money, and, like beer, are
drunk only for pleasure.

What right has anyone to say to working men that when their work is
done they should not find pleasure in drinking a glass or two of beer
together in a tavern or anywhere else?  Let those who would presume to
condemn them carry their argument to its logical conclusion and
condemn pleasure of every kind.  Let them persuade the working classes
to lead still simpler lives; to drink water instead of such
unwholesome things as tea, coffee, beer, lemonade and all the other
harmful and unnecessary stuff.  They would then be able to live ever
so much more cheaply, and as wages are always and everywhere regulated
by the cost of living, they would be able to work for lower pay.

These people are fond of quoting the figures of the `Nation's Drink
Bill,' as if all this money were spent by the working classes!  But if
the amount of money spent in drink by the `aristocracy', the clergy
and the middle classes were deducted from the `Nation's Drink Bill',
it would be seen that the amount spent per head by the working classes
is not so alarming after all; and would probably not be much larger
than the amount spent on drink by those who consume tea and coffee and
all the other unwholesome and unnecessary `temperance' drinks.

The fact that some of Rushton's men spent about two shillings a week
on drink while they were in employment was not the cause of their
poverty.  If they had never spent a farthing for drink, and if their
wretched wages had been increased fifty percent, they would still have
been in a condition of the most abject and miserable poverty, for
nearly all the benefits and privileges of civilization, nearly
everything that makes life worth living, would still have been beyond
their reach.

It is inevitable, so long as men have to live and work under such
heartbreaking, uninteresting conditions as at present that a certain
proportion of them will seek forgetfulness and momentary happiness in
the tavern, and the only remedy for this evil is to remove the cause;
and while that is in process, there is something else that can be done
and that is, instead of allowing filthy drinking dens, presided over
by persons whose interest it is to encourage men to drink more bad
beer than is good for them or than they can afford, - to have
civilized institutions run by the State or the municipalities for use
and not merely for profit.  Decent pleasure houses, where no
drunkenness or filthiness would be tolerated - where one could buy
real beer or coffee or tea or any other refreshments; where men could
repair when their day's work was over and spend an hour or two in
rational intercourse with their fellows or listen to music and
singing.  Taverns to which they could take their wives and children
without fear of defilement, for a place that is not fit for the
presence of a woman or a child is not fit to exist at all.

Owen, being a teetotaller, did not spend any of his money on drink;
but he spent a lot on what he called `The Cause'.  Every week he
bought some penny or twopenny pamphlets or some leaflets about
Socialism, which he lent or gave to his mates; and in this way and by
means of much talk he succeeded in converting a few to his party.
Philpot, Harlow and a few others used to listen with interest, and
some of them even paid for the pamphlets they obtained from Owen, and
after reading them themselves, passed them on to others, and also
occasionally `got up' arguments on their own accounts.  Others were
simply indifferent, or treated the subject as a kind of joke,
ridiculing the suggestion that it was possible to abolish poverty.
They repeated that there had `always been rich and poor in the world
and there always would be, so there was an end of it'.  But the
majority were bitterly hostile; not to Owen, but to Socialism.  For
the man himself most of them had a certain amount of liking,
especially the ordinary hands because it was known that he was not a
`master's man' and that he had declined to `take charge' of jobs which
Misery had offered to him.  But to Socialism they were savagely and
malignantly opposed.  Some of those who had shown some symptoms of
Socialism during the past winter when they were starving had now quite
recovered and were stout defenders of the Present System.

Barrington was still working for the firm and continued to maintain
his manner of reserve, seldom speaking unless addressed but all the
same, for several reasons, it began to be rumoured that he shared
Owen's views.  He always paid for the pamphlets that Owen gave him,
and on one occasion, when Owen bought a thousand leaflets to give
away, Barrington contributed a shilling towards the half-crown that
Owen paid for them.  But he never took any part in the arguments that
sometimes raged during the dinner-hour or at breakfast-time.

It was a good thing for Owen that he had his enthusiasm for `the
cause' to occupy his mind.  Socialism was to him what drink was to
some of the others - the thing that enable them to forget and tolerate
the conditions under which they were forced to exist.  Some of them
were so muddled with beer, and others so besotted with admiration of
their Liberal and Tory masters, that they were oblivious of the misery
of their own lives, and in a similar way, Owen was so much occupied in
trying to rouse them from their lethargy and so engrossed in trying to
think out new arguments to convince them of the possibility of
bringing about an improvement in their condition that he had no time
to dwell upon his own poverty; the money that he spent on leaflets and
pamphlets to give away might have been better spent on food and
clothing for himself, because most of those to whom he gave them were
by no means grateful; but he never thought of that; and after all,
nearly everyone spends money on some hobby or other.  Some people deny
themselves the necessaries or comforts of life in order that they may
be able to help to fatten a publican.  Others deny themselves in order
to enable a lazy parson to live in idleness and luxury; and others
spend much time and money that they really need for themselves in
buying Socialist literature to give away to people who don't want to
know about Socialism.

One Sunday morning towards the end of July, a band of about
twenty-five men and women on bicycles invaded the town.  Two of them -
who rode a few yards in front of the others, had affixed to the
handlebars of each of their machines a slender, upright standard from
the top of one of which fluttered a small flag of crimson silk with
`International Brotherhood and Peace' in gold letters.  The other
standard was similar in size and colour, but with a different legend:
`One for all and All for one.'

As they rode along they gave leaflets to the people in the streets,
and whenever they came to a place where there were many people they
dismounted and walked about, giving their leaflets to whoever would
accept them.  They made several long halts during their progress along
the Grand Parade, where there was a considerable crowd, and then they
rode over the hill to Windley, which they reached a little before
opening time.  There were little crowds waiting outside the several
public houses and a number of people passing through the streets on
their way home from Church and Chapel.  The strangers distributed
leaflets to all those who would take them, and they went through a lot
of the side streets, putting leaflets under the doors and in the
letter-boxes.  When they had exhausted their stock they remounted and
rode back the way they came.

Meantime the news of their arrival had spread, and as they returned
through the town they were greeted with jeers and booing.  Presently
someone threw a stone, and as there happened to be plenty of stones
just there several others followed suit and began running after the
retreating cyclists, throwing stones, hooting and cursing.

The leaflet which had given rise to all this fury read as follows:

                            WHAT IS SOCIALISM?

    At present the workers, with hand and brain produce continually
    food, clothing and all useful and beautiful things in great
    abundance.

    BUT THEY LABOUR IN VAIN - for they are mostly poor and often in
    want.  They find it a hard struggle to live.  Their women and
    children suffer, and their old age is branded with pauperism.

    Socialism is a plan by which poverty will be abolished, and
    everyone enabled to live in plenty and comfort, with leisure and
    opportunity for ampler life.

    If you wish to hear more of this plan, come to the field at the
    Cross Roads on the hill at Windley, on Tuesday evening next at 8
    P.M. and

                      LOOK OUT FOR THE SOCIALIST VAN

The cyclists rode away amid showers of stones without sustaining much
damage.  One had his hand cut and another, who happened to look round,
was struck on the forehead, but these were the only casualties.

On the following Tuesday evening, long before the appointed time,
there was a large crowd assembled at the cross roads or the hill at
Windley, waiting for the appearance of the van, and they were
evidently prepared to give the Socialists a warm reception.  There was
only one policeman in uniform there but there were several in plain
clothes amongst the crowd.

Crass, Dick Wantley, the Semi-drunk, Sawkins, Bill Bates and several
other frequenters of the Cricketers were amongst the crowd, and there
were also a sprinkling of tradespeople, including the Old Dear and Mr
Smallman, the grocer, and a few ladies and gentlemen - wealthy
visitors - but the bulk of the crowd were working men, labourers,
mechanics and boys.

As it was quite evident that the crowd meant mischief - many of them
had their pockets filled with stones and were armed with sticks -
several of the Socialists were in favour of going to meet the van to
endeavour to persuade those in charge from coming, and with that
object they withdrew from the crowd, which was already regarding them
with menacing looks, and went down the road in the direction from
which the van was expected to come.  They had not gone very far,
however, before the people, divining what they were going to do, began
to follow them and while they were hesitating what course to pursue,
the Socialist van, escorted by five or six men on bicycles, appeared
round the corner at the bottom of the hill.

As soon as the crowd saw it, they gave an exultant cheer, or, rather,
yell, and began running down the hilt to meet it, and in a few minutes
it was surrounded by a howling mob.  The van was drawn by two horses;
there was a door and a small platform at the back and over this was a
sign with white letters on a red ground: `Socialism, the only hope of
the Workers.'

The driver pulled up, and another man on the platform at the rear
attempted to address the crowd, but his voice was inaudible in the din
of howls, catcalls, hooting and obscene curses.  After about an hour
of this, as the crowd began pushing against the van and trying to
overturn it, the terrified horses commenced to get restive and
uncontrollable, and the man on the box attempted to drive up the hill.
This seemed to still further infuriate the horde of savages who
surrounded the van.  Numbers of them clutched the wheels and turned
them the reverse way, screaming that it must go back to where it came
from; several of them accordingly seized the horses' heads and, amid
cheers, turned them round.

The man on the platform was still trying to make himself heard, but
without success.  The strangers who had come with the van and the
little group of local Socialists, who had forced their way through the
crowd and gathered together close to the platform in front of the
would-be speaker, only increased the din by their shouts of appeal to
the crowd to `give the man a fair chance'.  This little bodyguard
closed round the van as it began to move slowly downhill, but they
were not sufficiently numerous to protect it from the crowd, which,
not being satisfied with the rate at which the van was proceeding,
began to shout to each other to `Run it away!' `Take the brake off!'
and several savage rushes were made with the intention of putting
these suggestions into execution.

Some of the defenders were hampered with their bicycles, but they
resisted as well as they were able, and succeeded in keeping the crowd
off until the foot of the hill was reached, and then someone threw the
first stone, which by a strange chance happened to strike one of the
cyclists whose head was already bandaged - it was the same man who had
been hit on the Sunday.  This stone was soon followed by others, and
the man on the platform was the next to be struck.  He got it right on
the mouth, and as he put up his handkerchief to staunch the blood
another struck him on the forehead just above the temple, and he
dropped forward on his face on to the platform as if he had been shot.

As the speed of the vehicle increased, a regular hail of stones fell
upon the roof and against the sides of the van and whizzed past the
retreating cyclists, while the crowd followed close behind, cheering,
shrieking out volleys of obscene curses, and howling like wolves.

`We'll give the b--rs Socialism!' shouted Crass, who was literally
foaming at the mouth.

`We'll teach 'em to come 'ere trying to undermined our bloody
morality,' howled Dick Wantley as he hurled a lump of granite that he
had torn up from the macadamized road at one of the cyclists.

They ran on after the van until it was out of range, and then they
bethought themselves of the local Socialists; but they were nowhere to
be seen; they had prudently withdrawn as soon as the van had got
fairly under way, and the victory being complete, the upholders of the
present system returned to the piece of waste ground on the top of the
hill, where a gentleman in a silk hat and frockcoat stood up on a
little hillock and made a speech.  He said nothing about the Distress
Committee or the Soup Kitchen or the children who went to school
without proper clothes or food, and made no reference to what was to
be done next winter, when nearly everybody would be out of work.
These were matters he and they were evidently not at all interested
in.  But he said a good deal about the Glorious Empire! and the Flag!
and the Royal Family.  The things he said were received with rapturous
applause, and at the conclusion of his address, the crowd sang the
National Anthem with great enthusiasm and dispersed, congratulating
themselves that they had shown to the best of their ability what
Mugsborough thought of Socialism and the general opinion of the crowd
was that they would hear nothing more from the Socialist van.

But in this they were mistaken, for the very next Sunday evening a
crowd of Socialists suddenly materialized at the Cross Roads.  Some of
them had come by train, others had walked from different places and
some had cycled.

A crowd gathered and the Socialists held a meeting, two speeches being
delivered before the crowd recovered from their surprise at the
temerity of these other Britishers who apparently had not sense enough
to understand that they had been finally defeated and obliterated last
Tuesday evening: and when the cyclist with the bandaged head got up on
the hillock some of the crowd actually joined in the hand-clapping
with which the Socialists greeted him.

In the course of his speech he informed them that the man who had come
with the van and who had been felled whilst attempting to speak from
the platform was now in hospital.  For some time it had been probable
that he would not recover, but he was now out of danger, and as soon
as he was well enough there was no doubt that he would come there
again.

Upon this Crass shouted out that if ever the Vanners did return, they
would finish what they had begun last Tuesday.  He would not get off
so easy next time.  But when he said this, Crass - not being able to
see into the future - did not know what the reader will learn in due
time, that the man was to return to that place under different
circumstances.

When they had finished their speech-making one of the strangers who
was acting as chairman invited the audience to put questions, but as
nobody wanted to ask any, he invited anyone who disagreed with what
had been said to get up on the hillock and state his objections, so
that the audience might have an opportunity of judging for themselves
which side was right; but this invitation was also neglected.  Then
the chairman announced that they were coming there again next Sunday
at the same time, when a comrade would speak on `Unemployment and
Poverty, the Cause and the Remedy', and then the strangers sang a song
called `England Arise', the first verse being:

        England Arise, the long, long night is over,
        Faint in the east, behold the Dawn appear
        Out of your evil dream of toil and sorrow
        Arise, O England! for the day is here!

During the progress of the meeting several of the strangers had been
going out amongst the crowd giving away leaflets, which many of the
people gloomily refused to accept, and selling penny pamphlets, of
which they managed to dispose of about three dozen.

Before declaring the meeting closed, the chairman said that the
speaker who was coming next week resided in London: he was not a
millionaire, but a workman, the same as nearly all those who were
there present.  They were not going to pay him anything for coming,
but they intended to pay his railway fare.  Therefore next Sunday
after the meeting there would be a collection, and anything over the
amount of the fare would be used for the purchase of more leaflets
such as those they were now giving away.  He hoped that anyone who
thought that any of the money went into the pockets of those who held
the meeting would come and join: then they could have their share.

The meeting now terminated and the Socialists were suffered to depart
in peace.  Some of them, however, lingered amongst the crowd after the
main body had departed, and for a long time after the meeting was over
little groups remained on the field excitedly discussing the speeches
or the leaflets.

The next Sunday evening when the Socialists came they found the field
at the Cross Roads in the possession of a furious, hostile mob, who
refused to allow them to speak, and finally they had to go away
without having held a meeting.  They came again the next Sunday, and
on this occasion they had a speaker with a very loud - literally a
stentorian - voice, and he succeeded in delivering an address, but as
only those who were very close were able to hear him, and as they were
all Socialists, it was not of much effect upon those for whom it was
intended.

They came again the next Sunday and nearly every other Sunday during
the summer: sometimes they were permitted to hold their meeting in
comparative peace and at other times there was a row.  They made
several converts, and many people declared themselves in favour of
some of the things advocated, but they were never able to form a
branch of their society there, because nearly all those who were
convinced were afraid to publicly declare themselves lest they should
lose their employment or customers.


Chapter 44

The Beano


Now and then a transient gleam of sunshine penetrated the gloom in
which the lives of the philanthropists were passed.  The cheerless
monotony was sometimes enlivened with a little innocent merriment.
Every now and then there was a funeral which took Misery and Crass
away for the whole afternoon, and although they always tried to keep
the dates secret, the men generally knew when they were gone.

Sometimes the people in whose houses they were working regaled them
with tea, bread and butter, cake or other light refreshments, and
occasionally even with beer - very different stuff from the petrifying
liquid they bought at the Cricketers for twopence a pint.  At other
places, where the people of the house were not so generously disposed,
the servants made up for it, and entertained them in a similar manner
without the knowledge of their masters and mistresses.  Even when the
mistresses were too cunning to permit of this, they were seldom able
to prevent the men from embracing the domestics, who for their part
were quite often willing to be embraced; it was an agreeable episode
that helped to vary the monotony of their lives, and there was no harm
done.

It was rather hard lines on the philanthropists sometimes when they
happened to be working in inhabited houses of the better sort.  They
always had to go in and out by the back way, generally through the
kitchen, and the crackling and hissing of the poultry and the joints
of meat roasting in the ovens, and the odours of fruit pies and tarts,
and plum puddings and sage and onions, were simply maddening.  In the
back-yards of these houses there were usually huge stacks of empty
beer, stout and wine bottles, and others that had contained whisky,
brandy or champagne.

The smells of the delicious viands that were being prepared in the
kitchen often penetrated into the dismantled rooms that the
philanthropists were renovating, sometimes just as they were eating
their own wretched fare out of their dinner basket, and washing it
down with draughts of the cold tea or the petrifying liquid they
sometimes brought with them in bottles.

Sometimes, as has been said, the people of the house used to send up
some tea and bread and butter or cakes or other refreshments to the
workmen, but whenever Hunter got to know of it being done he used to
speak to the people about it and request that it be discontinued, as
it caused the men to waste their time.

But the event of the year was the Beano, which took place on the last
Saturday in August, after they had been paying in for about four
months.  The cost of the outing was to be five shillings a head, so
this was the amount each man had to pay in, but it was expected that
the total cost - the hire of the brakes and the cost of the dinner -
would come out at a trifle less than the amount stated, and in that
case the surplus would be shared out after the dinner.  The amount of
the share-out would be greater or less according to other
circumstances, for it generally happened that apart from the
subscriptions of the men, the Beano fund was swelled by charitable
donations from several quarters, as will be seen later on.

When the eventful day arrived, the hands, instead of working till one,
were paid at twelve o'clock and rushed off home to have a wash and
change.

The brakes were to start from the `Cricketers' at one, but it was
arranged, for the convenience of those who lived at Windley, that they
were to be picked up at the Cross Roads at one-thirty.

There were four brakes altogether - three large ones for the men and
one small one for the accommodation of Mr Rushton and a few of his
personal friends, Didlum, Grinder, Mr Toonarf, an architect and Mr
Lettum, a house and estate Agent.  One of the drivers was accompanied
by a friend who carried a long coachman's horn.  This gentleman was
not paid to come, but, being out of work, be thought that the men
would be sure to stand him a few drinks and that they would probably
make a collection for him in return for his services.

Most of the chaps were smoking twopenny cigars, and had one or two
drinks with each other to try to cheer themselves up before they
started, but all the same it was a melancholy procession that wended
its way up the hill to Windley.  To judge from the mournful expression
on the long face of Misery, who sat on the box beside the driver of
the first large brake, and the downcast appearance of the majority of
the men, one might have thought that it was a funeral rather than a
pleasure party, or that they were a contingent of lost souls being
conducted to the banks of the Styx.  The man who from time to time
sounded the coachman's horn might have passed as the angel sounding
the last trump, and the fumes of the cigars were typical of the smoke
of their torment, which ascendeth up for ever and ever.

A brief halt was made at the Cross Roads to pick up several of the
men, including Philpot, Harlow, Easton, Ned Dawson, Sawkins, Bill
Bates and the Semi-drunk.  The two last-named were now working for
Smeariton and Leavit, but as they had been paying in from the first,
they had elected to go to the Beano rather than have their money back.
The Semi-drunk and one or two other habitual boozers were very shabby
and down at heel, but the majority of the men were decently dressed.
Some had taken their Sunday clothes out of pawn especially for the
occasion.  Others were arrayed in new suits which they were going to
pay for at the rate of a shilling a week.  Some had bought themselves
second-hand suits, one or two were wearing their working clothes
brushed and cleaned up, and some were wearing Sunday clothes that had
not been taken out of pawn for the simple reason that the pawnbrokers
would not take them in.  These garments were in what might be called a
transition stage - old-fashioned and shiny with wear, but yet too good
to take for working in, even if their owners had been in a position to
buy some others to take their place for best.  Crass, Slyme and one or
two of the single men, however, were howling swells, sporting stand-up
collars and bowler hats of the latest type, in contradistinction to
some of the others, who were wearing hats of antique patterns, and
collars of various shapes with jagged edges.  Harlow had on an old
straw hat that his wife had cleaned up with oxalic acid, and Easton
had carefully dyed the faded binding of his black bowler with ink.
Their boots were the worst part of their attire: without counting
Rushton and his friends, there were thirty-seven men altogether,
including Nimrod, and there were not half a dozen pairs of really good
boots amongst the whole crowd.

When all were seated a fresh start was made.  The small brake, with
Rushton, Didlum, Grinder and two or three other members of the Band,
led the way.  Next came the largest brake with Misery on the box.
Beside the driver of the third brake was Payne, the foreman carpenter.
Crass occupied a similar position of honour on the fourth brake, on
the back step of which was perched the man with the coachman's horn.

Crass - who had engaged the brakes - had arranged with the drivers
that the cortege should pass through the street where he and Easton
lived, and as they went by Mrs Crass was standing at the door with the
two young men lodgers, who waved their handkerchiefs and shouted
greetings.  A little further on Mrs Linden and Easton's wife were
standing at the door to see them go by.  In fact, the notes of the
coachman's horn alarmed most of the inhabitants, who crowded to their
windows and doors to gaze upon the dismal procession as it passed.

The mean streets of Windley were soon left far behind and they found
themselves journeying along a sunlit, winding road, bordered with
hedges of hawthorn, holly and briar, past rich, brown fields of
standing corn, shimmering with gleams of gold, past apple-orchards
where bending boughs were heavily loaded with mellow fruits exhaling
fragrant odours, through the cool shades of lofty avenues of venerable
oaks, whose overarched and interlacing branches formed a roof of
green, gilt and illuminated with quivering spots and shafts of
sunlight that filtered through the trembling leaves; over old mossy
stone bridges, spanning limpid streams that duplicated the blue sky
and the fleecy clouds; and then again, stretching away to the horizon
on every side over more fields, some rich with harvest, others filled
with drowsing cattle or with flocks of timid sheep that scampered away
at the sound of the passing carriages.  Several times they saw merry
little companies of rabbits frisking gaily in and out of the hedges or
in the fields beside the sheep and cattle.  At intervals, away in the
distance, nestling in the hollows or amid sheltering trees, groups of
farm buildings and stacks of hay; and further on, the square ivy-clad
tower of an ancient church, or perhaps a solitary windmill with its
revolving sails alternately flashing and darkening in the rays of the
sun.  Past thatched wayside cottages whose inhabitants came out to
wave their hands in friendly greeting.  Past groups of sunburnt,
golden-haired children who climbed on fences and five-barred gates,
and waved their hats and cheered, or ran behind the brakes for the
pennies the men threw down to them.

From time to time the men in the brakes made half-hearted attempts at
singing, but it never came to much, because most of them were too
hungry and miserable.  They had not had time to take any dinner and
would not have taken any even if they had the time, for they wished to
reserve their appetites for the banquet at the Queen Elizabeth, which
they expected to reach about half past three.  However, they cheered
up a little after the first halt - at the Blue Lion, where most of
them got down and had a drink.  Some of them, including the
Semi-drunk, Ned Dawson, Bill Bates and Joe Philpot - had two or three
drinks, and felt so much happier for them that, shortly after they
started off again, sounds of melody were heard from the brake the
three first named rode in - the one presided over by Crass - but it
was not very successful, and even after the second halt - about five
miles further on - at the Warrior's Head, they found it impossible to
sing with any heartiness.  Fitful bursts of song arose from time to
time from each of the brakes in turn, only to die mournfully away.  It
is not easy to sing on an empty stomach even if one has got a little
beer in it; and so it was with most of them.  They were not in a mood
to sing, or to properly appreciate the scenes through which they were
passing.  They wanted their dinners, and that was the reason why this
long ride, instead of being a pleasure, became after a while, a weary
journey that seemed as if it were never coming to an end.

The next stop was at the Bird in Hand, a wayside public house that
stood all by itself in a lonely hollow.  The landlord was a fat,
jolly-looking man, and there were several customers in the bar - men
who looked like farm-labourers, but there were no other houses to be
seen anywhere.  This extraordinary circumstance exercised the minds of
our travellers and formed the principal topic of conversation until
they arrived at the Dew Drop Inn, about half an hour afterwards.  The
first brake, containing Rushton and his friends, passed on without
stopping here.  The occupants of the second brake, which was only a
little way behind the first, were divided in opinion whether to stop
or go on.  Some shouted out to the driver to pull up, others ordered
him to proceed, and more were undecided which course to pursue - a
state of mind that was not shared by the coachman, who, knowing that
if they stopped somebody or other would be sure to stand him a drink,
had no difficulty whatever in coming to a decision, but drew rein at
the inn, an example that was followed by both the other carriages as
they drove up.

It was a very brief halt, not more than half the men getting down at
all, and those who remained in the brakes grumbled so much at the
delay that the others drank their beer as quickly as possible and the
journey was resumed once more, almost in silence.  No attempts at
singing, no noisy laughter; they scarcely spoke to each other, but sat
gloomily gazing out over the surrounding country.

Instructions had been given to the drivers not to stop again till they
reached the Queen Elizabeth, and they therefore drove past the World
Turned Upside Down without stopping, much to the chagrin of the
landlord of that house, who stood at the door with a sickly smile upon
his face.  Some of those who knew him shouted out that they would give
him a call on their way back, and with this he had to be content.

They reached the long-desired Queen Elizabeth at twenty minutes to
four, and were immediately ushered into a large room where a round
table and two long ones were set for dinner - and they were set in a
manner worthy of the reputation of the house.

The cloths that covered the tables and the serviettes, arranged
fanwise in the drinking glasses, were literally as white as snow, and
about a dozen knives and forks and spoons were laid for each person.
Down the centre of the table glasses of delicious yellow custard and
cut-glass dishes of glistening red and golden jelly alternated with
vases of sweet-smelling flowers.

The floor of the dining-room was covered with oilcloth - red flowers
on a pale yellow ground; the pattern was worn off in places, but it
was all very clean and shining.  Whether one looked at the walls with
the old-fashioned varnished oak paper, or at the glossy piano standing
across the corner near the white-curtained window, at the shining oak
chairs or through the open casement doors that led into the shady
garden beyond, the dominating impression one received was that
everything was exquisitely clean.

The landlord announced that dinner would be served in ten minutes, and
while they were waiting some of them indulged in a drink at the bar -
just as an appetizer - whilst the others strolled in the garden or, by
the landlord's invitation, looked over the house.  Amongst other
places, they glanced into the kitchen, where the landlady was
superintending the preparation of the feast, and in this place, with
its whitewashed walls and red-tiled floor, as in every other part of
the house, the same absolute cleanliness reigned supreme.

`It's a bit differint from the Royal Caff, where we got the sack,
ain't it?' remarked the Semi-drunk to Bill Bates as they made their
way to the dining-room in response to the announcement that dinner was
ready.

`Not arf!' replied Bill.

Rushton, with Didlum and Grinder and his other friends, sat at the
round table near the piano.  Hunter took the head of the longer of the
other two tables and Crass the foot, and on either side of Crass were
Bundy and Slyme, who had acted with him as the Committee who had
arranged the Beano.  Payne, the foreman carpenter, occupied the head
of the other table.

The dinner was all that could be desired; it was almost as good as the
kind of dinner that is enjoyed every day by those persons who are too
lazy to work but are cunning enough to make others work for them.

There was soup, several entrees, roast beef, boiled mutton, roast
turkey, roast goose, ham, cabbage, peas, beans and sweets galore, plum
pudding, custard, jelly, fruit tarts, bread and cheese and as much
beer or lemonade as they liked to pay for, the drinks being an extra;
and afterwards the waiters brought in cups of coffee for those who
desired it.  Everything was up to the knocker, and although they were
somewhat bewildered by the multitude of knives and forks, they all,
with one or two exceptions, rose to the occasion and enjoyed
themselves famously.  The excellent decorum observed being marred only
by one or two regrettable incidents.  The first of these occurred
almost as soon as they sat down, when Ned Dawson who, although a big
strong fellow, was not able to stand much beer, not being used to it,
was taken ill and had to be escorted from the room by his mate Bundy
and another man.  They left him somewhere outside and he came back
again about ten minutes afterwards, much better but looking rather
pale, and took his seat with the others.

The turkeys, the roast beef and the boiled mutton, the peas and beans
and the cabbage, disappeared with astonishing rapidity, which was not
to be wondered at, for they were all very hungry from the long drive,
and nearly everyone made a point of having at least one helping of
everything there was to be had.  Some of them went in for two lots of
soup.  Then for the next course, boiled mutton and ham or turkey: then
some roast beef and goose.  Then a little more boiled mutton with a
little roast beef.  Each of the three boys devoured several times his
own weight of everything, to say nothing of numerous bottles of
lemonade and champagne ginger beer.

Crass frequently paused to mop the perspiration from his face and neck
with his serviette.  In fact everybody had a good time.  There was
enough and to spare of everything to eat, the beer was of the best,
and all the time, amid the rattle of the crockery and the knives and
forks, the proceedings were enlivened by many jests and flashes of wit
that continuously kept the table in a roar.

`Chuck us over another dollop of that there white stuff, Bob,' shouted
the Semi-drunk to Crass, indicating the blancmange.

Crass reached out his hand and took hold of the dish containing the
`white stuff', but instead of passing it to the Semi-drunk, he
proceeded to demolish it himself, gobbling it up quickly directly from
the dish with a spoon.

`Why, you're eating it all yerself, yer bleeder,' cried the Semi-drunk
indignantly, as soon as he realized what was happening.

`That's all right, matey,' replied Crass affably as he deposited the
empty dish on the table.  `It don't matter, there's plenty more where
it come from.  Tell the landlord to bring in another lot.'

Upon being applied to, the landlord, who was assisted by his daughter,
two other young women and two young men, brought in several more lots
and so the Semi-drunk was appeased.

As for the plum-pudding - it was a fair knock-out; just like
Christmas: but as Ned Dawson and Bill Bates had drunk all the sauce
before the pudding was served, they all had to have their first
helping without any.  However, as the landlord brought in another lot
shortly afterwards, that didn't matter either.

As soon as dinner was over, Crass rose to make his statement as
secretary.  Thirty-seven men had paid five shillings each: that made
nine pounds five shillings.  The committee had decided that the three
boys - the painters' boy, the carpenters' boy and the front shop boy -
should be allowed to come half-price: that made it nine pounds twelve
and six.  In addition to paying the ordinary five-shilling
subscription, Mr Rushton had given one pound ten towards the expenses.
(Loud cheers.)  And several other gentlemen had also given something
towards it.  Mr Sweater, of the Cave, one pound.  (Applause.)  Mr
Grinder, ten shillings in addition to the five-shilling subscription.
(Applause.)  Mr Lettum, ten shillings, as well as the five-shilling
subscription.  (Applause.)  Mr Didlum, ten shillings in addition to
the five shillings.  (Cheers.)  Mr Toonarf, ten shillings as well as
the five-shilling subscription.  They had also written to some of the
manufacturers who supplied the firm with materials, and asked them to
give something: some of 'em had sent half a crown, some five
shillings, some hadn't answered at all, and two of 'em had written
back to say that as things is cut so fine nowadays, they didn't hardly
get no profit on their stuff, so they couldn't afford to give nothing;
but out of all the firms they wrote to they managed to get thirty-two
and sixpence altogether, making a grand total of seventeen pounds.

As for the expenses, the dinner was two and six a head, and there was
forty-five of them there, so that came to five pounds twelve and six.
Then there was the hire of the brakes, also two and six a head, five
pound twelve and six, which left a surplus of five pound fifteen to be
shared out (applause), which came to three shillings each for the
thirty-seven men, and one and fourpence for each of the boys.  (Loud
and prolonged cheers.)

Crass, Slyme and Bundy now walked round the tables distributing the
share-out, which was very welcome to everybody, especially those who
had spent nearly all their money during the journey from Mugsborough,
and when this ceremony was completed, Philpot moved a hearty vote of
thanks to the committee for the manner in which they had carried out
their duties, which was agreed to with acclamation.  Then they made a
collection for the waiters, and the three waitresses, which amounted
to eleven shillings, for which the host returned thanks on behalf of
the recipients, who were all smiles.

Then Mr Rushton requested the landlord to serve drinks and cigars all
round.  Some had cigarettes and the teetotallers had lemonade or
ginger beer.  Those who did not smoke themselves took the cigar all
the same and gave it to someone else who did.  When all were supplied
there suddenly arose loud cries of `Order!' and it was seen that
Hunter was upon his feet.

As soon as silence was obtained, Misery said that he believed that
everyone there present would agree with him, when he said that they
should not let the occasion pass without drinking the 'ealth of their
esteemed and respected employer, Mr Rushton.  (Hear, hear.)  Some of
them had worked for Mr Rushton on and off for many years, and as far
as THEY was concerned it was not necessary for him (Hunter) to say
much in praise of Mr Rushton.  (Hear, hear.)  They knew Mr Rushton as
well as he did himself and to know him was to esteem him.  (Cheers.)
As for the new hands, although they did not know Mr Rushton as well as
the old hands did, he felt sure that they would agree that as no one
could wish for a better master.  (Loud applause.)  He had much
pleasure in asking them to drink Mr Rushton's health.  Everyone rose.

`Musical honours, chaps,' shouted Crass, waving his glass and leading
off the singing which was immediately joined in with great enthusiasm
by most of the men, the Semi-drunk conducting the music with a table
knife:

        For he's a jolly good fellow,
        For he's a jolly good fellow,
        For he's a jolly good fel-ell-O,
        And so say all of us,
        So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray!
        So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray!

        For he's a jolly good fellow,
        For 'e's a jolly good fellow
        For 'e's a jolly good fel-ell-O,
        And so say all of us.

`Now three cheers!' shouted Crass, leading off.

        Hip, hip, hip, hooray!
        Hip, hip, hip, hooray!
        Hip, hip, hip, hooray!

Everyone present drank Rushton's health, or at any rate went through
the motions of doing so, but during the roar of cheering and singing
that preceded it several of the men stood with expressions of contempt
or uneasiness upon their faces, silently watching the enthusiasts or
looking at the ceiling or on the floor.

`I will say this much,' remarked the Semidrunk as they all resumed
their seats - he had had several drinks during dinner, besides those
he had taken on the journey - I will say this much, although I did
have a little misunderstanding with Mr Hunter when I was workin' at
the Royal Caff, I must admit that this is the best firm that's ever
worked under me.'

This statement caused a shout of laughter, which, however, died away
as Mr Rushton rose to acknowledge the toast to his health.  He said
that he had now been in business for nearly sixteen years and this was -
he believed - the eleventh outing he had had the pleasure of
attending.  During all that time the business had steadily progressed
and had increased in volume from year to year, and he hoped and
believed that the progress made in the past would be continued in the
future.  (Hear, hear.)  Of course, he realized that the success of the
business depended very largely upon the men as well as upon himself;
he did his best in trying to get work for them, and it was necessary -
if the business was to go on and prosper - that they should also do
their best to get the work done when he had secured it for them.
(Hear, hear.)  The masters could not do without the men, and the men
could not live without the masters.  (Hear, hear.)  It was a matter of
division of labour: the men worked with their hands and the masters
worked with their brains, and one was no use without the other.  He
hoped the good feeling which had hitherto existed between himself and
his workmen would always continue, and he thanked them for the way in
which they had responded to the toast of his health.

Loud cheers greeted the conclusion of this speech, and then Crass
stood up and said that he begged to propose the health of Mr 'Unter.
(Hear, hear.)  He wasn't going to make a long speech as he wasn't much
of a speaker.  (Cries of `You're all right,' `Go on,' etc.)  But he
felt sure as they would all hagree with him when be said that - next
to Mr Rushton - there wasn't no one the men had more respect and
liking for than Mr 'Unter.  (Cheers.)  A few weeks ago when Mr 'Unter
was laid up, many of them began to be afraid as they was going to lose
'im.  He was sure that all the 'ands was glad to 'ave this
hoppertunity of congratulating him on his recovery (Hear, hear) and of
wishing him the best of 'ealth in the future and hoping as he would be
spared to come to a good many more Beanos.

Loud applause greeted the conclusion of Crass's remarks, and once more
the meeting burst into song:

        For he's a jolly good fellow
        For he's a jolly good fellow.
        For he's a jolly good fellow,
        And so say all of us.
        So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray!
        So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray!

When they had done cheering, Nimrod rose.  His voice trembled a little
as he thanked them for their kindness, and said that he hoped he
deserved their goodwill.  He could only say that as he was sure as he
always tried to be fair and considerate to everyone.  (Cheers.)  He
would now request the landlord to replenish their glasses.  (Hear,
hear.)

As soon as the drinks were served, Nimrod again rose and said he
wished to propose the healths of their visitors who had so kindly
contributed to their expenses - Mr Lettum, Mr Didlum, Mr Toonarf and
Mr Grinder.  (Cheers.)  They were very pleased and proud to see them
there (Hear, hear), and he was sure the men would agree with him when
he said that Messrs Lettum, Didlum, Toonarf and Grinder were jolly
good fellows.

To judge from the manner in which they sang the chorus and cheered, it
was quite evident that most of the hands did agree.  When they left
off, Grinder rose to reply on behalf of those included in the toast.
He said that it gave them much pleasure to be there and take part in
such pleasant proceedings and they were glad to think that they had
been able to help to bring it about.  It was very gratifying to see
the good feeling that existed between Mr Rushton and his workmen,
which was as it should be, because masters and men was really fellow
workers - the masters did the brain work, the men the 'and work.  They
was both workers, and their interests was the same.  He liked to see
men doing their best for their master and knowing that their master
was doing his best for them, that he was not only a master, but a
friend.  That was what he (Grinder) liked to see - master and men
pulling together - doing their best, and realizing that their
interests was identical.  (Cheers.)  If only all masters and men would
do this they would find that everything would go on all right, there
would be more work and less poverty.  Let the men do their best for
their masters, and the masters do their best for their men, and they
would find that that was the true solution of the social problem, and
not the silly nonsense that was talked by people what went about with
red flags.  (Cheers and laughter.)  Most of those fellows were chaps
who was too lazy to work for their livin'.  (Hear, hear.)  They could
take it from him that, if ever the Socialists got the upper hand there
would just be a few of the hartful dodgers who would get all the
cream, and there would be nothing left but 'ard work for the rest.
(Hear. hear.)  That's wot hall those hagitators was after: they wanted
them (his hearers) to work and keep 'em in idleness.  (Hear, hear.)
On behalf of Mr Didlum, Mr Toonarf, Mr Lettum and himself, he thanked
them for their good wishes, and hoped to be with them on a sim'ler
occasion in the future.

Loud cheers greeted the termination of his speech, but it was obvious
from some of the men's faces that they resented Grinder's remarks.
These men ridiculed Socialism and regularly voted for the continuance
of capitalism, and yet they were disgusted and angry with Grinder!
There was also a small number of Socialists - not more than half a
dozen altogether - who did not join in the applause.  These men were
all sitting at the end of the long table presided over by Payne.  None
of them had joined in the applause that greeted the speeches, and so
far neither had they made any protest.  Some of them turned very red
as they listened to the concluding sentences of Grinder's oration, and
others laughed, but none of them said anything.  They knew before they
came that there was sure to be a lot of 'Jolly good fellow' business
and speechmaking, and they had agreed together beforehand to take no
part one way or the other, and to refrain from openly dissenting from
anything that might be said, but they had not anticipated anything
quite so strong as this.

When Grinder sat down some of those who had applauded him began to
jeer at the Socialists.

`What have you got to say to that?' they shouted.  `That's up against
yer!'

`They ain't got nothing to say now.'

`Why don't some of you get up and make a speech?'

This last appeared to be a very good idea to those Liberals and Tories
who had not liked Grinder's observations, so they all began to shout
`Owen!' `Owen!' `Come on 'ere.  Get up and make a speech!' `Be a man!'
and so on.  Several of those who had been loudest in applauding
Grinder also joined in the demand that Owen should make a speech,
because they were certain that Grinder and the other gentlemen would
be able to dispose of all his arguments; but Owen and the other
Socialists made no response except to laugh, so presently Crass tied a
white handkerchief on a cane walking-stick that belonged to Mr Didlum,
and stuck it in the vase of flowers that stood on the end of the table
where the Socialist group were sitting.

When the noise had in some measure ceased, Grinder again rose.  `When
I made the few remarks that I did, I didn't know as there was any
Socialists 'ere: I could tell from the look of you that most of you
had more sense.  At the same time I'm rather glad I said what I did,
because it just shows you what sort of chaps these Socialists are.
They're pretty artful - they know when to talk and when to keep their
mouths shut.  What they like is to get hold of a few ignorant workin'
men in a workshop or a public house, and then they can talk by the
mile - reg'ler shop lawyers, you know wot I mean - I'm right and
everybody else is wrong.  (Laughter.)  You know the sort of thing I
mean.  When they finds theirselves in the company of edicated people
wot knows a little more than they does theirselves, and who isn't
likely to be misled by a lot of claptrap, why then, mum's the word.
So next time you hears any of these shop lawyers' arguments, you'll
know how much it's worth.'

Most of the men were delighted with this speech, which was received
with much laughing and knocking on the tables.  They remarked to each
other that Grinder was a smart man: he'd got the Socialists weighed up
just about right - to an ounce.

Then, it was seen that Barrington was on his feet facing Grinder and a
sudden, awe-filled silence fell.

`It may or may not be true,' began Barrington, `that Socialists always
know when to speak and when to keep silent, but the present occasion
hardly seemed a suitable one to discuss such subjects.

`We are here today as friends and want to forget our differences and
enjoy ourselves for a few hours.  But after what Mr Grinder has said I
am quite ready to reply to him to the best of my ability.

`The fact that I am a Socialist and that I am here today as one of Mr
Rushton's employees should be an answer to the charge that Socialists
are too lazy to work for their living.  And as to taking advantage of
the ignorance and simplicity of working men and trying to mislead them
with nonsensical claptrap, it would have been more to the point if Mr
Grinder had taken some particular Socialist doctrine and had proved it
to be untrue or misleading, instead of adopting the cowardly method of
making vague general charges that he cannot substantiate.  He would
find it far more difficult to do that than it would be for a Socialist
to show that most of what Mr Grinder himself has been telling us is
nonsensical claptrap of the most misleading kind.  He tells us that
the employers work with their brains and the men with their hands.  If
it is true that no brains are required to do manual labour, why put
idiots into imbecile asylums?  Why not let them do some of the hand
work for which no brains are required?  As they are idiots, they would
probably be willing to work for even less than the ideal "living
wage".  If Mr Grinder had ever tried, he would know that manual
workers have to concentrate their minds and their attention on their
work or they would not be able to do it at all.  His talk about
employers being not only the masters but the "friends" of their
workmen is also mere claptrap because he knows as well as we do, that
no matter how good or benevolent an employer may be, no matter how
much he might desire to give his men good conditions, it is impossible
for him to do so, because he has to compete against other employers
who do not do that.  It is the bad employer - the sweating,
slave-driving employer - who sets the pace and the others have to
adopt the same methods - very often against their inclinations - or
they would not be able to compete with him.  If any employer today
were to resolve to pay his workmen not less wages than he would be
able to live upon in comfort himself, that he would not require them
to do more work in a day than he himself would like to perform every
day of his own life, Mr Grinder knows as well as we do that such an
employer would be bankrupt in a month; because he would not be able to
get any work except by taking it at the same price as the sweaters and
the slave-drivers.

`He also tells us that the interests of masters and men are identical;
but if an employer has a contract, it is to his interest to get the
work done as soon as possible; the sooner it is done the more profit
he will make; but the more quickly it is done, the sooner will the men
be out of employment.  How then can it be true that their interests
are identical?

`Again, let us suppose that an employer is, say, thirty years of age
when he commences business, and that he carries it on for twenty
years.  Let us assume that he employs forty men more or less regularly
during that period and that the average age of these men is also
thirty years at the time the employer commences business.  At the end
of the twenty years it usually happens that the employer has made
enough money to enable him to live for the remainder of his life in
ease and comfort.  But what about the workman?  All through those
twenty years they have earned but a bare living wage and have had to
endure such privations that those who are not already dead are broken
in health.

`In the case of the employer there had been twenty years of steady
progress towards ease and leisure and independence.  In the case of
the majority of the men there were twenty years of deterioration,
twenty years of steady, continuous and hopeless progress towards
physical and mental inefficiency: towards the scrap-heap, the
work-house, and premature death.  What is it but false, misleading,
nonsensical claptrap to say that their interests were identical with
those of their employer?

`Such talk as that is not likely to deceive any but children or fools.
We are not children, but it is very evident that Mr Grinder thinks
that we are fools.

`Occasionally it happens, through one or more of a hundred different
circumstances over which he has no control, or through some error of
judgement, that after many years of laborious mental work an employer
is overtaken by misfortune, and finds himself no better and even worse
off than when he started; but these are exceptional cases, and even if
he becomes absolutely bankrupt he is no worse off than the majority of
the workmen.

`At the same time it is quite true that the real interests of
employers and workmen are the same, but not in the sense that Mr
Grinder would have us believe.  Under the existing system of society
but a very few people, no matter how well off they may be, can be
certain that they or their children will not eventually come to want;
and even those who think they are secure themselves, find their
happiness diminished by the knowledge of the poverty and misery that
surrounds them on every side.

`In that sense only is it true that the interests of masters and men
are identical, for it is to the interest of all, both rich and poor,
to help to destroy a system that inflicts suffering upon the many and
allows true happiness to none.  It is to the interest of all to try
and find a better way.'

Here Crass jumped up and interrupted, shouting out that they hadn't
come there to listen to a lot of speechmaking - a remark that was
greeted with unbounded applause by most of those present.  Loud cries
of `Hear, hear!' resounded through the room, and the Semi-drunk
suggested that someone should sing a song.

The men who had clamoured for a speech from Owen said nothing, and Mr
Grinder, who had been feeling rather uncomfortable, was secretly very
glad of the interruption.

The Semi-drunk's suggestion that someone should sing a song was
received with unqualified approbation by everybody, including
Barrington and the other Socialists, who desired nothing better than
that the time should be passed in a manner suitable to the occasion.
The landlord's daughter, a rosy girl of about twenty years of age, in
a pink print dress, sat down at the piano, and the Semi-drunk, taking
his place at the side of the instrument and facing the audience, sang
the first song with appropriate gestures, the chorus being rendered
enthusiastically by the full strength of the company, including
Misery, who by this time was slightly drunk from drinking gin and
ginger beer:

        `Come, come, come an' 'ave a drink with me
        Down by the ole Bull and Bush.
        Come, come, come an' shake 'ands with me
        Down by the ole Bull and Bush.
        Wot cheer me little Germin band!
        Fol the diddle di do!
        Come an' take 'old of me 'and
        Come, come, come an' 'ave a drink with me,
        Down by the old Bull and Bush,
        Bush! Bush!'

Protracted knocking on the tables greeted the end of the song, but as
the Semi-drunk knew no other except odd verses and choruses, he called
upon Crass for the next, and that gentleman accordingly sang `Work,
Boys, Work' to the tune of `Tramp, tramp, tramp, the boys are
marching'.  As this song is the Marseillaise of the Tariff Reform
Party, voicing as it does the highest ideals of the Tory workmen of
this country, it was an unqualified success, for most of them were
Conservatives.

        `Now I'm not a wealthy man,
        But I lives upon a plan
        Wot will render me as 'appy as a King;
        An' if you will allow, I'll sing it to you now,
        For time you know is always on the wing.

        Work, boys, work and be contented
        So long as you've enough to buy a meal.
        For if you will but try, you'll be wealthy - bye and bye -
        If you'll only put yer shoulder to the wheel.'

`Altogether, boys,' shouted Grinder, who was a strong Tariff Reformer,
and was delighted to see that most of the men were of the same way of
thinking; and the `boys' roared out the chorus once more:

        Work, boys, work and be contented
        So long as you've enough to buy a meal
        For if you will but try, you'll be wealthy - bye and bye
        If you'll only put your shoulder to the wheel.

As they sang the words of this noble chorus the Tories seemed to
become inspired with lofty enthusiasm.  It is of course impossible to
say for certain, but probably as they sang there arose before their
exalted imaginations, a vision of the Past, and looking down the long
vista of the years that were gone, they saw that from their childhood
they had been years of poverty and joyless toil.  They saw their
fathers and mothers, weaned and broken with privation and excessive
labour, sinking unhonoured into the welcome oblivion of the grave.

And then, as a change came over the spirit of their dream, they saw
the Future, with their own children travelling along the same weary
road to the same kind of goal.

It is possible that visions of this character were conjured up in
their minds by the singing, for the words of the song gave expression
to their ideal of what human life should be.  That was all they wanted -
to be allowed to work like brutes for the benefit of other people.
They did not want to be civilized themselves and they intended to take
good care that the children they had brought into the world should
never enjoy the benefits of civilization either.  As they often said:

`Who and what are our children that they shouldn't be made to work for
their betters?  They're not Gentry's children, are they?  The good
things of life was never meant for the likes of them.  Let 'em work!
That's wot the likes of them was made for, and if we can only get
Tariff Reform for 'em they will always be sure of plenty of it - not
only Full Time, but Overtime!  As for edication, travellin' in furrin'
parts, an' enjoying life an' all sich things as that, they was never
meant for the likes of our children - they're meant for Gentry's
children!  Our children is only like so much dirt compared with
Gentry's children!  That's wot the likes of us is made for - to Work
for Gentry, so as they can 'ave plenty of time to enjoy theirselves;
and the Gentry is made to 'ave a good time so as the likes of us can
'ave Plenty of Work.'

There were several more verses, and by the time they had sung them
all, the Tories were in a state of wild enthusiasm.  Even Ned Dawson,
who had fallen asleep with his head pillowed on his arms on the table,
roused himself up at the end of each verse, and after having joined in
the chorus, went to sleep again.

At the end of the song they gave three cheers for Tariff Reform and
Plenty of Work, and then Crass, who, as the singer of the last song,
had the right to call upon the next man, nominated Philpot, who
received an ovation when he stood up, for he was a general favourite.
He never did no harm to nobody, and he was always wiling to do anyone
a good turn whenever he had the opportunity.  Shouts of `Good old Joe'
resounded through the room as he crossed over to the piano, and in
response to numerous requests for `The old song' he began to sing `The
Flower Show':

        `Whilst walkin' out the other night, not knowing where to go
        I saw a bill upon a wall about a Flower Show.

        So I thought the flowers I'd go and see to pass away the night.
        And when I got into that Show it was a curious sight.
        So with your kind intention and a little of your aid,
        Tonight some flowers I'll mention which I hope will never fade.'

        Omnes:
        To-night some flowers I'll mention which I hope will never fade.'

There were several more verses, from which it appeared that the
principal flowers in the Show were the Rose, the Thistle and the
Shamrock.

When he had finished, the applause was so deafening and the demands
for an encore so persistent that to satisfy them he sang another old
favourite - `Won't you buy my pretty flowers?'

        `Ever coming, ever going,
        Men and women hurry by,
        Heedless of the tear-drops gleaming,
        In her sad and wistful eye
        How her little heart is sighing
        Thro' the cold and dreary hours,
        Only listen to her crying,
        "Won't you buy my pretty flowers?"'

When the last verse of this sang had been sung five er six times,
Philpot exercised his right of nominating the next singer, and called
upon Dick Wantley, who with many suggestive gestures and grimaces sang
`Put me amongst the girls', and afterwards called upon Payne, the
foreman carpenter, who gave `I'm the Marquis of Camberwell Green'.

There was a lot of what music-hall artists call `business' attached to
his song, and as he proceeded, Payne, who was ghastly pale and very
nervous, went through a lot of galvanic motions and gestures, bowing
and scraping and sliding about and flourishing his handkerchief in
imitation of the courtly graces of the Marquis.  During this
performance the audience maintained an appalling silence, which so
embarrassed Payne that before he was half-way through the song he had
to stop because he could not remember the rest.  However, to make up
for this failure he sang another called `We all must die, like the
fire in the grate'.  This also was received in a very lukewarm manner
by the crowd, same of whom laughed and others suggested that if he
couldn't sing any better than that, the sooner HE was dead the better.

This was followed by another Tory ballad, the chorus being as follows:

        His clothes may be ragged, his hands may be soiled.
        But where's the disgrace if for bread he has toiled.
        His 'art is in the right place, deny it no one can
        The backbone of Old England is the honest workin' man.'

After a few more songs it was decided to adjourn to a field at the
rear of the tavern to have a game of cricket.  Sides were formed,
Rushton, Didlum, Grinder, and the other gentlemen taking part just as
if they were only common people, and while the game was in progress
the rest played ring quoits or reclined on the grass watching the
players, whilst the remainder amused themselves drinking beer and
playing cards and shove-ha'penny in the bar parlour, or taking walks
around the village sampling the beer at the other pubs, of which there
were three.

The time passed in this manner until seven o'clock, the hour at which
it had been arranged to start on the return journey; but about a
quarter of an hour before they set out an unpleasant incident occurred.

During the time that they were playing cricket a party of glee
singers, consisting of four young girls and five men, three of whom
were young fellows, the other two being rather elderly, possibly the
fathers of some of the younger members of the party, came into the
field and sang several part songs for their entertainment.  Towards
the close of the game most of the men had assembled in this field, and
during a pause in the singing the musicians sent one of their number,
a shy girl about eighteen years of age - who seemed as if she would
rather that someone else had the task - amongst the crowd to make a
collection.  The girl was very nervous and blushed as she murmured her
request, and held out a straw hat that evidently belonged to one of
the male members of the glee party.  A few of the men gave pennies,
some refused or pretended not to see either the girl or the hat,
others offered to give her some money for a kiss, but what caused the
trouble was that two or three of those who had been drinking more than
was good for them dropped the still burning ends of their cigars, all
wet with saliva as they were, into the hat and Dick Wantley spit into
it.

The girl hastily returned to her companions, and as she went some of
the men who had witnessed the behaviour of those who had insulted her,
advised them to make themselves scarce, as they stood a good chance of
getting a thrashing from the girl's friends.  They said it would serve
them dam' well right if they did get a hammering.

Partly sobered by fear, the three culprits sneaked off and hid
themselves, pale and trembling with terror, under the box seats of the
three brakes.  They had scarcely left when the men of the glee party
came running up, furiously demanding to see those who had insulted the
girl.  As they could get no satisfactory answer, one of their number
ran back and presently returned, bringing the girl with him, the other
young women following a little way behind.

She said she could not see the men they were looking for, so they went
down to the public house to see if they could find them there, some of
the Rushton's men accompanying them and protesting their indignation.


The time passed quickly enough and by half past seven the brakes were
loaded up again and a start made for the return journey.

They called at all the taverns on the road, and by the time they
reached the Blue Lion half of them were three sheets in the wind, and
five or six were very drunk, including the driver of Crass's brake and
the man with the bugle.  The latter was so far gone that they had to
let him lie down in the bottom of the carriage amongst their feet,
where he fell asleep, while the others amused themselves by blowing
weird shrieks out of the horn.

There was an automatic penny-in-the-slot piano at the Blue Lion and as
that was the last house of the road they made a rather long stop
there, playing hooks and rings, shove-ha'penny, drinking, singing,
dancing and finally quarrelling.

Several of them seemed disposed to quarrel with Newman.  All sorts of
offensive remarks were made at him in his hearing.  Once someone
ostentatiously knocked his glass of lemonade over, and a little later
someone else collided violently with him just as he was in the act of
drinking, causing his lemonade to spill all over his clothes.  The
worst of it was that most of these rowdy ones were his fellow
passengers in Crass's brake, and there was not much chance of getting
a seat in either of the other carriages, for they were overcrowded
already.

From the remarks he overheard from time to time, Newman guessed the
reason of their hostility, and as their manner towards him grew more
menacing, he became so nervous that he began to think of quietly
sneaking off and walking the remainder of the way home by himself,
unless he could get somebody in one of the other brakes to change
seats with him.

Whilst these thoughts were agitating his mind, Dick Wantley suddenly
shouted out that he was going to go for the dirty tyke who had offered
to work under price last winter.

It was his fault that they were all working for sixpence halfpenny and
he was going to wipe the floor with him.  Some of his friends eagerly
offered to assist, but others interposed, and for a time it looked as
if there was going to be a free fight, the aggressors struggling hard
to get at their inoffensive victim.

Eventually, however, Newman found a seat in Misery's brake, squatting
on the floor with his back to the horses, thankful enough to be out of
reach of the drunken savages, who were now roaring out ribald songs
and startling the countryside, as they drove along, with unearthly
blasts on the coach horn.

Meantime, although none of them seemed to notice it, the brake was
travelling at a furious rate, and swaying about from side to side in a
very erratic manner.  It would have been the last carriage, but things
had got a bit mixed at the Blue Lion and, instead of bringing up the
rear of the procession, it was now second, just behind the small
vehicle containing Rushton and his friends.

Crass several times reminded them that the other carriage was so near
that Rushton must be able to hear every word that was said, and these
repeated admonitions at length enraged the Semi-drunk, who shouted out
that they didn't care a b--r if he could hear.  Who the bloody hell
was he?  To hell with him!

`Damn Rushton, and you too!' cried Bill Bates, addressing Crass.
`You're only a dirty toe-rag!  That's all you are - a bloody rotter!
That's the only reason you gets put in charge of jobs - 'cos you're a
good nigger-driver!  You're a bloody sight worse than Rushton or
Misery either!  Who was it started the one-man, one-room dodge, eh?
Why, you, yer bleeder!'

`Knock 'im orf 'is bleedin' perch,' suggested Bundy.

Everybody seemed to think this was a very good idea, but when the
Semi-drunk attempted to rise for the purpose of carrying it out, he
was thrown down by a sudden lurch of the carriage on the top of the
prostrate figure of the bugle man and by the time the others had
assisted him back to his seat they had forgotten all about their plan
of getting rid of Crass.

Meantime the speed of the vehicle had increased to a fearful rate.

Rushton and the other occupants of the little wagonette in front had
been for some time shouting to them to moderate the pace of their
horses, but as the driver of Crass's brake was too drunk to understand
what they said he took no notice, and they had no alternative but to
increase their own speed to avoid being run down.  The drunken driver
now began to imagine that they were trying to race him, and became
fired with the determination to pass them.  It was a very narrow road,
but there was just about room to do it, and he had sufficient
confidence in his own skill with the ribbons to believe that he could
get past in safety.

The terrified gesticulations and the shouts of Rushton's party only
served to infuriate him, because he imagined that they were jeering at
him for not being able to overtake them.  He stood up on the footboard
and lashed the horses till they almost flew over the ground, while the
carriage swayed and skidded in a fearful manner.

In front, the horses of Rushton's conveyance were also galloping at
top speed, the vehicle bounding and reeling from one side of the road
to the other, whilst its terrified occupants, whose faces were
blanched with apprehension, sat clinging to their seats and to each
other, their eyes projecting from the sockets as they gazed back with
terror at their pursuers, some of whom were encouraging the drunken
driver with promises of quarts of beer, and urging on the homes with
curses and yells.

Crass's fat face was pallid with fear as he clung trembling to his
seat.  Another man, very drunk and oblivious of everything, was
leaning over the side of the brake, spewing into the road, while the
remainder, taking no interest in the race, amused themselves by
singing - conducted by the Semi-drunk - as loud as they could roar:

        `Has anyone seen a Germin band,
        Germin Band, Germin Band?
        I've been Iookin' about,
        Pom - Pom, Pom, Pom, Pom!

        `I've searched every pub, both near and far,
        Near and far, near and far,
        I want my Fritz,
        What plays tiddley bits
        On the big trombone!'

The other two brakes had fallen far behind.  The one presided over by
Hunter contained a mournful crew.  Nimrod himself, from the effects of
numerous drinks of ginger beer with secret dashes of gin in it, had
become at length crying drunk, and sat weeping in gloomy silence
beside the driver, a picture of lachrymose misery and but dimly
conscious of his surroundings, and Slyme, who rode with Hunter because
he was a fellow member of the Shining Light Chapel.  Then there was
another paperhanger - an unhappy wretch who was afflicted with
religious mania; he had brought a lot of tracts with him which he had
distributed to the other men, to the villagers of Tubberton and to
anybody else who would take them.

Most of the other men who rode in Nimrod's brake were of the
`religious' working man type.  Ignorant, shallow-pated dolts, without
as much intellectuality as an average cat.  Attendants at various PSAs
and `Church Mission Halls' who went every Sunday afternoon to be
lectured on their duty to their betters and to have their minds - save
the mark! - addled and stultified by such persons as Rushton, Sweater,
Didlum and Grinder, not to mention such mental specialists as the holy
reverend Belchers and Boshers, and such persons as John Starr.

At these meetings none of the `respectable' working men were allowed
to ask any questions, or to object to, or find fault with anything
that was said, or to argue, or discuss, or criticize.  They had to sit
there like a lot of children while they were lectured and preached at
and patronized.  Even as sheep before their shearers are dumb, so they
were not permitted to open their mouths.  For that matter they did not
wish to be allowed to ask any questions, or to discuss anything.  They
would not have been able to.  They sat there and listened to what was
said, but they had but a very hazy conception of what it was all
about.

Most of them belonged to these PSAs merely for the sake of the loaves
and fishes.  Every now and then they were awarded prizes - Self-help
by Smiles, and other books suitable for perusal by persons suffering
from almost complete obliteration of the mental faculties.  Besides
other benefits there was usually a Christmas Club attached to the
`PSA' or `Mission' and the things were sold to the members slightly
below cost as a reward for their servility.

They were for the most part tame, broken-spirited, poor wretches who
contentedly resigned themselves to a life of miserable toil and
poverty, and with callous indifference abandoned their offspring to
the same fate.  Compared with such as these, the savages of New Guinea
or the Red Indians are immensely higher in the scale of manhood.  They
are free!  They call no man master; and if they do not enjoy the
benefits of science and civilization, neither do they toil to create
those things for the benefit of others.  And as for their children -
most of those savages would rather knock them on the head with a
tomahawk than allow them to grow up to be half-starved drudges for
other men.

But these were not free: their servile lives were spent in grovelling
and cringing and toiling and running about like little dogs at the
behest of their numerous masters.  And as for the benefits of science
and civilization, their only share was to work and help to make them,
and then to watch other men enjoy them.  And all the time they were
tame and quiet and content and said, `The likes of us can't expect to
'ave nothing better, and as for our children wot's been good enough
for us is good enough for the likes of them.'

But although they were so religious and respectable and so contented
to be robbed on a large scale, yet in small matters, in the
commonplace and petty affairs of their everyday existence, most of
these men were acutely alive to what their enfeebled minds conceived
to be their own selfish interests, and they possessed a large share of
that singular cunning which characterizes this form of dementia.

That was why they had chosen to ride in Nimrod's brake - because they
wished to chum up with him as much as possible, in order to increase
their chances of being kept on in preference to others who were not so
respectable.

Some of these poor creatures had very large heads, but a close
examination would have shown that the size was due to the
extraordinary thickness of the bones.  The cavity of the skull was not
so large as the outward appearance of the head would have led a casual
observer to suppose, and even in those instances where the brain was
of a fair size, it was of inferior quality, being coarse in texture
and to a great extent composed of fat.

Although most of them were regular attendants at some place of
so-called worship, they were not all teetotallers, and some of them
were now in different stages of intoxication, not because they had had
a great deal to drink, but because - being usually abstemious - it did
not take very much to make them drunk.

From time to time this miserable crew tried to enliven the journey by
singing, but as most of them only knew odd choruses it did not come to
much.  As for the few who did happen to know all the words of a song,
they either had no voices or were not inclined to sing.  The most
successful contribution was that of the religious maniac, who sang
several hymns, the choruses being joined in by everybody, both drunk
and sober.

The strains of these hymns, wafted back through the balmy air to the
last coach, were the cause of much hilarity to its occupants who also
sang the choruses.  As they had all been brought up under `Christian'
influences and educated in `Christian' schools, they all knew the
words: `Work, for the night is coming', `Turn poor Sinner and escape
Eternal Fire', `Pull for the Shore' and `Where is my Wandering Boy?'

The last reminded Harlow of a song he knew nearly all the words of,
`Take the news to Mother', the singing of which was much appreciated
by all present and when it was finished they sang it all over again,
Philpot being so affected that he actually shed tears; and Easton
confided to Owen that there was no getting away from the fact that a
boy's best friend is his mother.

In this last carriage, as in the other two, there were several men who
were more or less intoxicated and for the same reason - because not
being used to taking much liquor, the few extra glasses they had drunk
had got into their heads.  They were as sober a lot of fellows as need
be at ordinary times, and they had flocked together in this brake
because they were all of about the same character - not tame,
contented imbeciles like most of those in Misery's carnage, but men
something like Harlow, who, although dissatisfied with their
condition, doggedly continued the hopeless, weary struggle against
their fate.

They were not teetotallers and they never went to either church or
chapel, but they spent little in drink or on any form of enjoyment -
an occasional glass of beer or a still rarer visit to a music-hall and
now and then an outing more or less similar to this being the sum
total of their pleasures.

These four brakes might fitly be regarded as so many travelling
lunatic asylums, the inmates of each exhibiting different degrees and
forms of mental disorder.

The occupants of the first - Rushton, Didlum and Co. - might be
classed as criminal lunatics who injured others as well as themselves.
In a properly constituted system of society such men as these would be
regarded as a danger to the community, and would be placed under such
restraint as would effectually prevent them from harming themselves or
others.  These wretches had abandoned every thought and thing that
tends to the elevation of humanity.  They had given up everything that
makes life good and beautiful, in order to carry on a mad struggle to
acquire money which they would never be sufficiently cultured to
properly enjoy.  Deaf and blind to every other consideration, to this
end they had degraded their intellects by concentrating them upon the
minutest details of expense and profit, and for their reward they
raked in their harvest of muck and lucre along with the hatred and
curses of those they injured in the process.  They knew that the money
they accumulated was foul with the sweat of their brother men, and wet
with the tears of little children, but they were deaf and blind and
callous to the consequences of their greed.  Devoid of every ennobling
thought or aspiration, they grovelled on the filthy ground, tearing up
the flowers to get at the worms.

In the coach presided over by Crass, Bill Bates, the Semi-drunk and
the other two or three habitual boozers were all men who had been
driven mad by their environment.  At one time most of them had been
fellows like Harlow, working early and late whenever they got the
chance, only to see their earnings swallowed up in a few minutes every
Saturday by the landlord and all the other host of harpies and
profitmongers, who were waiting to demand it as soon as it was earned.
In the years that were gone, most of these men used to take all their
money home religiously every Saturday and give it to the `old girl'
for the house, and then, lo and behold, in a moment, yea, even in the
twinkling of an eye, it was all gone!  Melted away like snow in the
sun! and nothing to show for it except an insufficiency of the bare
necessaries of life!  But after a time they had become heartbroken and
sick and tired of that sort of thing.  They hankered after a little
pleasure, a little excitement, a little fun, and they found that it
was possible to buy something like those in quart pots at the pub.
They knew they were not the genuine articles, but they were better
than nothing at all, and so they gave up the practice of giving all
their money to the old girl to give to the landlord and the other
harpies, and bought beer with some of it instead; and after a time
their minds became so disordered from drinking so much of this beer,
that they cared nothing whether the rent was paid or not.  They cared
but little whether the old girl and the children had food or clothes.
They said, `To hell with everything and everyone,' and they cared for
nothing so long as they could get plenty of beer.

The occupants of Nimrod's coach have already been described and most
of them may correctly be classed as being similar to cretin idiots of
the third degree - very cunning and selfish, and able to read and
write, but with very little understanding of what they read except on
the most common topics.

As for those who rode with Harlow in the last coach, most of them, as
has been already intimated, were men of similar character to himself.
The greater number of them fairly good workmen and - unlike the
boozers in Crass's coach - not yet quite heartbroken, but still
continuing the hopeless struggle against poverty.  These differed from
Nimrod's lot inasmuch as they were not content.  They were always
complaining of their wretched circumstances, and found a certain kind
of pleasure in listening to the tirades of the Socialists against the
existing social conditions, and professing their concurrence with many
of the sentiments expressed, and a desire to bring about a better
state of affairs.

Most of them appeared to be quite sane, being able to converse
intelligently on any ordinary subject without discovering any symptoms
of mental disorder, and it was not until the topic of Parliamentary
elections was mentioned that evidence of their insanity was
forthcoming.  It then almost invariably appeared that they were
subject to the most extraordinary hallucinations and extravagant
delusions, the commonest being that the best thing that the working
people could do to bring about an improvement in their condition, was
to continue to elect their Liberal and Tory employers to make laws for
and to rule over them!  At such times, if anyone ventured to point out
to them that that was what they had been doing all their lives, and
referred them to the manifold evidences that met them wherever they
turned their eyes of its folly and futility, they were generally
immediately seized with a paroxysm of the most furious mania, and were
with difficulty prevented from savagely assaulting those who differed
from them.

They were usually found in a similar condition of maniacal excitement
for some time preceding and during a Parliamentary election, but
afterwards they usually manifested that modification of insanity which
is called melancholia.  In fact they alternated between these two
forms of the disease.  During elections, the highest state of exalted
mania; and at ordinary times - presumably as a result of reading about
the proceedings in Parliament of the persons whom they had elected -
in a state of melancholic depression, in their case an instance of
hope deferred making the heart sick.

This condition occasionally proved to be the stage of transition into
yet another modification of the disease - that known as dipsomania,
the phase exhibited by Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk.

Yet another form of insanity was that shown by the Socialists.  Like
most of their fellow passengers in the last coach, the majority of
these individuals appeared to be of perfectly sound mind.  Upon
entering into conversation with them one found that they reasoned
correctly and even brilliantly.  They had divided their favourite
subject into three parts.  First; an exact definition of the condition
known as Poverty.  Secondly; a knowledge of the causes of Poverty; and
thirdly, a rational plan for the cure of Poverty.  Those who were
opposed to them always failed to refute their arguments, and feared,
and nearly always refused, to meet them in fair fight - in open debate -
preferring to use the cowardly and despicable weapons of slander and
misrepresentation.  The fact that these Socialists never encountered
their opponents except to defeat them, was a powerful testimony to the
accuracy of their reasonings and the correctness of their conclusions -
and yet they were undoubtedly mad. One might converse with them for an
indefinite time on the three divisions of their subject without
eliciting any proofs of insanity, but directly one inquired what means
they proposed to employ in order to bring about the adoption of their
plan, they replied that they hoped to do so by reasoning with the
others!

Although they had sense enough to understand the real causes of
poverty, and the only cure for poverty, they were nevertheless so
foolish that they entertained the delusion that it is possible to
reason with demented persons, whereas every sane person knows that to
reason with a maniac is not only fruitless, but rather tends to fix
more deeply the erroneous impressions of his disordered mind.

The wagonette containing Rushton and his friends continued to fly
over the road, pursued by the one in which rode Crass, Bill Bates, and
the Semi-drunk; but notwithstanding all the efforts of the drunken
driver, they were unable to overtake or pass the smaller vehicle, and
when they reached the foot of the hill that led up to Windley the
distance between the two carriages rapidly increased, and the race was
reluctantly abandoned.

When they reached the top of the hill Rushton and his friends did not
wait for the others, but drove off towards Mugsborough as fast as they
could.

Crass's brake was the next to arrive at the summit, and they halted
there to wait for the other two conveyances and when they came up all
those who lived nearby got out, and some of them sang `God Save the
King', and then with shouts of `Good Night', and cries of `Don't
forget six o'clock Monday morning', they dispersed to their homes and
the carriages moved off once more.

At intervals as they passed through Windley brief stoppages were made
in order to enable others to get out, and by the time they reached the
top of the long incline that led down into Mugsborough it was nearly
twelve o'clock and the brakes were almost empty, the only passengers
being Owen and four or five others who lived down town.  By ones and
twos these also departed, disappearing into the obscurity of the
night, until there was none left, and the Beano was an event of the
past.


Chapter 45

The Great Oration


The outlook for the approaching winter was - as usual - gloomy in the
extreme.  One of the leading daily newspapers published an article
prophesying a period of severe industrial depression.  `As the
warehouses were glutted with the things produced by the working
classes, there was no need for them to do any more work - at present;
and so they would now have to go and starve until such time as their
masters had sold or consumed the things already produced.'  Of course,
the writer of the article did not put it exactly like that, but that
was what it amounted to.  This article was quoted by nearly all the
other papers, both Liberal and Conservative.  The Tory papers -
ignoring the fact that all the Protectionist countries were in exactly
the same condition, published yards of misleading articles about
Tariff Reform.  The Liberal papers said Tariff Reform was no remedy.
Look at America and Germany - worse than here!  Still, the situation
was undoubtedly very serious - continued the Liberal papers - and
Something would have to be done.  They did not say exactly what,
because, of course, they did not know; but Something would have to be
done - tomorrow.  They talked vaguely about Re-afforestation, and
Reclaiming of Foreshores, and Sea walls: but of course there was the
question of Cost! that was a difficulty.  But all the same Something
would have to be done.  Some Experiments must be tried!  Great caution
was necessary in dealing with such difficult problems!  We must go
slow, and if in the meantime a few thousand children die of
starvation, or become `rickety' or consumptive through lack of proper
nutrition it is, of course, very regrettable, but after all they are
only working-class children, so it doesn't matter a great deal.

Most of the writers of these Liberal and Tory papers seemed to think
that all that was necessary was to find `Work' for the `working'
class!  That was their conception of a civilized nation in the
twentieth century!  For the majority of the people to work like brutes
in order to obtain a `living wage' for themselves and to create
luxuries for a small minority of persons who are too lazy to work at
all!  And although this was all they thought was necessary, they did
not know what to do in order to bring even that much to pass!  Winter
was returning, bringing in its train the usual crop of horrors, and
the Liberal and Tory monopolists of wisdom did not know what to do!

Rushton's had so little work in that nearly all the hands expected
that they would be slaughtered the next Saturday after the `Beano' and
there was one man - Jim Smith he was called - who was not allowed to
live even till then: he got the sack before breakfast on the Monday
morning after the Beano.

This man was about forty-five years old, but very short for his age,
being only a little over five feet in height.  The other men used to
say that Little Jim was not made right, for while his body was big
enough for a six-footer, his legs were very short, and the fact that
he was rather inclined to be fat added to the oddity of his
appearance.

On the Monday morning after the Beano he was painting an upper room in
a house where several other men were working, and it was customary for
the coddy to shout `Yo! Ho!' at mealtimes, to let the hands know when
it was time to leave off work.  At about ten minutes to eight, Jim had
squared the part of the work he had been doing - the window - so he
decided not to start on the door or the skirting until after
breakfast.  Whilst he was waiting for the foreman to shout `Yo! Ho!'
his mind reverted to the Beano, and he began to hum the tunes of some
of the songs that had been sung.  He hummed the tune of `He's a jolly
good fellow', and he could not get the tune out of his mind: it kept
buzzing in his head. He wondered what time it was?  It could not be
very far off eight now, to judge by the amount of work he had done
since six o'clock.  He had rubbed down and stopped all the woodwork
and painted the window.  A jolly good two hours' work!  He was only
getting sixpence-halfpenny an hour and if he hadn't earned a bob he
hadn't earned nothing!  Anyhow, whether he had done enough for 'em or
not he wasn't goin' to do no more before breakfast.

The tune of `He's a jolly good fellow' was still buzzing in his head;
he thrust his hands deep down in his trouser pockets, and began to
polka round the room, humming softly:

        `I won't do no more before breakfast!
        I won't do no more before breakfast!
        I won't do no more before breakfast!
        So 'ip 'ip 'ip 'ooray!
        So 'ip 'ip 'ip 'ooray So 'ip 'ip 'ooray!
        I won't do no more before breakfast - etc.'

`No! and you won't do but very little after breakfast, here!' shouted
Hunter, suddenly entering the room.

`I've bin watchin' of you through the crack of the door for the last
'arf hour; and you've not done a dam' stroke all the time.  You make
out yer time sheet, and go to the office at nine o'clock and git yer
money; we can't afford to pay you for playing the fool.'

Leaving the man dumbfounded and without waiting for a reply, Misery
went downstairs and after kicking up a devil of a row with the foreman
for the lack of discipline on the job, he instructed him that Smith
was not to be permitted to resume work after breakfast.  Then he rode
away.  He had come in so stealthily that no one had known anything of
his arrival until they heard him bellowing at Smith.

The latter did not stay to take breakfast but went off at once, and
when he was gone the other chaps said it served him bloody well right:
he was always singing, he ought to have more sense.  You can't do as
you like nowadays you know!

Easton - who was working at another job with Crass as his foreman -
knew that unless some more work came in he was likely to be one of
those who would have to go.  As far as he could see it was only a week
or two at the most before everything would be finished up.  But
notwithstanding the prospect of being out of work so soon he was far
happier than he had been for several months past, for he imagined he
had discovered the cause of Ruth's strange manner.

This knowledge came to him on the night of the Beano.  When he arrived
home he found that Ruth had already gone to bed: she had not been
well, and it was Mrs Linden's explanation of her illness that led
Easton to think that he had discovered the cause of the unhappiness of
the last few months.  Now that he knew - as he thought - he blamed
himself for not having been more considerate and patient with her.  At
the same time he was at a loss to understand why she had not told him
about it herself.  The only explanation he could think of was the one
suggested by Mrs Linden - that at such times women often behaved
strangely.  However that might be, he was glad to think he knew the
reason of it all, and he resolved that he would be more gentle and
forebearing with her.

The place where he was working was practically finished.  It was a
large house called `The Refuge', very similar to `The Cave', and
during the last week or two, it had become what they called a
`hospital'.  That is, as the other jobs became finished the men were
nearly all sent to this one, so that there was quite a large crowd of
them there.  The inside work was all finished - with the exception of
the kitchen, which was used as a mess room, and the scullery, which
was the paint shop.

Everybody was working on the job.  Poor old Joe Philpot, whose
rheumatism had been very bad lately, was doing a very rough job -
painting the gable from a long ladder.

But though there were plenty of younger men more suitable for this,
Philpot did not care to complain for fear Crass or Misery should think
he was not up to his work.  At dinner time all the old hands assembled
in the kitchen, including Crass, Easton, Harlow, Bundy and Dick
Wantley, who still sat on a pail behind his usual moat.

Philpot and Harlow were absent and everybody wondered what had become
of them.

Several times during the morning they had been seen whispering
together and comparing scraps of paper, and various theories were put
forward to account for their disappearance.  Most of the men thought
they must have heard something good about the probable winner of the
Handicap and had gone to put something on.  Some others thought that
perhaps they had heard of another `job' about to be started by some
other firm and had gone to inquire about it.

`Looks to me as if they'll stand a very good chance of gettin' drowned
if they're gone very far,' remarked Easton, referring to the weather.
It had been threatening to rain all the morning, and during the last
few minutes it had become so dark that Crass lit the gas, so that - as
he expressed it - they should be able to see the way to their mouths.
Outside, the wind grew more boisterous every moment; the darkness
continued to increase, and presently there succeeded a torrential
downfall of rain, which beat fiercely against the windows, and poured
in torrents down the glass.  The men glanced gloomily at each other.
No more work could be done outside that day, and there was nothing
left to do inside.  As they were paid by the hour, this would mean
that they would have to lose half a day's pay.

`If it keeps on like this we won't be able to do no more work, and we
won't be able to go home either,' remarked Easton.

`Well, we're all right 'ere, ain't we?' said the man behind the moat;
`there's a nice fire and plenty of heasy chairs.  Wot the 'ell more do
you want?'

`Yes,' remarked another philosopher.  `If we only had a shove-ha'penny
table or a ring board, I reckon we should be able to enjoy ourselves
all right.'

Philpot and Harlow were still absent, and the others again fell to
wondering where they could be.

`I see old Joe up on 'is ladder only a few minutes before twelve,'
remarked Wantley.

Everyone agreed that it was a mystery.

At this moment the two truants returned, looking very important.

Philpot was armed with a hammer and carried a pair of steps, while
Harlow bore a large piece of wallpaper which the two of them proceeded
to tack on the wall, much to the amusement of the others, who read the
announcement opposite written in charcoal.

Every day at meals since Barrington's unexpected outburst at the Beano
dinner, the men had been trying their best to `kid him on' to make
another speech, but so far without success.  If anything, he had been
even more silent and reserved than before, as if he felt some regret
that he had spoken as he had on that occasion.  Crass and his
disciples attributed Barrington's manner to fear that he was going to
get the sack for his trouble and they agreed amongst themselves that
it would serve him bloody well right if 'e did get the push.

When they had fixed the poster on the wall, Philpot stood the steps in
the corner of the room, with the back part facing outwards, and then,
everything being ready for the lecturer, the two sat down in their
accustomed places and began to eat their dinners, Harlow remarking
that they would have to buck up or they would be too late for the
meeting; and the rest of the crowd began to discuss the poster.

`Wot the 'ell does PLO mean?' demanded Bundy, with a puzzled
expression.

`Plain Layer On,' answered Philpot modestly.

`'Ave you ever 'eard the Professor preach before?' inquired the man on
the pail, addressing Bundy.

`Only once, at the Beano,' replied that individual; `an' that was once
too often!'

`Finest speaker I ever 'eard,' said the man on the pail with
enthusiasm.  `I wouldn't miss this lecture for anything: this is one
of 'is best subjects.  I got 'ere about two hours before the doors was
opened, so as to be sure to get a seat.'

`Yes, it's a very good subject,' said Crass, with a sneer.  `I believe
most of the Labour Members in Parliament is well up in it.'

`And wot about the other members?' demanded Philpot.  `Seems to me as
if most of them knows something about it too.'

`The difference is,' said Owen, `the working classes voluntarily pay
to keep the Labour Members, but whether they like it or not, they have
to keep the others.'

`The Labour members is sent to the 'Ouse of Commons,' said Harlow,
`and paid their wages to do certain work for the benefit of the
working classes, just the same as we're sent 'ere and paid our wages
by the Bloke to paint this 'ouse.'

`Yes,' said Crass; `but if we didn't do the work we're paid to do, we
should bloody soon get the sack.'

                           Imperial Bankquet Hall
                                `The Refuge'
                         on Thursday at 12.30 prompt

                            Professor Barrington
                               WILL DELIVER A

                                   ORATION

                                  ENTITLED

                            THE GREAT SECRET, OR
                          HOW TO LIVE WITHOUT WORK

                          The Rev. Joe Philpot PLO
          (Late absconding secretary of the light refreshment fund)
                    Will take the chair and anything else
                          he can lay his hands on.

                         At The End Of The Lecture
                             A MEETING WILL BE
                                  ARRANGED
                      And carried out according to the
                       Marquis of Queensbury's Rules.

                        A Collection will be took up
                       in aid of the cost of printing

`I can't see how we've got to keep the other members,' said Slyme;
`they're mostly rich men, and they live on their own money.'

`Of course,' said Crass.  `And I should like to know where we should
be without 'em!  Talk about us keepin' them!  It seems to me more like
it that they keeps us!  The likes of us lives on rich people.  Where
should we be if it wasn't for all the money they spend and the work
they 'as done?  If the owner of this 'ouse 'adn't 'ad the money to
spend to 'ave it done up, most of us would 'ave bin out of work this
last six weeks, and starvin', the same as lots of others 'as been.'

`Oh yes, that's right enough,' agreed Bundy.  `Labour is no good
without Capital.  Before any work can be done there's one thing
necessary, and that's money.  It would be easy to find work for all
the unemployed if the local authorities could only raise the money.'

`Yes; that's quite true,' said Owen.  `And that proves that money is
the cause of poverty, because poverty consists in being short of the
necessaries of life: the necessaries of life are all produced by
labour applied to the raw materials: the raw materials exist in
abundance and there are plenty of people able and willing to work; but
under present conditions no work can be done without money; and so we
have the spectacle of a great army of people compelled to stand idle
and starve by the side of the raw materials from which their labour
could produce abundance of all the things they need - they are
rendered helpless by the power of Money!  Those who possess all the
money say that the necessaries of life shall not be produced except
for their profit.'

`Yes! and you can't alter it,' said Crass, triumphantly.  `It's always
been like it, and it always will be like it.'

`'Ear! 'Ear!' shouted the man behind the moat.  `There's always been
rich and poor in the world, and there always will be.'

Several others expressed their enthusiastic agreement with Crass's
opinion, and most of them appeared to be highly delighted to think
that the existing state of affairs could never be altered.

`It hasn't always been like it, and it won't always be like it,' said
Owen.  `The time will come, and it's not very far distant, when the
necessaries of life will be produced for use and not for profit.  The
time is coming when it will no longer be possible for a few selfish
people to condemn thousands of men and women and little children to
live in misery and die of want.'

`Ah well, it won't be in your time, or mine either,' said Crass
gleefully, and most of the others laughed with imbecile satisfaction.

`I've 'eard a 'ell of a lot about this 'ere Socialism,' remarked the
man behind the moat, `but up to now I've never met nobody wot could
tell you plainly exactly wot it is.'

`Yes; that's what I should like to know too,' said Easton.

`Socialism mean "What's yours is mine, and what's mine's me own,"'
observed Bundy, and during the laughter that greeted this definition
Slyme was heard to say that Socialism meant Materialism, Atheism and
Free Love, and if it were ever to come about it would degrade men and
women to the level of brute beasts.  Harlow said Socialism was a
beautiful ideal, which he for one would be very glad to see realized,
and he was afraid it was altogether too good to be practical, because
human nature is too mean and selfish.  Sawkins said that Socialism was
a lot of bloody rot, and Crass expressed the opinion - which he had
culled from the delectable columns of the Obscurer - that it meant
robbing the industries for the benefit of the idle and thriftless.


Philpot had by this time finished his bread and cheese, and, having
taken a final draught of tea, he rose to his feet, and crossing over
to the corner of the room, ascended the pulpit, being immediately
greeted with a tremendous outburst of hooting, howling and booing,
which he smilingly acknowledged by removing his cap from his bald head
and bowing repeatedly.  When the storm of shrieks, yells, groans and
catcalls had in some degree subsided, and Philpot was able to make
himself heard, he addressed the meeting as follows:

`Gentlemen: First of all I beg to thank you very sincerely for the
magnificent and cordial reception you have given me on this occasion,
and I shall try to deserve your good opinion by opening the meeting as
briefly as possible.

`Putting all jokes aside, I think we're all agreed about one thing,
and that is, that there's plenty of room for improvement in things in
general.  (Hear, hear.)  As our other lecturer, Professor Owen,
pointed out in one of 'is lectures and as most of you 'ave read in the
newspapers, although British trade was never so good before as it is
now, there was never so much misery and poverty, and so many people
out of work, and so many small shopkeepers goin' up the spout as there
is at this partickiler time.  Now, some people tells us as the way to
put everything right is to 'ave Free Trade and plenty of cheap food.
Well, we've got them all now, but the misery seems to go on all around
us all the same.  Then there's other people tells us as the `Friscal
Policy" is the thing to put everything right.  ("Hear, hear" from
Crass and several others.)  And then there's another lot that ses that
Socialism is the only remedy.  Well, we all know pretty well wot Free
Trade and Protection means, but most of us don't know exactly what
Socialism means; and I say as it's the dooty of every man to try and
find out which is the right thing to vote for, and when 'e's found it
out, to do wot 'e can to 'elp to bring it about.  And that's the
reason we've gorn to the enormous expense of engaging Professor
Barrington to come 'ere this afternoon and tell us exactly what
Socialism is.

`'As I 'ope you're all just as anxious to 'ear it as I am myself, I
will not stand between you and the lecturer no longer, but will now
call upon 'im to address you.'

Philpot was loudly applauded as he descended from the pulpit, and in
response to the clamorous demands of the crowd, Barrington, who in the
meantime had yielded to Owen's entreaties that he would avail himself
of this opportunity of proclaiming the glad tidings of the good time
that is to be, got up on the steps in his turn.

Harlow, desiring that everything should be done decently and in order,
had meantime arranged in front of the pulpit a carpenter's sawing
stool, and an empty pail with a small piece of board laid across it,
to serve as a seat and a table for the chairman.  Over the table he
draped a large red handkerchief.  At the right he placed a plumber's
large hammer; at the left, a battered and much-chipped jam-jar, full
of tea.  Philpot having taken his seat on the pail at this table and
announced his intention of bashing out with the hammer the brains of
any individual who ventured to disturb the meeting, Barrington
commenced:

`Mr Chairman and Gentlemen.  For the sake of clearness, and in order
to avoid confusing one subject with another, I have decided to divide
the oration into two parts.  First, I will try to explain as well as I
am able what Socialism is.  I will try to describe to you the plan or
system upon which the Co-operative Commonwealth of the future will be
organized; and, secondly, I will try to tell you how it can be brought
about.  But before proceeding with the first part of the subject, I
would like to refer very slightly to the widespread delusion that
Socialism is impossible because it means a complete change from an
order of things which has always existed.  We constantly hear it said
that because there have always been rich and poor in the world, there
always must be.  I want to point out to you first of all, that it is
not true that even in its essential features, the present system has
existed from all time; it is not true that there have always been rich
and poor in the world, in the sense that we understand riches and
poverty today.

`These statements are lies that have been invented for the purpose of
creating in us a feeling of resignation to the evils of our condition.
They are lies which have been fostered by those who imagine that it is
to their interest that we should be content to see our children
condemned to the same poverty and degradation that we have endured
ourselves.

I do not propose - because there is not time, although it is really
part of my subject - to go back to the beginnings of history, and
describe in detail the different systems of social organization which
evolved from and superseded each other at different periods, but it is
necessary to remind you that the changes that have taken place in the
past have been even greater than the change proposed by Socialists
today.  The change from savagery and cannibalism when men used to
devour the captives they took in war - to the beginning of chattel
slavery, when the tribes or clans into which mankind were divided -
whose social organization was a kind of Communism, all the individuals
belonging to the tribe being practically social equals, members of one
great family - found it more profitable to keep their captives as
slaves than to eat them.  The change from the primitive Communism of
the tribes, into the more individualistic organization of the nations,
and the development of private ownership of the land and slaves and
means of subsistence.  The change from chattel slavery into Feudalism;
and the change from Feudalism into the earlier form of Capitalism; and
the equally great change from what might be called the individualistic
capitalism which displaced Feudalism, to the system of Co-operative
Capitalism and Wage Slavery of today.'

`I believe you must 'ave swollered a bloody dictionary,' exclaimed the
man behind the moat.

`Keep horder" shouted Philpot, fiercely, striking the table with the
hammer, and there were loud shouts of `Chair' and `Chuck 'im out,'
from several quarters.

When order was restored, the lecturer proceeded:

`So it is not true that practically the suite state of affairs as we
have today has always existed.  It is not true that anything like the
poverty that prevails at present existed at any previous period of the
world's history.  When the workers were the property of their masters,
it was to their owners' interest to see that they were properly
clothed and fed; they were not allowed to be idle, and they were not
allowed to starve.  Under Feudalism also, although there were certain
intolerable circumstances, the position of the workers was,
economically, infinitely better than it is today.  The worker was in
subjection to his Lord, but in return his lord had certain
responsibilities and duties to perform, and there was a large measure
of community of interest between them.

`I do not intend to dwell upon this pout at length, but in support of
what I have said I will quote as nearly as I can from memory the words
of the historian Froude.

`"I do not believe," says Mr Froude, "that the condition of the people
in Mediaeval Europe was as miserable as is pretended.  I do not
believe that the distribution of the necessaries of life was as
unequal as it is at present.  If the tenant lived hard, the lord had
little luxury.  Earls and countesses breakfasted at five in the
morning, on salt beef and herring, a slice of bread and a draught of
ale from a blackjack.  Lords and servants dined in the same hall and
shared the same meal."

`When we arrive at the system that displaced Feudalism, we find that
the condition of the workers was better in every way than it is at
present.  The instruments of production - the primitive machinery and
the tools necessary for the creation of wealth - belonged to the
skilled workers who used them, and the things they produced were also
the property of those who made them.

`In those days a master painter, a master shoemaker, a master saddler,
or any other master tradesmen, was really a skilled artisan working on
his own account.  He usually had one or two apprentices, who were
socially his equals, eating at the same table and associating with the
other members of his family.  It was quite a common occurrence for the
apprentice - after he had attained proficiency in his work - to marry
his master's daughter and succeed to his master's business.  In those
days to be a "master" tradesman meant to be master of the trade, not
merely of some underpaid drudges in one's employment.  The apprentices
were there to master the trade, qualifying themselves to become master
workers themselves; not mere sweaters and exploiters of the labour of
others, but useful members of society.  In those days, because there
was no labour-saving machinery the community was dependent for its
existence on the productions of hand labour.  Consequently the
majority of the people were employed in some kind of productive work,
and the workers were honoured and respected citizens, living in
comfort on the fruits of their labour.  They were not rich as we
understand wealth now, but they did not starve and they were not
regarded with contempt, as are their successors of today.

`The next great change came with the introduction of steam machinery.
That power came to the aid of mankind in their struggle for existence,
enabling them to create easily and in abundance those things of which
they had previously been able to produce only a bare sufficiency.  A
wonderful power - equalling and surpassing the marvels that were
imagined by the writers of fairy tales and Eastern stories - a power
so vast - so marvellous, that it is difficult to find words to convey
anything like an adequate conception of it.

`We all remember the story, in The Arabian Nights, of Aladdin, who in
his poverty became possessed of the Wonderful Lamp and - he was poor
no longer.  He merely had to rub the Lamp - the Genie appeared, and at
Aladdin's command he produced an abundance of everything that the
youth could ask or dream of.  With the discovery of steam machinery,
mankind became possessed of a similar power to that imagined by the
Eastern writer.  At the command of its masters the Wonderful Lamp of
Machinery produces an enormous, overwhelming, stupendous abundance and
superfluity of every material thing necessary for human existence and
happiness.  With less labour than was formerly required to cultivate
acres, we can now cultivate miles of land.  In response to human
industry, aided by science and machinery, the fruitful earth teems
with such lavish abundance as was never known or deemed possible
before.  If you go into the different factories and workshops you will
see prodigious quantities of commodities of every kind pouring out of
the wonderful machinery, literally like water from a tap.

`One would naturally and reasonably suppose that the discovery or
invention of such an aid to human industry would result in increased
happiness and comfort for every one; but as you all know, the reverse
is the case; and the reason of that extraordinary result, is the
reason of all the poverty and unhappiness that we see around us and
endure today - it is simply because - the machinery became the
property of a comparatively few individuals and private companies, who
use it not for the benefit of the community but to create profits for
themselves.

`As this labour-saving machinery became more extensively used, the
prosperous class of skilled workers gradually disappeared.  Some of
the wealthier of them became distributers instead of producers of
wealth; that is to say, they became shopkeepers, retailing the
commodities that were produced for the most part by machinery.  But
the majority of them in course of time degenerated into a class of
mere wage earners, having no property in the machines they used, and
no property in the things they made.

`They sold their labour for so much per hour, and when they could not
find any employer to buy it from them, they were reduced to
destitution.

`Whilst the unemployed workers were starving and those in employment
not much better off, the individuals and private companies who owned
the machinery accumulated fortunes; but their profits were diminished
and their working expenses increased by what led to the latest great
change in the organization of the production of the necessaries of
life - the formation of the Limited Companies and the Trusts; the
decision of the private companies to combine and co-operate with each
other in order to increase their profits and decrease their working
expenses.  The results of these combines have been - an increase in
the quantities of the things produced: a decrease in the number of
wage earners employed - and enormously increased profits for the
shareholders.

`But it is not only the wage-earning class that is being hurt; for
while they are being annihilated by the machinery and the efficient
organization of industry by the trusts that control and are beginning
to monopolize production, the shopkeeping classes are also being
slowly but surely crushed out of existence by the huge companies that
are able by the greater magnitude of their operations to buy and sell
more cheaply than the small traders.

`The consequence of all this is that the majority of the people are in
a condition of more or less abject poverty - living from hand to
mouth.  It is an admitted fact that about thirteen millions of our
people are always on the verge of starvation.  The significant results
of this poverty face us on every side.  The alarming and persistent
increase of insanity.  The large number of would-be recruits for the
army who have to be rejected because they are physically unfit; and
the shameful condition of the children of the poor.  More than
one-third of the children of the working classes in London have some
sort of mental or physical defect; defects in development; defects of
eyesight; abnormal nervousness; rickets, and mental dullness.  The
difference in height and weight and general condition of the children
in poor schools and the children of the so-called better classes,
constitutes a crime that calls aloud to Heaven for vengeance upon
those who are responsible for it.

`It is childish to imagine that any measure of Tariff Reform or
Political Reform such as a paltry tax on foreign-made goods or
abolishing the House of Lords, or disestablishing the Church - or
miserable Old Age Pensions, or a contemptible tax on land, can deal
with such a state of affairs as this.  They have no House of Lords in
America or France, and yet their condition is not materially different
from ours.  You may be deceived into thinking that such measures as
those are great things.  You may fight for them and vote for them, but
after you have got them you will find that they will make no
appreciable improvement in your condition.  You will still have to
slave and drudge to gain a bare sufficiency of the necessaries of
life.  You will still have to eat the same kind of food and wear the
same kind of clothes and boots as now.  Your masters will still have
you in their power to insult and sweat and drive.  Your general
condition will be just the same as at present because such measures as
those are not remedies but red herrings, intended by those who trail
them to draw us away from the only remedy, which is to be found only
in the Public Ownership of the Machinery, and the National
Organization of Industry for the production and distribution of the
necessaries of life, not for the profit of a few but for the benefit
of all!

`That is the next great change; not merely desirable, but imperatively
necessary and inevitable!  That is Socialism!

`It is not a wild dream of Superhuman Unselfishness.  No one will be
asked to sacrifice himself for the benefit of others or to love his
neighbours better than himself as is the case under the present
system, which demands that the majority shall unselfishly be content
to labour and live in wretchedness for the benefit of a few.  There is
no such principle of Philanthropy in Socialism, which simply means
that even as all industries are now owned by shareholders, and
organized and directed by committees and officers elected by the
shareholders, so shall they in future belong to the State, that is,
the whole people - and they shall be organized and directed by
committees and officers elected by the community.

`Under existing circumstances the community is exposed to the danger
of being invaded and robbed and massacred by some foreign power.
Therefore the community has organized and owns and controls an Army
and Navy to protect it from that danger.  Under existing circumstances
the community is menaced by another equally great danger - the people
are mentally and physically degenerating from lack of proper food and
clothing.  Socialists say that the community should undertake and
organize the business of producing and distributing all these things;
that the State should be the only employer of labour and should own
all the factories, mills, mines, farms, railways, fishing fleets,
sheep farms, poultry farms and cattle ranches.

`Under existing circumstances the community is degenerating mentally
and physically because the majority cannot afford to have decent
houses to live in.  Socialists say that the community should take in
hand the business of providing proper houses for all its members, that
the State should be the only landlord, that all the land and all the
houses should belong to the whole people...

`We must do this if we are to keep our old place in the van of human
progress.  A nation of ignorant, unintelligent, half-starved,
broken-spirited degenerates cannot hope to lead humanity in its
never-ceasing march onward to the conquest of the future.

        `Vain. mightiest fleet of iron framed;
        Vain the all-shattering guns
        Unless proud England keep, untamed,
        The stout hearts of her sons.

`All the evils that I have referred to are only symptoms of the one
disease that is sapping the moral, mental and physical life of the
nation, and all attempts to cure these symptoms are foredoomed to
failure, simply because they are the symptoms and not the disease.
All the talk of Temperance, and the attempts to compel temperance, are
foredoomed to failure, because drunkenness is a symptom, and not the
disease.

`India is a rich productive country.  Every year millions of pounds
worth of wealth are produced by her people, only to be stolen from
them by means of the Money Trick by the capitalist and official class.
Her industrious sons and daughters, who are nearly all tdtal
abstainers, live in abject poverty, and their misery is not caused by
laziness or want of thrift, or by Intemperance.  They are poor for the
same reason that we are poor - Because we are Robbed.

`The hundreds of thousands of pounds that are yearly wasted in
well-meant but useless charity accomplish no lasting good, because
while charity soothes the symptoms it ignores the disease, which is -
the PRIVATE OWNERSHIP of the means of producing the necessaries of
life, and the restriction of production, by a few selfish individuals
for their own profit.  And for that disease there is no other remedy
than the one I have told you of - the PUBLIC OWNERSHIP and cultivation
of the land, the PUBLIC OWNERSHIP OF the mines, railways, canals,
ships, factories and all the other means of production, and the
establishment of an Industrial Civil Service - a National Army of
Industry - for the purpose of producing the necessaries, comforts and
refinements of life in that abundance which has been made possible by
science and machinery - for the use and benefit of THE WHOLE OF THE
PEOPLE.'

`Yes: and where's the money to come from for all this?' shouted Crass,
fiercely.

`Hear, hear,' cried the man behind the moat.

`There's no money difficulty about it,' replied Barrington.  `We can
easily find all the money we shall need.'

`Of course,' said Slyme, who had been reading the Daily Ananias,
`there's all the money in the Post Office Savings Bank.  The
Socialists could steal that for a start; and as for the mines and land
and factories, they can all be took from the owners by force.'

`There will be no need for force and no need to steal anything from
anybody.'

`And there's another thing I objects to,' said Crass.  `And that's all
this 'ere talk about hignorance: wot about all the money wots spent
every year for edication?'

`You should rather say - "What about all the money that's wasted every
year on education?"  What can be more brutal and senseless than trying
to "educate" a poor little, hungry, ill-clad child?  Such so-called
"instruction" is like the seed in the parable of the Sower, which fell
on stony ground and withered away because it had no depth of earth;
and even in those cases where it does take root and grow, it becomes
like the seed that fell among thorns and the thorns grew up and choked
it, and it bore no fruit.

`The majority of us forget in a year or two all that we learnt at
school because the conditions of our lives are such as to destroy all
inclination for culture or refinement.  We must see that the children
are properly clothed and fed and that they are not made to get up in
the middle of the night to go to work for several hours before they go
to school.  We must make it illegal for any greedy, heartless
profit-hunter to hire them and make them labour for several hours in
the evening after school, or all day and till nearly midnight on
Saturday.  We must first see that our children are cared for, as well
as the children of savage races, before we can expect a proper return
for the money that we spend on education.'

`I don't mind admitting that this 'ere scheme of national ownership
and industries is all right if it could only be done,' said Harlow,
`but at present, all the land, railways and factories, belongs to
private capitalists; they can't be bought without money, and you say
you ain't goin' to take 'em away by force, so I should like to know
how the bloody 'ell you are goin' to get 'em?'

`We certainly don't propose to buy them with money, for the simple
reason that there is not sufficient money in existence to pay for them.

`If all the gold and silver money in the World were gathered together
into one heap, it would scarcely be sufficient to buy all the private
property in England.  The people who own all these things now never
really paid for them with money - they obtained possession of them by
means of the "Money Trick" which Owen explained to us some time ago.'

`They obtained possession of them by usin' their brain,' said Crass.
`Exactly,' replied the lecturer.  `They tell us themselves that that
is how they got them away from us; they call their profits the "wages
of intelligence".  Whilst we have been working, they have been using
their intelligence in order to obtain possession of the things we have
created.  The time has now arrived for us to use our intelligence in
order to get back the things they have robbed us of, aid to prevent
them from robbing us any more.  As for how it is to be done, we might
copy the methods that they have found so successful.'

`Oh, then you DO mean to rob them after all,' cried Slyme,
triumphantly.  `If it's true that they robbed the workers, and if
we're to adopt the same method then we'll be robbers too!'

`When a thief is caught having in his possession the property of
others it is not robbery to take the things away from him and to
restore them to their rightful owners,' retorted Barrington.

`I can't allow this 'ere disorder to go on no longer,' shouted
Philpot, banging the table with the plumber's hammer as several men
began talking at the same time.

`There will be plenty of tuneropperty for questions and opposition at
the hend of the horation, when the pulpit will be throwed open to
anyone as likes to debate the question.  I now calls upon the
professor to proceed with the second part of the horation: and anyone
wot interrupts will get a lick under the ear-'ole with this' - waving
the hammer - `and the body will be chucked out of the bloody winder.'

Loud cheers greeted this announcement.  It was still raining heavily,
so they thought they might as well pass the time listening to
Barrington as in any other way.

`A large part of the land may be got back in the same way as it was
taken from us.  The ancestors of the present holders obtained
possession of it by simply passing Acts of Enclosure: the nation
should regain possession of those lands by passing Acts of Resumption.
And with regard to the other land, the present holders should be
allowed to retain possession of it during their lives and then it
should revert to the State, to be used for the benefit of all.
Britain should belong to the British people, not to a few selfish
individuals.  As for the railways, they have already been nationalized
in some other countries, and what other countries can do we can do
also.  In New Zealand, Australia, South Africa, Germany, Belgium,
Italy, Japan and some other countries some of the railways are already
the property of the State.  As for the method by which we can obtain
possession of them, the difficulty is not to discover a method, but
rather to decide which of many methods we shall adopt.  One method
would be to simply pass an Act declaring that as it was contrary to
the public interest that they should be owned by private individuals,
the railways would henceforth be the property of the nation.  All
railways servants, managers and officials would continue in their
employment; the only difference being that they would now be in the
employ of the State.  As to the shareholders -'

`They could all be knocked on the 'ead, I suppose,' interrupted Crass.

`Or go to the workhouse,' said Slyme.

`Or to 'ell,' suggested the man behind the moat.

`- The State would continue to pay to the shareholders the same
dividends they had received on an average for, say, the previous three
years.  These payments would be continued to the present shareholders
for life, or the payments might be limited to a stated number of years
and the shares would be made non-transferable, like the railway
tickets of today. As for the factories, shops, and other means of
production and distribution, the State must adopt the same methods of
doing business as the present owners.  I mean that even as the big
Trusts and companies are crushing - by competition - the individual
workers and small traders, so the State should crush the trusts by
competition.  It is surely justifiable for the State to do for the
benefit of the whole people that which the capitalists are already
doing for the profit of a few shareholders. The first step in this
direction will be the establishment of Retail Stores for the purpose
of supplying all national and municipal employees with the necessaries
of life at the lowest possible prices.  At first the Administration
will purchase these things from the private manufacturers, in such
large quantities that it will be able to obtain them at the very
cheapest rate, and as there will be no heavy rents to pay for showy
shops, and no advertising expenses, and as the object of the
Administration will be not to make profit, but to supply its workmen
and officials with goods at the lowest price, they will be able to
sell them much cheaper than the profit-making private stores.

`The National Service Retail Stores will be for the benefit of only
those in the public service; and gold, silver or copper money will not
be accepted in payment for the things sold.  At first, all public
servants will continue to be paid in metal money, but those who desire
it will be paid all or part of their wages in paper money of the same
nominal value, which will be accepted in payment for their purchases
at the National Stores and at the National Hotels, Restaurants and
other places which will be established for the convenience of those in
the State service.  The money will resemble bank-notes.  It will be
made of a special very strong paper, and will be of all value, from a
penny to a pound.

`As the National Service Stores will sell practically everything that
could be obtained elsewhere, and as twenty shillings in paper money
will be able to purchase much more at the stores than twenty shillings
of metal money would purchase anywhere else, it will not be long
before nearly all public servants will prefer to be paid in paper
money.  As far as paying the salaries and wages of most of its
officials and workmen is concerned, the Administration will not then
have any need of metal money.  But it will require metal money to pay
the private manufacturers who supply the goods sold in the National
Stores.  But - all these things are made by labour; so in order to
avoid having to pay metal money for them, the State will now commence
to employ productive labour.  All the public land suitable for the
purpose will be put into cultivation and State factories will be
established for manufacturing food, boots, clothing, furniture and all
other necessaries and comforts of life.  All those who are out of
employment and willing to work, will be given employment on these
farms and in these factories.  In order that the men employed shall
not have to work unpleasantly hard, and that their hours of labour may
be as short as possible - at first, say, eight hours per day - and
also to make sure that the greatest possible quantity of everything
shall be produced, these factories and farms will be equipped with the
most up-to-date and efficient labour-saving machinery.  The people
employed in the farms and factories will be paid with paper money...
The commodities they produce will go to replenish the stocks of the
National Service Stores, where the workers will be able to purchase
with their paper money everything they need.

`As we shall employ the greatest possible number of labour-saving
machines, and adopt the most scientific methods in our farms and
factories, the quantities of goods we shall be able to produce will be
so enormous that we shall be able to pay our workers very high wages -
in paper money - and we shall be able to sell our produce so cheaply,
that all public servants will be able to enjoy abundance of
everything.

`When the workers who are being exploited and sweated by the private
capitalists realize how much worse off they are than the workers in
the employ of the State, they will come and ask to be allowed to work
for the State, and also, for paper money.  That will mean that the
State Army of Productive Workers will be continually increasing in
numbers.  More State factories will be built, more land will be put
into cultivation.  Men will be given employment making bricks,
woodwork, paints, glass, wallpapers and all kinds of building
materials and others will be set to work building - on State land -
beautiful houses, which will be let to those employed in the service
of the State.  The rent will be paid with paper money.

`State fishing fleets will be established and the quantities of
commodities of all kinds produced will be so great that the State
employees and officials will not be able to use it all.  With their
paper money they will be able to buy enough and more than enough to
satisfy all their needs abundantly, but there will still be a great
and continuously increasing surplus stock in the possession of the
State.

`The Socialist Administration will now acquire or build fleets of
steam trading vessels, which will of course be manned and officered by
State employees - the same as the Royal Navy is now.  These fleets of
National trading vessels will carry the surplus stocks I have
mentioned, to foreign countries, and will there sell or exchange them
for some of the products of those countries, things that we do not
produce ourselves.  These things will be brought to England and sold
at the National Service Stores, at the lowest possible price, for
paper money, to those in the service of the State.  This of course
will only have the effect of introducing greater variety into the
stocks - it will not diminish the surplus: and as there would be no
sense in continuing to produce more of these things than necessary, it
would then be the duty of the Administration to curtail or restrict
production of the necessaries of life.  This could be done by reducing
the hours of the workers without reducing their wages so as to enable
them to continue to purchase as much as before.

`Another way of preventing over production of mere necessaries and
comforts will be to employ a large number of workers producing the
refinements and pleasures of life, more artistic houses, furniture,
pictures, musical instruments and so forth.

`In the centre of every district a large Institute or pleasure house
could be erected, containing a magnificently appointed and decorated
theatre; Concert Hall, Lecture Hall, Gymnasium, Billiard Rooms,
Reading Rooms, Refreshment Rooms, and so on.  A detachment of the
Industrial Army would be employed as actors, artistes, musicians,
singers and entertainers.  In fact everyone that could be spared from
the most important work of all - that of producing the necessaries of
life - would be employed in creating pleasure, culture, and education.
All these people - like the other branches of the public service -
would be paid with paper money, and with it all of them would be able
to purchase abundance of all those things which constitute
civilization.

`Meanwhile, as a result of all this, the kind-hearted private
employers and capitalists would find that no one would come and work
for them to be driven and bullied and sweated for a miserable trifle
of metal money that is scarcely enough to purchase sufficient of the
necessaries of life to keep body and soul together.

`These kind-hearted capitalists will protest against what they will
call the unfair competition of State industry, and some of them may
threaten to leave the country and take their capital with them...  As
most of these persons are too lazy to work, and as we will not need
their money, we shall be very glad to see them go.  But with regard to
their real capital - their factories, farms, mines or machinery - that
will be a different matter...  To allow these things to remain idle
and unproductive would constitute an injury to the community.  So a
law will be passed, declaring that all land not cultivated by the
owner, or any factory shut down for more than a specified time, will
be taken possession of by the State and worked for the benefit of the
community...  Fair compensation will be paid in paper money to the
former owners, who will be granted an income or pension of so much a
year either for life or for a stated period according to circumstances
and the ages of the persons concerned.

`As for the private traders, the wholesale and retail dealers in the
things produced by labour, they will be forced by the State
competition to close down their shops and warehouses - first, because
they will not be able to replenish their stocks; and, secondly,
because even if they were able to do so, they would not be able to
sell them.  This will throw out of work a great host of people who are
at present engaged in useless occupations; the managers and assistants
in the shops of which we now see half a dozen of the same sort in a
single street; the thousands of men and women who are slaving away
their lives producing advertisements, for, in most cases, a miserable
pittance of metal money, with which many of them are unable to procure
sufficient of the necessaries of life to secure them from starvation.

`The masons, carpenters, painters. glaziers, and all the others
engaged in maintaining these unnecessary stores and shops will all be
thrown out of employment, but all of them who are willing to work will
be welcomed by the State and will be at once employed helping either
to produce or distribute the necessaries and comforts of life.  They
will have to work fewer hours than before...  They will not have to
work so hard - for there will be no need to drive or bully, because
there will be plenty of people to do the work, and most of it will be
done by machinery - and with their paper money they will be able to
buy abundance of the things they help to produce.  The shops and
stores where these people were formerly employed will be acquired by
the State, which will pay the former owners fair compensation in the
same manner as to the factory owners.  Some of the buildings will be
utilized by the State as National Service Stores, others transformed
into factories and others will be pulled down to make room for
dwellings, or public buildings...  It will be the duty of the
Government to build a sufficient number of houses to accommodate the
families of all those in its employment, and as a consequence of this
and because of the general disorganization and decay of what is now
called "business", all other house property of all kinds will rapidly
depreciate in value.  The slums and the wretched dwellings now
occupied by the working classes - the miserable, uncomfortable,
jerry-built "villas" occupied by the lower middle classes and by
"business" people, will be left empty and valueless upon the hands of
their rack renting landlords, who will very soon voluntarily offer to
hand them and the ground they stand upon to the state on the same
terms as those accorded to the other property owners, namely - in
return for a pension.  Some of these people will be content to live in
idleness on the income allowed them for life as compensation by the
State: others will devote themselves to art or science and some others
will offer their services to the community as managers and
superintendents, and the State will always be glad to employ all those
who are willing to help in the Great Work of production and
distribution.

`By this time the nation will be the sole employer of labour, and as
no one will be able to procure the necessaries of life without paper
money, and as the only way to obtain this will be working, it will
mean that every mentally and physically capable person in the
community will be helping in the great work of PRODUCTION and
DISTRIBUTION.  We shall not need as at present, to maintain a police
force to protect the property of the idle rich from the starving
wretches whom they have robbed.  There will be no unemployed and no
overlapping of labour, which will be organized and concentrated for
the accomplishment of the only rational object - the creation of the
things we require...  For every one labour-saving machine in use
today, we will, if necessary, employ a thousand machines! and
consequently there will be produced such a stupendous, enormous,
prodigious, overwhelming abundance of everything that soon the
Community will be faced once more with the serious problem of
OVER-PRODUCTION.

`To deal with this, it will be necessary to reduce the hours of our
workers to four or five hours a day...  All young people will be
allowed to continue at public schools and universities and will not be
required to take any part in the work or the nation until they are
twenty-one years of age.  At the age of forty-five, everyone will be
allowed to retire from the State service on full pay...  All these
will be able to spend the rest of their days according to their own
inclinations; some will settle down quietly at home, and amuse
themselves in the same ways as people of wealth and leisure do at the
present day - with some hobby, or by taking part in the organization
of social functions, such as balls, parties, entertainments, the
organization of Public Games and Athletic Tournaments, Races and all
kinds of sports.

`Some will prefer to continue in the service of the State.  Actors,
artists, sculptors, musicians and others will go on working for their
own pleasure and honour...  Some will devote their leisure to science,
art, or literature.  Others will prefer to travel on the State
steamships to different parts of the world to see for themselves all
those things of which most of us have now but a dim and vague
conception.  The wonders of India and Egypt, the glories of Rome, the
artistic treasures of the continent and the sublime scenery of other
lands.

`Thus - for the first time in the history of humanity - the benefits
and pleasures conferred upon mankind by science and civilization will
be enjoyed equally by all, upon the one condition, that they shall do
their share of the work, that is necessary in order to, make all these
things possible.

`These are the principles upon which the CO-OPERATIVE COMMONWEALTH of
the future will be organized.  The State in which no one will be
distinguished or honoured above his fellows except for Virtue or
Talent.  Where no man will find his profit in another's loss, and we
shall no longer be masters and servants, but brothers, free men, and
friends.  Where there will be no weary, broken men and women passing
their joyless lives in toil and want, and no little children crying
because they are hungry or cold.

`A State wherein it will be possible to put into practice the
teachings of Him whom so many now pretend to follow.  A society which
shall have justice and co-operation for its foundation, and
International Brotherhood and love for its law.

        `Such are the days that shall be! but
        What are the deeds of today,
        In the days of the years we dwell in,
        That wear our lives away?
        Why, then, and for what we are waiting?
        There are but three words to speak
        "We will it," and what is the foreman
        but the dream strong wakened and weak?
        `Oh, why and for what are we waiting, while
        our brothers droop and die?
        And on every wind of the heavens, a
        wasted life goes by.
        `How long shall they reproach us, where
        crowd on crowd they dwell
        Poor ghosts of the wicked city,
        gold crushed, hungry hell?
        `Through squalid life they laboured in
        sordid grief they died
        Those sons of a mighty mother, those
        props of England's pride.
        They are gone, there is none can undo
        it, nor save our souls from the curse,
        But many a million cometh, and shall
        they be better or worse?

        `It is We must answer and hasten and open wide the door,
        For the rich man's hurrying terror, and the slow foot hope of
        the poor,
        Yea, the voiceless wrath of the wretched and their unlearned
        discontent,
        We must give it voice and wisdom, till the waiting tide be
        spent
        Come then since all things call us, the living and the dead,
        And o'er the weltering tangle a glimmering light is shed.'

As Barrington descended from the Pulpit and walked back to his
accustomed seat, a loud shout of applause burst from a few men in the
crowd, who stood up and waved their caps and cheered again and again.
When order was restored, Philpot rose and addressed the meeting:

`Is there any gentleman wot would like to ask the Speaker a question?'

No one spoke and the Chairman again put the question without obtaining
any response, but at length one of the new hands who had been `taken
on' about a week previously to replace another painter who had been
sacked for being too slow - stood up and said there was one point that
he would like a little more information about.  This man had two
patches on the seat of his trousers, which were also very much frayed
and ragged at the bottoms of the legs: the lining of his coat was all
in rags, as were also the bottoms of the sleeves; his boots were old
and had been many times mended and patched; the sole of one of them
had begun to separate from the upper and he had sewn these parts
together with a few stitches of copper wire.  He had been out of
employment for several weeks and it was evident from the pinched
expression of his still haggard face that during that time he had not
had sufficient to eat.  This man was not a drunkard, neither was he
one of those semi-mythical persons who are too lazy to work.  He was
married and had several children.  One of them, a boy of fourteen
years old, earned five shillings a week as a light porter at a
Grocer's.

Being a householder the man had a vote, but he had never hitherto
taken much interest in what he called `politics'.  In his opinion,
those matters were not for the likes of him.  He believed in leaving
such difficult subjects to be dealt with by his betters.  In his
present unhappy condition he was a walking testimonial to the wisdom
and virtue and benevolence of those same `betters' who have hitherto
managed the affairs of the world with results so very satisfactory for
themselves.

`I should like to ask the speaker,' he said, `supposin' all this that
'e talks about is done - what's to become of the King, and the Royal
Family, and all the Big Pots?'

`'Ear, 'ear,' cried Crass, eagerly - and Ned Dawson and the man behind
the moat both said that that was what they would like to know, too.

`I am much more concerned about what is to become of ourselves if
these things are not done,' replied Barrington.  `I think we should
try to cultivate a little more respect of our own families and to
concern ourselves a little less about "Royal" Families.  I fail to see
any reason why we should worry ourselves about those people; they're
all right - they have all they need, and as far as I am aware, nobody
wishes to harm them and they are well able to look after themselves.
They will fare the same as the other rich people.'

`I should like to ask,' said Harlow, `wot's to become of all the gold
and silver and copper money?  Wouldn't it be of no use at all?'

`It would be of far more use under Socialism than it is at present.
The State would of course become possessed of a large quantity of it
in the early stages of the development of the Socialist system,
because - at first - while the State would be paying all its officers
and productive workers in paper, the rest of the community - those not
in State employ - would be paying their taxes in gold as at present.
All travellers on the State railways - other than State employees -
would pay their fares in metal money, and gold and silver would pour
into the State Treasury from many other sources.  The State would
receive gold and silver and - for the most part - pay out paper.  By
the time the system of State employment was fully established, gold
and silver would only be of value as metal and the State would
purchase it from whoever possessed and wished to sell it - at so much
per pound as raw material: instead of hiding it away in the vaults of
banks, or locking it up in iron safes, we shall make use of it.  Some
of the gold will be manufactured into articles of jewellery, to be
sold for paper money and worn by the sweethearts and wives and
daughters of the workers; some of it will be beaten out into gold leaf
to be used in the decoration of the houses of the citizens and of
public buildings.  As for the silver, it will be made into various
articles of utility for domestic use.  The workers will not then, as
now, have to eat their food with poisonous lead or brass spoons and
forks, we shall have these things of silver and if there is not enough
silver we shall probably have a non-poisonous alloy of that metal.'

`As far as I can make out,' said Harlow, `the paper money will be just
as valuable as gold and silver is now.  Well, wot's to prevent artful
dodgers like old Misery and Rushton saving it up and buying and
selling things with it, and so livin' without work?'

`Of course,' said Crass, scornfully.  `It would never do!'

`That's a very simple matter; any man who lives without doing any
useful work is living on the labour of others, he is robbing others of
part of the result of their labour.  The object of Socialism is to
stop this robbery, to make it impossible.  So no one will be able to
hoard up or accumulate the paper money because it will be dated, and
will become worthless if it is not spent within a certain time after
its issue.  As for buying and selling for profit - from whom would
they buy?  And to whom would they sell?'

`Well, they might buy some of the things the workers didn't want, for
less than the workers paid for them, and then they could sell 'em
again.'

`They'd have to sell them for less than the price charged at the
National Stores, and if you think about it a little you'll see that it
would not be very profitable.  It would be with the object of
preventing any attempts at private trading that the Administration
would refuse to pay compensation to private owners in a lump sum.  All
such compensations would be paid, as I said, in the form of a pension
of so much per year.

`Another very effective way to prevent private trading would be to
make it a criminal offence against the well-being of the community.
At present many forms of business are illegal unless you take out a
licence; under Socialism no one would be allowed to trade without a
licence, and no licences would be issued.'

`Wouldn't a man be allowed to save up his money if he wanted to,
demanded Slyme with indignation.

`There will be nothing to prevent a man going without some of the
things he might have if he is foolish enough to do so, but he would
never be able to save up enough to avoid doing his share of useful
service.  Besides, what need would there be for anyone to save?  One's
old age would be provided for.  No one could ever be out of
employment.  If one was ill the State hospitals and Medical Service
would be free.  As for one's children, they would attend the State
Free Schools and Colleges and when of age they would enter the State
Service, their futures provided for.  Can you tell us why anyone would
need or wish to save?'

Slyme couldn't.

`Are there any more questions?' demanded Philpot.

`While we are speaking of money,' added Barrington, `I should like to
remind you that even under the present system there are many things
which cost money to maintain, that we enjoy without having to pay for
directly.  The public roads and pavements cost money to make and
maintain and light.  So do the parks, museums and bridges.  But they
are free to all.  Under a Socialist Administration this principle will
be extended - in addition to the free services we enjoy now we shall
then maintain the trains and railways for the use of the public, free.
And as time goes on, this method of doing business will be adopted in
many other directions.'

`I've read somewhere,' said Harlow, `that whenever a Government in any
country has started issuing paper money it has always led to
bankruptcy.  How do you know that the same thing would not happen
under a Socialist Administration?'

`'Ear, 'ear,' said Crass.  `I was just goin' to say the same thing.'

`If the Government of a country began to issue large amounts of paper
money under the present system,' Barrington replied, `it would
inevitably lead to bankruptcy, for the simple reason that paper money
under the present system - bank-notes, bank drafts, postal orders,
cheques or any other form - is merely a printed promise to pay the
amount - in gold or silver - on demand or at a certain date.  Under
the present system if a Government issues more paper money than it
possesses gold and silver to redeem, it is of course bankrupt.  But
the paper money that will be issued under a Socialist Administration
will not be a promise to pay in gold or silver on demand or at any
time.  It will be a promise to supply commodities to the amount
specified on the note, and as there could be no dearth of those things
there could be no possibility of bankruptcy.'

`I should like to know who's goin' to appoint the hofficers of this
'ere hindustrial harmy,' said the man on the pail.  `We don't want to
be bullied and chivied and chased about by a lot of sergeants and
corporals like a lot of soldiers, you know.'

`'Ear. 'ear,' said Crass.  `You must 'ave some masters.  Someone's got
to be in charge of the work.'

`We don't have to put up with any bullying or chivying or chasing now,
do we?' said Barrington.  `So of course we could not have anything of
that sort under Socialism.  We could not put up with it at all!  Even
if it were only for four or five hours a day.  Under the present
system we have no voice in appointing our masters and overseers and
foremen - we have no choice as to what master we shall work under.  If
our masters do not treat us fairly we have no remedy against them.
Under Socialism it will be different; the workers will be part of the
community; the officers or managers and foremen will be the servants
of the community, and if any one of these men were to abuse his
position he could be promptly removed.  As for the details of the
organization of the Industrial Army, the difficulty is, again, not so
much to devise a way, but to decide which of many ways would be the
best, and the perfect way will probably be developed only after
experiment and experience.  The one thing we have to hold fast to is
the fundamental principle of State employment or National service.
Production for use and not for profit.  The national organization of
industry under democratic control.  One way of arranging this business
would be for the community to elect a Parliament in much the same way
as is done at present.  The only persons eligible for election to be
veterans of the industrial Army, men and women who had put in their
twenty-five years of service.

`This Administrative Body would have control of the different State
Departments.  There would be a Department of Agriculture, a Department
of Railways and so on, each with its minister and staff.

`All these Members of Parliament would be the relatives - in some
cases the mothers and fathers of those in the Industrial Service, and
they would be relied upon to see that the conditions of that service
were the best possible.

`As for the different branches of the State Service, they could be
organized on somewhat the same lines as the different branches of the
Public Service are now - like the Navy, the Post Office and as the
State Railways in some other countries, or as are the different
branches of the Military Army, with the difference that all promotions
will be from the ranks, by examinations, and by merit only.  As every
recruit will have had the same class of education they will all have
absolute equality of opportunity and the men who would attain to
positions of authority would be the best men, and not as at present,
the worst.'

`How do you make that out?' demanded Crass.

`Under the present system, the men who become masters and employers
succeed because they are cunning and selfish, not because they
understand or are capable of doing the work out of which they make
their money.  Most of the employers in the building trade for instance
would be incapable of doing any skilled work.  Very few of them would
be worth their salt as journeymen.  The only work they do is to scheme
to reap the benefit of the labour of others.

`The men who now become managers and foremen are selected not because
of their ability as craftsmen, but because they are good slave-drivers
and useful producers of profit for their employers.'

`How are you goin' to prevent the selfish and cunnin', as you call
'em, from gettin' on top THEN as they do now?' said Harlow.

`The fact that all workers will receive the same pay, no matter what
class of work they are engaged in, or what their position, will ensure
our getting the very best man to do all the higher work and to
organize our business.'

Crass laughed: `What!  Everybody to get the same wages?'

`Yes: there will be such an enormous quantity of everything produced,
that their wages will enable everyone to purchase abundance of
everything they require.  Even if some were paid more than others they
would not be able to spend it.  There would be no need to save it, and
as there will be no starving poor, there will be no one to give it
away to.  If it were possible to save and accumulate money it would
bring into being an idle class, living on their fellows: it would lead
to the downfall of our system, and a return to the same anarchy that
exists at present.  Besides, if higher wages were paid to those
engaged in the higher work or occupying positions of authority it
would prevent our getting the best men.  Unfit persons would try for
the positions because of the higher pay.  That is what happens now.
Under the present system men intrigue for and obtain or are
pitchforked into positions for which they have no natural ability at
all; the only reason they desire these positions is because of the
salaries attached to them.  These fellows get the money and the work
is done by underpaid subordinates whom the world never hears of.
Under Socialism, this money incentive will be done away with, and
consequently the only men who will try for these positions will be
those who, being naturally fitted for the work, would like to do it.
For instance a man who is a born organizer will not refuse to
undertake such work because he will not be paid more for it.  Such a
man will desire to do it and will esteem it a privilege to be allowed
to do it.  He will revel in it.  To think out all the details of some
undertaking, to plan and scheme and organize, is not work for a man
like that.  It is a pleasure.  But for a man who has sought and
secured such a position, not because he liked the work, but because he
liked the salary - such work as this would be unpleasant labour.
Under Socialism the unfit man would not apply for that post but would
strive after some other for which he was fit and which he would
therefore desire and enjoy.  There are some men who would rather have
charge of and organize and be responsible for work than do it with
their hands.  There are others who would rather do delicate or
difficult or artistic work, than plain work.  A man who is a born
artist would rather paint a frieze or a picture or carve a statue than
he would do plain work, or take charge of and direct the labour of
others.  And there are another sort of men who would rather do
ordinary plain work than take charge, or attempt higher branches for
which they have neither liking or natural talent.

`But there is one thing - a most important point that you seem to
entirely lose sight of, and that is, that all these different kinds
and classes are equal in one respect - THEY ARE ALL EQUALLY NECESSARY.
Each is a necessary and indispensable part of the whole; therefore
everyone who has done his full share of necessary work is justly
entitled to a full share of the results.  The men who put the slates
on are just as indispensable as the men who lay the foundations.  The
work of the men who build the walls and make the doors is just as
necessary as the work of the men who decorate the cornice.  None of
them would be of much use without the architect, and the plans of the
architect would come to nothing, his building would be a mere castle
in the air, if it were not for the other workers.  Each part of the
work is equally necessary, useful and indispensable if the building is
to he perfected.  Some of these men work harder with their brains than
with their hands and some work harder with their hands than with their
brains, BUT EACH ONE DOES HIS FULL SHARE OF THE WORK.  This truth will
be recognized and acted upon by those who build up and maintain the
fabric of our Co-operative Commonwealth.  Every man who does his full
share of the useful and necessary work according to his abilities
shall have his full share of the total result.  Herein will be its
great difference from the present system, under which it is possible
for the cunning and selfish ones to take advantage of the simplicity
of others and rob them of part of the fruits of their labour.  As for
those who will be engaged in the higher branches, they will be
sufficiently rewarded by being privileged to do the work they are
fitted for and enjoy.  The only men and women who are capable of good
and great work of any kind are those who, being naturally fit for it,
love the work for its own sake and not for the money it brings them.
Under the present system, many men who have no need of money produce
great works, not for gain but for pleasure: their wealth enables them
to follow their natural inclinations.  Under the present system many
men and women capable of great works are prevented from giving
expression to their powers by poverty and lack of opportunity: they
live in sorrow and die heartbroken, and the community is the loser.
These are the men and women who will be our artists, sculptors,
architects, engineers and captains of industry.

`Under the present system there are men at the head of affairs whose
only object is the accumulation of money.  Some of them possess great
abilities and the system has practically compelled them to employ
those abilities for their own selfish ends to the hurt of the
community.  Some of them have built up great fortunes out of the sweat
and blood and tears of men and women and little children.  For those
who delight in such work as this, there will be no place in our
Co-operative Commonwealth.'

`Is there any more questions?' demanded Philpot.

`Yes,' said Harlow.  `If there won't be no extry pay and if anybody
will have all they need for just doing their part of the work, what
encouragement will there be for anyone to worry his brains out trying
to invent some new machine, or make some new discovery?'

`Well,' said Barrington, `I think that's covered by the last answer,
but if it were found necessary - which is highly improbable - to offer
some material reward in addition to the respect, esteem or honour that
would be enjoyed by the author of an invention that was a boon to the
community, it could be arranged by allowing him to retire before the
expiration of his twenty-five years service.  The boon he had
conferred on the community by the invention, would be considered
equivalent to so many years work.  But a man like that would not
desire to cease working; that sort go on working all their lives, for
love.  There's Edison for instance.  He is one of the very few
inventors who have made money out of their work; he is a rich man, but
the only use his wealth seems to be to him is to procure himself
facilities for going on with his work; his life is a round of what
some people would call painful labour: but it is not painful labour to
him; it's just pleasure, he works for the love of it.  Another way
would be to absolve a man of that sort from the necessity of ordinary
work, so as to give him a chance to get on with other inventions.  It
would be to the interests of the community to encourage him in every
way and to place materials and facilities at his disposal.

`But you must remember that even under the present system, Honour and
Praise are held to be greater than money.  How many soldiers would
prefer money to the honour of wearing the intrinsically valueless
Victoria Cross?

`Even now men think less of money than they do of the respect, esteem
or honour they are able to procure with it.  Many men spend the
greater part of their lives striving to accumulate money, and when
they have succeeded, they proceed to spend it to obtain the respect of
their fellow-men.  Some of them spend thousands of pounds for the
honour of being able to write "MP" after their names.  Others buy
titles.  Others pay huge sums to gain admission to exclusive circles
of society.  Others give the money away in charity, or found libraries
or universities.  The reason they do these things is that they desire
to be applauded and honoured by their fellow-men.

`This desire is strongest in the most capable men - the men of genius.
Therefore, under Socialism the principal incentive to great work will
be the same as now - Honour and Praise.  But, under the present
system, Honour and Praise can be bought with money, and it does not
matter much how the money was obtained.

`Under Socialism it will be different.  The Cross of Honour and the
Laurel Crown will not be bought and sold for filthy lucre.  They will
be the supreme rewards of Virtue and of Talent.'

`Anyone else like to be flattened Out?' inquired Philpot.

`What would you do with them what spends all their money in drink?'
asked Slyme.

`I might reasonably ask you, "What's done with them or what you
propose to do with them now?"  There are many men and women whose
lives are so full of toil and sorrow and the misery caused by abject
poverty, who are so shut out from all that makes life worth living,
that the time they spend in the public house is the only ray of
sunshine in their cheerless lives.  Their mental and material poverty
is so great that they are deprived of and incapable of understanding
the intellectual and social pleasures of civilization...  Under
Socialism there will be no such class as this.  Everyone will be
educated, and social life and rational pleasure will be within the
reach of all.  Therefore we do not believe that there will be such a
class.  Any individuals who abandoned themselves to such a course
would be avoided by their fellows; but if they became very degraded,
we should still remember that they were our brother men and women, and
we should regard them as suffering from a disease inherited from their
uncivilized forefathers and try to cure them by placing them under
some restraint: in an institute for instance.'

`Another good way to deal with 'em,' said Harlow, `would be to allow
them double pay, so as they could drink themselves to death.  We could
do without the likes of them.'

`Call the next case,' said Philpot.

`This 'ere abundance that you're always talking about,' said Crass,
you can't be sure that it would be possible to produce all that.
You're only assoomin' that it could be done.'

Barrington pointed to the still visible outlines of the `Hoblong' that
Owen had drawn on the wall to illustrate a previous lecture.

`Even under the present silly system of restricted production, with
the majority of the population engaged in useless, unproductive,
unnecessary work, and large numbers never doing any work at all, there
is enough produced to go all round after a fashion.  More than enough,
for in consequence of what they call "Over-Production", the markets
are periodically glutted with commodities of all kinds, and then for a
time the factories are closed and production ceases.  And yet we can
all manage to exist - after a fashion.  This proves that if productive
industry were organized on the lines advocated by Socialists there
could be produced such a prodigious quantity of everything, that
everyone could live in plenty and comfort.  The problem of how to
produce sufficient for all to enjoy abundance is already solved: the
problem that then remains is - How to get rid of those whose greed and
callous indifference to the sufferings of others, prevents it being
done.'

`Yes! and you'll never be able to get rid of 'em, mate,' cried Crass,
triumphantly - and the man with the copper wire stitches in his boot
said that it couldn't be done.

`Well, we mean to have a good try, anyhow,' said Barrington.

Crass and most of the others tried hard to think of something to say
in defence of the existing state of affairs, or against the proposals
put forward by the lecturer; but finding nothing, they maintained a
sullen and gloomy silence.  The man with the copper wire stitches in
his boot in particular appeared to be very much upset; perhaps he was
afraid that if the things advocated by the speaker ever came to pass
he would not have any boots at all.  To assume that he had some such
thought as this, is the only rational way to account for his
hostility, for in his case no change could have been for the worse
unless it reduced him to almost absolute nakedness and starvation.

To judge by their unwillingness to consider any proposals to alter the
present system, one might have supposed that they were afraid of
losing something, instead of having nothing to lose - except their
poverty.

It was not till the chairman had made several urgent appeals for more
questions that Crass brightened up: a glad smile slowly spread over
and illuminated his greasy visage: he had at last thought of a most
serious and insurmountable obstacle to the establishment of the
Co-operative Commonwealth.

`What,' he demanded, in a loud voice, `what are you goin' to do, in
this 'ere Socialist Republic of yours, with them wot WON'T WORK'!"

As Crass flung this bombshell into the Socialist camp, the miserable,
ragged-trousered crew around him could scarce forbear a cheer; but the
more intelligent part of the audience only laughed.

`We don't believe that there will be any such people as that,' said
Barrington.

`There's plenty of 'em about now, anyway,' sneered Crass.

`You can't change 'uman nature, you know,' cried the man behind the
moat, and the one who had the copper wire stitches in his boot laughed
scornfully.

`Yes, I know there are plenty such now,' rejoined Barrington.  `It's
only what is to be expected, considering that practically all workers
live in poverty, and are regarded with contempt.  The conditions under
which most of the work is done at present are so unpleasant and
degrading that everyone refuses to do any unless they are compelled;
none of us here, for instance, would continue to work for Rushton if
it were not for the fact that we have either to do so or starve; and
when we do work we only just earn enough to keep body and soul
together.  Under the present system everybody who can possibly manage
to do so avoids doing any work, the only difference being that some
people do their loafing better than others.  The aristocracy are too
lazy to work, but they seem to get on all right; they have their
tenants to work for them.  Rushton is too lazy to work, so he has
arranged that we and Nimrod shall work instead, and he fares much
better than any of us who do work.  Then there is another kind of
loafers who go about begging and occasionally starving rather than
submit to such abominable conditions as are offered to them.  These
last are generally not much worse off than we are and they are often
better off.  At present, people have everything to gain and but little
to lose by refusing to work.  Under Socialism it would be just the
reverse; the conditions of labour would be so pleasant, the hours of
obligatory work so few, and the reward so great, that it is absurd to
imagine that any one would be so foolish as to incur the contempt of
his fellows and make himself a social outcast by refusing to do the
small share of work demanded of him by the community of which he was a
member.

`As for what we should do to such individuals if there did happen to
be some, I can assure you that we would not treat them as you treat
them now.  We would not dress them up in silk and satin and broadcloth
and fine linen: we would not embellish them, as you do, with jewels of
gold and jewels of silver and with precious stones; neither should we
allow them to fare sumptuously every day.  Our method of dealing with
them would be quite different from yours.  In the Co-operative
Commonwealth there will be no place for loafers; whether they call
themselves aristocrats or tramps, those who are too lazy to work shall
have no share in the things that are produced by the labour of others.
Those who do nothing shall have nothing.  If any man will not work,
neither shall he eat.  Under the present system a man who is really
too lazy to work may stop you in the street and tell you that he
cannot get employment.  For all you know, he may be telling the truth,
and if you have any feeling and are able, you will help him.  But in
the Socialist State no one would have such an excuse, because everyone
that was willing would be welcome to come and help in the work of
producing wealth and happiness for all, and afterwards he would also
be welcome to his full share of the results.'

`Any more complaints?' inquired the chairman, breaking the gloomy
silence that followed.

`I don't want anyone to think that I am blaming any of these
present-day loafers,' Barrington added.  `The wealthy ones cannot be
expected voluntarily to come and work under existing conditions and if
they were to do so they would be doing more harm than good - they
would be doing some poor wretches out of employment.  They are not to
be blamed; the people who are to blame are the working classes
themselves, who demand and vote for the continuance of the present
system.  As for the other class of loafers - those at the bottom, the
tramps and people of that sort, if they were to become sober and
industrious tomorrow, they also would be doing more harm than good to
the other workers; it would increase the competition for work.  If all
the loafers in Mugsborough could suddenly be transformed into decent
house painters next week, Nimrod might be able to cut down the wages
another penny an hour.  I don't wish to speak disrespectfully of these
tramps at all.  Some of them are such simply because they would rather
starve than submit to the degrading conditions that we submit to, they
do not see the force of being bullied and chased, and driven about in
order to gain semi-starvation and rags.  They are able to get those
without working; and I sometimes think that they are more worthy of
respect and are altogether a nobler type of beings than a lot of
broken-spirited wretches like ourselves, who are always at the mercy
of our masters, and always in dread of the sack.'

`Any more questions?' said the chairman.

`Do you mean to say as the time will ever come when the gentry will
mix up on equal terms with the likes of us?' demanded the man behind
the moat, scornfully.

`Oh, no,' replied the lecturer.  When we get Socialism there won't be
any people like us.  Everybody will be civilized.'

The man behind the moat did not seem very satisfied with this answer,
and told the others that he could not see anything to laugh at.

`Is there any more questions?' cried Philpot.  `Now is your chance to
get some of your own back, but don't hall speak at once.'

`I should like to know who's goin' to do all the dirty work?' said
Slyme.  `If everyone is to be allowed to choose 'is own trade, who'd
be fool enough to choose to be a scavenger, a sweep, a dustman or a
sewer man? nobody wouldn't want to do such jobs as them and everyone
would be after the soft jobs.'

`Of course,' cried Crass, eagerly clutching at this last straw.  `The
thing sounds all right till you comes to look into it, but it wouldn't
never work!'

`It would be very easy to deal with any difficulty of that sort,'
replied Barrington, `if it were found that too many people were
desirous of pursuing certain callings, it would be known that the
conditions attached to those kinds of work were unfairly easy, as
compared with other lines, so the conditions in those trades would be
made more severe.  A higher degree of skill would be required.  If we
found that too many persons wished to be doctors, architects,
engineers and so forth, we would increase the severity of the
examinations.  This would scare away all but the most gifted and
enthusiastic.  We should thus at one stroke reduce the number of
applicants and secure the very best men for the work - we should have
better doctors, better architects, better engineers than before.

`As regards those disagreeable tasks for which there was a difficulty
in obtaining volunteers, we should adopt the opposite means.  Suppose
that six hours was the general thing; and we found that we could not
get any sewer men; we should reduce the hours of labour in that
department to four, or if necessary to two, in order to compensate for
the disagreeable nature of the work.

`Another way out of such difficulties would be to have a separate
division of the Industrial army to do all such work, and to make it
obligatory for every man to put in his first year of State service as
a member of this corps.  There would be no hardship in that.  Everyone
gets the benefit of such work; there would be no injustice in
requiring everyone to share.  This would have the effect also of
stimulating invention; it would be to everyone's interest to think out
means of doing away with such kinds of work and there is no doubt that
most of it will be done by machinery in some way or other.  A few
years ago the only way to light up the streets of a town was to go
round to each separate gas lamp and light each jet, one at a time:
now, we press a few buttons and light up the town with electricity.
In the future we shall probably be able to press a button and flush
the sewers.'

`What about religion?' said Slyme.  `I suppose there won't be no
churches nor chapels; we shall all have to be atheists.'

`Everybody will be perfectly free to enjoy their own opinions and to
practise any religion they like; but no religion or sect will be
maintained by the State.  If any congregation or body of people wish
to have a building for their own exclusive use as a church or chapel
or lecture hall it will be supplied to them by the State on the same
terms as those upon which dwelling houses will be supplied; the State
will construct the special kind of building and the congregation will
have to pay the rent, the amount to be based on the cost of
construction, in paper money of course.  As far as the embellishment
or decoration of such places is concerned, there will of course be
nothing to prevent the members of the congregation if they wish from
doing any such work as that themselves in their own spare time of
which they will have plenty.'

`If everybody's got to do their share of work, where's the minister
and clergymen to come from?'

`There are at least three ways out of that difficulty.  First,
ministers of religion could be drawn from the ranks of the Veterans -
men over forty-five years old who had completed their term of State
service.  You must remember that these will not be worn out wrecks, as
too many of the working classes are at that age now.  They will have
had good food and clothing and good general conditions all their
lives; and consequently they will be in the very prime of life.  They
will be younger than many of us now are at thirty; they will be ideal
men for the positions we are speaking of.  All well educated in their
youth, and all will have had plenty of leisure for self culture during
the years of their State service and they will have the additional
recommendation that their congregation will not be required to pay
anything for their services.

`Another way: If a congregation wished to retain the full-time
services of a young man whom they thought specially gifted but who had
not completed his term of State service, they could secure him by
paying the State for his services; thus the young man would still
remain in State employment, he would still continue to receive his pay
from the National Treasury, and at the age of forty-five would be
entitled to his pension like any other worker, and after that the
congregation would not have to pay the State anything.

`A third - and as it seems to me, the most respectable way - would be
for the individual in question to act as minister or pastor or
lecturer or whatever it was, to the congregation without seeking to
get out of doing his share of the State service.  The hours of
obligatory work would be so short and the work so light that he would
have abundance of leisure to prepare his orations without sponging on
his co-religionists.'

`'Ear, 'ear!' cried Harlow.

`Of course,' added Barrington, `it would not only be congregations of
Christians who could adopt any of these methods.  It is possible that
a congregation of agnostics, for instance, might want a separate
building or to maintain a lecturer.'

`What the 'ell's an agnostic?' demanded Bundy.

`An agnostic,' said the man behind the moat, `is a bloke wot don't
believe nothing unless 'e see it with 'is own eyes.'

`All these details,' continued the speaker, `of the organization of
affairs and the work of the Co-operative Commonwealth, are things
which do not concern us at all.  They have merely been suggested by
different individuals as showing some ways in which these things could
be arranged.  The exact methods to be adopted will be decided upon by
the opinion of the majority when the work is being done.  Meantime,
what we have to do is to insist upon the duty of the State to provide
productive work for the unemployed, the State feeding of
schoolchildren, the nationalization or Socialization of Railways;
Land; the Trusts, and all public services that are still in the hands
of private companies.  If you wish to see these things done, you must
cease from voting for Liberal and Tory sweaters, shareholders of
companies, lawyers, aristocrats, and capitalists; and you must fill
the House of Commons with Revolutionary Socialists.  That is - with
men who are in favour of completely changing the present system.  And
in the day that you do that, you will have solved the poverty
"problem".  No more tramping the streets begging for a job!  No more
hungry children at home.  No more broken boots and ragged clothes.  No
more women and children killing themselves with painful labour whilst
strong men stand idly by; but joyous work and joyous leisure for all.'

`Is there any more questions?' cried Philpot.

`Is it true,' said Easton, `that Socialists intend to do away with the
Army and Navy?'

`Yes; it is true.  Socialists believe in International Brotherhood and
peace.  Nearly all wars are caused by profit-seeking capitalists,
seeking new fields for commercial exploitation, and by aristocrats who
make it the means of glorifying themselves in the eyes of the deluded
common people.  You must remember that Socialism is not only a
national, but an international movement and when it is realized, there
will be no possibility of war, and we shall no longer seed to maintain
an army and navy, or to waste a lot of labour building warships or
manufacturing arms and ammunition.  All those people who are now
employed will then be at liberty to assist in the great work of
producing the benefits of civilization; creating wealth and knowledge
and happiness for themselves and others - Socialism means Peace on
earth and goodwill to all mankind.  But in the meantime we know that
the people of other nations are not yet all Socialists; we do not
forget that in foreign countries - just the same as in Britain - there
are large numbers of profit seeking capitalists, who are so destitute
of humanity, that if they thought it could be done successfully and
with profit to themselves they would not scruple to come here to
murder and to rob.  We do not forget that in foreign countries - the
same as here - there are plenty of so-called "Christian" bishops and
priests always ready to give their benediction to any such murderous
projects, and to blasphemously pray to the Supreme Being to help his
children to slay each other like wild beasts.  And knowing and
remembering all this, we realize that until we have done away with
capitalism, aristocracy and anti-Christian clericalism, it is our duty
to be prepared to defend our homes and our native land.  And therefore
we are in favour of maintaining national defensive forces in the
highest possible state of efficiency.  But that does not mean that we
are in favour of the present system of organizing those forces.  We do
not believe in conscription, and we do not believe that the nation
should continue to maintain a professional standing army to be used at
home for the purpose of butchering men and women of the working
classes in the interests of a handful of capitalists, as has been done
at Featherstone and Belfast; or to be used abroad to murder and rob
the people of other nations.  Socialists advocate the establishment of
a National Citizen Army, for defensive purposes only.  We believe that
every able bodied man should be compelled to belong to this force and
to undergo a course of military training, but without making him into
a professional soldier, or taking him away from civil life, depriving
him of the rights of citizenship or making him subject to military
"law" which is only another name for tyranny and despotism.  This
Citizen Army could be organized on somewhat similar lines to the
present Territorial Force, with certain differences.  For instance, we
do not believe - as our present rulers do - that wealth and
aristocratic influence are the two most essential qualifications for
an efficient officer; we believe that all ranks should be attainable
by any man, no matter how poor, who is capable of passing the
necessary examinations, and that there should be no expense attached
to those positions which the Government grant, or the pay, is not
sufficient to cover.  The officers could be appointed in any one of
several ways: They might be elected by the men they would have to
command, the only qualification required being that they had passed
their examinations, or they might be appointed according to merit -
the candidate obtaining the highest number of marks at the
examinations to have the first call on any vacant post, and so on in
order of merit.  We believe in the total abolition of courts martial,
any offence against discipline should be punishable by the ordinary
civil law - no member of the Citizen Army being deprived of the rights
of a citizen.'

`What about the Navy?' cried several voices.

`Nobody wants to interfere with the Navy except to make its
organization more democratic - the same as that of the Citizen Army -
and to protect its members from tyranny by entitling them to be tried
in a civil court for any alleged offence.

`It has been proved that if the soil of this country were
scientifically cultivated, it is capable of producing sufficient to
maintain a population of a hundred millions of people.  Our present
population is only about forty millions, but so long as the land
remains in the possession of persons who refuse to allow it to be
cultivated we shall continue to be dependent on other countries for
our food supply.  So long as we are in that position, and so long as
foreign countries are governed by Liberal and Tory capitalists, we
shall need the Navy to protect our overseas commerce from them.  If we
had a Citizen Army such as I have mentioned, of nine or ten millions
of men and if the land of this country was properly cultivated, we
should be invincible at home.  No foreign power would ever be mad
enough to attempt to land their forces on our shores.  But they would
now be able to starve us all to death in a month if it were not for
the Navy.  It's a sensible and creditable position, isn't it?'
concluded Barrington.  `Even in times of peace, thousands of people
standing idle and tamely starving in their own fertile country,
because a few land "Lords" forbid them to cultivate it.'

`Is there any more questions?' demanded Philpot, breaking a prolonged
silence.

`Would any Liberal or Tory capitalist like to get up into the pulpit
and oppose the speaker?' the chairman went on, finding that no one
responded to his appeal for questions.

The silence continued.

`As there's no more questions and no one won't get up into the pulpit,
it is now my painful duty to call upon someone to move a resolution.'

`Well, Mr Chairman,' said Harlow, `I may say that when I came on this
firm I was a Liberal, but through listenin' to several lectures by
Professor Owen and attendin' the meetings on the hill at Windley and
reading the books and pamphlets I bought there and from Owen, I came
to the conclusion some time ago that it's a mug's game for us to vote
for capitalists whether they calls theirselves Liberals or Tories.
They're all alike when you're workin' for 'em; I defy any man to say
what's the difference between a Liberal and a Tory employer.  There is
none - there can't be; they're both sweaters, and they've got to be,
or they wouldn't be able to compete with each other.  And since that's
what they are, I say it's a mug's game for us to vote 'em into
Parliament to rule over us and to make laws that we've got to abide by
whether we like it or not . There's nothing to choose between 'em, and
the proof of it is that it's never made much difference to us which
party was in or which was out.  It's quite true that in the past both
of 'em have passed good laws, but they've only done it when public
opinion was so strong in favour of it that they knew there was no
getting out of it, and then it was a toss up which side did it.

`That's the way I've been lookin' at things lately, and I'd almost
made up my mind never to vote no more, or to trouble myself about
politics at all, because although I could see there was no sense in
voting for Liberal or Tory capitalists, at the same time I must admit
I couldn't make out how Socialism was going to help us.  But the
explanation of it which Professor Barrington has given us this
afternoon has been a bit of an eye opener for me, and with your
permission I should like to move as a resolution, "That it is the
opinion of this meeting that Socialism is the only remedy for
Unemployment and Poverty."'

The conclusion of Harlow's address was greeted with loud cheers from
the Socialists, but most of the Liberal and Tory supporters of the
present system maintained a sulky silence.

`I'll second that resolution,' said Easton.

`And I'll lay a bob both ways,' remarked Bundy.  The resolution was
then put, and though the majority were against it, the Chairman
declared it was carried unanimously.

By this time the violence of the storm had in a great measure abated,
but as rain was still falling it was decided not to attempt to resume
work that day.  Besides, it would have been too late, even if the
weather had cleared up.

`P'raps it's just as well it 'as rained,' remarked one man.  `If it
'adn't some of us might 'ave got the sack tonight.  As it is, there'll
be hardly enough for all of us to do tomorrer and Saturday mornin'
even if it is fine.'

This was true: nearly all the outside was finished, and what remained
to be done was ready for the final coat.  Inside all there was to do
was to colour wash the walls and to give the woodwork of the kitchen
and scullery the last coat of paint.

It was inevitable - unless the firm had some other work for them to do
somewhere else - that there would be a great slaughter on Saturday.

`Now,' said Philpot, assuming what he meant to be the manner of a
school teacher addressing children, `I wants you hall to make a
speshall heffort and get 'ere very early in the mornin' - say about
four o'clock - and them wot doos the most work tomorrer, will get a
prize on Saturday.'

`What'll it be, the sack?' inquired Harlow.

`Yes,' replied Philpot, `and not honly will you get a prize for good
conduck tomorrer, but if you all keep on workin' like we've bin doing
lately till you're too hold and wore hout to do any more, you'll be
allowed to go to a nice workhouse for the rest of your lives! and each
one of you will be given a title - "Pauper!"'

And they laughed!

Although the majority of them had mothers or fathers or other near
relatives who had already succeeded to the title - they laughed!

As they were going home, Crass paused at the gate, and pointing up to
the large gable at the end of the house, he said to Philpot:

`You'll want the longest ladder - the 65, for that, tomorrow.'

Philpot looked up at the gable.

It was very high.


Chapter 46

The `Sixty-five'


The next morning after breakfast, Philpot, Sawkins, Harlow and
Barrington went to the Yard to get the long ladder - the 65 - so
called because it had sixty-five rungs.  It was really what is known
as a builder's scaffold ladder, and it had been strengthened by
several iron bolts or rods which passed through just under some of the
rungs.  One side of the ladder had an iron band or ribbon twisted and
nailed round it spirally.  It was not at all suitable for painters'
work, being altogether too heavy and cumbrous.  However, as none of
the others were long enough to reach the high gable at the Refuge,
they managed, with a struggle, to get it down from the hooks and put
it on one of the handcarts and soon passed through the streets of mean
and dingy houses in the vicinity of the yard, and began the ascent of
the long hill.

There had been a lot of rain during the night, and the sky was still
overcast with dark grey clouds.  The cart went heavily over the muddy
road; Sawkins was at the helm, holding the end of the ladder and
steering; the others walked a little further ahead, at the sides of
the cart.

It was such hard work that by the time they were half-way up the hill
they were so exhausted and out of breath that they had to stop for a
rest.

`This is a bit of all right, ain't it?' remarked Harlow as he took off
his cap and wiped the sweat from his forehead with his handkerchief.

While they rested they kept a good look out for Rushton or Hunter, who
were likely to pass by at any moment.

At first, no one made any reply to Harlow's observation, for they were
all out of breath and Philpot's lean fingers trembled violently as he
wiped the perspiration from his face.

`Yes, mate,' he said despondently, after a while.  `It's one way of
gettin' a livin' and there's plenty better ways.'

In addition to the fact that his rheumatism was exceptionally bad, he
felt unusually low-spirited this morning; the gloomy weather and the
prospect of a long day of ladder work probably had something to do
with it.

`A "living" is right,' said Barrington bitterly.  He also was
exhausted with the struggle up the hill and enraged by the woebegone
appearance of poor old Philpot, who was panting and quivering from the
exertion.

They relapsed into silence.  The unaccountable depression that
possessed Philpot deprived him of all his usual jocularity and filled
him with melancholy thoughts.  He had travelled up and down this hill
a great many times before under similar circumstances and he said to
himself that if he had half a quid now for every time he had pushed a
cart up this road, he wouldn't need to do anyone out of a job all the
rest of his life.

The shop where he had been apprenticed used to be just down at the
bottom; the place had been pulled down years ago, and the ground was
now occupied by more pretentious buildings.  Not quite so far down the
road - on the other side - he could see the church where he used to
attend Sunday School when he was a boy, and where he was married just
thirty years ago.  Presently - when they reached the top of the hill -
he would be able to look across the valley and see the spire of the
other church, the one in the graveyard, where all those who were dear
to him had been one by one laid to rest.  He felt that he would not be
sorry when the time came to join them there.  Possibly, in the next
world - if there were such a place - they might all be together once
more.

He was suddenly aroused from these thoughts by an exclamation from
Harlow.

`Look out! Here comes Rushton.'

They immediately resumed their journey.  Rushton was coming up the
hill in his dog-cart with Grinder sitting by his side.  They passed so
closely that Philpot - who was on that side of the cart - was splashed
with mud from the wheels of the trap.

`Them's some of your chaps, ain't they?' remarked Grinder.

`Yes,' replied Rushton.  `We're doing a job up this way.'

`I should 'ave thought it would pay you better to use a 'orse for sich
work as that,' said Grinder.

`We do use the horses whenever it's necessary for very big loads, you
know,' answered Rushton, and added with a laugh: `But the donkeys are
quite strong enough for such a job as that.'

The `donkeys' struggled on up the hill for about another hundred yards
and then they were forced to halt again.

`We mustn't stop long, you know,' said Harlow.  `Most likely he's gone
to the job, and he'll wait to see how long it takes us to get there.'

Barrington felt inclined to say that in that case Rushton would have
to wait, but he remained silent, for he remembered that although he
personally did not care a brass button whether he got the sack or not,
the others were not so fortunately circumstanced.

While they were resting, another two-legged donkey passed by pushing
another cart - or rather, holding it back, for he was coming slowly
down the hill.  Another Heir of all the ages - another Imperialist - a
degraded, brutalized wretch, clad in filthy, stinking rags, his toes
protruding from the rotten broken boots that were tied with bits of
string upon his stockingless feet.  The ramshackle cart was loaded
with empty bottles and putrid rags, heaped loosely in the cart and
packed into a large sack.  Old coats and trousers, dresses,
petticoats, and under-clothing, greasy, mildewed and malodorous.  As
he crept along with his eyes on the ground, the man gave utterance at
intervals to uncouth, inarticulate sounds.

`That's another way of gettin' a livin',' said Sawkins with a laugh as
the miserable creature slunk past.

Harlow also laughed, and Barrington regarded them curiously.  He
thought it strange that they did not seem to realize that they might
some day become like this man themselves.

`I've often wondered what they does with all them dirty old rags,'
said Philpot.

`Made into paper,' replied Harlow, briefly.

`Some of them are,' said Barrington, `and some are manufactured into
shoddy cloth and made into Sunday clothes for working men.

`There's all sorts of different ways of gettin' a livin',' remarked
Sawkins, after a pause.  `I read in a paper the other day about a
bloke wot goes about lookin' for open trap doors and cellar flaps in
front of shops.  As soon as he spotted one open, he used to go and
fall down in it; and then he'd be took to the 'orspital, and when he
got better he used to go and threaten to bring a action against the
shop-keeper and get damages, and most of 'em used to part up without
goin' in front of the judge at all.  But one day a slop was a watchin'
of 'im, and seen 'im chuck 'isself down one, and when they picked 'im
up they found he'd broke his leg.  So they took 'im to the 'orspital
and when he came out and went round to the shop and started talkin'
about bringin' a action for damages, the slop collared 'im and they
give 'im six months.'

`Yes, I read about that,' said Harlow, `and there was another case of
a chap who was run over by a motor, and they tried to make out as 'e
put 'isself in the way on purpose; but 'e got some money out of the
swell it belonged to; a 'undered pound I think it was.'

`I only wish as one of their motors would run inter me,' said Philpot,
making a feeble attempt at a joke.  `I lay I'd get some a' me own back
out of 'em.'

The others laughed, and Harlow was about to make some reply but at
that moment a cyclist appeared coming down the hill from the direction
of the job.  It was Nimrod, so they resumed their journey once more
and presently Hunter shot past on his machine without taking any
notice of them...

When they arrived they found that Rushton had not been there at all,
but Nimrod had.  Crass said that he had kicked up no end of a row
because they had not called at the yard at six o'clock that morning
for the ladder, instead of going for it after breakfast - making two
journeys instead of one, and he had also been ratty because the big
gable had not been started the first thing that morning.

They carried the ladder into the garden and laid it on the ground
along the side of the house where the gable was.  A brick wall about
eight feet high separated the grounds of `The Refuge' from those of
the premises next door.  Between this wall and the side wall of the
house was a space about six feet wide and this space formed a kind of
alley or lane or passage along the side of the house.  They laid the
ladder on the ground along this passage, the `foot' was placed about
half-way through; just under the centre of the gable, and as it lay
there, the other end of the ladder reached right out to the front
railings.

Next, it was necessary that two men should go up into the attic - the
window of which was just under the point of the gable - and drop the
end of a long rope down to the others who would tie it to the top of
the ladder.  Then two men would stand on the bottom rung, so as to
keep the `foot' down, and the three others would have to raise the
ladder up, while the two men up in the attic hauled on the rope.

They called Bundy and his mate Ned Dawson to help, and it was arranged
that Harlow and Crass should stand on the foot because they were the
heaviest.  Philpot, Bundy, and Barrington were to `raise', and Dawson
and Sawkins were to go up to the attic and haul on the rope.

`Where's the rope?' asked Crass.

The others looked blankly at him.  None of them had thought of
bringing one from the yard.

`Why, ain't there one 'ere?' asked Philpot.

`One 'ere?  Of course there ain't one 'ere!' snarled Crass.  `Do you
mean to say as you ain't brought one, then?'

Philpot stammered out something about having thought there was one at
the house already, and the others said they had not thought about it
at all.

`Well, what the bloody hell are we to do now?' cried Crass, angrily.

`I'll go to the yard and get one,' suggested Barrington.  `I can do it
in twenty minutes there and back.'

`Yes! and a bloody fine row there'd be if Hunter was to see you!  'Ere
it's nearly ten o'clock and we ain't made a start on this gable wot we
ought to 'ave started first thing this morning.'

`Couldn't we tie two or three of those short ropes together?'
suggested Philpot.  `Those that the other two ladders was spliced
with?'

As there was sure to be a row if they delayed long enough to send to
the yard, it was decided to act on Philpot's suggestion.

Several of the short ropes were accordingly tied together but upon
examination it was found that some parts were so weak that even Crass
had to admit it would be dangerous to attempt to haul the heavy ladder
up with them.

`Well, the only thing as I can see for it,' he said, `is that the boy
will 'ave to go down to the yard and get the long rope.  It won't do
for anyone else to go: there's been one row already about the waste of
time because we didn't call at the yard for the ladder at six o'clock.'

Bert was down in the basement of the house limewashing a cellar.
Crass called him up and gave him the necessary instructions, chief of
which was to get back again as soon as ever he could.  The boy ran
off, and while they were waiting for him to come back the others went
on with their several jobs.  Philpot returned to the small gable he
had been painting before breakfast, which he had not quite finished.
As he worked a sudden and unaccountable terror took possession of him.
He did not want to do that other gable; he felt too ill; and he almost
resolved that he would ask Crass if he would mind letting him do
something else.  There were several younger men who would not object
to doing it - it would be mere child's play to them, and Barrington
had already - yesterday - offered to change jobs with him.

But then, when he thought of what the probable consequences would be,
he hesitated to take that course, and tried to persuade himself that
he would be able to get through with the work all right.  He did not
want Crass or Hunter to mark him as being too old for ladder work.

Bert came back in about half an hour flushed and sweating with the
weight of the rope and with the speed he had made.  He delivered it to
Crass and then returned to his cellar and went on with the
limewashing, while Crass passed the word for Philpot and the others to
come and raise the ladder.  He handed the rope to Ned Dawson, who took
it up to the attic, accompanied by Sawkins; arrived there they lowered
one end out of the window down to the others.

`If you ask me,' said Ned Dawson, who was critically examining the
strands of the rope as he passed it out through the open window, 'If
you ask me, I don't see as this is much better than the one we made up
by tyin' the short pieces together.  Look 'ere,' - he indicated a part
of the rope that was very frayed and worn - `and 'ere's another place
just as bad.'

`Well, for Christ's sake don't say nothing about it now,' replied
Sawkins.  `There's been enough talk and waste of time over this job
already.'

Ned made no answer and the end having by this time reached the ground,
Bundy made it fast to the ladder, about six rungs from the top.

The ladder was lying on the ground, parallel to the side of the house.
The task of raising it would have been much easier if they had been
able to lay it at right angles to the house wall, but this was
impossible because of the premises next door and the garden wall
between the two houses.  On account of its having to be raised in this
manner the men at the top would not be able to get a straight pull on
the rope; they would have to stand back in the room without being able
to see the ladder, and the rope would have to be drawn round the
corner of the window, rasping against the edge of the stone sill and
the brickwork.

The end of the rope having been made fast to the top of the ladder,
Crass and Harlow stood on the foot and the other three raised the top
from the ground; as Barrington was the tallest, he took the middle
position - underneath the ladder - grasping the rungs, Philpot being
on his left and Bundy on his right, each holding one side of the ladder.

At a signal from Crass, Dawson and Sawkins began to haul on the rope,
and the top of the ladder began to use slowly into the air.

Philpot was not of much use at this work, which made it all the harder
for the other two who were lifting, besides putting an extra strain on
the rope.  His lack of strength, and the efforts of Barrington and
Bundy to make up for him caused the ladder to sway from side to side,
as it would not have done if they had all been equally capable.

Meanwhile, upstairs, Dawson and Sawkins - although the ladder was as
yet only a little more than half the way up - noticed, as they hauled
and strained on the rope, that it had worn a groove for itself in the
corner of the brickwork at the side of the window; and every now and
then, although they pulled with all their strength, they were not able
to draw in any part of the rope at all; and it seemed to them as if
those others down below must have let go their hold altogether, or
ceased lifting.

That was what actually happened.  The three men found the weight so
overpowering, that once or twice they were compelled to relax their
efforts for a few seconds, and at those times the rope had to carry
the whole weight of the ladder; and the part of the rope that had to
bear the greatest strain was the part that chanced to be at the angle
of the brickwork at the side of the window.  And presently it happened
that one of the frayed and worn places that Dawson had remarked about
was just at the angle during one of those momentary pauses.  On one
end there hung the ponderous ladder, straining the frayed rope against
the corner of the brickwork and the sharp edge of the stone sill, at
the other end were Dawson and Sawkins pulling with all their strength,
and in that instant the rope snapped like a piece of thread.  One end
remained in the hands of Sawkins and Dawson, who reeled backwards into
the room, and the other end flew up into the air, writhing like the
lash of a gigantic whip.  For a moment the heavy ladder swayed from
side to side: Barrington, standing underneath, with his hands raised
above his head grasping one of the rungs, struggled desperately to
hold it up.  At his right stood Bundy, also with arms upraised holding
the side; and on the left, between the ladder and the wall, was Philpot.

For a brief space they strove fiercely to support the overpowering
weight, but Philpot had no strength, and the ladder, swaying over to
the left, crashed down, crushing him upon the ground and against the
wall of the house.  He fell face downwards, with the ladder across his
shoulders; the side that had the iron bands twisted round it fell
across the back of his neck, forcing his face against the bricks at
the base of the wall.  He uttered no cry and was quite still, with
blood streaming from the cuts on his face and trickling from his ears.

Barrington was also hurled to the ground with his head and arms under
the ladder; his head and face were cut and bleeding and he was
unconscious; none of the others was hurt, for they had all had time to
jump clear when the ladder fell.  Their shouts soon brought all the
other men running to the spot, and the ladder was quickly lifted off
the two motionless figures.  At first it seemed that Philpot was dead,
but Easton rushed off for a neighbouring doctor, who came in a few
minutes.

He knelt down and carefully examined the crushed and motionless form
of Philpot, while the other men stood by in terrified silence.

Barrington, who fortunately was but momentarily stunned was sitting
against the wall and had suffered nothing more serious than minor cuts
and bruises.

The doctor's examination of Philpot was a very brief one, and when he
rose from his knees, even before he spoke they knew from his manner
that their worst fears were realized.

Philpot was dead.


Chapter 47

The Ghouls


Barrington did not do any more work that day, but before going home he
went to the doctor's house and the latter dressed the cuts on his head
and arms.  Philpot's body was taken away on the ambulance to the
mortuary.

Hunter arrived at the house shortly afterwards and at once began to
shout and bully because the painting of the gable was not yet
commenced.  When he heard of the accident he blamed them for using the
rope, and said they should have asked for a new one.  Before he went
away he had a long, private conversation with Crass, who told him that
Philpot had no relatives and that his life was insured for ten pounds
in a society of which Crass was also a member.  He knew that Philpot
had arranged that in the event of his death the money was to be paid
to the old woman with whom he lodged, who was a very close friend.
The result of this confidential talk was that Crass and Hunter came to
the conclusion that it was probable that she would be very glad to be
relieved of the trouble of attending to the business of the funeral,
and that Crass, as a close friend of the dead man, and a fellow member
of the society, was the most suitable person to take charge of the
business for her.  He was already slightly acquainted with the old
lady, so he would go to see her at once and get her authority to act
on her behalf.  Of course, they would not be able to do much until
after the inquest, but they could get the coffin made - as Hunter knew
the mortuary keeper there would be no difficulty about getting in for
a minute to measure the corpse.

This matter having been arranged, Hunter departed to order a new rope,
and shortly afterwards Crass - having made sure that everyone would
have plenty to do while he was gone - quietly slipped away to go to
see Philpot's landlady.  He went off so secretly that the men did not
know that he had been away at all until they saw him come back just
before twelve o'clock.

The new rope was brought to the house about one o'clock and this time
the ladder was raised without any mishap.  Harlow was put on to paint
the gable, and he felt so nervous that he was allowed to have Sawkins
to stand by and hold the ladder all the time.  Everyone felt nervous
that afternoon, and they all went about their work in an unusually
careful manner.

When Bert had finished limewashing the cellar, Crass set him to work
outside, painting the gate of the side entrance.  While the boy was
thus occupied he was accosted by a solemn-looking man who asked him
about the accident.  The solemn stranger was very sympathetic and
inquired what was the name of the man who had been killed, and whether
he was married.  Bert informed him that Philpot was a widower, and
that he had no children.

`Ah, well, that's so much the better, isn't it?' said the stranger
shaking his head mournfully.  `It's a dreadful thing, you know, when
there's children left unprovided for.  You don't happen to know where
he lived, do you?'

`Yes,' said Bert, mentioning the address and beginning to wonder what
the solemn man wanted to know for, and why he appeared to be so sorry
for Philpot since it was quite evident that he had never known him.

`Thanks very much,' said the man, pulling out his pocket-book and
making a note of it.  `Thanks very much indeed.  Good afternoon,' and
he hurried off.

`Good afternoon, sir,' said Bert and he turned to resume his work.
Crass came along the garden just as the mysterious stranger was
disappearing round the corner.

`What did HE want?' said Crass, who had seen the man talking to Bert.

`I don't know exactly; he was asking about the accident, and whether
Joe left any children, and where he lived.  He must be a very decent
sort of chap, I should think.  He seems quite sorry about it.'

`Oh, he does, does he?' said Crass, with a peculiar expression.
`Don't you know who he is?'

`No,' replied the boy; `but I thought p'raps he was a reporter of some
paper.

`'E ain't no reporter: that's old Snatchum the undertaker.  'E's
smellin' round after a job; but 'e's out of it this time, smart as 'e
thinks 'e is.'

Barrington came back the next morning to work, and at breakfast-time
there was a lot of talk about the accident.  They said that it was all
very well for Hunter to talk like that about the rope, but he had
known for a long time that it was nearly worn out.  Newman said that
only about three weeks previously when they were raising a ladder at
another job he had shown the rope to him, and Misery had replied that
there was nothing wrong with it.  Several others besides Newman
claimed to have mentioned the matter to Hunter, and each of them said
he had received the same sort of reply.  But when Barrington suggested
that they should attend the inquest and give evidence to that effect,
they all became suddenly silent and in a conversation Barrington
afterwards had with Newman the latter pointed out that if he were to
do so, it would do no good to Philpot.  It would not bring him back
but it would be sure to do himself a lot of harm.  He would never get
another job at Rushton's and probably many of the other employers
would `mark him' as well.

`So if YOU say anything about it,' concluded Newman, `don't bring my
name into it.'

Barrington was constrained to admit that all things considered it was
right for Newman to mind his own business.  He felt that it would not
be fair to urge him or anyone else to do or say anything that would
injure themselves.

Misery came to the house about eleven o'clock and informed several of
the hands that as work was very slack they would get their back day at
pay time.  He said that the firm had tendered for one or two jobs, so
they could call round about Wednesday and perhaps he might then be
able to give some of them another start, Barrington was not one of
those who were `stood off', although he had expected to be on account
of the speech he had made at the Beano, and everyone said that he
would have got the push sure enough if it had not been for the
accident.

Before he went away, Nimrod instructed Owen and Crass to go to the
yard at once: they would there find Payne the carpenter, who was
making Philpot's coffin, which would be ready for Crass to varnish by
the time they got there.

Misery told Owen that he had left the coffin plate and the
instructions with Payne and added that he was not to take too much
time over the writing, because it was a very cheap job.

When they arrived at the yard, Payne was just finishing the coffin,
which was of elm.  All that remained to be done to it was the pitching
of the joints inside and Payne was in the act of lifting the pot of
boiling pitch off the fire to do this.

As it was such a cheap job, there was no time to polish it properly,
so Crass proceeded to give it a couple of coats of spirit varnish, and
while he was doing this Owen wrote the plate, which was made of very
thin zinc lacquered over to make it look like brass:

                                JOSEPH PHILPOT
                                     Died
                              September 1st 19--
                                Aged 56 years.

The inquest was held on the following Monday morning, and as both
Rushton and Hunter thought it possible that Barrington might attempt
to impute some blame to them, they had worked the oracle and had
contrived to have several friends of their own put on the jury.  There
was, however, no need for their alarm, because Barrington could not
say that he had himself noticed, or called Hunter's attention to the
state of the rope; and he did not wish to mention the names of the
others without their permission.  The evidence of Crass and the other
men who were called was to the effect that it was a pure accident.
None of them had noticed that the rope was unsound.  Hunter also swore
that he did not know of it - none of the men had ever called his
attention to it; if they had done so he would have procured a new one
immediately.

Philpot's landlady and Mr Rushton were also called as witnesses, and
the end was that the jury returned a verdict of accidental death, and
added that they did not think any blame attached to anyone.

The coroner discharged the jury, and as they and the witnesses passed
out of the room, Hunter followed Rushton outside, with the hope of
being honoured by a little conversation with him on the satisfactory
issue of the case; but Rushton went off without taking any notice of
him, so Hunter returned to the room where the court had been held to
get the coroner's certificate authorizing the interment of the body.
This document is usually handed to the friends of the deceased or to
the undertaker acting for them.  When Hunter got back to the room he
found that during his absence the coroner had given it to Philpot's
landlady, who had taken it with her.  He accordingly hastened outside
again to ask her for it, but the woman was nowhere to be seen.

Crass and the other men were also gone; they had hurried off to return
to work, and after a moment's hesitation Hunter decided that it did
not matter much about the certificate.  Crass had arranged the
business with the landlady and he could get the paper from her later
on.  Having come to this conclusion, he dismissed the subject from his
mind: he had several prices to work out that afternoon - estimates
from some jobs the firm was going to tender for.

That evening, after having been home to tea, Crass and Sawkins met by
appointment at the carpenter's shop to take the coffin to the
mortuary, where Misery had arranged to meet them at half past eight
o'clock.  Hunter's plan was to have the funeral take place from the
mortuary, which was only about a quarter of an hour's walk from the
yard; so tonight they were just going to lift in the body and get the
lid screwed down.

It was blowing hard and raining heavily when Crass and Sawkins set
out, carrying the coffin - covered with a black cloth - on their
shoulders.  They also took a small pair of tressels for the coffin to
stand on.  Crass carried one of these slung over his arm and Sawkins
the other.

On their way they had to pass the `Cricketers' and the place looked so
inviting that they decided to stop and have a drink - just to keep the
damp out, and as they could not very well take the coffin inside with
them, they stood it up against the brick wall a little way from the
side of the door: as Crass remarked with a laugh, there was not much
danger of anyone pinching it.  The Old Dear served them and just as
they finished drinking the two half-pints there was a loud crash
outside and Crass and Sawkins rushed out and found that the coffin had
blown down and was lying bottom upwards across the pavement, while the
black cloth that had been wrapped round it was out in the middle of
the muddy road.  Having recovered this, they shook as much of the dirt
off as they could, and having wrapped it round the coffin again they
resumed their journey to the mortuary, where they found Hunter waiting
for them, engaged in earnest conversation with the keeper.  The
electric light was switched on, and as Crass and Sawkins came in they
saw that the marble slab was empty.

The corpse was gone.

`Snatchum came this afternoon with a hand-truck and a corfin,'
explained the keeper.  `I was out at the time, and the missis thought
it was all right so she let him have the key.'

Hunter and Crass looked blankly at each other.

`Well, this takes the biskit!' said the latter as soon as he could
speak.

`I thought you said you had settled everything all right with the old
woman?' said Hunter.

`So I did,' replied Crass.  `I seen 'er on Friday, and I told 'er to
leave it all to me to attend to, and she said she would.  I told 'er
that Philpot said to me that if ever anything 'appened to 'im I was to
take charge of everything for 'er, because I was 'is best friend.  And
I told 'er we'd do it as cheap as possible.'

`Well, it seems to me as you've bungled it somehow,' said Nimrod,
gloomily.  `I ought to have gone and seen 'er myself, I was afraid
you'd make a mess of it,' he added in a wailing tone.  `It's always
the same; everything that I don't attend to myself goes wrong.'

An uncomfortable silence fell.  Crass thought that the principal piece
of bungling in this affair was Hunter's failure to secure possession
of the Coroner's certificate after the inquest, but he was afraid to
say so.

Outside, the rain was still falling and drove in through the partly
open door, causing the atmosphere of the mortuary to be even more than
usually cold and damp.  The empty coffin had been reared against one
of the walls and the marble slab was still stained with blood, for the
keeper had not had time to clean it since the body had been removed.

`I can see 'ow it's been worked,' said Crass at last.  `There's one of
the members of the club who works for Snatchum, and 'e's took it on
'isself to give the order for the funeral; but 'e's got no right to do it.'

`Right or no right, 'e's done it,' replied Misery, `so you'd better
take the box back to the shop.'

Crass and Sawkins accordingly returned to the workshop, where they
were presently joined by Nimrod.

`I've been thinking this business over as I came along,' he said, `and
I don't see being beat like this by Snatchum; so you two can just put
the tressels and the box on a hand cart and we'll take it over to
Philpot's house.'

Nimrod walked on the pavement while the other two pushed the cart, and
it was about half past nine, when they arrived at the street in
Windley where Philpot used to live.  They halted in a dark part of the
street a few yards away from the house and on the opposite side.

`I think the best thing we can do,' said Misery, `is for me and
Sawkins to wait 'ere while you go to the 'ouse and see 'ow the land
lies.  You've done all the business with 'er so far.  It's no use
takin' the box unless we know the corpse is there; for all we know,
Snatchum may 'ave taken it 'ome with 'im.'

`Yes; I think that'll be the best way,' agreed Crass, after a moment's
thought.

Nimrod and Sawkins accordingly took shelter in the doorway of an empty
house, leaving the handcart at the kerb, while Crass went across the
street and knocked at Philpot's door.  They saw it opened by an
elderly woman holding a lighted candle in her hand; then Crass went
inside and the door was shut.  In about a quarter of an hour he
reappeared and, leaving the door partly open behind him, he came out
and crossed over to where the others were waiting.  As he drew near
they could see that he carried a piece of paper in his hand.

`It's all right,' he said in a hoarse whisper as he came up.  I've got
the stifficut.'

Misery took the paper eagerly and scanned it by the light of a match
that Crass struck.  It was the certificate right enough, and with a
sigh of relief Hunter put it into his note-book and stowed it safely
away in the inner pocket of his coat, while Crass explained the result
of his errand.

It appeared that the other member of the Society, accompanied by
Snatchum, had called upon the old woman and had bluffed her into
giving them the order for the funeral.  It was they who had put her up
to getting the certificate from the Coroner - they had been careful to
keep away from the inquest themselves so as not to arouse Hunter's or
Crass's suspicions.

`When they brought the body 'ome this afternoon,' Crass went on,
`Snatchum tried to get the stifficut orf 'er, but she'd been thinkin'
things over and she was a bit frightened 'cos she knowed she'd made
arrangements with me, and she thought she'd better see me first; so
she told 'im she'd give it to 'im on Thursday; that's the day as 'e
was goin' to 'ave the funeral.'

`He'll find he's a day too late,' said Misery, with a ghastly grin.
`We'll get the job done on Wednesday.'

`She didn't want to give it to me, at first,' Crass concluded, `but I
told 'er we'd see 'er right if old Snatchum tried to make 'er pay for
the other coffin.'

`I don't think he's likely to make much fuss about it,' said Hunter.
`He won't want everybody to know he was so anxious for the job.'

Crass and Sawkins pushed the handcart over to the other side of the
road and then, lifting the coffin off, they carried it into the house,
Nimrod going first.

The old woman was waiting for them with the candle at the end of the
passage.

`I shall be very glad when it's all over,' she said, as she led the
way up the narrow stairs, closely followed by Hunter, who carried the
tressels, Crass and Sawkins, bringing up the rear with the coffin.  `I
shall be very glad when it's all over, for I'm sick and tired of
answerin' the door to undertakers.  If there's been one 'ere since
Friday there's been a dozen, all after the job, not to mention all the
cards what's been put under the door, besides the one's what I've had
give to me by different people.  I had a pair of boots bein' mended
and the man took the trouble to bring 'em 'ome when they was finished -
a thing 'e's never done before - just for an excuse to give me an
undertaker's card.

`Then the milkman brought one, and so did the baker, and the
greengrocer give me another when I went in there on Saturday to buy
some vegetables for Sunday dinner.'

Arrived at the top landing the old woman opened a door and entered a
small and wretchedly furnished room.

Across the lower sash of the window hung a tattered piece of lace
curtain.  The low ceiling was cracked and discoloured.

There was a rickety little wooden washstand, and along one side of the
room a narrow bed covered with a ragged grey quilt, on which lay a
bundle containing the clothes that the dead man was wearing at the
time of the accident.

There was a little table in front of the window, with a small
looking-glass upon it, and a cane-seated chair was placed by the
bedside and the floor was covered with a faded piece of drab-coloured
carpet of no perceptible pattern, worn into holes in several places.

In the middle of this dreary room, upon a pair of tressels, was the
coffin containing Philpot's body.  Seen by the dim and flickering
light of the candle, the aspect of this coffin, covered over with a
white sheet, was terrible in its silent, pathetic solitude.

Hunter placed the pair of tressels he had been carrying against the
wall, and the other two put the empty coffin on the floor by the side
of the bed.  The old woman stood the candlestick on the mantelpiece,
and withdrew, remarking that they would not need her assistance.  The
three men then removed their overcoats and laid them on the end of the
bed, and from the pocket of his Crass took out two large screwdrivers,
one of which he handed to Hunter.  Sawkins held the candle while they
unscrewed and took off the lid of the coffin they had brought with
them: it was not quite empty, for they had brought a bag of tools
inside it.

`I think we shall be able to work better if we takes the other one orf
the trussels and puts it on the floor,' remarked Crass.

`Yes, I think so, too,' replied Hunter.

Crass took off the sheet and threw it on the bed, revealing the other
coffin, which was very similar in appearance to the one they had
brought with them, being of elms with the usual imitation brass
furniture.  Hunter took hold of the head and Crass the foot and they
lifted it off the tressels on to the floor.

`'E's not very 'eavy; that's one good thing,' observed Hunter.

`'E always was a very thin chap,' replied Crass.

The screws that held down the lid had been covered over with
large-headed brass nails which had to be wrenched off before they
could get at the screws, of which there were eight altogether.  It was
evident from the appearance of the beads of these screws that they
were old ones that had been used for some purpose before: they were
rusty and of different sizes, some being rather larger or smaller,
than they should have been.  They were screwed in so firmly that by
the time they had drawn half of them out the two men were streaming
with perspiration.  After a while Hunter took the candle from Sawkins
and the latter had a try at the screws.

`Anyone would think the dam' things had been there for a 'undred
years,' remarked Hunter, savagely, as he wiped the sweat from his face
and neck with his handkerchief.

Kneeling on the lid of the coffin and panting and grunting with the
exertion, the other two continued to struggle with their task.
Suddenly Crass uttered an obscene curse; he had broken off one side of
the head of the screw he was trying to turn and almost at the same
instant a similar misfortune happened to Sawkins.

After this, Hunter again took a screwdriver himself, and when they got
all the screws out with the exception of the two broken ones, Crass
took a hammer and chisel out of the bag and proceeded to cut off what
was left of the tops of the two that remained.  But even after this
was done the two screws still held the lid on the coffin, and so they
had to hammer the end of the blade of the chisel underneath and lever
the lid up so that they could get hold of it with their fingers.  It
split up one side as they tore it off, exposing the dead man to view.

Although the marks of the cuts and bruises were still visible on
Philpot's face, they were softened down by the pallor of death, and a
placid, peaceful expression pervaded his features.  His hands were
crossed upon his breast, and as he lay there in the snow-white grave
clothes, almost covered in by the white lace frill that bordered the
sides of the coffin, he looked like one in a profound and tranquil sleep.

They laid the broken lid on the bed, and placed the two coffins side
by side on the floor as close together as possible.  Sawkins stood at
one side holding the candle in his left hand and ready to render with
his right any assistance that might unexpectedly prove to be
necessary.  Crass, standing at the foot, took hold of the body by the
ankles, while Hunter at the other end seized it by the shoulders with
his huge, clawlike hands, which resembled the talons of some obscene
bird of prey, and they dragged it out and placed it in the other
coffin.

Whilst Hunter - hovering ghoulishly over the corpse - arranged the
grave clothes and the frilling, Crass laid the broken cover on the top
of the other coffin and pushed it under the bed out of the way.  Then
he selected the necessary screws and nails from the bag. and Hunter
having by this time finished, they proceeded to screw down the lid.
Then they lifted the coffin on to the tressels, covering it over with
the sheet, and the appearance it then presented was so exactly similar
to what they had seen when they first entered the room, that it caused
the same thought to occur to all of them: Suppose Snatchum took it
into his head to come there and take the body out again?  If he were
to do so and take it up to the cemetery they might be compelled to
give up the certificate to him and then all their trouble would be
lost.

After a brief consultation, they resolved that it would be safer to
take the corpse on the handcart to the yard and keep it in the
carpenter's shop until the funeral, which could take place from there.
Crass and Sawkins accordingly lifted the coffin off the tressels, and -
while Hunter held the light - proceeded to carry it downstairs, a task
of considerable difficulty owing to the narrowness of the staircase
and the landing.  However, they got it down at last and, having put it
on the handcart, covered it over with the black wrapper.  It was still
raining and the lamp in the cart was nearly out, so Sawkins trimmed
the wick and relit it before they started.

Hunter wished them `Good-night' at the corner of the street, because
it was not necessary for him to accompany them to the yard - they
would be able to manage all that remained to be done by themselves.
He said he would make the arrangements for the funeral as soon as he
possibly could the next morning, and he would come to the job and let
them know, as soon as he knew himself, at what time they would have to
be in attendance to act as bearers.  He had gone a little distance on
his way when he stopped and turned back to them.

`It's not necessary for either of you to make a song about this
business, you know,' he said.

The two men said that they quite understood that: he could depend on
their keeping their mouths shut.

When Hunter had gone, Crass drew out his watch.  It was a quarter to
eleven.  A little way down the road the lights of a public house were
gleaming through the mist.

`We shall be just in time to get a drink before closing time if we
buck up,' he said.  And with this object they hurried on as fast as
they could.

When they reached the tavern they left the cart standing by the kerb,
and went inside, where Crass ordered two pints of four-ale, which he
permitted Sawkins to pay for.

`How are we going on about this job?' inquired the latter after they
had each taken a long drink, for they were thirsty after their
exertions. `I reckon we ought to 'ave more than a bob for it, don't
you?  It's not like a ordinary "lift in".'

`Of course it ain't,' replied Crass.  `We ought to 'ave about, say' -
reflecting - `say arf a dollar each at the very least.'

`Little enough too,' said Sawkins.  `I was going to say arf a crown,
myself.'

Crass agreed that even half a crown would not be too much.

`'Ow are we going' on about chargin' it on our time sheets?' asked
Sawkins, after a pause.  `If we just put a "lift in", they might only
pay us a bob as usual.'

As a rule when they had taken a coffin home, they wrote on their time
sheets, `One lift in', for which they were usually paid one shilling,
unless it happened to be a very high-class funeral, when they
sometimes got one and sixpence.  They were never paid by the hour for
these jobs.

Crass smoked reflectively.

`I think the best way will be to put it like this,' he said at length.
`"Philpot's funeral.  One lift out and one lift in.  Also takin'
corpse to carpenter's shop."  'Ow would that do?'

Sawkins said that would be a very good way to put it, and they
finished their beer just as the landlord intimated that it was closing
time.  The cart was standing where they left it, the black cloth
saturated with the rain, which dripped mournfully from its sable
folds.

When they reached the plot of waste ground over which they had to pass
in order to reach the gates of the yard, they had to proceed very
cautiously, for it was very dark, and the lantern did not give much
light.  A number of carts and lorries were standing there, and the
path wound through pools of water and heaps of refuse.  After much
difficulty and jolting, they reached the gate, which Crass unlocked
with the key he had obtained from the office earlier in the evening.
They soon opened the door of the carpenter's shop and, after lighting
the gas, they arranged the tressels and then brought in the coffin and
placed it upon them.  Then they locked the door and placed the key in
its usual hiding-place, but the key of the outer gate they took with
them and dropped into the letter-box at the office, which they had to
pass on their way home.

As they turned away from the door, they were suddenly confronted by a
policeman who flashed his lantern in their faces and demanded to know
why they had tried the lock...

The next morning was a very busy one for Hunter, who had to see
several new jobs commenced.  They were all small affairs.  Most of
them would only take two or three days from start to finish.

Attending to this work occupied most of his morning, but all the same
he managed to do the necessary business connected with the funeral,
which he arranged to take place at two o'clock on Wednesday afternoon
from the mortuary, where the coffin had been removed during the day,
Hunter deciding that it would not look well to have the funeral start
from the workshop.

Although Hunter had kept it as quiet as possible, there was a small
crowd, including several old workmates of Philpot's who happened to be
out of work, waiting outside the mortuary to see the funeral start,
and amongst them were Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk, who were both
sober.  Barrington and Owen were also there, having left work for the
day in order to go to the funeral.  They were there too in a sense as
the representatives of the other workmen, for Barrington carried a
large wreath which had been subscribed for voluntarily by Rushton's
men.  They could not all afford to lose the time to attend the
funeral, although most of them would have liked to pay that tribute of
regard to their old mate, so they had done this as the next best
thing.  Attached to the wreath was a strip of white satin ribbon, upon
which Owen had painted a suitable inscription.

Promptly at two o'clock the hearse and the mourning coach drove up
with Hunter and the four bearers - Crass, Slyme, Payne and Sawkins,
all dressed in black with frock coats and silk hats.  Although they
were nominally attired in the same way, there was a remarkable
dissimilarity in their appearance.  Crass's coat was of smooth,
intensely black cloth, having been recently dyed, and his hat was
rather low in the crown, being of that shape that curved outwards
towards the top.  Hunter's coat was a kind of serge with a rather
rusty cast of colour and his hat was very tall and straight, slightly
narrower at the crown than at the brim.  As for the others, each of
them had a hat of a different fashion and date, and their `black'
clothes ranged from rusty brown to dark blue.

These differences were due to the fact that most of the garments had
been purchased at different times from different second-hand clothes
shops, and never being used except on such occasions as the present,
they lasted for an indefinite time.

When the coffin was brought out and placed in the hearse, Hunter laid
upon it the wreath that Barrington gave him, together with the another
he had brought himself, which had a similar ribbon with the words:
`From Rushton & Co. With deep sympathy.'

Seeing that Barrington and Owen were the only occupants of the
carriage, Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk came up to the door and asked
if there was any objection to their coming and as neither Owen nor
Barrington objected, they did not think it necessary to ask anyone
else's permission, so they got in.

Meanwhile, Hunter had taken his position a few yards in front of the
hearse and the bearers each his proper position, two on each side.  As
the procession turned into the main road, they saw Snatchum standing
at the corner looking very gloomy.  Hunter kept his eyes fixed
straight ahead and affected not to see him, but Crass could not resist
the temptation to indulge in a jeering smile, which so enraged
Snatchum that he shouted out:

`It don't matter!  I shan't lose much!  I can use it for someone
else!'

The distance to the cemetery was about three miles, so as soon as they
got out of the busy streets of the town, Hunter called a halt, and got
up on the hearse beside the driver, Crass sat on the other side, and
two of the other bearers stood in the space behind the driver's seat,
the fourth getting up beside the driver of the coach; and then they
proceeded at a rapid pace.

As they drew near to the cemetery they slowed down, and finally
stopped when about fifty yards from the gate.  Then Hunter and the
bearers resumed their former position, mid they passed through the
open gate and up to the door of the church, where they were received
by the clerk - a man in a rusty black cassock, who stood by while they
carried the coffin in and placed it on a kind of elevated table which
revolved on a pivot.  They brought it in footfirst, and as soon as
they had placed it upon the table, the clerk swung it round so as to
bring the foot of the coffin towards the door ready to be carried out
again.

There was a special pew set apart for the undertakers, and in this
Hunter and the bearers took their seats to await the arrival of the
clergyman.  Barrington and the three others sat on the opposite side.
There was no altar or pulpit in this church, but a kind of reading
desk stood on a slightly raised platform at the other end of the
aisle.

After a wait of about ten minutes, the clergyman entered and, at once
proceeding to the desk, began to recite in a rapid and wholly
unintelligible manner the usual office.  If it had not been for the
fact that each of his hearers had a copy of the words - for there was
a little book in each pew - none of them would have been able to
gather the sense of what the man was gabbling.  Under any other
circumstances, the spectacle of a human being mouthing in this absurd
way would have compelled laughter, and so would the suggestion that
this individual really believed that he was addressing the Supreme
Being.  His attitude and manner were contemptuously indifferent.
While he recited, intoned, or gabbled, the words of the office, he was
reading the certificate and some other paper the clerk had placed upon
the desk, and when he had finished reading these, his gaze wandered
abstractedly round the chapel, resting for a long time with an
expression of curiosity upon Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk, who were
doing their best to follow in their books the words he was repeating.
He next turned his attention to his fingers, holding his hand away
from him nearly at arm's length and critically examining the nails.

From time to time as this miserable mockery proceeded the clerk in the
rusty black cassock mechanically droned out a sonorous `Ah-men', and
after the conclusion of the lesson the clergyman went out of the
church, taking a short cut through the grave-stones and monuments,
while the bearers again shouldered the coffin and followed the clerk
to the grave.  When they arrived within a few yards of their
destination, they were rejoined by the clergyman, who was waiting for
them at the corner of one of the paths.  He put himself at the head of
the procession with an open book in his hand, and as they walked
slowly along, he resumed his reading or repetition of the words of the
service.

He had on an old black cassock and a much soiled and slightly torn
surplice.  The unseemly appearance of this dirty garment was
heightened by the circumstance that he had not taken the trouble to
adjust it properly.  It hung all lop-sided, showing about six inches
more of the black cassock underneath one side than the other.
However, perhaps it is not right to criticize this person's appearance
so severely, because the poor fellow was paid only seven-and-six for
each burial, and as this was only the fourth funeral he had officiated
at that day, probably he could not afford to wear clean linen - at any
rate, not for the funerals of the lower classes.

He continued his unintelligible jargon while they were lowering the
coffin into the grave, and those who happened to know the words of the
office by heart were, with some difficulty, able to understand what he
was saying:

`Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of His great mercy to take
unto Himself the soul of our Dear Brother here departed, we therefore
commit his body to the ground; earth to earth; ashes to ashes, dust to
dust -'

The earth fell from the clerk's hand and rattled on the lid of the
coffin with a mournful sound, and when the clergyman had finished
repeating the remainder of the service, he turned and walked away in
the direction of the church.  Hunter and the rest of the funeral party
made their way back towards the gate of the cemetery where the hearse
and the carriage were waiting.

On their way they saw another funeral procession coming towards them.
It was a very plain-looking closed hearse with only one horse.  There
was no undertaker in front and no bearers walked by the sides.

It was a pauper's funeral.

Three men, evidently dressed in their Sunday clothes, followed behind
the hearse.  As they reached the church door, four old men who were
dressed in ordinary everyday clothes, came forward and opening the
hearse took out the coffin and carried it into the church, followed by
the other three, who were evidently relatives of the deceased.  The
four old men were paupers - inmates of the workhouse, who were paid
sixpence each for acting as bearers.

They were just taking out the coffin from the hearse as Hunter's party
was passing, and most of the latter paused for a moment and watched
them carry it into the church.  The roughly made coffin was of white
deal, not painted or covered in any way, and devoid of any fittings or
ornament with the exception of a square piece of zinc on the lid.
None of Rushton's party was near enough to recognize any of the
mourners or to read what was written on the zinc, but if they had been
they would have seen, roughly painted in black letters

                                     J.L.
                                   Aged 67

and some of them would have recognized the three mourners who were
Jack Linden's sons.

As for the bearers, they were all retired working men who had come
into their `titles'.  One of them was old Latham, the venetian blind
maker.


Chapter 48

The Wise men of the East


At the end of the following week there was a terrible slaughter at
Rushton's.  Barrington and all the casual hands were sacked, including
Newman, Easton and Harlow, and there was so little work that it looked
as if everyone else would have to stand off also.  The summer was
practically over, so those who were stood off had but a poor chance of
getting a start anywhere else, because most other firms were
discharging hands as well.

There was only one other shop in the town that was doing anything at
all to speak of, and that was the firm of Dauber and Botchit.  This
firm had come very much to the front during the summer, and had
captured several big jobs that Rushton & Co. had expected to get,
besides taking away several of the latter's old customers.

This firm took work at almost half the price that Rushton's could do
it for, and they had a foreman whose little finger was thicker than
Nimrod's thigh . Some of the men who had worked for both firms during
the summer, said that after working for Dauber and Botchit, working
for Rushton seemed like having a holiday.

`There's one bloke there,' said Newman, in conversation with Harlow
and Easton.  `There's one bloke there wot puts up twenty-five rolls o'
paper in a day an' trims and pastes for 'imself; and as for the
painters, nearly everyone of 'em gets over as much work as us three
put together, and if you're working there you've got to do the same or
get the sack.'

However much truth or falsehood or exaggeration there may have been in
the stories of the sweating and driving that prevailed at Dauber and
Botchit's, it was an indisputable fact that the other builders found it
very difficult to compete with them, and between the lot of them what
work there was to do was all finished or messed up in about a quarter
of the time that it would have taken to do it properly.

By the end of September there were great numbers of men out of
employment, and the practical persons who controlled the town were
already preparing to enact the usual farce of `Dealing' with the
distress that was certain to ensue.  The Rev. Mr Bosher talked of
reopening the Labour Yard; the secretary of the OBS appealed for more
money and cast-off clothing and boots - the funds of the Society had
been depleted by the payment of his quarter's salary.  There were
rumours that the Soup Kitchen would be reopened at an early date for
the sale of `nourishment', and charitable persons began to talk of
Rummage Sales and soup tickets.

Now and then, whenever a `job' `came in', a few of Rushton's men were
able to put in a few hours' work, but Barrington never went back.  His
manner of life was the subject of much speculation on the part of his
former workmates, who were not a little puzzled by the fact that he
was much better dressed than they had ever known him to be before, and
that he was never without money.  He generally had a tanner or a bob
to lend, and was always ready to stand a drink, to say nothing of what
it must have cost him for the quantities of Socialist pamphlets and
leaflets that he gave away broadcast.  He lodged over at Windley, but
he used to take his meals at a little coffee tavern down town, where
he used often to invite one or two of his old mates to take dinner
with him.  It sometimes happened that one of them would invite him
home of an evening, to drink a cup of tea, or to see some curiosity
that the other thought would interest him, and on these occasions - if
there were any children in the house to which they were going -
Barrington usually made a point of going into a shop on their way, and
buying a bag of cakes or fruit for them.

All sorts of theories were put forward to account for his apparent
affluence.  Some said he was a toff in disguise; others that he had
rich relations who were ashamed of him because he was a Socialist, and
who allowed him so much a week so long as he kept away from them and
did not use his real name.  Some of the Liberals said that he was in
the pay of the Tories, who were seeking by underhand methods to split
up the Progressive Liberal Party.  Just about that time several
burglaries took place in the town, the thieves getting clear away with
the plunder, and this circumstance led to a dark rumour that
Barrington was the culprit, and that it was these ill-gotten gains
that he was spending so freely.

About the middle of October an event happened that drew the town into
a state of wild excitement, and such comparatively unimportant
subjects as unemployment and starvation were almost forgotten.

Sir Graball D'Encloseland had been promoted to yet a higher post in
the service of the country that he owned such a large part of; he was
not only to have a higher and more honourable position, but also - as
was nothing but right - a higher salary.  His pay was to be increased
to seven thousand five hundred a year or one hundred and fifty pounds
per week, and in consequence of this promotion it was necessary for
him to resign his seat and seek re-election.

The ragged-trousered Tory workmen as they loitered about the streets,
their stomachs empty, said to each other that it was a great honour
for Mugsborough that their Member should be promoted in this way.
They boasted about it and assumed as much swagger in their gait as
their broken boots permitted.

They stuck election cards bearing Sir Graball's photograph in their
windows and tied bits of blue and yellow ribbon - Sir Graball's
colours - on their underfed children.

The Liberals were furious.  They said that an election had been sprung
on them - they had been taken a mean advantage of - they had no
candidate ready.

They had no complaint to make about the salary, all they complained of
was the short notice.  It wasn't fair because while they - the leading
Liberals - had been treating the electors with the contemptuous
indifference that is customary, Sir Graball D'Encloseland had been
most active amongst his constituents for months past, cunningly
preparing for the contest.  He had really been electioneering for the
past six months!  Last winter he had kicked off at quite a number of
football matches besides doing all sorts of things for the local
teams.  He had joined the Buffalos and the Druids, been elected
President of the Skull and Crossbones Boys' Society, and, although he
was not himself an abstainer, he was so friendly to Temperance that he
had on several occasions, taken the chair at teetotal meetings, to say
nothing of the teas to the poor school children and things of that
sort.  In short, he had been quite an active politician, in the Tory
sense of the word, for months past and the poor Liberals had not smelt
a rat until the election was sprung upon them.

A hurried meeting of the Liberal Three Hundred was held, and a
deputation sent to London to find a candidate but as there was only a
week before polling day they were unsuccessful in their mission.
Another meeting was held, presided over by Mr Adam Sweater - Rushton
and Didlum also being present.

Profound dejection was depicted on the countenances of those assembled
slave-drivers as they listened to the delegates' report.  The sombre
silence that followed was broken at length by Mr Rushton, who suddenly
started up and said that he began to think they had made a mistake in
going outside the constituency at all to look for a man.  It was
strange but true that a prophet never received honour in his own land.
They had been wasting the precious time running about all over the
country, begging and praying for a candidate, and overlooking the fact
that they had in their midst a gentleman - a fellow townsman, who, he
believed, would have a better chance of success than any stranger.
Surely they would all agree - if they could only prevail upon him to
stand - that Adam Sweater would be an ideal Liberal Candidate!

While Mr Rushton was speaking the drooping spirits of the Three
Hundred were reviving, and at the name of Sweater they all began to
clap their hands and stamp their feet.  Loud shouts of enthusiastic
approval burst forth, and cries of `Good old Sweater' resounded
through the room.

When Sweater rose to reply, the tumult died away as suddenly as it had
commenced.  He thanked them for the honour they were conferring upon
him.  There was no time to waste in words or idle compliments; rather
than allow the Enemy to have a walk-over, he would accede to their
request and contest the seat.

A roar of applause burst from the throats of the delighted Three
Hundred.

Outside the hail in which the meeting was being held a large crowd of
poverty-stricken Liberal working men, many of them wearing broken
boots and other men's cast-off clothing, was waiting to hear the
report of the slave-drivers' deputation, and as soon as Sweater had
consented to be nominated, Didlum rushed and opened the window
overlooking the street and shouted the good news down to the crowd,
which joined in the cheering.  In response to their demands for a
speech, Sweater brought his, obese carcass to the window and addressed
a few words to them, reminding them of the shortness of the time at
their disposal, and intreating them to work hard in order that the
Grand old Flag might be carried to victory.

At such times these people forgot all about unemployment and
starvation, and became enthusiastic about `Grand old Flags'.  Their
devotion to this flag was so great that so long as they were able to
carry it to victory, they did not mind being poverty stricken and
hungry and ragged; all that mattered was to score off their hated
`enemies' their fellow countrymen the Tories, and carry the grand old
flag to victory.  The fact that they had carried the flag to victory
so often in the past without obtaining any of the spoils, did not seem
to damp their ardour in the least.  Being philanthropists, they were
content - after winning the victory - that their masters should always
do the looting.

At the conclusion of Sweater's remarks the philanthropists gave three
frantic cheers and then someone in the crowd shouted `What's the
colour?'  After a hasty consultation with Rushton, who being a
`master' decorator, was thought to be an authority on colours - green -
grass green - was decided upon, and the information was shouted down
to the crowd, who cheered again.  Then a rush was made to Sweater's
Emporium and several yards of cheap green ribbon were bought, and
divided up into little pieces, which they tied into their buttonholes,
and thus appropriately decorated, formed themselves into military
order, four deep, and marched through all the principal streets, up
and down the Grand Parade, round and round the Fountain, and finally
over the hill to Windley, singing to the tune of `Tramp, tramp, tramp,
the Boys are marching':

        `Vote, Vote, Vote for Adam Sweater!
        Hang old Closeland on a tree!
        Adam Sweater is our man,
        And we'll have him if we can,
        Then we'll always have the biggest loaf for tea.'

The spectacle presented by these men - some of them with grey heads
and beards - as they marked time or tramped along singing this
childish twaddle, would have been amusing if it had not been
disgusting.

By way of variety they sang several other things, including:

        `We'll hang ole Closeland
        On a sour apple tree,'

and

        `Rally, Rally, men of Windley
        For Sweater's sure to win.'

As they passed the big church in Quality Street, the clock began to
strike.  It was one of those that strike four chimes at each quarter
of the hour.  It was now ten o'clock so there were sixteen musical
chimes:

        Ding, dong! Ding Dong!
        Ding dong! Ding dong!
        Ding dong! Ding dong!
        Ding dong! Ding dong!

They all chanted A-dam Sweat-er' in time with the striking clock.  In
the same way the Tories would chant:
        `Grab - all Close - land!
        Grab - all Close - land!
        Grab - all Close - land!
        Grab - all Close - land!'

The town was soon deluged with mendacious literature and smothered
with huge posters:

                      `Vote for Adam Sweater!
                     The Working-man's Friend!'
              `Vote for Sweater and Temperance Reform.'
           `Vote for Sweater - Free Trade and Cheap Food.'

                                 or

      `Vote for D'Encloseland: Tariff Reform and Plenty of Work!'

This beautiful idea - `Plenty of Work' - appealed strongly to the Tory
workmen.  They seemed to regard themselves and their children as a
sort of machines or beasts of burden, created for the purpose of
working for the benefit of other people.  They did not think it right
that they should Live, and enjoy the benefits of civilization.  All
they desired for themselves and their children was `Plenty of Work'.

They marched about the streets singing their Marseillaise, `Work,
Boys, Work and be contented', to the tune of `Tramp, tramp, tramp the
Boys are marching', and at intervals as they tramped along, they gave
three cheers for Sir Graball, Tariff Reform, and - Plenty of Work.

Both sides imported gangs of hired orators who held forth every night
at the corners of the principal streets, and on the open spaces from
portable platforms, and from motor cars and lorries.  The Tories said
that the Liberal Party in the House of Commons was composed
principally of scoundrels and fools, the Liberals said that the Tory
Party were fools and scoundrels.  A host of richly dressed canvassers
descended upon Windley in carriages and motor cars, and begged for
votes from the poverty-stricken working men who lived there.

One evening a Liberal demonstration was held at the Cross Roads on
Windley Hill.  Notwithstanding the cold weather, there was a great
crowd of shabbily dressed people, many of whom had not had a really
good meal for months.  It was a clear night.  The moon was at the
full, and the scene was further illuminated by the fitful glare of
several torches, stuck on the end of twelve-foot poles.  The platform
was a large lorry, and there were several speakers, including Adam
Sweater himself and a real live Liberal Peer - Lord Ammenegg.  This
individual had made a considerable fortune in the grocery and
provision line, and had been elevated to the Peerage by the last
Liberal Government on account of his services to the Party, and in
consideration of other considerations.

Both Sweater and Ammenegg were to speak at two other meetings that
night and were not expected at Windley until about eight-thirty, so to
keep the ball rolling till they arrived, several other gentlemen,
including Rushton - who presided - and Didlum, and one of the five
pounds a week orators, addressed the meeting.  Mingled with the crowd
were about twenty rough-looking men - strangers to the town - who wore
huge green rosettes and loudly applauded the speakers.  They also
distributed Sweater literature and cards with lists of the different
meetings that were to be held during the election.  These men were
bullies hired by Sweater's agent.  They came from the neighbourhood of
Seven Dials in London and were paid ten shillings a day.  One of their
duties was to incite the crowd to bash anyone who disturbed the
meetings or tried to put awkward questions to the speakers.

The hired orator was a tall, slight man with dark hair, beard and
moustache, he might have been called well-looking if it had not been
for a ugly scar upon his forehead, which gave him a rather sinister
appearance.  He was an effective speaker; the audience punctuated his
speech with cheers, and when he wound up with an earnest appeal to
them - as working men - to vote for Adam Sweater, their enthusiasm
knew no bounds.

`I've seen him somewhere before,' remarked Barrington, who was
standing in the crowd with Harlow, Owen and Easton.

`So have I,' said Owen, with a puzzled expression.  `But for the life
of me, I can't remember where.'

Harlow and Easton also thought they had seen the man before, but their
speculations were put an end to by the roar of cheering that heralded
the arrival of the motor car, containing Adam Sweater and his friend,
Lord Ammenegg.  Unfortunately, those who had arranged the meeting had
forgotten to provide a pair of steps, so Sweater found it a matter of
considerable difficulty to mount the platform.  However, while his
friends were hoisting and pushing him up, the meeting beguiled the
time by singing:


        `Vote, vote, vote for Adam Sweater.'

After a terrible struggle they succeeded in getting him on to the
cart, and while he was recovering his wind, Rushton made a few remarks
to the crowd.  Sweater then advanced to the front, but in consequence
of the cheering and singing, he was unable to make himself heard for
several minutes.

When at length he was able to proceed, ho made a very clever speech -
it had been specially written for him and had cost ten guineas.  A
large part of it consisted of warnings against the dangers of
Socialism.  Sweater had carefully rehearsed this speech and he
delivered it very effectively.  Some of those Socialists, he said,
were well-meaning but mistaken people, who did not realize the harm
that would result if their extraordinary ideas were ever put into
practice.  He lowered his voice to a blood-curdling stage whisper as
he asked:

`What is this Socialism that we hear so much about, but which so few
understand? What is it, and what does it mean?'

Then, raising his voice till it rang through the air and fell upon the
ears of the assembled multitude like the clanging of a funeral bell,
he continued:

`It is madness!  Chaos!  Anarchy!  It means Ruin!  Black Ruin for the
rich, and consequently, of course, Blacker Ruin still for the poor!'

As Sweater paused, a thrill of horror ran through the meeting.  Men
wearing broken boots and with patches upon the seats and knees, and
ragged fringes round the bottoms of the legs of their trousers, grew
pale, and glanced apprehensively at each other.  If ever Socialism did
come to pass, they evidently thought it very probable that they would
have to walk about in a sort of prehistoric highland costume, without
any trousers or boots at all.

Toil-worn women, most of them dressed in other women's shabby cast-off
clothing - weary, tired-looking mothers who fed their children for the
most part on adulterated tea, tinned skimmed milk and bread and
margarine, grew furious as they thought of the wicked Socialists who
were trying to bring Ruin upon them.

It never occurred to any of these poor people that they were in a
condition of Ruin, Black Ruin, already.  But if Sweater had suddenly
found himself reduced to the same social condition as the majority of
those he addressed, there is not much doubt that he would have thought
that he was in a condition of Black Ruin.

The awful silence that had fallen on the panic-stricken crowd, was
presently broken by a ragged-trousered Philanthropist, who shouted
out:

`We knows wot they are, sir.  Most of 'em is chaps wot's got tired of
workin' for their livin', so they wants us to keep 'em.'

Encouraged by numerous expressions of approval from the other
Philanthropists, the man continued:

`But we ain't such fools as they thinks, and so they'll find out next
Monday.  Most of 'em wants 'angin', and I wouldn't mind lendin' a 'and
with the rope myself.'

Applause and laughter greeted these noble sentiments, and Sweater
resumed his address, when another man - evidently a Socialist - for he
was accompanied by three or four others who like himself wore red ties -
interrupted and said that he would like to ask him a question.  No
notice was taken of this request either by Mr Sweater or the chairman,
but a few angry cries of `Order!' came from the crowd.  Sweater
continued, but the man again interrupted and the cries of the crowd
became more threatening.  Rushton started up and said that he could
not allow the speaker to be interrupted, but if the gentleman would
wait till the end of the meeting, he would have an opportunity of
asking his question then.

The man said he would wait as desired; Sweater resumed his oration,
and presently the interrupter and his friends found themselves
surrounded by the gang of hired bullies who wore the big rosettes and
who glared menacingly at them.

Sweater concluded his speech with an appeal to the crowd to deal a
`Slashing Bow at the Enemy' next Monday, and then amid a storm of
applause, Lord Ammenegg stepped to the front.  He said that he did not
intend to inflict a long speech upon them that evening, and as it was
nomination day tomorrow he would not be able to have the honour of
addressing them again during the election; but even if he had wished
to make a long speech, it would be very difficult after the brilliant
and eloquent address they had just listened to from Mr Sweater, for it
seemed to him (Ammenegg) that Adam Sweater had left nothing for anyone
else to say.  But he would like to tell them of a Thought that had
occurred to him that evening.  They read in the Bible that the Wise
Men came from the East.  Windley, as they all knew, was the East end
of the town.  They were the men of the East, and he was sure that next
Monday they would prove that they were the Wise Men of the East, by
voting for Adam Sweater and putting him at the top of the poll with a
`Thumping Majority'.

The Wise Men of the East greeted Ammenegg's remarks with prolonged,
imbecile cheers, and amid the tumult his Lordship and Sweater got into
the motor car and cleared off without giving the man with the red tie
or anyone else who desired to ask questions any opportunity of doing
so.  Rushton and the other leaders got into another motor car, and
followed the first to take part in another meeting down-town, which
was to be addressed by the great Sir Featherstone Blood.

The crowd now resolved itself into military order, headed by the men
with torches and a large white banner on which was written in huge
black letters, `Our man is Adam Sweater'.

They marched down the hill singing, and when they reached the Fountain
on the Grand Parade they saw another crowd holding a meeting there.
These were Tories and they became so infuriated at the sound of the
Liberal songs and by the sight of the banner, that they abandoned
their meeting and charged the processionists.  A free fight ensued.
Both sides fought like savages, but as the Liberals were outnumbered
by about three to one, they were driven off the field with great
slaughter; most of the torch poles were taken from them, and the
banner was torn to ribbons.  Then the Tories went back to the Fountain
carrying the captured torches, and singing to the tune of `Has anyone
seen a German Band?'

        `Has anyone seen a Lib'ral Flag,
        Lib'ral Flag, Lib'ral Flag?'

While the Tories resumed their meeting at the Fountain, the Liberals
rallied in one of the back streets.  Messengers were sent in various
directions for reinforcements, and about half an hour afterwards they
emerged from their retreat and swooped down upon the Tory meeting.
They overturned the platform, recaptured their torches, tore the
enemy's banner to tatters and drove them from their position.  Then
the Liberals in their turn paraded the streets singing `Has anyone
seen a Tory Flag?' and proceeded to the hall where Sir Featherstone
was speaking, arriving as the audience left.

The crowd that came pouring out of the hall was worked up to a frenzy
of enthusiasm, for the speech they had just listened to had been a
sort of manifesto to the country.

In response to the cheering of the processionists - who, of course,
had not heard the speech, but were cheering from force of habit - Sir
Featherstone Blood stood up in the carriage and addressed the crowd,
briefly outlining the great measures of Social Reform that his party
proposed to enact to improve the condition of the working classes; and
as they listened, the Wise Men grew delirious with enthusiasm.  He
referred to Land Taxes and Death Duties which would provide money to
build battleships to protect the property of the rich, and provide
Work for the poor.  Another tax was to provide a nice, smooth road for
the rich to ride upon in motor cars - and to provide Work for the
poor.  Another tax would be used for Development, which would also
make Work for the poor.  And so on.  A great point was made of the
fact that the rich were actually to be made to pay something towards
the cost of their road themselves!  But nothing was said about how
they would get the money to do it.  No reference was made to how the
workers would be sweated and driven and starved to earn Dividends and
Rent and Interest and Profits to put into the pockets of the rich
before the latter would be able to pay for anything at all.

These are the things, Gentlemen, that we propose to do for you, and,
at the rate of progress which we propose to adopt, I say without fear
or contradiction, that within the next Five Hundred years we shall so
reform social conditions in this country, that the working classes
will be able to enjoy some of the benefits of civilization.

`The only question before you is: Are you willing to wait for Five
Hundred Years?'

`Yes, sir,' shouted the Wise Men with enthusiasm at the glorious
prospect.

`Yes, Sir: we'll wait a thousand years if you like, Sir!'

`I've been waiting all my life,' said one poor old veteran, who had
assisted to `carry the "Old Flag" to victory' times out of number in
the past and who for his share of the spoils of those victories was
now in a condition of abject, miserable poverty, with the portals of
the workhouse yawning open to receive him; `I've waited all my life,
hoping and trusting for better conditions so a few more years won't
make much difference to me.'

`Don't you trouble to 'urry yourself, Sir,' shouted another Solomon in
the crowd.  `We don't mind waiting.  Take your own time, Sir.  You
know better than the likes of us 'ow long it ought to take.'

In conclusion, the great man warned them against being led away by the
Socialists, those foolish, unreasonable, impractical people who wanted
to see an immediate improvement in their condition; and he reminded
them that Rome was not built in a day.

The Wise Men applauded lustily.  It did not appear to occur to any of
them that the rate at which the ancient Roman conducted their building
operations had nothing whatever to do with the case.

Sir Featherstone Blood sat down amid a wild storm of cheering, and
then the procession reformed, and, reinforced by the audience from the
hall, they proceeded to march about the dreary streets, singing, to
the tune of the `Men of Harlech':

        `Vote for Sweater, Vote for Sweater!
        Vote for Sweater, VOTE FOR SWEATER!
        `He's the Man, who has a plan,
        To liberate and reinstate the workers!
        `Men of Mugs'bro', show your mettle,
        Let them see that you're in fettle!
        Once for all this question settle
        Sweater shall Prevail!'

The carriage containing Sir Featherstone, Adam Sweater, and Rushton
and Didlum was in the middle of the procession.  The banner and the
torches were at the head, and the grandeur of the scene was heightened
by four men who walked - two on each side of the carriage, burning
green fire in frying pans.  As they passed by the Slave Market, a
poor, shabbily dressed wretch whose boots were so worn and rotten that
they were almost falling off his feet, climbed up a lamp-post, and
taking off his cap waved it in the air and shrieked out: `Three Cheers
for Sir Featherstone Blood, our future Prime Minister!'

The Philanthropists cheered themselves hoarse and finally took the
horses out of the traces and harnessed themselves to the carriage
instead.

`'Ow much wages will Sir Featherstone get if 'e is made Prime
Minister?' asked Harlow of another Philanthropist who was also pushing
up behind the carriage.

`Five thousand a year,' replied the other, who by some strange chance
happened to know.  `That comes to a 'underd pounds a week.'

`Little enough, too, for a man like 'im,' said Harlow.

`You're right, mate,' said the other, with deep sympathy in his voice.
`Last time 'e 'eld office 'e was only in for five years, so 'e only
made twenty-five thousand pounds out of it.  Of course 'e got a
pension as well - two thousand a year for life, I think it is; but
after all, what's that - for a man like 'im?'

`Nothing,' replied Harlow, in a tone of commiseration, and Newman, who
was also there, helping to drag the carriage, said that it ought to be
at least double that amount.

However, they found some consolation in knowing that Sir Featherstone
would not have to wait till he was seventy before he obtained his
pension; he would get it directly he came out of office.


The following evening Barrington, Owen and a few others of the same
way of thinking, who had subscribed enough money between them to
purchase a lot of Socialist leaflets, employed themselves distributing
them to the crowds at the Liberal and Tory meetings, and whilst they
were doing this they frequently became involved in arguments with the
supporters of the capitalist system.  In their attempts to persuade
others to refrain from voting for either of the candidates, they were
opposed even by some who professed to believe in Socialism, who said
that as there was no better Socialist candidate the thing to do was to
vote for the better of the two.  This was the view of Harlow and
Easton, whom they met.  Harlow had a green ribbon in his buttonhole,
but Easton wore D'Encloseland's colours.

One man said that if he had his way, all those who had votes should be
compelled to record them - whether they liked it or not - or be
disenfranchised!  Barrington asked him if he believed in Tarrif
Reform.  The man said no.

`Why not?' demanded Barrington.

The other replied that he opposed Tariff Reform because he believed it
would ruin the country.  Barrington inquired if he were a supporter of
Socialism.  The man said he was not, and when further questioned he
said that he believed if it were ever adopted it would bring black ruin
upon the country - he believed this because Mr Sweater had said so.
When Barrington asked him - supposing there were only two candidates,
one a Socialist and the other a Tariff Reformer - how would he like to
be compelled to vote for one of them, he was at a loss for an answer.

During the next few days the contest continued.  The hired orators
continued to pour forth their streams of eloquence; and tons of
literature flooded the town.  The walls were covered with huge
posters: `Another Liberal Lie.' `Another Tory Fraud.'

Unconsciously each of these two parties put in some splendid work for
Socialism, in so much that each of them thoroughly exposed the
hypocrisy of the other.  If the people had only had the sense, they
might have seen that the quarrel between the Liberal and Tory leaders
was merely a quarrel between thieves over the spoil; but unfortunately
most of the people had not the sense to perceive this.  They were
blinded by bigoted devotion to their parties, and - inflamed with
maniacal enthusiasm - thought of nothing but `carrying their flags to
victory'.

At considerable danger to themselves, Barrington, Owen and the other
Socialists continued to distribute their leaflets and to heckle the
Liberal and Tory speakers.  They asked the Tories to explain the
prevalence of unemployment and poverty in protected countries, like
Germany and America, and at Sweater's meetings they requested to be
informed what was the Liberal remedy for unemployment.  From both
parties the Socialists obtained the same kinds of answer - threats of
violence and requests `not to disturb the meeting'.

These Socialists held quite a lot of informal meetings on their own.
Every now and then when they were giving their leaflets away, some
unwary supporter of the capitalist system would start an argument, and
soon a crowd would gather round and listen.

Sometimes the Socialists succeeded in arguing their opponents to an
absolute standstill, for the Liberals and Tones found it impossible to
deny that machinery is the cause of the overcrowded state of the
labour market; that the overcrowded labour market is the cause of
unemployment; that the fact of there being always an army of
unemployed waiting to take other men's jobs away from them destroys
the independence of those who are in employment and keeps them in
subjection to their masters.  They found it impossible to deny that
this machinery is being used, not for the benefit of all, but to make
fortunes for a few.  In short, they were unable to disprove that the
monopoly of the land and machinery by a comparatively few persons, is
the cause of the poverty of the majority.  But when these arguments
that they were unable to answer were put before them and when it was
pointed out that the only possible remedy was the Public Ownership and
Management of the Means of production, they remained angrily silent,
having no alternative plan to suggest.

At other times the meeting resolved itself into a number of
quarrelsome disputes between the Liberals and Tories that formed the
crowd, which split itself up into a lot of little groups and whatever
the original subject might have been they soon drifted to a hundred
other things, for most of the supporters of the present system seemed
incapable of pursuing any one subject to its logical conclusion.  A
discussion would be started about something or other; presently an
unimportant side issue would crop up, then the original subject would
be left unfinished, and they would argue and shout about the side
issue.  In a little while another side issue would arise, and then the
first side issue would be abandoned also unfinished, and an angry
wrangle about the second issue would ensue, the original subject being
altogether forgotten.

They did not seem to really desire to discover the truth or to find
out the best way to bring about an improvement in their condition,
their only object seemed to be to score off their opponents.

Usually after one of these arguments, Owen would wander off by
himself, with his head throbbing and a feeling of unutterable
depression and misery at his heart; weighed down by a growing
conviction of the hopelessness of everything, of the folly of
expecting that his fellow workmen would ever be willing to try to
understand for themselves the causes that produced their sufferings.
It was not that those causes were so obscure that it required
exceptional intelligence to perceive them; the causes of all the
misery were so apparent that a little child could easily be made to
understand both the disease and the remedy; but it seemed to him that
the majority of his fellow workmen had become so convinced of their
own intellectual inferiority that they did not dare to rely on their
own intelligence to guide them, preferring to resign the management of
their affairs unreservedly into the hands of those who battened upon
and robbed them.  They did not know the causes of the poverty that
perpetually held them and their children in its cruel grip, and - they
did not want to know!  And if one explained those causes to them in
such language and in such a manner that they were almost compelled to
understand, and afterwards pointed out to them the obvious remedy,
they were neither glad nor responsive, but remained silent and were
angry because they found themselves unable to answer and disprove.

