"When I growed up and run with boys my color I got wicked. We gambled
and drunk whiskey, then I seen how I was departing from good raising.
I changed. I stopped sociating with bad company. The Lord hailed me in
wide open day time and told me my better life was pleasing in his
sight. I heard him. I didn't see nuthin'. I was called upon to teach a
Sunday School class. Three months I was Sunday School leader. Three
months more I was a licensed preacher. Ordained under Bishop Lee,
Johnson, Copeland--all colored bishops at Topeka, Kansas. Then I
attended conference at Bereah, Kentucky. Bishop Dizney presided. I
preached in Kentucky, Missouri, Kansas, Alabama, Tennessee,
Mississippi, and Arkansas. I am now what they call a superannuated
minister.

"One criticism on my color. They will never progress till they become
more harmonious in spirit with the desires of the white people in the
home land of the white man. I mean when a white person come want some
work or a favor and he not go help him without too much pay."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Absolom Jenkins,
                    R.F.D., Helena, Arkansas
Age: 80
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"I was born a few years before the break out of the old war (Civil
War). I had a boy fit in this last war (World War). He gets a pension
and he sends me part of it every month. He don't send me no amount
whatever he can spare me. He never do send me less than ten dollars. I
pick cotton some last year. I pick twenty or thirty pounds and it got
to raining and so cold my granddaughter said it would make me sick.

"I was born durin' slavery. I was born 'bout twenty-five miles from
Nolan, Tennessee. They call me Ab Jenkins for my old master. He was A.
B. Jenkins. I don't know if his name was Absolom or not. Mother was
name Liddy Strum. They was both sold on the block. They both come to
Tennessee from Virginia in a drove and was sold to men lived less than
ten miles apart. Then they got consent and got married. I don't know
how they struck up together.

"They had three families of us. We lived up close to A. B. Jenkins'
house. He had been married. He was old man when I knowed him. His
daughter lived with him. She was married. Her husband was brought home
from the war dead. I don't know if he got sick and died or shot. The
only little children on the place was me and Jake Jenkins. We was no
kin but jus' like twins. Master would call us up and stick his finger
in biscuits and pour molasses in the hole. That was sure good eating.
The 'lasses wouldn't spill till we done et it up. He'd fix us up
another one. He give us biscuits oftener than the grown folks got
them. We had plenty wheat bread till the old war come on. My mother
beat biscuits with a paddle. She cooked over at Strum's. I lived over
at Jenkins. Grandma Kizzy done my cooking. Master's girl cooked us
biscuits. Master Jenkins loose his hat, his stick, his specks, and
call us to find 'em. He could see. He called us to keep us outer
badness. We had a big business of throwing at things. He threatened to
whoop us. We slacked up on it. I never heard them say but I believe
from what I seen it was agreed to divide the children. Pa would take
me over to see mama every Sunday morning. We leave soon as I could get
my clean long shirt and a little to eat. We walked four miles. He'd
tote me. She had a girl with her. I never stayed over there much and
the girl never come to my place 'cepting when mama come. They let her
stand on the surrey and Eloweise stand inside when they went to
preaching. She'd ride Master Jenkins' mare home and turn her loose to
come home. Me and papa always walked.

"When freedom come on, the country was tore to pieces. Folks don't
know what hard times is now. Some folks said do one thing for the
best, somebody said do another way. Folks roved around for five or six
years trying to do as well as they had done in slavery. It was years
'fore they got back to it. I was grown 'fore they ever got to doing
well again. My folks got off to Nashville. We lived there by the
hardest--eight in family. We moved to Mississippi bottoms not far from
Meridian. We started picking up. We all got fat as hogs. We farmed and
done well. We got to own forty acres of ground and lost two of the
girls with malaria fever. Then we sold out and come to Helena. We
boys, four of us, farmed, hauled wood, sawmilled, worked on the boats
about till our parents died. They died close to Marion on a farm we
rented. I had two boys. One got drowned. The other helps me out a
heap. He got some little children now and got one grown and married.

"The Ku Klux was hot in Tennessee. They whooped a heap of people. The
main thing was to make the colored folks go to work and not steal, but
it was carpet-baggers stealing and go pack it on colored folks. They'd
tell colored folks not to do this and that and it would get them in
trouble. The Ku Klux would whoop the colored folks. Some colored folks
thought 'cause they was free they ought not work. They got to rambling
and scattered out.

"I voted a long time. The voting has caused trouble all along. I voted
different ways--sometimes Republican and sometimes Independent. I
don't believe women ought to vote somehow. I don't vote. I voted for
Cleveland years ago and I voted for Wilson. I ain't voted since the
last war. I don't believe in war.

"Times have changed so much it is lack living in another world now.
Folks living in too much hurry. They getting too fast. They are
restless. I see a heaps of overbearing folks now. Folks after I got
grown looked so fresh and happy. Young folks look tired, mad, worried
now. They fixes up their face but it still show it. Folks quicker than
they used to be. They acts before they have time to think now. Times
is good for me but I see old folks need things. I see young folks
wasteful--both black and white. White folks setting the pace for us
colored folks. It's mighty fast and mighty hard."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Dora Jerman,
                    Forrest City, Arkansas
Age: 60?


"I was born at Bow-and-arrow, Arkansas. Sid McDaniel owned my father.
Mother was Mary Miller and she married Pete Williams from Tennessee.
Grandma lived with us till she died. She used to have us sit around
handy to thread her needles. She was a great hand to piece quilts. Her
and Aunt Polly both. Aunt Polly was a friend that was sold with her
every time. They was like sisters and the most pleasure to each other
in old age.

"My great-great-grandma said to grandma, 'Hurry back wid that pitcher
of water, honey, so you will have time to run by and see your mama and
the children and tell them good-bye. Old master says you going to be
sold early in the morning.' The water was for supper. That was the
last time she ever seen or heard of any of her own kin folks. Grandma
said a gang of them was sold next morning. Aunt Polly was no kin but
they was sold together. Whitfield bought one and Strum bought the
other.

"They come on a boat from Virginia to Aberdeen, Mississippi. They
wouldn't sell her mother because she brought fine children. I think
she said they had a regular stock man. She and Aunt Polly was sold
several times and together till freedom. When they got off the boat
they had to walk a right smart ways and grandma's feet cracked open
and bled. 'Black Mammy' wrapped her feet up in rags and greased them
with hot tallow or mutton suet and told her not to cry no more, be a
good girl and mind master and mistress.

"Grandma said she had a hard time all her life. She was my mother's
mother and she lived to be way over a hundred years old. Aunt Polly
lived with her daughter when she got old. Grandma died first. Then
Aunt Polly grieved so. She was old, old when she died. They still
lived close together, mostly together. Aunt Polly was real black; mama
was lighter. I called grandma 'mama' a right smart too. They called
each other 'sis'. Grandma said, 'I love sis so good.' Aunt Polly
lessened her days grieving for sis. They was both field hands. They
would tell us girls about how they lived when they was girls. We'd
cry.

"We lived in the country and we listened to what they said to us. If
it had been times then like now I wouldn't know to tell you. Folks is
in such a hurry somehow. Gone or going somewhere all the time.

"All my folks is most all full-blood African. I don't believe in races
mixing up. It is a sin. Grandma was the brightest one of any of us.
She was ginger-cake color.

"No, I don't vote. I don't believe in that neither.

"Times is too fast. Fast folks makes fast times. They all fast. Coming
to destruction."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Adaline Johnson
                    Joining the Plunkett farms
                    Eight miles from Biscoe, Arkansas
Age: 96


"I was born twelve miles from the capital, Jackson, Mississippi, on
Strickland's place. My mother was born in Edgecombe County, North
Carolina. Master Jim Battle was old man. He owned three big
plantations, full of niggers. They took me to Edgecombe County where
my mother was born. Battles was rich set of white folks. They lived at
Tarbry, North Carolina and some at Rocky Mount. Joe Battle was my old
master. There was Hue Battle too. Master Joe Battle and Master
Marmaduke was bosses of the whole country. They told Mars Joe not to
whoop that crazy nigger man. He undertook it. He hit him seven licks
with the hoe and killed him. Killed him in Mississippi.

"Master Marmaduke fell at the hotel at Greensboro, North Carolina. He
was a hard drinker and they didn't tell them about it at the hotel. He
got up in the night, fell down the steps and killed hisself. Tom
Williams didn't drink. He went to war and got shot. He professed
religion when he was twelve years old and kept the faith. Had his
Testament in his pocket and blood run on it. That was when he was shot
in the Civil War.

"They took that crazy nigger man to several places, found there was no
law to kill a crazy man. They took him to North Carolina where was all
white folks at that place in Edgecombe County. They hung the poor
crazy nigger. They was 'fraid of uprisings the reason they took him to
place all white folks lived.

"My papa and Brutten (Brittain) Williams same age. Old Mistress
Frankie (Tom Williams', Sr. wife) say, 'Let 'em be, he ain't goiner
whoop Fenna, he's kin to him. He ain't goiner lay his hand on Fenna.'
They whoop niggers black as me. Fenna waited on Master Brutten
Williams. Fenna was half white. He was John Williams' boy. John was
Brutten's brother. John Williams went to Mississippi and overseed for
Mr. Bass. Mars Brutten got crazy. He'd shoot at anything and call it a
hawk.

"Mother was a field woman. When she got in ill health, they put her to
sew. Miss Evaline Perry in Mississippi learned her how to sew. She
sewed up bolts of cloth into clothes for the niggers.

"Brutten Williams bought her from Joe Battle and he willed her to Joe
Williams. She cooked and wove some in her young life. Rich white folks
didn't sell niggers unless they got mad about them. Like mother, they
changed her about. We never was cried off and put up in front of the
public.

"Mars Joe Battle wasn't good. He ruled 'em all. He was Mars Marmaduke
Battle's uncle. They went 'round to big towns and had a good time.
Miss Polly Henry married Mars Brutten. He moved back (from
Mississippi) to North Carolina. They had a big orchard. They give it
all away soon as it ripen. He had a barrel of apple and peach brandy.
He give some of it out in cups. They said there was some double
rectifying in that barrel of brandy. He died.

"Master Tom was killed in war. When he had a ferlough he give all the
men on his place five dollars and every woman a sow pig to raise from.
Tole us all good-bye, said he'd never get back alive. He give me one
and my mother one too. We prized them hogs 'bove everything we ever
had. He got killed. Master Tom was so good to his niggers. He never
whooped them. His wife ruled him, made him do like she wanted
everything but mean to his niggers. Her folks slashed their niggers
and she tried to make him do that too. He wouldn't. They said she wore
the breeches 'cause she ruled him.

"She was Mistress Helland Harris Williams. She took our big hogs away
from every one of us. We raised 'em up fine big hogs. She took them
away from us. Took all the hogs Master Tom give us back. She had
plenty land he left her and cows, some hogs. She married Allen
Hopkins. They had a boy. He sent him to Texas, then he left her. She
was so mean. Followed the boy to Texas. They all said she couldn't
rule Allen Hopkins like she did Tom Williams. She didn't.

"When freedom come on, mother and me both left her 'cause I seen she
wouldn't do. My papa left too and he had raised a little half white
boy. 'Cause he was same age of Brutten Williams, Tom took Brutten's
little nigger child and give him to papa to raise. His name Wilks. His
own black mama beat him. When freedom come on, we went to Cal Pierce's
place. They kept Wilks. He used to run off and come to us. They give
him to somebody else 'way off. Tom had a brother in Georgia. It was
Tom's wife wouldn't let Wilks go on living with us.

"Old mistress just did rave about her boys mixing up with them niggers
but she was better than any other white women to Wilks and Fenna and
George.

"'Big Will' could do much as any two other niggers. When they bought
him a axe, it was a great big axe. They bought him a great big hoe.
They got a new overseer. Overseer said he use a hoe and axe like
everybody else. 'Big Will' killed the overseer with his big axe. Jim
Battle was gone off. His son Marmaduke Battle put him in jail. When
Jim Battle come back he said Marmaduke ought to sent for him, not put
him in jail. Jim Battle sold 'Big Will'. We never heard or seen him no
more. His family stayed on the plantation and worked. 'Big Will' could
split as many more rails as anybody else on the place.

"I seen people sell babies out of the cradle. Poor white people buy
babies and raise them.

"The Battles had gins and stores in North Carolina and Williams had
farms, nothing but farms.

"When I was a girl I nursed the nigger women's babies and seen after
the children. I nursed Tom Williams' boy, Johnny Williams. He run to
me, said, 'Them killed my papa.' I took him up in my arms. Then was
when the Yankee soldiers come on the place. Sid Williams went to war.
I cooked when the regular cook was weaving. Mother carded and spun
then. I had a ounce of cotton to card every night from September till
March. When I'd be dancing around, Miss Helland Harris Williams say,
'You better be studying your pewter days.' Meant for me to stop
dancing.

"Mistress Polly married a Perry, then Right Hendrick. Perrys was rich
folks. When Marmaduke Battle died all the niggers cried and cried and
bellowed because they thought they would be sold and get a mean
master.

"They had a mean master right then--Right Hendrick. Mean a man as ever
God ever wattled a gut in I reckon. That was in Mississippi. They took
us back and forth when it suited them. We went in hacks, surreys and
stage-coaches, wagons, horseback, and all sorts er ways. We went on
big river boats sometimes. They sold off a lot of niggers to settle up
the estate. What I want to know is how they settle up estates now.

"They parched persimmon seed and wheat during the war to make coffee.
I ploughed during the Civil War. Strange people come through, took our
snuff and tobacco. Master Tom said for us not have no light at night
so the robbers couldn't find us so easy. He was a good man. The
Yankees said they had to subdue our country. They took everything they
could find. Times was hard. That was in North Carolina.

"When Brutten Williams bought me and mama--mama was Liza
Williams--Master Brutten bought her sister three or four years after
that and they took us to (Zeblin or) Sutton in Franklin County. Now
they call it Wakefield Post Office. Brutten willed us to Tom. Sid,
Henry, John was Tom Williams' boys, and his girls were Pink and Tish.

"Master John and Marmaduke Battle was rich as they could be. They was
Joe Battle's uncles. Jesse Ford was Marmaduke's half-brother in Texas.
He come to Mississippi to get his part of the niggers and the rest was
put on a block and sold. Master Marmaduke broke his neck when he fell
downstairs. I never heard such crying before nor since as I heard that
day. Said they lost their best master. They knowed how bad they got
whooped on Ozoo River.

"Master Marmaduke walked and bossed his overseers. He went to the big
towns. He never did marry. My last master was Tom Williams. He was so
nice to us all. He confessed religion. He worked us hard, then hard
times come when he went to war. He knowed our tracks--foot tracks and
finger tracks both.

"Somebody busted a choice watermelon, plugged it out with his fingers
and eat it. Master Tom said, 'Fenna, them your finger marks.' Then he
scolded him good fashioned. Old Mistress Frankie say, 'Don't get
scared, he ain't go to whoop him, they kin. Fenna kin to him, he not
goiner hurt him.'

"At the crossroads there was a hat shop. White man brought a lot of
white free niggers to work in the hat shop. Way they come free
niggers. Some poor woman had no living. Nigger men steal flour or a
hog, take it and give it to her. She be hungry. Pretty soon a mulatto
baby turned up. Then folks want to run her out the country. Sometimes
they did.

"Old man Stinson (Stenson?) left and went to Ohio. They wrote back to
George to come after them to Ohio. Bill Harris had a baltimore
trotter. The letter lay about in the post office. They broke it open,
read it, give it to his owner. He got mad and sold George. He was Sam
Harrises carriage driver. Dick and him was half-brothers. Dick learned
him about reading and writing. When the war was over George come
through on the train. Sam Harris run up there, cracked his heels
together, hugged him, and give him ten dollars. He sold him when he
was so mad. I don't know if he went to Ohio to Stinson's or not.

"We stayed in the old country twenty-five or thirty years after
freedom.

"When we left Miss Helland Harris Williams', Tim Terrel come by there
with his leg shot off and was there till he could get on to his folks.

"When I come here I was expecting to go to California. There was cars
going different places. We got on Mr. Boyd's car. He paid our way out
here. Mr. Jones brought his car to Memphis and stopped. Mr. Boyd
brought us right here. That was in 1892. We got on the train at
Raleigh, North Carolina.

"Papa bought forty acres land from the Boyd estate. Our children
scattered and we sold some of it. We got twenty acres. Some of it in
woods. I had to sell my cow to bury my granddaughter what lived with
me--taking care of me. Papa tole my son to take care of me and since
he died my son gone stone blind. I ain't got no chickens hardly. I go
hungry nigh all the time. I gets eight dollars for me and my blind son
both. If I could get a cow. We tries to have a garden. They ain't
making nothing on my land this year. I'm having the hardest time I
ever seen in my life. I got a toothpick in my ear and it's rising.
The doctor put some medicine in my ears--both of them.

"When I was in slavery I wore peg shoes. I'd be working and not time
to take off my shoes and fix the tacks--beat 'em down. They made holes
in bottoms of my feet; now they got to be corns and I can't walk and
stand."


Interviewer's Comment

This is another one of those _terrible_ cases. This old woman is on
starvation. She had a cow and can't get another one. The son is blind
but feels about and did milk. The bedbugs are nearly eating her up.
They scald but can't get rid of them. They have a fairly good house to
live in. But the old woman is on starvation and away back eight miles
from Biscoe. I hate to see good old Negroes want for something to eat.
She acts like a small child. Pitiful, so feeble. The second time I
went out there I took her daughter who walks out there every week. We
fixed her up an iron bedstead so she can sleep better. I took her a
small cake. That was her dinner. She had eaten one egg that morning.
She was a clean, kind old woman. Very much like a child. Has a rising
in her head and said she was afraid her head would kill her. She gave
me a gallon of nice figs her daughter picked, so I paid her
twenty-five cents for them. She had plenty figs and no sugar.


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Alice Johnson
                    601 W. Eighth Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 77


"You want to know what they did in slavery times! They were doin' jus'
what they do now. The white folks was beatin' the niggers, burning 'em
and boilin' 'em, workin' 'em and doin' any other thing they wanted to
do with them. 'Course you wasn't here then to know about nigger dogs
and bull whips, were you? The same thing is goin' on right now. They
got the same bull whips and the same old nigger dogs. If you don't
believe it, go right out here to the county farm and you find 'em
still whippin' the niggers and tearing them up and sometimes lettin'
the dogs bite them to save the bull whips.

"I was here in slavery time but I was small and I don't know much
about it 'cept what they told me. But you don't need to go no further
to hear all you want to know. They sont you to the right place. They
all know me and they call me Mother Johnson. So many folks been here
long as me, but don't want to admit it. They black their hair and
whiten their faces, and powder and paint. 'Course it's good to look
good all right. But when you start that stuff, you got to keep it up.
Tain't no use to start and stop. After a while you got that same color
hair and them same splotches again. Folks say, 'What's the matter, you
gittin so dark?' Then you say, 'Uh, my liver is bad.' You got to keep
that thing up, baby.

"I thank God for my age. I thank God He's brought me safe all the way.
That is the matter with this world now. It ain't got enough religion.

"I was born in Mississippi way below Jackson in Crystal Springs. That
is on the I. C. Road near New Orleans. The train that goes there goes
to New Orleans. I was bred and born and married there in Crystal
Springs. I don't know just when I was born but I know it was in the
month of December.

"I remember when the slaves were freed. I remember the War 'cause I
used to hear them talking about the Yankees and I didn't know whether
they were mules or horses or what not. I didn't know if they was
varmints or folks or what not. I can't remember whether I seen any
soldiers or not. I heard them talking about soldiers, but I didn't see
none right 'round where we was.

"Now what good's that all goin' to do me? It ain't goin' to do me no
good to have my name in Washington. Didn't do me no good if he stuck
my name up on a stick in Washington. Some of them wouldn't know me.
Those that did would jus' say, 'That's old Alice Johnson.'

"Us old folks, they don't count us. They jus' kick us out of the way.
They give me 'modities and a mite to spend. Time you go and get lard,
sugar, meat, and flour, and pay rent and buy wood, you don't have
'nough to go 'round. Now that might do you some good if you didn't
have to pay rent and buy wood and oil and water. I'll tell you
something so you can earn a living. Your mama give you a education so
you can earn a living and you earnin' it jus' like she meant you to.
But most of us don't earn it that way, and most of these educated
folks not earnin' a livin' with their education. They're in jail
somewheres. They're walkin' up and down Ninth Street and runnin' in
and out of these here low dives. You go down there to the penitentiary
and count those prisoners and I'll bet you don't find nary one that
don't know how to read and write. They're all educated. Most of these
educated niggers don't have no feeling for common niggers. 'They just
walk on them like they wasn't living. And don't come to 'em tellin'
them that you wanting to use them!

"The people et the same thing in slavery time that they eat now. Et
better then 'n they do now. Chickens, cows, mules died then, they
throw 'em to the buzzards. Die now, they sell 'em to you to eat.
Didn't eat that in slavery time. Things they would give to the dogs
then, they sell to the people to eat now. People et pure stuff in
slavery. Don't eat pure stuff now. Got pure food law, but that's all
that is pure.

"My mother's name was Diana Benson and my father's name was Joe Brown.
That's what folks say, I don't know. I have seen them but I wasn't
brought up with no mother and father. Come up with the white folks and
colored folks fust one and then the other. I think my mother and
father died before freedom. I don't know what the name of their master
was. All my folks died early.

"The fus' white folks I knowed anything about was Rays. They said that
they were my old slave-time masters. They were nice to me. Treated me
like they would their own children. Et and slept with them. They
treated me jus' like they own. Heap of people say they didn't have no
owners, but they got owners yet now out there on that government farm.

"The fus' work I done in my life was nussing. I was a child then and I
stayed with the white folks' children. Was raised up in the house with
'em. I was well taken care of too. I was jus' like their children.
That was at Crystal Springs.

"I left them before I got grown and went off with other folks. I never
had no reason. Jus' went on off. I didn't go for better because I was
doing better. They jus' told me to come and I went.

"I been living now in Arkansas ever since 1911. My husband and I
stayed on to work and make a living. I take care of myself. I'm not
looking for nothin' now but a better home over yonder--better home
than this. Thank the Lawd, I gits along all right. The government
gives me a check to buy me a little meat and bread with. Maybe the
government will give me back that what they took off after a while. I
don't know. It takes a heap of money to feed thousands and millions of
people. When the check comes, I am glad to git it no matter how little
it is. Twarn't for it, I would be in a sufferin' condition.

"I belong to the Arch Street Baptist Church. I been for about twenty
years. I was married sixteen years to my first husband and
twenty-eight to my second. The last one has been dead five years and
the other one thirty-six years. I ain't got none walkin' 'round. All
my husbands is dead. There ain't nothin' in this quitin' and goin' and
breakin' up and bustin' up. I don't tell no woman to quit and don't
tell no man to quit. Go over there and git 'nother woman and she will
be wuss than the one you got. When you fall out, reason and git
together. Do right. I stayed with both of my husbands till they died.
I ain't bothered 'bout another one. Times is so hard no man can take
care of a woman now. Come time to pay rent, 'What you waiting for me
to pay rent for? You been payin' it, ain't you?' Come time to buy
clothes, 'What you waitin' for me to buy clothes for? Where you
gittin' 'um from before you mai'd me?' Come time to pay the grocery
bill, 'How come you got to wait for me to pay the grocery bill? Who
been payin' it?' No Lawd, I don't want no man unless he works. What
could I do with him? I don't want no man with a home and bank account.
You can't git along with 'im. You can't git along with him and you
can't git along with her."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Allen Johnson
                    718 Arch Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: About 82


"I was born in Georgia about twelve miles from Cartersville, in Cass
County, and about the same distance from Cassville. I was a boy about
eight or nine years old when I come from there. But I have a very good
memory. Then I have seed the distance and everything in the Geography.
My folks were dead long ago now. My oldest brother is dead too. He was
just large enough to go to the mills. In them times, they had mills.
They would fix him on the horse and he would go ahead.

"My father's name was Clem Johnson, and my mother's name was Mandy.
Her madam's name I don't know. I was small. I remember my grandma.
She's dead long long ago. Long time ago! I think her name was Rachel.
Yes, I'm positive it was Rachel. That is what I believe. I was a
little bitty fellow then. I think she was my mother's mother. I know
one of my mother's sisters. Her name was Lucinda. I don't know how
many she had nor nothin'.

"Johnsons was the name of the masters my mother and father had. They
go by the name of Johnson yet. Before that I don't know who they had
for masters. The pastor's name was Lindsay Johnson and the old missis
was Mary Johnson. People long time ago used to send boys big enough to
ride to the mill. My brother used to go. It ran by water-power. They
had a big mill pond. They dammed that up. When they'd get ready to run
the mill, they'd open that dam and it would turn the wheel. My oldest
brother went to the mill and played with old master's son and me.

"They used to throw balls over the house and see which could catch
them first. There would be three or four on a side of the house and
they would throw the ball over the house to see which side would be
quickest and aptest.

"My mother and father both belonged to the same man, Lindsay Johnson.
I was a small boy. I can't tell you how he was to his folks. Seems
like though he was pretty good to us. Seemed like he was a pretty good
master. He didn't overwork his niggers. He didn't beat and 'buse them.
He gave them plenty to eat and drink. You see the better a Negro
looked and the finer he was the more money he would bring if they
wanted to sell them. I have heard my mother and father talk about it
plenty of times.

"My father worked in the field during slavery. My mother didn't do
much of no kind of work much. She was a woman that had lots of
children to take care of. She had four children during slavery and
twelve altogether. Her children were all small when freedom was
declared. My oldest brother, I don't remember much about slavery
except playing 'round with him and with the other little boys, the
white boys and the nigger boys. They were very nice to me.

"I was a great big boy when I heard them talking about the pateroles
catching them or whipping them. At that time when they would go off
they would have to have a pass. When they went off if they didn't have
a pass they would whip and report them to their owners. And they would
be likely to get another brushing from the owners. The pateroles never
bothered the children any. The children couldn't go anywhere without
the consent of the mother and father. And there wasn't any danger of
them running off. If they caught a little child between plantations,
they would probably just run them home. It was all right for a child
to go in the different quarters and play with one another during
daytime just so they got back before night. I was a small boy but I
have very good recollections about these things. I couldn't tell you
whether the pateroles ever bothered my father or not. Never heard him
say. But he was a careful man and he always knew the best time and way
to go and come. Them old fellows had a way to git by as well as we do
now.

"They fed the slaves about what they wanted to. They would give them
meat and flour and meal. I used to hear my father say the old boss fed
him well. Then again they would have hog killln' time 'long about
Christmas. The heads, lights, chittlings and fats would be given to
the slaves. 'Course I didn't know much about that only what I heard
from the old folks talking about it. They lived in the way of eating,
I suppose, better than they do now. Had no expense whatever.

"As to amusements, I'll tell you I don't know. They'd have little
dances about like they do now. And they give quiltings and they'd have
a ring play. My mother never knew anything about dances and fiddling
and such things; she was a Christian. They had churches you know. My
white folks didn't object to the niggers goin' to meetin'. 'Course
they had to have a pass to go anywhere. If they didn't they'd git a
brushin' from the pateroles if they got caught and the masters were
likely to give them another light brushin' when they got home.

"I think that was a pretty good system. They gave a pass to those that
were allowed to be out and the ones that were supposed to be out were
protected. Of course, now you are your own free agent and you can go
and come as you please. Now the police take the place of the
pateroles. If they find you out at the wrong time and place they are
likely to ask you about it.

"A slave was supposed to pick a certain amount of cotton I have heard.
They had tasks. But we didn't pick cotton. Way back in Georgia that
ain't no cotton country. Wheat, corn, potatoes, and things like that.
But in Louisiana and Mississippi, there was plenty of cotton. Arkansas
wasn't much of a cotton state itself. It was called a 'Hoojer' state
when I was a boy. That is a reference to the poor white man. He was a
'Hoojer'. He wasn't rich enough to own no slaves and they called him a
'Hoojer'.

"The owners would hire them to take care of the niggers and as
overseers and pateroles. They was hired and paid a little salary jus'
like the police is now. If we didn't have killing and murderin', there
wouldn't be no need for the police. The scoundrel who robs and kills
folks ought to be highly prosecuted.

"I reckon I was along eight or nine years old when freedom came. My
oldest brother was twelve, and I was next to him. I must have been
eight or nine--or maybe ten.

"My occupation since freedom has been farming and doing a little job
work--anything I could git. Work by the day for mechanic and one thing
and another. I know nothin' about no trade 'ceptin' what I have picked
up. Never took no contracts 'ceptin' for building a fence or somethin'
small like that. Mechanic's work I suppose calls for license."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Annie Johnson
                    804 Izard Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 78


"I was born in Holly Springs, Mississippi, and I was four years old
when the Civil War closed. My parents died when I was a baby and a
white lady named Mrs. Mary Peters took me and raised me. They moved
from there to Champaign, Illinois when I was about six years old. My
mother died when I was born. Them white people only had two slaves, my
mother and my father, and my father had run off with the Yankees. Mrs.
Peters was their mistress. She died when I was eight years old and
then I stayed with her sister. That was when I was up in Champaign.

"The sister's name was Mrs. Mary Smith. She just taught school here
and there and around in different places, and I went around with her
to take care of her children. That kept up until I was twenty years
old. All of her traveling was in Illinois.

"I didn't get much schooling. I went to school a while and taken sore
eyes. The doctor said if I continued to go to school, I would strain
my eyes. After he told me that I quit. I learned enough to read the
Bible and the newspaper and a little something like that, but I can't
do much. My eyes is very weak yet.

"When I was twenty years old I married Henry Johnson, who was from
Virginia. I met him in Champaign. We stayed in Champaign about two
years. Then we came on down to St. Louis. He was just traveling 'round
looking for work and staying wherever there was a job. Didn't have no
home nor nothing. He was a candy maker by trade, but he did anything
he could get to do. He's been dead for forty years now. He came down
here, then went back to Champaign and died in Springfield, Illinois
while I was here.

"I don't get no pension, don't get nothing. I get along by taking in a
little washing now and then.

"My mother's name was Eliza Johnson and my father's name was Joe
Johnson. I don't know a thing about none of my grandparents. And I
don't know what my mother's name was before she married.

"A gentleman what worked on the place where I lived said that if you
didn't have a pass during slave times, that if the pateroles caught
you, they would whip you and make you run back home. He said he had to
run through the woods every which way once to keep them from catching
him.

"I have heard the old folks talk about being put on the block. The
colored woman I lived with in Champaign told me that they put her on
the block and sold her down into Ripley, Mississippi.

"She said that the way freedom came was this. The boss man told her
she was free. Some of the slaves lived with him and some of them
picked up and went on off somewhere.

"The Ku Klux never bothered me. I have heard some of the colored
people say how they used to come 'round and bother the church services
looking for this one and that one.

"I don't know what to say about these young folks. I declare, they
have just gone wild. They are almost getting like brutes. A woman come
by here the other day without more 'n a spoonful of things on and
stopped and struck a match and lit her cigarette. You can't talk to
them neither. I don't know what we ought to do about it. They let
these white men run around with them. I see 'em doing anything. I
think times are bad and getting worse. Just as that shooting they had
over in North Little Rock." (Shooting and robbing of Rev. Sherman, an
A. M. E. minister, by Negro robbers.)


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Ben Johnson
                    Near Holly Grove and Clarendon, Arkansas
Age: 73


"My master was Wort Garland. My papa's master was Steve Johnson. Papa
went off to Louisiana and I never seen him since. I guess he got
killed. I was born in Madison County, Tennessee. I come to Arkansas
1889. Mother was here. She come on a transient ticket. My papa come
wid her to Holly Grove. They both field hands. I worked on the
section--railroad section. I cut and hauled timber and farms. I never
own no land, no home. I have two boys went off and a grown girl in
Phillips County. I don't get no help. I works bout all I able and can
get to do.

"I have voted. I votes a Republican ticket. I like this President. If
the men don't know how to vote recken the women will show em how.

"The present conditions is very good. The present generation is beyond
me.

"I heard my folks set around the fireplace at night and talk about
olden times but I couldn't tell it straight and I was too little to
know bout it.

"We looked all year for Christmas to get some good things in our
stockings. They was knit at night. Now we has oranges and bananas all
the time, peppermint candy--in sticks--best candy I ever et. Folks
have more now that sort than we had when I was growing up. We was
raised on meat and corn bread, milk, and garden stuff. Had plenty
apples, few peaches, sorghum molasses, and peanuts. Times is better
now than when I come on far as money goes. Wood is scarce and folks
can't have hogs no more. No place to run and feed cost so much. Can't
buy it. Feed cost more 'en the hog. Times change what makes the folks
change so much I recken."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Ben Johnson (deaf),
                    Clarendon, Arkansas
Age: 84
Black


"Steve Johnson was my owner. Way he come by me was dat he married in
the Ward family and heired him and my mother too. Louis Johnson was my
father's name. At one time Wort Garland owned my mother, and she was
sold. Her name was Mariah.

"My father went to war twice. Once he was gone three weeks and next
time three or four months. He come home sound. I stayed on Johnson's
farm till I was a big boy."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Betty Johnson
                    1920 Dennison Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 83
[Date Stamp: MAY 11 1938]


"I was born in Montgomery, Alabama, within a block of the statehouse.
We were the only colored people in the neighborhood. I am eighty-three
years old. I was born free. I have never been a slave. I never met any
slaves when I was small, and never talked to any. I didn't live near
them and didn't have any contacts with them.

"My father carried my mother to Pennsylvania before I was born and set
her free. Then he carried her back to Montgomery, Alabama, and all her
children were born free there.

"We had everything that life needed. He was one of the biggest
planters around in that part of the country and did the shipping for
everybody.

"My mother's name was Josephine Hassell. She had nine children. All of
them are dead except three. One is in Washington, D. C.; another is in
Chicago, Illinois, and then I am here. One of my brothers was a mail
clerk for the government for fifty years, and then he went to
Washington and worked in the dead letter office.

"My father taken my oldest brother just before the Civil War and
entered him in Yale and he stayed there till he finished. Later he
became a freight conductor and lost his life when his train was caught
in a cyclone. That's been years ago.

"My sisters in Washington and Chicago are the only two living besides
myself. All the others are dead. All of them were government workers.
My sister in Washington has four boys and five girls. My sister in
Chicago has two children--one in Detroit and one in Washington. I am
the oldest living.

"We never had any kind of trouble with white people in slave time, and
we never had any since. Everybody in town knowed us, and they never
bothered us. The editor of the paper in Montgomery got up all our
history and sent the paper to my brother in Washington. If I had saved
the paper, I would have had it now. I don't know the name of the
paper. It was a white paper. I can't even remember the name of the
editor.

"We were always supported by my father. My mother _did_ [HW: ?] do
nothing at all except stay home and take care of her children. I had a
father that cared for us. He didn't leave that part undone. He did his
part in every respect. He sent every child away to school. He sent two
to Talladega, one to Yale, three to Fiske, and one to Howard
University.

"I don't remember much about how freedom came to the slaves. You see,
we didn't live near any of them and would not notice, and I was young
anyway. All I remember is that when the army came in, everybody had a
stick with a white handkerchief on it. The white handkerchief
represented peace. I don't know just how they announced that the
slaves were free.

"We lived in as good a house as this one here. It had eight rooms in
it. I was married sixty years ago. My husband died two years ago. We
were married fifty-eight years. Were the only colored people here to
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary. (She is mistaken in this; Waters
McIntosh has been married for fifty-six years and he and his wife are
still making it together in an ideal manner--ed.) I am the mother of
eight children; three girls are living and two boys. The rest are
dead.

"I married a good man. Guess there was never a better. We lived
happily together for a long time and he gave me everything I needed.
He gave me and my children whatever we asked for.

"I was sick for three years. Then my husband took down and was sick
for seven years before he died.

"I belong to the Holiness Church down on Izard Street, and Brother
Jeeter is my pastor."


INTERVIEWER'S COMMENT

Betty Johnson's memory is accurate, and she tells whatever she wishes
to tell without hesitation and clearly. She leaves out details which
she does not wish to mention evidently, and there is a reserve in her
manner which makes questioning beyond a certain point impertinent.
However, just what she tells presents a picture into which the details
may easily be fitted.

Her husband is dead, but he was evidently of the same type she is. She
lives in a beautiful and well kept cottage. Her husband left a similar
house for each of her three children. The husband, of course, was
colored. It is equally evident that the father was white.

Although my questions traveled into corners where they evidently did
not wish to follow, the mother and son, who was from time to time with
her, answered courteously and showed no irritation.


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Cinda Johnson
                    506 E. Twenty, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 83


"Yes ma'm, this is Cinda. Yes'm, I remember seein' the soldiers but I
didn't know what they was doin'. You know old folks didn't talk in
front of chilluns like they does now--but I been here. I got great
grand chillun--boy big enuf to chop cotton. That's my daughter's
daughter's chile. Now you _know_ I been here.

"I heered em talkin' bout freedom. My mother emigrated here drectly
after freedom. I was born in Alabama. When we come here, I know I was
big enuf to clean house and milk cows. My mother died when I was bout
fifteen. She called me to the bed and tole me who to stay with. I been
treated bad, but I'm still here and I thank the Lord He let me stay.

"I been married twice. My first husband died, but I didn't have no
graveyard love. I'm the mother of ten whole chillun. All dead but two
and only one of them of any service to me. That's my son. He's good to
me and does what he can but he's got a family. My daughter-in-law--all
she does is straighten her hair and look cute.

"One of my sons what died belonged to the Odd Fellows and I bought
this place with insurance. I lives here alone in peace. Yes, honey, I
been here a long time."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Ella Johnson
                    913-1/2 Victory Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: About 85


"I was born in Helena, Arkansas. Not exactly in the town but in hardly
not more than three blocks from the town. Have you heard about the
Grissoms down there? Well, them is my white folks. My maiden name was
Burke. But we never called ourselves any name 'cept Grissom.

"My mother's name was Sylvia Grissom. Her husband was named Jack
Burkes. He went to the Civil War. That was a long time ago. When they
got up the war, they sold out a lot of the colored folks. But they
didn't get a chance to sell my mother. She left. They tell me one of
them Grissom boys has been down here looking for me. He didn't find me
and he went on back.

My mother's mistress was named Sylvia Grissom too. All of us was named
after the white folks. All the old folks is dead, but the young ones
is living. I think my mother's master was named John. They had so many
of them that I forgit which is which. But they had all mama's children
named after them. My mother had three girls and three boys.

"When the war began and my father went to war, my mother left Helena
and came here. She run off from the Grissoms. They whipped her too
much, those white folks did. She got tired of all that beating. She
took all of us with her. All six of us children were born before the
war. I was the fourth.

"There is a place down here where the white folks used to whip and
hang the niggers. Baskin Lake they call it. Mother got that far. I
don't know how. I think that she came in a wagon. She stayed there a
little while and then she went to Churchill's place. Churchill's place
and John Addison's place is close together down there. That is old
time. Them folks is dead, dead, dead. Churchill's and Addison's places
joined near Horse Shoe Lake. They had hung and burnt people--killed
'em and destroyed 'em at Baskin Lake. We stayed there about four days
before we went on to Churchill's place. We couldn't stay there long.

"The ha'nts--the spirits--bothered us so we couldn't sleep. All them
people that had been killed there used to come back. We could hear
them tipping 'round in the house all the night long. They would blow
out the light. You would kiver up and they would git on top of the
kiver. Mama couldn't stand it; so she come down to General Churchill's
place and made arrangements to stay there. Then she came back and got
us children. She had an old man to stay there with us until she come
back and got us. We couldn't stay there with them ha'nts dancing
'round and carryin' us a merry gait.

"At Churchill's place my mother made cotton and corn. I don't know
what they give her for the work, but I know they paid her. She was a
hustling old lady. The war was still goin' on. Churchill was a Yankee.
He went off and left the plantation in the hands of his oldest son.
His son was named Jim Churchill. That is the old war; that is the
first war ever got up--the Civil War. Ma stayed at Churchill's long
enough to make two or three crops. I don't know just how long.
Churchill and them wanted to own her--them and John Addison.

"There was three of us big enough to work and help her in the field.
Three--I made four. There was my oldest sister, my brother, and my
next to my oldest sister, and myself--Annie, John, Martha, and me. I
chopped cotton and corn. I used to tote the leadin' row. Me and my
company walked out ahead. I was young then, but my company helped me
pick that cotton. That nigger could pick cotton too. None of the res'
of them could pick anything for looking at him.

"Mother stayed at Churchill's till plumb after the war. My father died
before the war was over. They paid my mother some money and said she
would get the balance. That means there was more to come, doesn't it?
But they didn't no more come. They all died and none of them got the
balance. I ain't never got nothin' either. I gave my papers to Adams
and Singfield. I give them to Adams; Adams is a Negro that one-legged
Wash Jordan sent to me. They all say he's a big crook, but I didn't
know it. Adams kept coming to my house until he got my papers and then
when he got the papers he didn't come no more.

"After Adams got the papers, he carried me down to Lawyer Singfield's.
He said I had to be sworn in and it would cost me one dollar.
Singfield wrote down every child's name and everybody's age. When he
got through writing, he said that was all and me and Pearl made up one
dollar between us and give it to him. And then we come on away. We
left Mr. Adams and Mr. Singfield in Singfield's office and we left the
papers there in the office with them. They didn't give me no receipt
for the papers and they didn't give me no receipt for the dollar.
Singfield's wife has been to see me several times to sell me
something. She wanted to git me to buy a grave, but she ain't never
said nothin' about those papers. You think she doesn't know 'bout 'em?
I have seen Adams once down to Jim Perry's funeral on Arch Street. I
asked him about my papers and he said the Government hadn't answered
him. He said, 'Who is you?' I said, 'This is Mrs. Johnson.' Then he
went on out. He told me when he got a answer, it will come right to my
door.

"I never did no work before goin' on Churchill's plantation. Some of
the oldest ones did, but I didn't. I learned how to plow at John
Addison's place. The war was goin' on then. I milked cows for him and
churned and cleaned up. I cooked some for him. Are you acquainted with
Blass? I nursed Julian Blass. I didn't nurse him on Addison's place; I
nursed him at his father's house up on Main Street, after I come here.
I nursed him and Essie both. I nursed her too. I used to have a time
with them chillen. They weren't nothin' but babies. The gal was about
three months old and Julian was walkin' 'round. That was after I come
to Little Rock.

"My mother come to Little Rock right after the war. She brought all of
us with her but the oldest. He come later.

"She want to work and cooked and washed and ironed here. I don't
remember the names of the people she worked for. They all dead--the
old man and the old ladies.

"She sent me to school. I went to school at Philander [HW: (Philander
Smith College?)] and down to the end of town and in the country. We
had a white man first and then we had a colored woman teacher. The
white man was rough. He would fight all the time. I would read and
spell without opening my book. They would have them blue-back spellers
and McGuffy's reader. They got more education then than they do now.
Now they is busy fighting one another and killin' one another. When
you see anything in the paper, you don't know whether it is true or
not. Florence Lacy's sister was one of my teachers. I went to Union
school once. [HW: ---- insert from P. 5]

"You remember Reuben White? They tried to bury him and he came to
before they got him in the grave. He used to own the First Baptist
Church. He used to pastor it too. He sent for J. P. Robinson by me. He
told Robinson he wanted him to take the Church and keep it as long as
he lived. Robinson said he would keep it. Reuben White went to his
brother's and died. They brought him back here and kept his body in
the First Baptist Church a whole week. J. P. carried on the meetin',
and them sisters was fightin' him. They went on terrible. He started
out of the church and me and 'nother woman stopped him. At last they
voted twice, and finally they elected J. P. He was a good pastor, but
he hurrahed the people and they didn't like that.

"Reuben White didn't come back when they buried him the second time.
They were letting the coffin down in the grave when they buried him
the first time, and he knocked at it on the inside, knock, knock.
(Here the old lady rapped on the doorsill with her knuckles--ed.) They
drew that coffin up and opened it. How do I know? I was there. I heard
it and seen it. They took him out of the coffin and carried him back
to his home in the ambulance. He lived about three or four years after
that.

"I had a member to die in my order and they sent for the undertaker
and he found that she wasn't dead. They took her down to the
undertaker's shop, and found that she wasn't dead. They said she died
after they embalmed her. That lodge work ran my nerves down. I was in
the Tabernacle then. Goodrich and Dubisson was the undertakers that
had the body. Lucy Tucker was the woman. I guess she died when they
got her to the shop. They say the undertaker cut on her before he
found that she was dead.

"I don't know how many grades I finished in school. I guess it was
about three altogether. I had to git up and go to work then. [TR: This
paragraph was marked with a line on the right; possibly it is the
paragraph to be inserted on the previous page.]

"After I quit school, I nursed mighty nigh all the time. I cooked for
Governor Rector part of the time. I cooked for Dr. Lincoln Woodruff. I
cooked for a whole lot of white folks. I washed and ironed for them
Anthonys down here. She like to had a fit over me the last time she
saw me. She wanted me to come back, but my hand couldn't stand it. I
cooked for Governor Rose's wife. That's been a long time back. I
wouldn't 'low nobody to come in the kitchen when I was working. I
would say, 'You goin' to come in this kitchen, I'll have to git out.'
The Governor was awful good to me. They say he kicked the res' of them
out. I scalded his little grandson once. I picked up the teakettle.
Didn't know it had water in it and it slipped and splashed water over
the little boy's hand. If'n it had been hot as it ought to have been,
it would have burnt him bad. He went out of that kitchen hollerin'.
The Governor didn't say nothin' 'cept, 'Ella, please don't do it
again.' I said, 'I guess that'll teach him to stay out of that kitchen
now.' I was boss of that kitchen when I worked there.

"We took the lock off the door once so the Governor couldn't git in
it.

"I dressed up and come out once and somebody called the Governor and
said, 'Look at your cook.' And he said, 'That ain't my cook.' That was
Governor Rector. I went in and put on my rags and come in the kitchen
to cook and he said, 'That is my cook.' He sure wanted me to keep on
cookin' for him, but I just got sick and couldn't stay.

"I hurt my hand over three years ago. My arm swelled and folks rubbed
it and got all the swelling down in one place in my hand. They told me
to put fat meat on it. I put it on and the meat hurt so I had to take
it off. Then they said put the white of an egg on it. I did that too
and it was a little better. Then they rubbed the place until it
busted. But it never did cure up. I poisoned it by goin' out pulling
up greens in the garden. They tell me I got dew poisoning.

"I don't git no help from the Welfare or from the Government. My
husband works on the relief sometimes. He's on the relief now.

"I married--oh, Lordy, lemme see when I did marry. It's been a long
time ago, more 'n thirty years it's been. It's been longer than that.
We married up here on Twelfth and State Street, right here in Little
Rock. I had a big wedding. I had to go to Thompson's hall. That was on
Tenth and State Street. They had to go to git all them people in. They
had a big time that night.

"I lived in J. P. Robinson's house twenty-two years. And then I lived
in front of Dunbar School. It wasn't Dunbar then. I know all the
people that worked at the school. I been living here about six
months."


Interviewer's Comment

Ella Johnson is about eighty-five years old. Her father went to war
when the War first broke out. Her mother ran away then and went to
Churchill's farm not later than 1862. Ella Johnson learned to plow
then and she was at least nine years old she says and perhaps older
when she learned to plow. So she must be at least eighty-five.


Interviewer: Mary D. Hudgins
Person interviewed: Fanny Johnson
Aged: 76
Home: Palmetto (lives with daughter who owns
a comfortable, well furnished home)


As told by: Mrs. Fanny Johnson

"Yes ma'am. I remembers the days of slavery. I was turned five years
old when the war started rushing. No ma'am, I didn't see much of the
Yankees. They didn't come thru but twice. Was I afraid? No ma'am. I
was too busy to be scared. I was too busy looking at the buttons they
wore. Until they went in Master's smoke house. Then I quit looking and
started hollering. But, I'll tell you all about that later.

My folks all come from Maryland. They was sold to a man named Woodfork
and brought to Nashville. The Woodfork colored folks was always
treated good. Master used to buy up lots of plantations. Once he
bought one in Virginia with all the slaves on the place. He didn't
believe in separating families. He didn't believe in dividing mother
from her baby.

But they did take them away from their babies. I remember my
grandmother telling about it. The wagon would drive down into the
field and pick up a woman. Then somebody would meet her at the gate
and she would nurse her baby for the last time. Then she'd have to go
on. Leastwise, if they hadn't sold her baby too.

It was pretty awful. But I don't hold no grudge against anybody. White
or black, there's good folks in all kinds. I don't hold nothing
against nobody. The good Lord knows what he is about. Most of the time
it was just fine on any Woodfork place. Master had so many places he
couldn't be at 'em all. We lived down on the border, on the
Arkansas-Louisiana line sort of joining to Grand Lake. Master was up
at Nashville, Tennessee. Most of the time the overseers was good to
us.

But it wasn't that way on all the plantations. On the next one they
was mean. Why you could hear the sound of the strap for two blocks. No
there wasn't any blocks. But you could hear it that far. The "niggah
drivah" would stand and hit them with a wide strap. The overseer would
stand off and split the blisters with a bull whip. Some they whipped
so hard they had to carry them in. Just once did anybody on the
Woodfork place get whipped that way.

We never knew quite what happened. But my grandmother thought that the
colored man what took down the ages of the children so they'd know
when to send them to the field must have wrote Master. Anybody else
couldn't have done it. Anyhow, Master wrote back a letter and said, 'I
bought my black folks to work, not to be killed.' And the overseer
didn't dare do so any more.

No ma'am, I never worked in the field. I wasn't old enough. You see I
helped my grandmother, she is the one who took care of the babies. All
the women from the lower end would bring their babies to the upper end
for her to look after while they was in the field. When I got old
enough, I used to help rock the cradles. We used to have lots of
babies to tend. The women used to slip in and nurse their babies. If
the overseer thought they stayed too long he used to come in and whip
them out--out to the fields. But they was good to us, just the same.
We had plenty to wear and lots to eat and good cabins to live in. All
of them wasn't that way though.

I remember the women on the next plantation used to slip over and get
somthing to eat from us. The Woodfork colored folks was always well
took care of. Our white folks was good to us. During the week there
was somebody to cook for us. On Sunday all of them cooked in their
cabins and they had plenty. The women on the next plantation, even
when they was getting ready to have babies didn't seem to get enough
to eat. They used to slip off at night and come over to our place. The
Woodfork people never had to go nowhere for food. Our white folks
treated us real good.

Didn't make much difference when the war started rushing. We didn't
see any fighting. I told you the Yankees come thru twice----let me go
back a spell.

We had lots of barrels of Louisiana molasses. We could eat all we
wanted. When the barrels was empty, we children was let scrape them.
Lawsey, I used to get inside the barrel and scrape and scrape and
scrape until there wasn't any sweetness left.

We was allowed to do all sorts of other things too. Like there was
lots of pecans down in the swamps. The boys, and girls too for that
matter, was allowed to pick them and sell them to the river boats what
come along. The men was let cut cord wood and sell it to the boats.
Flat boats they was. There was regular stores on them. You could buy
gloves and hats and lots of things. They would burn the wood on the
boat and carry the nuts up North to sell. But me, I liked the sugar
barrel best.

When the Yankees come thru, I wasn't scared. I was too busy looking at
the bright buttons on their coats. I edged closer and closer. All they
did was laugh. But I kept looking at them. Until they went into the
smoke house. Then I turned loose and hollered. I hollored because I
thought they was going to take all Master's sirup. I didn't want that
to happen. No ma'am they didn't take nothing. Neither time they came.

After the war was over they took us down the river to The Bend. It was
near Vicksburg----an all day's ride. There they put us on a plantation
and took care of us. It was the most beautifulest place I ever see.
All the cabins was whitewashed good. The trees was big and the whole
place was just lovely. It was old man Jeff Davis' place.

They fed us good, gave us lots to eat. They sent up north, the Yankees
did, and got a young white lady to come down and teach us. I didn't
learn nothing. They had our school near what was the grave yard. I
didn't learn cause I was too busy looking around at the tombstones.
They was beautiful. They looked just like folks to me. Looks like I
ought have learned. They was mighty good to send somebody down to
learn us that way. I ought have learned, it looks ungrateful, but I
didn't.

My mother died on that place. It was a mighty nice place. Later on we
come to Arkansas. We farmed. Looked like it was all we knowed how to
do. We worked at lots of places. One time we worked for a man named
Thomas E. Allen. He was at Rob Roy on the Arkansas near Pine Bluff.
Then we worked for a man named Kimbroo. He had a big plantation in
Jefferson county. For forty years we worked first one place, then
another.

After that I went out to Oklahoma. I went as a cook. Then I got the
idea of following the resort towns about. In the summer I'd to [TR:
go?] to Eureka.[D] In the winter I'd come down to Hot Springs.[E] That
was the way to make the best money. Folks what had money moved about
like that. I done cooking at other resorts too. I cooked at the hotel
at Winslow.[F] I done that several summers.

Somehow I always come back to Hot Springs. Good people in Eureka.
Finest man I ever worked for--for a rich man was Mr. Rigley, [TR:
Wrigley] you know. He was the man who made chewing gum. We didn't have
no gas in Eureka. Had to cook by wood. I remember lots of times Mr.
Wrigley would come out in the yard where I was splitting kindling.
He'd laugh and he'd take the ax away from me and split it hisself.
Finest man----for a rich man I ever see.

Cooking at the hotel at Winslow was nice. There was lots of fine
ladies what wanted to take me home with them when they went home. But
I told them, 'No thank you, Hot Springs is my home. I'm going there
this winter.'

I'm getting sort of old now. My feet ain't so sure as they used to be.
But I can get about. I can get around to cook and I can still see to
thread a needle. My daughter has a good home for me." (I was conducted
into a large living room, comfortably furnished and with a degree of
taste--caught glimpses of a well furnished dining room and a kitchen
equipment which appeared thoroughly modern--Interviewer)

"People in Hot Springs is good people. They seem sort of friendly.
Folks in Eureka did too, even more so. But maybe it was cause I was
younger then and got to see more of them. But the Lord has blessed me
with a good daughter. I got nothing to complain about, I don't hold
grudges against nobody. The good Lord knows what he is doing."

[Footnote D: Eureka Springs, Ark.]

[Footnote E: Hot Springs National Park]

[Footnote F: rustic hotel on mountain near village of Winslow, Ark.]


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: George Johnson
                    814 W. Ninth Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 75


"I was born in Richmond, Virginia, September 28, 1862, and came to
this country in 1869. My father was named Benjamin Johnson and my
mother was named Phoebe Johnson. I don't know the names of my
grandmother and grandfather. My father's master was named Johnson; I
forget his first name. He was a doctor and lived on Charleston and
Morgan Streets. I don't know what my mother's name was before she
married my father. And I don't know what her master's name was. She
died when I was just three years old.

"The way my father happened to bring me out here was, Burton Tyrus
came out here in Richmond stump speaking and telling the people that
money grew like apples on a tree in Arkansas. They got five or six
boat loads of Negroes to come out here with them. Father went to share
cropping on the Red River Bottom on the Chickaninny Farm. He put in
his crop, but by the time he got ready to gather it, he taken sick and
died. He couldn't stand this climate.

"Then me and my sisters was supposed to be bound out to Henry Moore
and his wife. I stayed with them about six years and then I ran off.
And I been scouting 'round for myself ever since.

"My occupation has been chiefly public work. My first work was rail
roading and steam boating. I was on the Iron Mountain when she was
burning wood. That was about fifty some years ago. After that I worked
on the steamboats _Natchez_ and _Jim Lee_. I worked on them as
roustabout. After that I would just commence working everywhere I
could get it. I came here about forty-five years ago because I liked
the city. I was in and out of the city but made this place my
headquarters.

"I'm not able to do any work now. I put in for the Old Age Pension two
years ago. They told me I would have to prove my age but I couldn't do
it any way except to produce my marriage license. I produced them. I
got the license right out of this county courthouse here. I was
married the last time in 1907 and was forty-five years old then. That
will make me seventy-six years old this year--the twenty-eighth day of
this coming September. My wife died nine years ago.

"I have heard my father talking a little but old folks then didn't
allow the young ones to hear much. My daddy sent me to bed at night.
When night came you went to bed; you didn't hang around waiting to
hear what the old folks would say.

"My daddy got his leg shot in the Civil War. He said he was in that
battle there in Richmond. I don't know which side he was on, but I
know he got his leg shot off. He was one-legged. He never did get any
pension. I don't know even whether he was really enlisted or not. All
I know is that he got his leg shot off in the war.

"When the war ended in 1865, the slaves around Richmond were freed. I
never heard my father give the details of how he got his freedom. I
was too young to remember them myself.

"I don't know how many slaves Dr. Johnson had but I know it was a good
many, for he was a tobacco raiser. I don't remember what kind of
houses his slaves lived in. [And I never heard the kind of food we
et.] [HW: ?]

"I never heered tell of patrols till I came to Arkansas. I never
heered much of the Ku Klux either. I guess that was all the same,
wasn't it? Peace wasn't declared here till 1866. I never heered of
any of my acquaintances being bothered but I heered the colored people
was scared. All I know was that you had to come in early. Didn't, they
get you.

"What little schooling I got, I got it by going to night school here.
That is been a good many years back--forty years back. I forgot now
who was teaching night school. It was some kin of Ishes out here I
know.


Opinions

"I think times is tight now. Tighter than I ever knowed 'em to be
before. Quite a change in this world now. There is not enough work now
for the people and from what I can see, electricity has knocked the
laboring man out. It has cut the mules and the men out.

"My opinion of these young people is that they got all the education
in the world and no business qualifications. They are too fast for any
use."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: John Johnson
                    R.F.D., Clarendon, Arkansas
Age: 73


"I was born sixteen miles on the other side of Jackson, Tennessee. The
old mistress was Miss Sally, and old master was Mr. Steve Johnson,
same name as mine. My papa's name was Louis Johnson but my mama
belonged to the Conleys and befo' she married papa her name was Martha
Conley. My folks fur as I knowed was field hands. They stayed on at
Johnsons and worked a long time after freedom. I was born just befo'
freedom. From what I heard all of my folks talkin' the Ku Klux 'fected
the colored folks right smart, more than the war. Seemed 'bout like
two wars and both of 'em tried their best to draw in the black race.
The black race wanted peace all the time. It was Abraham Lincoln whut
wanted to free the black race. He was the President. The first war was
'bout freedom and the war right after it was equalization. The Ku Klux
muster won it cause they didn't want the colored folks have as much as
they have. I heard my folks say they knowed some of the Ku Klux. They
would get killed sometimes and then you hear 'bout it. They would be
nice as pie in day time and then dress up at night and be mean as they
could be. They wanted the colored folks think they was hants and
monsters from the bad place. All the Yankees whut wanted to stay after
they quit fighting, they run 'em out wid hounds at night. The Ku Klux
was awful mean I heard 'em say. Mr. Steve Johnson looked after all his
hands. All that stayed on to work for him. He told 'em long as they
stayed home at night and behave 'em selves they needn't be scared.
They wanter go out at night they had to have him write 'em a pass.
Jess like slavery an' they were free.

"The master didn't give 'em nuthin'. He let 'em live in his
houses--log houses, and he had 'em fed from the store stead of the
smoke house. He give 'em a little money in the fall to pay 'em. 'Bout
all the difference they didn't get beat up. If they didn't work he
would make 'em leave his place.

"That period--after the Civil War, it sure was hard. It was a
_de_'pression I'll tell you. I never seed a dollar till I was 'bout
grown. They called 'em 'wagon wheels.' They was mighty scarce. Great
big heavy pieces of silver. I ain't seed one fer years. But they used
to be some money.

"Lady, whut you wanter know was fo my days, fo I was born. My folks
could answered all dem questions. There was 4 girls and 6 boys in my
family.

"Course I did vote. I used to have a heap a fun on election day. They
give you a drink. It was plentiful I tell you. I never did drink much.
I voted Republican ticket. I know it would sho be too bad if the white
folks didn't hunt good canidates. The colored race got too fur behind
to be able to run our govmint. Course I mean education. When they git
educated they ain't studyin' nuthin' but spendin' all they make and
havin' a spreein' time. Lady, that is yo job. The young generation
ain't carin' 'bout no govinment.

"The present conditions--that's whut I been tellin' you 'bout. It is
hard to get work heap of the time. When the white man got money he
sure give the colored man and woman work to do. The white man whut
live 'mong us is our best friend. He stand by our color the best. It
is a heap my age, I reckon, I can't keep in work. Young folks can pick
up work nearly all time.

"I started to pay fer my home when I worked at the mill. I used to
work at a shoe and shettle mill. I got holt of a little cash. I still
tryin' to pay fer my home. I will make 'bout two bales cotton this
year. Yes maam they is my own. I got a hog. I got a garden. I ain't
got no cow.

"No maam I don't get no 'sistance from the govmint. No commodities--no
nuthin'. I signed up but they ain't give me nuthin'. I think I am due
it. I am gettin' so no account I needs it. Lady, I never do waste no
money. I went to the show ground and I seed 'em buyin' goobers and
popcorn. I seed a whole drove of colored folks pushin' and scrouging
in there so feared they wouldn't get the best seat an' miss somepin.
Heap of poor white people scrouging in there too all together. They
need their money to live on fo cold weather come. Ain't I tellin' you
right? I sho never moved outer my tracks. I never been to a show in my
life. Them folks come in here wid music and big tent every year. I
never been to a show in my life. That what they come here fur, to get
the cotton pickin' money. Lady, they get a pile of money fore they
leave. Course folks needs it now.

"When I had my mules and rented I made most and next to that when I
farmed for a fourth. When I was young I made plenty. I know how cotton
an' corn is made now but I ain't able to do much work, much hard work.
The Bible say twice a child and once a man. My manhood is gone fur as
work concerned.

"I like mighty well if you govmint folks could give me a little
'sistance. I need it pretty bad at times and can't get a bit."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Letha Johnson
                    2203 W. Twelfth Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 77


"I heered the people say I was born in time of slavery. I was born
durin' of the War.

"And when we went back home they said we had been freed four years.

"My father's last owner was named Crawford. He was a awful large man.
That was in Monroe County, Mississippi.

"I know they was good to us 'cause we stayed right there after freedom
till my father died in 1889. And mama stayed a year or two, then she
come to Arkansas.

"After my husband died in 1919, I went to Memphis. Then this girl I
raised--her mother willed her to me--I come here to Arkansas to live
with her after I got down with the rheumatism so I couldn't wash and
iron.

"In my husband's lifetime I didn't do nothin' but farm. And after I
went to Memphis I cooked. Then I worked for a Italian lady, but she
did her own cookin'. And oh, I thought she could make the best
spaghetti.

"I used to spin and make soap. My last husband and I was married
fifteen years and eight months and we never did buy a bar of soap. I
used to be a good soap maker. And knit all my own socks and stockin's.

"I used to go to a school-teacher named Thomas Jordan. I remember he
used to have us sing a song

    'I am a happy bluebird
    Sober as you see;
    Pure cold water
    Is the drink for me.

    I'll take a drink here
    And take a drink there,
    Make the woods ring
    With my temperance prayer.'

We'd all sing it; that was our school song. I believe that's the
onliest one I can remember.

"'Bout this younger generation--well, I tell you, it's hard for me to
say. It just puts me to a wonder. They gone a way back there. Seem
like they don't have any 'gard for anything.

"I heard 'em 'fore I left Mississippi singin'

    'Everybody's doin' it, doin' it.'

"'Co'se when I was young they was a few that was wild, but seem like
now they is all wild. But I feels sorry for 'em."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Lewis Johnson
                    713 Missouri Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 87


"I'll be eighty-seven the eighteenth of this month if I live.

"They's a heap of things the human family calls luck. I count myself
lucky to be livin' as old as I is.

"Some says it is a good deed I've done but I says it's the power of
God.

"I never had but two spells of sickness when I was spectin' to die.
Once was in Mississippi. I had a congestis chill. I lay speechless
twenty-four hours and when I come to myself they had five doctors in
the house with me.

"But my time hadn't come and I'm yet livin' by the help of the good
Master.

"I stole off when I was eighteen and got my first marriage license.
They was a white fellow was a justice of the peace and he took
advantage of my father and he stood for me 'cause he wanted me to work
on his place. In them days they'd do most anything to gain labor.

"When they was emigratin' 'em from Georgia to these countries, they
told 'em they was hogs runnin' around already barbecued with a knife
and fork in their back. Told 'em the cotton growed so tall you had to
put little chaps up the stalk to get the top bolls.

"But they tole some things was true. Said in Mississippi the cotton
growed so tall and spread so it took two to pick a row, and I found
that true.

"Old master always fed his hands good so they could meet the demands
when he called on 'em. He worked 'em close but he fed 'em.

"He raised wheat, corn, peas, rye, and oats, and all such like that.
Oh, he was a round farmer all right. And he raised feed for his stock
too.

"My old boss used to raise sweet potatoes enough to last three years.

"The people of the South was carried through that sweat of freedom.
They was compelled to raise cotton and not raise much to eat. They
told 'em they could buy it cheaper than raise it, but it was a
mistake.

"I used to have a wood yard on the Mississippi and when the steamers
come down the river, I used to go aboard and quiz the people from the
North. Heap of 'em would get chips of different woods and put it away
to carry home to show. And they'd take cotton bolls and some limbs to
show the people at home how cotton grows.

"To my idea, the North is wiser than the South. My idea of the North
is they is more samissive to higher trades--buildin' wagons and
buggies, etc.

"Years ago they wasn't even a factory here to make cloth. Had to send
the cotton to the North and then order the cloth from the North, and
time they got it the North had all the money.

"In the old days they was only two countries they could depend on to
raise tobacco and that was Virginia and South Carolina.

"I can remember a right smart before the War started. Now I can set
down and think of every horse's name my old boss had. He had four he
kept for Sunday business. Had Prince, Bill, Snap, and Puss. And every
Saturday evening he had the boys take 'em in the mill pond and wash
'em off--fix 'em up for Sunday."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Lizzie Johnson,
                    Biscoe, Arkansas
Age: 65


"I was born at Holly Springs, Mississippi. My mother was fifteen years
old when the surrender come on. Her name was Alice Airs. Mama said she
and grandma was sold in the neighborhood and never seen none of her
folks after they was sold. The surrender come on. They quit and went
on with some other folks that come by. Mama got away from them and
married the second year of the surrender. She said she really got
married; she didn't jump the broom. Mama was a cook in war times.
Grandma churned and worked in the field. Grandma lived in to herself
but mama slept on the kitchen floor. They had a big pantry built
inside the kitchen and in both doors was a sawed-out place so the cats
could come and go.

"My father was sold during of the War too but he never said much about
it. He said some of the slaves would go in the woods and the masters
would be afraid to go hunt them out without dogs. They made bows and
arrows in the woods.

"I heard my parents tell about the Ku Klux come and made them cook
them something to eat. They drunk water while she was cooking. I heard
them say they would get whooped if they sot around with a book in
their hand. When company would come they would turn the pot down and
close the shutters and doors. They had preaching and prayed that way.
The pot was to drown out the sound.

"They said one man would sell off his scrawny niggers. He wanted fine
looking stock on his place. He couldn't sell real old folks. They kept
them taking care of the children and raising chickens, turkeys, ducks,
geese, and made some of them churn and milk.

"My stepfather said he knowed a man married a woman after freedom and
found out she was his mother. He had been sold from her when he was a
baby. They quit and he married ag'in. He had a scar on his thigh she
recollected. The scar was right there when he was grown. That brought
up more talk and they traced him up to be her own boy.

"Hester Swafford died here in Biscoe about seven years ago. Said she
run away from her owners and walked to Memphis. They took her up over
there. Her master sent one of the overseers for her. She rode
astraddle behind him back. They got back about daylight. They whooped
her awful and rubbed salt and pepper in the gashes, and another man
stood by handed her a hoe. She had to chop cotton all day long. The
women on the place would doctor her sores.

"Grandma said she remembered the stars falling. She said it turned
dark and seem like two hours sparkles fell. They said stars fell. She
said it was bad times. People was scared half to death. Mules and
horses just raced. She said it took place up in the day. They didn't
have time-pieces to know the time it come on.

"Young folks will be young the way I see it. They ain't much
different. Times is sure 'nough hard for old no 'count folks. Young
folks makes their money and spends it. We old folks sets back needing.
Times is lots different now. It didn't used to be that way."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Louis Johnson
                    721 Missouri Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 86


"My father said I was fifteen when peace was declared. In slavery days
they didn't low colored folks to keep their ages and didn't low em to
be educated. I was born in Georgia. I went to a little night school
but I never learned to read. I never learned to write my own name.

"I never did see no fightin' a tall but I saw em refugeein' goin'
through our country night and day. Said they was goin' to the Blue
Ridge Mountains to pitch battle. They was Rebels gettin' out of the
way of the Yankees.

"Old master was a pretty tough old fellow. He had work done aplenty.
He had a right smart of servants. I wasn't old enough to take a record
of things and they didn't low grown folks to ask too many questions.

"I can sit and study how the rich used to do. They had poor white
folks planted off in the field to raise hounds to run the colored
folks. Colored folks used to run off and stay in the woods. They'd
kill old master's hogs and eat em. I've known em to stay six months at
a time. I've seen the hounds goin' behind niggers in the woods.

"We had as good a time as we expected. My old master fed and clothed
very well but we had to keep on the go. Some masters was good to em.
Yes, madam, I'd ruther be in times like now than slavery. I like it
better now--I like my liberty.

"In slavery days they made you pray that old master and mistress would
hold their range forever.

"My old master was Bob Johnson. He lived in Muskoge County where I was
born. Then he moved to Harris County and that's where the war ketched
him. He become to be a widower there.

"I member when the Yankees come and took old master's horses and
mules.

"I had a young boss that went to the war and come home with the
rheumatism. He was walkin' on crutches and I know they sent him to a
refugee camp to see to things and when he come back he didn't have no
crutches. I guess the Yankees got em.

"Childern travels now from one seaport to another but in them days
they kept the young folks confined. I got along all right 'cept I
didn't have no liberty.

"I believe it was in June when they read the freedom papers. They told
us we was free but we could stay if we wanted to. My father left Bob
Johnson's and went to work for his son-in-law. I was subject to him
cause I was a minor, so I went with him. Before freedom, I chopped
cotton, hoed corn and drapped peas, but now I was big enough to follow
the plows. I was a cowboy too. I tended to the cows. Since I've been
grown I been a farmer--always was a farmer. I never would live in town
till I got disabled for farming.

"After we was free we was treated better. They didn't lash us then. We
was turned loose with the white folks to work on the shares. We always
got our share. They was more liberal along that line than they is now.

"After I come to this country of Arkansas I bought several places but
I failed to pay for them and lost them. Now my wife and me are livin'
on my daughter.

"I been married three times. I married 'fore I left Georgia but me and
her couldn't get along. Then I married in Mississippi and I brought
her to Arkansas. She died and now I been married to this woman
fifty-three years.

"I been belongin' to the church over forty years. I have to belong to
the church to give thanks for my chance here now. I think the people
is gettin' weaker and wiser."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Mag Johnson,
                    Clarendon, Arkansas
Age: 65 or 70?


"Pa was born in North Ca'lina. Ma was born in Virginia. Their names
George and Liza Fowler.

"Ma's fust owner what I heard her tell 'bout was Master Ed McGehee in
Virginia. He's the one what brung her in a crowd of nigger traders to
Somerville, Tennessee. The way it was, a cavalry of Yankees got in
back of them. The nigger trader gang drive up. They got separated. My
ma and her gang hid in a cave two weeks an' not much to eat. The
Yankees overtook 'em hid in the cave and passed on. Ma say one day the
nigger traders drive up in front McGehee's yard and they main heads
and Master Ed had a chat. They hung around till he got ready and took
off a gang of his own slaves wid him. They knowed he was after selling
them off when he left wid 'em.

"Ben Trotter in Tennessee bought ma and three more nigger girls. The
Yankees took and took from 'em. They freed a long time b'fore she
knowed of. She said they would git biscuits on Sunday around. Whoop
'em if one be gone.

"Ole miss went out to the cow pen an' ma jus' a gal like stole outen a
piece er pie and a biscuit and et it. The cook out the cow pen too but
the three gals was doing about in the house and yard. Ma shut polly up
in the shed room. Then she let it out when she et up the pie and
biscuit. Ole miss come in. Polly say, 'Liza shut me up, Liza shut me
up.' She missed the pie. Called all four the girls and ma said, 'I
done et it. I was so hungry.' Ole miss said that what polly talking
'bout, but she didn't understand the bird so very well. Ole miss say,
'I'm goiner tell Ben and have him whoop you.' That scared all four the
girls case he did whoop her which he seldom done. She say when Master
Ben come they stood by the door in a 'joining room. Ma say 'fore God
ole miss tole him. Master Ben sont 'em out to pick up apples. He had a
pie a piece cooked next day and a pan of hot biscuits and brown gravy,
tole 'em to fill up. He tole 'em he knowed they got tired of corn
batter cakes, milk and molasses but it was best he had to give them
till the War was done.

"Ma said her job got to be milking, raising and feeding the fowls,
chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, and turkeys all. The Yankees
discouraged her. They come so many times till they cleaned 'em out she
said.

"What they done to shut up polly's mouf was sure funny. He kept on
next morning saying, 'Liza shut me up, Liza shut me up.' Liza pulled
up her dress and underskirt and walked back'ards, bent down at him. He
got scared. He screamed and then he hollered 'Ball-head and no eyes'
all that day.

"Ma said they had corn shuckings and corn shellings and brush
burnings. Had music and square dancing plenty times.

"When they got free they didn't know what it was nor what in the world
to do with it. What they said 'minds me of folks now what got
education. Seems like they don't know what to do nor where to put it.

"Pa said the nigger men run off to get a rest. They'd take to the
woods and canebrakes. Once four of the best nigger fellars on their
master's place took to the woods for to git a little rest. The master
and paddyrolls took after 'em. They'd been down in there long 'nough
they'd spotted a hollow cypress with a long snag of a limb up on it.
It was in the water. They got them some vines and fixed up on the
snag. They heard the dogs and the horn. They started down in the
hollow cypress. One went down, the others coming on. He started
hollering. But he thought a big snake in there. He brought up a cub on
his nearly bare foot. They clem out and went from limb to limb till
they got so away the dogs would loose trail. They seen the mama bear
come and nap four her cubs to another place. His foot swole up so.
They had to tote my pa about. Next day the dogs bayed them up in the
trees. Master took them home, doctored his foot. Ast 'em why they
runed off and so much to be doing. They tole 'em they taking a little
rest. He whooped them every one.

"Pretty soon the Yankees come along and broke the white folks up. Pa
went wid the Yankees. He said he got grown in the War. He fed horses
for his general three years. He got arm and shoulder wounded, scalped
his head. They mustered him out and he got his bounty. He got sixty
dollars every three months.

"He died at Holly Grove, Arkansas about fifty years ago. Them was his
favorite stories."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Mandy Johnson
                    607 Cypress Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 92


"This is me. I'se old and ain't no 'count. I was done grown when the
war started. You _know_ I was grown when I was washin' and ironin'. I
stood right there and watched the soldiers goin' to war. I heered the
big bell go b-o-n-g, b-o-n-g and everybody sayin' 'There's goin' to be
a war, there's goin' to be a war!' They was gettin' up the force to go
bless your heart! Said they'd be back by nine tomorrow and some said
'I'm goin' to bring you a Yankee scalp.' And then they come again and
want _so many_. You could hear the old drums go boom--boom. They was
drums on this side and drums on that side and them drums was a
talkin'! Yes'm, I'se here when it started--milkin' cows, washin' and
cookin'. Oh, that was a time. Oh my Lord--them Yankees come in just
like blackbirds. They said the war was to free the folks. Lots of 'em
got killed on the first battle.

"I was born in Bastrop, Louisiana in February--I was a February colt.

"My old master was John Lovett and he was good to us. If anybody put
their hands on any of his folks they'd have him to whip tomorrow. They
called us old John's free niggers. Yes ma'm I had a good master. I
ain't got a scratch on me. I stayed right in the house and nussed till
I'se grown. We had a good time but some of 'em seed sights. I stayed
there a year after we was free.

"I married durin' the war and my husband went to war with my uncle. He
didn't come back and I waited three years and then I married again.

"You know they used to give the soldiers furloughs. One time one young
man come home and he wouldn't go back, just hid out in the cane brake.
Then the men come that was lookin' for them that 'exerted' durin' the
war and they waited till he come out for somethin' to eat and they
caught him and took him out in the bayou and shot him. That was the
onliest dead man I ever seen. I seen a heap of live ones.

"The war was gettin' hot then and old master was in debt. Old mistress
had a brother named Big Marse Lewis. He wanted to take all us folks
and sell us in New Orleans and said he'd get 'em out of debt. But old
master wouldn't do it. I know Marse Lewis got us in the jail house in
Bastrop and Mars John come to get us out and Marse Lewis shot him
down. I went to my master's burial--yes'm, I did! Old mistress didn't
let us go to New Orleans either. Oh Lordy, I was young them days and I
wasn't afraid of nothin'.

"Oh ho! What you talkin' 'bout? Ku Klux? They come out here just like
blackbirds. They tried to scare the people and some of 'em they
killed.

"Yes Lord, I seen a heap. I been through a lot and I seen a heap, but
I'm here yet. But I hope I never live to see another war.

"When peace was declared, old mistress say 'You goin' to miss me' and
I sho did. They's good to us. I ain't got nothin' to do now but sit
here and praise the Lord cause I gwine to go home some day."


Interviewer: Mrs. Carol Graham
Person interviewed: Marion Johnson


"Howdy, Missy, glad to see you again. As you sees I'm 'bout wound up
on my cotton baskets and now I got these chairs to put bottoms in but
I can talk while I does this work cause it's not zacting like making
baskets.

"'Pears like you got a cold. Now let me tell you what to do for it.
Make a tea out of pine straw and mullein leaves an' when you gets
ready for bed tonight take a big drink of it an' take some tallow and
mix snuff with it an' grease the bottom of your feets and under your
arms an' behind your ears and you'll be well in the mornin'.

"Yes'm hits right in the middle of cotton picking time now. Always
makes me think of when I was a boy. I picked cotton some but I got
lots of whippins 'cause I played too much. They was some chinquapin
trees in the fiel' and I jest natchally couldn' help stopping to pick
up some 'chanks' now an' then. I likes the fall time. It brings back
the old times on the plantation. After frost had done fell we would go
possum huntin' on bright moonlight nights and we would mostly find Mr.
Possum settin' in the 'simmon tree just helpin' hisself to them good
old ripe juicy 'simmons. We'd catch the possum an' then we'd help
ourselves to the 'simmons. Mentionin' 'simmons, my mammy sure could
make good pies with them. I can most taste them yet and 'simmon bread
too.

"He! he! he! jes' look at that boy goin' by with that stockin' on his
head. Niggers used to wear stockings on they legs but now they wear
them on they heads to make they hair lay down.

"Since this rain we had lately my rheumatism been botherin' me some. I
is gone to cutting my fingernails on Wednesday now so's I'll have
health; an' I got me a brand new remedy too an' it's a good one. Take
live earth worms an' drop them in hot grease an' let them cook till
there's no 'semblance of a worm then let the grease cool an' grease
the rheumatic parts. You know that rheumatism done come back cause I
got out of herbs. I just got to git some High John the Conqueror root
an' fix a red flannel sack an' put it in the sack along with five
finger grass, van van oil, controllin' powder, magnetic loadstone an'
drawin' powder. Now, missy, the way I fixes that sure will ward off
evil an' bring heaps of good luck. And I just got to fix myself that.
You better let me fix you one too. If you and me had one of them
wouldn't neither one of us be ailing. You needs some lucky hand root
too to carry round with you all the time. Better let Uncle Marion fix
you up.

"Did I ever tell you I used to tell fortunes with cards? But I stopped
that cause I got my jack now and it's so much truthfuler than cards.
You 'members when I answered that question for you and missy last year
and how what I told you come true. Yes'm I never misses now. Uncle
Marion can sure help you.

"There goes sister Melissy late with her washin' ergin. You know,
Missy, niggers is always slow and late. They'll be wantin' God to wait
on them when they start to heaven. White folks is always on time and
they sings 'When The Roll Is Called Up Yonder I'll Be There', and
niggers sing 'Don't Call The Roll Till I Get There.' You know I hates
for it to get so cool. I'll have to move in off the gallery to work.
When I sits on the gallery I sees everybody pass an' changes the time
of day with them. 'Howdy, Sister Melissy. Late ergin I see.' Yes, I
sees everything that goes on from my gallery. I hates for cool weather
to come so's I have to move in.

"Ain't that a cute little feller in long pants? Lawsy me! chillun
surely dresses diffunt now from when I was a chap. I didn' know
nothin' 'bout no britches; I went in my shirt tail--didn' wear nothin'
but a big old long shirt till I was 'bout twelve. You know that little
fellow's mama had me treat him for worms. I made him a medicine of
jimson weed an' lasses for his mama to give him every morning before
breakfast an' that sure will kill 'em. Yes'm, that little fellow is
all dressed up. 'Minds me of when I used to dress up to go courtin' my
gal. I felt 'bout as dressed up as that little fellow does. I'd take
soot out of the chimney and black my shoes then take a biscuit and rub
over them to shine 'em. You know biscuits have grease in them and my
shoes looked just like they done been shined by the bootblack.

"Law, missy, I don' know nothin' to tell you this time. Maybe if you
come back I can think of something 'bout when niggers was in politics
after the war but now I just can't 'member nothin'."


Interviewer: Carol Graham (Add.)
Person interviewed: Marion Johnson
                    El Dorado, Ark.
Age: ?


    "Dar's golden streets and a pearly gate somewhars,
     Dar's golden streets and a pearly gate somewhars,
       I gwian ter keep on searchin' till I finds hit,
     Dar's golden streets and a pearly gate somewhars.

    "Dar's perfect peace somewhars,
     Dar's perfect peace somewhars,
       I gwian ter keep on searchin' till I finds hit,
     Dar's perfect peace somewhars.

"Good mornin', Missie! Glad to see you again. I is workin' on chairs
again. Got these five to bottom for Mr. Brown and I sho can talk while
I does this work.

"Ain't the sunshine pretty this mornin'? I prayed last night that the
Lord would let today be sunny. I 'clare, Missie, hits rained so much
lately till I bout decided me and all my things was goin' to mildew.
Yes'm, me and all-l-l my things. And I done told you I likes to set on
my gallery to work. I likes to watch the folks go by. It seems so
natchel like to set here and howdy with em.

"I been in this old world a long time, but just can recollect bein' a
slave. Since Christmas ain't long past it sets me to thinkin' bout the
last time old Sandy Claus come to see us. He brought us each one a
stick of candy, a apple and a orange, and he never did come to see us
no more after that time cause we peeped. That was the last time he
ever filt our stockin'. But you knows how chaps is. We just had to
peep.

"You knows I was born and raised in Louisiana. I done told you that
many times. And I just wish you could see the vituals on old marster's
table at Christmas time. Lawdy, but his table jes groaned with good
things. Old Mistress had the cook cookin' for weeks before time it
seemed to me. There was hams and turkeys and chickens and cakes of all
kinds. They sho was plenty to eat. And they was a present for all the
niggers on the place besides the heaps of pretty things that Marster's
family got off the tree in the parlor.

"When I first began to work on the farm old master put me to cuttin'
sprouts, then when I got big enough to make a field hand, I went to
the field then. I done lots of kinds of work--worked in the field,
split rails, built fences, cleared new ground and just anything old
marster wanted me to do. I members one time I got a long old splinter
in my foot and couldn't get it out, so my mammy bound a piece of fat
meat round my foot and let it stay bout a couple days, then the
splinter come out real easy like. And I was always cutting myself too
when I was a chap. You know how careless chaps is. An soot was our
main standby for cuts. It would close the gash and heal it. And soot
and sugar is extra good to stop bleeding. Sometime, if I would be in
the field too far away from the house or anyplace where we could get
soot, we would get cobwebbs from the cotton house and different places
to stop the bleeding. One time we wasn't close to neither and one the
men scraped some felt off from a old black hat and put it on to stop
the bleedin'.

"My feets was tough. Didn't wear shoes much till I was grown. Went
barefooted. My feets was so tough I could step on stickers and not
feel em. Just to show how tough I was I used to take a blackberry limb
and take my toes and skin the briers off and it wouldn't hurt my
feets.

"Did I ever tell you bout my first pair of breeches? I was bout twelve
then and before that I went in my shirt tail. I thought I was goin' to
be so proud of my first breeches but I didn't like them. They was too
tight and didn't have no pockets. They come just below my knees and I
felt so uncomfortable-like that I tore em off me. And did I get a
lickin? I got such a lickin' that when my next ones was made I was
glad to put em on and wear em.

"I stayed round with marster's boys a lot, and them white boys was as
good to me as if I had been their brother. And I stayed up to the big
house lots of nights so as to be handy for runnin' for old master and
mistress. The big house was fine but the log cabin where my mammy
lived had so many cracks in it that when I would sleep down there I
could lie in bed and count the stars through the cracks. Mammy's beds
was ticks stuffed with dried grass and put on bunks built on the wall,
but they did sleep so good. I can most smell that clean dry grass now.
Mammy made her brooms from broom sage, and she cooked on a fireplace.
They used a oven and a fireplace up at the big house too. I never saw
no cookstove till I was grown.

"I members one time when I was a little shaver I et too many green
apples. And did I have the bellie ache, whoo-ee! And mammy poured cold
water over hot ashes and let it cool and made me drink it and it sure
cured me too. I members seein' her make holly bush tea, and parched
corn tea too for sickness. Nother time I had the toothache and mammy
put some axle grease in the hollow of the tooth and let it stay there.
The pain stopped and the tooth rotted out and we didn't have to pull
it.

"Whee! Did you see how that car whizzed round the corner? There warn't
no cars in my young days. They had mostly two-wheeled carts with
shafts for the horse to be hitched in, and lots of us drove oxen to
them carts. I plowed oxen many-a-day and rode em to and from the
field. Let me tell you, Missy, if you don't know nothin' bout
oxen--they surely does sull on you--you beat them and the more you
beat the more they sulls. Yes'm, they sure sulls in hot weather, but
it never gets too cold for em.

"Howdy, Parson. That sho was good preachin' Sunday. Yes suh, it was
fine.

"That's the pastor of our church, an he sho preached two good sermons
last Sunday. Sunday mornin' he preached 'Every kind of fish is caught
in a net' and that night he preached 'Marvel not you must be born
again.' But that mornin' sermon, it capped the climax. Parson sho told
em bout it. He say, 'First, they catch the crawfish, and that fish
ain't worth much; anybody that gets back from duty or one which says I
will and then won't is a crawfish Christian.' Then he say, 'The next
is a mudcat; this kind of a fish likes dark trashy places. When you
catch em you won't do it in front water; it likes back water and wants
to stay in mud. That's the way with some people in church. You can't
never get them to the front for nothin'. You has to fish deep for
them. The next one is the jellyfish. It ain't got no backbone to face
the right thing. That the trouble with our churches today. Too many
jellyfishes in em.' Next, he say is the gold fish--good for nothin'
but to look at. They is pretty. That the way folks is. Some of them go
to church just to sit up and look pretty to everybody. Too pretty to
sing; too pretty to say Amen! That what the parson preached Sunday.
Well, I'm a full-grown man and a full-grown Christian, praise the
Lord. Yes,'m, parson is a real preacher."


VOODOO MAN
UNCLE MARION JOHNSON, EX-SLAVE.
[Date Stamp: OCT 26 1936]


"Yes young missey ah'll sho tell yo-all whut yo wants ter know. Yes'm
ole Uncle Marion sho kin. Mah price is fo' bits fer one question.
No'm, not fo' bits fo th' two uv yo but fo' bits each. Yo say yo all
ain't got much money and yo all both wants ter know th' same thing.
Well ah reckon since yo all is been comin' roun' and tawkin' to ole
Uncle Marion ah cud make hit answer th' one question fuh both uv yo
fuh fo' bits 'tween yo. No'm ah caint bring hit out heah. Yo all will
haft tuh come inside th' house."

"[TR: " should be (]We went inside the house and Uncle Marion
unwrapped his voodoo instrument which proved to be a small glass
bottle about 2-1/2 inches tall wrapped to the neck in pink washable
adhesive tape and suspended from a dirty twine about six inches long.
At the top of the twine was a slip knot and in a sly way Uncle Marion
would twist the cord before asking the question. If the cord was
twisted in one direction the bottle would swing in a certain direction
and if the cord was twisted in the other direction the bottle would
swing in the opposite direction. Uncle Marion thought that we did not
observe this and of course we played dumb. By twisting the cord and
slyly working the muscles of his arm Uncle Marion made his instrument
answer his questions in the way that he wished them answered.)

"Now ifn the answer to huh question is yais swing towards huh and ifn
taint be still. (The bottle slowly swung toward me.) Now missy see hit
have done answered yo question and yo done seed hit say yes. Yes'm hit
sho am yes and yo' jes wait and see ifn ole Uncle Marion aint right.
Now yo jes answer the same question fuh tother young missy heah. Now
ifn the answer is yais yo turn toward huh which am the opposite to
which yo jes turnt and ifn the answer is no sta' still. (The bottle
then slowly turned around and went in Mrs. Thompson's direction.)

"Yo say whut do ah call dis heah? Ah calls hit a "jack". Yas'm hits a
jack an' hit sho will answer any question yo wants ter ask hit. No'm
yo cuden ask hit yo-self. Ah would haft ter ask hit fer yo. An' let me
tell yo' ole Uncle Marion sho kin help youall chillun. Ah kin help yo
all ward off evil and jinx; ah kin help yo all git a job; ah kin help
yo all ovah come the ruination uv yo home. Uncle Marion sho cain give
yo a helpin good luck hand. Ah cain help yo ovah come yo enemies.

"Now since ah knows yo young misses am in'erested an ah knows yo will
sen' othah fokes tuh me what am in trouble ah am gointer tell yo all
whut some uv mah magic remidies is so yo all kin tell fokes that ah
have them yarbs (herbs) fuh sale. Yes'm ah has them yarbs right hea
fuh sale and hit sho will work too.

"Now thar is High John the Conquerer Root. If'n yo totes one o' them
roots in yo pocket yo will nevah be widout money. No mam. And you'll
always conquer yo troubles an yo enemies. An fokes can sho git them
yarbs thru me. Efn Uncle Marion don' have non on han' he sho kin git
em for em.

"Den dar is five finger grass, ah kin git dat fuh yo too. Ifn dat is
hung up ovah th' bedstid hit brings restful sleep and keeps off evil.
Each one uv dem five fingahs stans for sumpin too. One stans fuh good
luck, two fuh money, thee fuh wisdom, fo' fuh power an five fuh love.

"Yas'm an ah kin buil' a unseen wall aroun' yo so as ter keep evil,
jinx and enemies way fum yo and hit'll bring heaps uv good luck too.
The way ah does hit is this way: Ah takes High John the Conqueror Root
and fixes apiece of red flannel so as ter make a sack and puts hit in
the sack along wid magnetic loadstone, five finger grass, van van oil,
controllin' powdah and drawin powdah and the seal uv powah. This heah
mus be worn aroun the neck and sprinkle hit ever mornin fuh seven
mornins wid three drops uv holy oil. Then theah is lucky han' root.
Hit looks jes like a human han'. If yo carries hit on yo person hit
will shake yo jinx and make yo a winnah in all kinds o games and
hit'll help yo choose winnin numbers."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Martha Johnson,
                    West Memphis
Age: 71


"I was born at Lake Providence, Louisiana second year after the War.
Mother's mother was left in Jackson, Tennessee. Mother was sold at
Vicksburg, Mississippi. Father's mother was left at Pittsburg,
Virginia. Father was brought to Lake Providence and sold to Master
Ross and Mr. Coleman was his overseer. He was stripped stark naked and
put up on the block. That was Nigger Traders Rule, he said. He was
black as men get to be. Mother was three-fourths white. Her master was
her father. He had two families. They was raised up in the same house
with his white family. Master's white wife raised her and kept her
till her death. He was dead I think.

"Then her young white master sold her. He sold his half-sister. She
met my father at Vicksburg, Mississippi where he mustered out. She was
chambermaid when the surrender came on, on the Gray Eagle boat from
Vicksburg to Memphis. Mother died when I was nine years old. Papa had
no boys, only three girls. I was his 'Tom Boy.' I did the milking and
out-of-door turns. Papa was a small man. He weighed 150 pounds. He
carpentered, made and mended shoes, and was a blacksmith. We farmed
and farmed. I was chambermaid in Haynes, Arkansas hotel three years. I
washed and ironed. I'm not much cook. I never was fond of cooking.

"I never voted. I'm not starting now. I'm too old.

"Times is hard. You can't get ahead no way. It keeps you hustling all
the time to live. Times is going pretty fast. In some ways times is
better for some people and harder for other people.

"These young folks don't want to be advised and I don't advise them
except my own children. I tell them all they listen to. They listen
now better than they did when they was younger. They are all grown.

"I don't get no help from nowhere but my children a little. I own my
home."


Interviewer: Pernella M. Anderson
Person interviewed: Millie Johnson (Old Bill)
                    El Dorado, Arkansas
Age: ?


"I was born in Caledonia, Arkansas but I don't know when. I just can't
tell you nothing hardly about when I was a child because my mind goes
and comes. I was a slave and my white folks were good to me. They let
me play and have a good time just like their children did.

"After I got grown I run around terrible. My husband quit me a long
time ago. The white folks let me have my way. They said I was mean and
if my husband fooled with me, told me to shoot him. I am going back
home to Caledonia when I get a chance. My sister's boy brought me up
here; Mack Ford is his name.

"A long time ago--I don't know how long it's been--I came out of the
back door something hung their teeth in my ankle. I hollered and
looked down and it was a big old rattlesnake. I cried to my sister to
get him off of me. She was scared, so all I knew to do was run, jump
and holler. I ran about--oh, I don't know how far--with the snake
hanging to my ankle. The snake would not let me go, and it wasn't but
one thing for me to do and that was stop and pull the snake off of me.
I stopped and began pulling. I pulled and pulled and pulled and
pulled. The snake would not let me go. I began pulling again. After
awhile I got it off. When I pulled the snake away the snake brought
his mouth full of my meat. You talk about hurting, that like to have
killed me. That place stayed sore for twenty years before it healed
up. After it had been healed a couple years I then scratched the
place on a bob wire that inflamed it. That has been about 25 or 30
years ago and it's been sore ever since. Lord, I sure have been
suffering too. As soon as it gets well I am going back to Caledonia. I
am praying for God to let me live to get back home. Mack Ford is the
cause of me being up here.

"I was born in slavery time way before the War. My name is Millie
Johnson but they call me Bill."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Rosie Johnson,
                    Holly Grove, Arkansas
Age: 76


"I was born and raised on Mr. Dial's place. Mama belong to them. My
papa belong to Frank Kerr. His old mistress' name Jane Roberts in
Alabama. His folks come from Alabama. He say Jane Roberts wouldn't
sell her slaves. They was aired (heired) down mong the children. David
Dial had sebral children and mama was his house girl and nurse. They
was married in Dial's yard. My papa name Jacob Kerr. They took me to
Texas when I warn't but two years old. We rode in the covered wagon
where they hauled the provisions. They muster stayed a pretty good
time. I heard em talkin' what all they raised out there and what a
difference they found in the country. They wanted to go. They didn't
wanter be in the war they said. It was too close to suit them.

"I recken I was too small to recollect the Ku Klux. I heard em talk
bout how mean the Jayhaws was.

"I never voted. What business I got votin' I would jes' lak you tell
me? I don't believe in it no more'n nuthin'.

"I been farmin' all my life. I had fourteen children. Eight livin'
now. They scattered bout up North. It took meat and bread to put in
their mouths and somebody workin' to get it there I tell you. There
ain't a lazy bone in me. I jes' give out purty nigh. I wash and iron
some when I ken get it.

"I got a hog and a garden. I ain't got nuthin' else. I don't own no
house, no place. I got a few chickens bout the place what eat up the
scraps what the pig don't get.

"I signed up three years ago. I don't get nuthin' now. What I scrape
round and make is all I has.

"I was born in June 1861. I don't recollect what day they said. Pear
lack it been so long. When it come to work I recken I is had a hard
time all my life. I never minded nuthin' till I got so slow and no
count."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Saint Johnson
                    Izard Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: --
Occupation: Drayman


"As far as slavery is concerned I know nothing about it except as the
white people told me. My mother would ask me what they told me and I
would tell her that Miss Annie said I didn't have to call her father
'Master' any more. And she would say, 'No, you don't.'

"My father's name was Wiley Johnson. He was ninety years old when he
died. He was born in Cave Spring, Georgia, in Floyd County. My mother
was born in the same place. Both of them were Johnsons. They were
married during slavery times. I don't know what her name was before
she married.

"Anyway, I've told you enough. I've told you too much. How come they
want all this stuff from the colored people anyway? Do you take any
stories from the white people? They know all about it. They know more
about it than I do. They don't need me to tell it to them.

"I don't tell my age. I just say I was born after slavery. Then I
can't be bothered about all this stuff about records. Colored people
didn't keep any records. How they goin' to know when they were born or
anything? I don't believe in all that stuff.

"You know these young people as well as I do. They ain't nothin'.

"I ain't got nothin' to say about politics. You know what the truth
is. Why don't you say it? You don't need to hide behind my words.
You're educated and I'm not; you don't need to get anything from me.

"Yes, I had some schoolin'. But you know more about these things than
I do."


Interviewer's Comment

At first, I thought I wouldn't write this interview up; but afterwards
I thought: Maybe this interview will be of interest to those who want
the work done. It represents the attitude of a very small, but
definite, minority. About five persons out of a hundred and fifty
contacted and more than eighty written up have taken this attitude.

Johnson is reputed to have been born in slavery, but he says not. He
had a high school education. He is a good man, wholesome in all his
contacts, despite the apparent intolerance of his private remarks to
the interviewer.


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Willie Johnson (female)
                    1007 Izard, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 71


"My father said he had a real good master. When he got up large enough
to work, his master learned him a trade. He learned the mechanic's
trade, such as blacksmithing and working in shops. He learned him all
of that. And then he learned him to be a shoemaker. You see, he
learned him iron work and woodworking too. And he never whipped him
during slavery time. Positively didn't allow that.

"My father's name was Jordan Kirkpatrick. His master was named
Kirkpatrick also. My father was born in Tennessee in Sumner County.

"My father married in slave time. You know, they married in slave
time. I have heard people talking about it. I have heard some people
say they married over 'gain when freedom came. My father had a
marriage certificate, and I didn't hear him say anything about being
married after freedom. I have seen the certificate lots of times. I
don't know the date of it. The certificate was issued in Sumner
County, Tennessee.

"My father and mother belonged to different masters. My mother's
master was a Murray. She had a good many people. Her name before she
married was Mary Murray. I don't know just how my mother and father
met. The two places weren't far apart. They lived a good distance from
each other though, and I remember hearing him tell how he had to go
across the fields to get to her house after he was through with the
day's work. The pateroles got after him once. They didn't catch him,
so they didn't do anything to him. He skipped them some way or
another.

"I have heard them say that before the slaves were set free the
soldiers were going 'round doing away with everything that they could
get their hands on. Just a while before they were set free, my father
took my mother and the children one night and slipped off. He went to
Nashville. That was during the War. It wasn't long after that till
everybody was set free. They never did capture him and get him back.

"During the War they went around pressing men into service. Finally
once, they caught him but they let him go. I don't know how he got
away.

"I can remember he said once they got after him and there was a white
man and his family living in the house. He rented a room from the
white man. That was in Nashville. These pateroles or whatever they was
got after him and claimed they were coming to get him, and the old man
and the old woman he stayed with took him upstairs and said they would
protect him if the pateroles came back. I don't know whether they came
back or not, but they never got him.

"My father supported himself and his family in Nashville by following
his trade. He seems to have gotten along all right. He never seemed to
have any trouble that I heard him speak of.

"I was born in 1867 in Nashville, Tennessee, about half a block from
the old Central Tennessee College[G]. I think it became Walden
University later on, and I think that it's out now. That's an old
school. My oldest sister was graduated from it. I could have been if I
hadn't taken up the married notion.

"I got part of my schooling in Nashville and part here. When I left
Nashville, I was only a child nine years old. I only went to school
four sessions after we came out here. I didn't like out here. I wanted
to stay back home. My father came out here because he had heard that
he could make more money with his trade here than he could in
Nashville, which he did. He was shoeing horses and building wagons and
so on. Just in this blacksmithing and carpenter work.

"I wanted to learn that. I would stay 'round the shop and help him
shoe horses. But they wouldn't let me take it up. I got so I could do
carpenter work pretty good. First I learned how to make a box
square--that is a hard job when a person doesn't know much.

"I never heard my father say anything about the food the slaves ate. I
have heard him talk about the good times they had around hog killing.
His master raised sweet potatoes and corn and wheat and things like
that. I guess they ate just about what they raised.

"My father never was a sharecropper. He knew nothing of rural work
except the mechanical side of it. He could make or do anything that
was needed in fixing up something to do farm work with. I have seen
him make and sharpen plows. The first cotton stalk cutter that was
made within ten miles of here was made by my father. The people 'round
here were knocking off cotton stalks with sticks until my father began
making the cutter. Then everybody began using his cutter. That is, the
different farmers and sharecroppers around here began using them. I
was scared of the first one he made. He made six saws or knives and
sharpened them and put them on a section of a log so that it could be
hitched to a mule and pulled through the fields and cut the cotton
stalks down.

"My mother's old master was her father. I think my father's father was
a Negro and his mother was an Indian. My mother's mother was an
American woman, that is, a slavery woman. My mother and father were
lucky in having good people. My mother was treated just like one of
her master's other children. My father's master had an overseer but
he never was allowed to touch my father. Of course my mother never was
under an overseer."

[Footnote G: [HW: Central Tennessee College estab. about 1866-7.]]


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Angeline Jones
                    Near Biscoe and Brinkley, Arkansas
Age: 79
[Date Stamp: May 31 1938]


"I was born in Memphis, Tennessee. Mother was cooking. Her name was
Marilla Harris and she took my pa's name, Brown. He was Francis Brown.
I was three years old when the surrender come on. Then grandma, my
mama and pa and me and my brother come with a family to Biscoe. There
wasn't no Biscoe but that's where we come to anyhow. Mama and grandma
cooked for a woman. They bought a big farm and started clearing. Some
of it was cleared. Mama's been dead forty years. I farmed all my whole
life. I don't know nothing else.

"Grandma had a right smart to say during slavery times. She was
cooking for her mistress and had a family. She'd hide good things to
take to her children. The mistress kept a polly parrot about in the
kitchen. Polly would tell on grandma. Caused grandma to get whoopings.
She talked like a good many of 'em. She got sick. The woman what
married grandma's brother was to take her place. She wasn't going to
be getting no whoopings. She sewed the parrot up. He got to dwindling.
They doctored him. She clipped his tongue at the same time so he never
could do no good talking. He died. They never found out his trouble.
Grandma said they worried about the parrot but she never did; she
knowed what been done. Grandma come from Paris, Tennessee but I think
the same folks fetched 'er. I don't think she said she was sold. She
said slavery times was hard. Mama didn't see as hard times as grandma
had. Grandma shielded her in the work part a whole heap to get to
live where she did. They loved to be together. She's been dead and
left me forty odd years. I works and support myself, and my kin folks
help all they can."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Charlie Jones
                    1303 Ohio Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 76


"I was borned in '61 in the State of Mississippi August the 15th.

"I member just a little bout the War. Yes'm, I member seein' the
soldiers. They was walkin'--just a long row of em. Had guns across
their shoulders and had them canteens. I member we chilluns run out to
the road and got upon the bars and watched em go by. I think it was
after they had fought in Vicksburg and was comin' back towards
Memphis.

"My mother belonged to the Harrises and we stayed with her and my
father belonged to the Joneses.

"I member how they used to feed us chillun. They had a big cook
kitchen at the big house and we chillun would be out in the yard
playin'. Cook had a big wooden tray and she'd come out and say
'Whoopee!' and set the tray on the ground. Sometimes it was milk and
sometimes it would be potlicker. We'd fall down and start eatin'. Get
out [TR: our?] heads in and crowd just like a lot of pigs.

"After freedom we went to old Colonel Jones and worked on the shares.
I wasn't big enough to work but I member when we left the Harris
place. I know they wasn't so cruel to em. Didn't have no overseer.
Some of the people had cruel overseers.

"I went to school after the War a right smart. I got as far as the
third grade. Studied McGuffy's Reader and the old Blue Back Speller.
Yes'm, sure did.

"I come here to Arkansas wid my parents in '78. Come right here to
Jefferson County, down at Fairfield on the Lambert place.

"All my life I've farmed. I worked on the shares and rented too. Could
make the most money rentin'. I got everywhere from 4¢ to 50¢ a pound
for cotton. I had cows and hogs and chickens and raised some corn.

"I made a garden and made a little cotton and corn last year on
government land on the old river bank.

"I heered of the Klu Klux but they never did bother me.

"I voted the Publican ticket and never had no trouble.

"I been right around this town fifteen years and I own this home. I
worked about six months at the shops but the rest of the time I
farmed.

"Heap of things I'd do when I was young the young folks won't do
now."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Cyntha Jones
                    3006 W. Tenth Avenue, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 88


"Well, here's one of em. Born down in Drew County.

"Simpson Dabney was old master and his wife named Miss Adeline.

"I reckon I do remember bout the War. Yes ma'am, the Yankees come and
they had me scared. I wouldn't know when they got in the yard till
they was all around me. Had me holdin' the bridles.

"My young missis' husband was in the War and when they fought the last
battle at Princeton, she had me drive the carriage. When I heard them
guns I said we better go back, so I turned round and made them horses
step so fast my dress tail stood out straight. I thought they was
goin' to kill us all. And when we got home all the windows was broke.
Miss Nancy say, 'Cyntha, somebody come and broke all my windows,' but
it was them guns broke em.

"Old master was a doctor but my young missis' husband wasn't nothin'
but a hunter till they carried him to war. He was so skeered they had
to most drag him.

"I seen two wars and heered tell of another.

"I member when the Yankees come and took things I just fussed at em. I
thought what was my white folks' things was mine too. But when they
got my old master's horse my daddy went amongst em and got it back
cause he had charge of the stock. I don't know whether he got em at
night or not but I know he went in the daytime and come back in the
daytime.

"Old master's children and my father's children worked in the field
just alike. He wouldn't low a overseer on the place, or a patroller
either.

"Dr. Dabney and his sister raised my mother. They brought her from
some furrin' country to Arkansas. And when he married, my mother
suckled every one of his children.

"I just worked in the house and nussed. Never worked in the field till
I was grown and married. I was nineteen when I married the fust time.
I stayed right there in that settlement till the second year of
surrender.

"When I was twenty-one they had me fixed up for a midwife. Old Dr.
Clark was the one started me. I never went to school a minute in my
life but the doctors would read to me out of their doctor books till I
could get a license. I got so I could read print till my eyes got so
bad. Old Dr. Clark was the one learned me most and since he died I
ain't never had a doctor mess with me.

"In fifteen years I had 299 babies on record right there in Rison.
That's where I was fixed up at--under five doctors. And anybody don't
believe it, they can go down there and look up the record.

"We had plenty to eat in slave times. Didn't have to go to the store
and buy it by the dribble like they does now. Just go to the
smokehouse and get it.

"I got such a big mind and will I wants to get about and raise
something to eat now so we wouldn't have to buy everything, but I
ain't able now. I've had twenty-one children but if I had em now
they'd starve to death.

"I been married four times but they all dead--every one of em.

"When freedom come my old master give my mother $500 cause she saved
his money for him when the Yankees come. She put it in the bed and
slept on it. He had four farms and he told her she could have ary one
of em and any of the stock, but my father had done spoke for a place
in Cleveland County--he had done bought him a place.

"And old master on his dying bed, he asked my mother to take his two
youngest children and raise em cause their mother was sickly, but she
didn't do it.

"I don't know hardly what to think of this younger generation. Used to
be they'd go to Sunday school barefooted but now'days, time they is
born they got shoes and stockin's on em.

"I used to spin, knit and weave. I even spun thread to make these
ropes they use to plow. I could spin a thread you could sew with, and
weave cloth with stripes and flowers. Have to know how to dye the
thread. That's all done in the warp. Call the other the filler.

"Now let me tell you, when that was goin' on and you raised your meat
and corn and potatoes, that was livin'!"


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Edmond Jones
                    1824 W. Second, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 75


"I growed up in the war. I remember seein' the soldiers--hundreds and
thousands of em. Oh, yes'm, I growed up in the war. I was born under
Abraham Lincoln's administration and then Grant.

"I remember when that old drum beat everbody had to be in bed at nine
o'clock. That was when they had martial law. Hays knocked that out you
know. That was when they had the Civil Rights Bill. I growed up in
that.

"Abraham Lincoln issued the Proclamation of Freedom in January and I
was born in May so you might say I was born right into freedom.

"I always say I was born so close to slavery I could smell it, just
like you cookin' somethin' for dinner and I smelled it.

"I tell these young people I can look back to my boy days quick as
they can.

"Yes'm, I don't know anything bout slavery. My people say they come
from North Carolina, but I been right here on this spot of ground for
forty-four years. I come here when they was movin' the cemetery.

"My mother was a cook here for Mrs. Reynolds. After I growed up here I
went out to my father where he was workin' on the shares and stayed
there a year. I married quite young and bought a place out there. I
said I was twenty-one when I got the license but I wasn't but twenty.

"In old times everbody thought of the future and had all kinds of
things to eat. First prayer I was taught was the Lord's Prayer--'Give
us this day our daily bread.' I said sure was a long time bein'
answered cause now we're gettin' it--just our daily bread.

"I never had no luck farmin'--ever' time I farmed river overflowed. I
raised everthing I needed or I didn't have it. Had as high as thirty
head of cows at one time.

"I went to work as janitor at Merril School to take the regular
janitor's place for just two months and how long you reckon I stayed
there? Twenty years. Then I come here and sit down and haven't done
anything since.

"The first school I went to was in the First Baptist Church on Pullen
Street. They had it there till they could put up a building.

"I went to nine different teachers and all of em was white. They was
sent here from the North. We studied McGuffy's reader and you stayed
with it till you learned it. I got it till today--in my head you
understand.

"Sure, Lord, I used to vote and hold ever' kind of office. Used to be
justice of the peace six years. I said I been in everthing but a bull
fight.

"I've traveled ever' place--Niagara Falls, Toronto, Canada. I been in
two World's Fairs and in several inaugurations. Professor Cheney says
I know more history than any the teachers at the college."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Eliza Jones
                    610 E. Eighteenth, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 89


"Yes ma'am, this is Eliza. I was born in slave times and I knowed how
to work good.

"You know I was grown in time of the War 'cause I married the first
year of freedom.

"Belonged to a widow named Edna Mitchell. That was in Tennessee near
Jackson. Oh Lawd, my missis was good to all her niggers--if you should
call 'em that.

"She had two men and three women. My mother was the cook. Let's
see--Sarah was one, Jane was two, and Eliza was three. (I was Eliza.)
Then there was Doc and Uncle Alf. I reckon he was our uncle. Anyway we
all called him Uncle Alf. He managed the business--he was the head man
and Doc was next. And Miss Edna raised us all to grown.

"Now I'm tellin' you right straight along. I try to tell the truth. I
forgits and I can't remember ever'thing like it ought to be but I hit
at it.

"Things is hard this year and I don't know how come. I guess it's
'cause folks is so wicked. They is livin' fast--black and white.

"How many chillun? Now, you'd be s'prised. I hardly ever tell folks
how many. I had fifteen; I was a good breeder. But they is all dead
but one, and they ain't doin' me no good. Never raised but two. Most
of 'em just died when they was born.

"I'd a been better off if I had stayed single a while longer and went
to school and learned how to read and write and figger. But I went to
another kind of a school.

"But I sure has been blest. I been here a long time, got a chile to
cook me a little bread--don't have to worry 'bout dat.

"I had to send clean back to where I j'ined the Metropolitan to get my
age. That was in Cairo, Illinois 'cause I'd lived there fifteen years.
But when my daughter and her husband come here and got settled, why I
come to finish it out.

"Yes ma'am, I sure have worked hard. I've plowed, split wood, and done
a little bit of ever'thing. But it was all done since freedom. In
slavery times I was a house girl. I tell you I was a heap better off a
slave than I was free.

"After freedom we had to go and get what we could get to do and work
hard.

"They used to talk 'bout ha'nts and squinch owls. Say it was a sign of
somebody dead. But I don't believe in that. 'Course what I don't
believe in somebody else does."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Evelyn Jones
                    815 Arch Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: Between 68 and 78?


"I was born in Lonoke County right here in Arkansas. My father's
name--I don't know it. I don't know nothin' 'bout my father. My
mother's name was Mary Davis.

"My daddy died when I was five weeks old. I don't know nothin' 'bout
'im. Just did manage to git here before he left. I don't know the date
of my birth. I don't know nothin' 'bout it and I ain't goin' to tell
no lie.

"I have nineteen children. My youngest living child is twenty-eight
years old. My oldest living is fifty-three. I have four dead. I don't
know how old the oldest one is. That one's dead.

"I have a cousin named Harry Jordan. He lives 'round here somewheres.
You'll find him. I don't know where he lives. He says he knows just
how old I am, and he says that I'm sixty-eight. My daughter here says
I'm seventy. And my son thinks I'm older. Don't nobody know. My daddy
never told me. My mama was near dead when I was born; what could she
tell me? So how am I to know?

"My mother was born in slavery. She was a slave. I don't know nothin'
'bout it. My mother came from Tennessee. That's what she told me. I
was born in a log cabin right here in Arkansas. I was born in a log
cabin right in front of the white folks' big house. It was not far
from the white folks' graveyard. You know they had a graveyard of
their own. Old Bill Pemberton, that was the name of the man owned the
place I was born on. But he wasn't my mother's owner.

"I don't know where my father come from. My mother said she had a good
time in slavery. She spoke of lots of things but I don't remember
them.

"My grandma told me about when she went to church she used to carry
her good clothes in a bundle. When she got near there, she would put
them on, and hide her old clothes under a rock. When she come out from
the meeting, she would have to put on her old clothes again to go home
in. She didn't dare let the white folks see her in good clothes.

"I think my mother's white people were named Jordans. My mother and
them all belonged to the young mistress. I think her name was Jordan.
Yes, that's what it was--Jordan.

"Grandmammy had so many children. She had nineteen children--just like
me. My grandmammy was a great big old red woman. She had red hair too.
I never heard her say nothin' 'bout nobody whippin' her and my
granddaddy. They whipped all them children though. My mama just had
six children.

"Mama said her master tried to keep her in slavery after freedom. My
mama worked at the spinning-wheel. When she heard the folks say they
was through with the War, she was at the spinning-wheel. The white
folks ought a tol' them they was free but they didn't. Old Jordan
carried them down in De Valla Bluff. He carried them down
there--called hisself gittin' away from the Yankees. But the Yankees
told mama to quit workin'. They tol' her that she was free. My mama
said she was in there at the wheel spinning and the house was full of
white men settin' there lookin' at her. You don't see that sort of
thing now.

"They had a man--I don't know what his name was. He stalled them
steers, stalled 'em twice a day. They used to pick cotton. I dreamed
about cotton the other night.

"My father farmed after slavery. I never heard them say they were
cheated out of nothin'. I don't know whether they was or not. I'll
tell you the truth. I didn't pay them no 'tention. Mighty little I can
remember."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: John Jones,
                    Brinkley, Arkansas
Age: 71


"I was raised an orph'_ant_ but I was born in Tennessee. I lived over
there and farmed till 'bout fifty year ago. I come out here wid Mr.
Woodson to pick cotton. He dead now and I still tryin' to work all I
can.

"I haben voted in thirty-five year. Because I couldn't vote in the
Primary, then I say I wouldn't vote 'tall. I don't care if the women
want to vote. Don't do no good nohow.

"I farmed all my life 'ceptin' 'bout ten years I worked on the
section. I got so I couldn't stand up to it every day and had to farm
again.

"I never considered times hard till I got disabled to work. It mighty
bad when you can't get no jobs to do. My hardest time is in the
winter. I has a garden and chickens but I ain't able to buy a cow. Man
give me a little pig the other day. He won't be big enough to eat till
late next spring. Every winter times is hard for me. It's been thater
wa's ever since I begin not to be able to get about. Helped by the
PWA."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: John Jones
                    3109 W. 10th Avenue, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 82


"I come here in 1856--you can figure it out for yourself. I was born
in Arkansas, fifty miles below here.

"I remember the soldiers. I know I was a little boy drivin' the gin.
Had to put me upon the lever. You see, all us little fellows had to
work.

"I remember seein' the Indians goin' by to fight at Arkansas Post.
They fought on the southern side. When I heard the cannons, I asked my
mama what it was and she said 'twas war.

"John Dye--that was my young master--went to the War but Ruben had a
kind of afflicted hand and he didn't go.

"Our plantation was on the river and I used to see the Yankee boats go
down the river.

"My papa belonged to the Douglases and mama belonged to the Dyes. I
was born on the Douglas place and I ain't been down there in over
fifty years. They said I was born in March but I don't know any more
bout it than a rabbit.

"Papa said he was raised up in the house. Said he didn't do much
work--just tended to the gin.

"I remember one night the Ku Klux come to our house. I was so scared I
run under the house and stayed till ma called me out. I was so scared
I didn't know what they had on.

"I remember when some of the folks come back from Texas and they said
peace was declared.

"I think my brother run off and jined the Yankees and come here when
they took Pine Bluff. War is a bad thing. I think they goin' keep on
till they hatch up another one.

"I didn't go to school much. I was the oldest boy at home and I had to
plow. I went seven days all told and since then I learned ketch as
ketch can. I can read and write pretty well. It's a consolation to be
able to read. If you can't get all of it, you can get some of it.

"Been here in Jefferson County ever since 1867. I come here from
Lincoln County.

"After freedom my papa moved my mama down on the Douglas place where
he was and stayed one year, then moved on the Simpson place in Lincoln
County, and then come up here in Jefferson County. I remember all the
moves.

"I remember down here where Kientz Bros, place is was the gallows
where they hung folks in slavery times. You know--when they had
committed some crime.

"Yes'm, I voted but I never held any office.

"I know I don't look my age but I can tell you a heap of things
happened before emancipation.

"I think the people are better off free--they got liberty."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Lidia Jones
                    228 N. Oak Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 94
Occupation: None--blind


"I was born in Mississippi and emigrated to Arkansas. Born on the
Peacock place. Old John Patterson was my old master.

"My first goin' out was to the cow pen, then to the kitchen, and then
they moved me to Mrs. Patterson's dining-room.

"I helped weave cloth. Dyed it? I wish you'd hush! My missis went to
the woods and got it. All I know is, she said it was indigo. She had a
great big kittle and she put her thread in that. No Lord, she never
bought _her_ indigo--she _raised_ it.

"Oh, Miss Fannie could do most anything. Made the prettiest
counter-panes I ever saw. Yes ma'am, she could do it and _did_ do it.

"She had a loom half as big as this house. Lord a mercy, a many a time
I went dancin' from that old spinnin'-wheel.

"They made all the clothes for the colored folks. They'd be sewin' for
weeks and months.

"Miss Fannie and Miss Frances--that was her daughter--they wove such
pretty cloth for the colored. You know, they went and made themselves
dresses and the white and colored had the same kind of dresses.

"Yes Lord, they _had_ some folks.

"Miss Frances wore hoops but Miss Fannie didn't.

"During of the War them Yankees come down the river; but to tell the
truth, we run and hid and never seen 'em no more.

"They took Mars John's fine saddle horse named Silver Heels. Yes
ma'am, took saddle and bridle and the horse on top of 'em. And he had
a mare named Buchanan and they took her too. He had done moved out of
the big house down into the woods. Called hisself hidin' I reckon. And
he had his horses tied down by the river and the Yankees slipped up on
him and took the horses.

"Yankees burned his house and gin house too and set fire to the
cotton. Oh Lord, I don't like to talk about it. Them Yankees was
rough.

"Right after freedom our white folks left this country and went to
Missouri and the last account I heard of 'em they was all dead.

"After freedom, folks scattered out just like sheep.

"I'm tryin' to study 'bout some songs but I can't think of nothin' but
Dixie."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Lydia Jones
                    228 North Oak Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 93


"My name's Lydia--Lydia Jones. Oh my God I'se born in Mississippi. I
wish you'd hush--I know all about slavery.

"I never had but one master. That was old John Patterson. No he want
good to me. I wish you'd hush! I had two young masters--Marse John and
Marse Edward. Marse John go off to war and say he gwine whip them
Yankees with his pocket knife, but he didn't _do_ it. They said the
war was to keep the colored folks slaves. I tell you I've heard them
bull whips a ringin' from sun to sun.

"After the war when they told us we is free, they said to hire
ourselves out. They didn't give us a nickel when we left.

"I heered talk of the Ku Klux and they come close enough for us to be
skeered but I never seen none of 'em. We never had no slave uprisin's
on our plantation--old John Patterson would a shot 'em down. I tell
you he was a rabid man.

"I used to pick cotton and chop cotton and help weave the cloth. My
old mistress--Miss Fannie--used to go to the woods and get things to
dye the cloth. She would dye some blue and some red.

"Only song I 'member is Dixie. I heered talk of some others but God
knows I never fooled with 'em.

"Yes'm I believes in hants. Let me tell you something. My mama seen my
daddy after he been dead a long time. He come right up through the
crack by the fireplace and he said 'Don't you be afraid Emmaline' but
she was agoin'. They had to sing and pray in the house 'fore my mama
would go back but she never seen him again.

"I'se been blind now for three years and I lives with my granddaughter
but lady, I'll tell you the truth--I been around. Yes, madam, I is."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Liza Jones (Cookie)
                    610 S. Eighteenth Street, Pine Bluff, Ark.
Age: 88


"Come in, this is Cookie. Well, I do know a heap about slavery, cause
I worked. I stayed in the house; I was house girl. They called me
Cookie cause I used to cook so much.

"That was in Madison County, near Jackson, Tennessee. My mistress was
good to me. Yes'm, I got along all right but a heap of others got
along all wrong.

"Mistress took care of us in the cold and all kinds of weather. She
sho did.

"She had four women and four men. We had plenty to eat. She had hogs
and sheep and geese and always cooked enough for all of us. Whatever
she had to eat we had.

"We clothed our darkies in slavery times. I was a weaver for four
years and never done nothin' else. Yes ma'm, I was a house woman and I
am now.

"Yes ma'm, I member seein' different kinds of soldiers. I member once
some Rebels come to old mistress to get somethin' to eat but before it
was ready the Yankees come and run em off. They didn't have time to
eat it all so us colored folks got the rest of it.

"Old mistress had a son Mac and he was in the war. The Yankees
captured him and carried him to Chicago and put him in a warehouse
over the water.

"Old mistress was a good old Christian woman. All the darkies had to
come to her room to prayermeetin' every night. She didn't skip no
nights. And her help didn't mind workin'. They'd go the length for
her, Miss.

"After I was grown I went most anywhere, but when I was little I sho
set on old mistress' dress tail. I used to go to church with her.
She'd say, "Open your mouf and sing" and I'd just holler and sing. I
can member now how loud I used to holler.

"Aint no use in talkin', I had a good mistress. I never was sold. Old
mistress wouldn't sell. There was a speculator come there and wanted
to buy us. When we was free, old mistress say, "Now I could a sold you
and had the money, and now you is goin' to leave." But they didn't,
they stayed. Some stayed with old mistress till she died, but I
didn't. I married the first year of freedom.

"My mistress and me spin a many a cut of cotton together. She couldn't
beat me neither. If that old soul was livin' today, I'd be right with
her. I was gettin' along. I didn't know nothin' but freedom.

"I had freedom then and I ain't been free since, didn't have no
sponsibility. But when they turned you loose, you had your doctor bill
and your grub bill--now wasn't you a slave then?

"My mammy was a cook and her name was Katy.

"After I was married we went to live at Black Ankle. I learned to cook
and I sho did cook for the white folks twenty-one years. I used to go
back and see old mistress. If I stay away too long, she send for me.

"How many childen I had? You want the truth? Well, fifteen, but never
had but three to live any length of time.

"Well, I told you the best I know and the straightest I know. If I
can't tell you the truth, I'm not goin' to tell you nothin'.

"Yes, honey, I saw the Ku Klux."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Lucy Jones,
                    Marianna, Arkansas
Age: Born 1866
[Date Stamp: MAY 11 1938]


"I was raised second year after the surrender. I don't know a father
or mother. They was dead when I was five years old. I had no sisters
nor brothers. Mrs. Cynthia Hall raised me. She raised my mother.
Master Hall was her husband. They was old people and they was so good
to me. They had no children and I lived in the house with them. I
never went to school a day in my life. I can't read. I can count
money.

"My mother was dark. I married when I was fifteen years old. I have
four children living. They are all dark. They are about the same color
but darker than I am.

"No ma'am, I don't believe one could be voodooed. I lived nearly all
my life with white folks and they don't heed no foolishness like that,
do they? I cooked, worked in the field, washed and ironed.

"I married three times. The first time at Raymond, Mississippi. I
never had no big weddings.

"Seems like some folks have lost their grip and ain't willing to start
over. I don't know much to say for the young people. They are not
smart. They got more schooling. They try to shirk all the work they
can. I never seen no Ku Klux in my life. People used to raise nearly
all their living at home and now they depend on buying nearly
everything. Well, I think it is bad."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Mary Jones
                    1017 Dennison, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 72


"I was born on the twenty-second of March, 1866, in Van Buren,
Arkansas. I had six children. All of them were bred and born at the
same place.

"I was born in a frame house. My father used to live in the country,
but I was born in the town. He bought it just as soon as he come out
of the army and married right away and bought this home. I don't know
where he got his money from. I guess he saved it. He served in the
Union army; he wasn't a servant. He was a soldier, and drawed his pay.
He never run through his money like most people do. I don't know
whether he made any money in slavery or not but he was a carpenter
during slave times and they say he always had plenty of money. I guess
he had saved some of that too.

"My mother was married twice. Her name was Louisa Buchanan. My father
was named Abraham Riley. My stepfather was named Moses Buchanan. My
father was a soldier in the old original war (the Civil War)--the war
they ended in 1865.

"I disremember who my mother's master was but I think it was a man
named Johnson. I didn't know my father's people. She married him from
White County up here. Her and him, they corresponded mostly in letters
because he traveled lots. He looked like an Indian. He had straight
hair and was tall and rawboned and wore a Texas hat. I had his picture
but the pictures fade away. My father was a sergeant. He died sometime
after the war. I don't remember when because I wasn't old enough. I
can just remember looking at the corpse. I was too small to do any
grieving.

"My mother was a nurse in slavery times. She nursed the white folks
and their children. She did the housework and such like. She was a
good cook too. After freedom, when the old folks died out, she cooked
for Zeb Ward--you know him, head of the penitentiary. She used to cook
for the Jews and gentiles. That her kind of work. That was her
occupation--good cook. She could make all kinds of provisions. She
could make preserves and they had a big orchard everywhere she worked.

"I have heard my mother talk about pateroles, jayhawkers, and Ku Klux,
but I never knew of them myself. I have heard say they were awful
bad--the Ku Klux or somethin'.

"My mother's white folks sold her. I don't know who they sold her to
or from. They sold her from her mother. I don't know how she got free.
I think she got free after the war ceased. But she had a good time all
her life. She had a good time because she was a good cook, and a good
nurse, and she had good white folks. My grandma, she had good folks
too. They was free before they were free, my ma and grandma. They was
just as free before freedom as they were afterwards. My mother had
seven children and two sets of twins among them. But I am the only one
living.


Occupation

"They say that I'm too old to work now; so I can't make nothin' to
keep my home goin'. I have five children living. Two are away from
here--one in Michigan, and another in Illinois. I have three others
but they don't make enough to help me much. I used to work 'round the
laundries. Then I used to work 'round with these colored restaurants.
I worked with a colored woman down by the station for twelve or
fifteen years. I first helped her wash and iron. She ironed and hired
other girls to wait table and wash dishes and so on. Them times wasn't
like they are now. They'd hire you and keep you. Then I worked at a
white boarding house on Second and Cross. I quit working at the
laundries because of the steady work in the restaurants. After the
restaurants I went to work in private families and worked with them
till I got so I couldn't work no more. Maybe I could do plenty of
things, but they won't give me a chance.

"I have been married twice. My second husband was John Jones. He
always went by the name of his white folks. They were named Ivory. He
came from up in Searcy. I got acquainted with him and we started going
together. He'd been married before and had children up in Searcy. He
got his leg cut off in a accident. He was working over to the shop
lifting ties with another helper and this man helping him gave way on
his side and let his end fall. It fell across my husband's foot and
blood poison set in and caused him to lose his foot and leg. He had
his foot cut off at the county hospital and made himself a peg-leg. He
cut it out hisself while he was at the hospital. He lived a long while
after that. He died on Tenth and Victory. My first husband was Henry
White. He was a shop worker too--the Iron Mountain.

"We went to school together. I lost my health before I married, and I
had to stop going to school. The doctor was a German and lived on
Cross between Fifth and Sixth. He said that he ought to have written
the history of my life to show what I was cured of because I was
paralyzed two years. My head was drawed 'way back between my
shoulders. I lived with my first husband about six years. He died with
T.B. in Memphis, Tennessee. He had married again when he died. We got
so we couldn't agree, so I thought it was best for him to live with
his mother and me to live with mine. We quit under good conditions. I
had a boy after he was separated from me.

"I don't know what to say about the people now. I don't get 'round
much. They aren't like they used to be. The young people don't like to
have you 'round them. I never did object to any of my children gettin'
married because my mother didn't object to me.

"I know Mr. Gillespie. (He passed at the time--ed.) He comes to see me
now and then. All my people are dead now 'cept my children."


Interviewer's Comment

Brother Gillespie has a story turned in previously. Evidently he is
making eyes at the old lady; but the romance is not likely to bud. She
has lost the sight of one eye apparently through a cataract which has
spread over the larger part of the iris. Nevertheless, she is more
active than he is, and apparently more competent, and she isn't
figuring on making her lot any harder than it is.


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Mary Jones
                    509 E. 23rd Avenue, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 78
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"I was born three weeks 'fore Christmas in South Carolina.

"I 'member one time the Yankees come along and I run to the door. I
know ma made me go back but I peeped out the window. You know how
children is. They wore great big old hats and blue coats.

"'Nother time we saw them a comin' and said, 'Yonder come the Yankees'
and we run. Ma said, 'Don't run, them's the Yankees what freed you.'

"Old mis' was named Joanna Long and old master was Joe Long. I can't
remember much, I just went by what ma said.

"I went to school now and then on account we had to work.

"We had done sold out in South Carolina and was down at the station
when some of the old folks said if we was goin' to the Mississippi
bottoms where the panthers and wolves was we would never come back. We
thought we was comin' to Arkansas but when we found out we was in the
Mississippi bottoms. We stayed there and made two crops, then we come
to Arkansas.

"The way the younger generation is livin' now, the Lord can't bless
'em. They know how to do right but they won't do it. Yes ma'am."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Nannie Jones
                    1601 Saracen Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 81


"Good morning. Come in. I sure is proud to see you. Yes ma'am, I sure
is.

"I was born in Chicot County. I heerd Dr. Gaines say I was four years
old in slavery times. I know I ain't no baby. I feels my age, too--in
my limbs.

"I heerd 'em talk about a war but I wasn't big enough to know about
it. My father went to war on one side but he didn't stay very long. I
don't know which side he was on. Them folks all dead now--I just can
remember 'em.

"Dr. Gaines had a pretty big crew on the place. I'm gwine tell you
what I know. I can't tell you nothin' else.

"Now I want to tell it like mama said. She said she was sold from
Kentucky. She died when I was small.

"I remember when they said the people was free. I know they jumped up
and down and carried on.

"Dr. Gaines was so nice to his people. I stayed in the house most of
the time. I was the little pet around the house. They said I was so
cute.

"Dr. Gaines give me my age but I lost it movin'. But I know I ain't no
baby. I never had but two children and they both livin'--two girls.

"Honey, I worked in the field and anywhere. I worked like a man. I
think that's what got me bowed down now. I keeps with a misery right
across my back. Sometimes I can hardly get along.

"Honey, I just don't know 'bout this younger generation. I just don't
have no thoughts for 'em, they so wild. I never was a rattlin' kind of
a girl. I always was civilized. Old people in them days didn't 'low
their children to do things. I know when mama called us, we'd better
go. They is a heap wusser now. So many of 'em gettin' into trouble."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Reuben Jones
                    Ezell Quarters, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 85


"Well, I'm one of em. I can tell you bout it from now till sundown.

"I was born at Senatobia, Mississippi, this side of Jackson. Born in
'52 on April the 16th. That's when I was born.

"Old man Stephen Williams was my master in time of the war and before
the war, too. He was pretty good to me. Give me plenty of something to
eat, but he whipped me. Oh, I specked I needed it. Put me in the field
when I was five years old. Put a tar cap on my head. I was so young
the sun made my hair come out so they put that tar cap on my head.

"I member when they put the folks on blocks as high as that house and
sell em to the highest bidder. No ma'm, I wasn't sold cause my mother
had three or four chillun and boss man wouldn't sell dem what had
chillun cause dem chillun was hands for him.

"They made me hide ever'thing they had from the Yankees. Yes'm, I seen
em come out after the fodder and the corn. We hid the meat and the
mules and the money. Drove the mules in the cave. Kept em der till the
Yankees left. We dug the hole for the meat but old marse dug the hole
for the money.

"I used to help put timbers on the bridge to keep the Yankees out but
dey come right on through just the same. Took the ox wagon but dey
sent it back.

"Couldn't go nowhere without a pass. Had a whippin' block right at the
horse trough. Yes ma'm, they'd eat you up. I mean they'd whip you, but
they give you plenty of somethin' to eat.

"My mother was the weaver and they had a tanyard on the place.

"In slavery days couldn't go see none of your neighbors without a
pass. People had meetin' right at the house. Dey'd have prayer and
singin'. I went to em. I could sing--Lord yes. I used to know a lot of
old songs--'Am I A Soldier of the Cross?'.

"Lord yes, ma'm, don't talk! When the soldiers come out where we was I
could hear the guns. Had a battle right in town. Rebels just as scared
of the Yankees as if twas a bear. I seed one or two of em come to town
and scare the whole business.

"I never knowed but one man run off and jined the Yankees. Carried his
master's finest ridin' hoss and a mule. He always had a fine hoss and
Yankees come and took it. When the Yankees come out the last time, my
owners cleaned out the smoke house and buried the meat.

"I helped gin cotton when I wasn't big enough to stand up to the
breast. Stood upon a bench and had a lantern hung up so I could see
fore daylight. Yes ma'm, great big gin house. Yes ma'm, I sho has
worked--all kinds and plowin'.

"Now my old boss called me Tony--that's what he called me.

"When peace come, we had done gathered our crop and we left there a
week later. You know people usually hunts their kinfolks and we went
to Hernando. Come to Arkansas in '77. Got offin de boat right der at
de cotehouse. Pine Bluff wasn't nothin' when I come here.

"I used to vote. I aimed to vote the Republican ticket--I don't know.

"Oh yes ma'm, I seed the Ku Klux, yes ma'm. They're bad, too. Lord I
seed a many of them. They come to my house. I went to the door and
that's as far as I went. That was in Hernando. I went back to my old
home in Hernando bout three months ago. Went where I was bred and born
but I didn't know the place it was tore up so.

"This younger generation whole lot different from when I was comin'
up. Yes'm, it's a whole lot different. They ain't doin' so well. I
have always tended to my own business. Cose I been arrested for
drivin' mules with sore shoulders. Didn't put me in jail, but the
officers come up. That was when I was workin' on the Lambert place. I
told em they wasn't my mules so they let me go.

"I can't tell you bout the times now. I hope it'll get better--can't
get no wusser."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Vergil Jones,
                    Brinkley, Arkansas
Age: 70


"My parents was Jane Jones and Vergil Jones. Their owner was Colonel
Jones in Alabama. Papa went to the war and served four years. He got a
$30 a month Union pension long as he lived. He was in a number of
places. He fought as a field man. He had a long musket he brought home
from the war. He told us a heap of things long time ago. Seem lack
folks set down and talked wid their children more'n they do nowdays.

"Papa come to this State after the surrender. He married here. I am
the oldest of seven children. Mama was in this State before the war.
She was bought when she was a girl and brought here. I don't know if
Colonel Jones owned her or if papa had seen her somewhere else. He
come to her and they married. My mama was a house girl some and she
washed and ironed for Miss Fannie Lambert. They had a big family and a
big farm. Their farm was seven miles this side of Indian Bay, eight
miles to Clarendon. They had thirteen in family and mama had seven
children made nine in her family. She had a bed piled full of starched
clothes white as snow. Lamberts had three sets of twins. Our family
lived with the Lamberts 23 or 24 years. We started working for Mr. B.
J. Lambert and Miss Fannie (his wife). Mama nursed me and R. T. from
the same breast. We was raised up grown together and I worked for R.
T. till he died. We played with J. L. Black too till he was grown. He
was county judge and sheriff of this county (Monroe).

"Folks that helped me out is about all dead. I pick cotton but I can't
pick very much. Now I don't have no work till chopping cotton times
comes on. It is hard now. I would do jobs but I don't hear of no jobs
to be done. I asked around but didn't find a thing to do.

"I heard about the Ku Kluxes. My papa used to dodge the Ku Kluxes. He
lay out in the bushes from them. It was bad times. Some folks would
advise the black folks to do one way and then the Ku Kluxes come and
make it hot for them. One thing the Ku Kluxes didn't want much big
gatherings among the black folks. They break up big gatherings. Some
white folks tell them to do one thing and then some others tell them
to do some other way. That is the way it was. The Ku Kluxes was hot
headed. Papa wasn't a bad man but he was afraid they did do so much.
He was on the lookout and dodged them all the time.

"I haven't voted for a long time. I couldn't keep my taxes up.

"I don't own a home. I pay $4 rent for it. It is a cold house--not so
good. I have farmed all my life. I still farm. Times got so that
nobody would run you (credit you) and I come here to get jobs between
farming. I still farm. They hire mostly by the day--day labor. Them
two things and my dis'bility is making it mighty hard for me to live.
I work at any jobs I can get.

"I signed up for the Old Age Pension. They said I couldn't work, I was
too old. I wanted to work on the government work. I never got nothing.
I don't get no kind of help. I thought I didn't know how to get into
the Old Age Pension reason I didn't get it. It would help keep in wood
this wet weather when work is scarce."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Walter Jones,
                    Brinkley, Arkansas
Age: 72


"My father run away scared of the Yankees. He got excited and left. My
mother didn't want him to leave her. She was crying when he left. My
father belong to the Wilsons. Mother was sold on the block in
Richmond, Virginia when she was twelve years old and never seen her
mother again. Mother belong to Charles Hunt. Her name was Lucy Hunt.
She married three times. Charles Hunt went to market to buy slaves. We
lived in Hardeman County, Tennessee when I was born but he sent us to
Mississippi. She worked in the field then but before then she was a
house girl. No, she was black. We are all African.

"I got eight children. When my wife died they finished scattering out.
I come here from Grand Junction, Mississippi. I eat breakfast on
Christmas day 1883 at Forrest City and spent the day at Hazen. I come
with friends. We paid our own ways. We come on the train and boat and
walked some.

"No, I don't take stock in voting. I never did. I have voted so long
ago I forgot it all.

"The biggest thing I can tell you ever happened to us more than I told
you was in 1878 I had yellow fever. Dr. Milton Pruitt come to see me.
The next day his brother come to see me. Dr. Milton died the next day.
I got well. At Grand Junction both black and white died. Some of both
color got well. A lot of people died.

"How am I making a living? I don't make one. Mr. Ashly lets me live in
a house and gives me scrap meat. I bottom chairs or do what I can. I
past heavy work. The Welfare don't help me. I farmed, railroaded
nearly all my life. Public work this last few years."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Oscar Felix Junell
                    1720 Brown Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 60


"My father's name was Peter Junell, Peter W. Junell. I don't know what
the W. was for. He was born in Ouachita County near Bearden, Arkansas.
Bearden is an old town. It is fourteen miles from Camden. My dad was
seventy-five years old when he died. He died in 1924. He was very
young in the time of slavery. He never did do very much work.

"His master was named John Junell. That was his old master. He had a
young master too, Warren Junell. His old master given him to his young
master, Warren. My father's mother and father both belonged to the
Junells. His mother's name was Dinah, and his father's name was
Anthony. All the slaves took their last names after their owners. They
never was sold, not in any time that my father could remember.

"As soon as my father was large enough to go to walkin' about, his old
master given him to his son, Master Warren Junell. Warren would carry
him about and make him rassle (wrestle). He was a good rassler. As far
as work was concerned, he didn't do nothing much of that. He just
followed his young master all around rasslin.

"His masters was good to him. They whipped slaves sometimes, but they
were considered good. My father always said they was good folks. He
never told me how he learnt that he was free.

"Pretty well all the slaves lived in log cabins. Even in my time,
there was hardly a board house in that county. The food the slaves ate
was mostly bread and milk--corn bread. Old man Junell was rich and
had lots of slaves. When he went to feed his slaves, he would feed
them jus like hogs. He had a great long trough and he would have bread
crumbled up in it and gallons of milk poured over the bread, and the
slaves would get round it and eat. Sometimes they would get to
fighting over it. You know, jus like hogs! They would be eatin and
sometimes one person would find somethin and get holt of it and
another one would want to take it, and they would get to fightin over
it. Sometimes blood would get in the trough, but they would eat right
on and pay no 'tention to it.

"I don't know whether they fed the old ones that way or not. I jus
heered my father tell how he et out of the trough hisself.

"I have heered my father talk about the pateroles too. He talked about
how they used to chase him. But he didn't have much experience with
them, because they never did catch him. That was after the war when
the slaves had been freed, but the pateroles still got after them. My
father remember how they would catch other slaves. One night they went
to an old man's house. It was dark and the old man told them to come
on in. He didn't have no gun, but he took his ax and stood behind the
door on the hinge side. It was after slavery. When he said for them to
come in, they rushed right on in and the old man killed three or four
of them with his ax. He was a old African, and they never had been
able to do nothin' with him, not even in slavery time. I never heard
that they did nothin' to the old man about it. The pateroles was
outlaws anyway.

"I heard my father say that in slavery time, they took the finest and
portlies' looking Negroes--the males--for breeding purposes. They
wouldn't let them strain themselves up nor nothin like that. They
wouldn't make them do much hard work."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Sam Keaton,
                    Brinkley, Ark.
Age: 78


"I was born close to Golden Hill down in Arkansas County. My parents
names was Louana and Dennis Keaton. They had ten children. Their
master was Mr. Jack Keaton and Miss Martha. They had four boys. They
all come from Virginia in wagons the second year of the war--the Civil
War. I heard 'em tell about walking. Some of em walked, some rode
horse back and some in wagons. I don't know if they knowed bout slave
uprisings or not. I know they wasn't in em because they come here wid
Mr. Jack Keaton. It was worse in Virginia than it was down here wid
them. Mr. Keaton didn't give em nothing at freedom. They stayed on
long as they wanted to stay and then they went to work for Mr. Jack
Keaton's brother, Mr. Ben Keaton. They worked on shares and picked
cotton by the hundred. My parents staid on down there till they died.
I been working for Mr. Floria for thirty years.

"My father did vote. He voted a Republican ticket. I haven't voted for
fifty years. They that do vote in the General election know very
little bout what they doing. If they could vote in the Primary they
would know but a mighty little about it. The women ain't got no
business voting. Their place is at home. They cain't keep their houses
tidied up and like they oughter be and go out and work regularly.
That's the reason I think they oughter stay at home and train the
children better than it being done.

"I think that the young generation is going to be lost. They killing
and fighting. They do everything. No, they don't work much as I do.
They don't save nothing! They don't save nothing! Times is harder than
they used to be some. Nearly everybody wants to live in town. My age
is making times heap harder for me. I live with my daughter. I am a
widower. I owns 40 acres land, a house, a cow. I made three bales
cotton, but I owe it bout all. I tried to get a little help so I could
get out of debt but I never could get no 'sistance from the Welfare."


Interviewer: Watt McKinney
Person interviewed: Tines Kendricks,
                    Trenton, Arkansas
Age: 104


"My name is Tines Kendricks. I was borned in Crawford County, Georgia.
You see, Boss, I is a little nigger and I really is more smaller now
dan I used to be when I was young 'cause I so old and stooped over. I
mighty nigh wore out from all these hard years of work and servin' de
Lord. My actual name what was give to me by my white folks, de
Kendricks, was 'Tiny'. Dey called me dat 'cause I never was no size
much. Atter us all sot free I just changed my name to 'Tines' an' dats
what I been goin' by for nigh on to ninety years.

"'Cordin' to what I 'member 'bout it, Boss, I is now past a hundred
and four year old dis past July de fourth two hours before day. What I
means is what I 'member 'bout what de old mars told me dat time I
comed back to de home place atter de War quit an' he say dat I past
thirty then. My mammy, she said I born two hours before day on de
fourth of July. Dat what dey tole me, Boss. I is been in good health
all my days. I ain't never been sick any in my life 'scusin' dese last
years when I git so old and feeble and stiff in de joints, and my teef
'gin to cave, and my old bones, dey 'gin to ache. But I just keep on
livin' and trustin' in de Lord 'cause de Good Book say, 'Wherefore de
evil days come an' de darkness of de night draw nigh, your strength,
it shall not perish. I will lift you up 'mongst dem what 'bides wid
me.' Dat is de Gospel, Boss.

"My old mars, he was named Arch Kendricks and us lived on de
plantation what de Kendricks had not far from Macon in Crawford
County, Georgia. You can see, Boss, dat I is a little bright an' got
some white blood in me. Dat is 'counted for on my mammy's side of de
family. Her pappy, he was a white man. He wasn't no Kendrick though.
He was a overseer. Dat what my mammy she say an' then I know dat
wasn't no Kendrick mixed up in nothin' like dat. Dey didn't believe in
dat kind of bizness. My old mars, Arch Kendricks, I will say dis, he
certainly was a good fair man. Old mis' an' de young mars, Sam, dey
was strickly tough an', Boss, I is tellin' you de truth dey was cruel.
De young mars, Sam, he never taken at all atter he pa. He got all he
meanness from old mis' an' he sure got plenty of it too. Old mis', she
cuss an' rare worse 'an a man. Way 'fore day she be up hollerin' loud
enough for to be heered two miles, 'rousin' de niggers out for to git
in de fields even 'fore light. Mars Sam, he stand by de pots handin'
out de grub an' givin' out de bread an' he cuss loud an' say: 'Take a
sop of dat grease on your hoecake an' move erlong fast 'fore I lashes
you.' Mars Sam, he was a big man too, dat he was. He was nigh on to
six an' a half feet tall. Boss, he certainly was a chile of de debbil.
All de cookin' in dem days was done in pots hangin' on de pot racks.
Dey never had no stoves endurin' de times what I is tellin' you 'bout.
At times dey would give us enough to eat. At times dey wouldn't--just
'cordin' to how dey feelin' when dey dishin' out de grub. De biggest
what dey would give de field hands to eat would be de truck what us
had on de place like greens, turnips, peas, side meat, an' dey sure
would cut de side meat awful thin too, Boss. Us allus had a heap of
corn-meal dumplin's an' hoecakes. Old mis', her an' Mars Sam, dey real
stingy. You better not leave no grub on your plate for to throw away.
You sure better eat it all iffen you like it or no. Old mis' and Mars
Sam, dey de real bosses an' dey was wicked. I'se tellin' you de truth,
dey was. Old mars, he didn't have much to say 'bout de runnin' of de
place or de handlin' of de niggers. You know all de property and all
the niggers belonged to old mis'. She got all dat from her peoples.
Dat what dey left to her on their death. She de real owner of
everything.

"Just to show you, Boss, how 'twas with Mars Sam, on' how contrary an'
fractious an' wicked dat young white man was, I wants to tell you
'bout de time dat Aunt Hannah's little boy Mose died. Mose, he sick
'bout er week. Aunt Hannah, she try to doctor on him an' git him well
an' she tell old mis' dat she think Mose bad off an' orter have de
doctor. Old mis', she wouldn't git de doctor. She say Mose ain't sick
much, an' bless my Soul, Aunt Hannah she right. In a few days from
then Mose is dead. Mars Sam, he come cussin' an' tole Gabe to get some
planks an' make de coffin an' sont some of dem to dig de grave over
dere on de far side of de place where dey had er buryin'-groun' for de
niggers. Us toted de coffin over to where de grave was dug an' gwine
bury little Mose dar an' Uncle Billy Jordan, he was dar and begun to
sing an' pray an' have a kind of funeral at de buryin'. Every one was
moanin' an' singin' an' prayin' and Mars Sam heard 'em an' come
sailin' over dar on he hoss an' lit right in to cussin' an' rarein'
an' say dat if dey don't hurry an' bury dat nigger an' shut up dat
singin' an' carryin' on, he gwine lash every one of dem, an' then he
went to cussin' worser an' 'busin' Uncle Billy Jordan. He say iffen he
ever hear of him doin' any more preachin' or prayin' 'round 'mongst de
niggers at de grave-yard or anywheres else, he gwine lash him to
death. No suh, Boss, Mars Sam wouldn't even 'low no preachin' or
singin' or nothin' like dat. He was wicked. I tell you he was.

"Old mis', she ginrally looked after de niggers when dey sick an' give
dem de medicine. An' too, she would get de doctor iffen she think dey
real bad off 'cause like I said, old mis', she mighty stingy an' she
never want to lose no nigger by dem dyin'. How-some-ever it was hard
some time to get her to believe you sick when you tell her dat you
was, an' she would think you just playin' off from work. I have seen
niggers what would be mighty near dead before old mis' would believe
them sick at all.

"Before de War broke out, I can 'member there was some few of de white
folks what said dat niggers ought to be sot free, but there was just
one now an' then that took that stand. One of dem dat I 'member was de
Rev. Dickey what was de parson for a big crowd of de white peoples in
dat part of de county. Rev. Dickey, he preached freedom for de niggers
and say dat dey all should be sot free an' gived a home and a mule.
Dat preachin' de Rev. Dickey done sure did rile up de folks--dat is de
most of them like de Kendricks and Mr. Eldredge and Dr. Murcheson and
Nat Walker and such as dem what was de biggest of the slaveowners.
Right away atter Rev. Dickey done such preachin' dey fired him from de
church, an' 'bused him, an' some of dem say dey gwine hang him to a
limb, or either gwine ride him on a rail out of de country. Sure
enough dey made it so hot on dat man he have to leave clean out of de
state so I heered. No suh, Boss, they say they ain't gwine divide up
no land with de niggers or give them no home or mule or their freedom
or nothin'. They say dey will wade knee deep in blood an' die first.

"When de War start to break out, Mars Sam listed in de troops and was
sent to Virginny. There he stay for de longest. I hear old mis'
tellin' 'bout de letters she got from him, an' how he wishin' they
hurry and start de battle so's he can get through killin' de Yankees
an' get de War over an' come home. Bless my soul, it wasn't long
before dey had de battle what Mars Sam was shot in. He writ de letter
from de hospital where they had took him. He say dey had a hard fight,
dat a ball busted his gun, and another ball shoot his cooterments
(accouterments) off him; the third shot tear a big hole right through
the side of his neck. The doctor done sew de wound up; he not hurt so
bad. He soon be back with his company.

"But it wasn't long 'fore dey writ some more letters to old mis' an'
say dat Mars Sam's wound not gettin' no better; it wasn't healin' to
do no good; every time dat they sew de gash up in his neck it broke
loose again. De Yankees had been puttin' poison grease on the bullets.
Dat was de reason de wound wouldn't get well. Dey feared Mars Sam
goin' to die an' a short time atter dat letter come I sure knowed it
was so. One night just erbout dusk dark, de screech owls, dey come in
er swarm an' lit in de big trees in de front of de house. A mist of
dust come up an' de owls, dey holler an' carry on so dat old mars get
he gun an' shot it off to scare dem erway. Dat was a sign, Boss, dat
somebody gwine to die. I just knowed it was Mars Sam.

"Sure enough de next day dey got de message dat Mars Sam dead. Dey
brung him home all de way from Virginny an' buried him in de
grave-yard on de other side of de garden wid his gray clothes on him
an' de flag on de coffin. That's what I'se telling you, Boss, 'cause
dey called all de niggers in an' 'lowed dem to look at Mars Sam. I
seen him an' he sure looked like he peaceful in he coffin with his
soldier clothes on. I heered atterwards dat Mars Sam bucked an' rared
just 'fore he died an' tried to get outen de bed, an' dat he cussed to
de last.

"It was this way, Boss, how come me to be in de War. You see, they
'quired all of de slaveowners to send so many niggers to de army to
work diggin' de trenches an' throwin' up de breastworks an' repairin'
de railroads what de Yankees done 'stroyed. Every mars was 'quired to
send one nigger for every ten dat he had. Iffen you had er hundred
niggers, you had to send ten of dem to de army. I was one of dem dat
my mars 'quired to send. Dat was de worst times dat dis here nigger
ever seen an' de way dem white men drive us niggers, it was something
awful. De strap, it was goin' from 'fore day till 'way after night. De
niggers, heaps of 'em just fall in dey tracks give out an' them white
men layin' de strap on dey backs without ceastin'. Dat was zackly way
it was wid dem niggers like me what was in de army work. I had to
stand it, Boss, till de War was over.

"Dat sure was a bad war dat went on in Georgia. Dat it was. Did you
ever hear 'bout de Andersonville prison in Georgia? I tell you, Boss,
dat was 'bout de worstest place dat ever I seen. Dat was where dey
keep all de Yankees dat dey capture an' dey had so many there they
couldn't nigh take care of them. Dey had them fenced up with a tall
wire fence an' never had enough house room for all dem Yankees. They
would just throw de grub to 'em. De mostest dat dey had for 'em to eat
was peas an' the filth, it was terrible. De sickness, it broke out
'mongst 'em all de while, an' dey just die like rats what been
pizened. De first thing dat de Yankees do when dey take de state 'way
from de Confedrits was to free all dem what in de prison at
Andersonville.

"Slavery time was tough, Boss. You Just don't know how tough it was. I
can't 'splain to you just how bad all de niggers want to get dey
freedom. With de 'free niggers' it was just de same as it was wid dem
dat was in bondage. You know there was some few 'free niggers' in dat
time even 'fore de slaves taken outen bondage. It was really worse on
dem dan it was with dem what wasn't free. De slaveowners, dey just
despised dem 'free niggers' an' make it just as hard on dem as dey
can. Dey couldn't get no work from nobody. Wouldn't airy man hire 'em
or give 'em any work at all. So because dey was up against it an'
never had any money or nothin', de white folks make dese 'free
niggers' sess (assess) de taxes. An' 'cause dey never had no money for
to pay de tax wid, dey was put up on de block by de court man or de
sheriff an' sold out to somebody for enough to pay de tax what dey say
dey owe. So dey keep these 'free niggers' hired out all de time most
workin' for to pay de taxes. I 'member one of dem 'free niggers'
mighty well. He was called 'free Sol'. He had him a little home an' a
old woman an' some boys. Dey was kept bounded out nigh 'bout all de
time workin' for to pay dey tax. Yas suh, Boss, it was heap more
better to be a slave nigger dan er free un. An' it was really er
heavenly day when de freedom come for de race.

"In de time of slavery annudder thing what make it tough on de niggers
was dem times when er man an' he wife an' their chillun had to be
taken 'way from one anudder. Dis sep'ration might be brung 'bout most
any time for one thing or anudder sich as one or tudder de man or de
wife be sold off or taken 'way to some other state like Louisiana or
Mississippi. Den when a mars die what had a heap of slaves, these
slave niggers be divided up 'mongst de mars' chillun or sold off for
to pay de mars' debts. Then at times when er man married to er woman
dat don't belong to de same mars what he do, then dey is li'ble to git
divided up an' sep'rated most any day. Dey was heaps of nigger
families dat I know what was sep'rated in de time of bondage dat tried
to find dey folkses what was gone. But de mostest of 'em never git
togedder ag'in even after dey sot free 'cause dey don't know where one
or de other is.

"Atter de War over an' de slaves taken out of dey bondage, some of de
very few white folks give dem niggers what dey liked de best a small
piece of land for to work. But de mostest of dem never give 'em
nothin' and dey sure despise dem niggers what left 'em. Us old mars
say he want to 'range wid all his niggers to stay on wid him, dat he
gwine give 'em er mule an' er piece er ground. But us know dat old
mis' ain't gwine agree to dat. And sure enough she wouldn't. I'se
tellin' you de truth, every nigger on dat place left. Dey sure done
dat; an' old mars an' old mis', dey never had a hand left there on
that great big place, an' all that ground layin' out.

"De gov'ment seen to it dat all of de white folks had to make
contracts wid de niggers dat stuck wid 'em, an' dey was sure strict
'bout dat too. De white folks at first didn't want to make the
contracts an' say dey wasn't gwine to. So de gov'ment filled de jail
with 'em, an' after that every one make the contract.

"When my race first got dey freedom an' begin to leave dey mars', a
heap of de mars got ragin' mad an' just tore up truck. Dey say dey
gwine kill every nigger dey find. Some of them did do dat very thing,
Boss, sure enough. I'se tellin' you de truth. Dey shot niggers down by
de hundreds. Dey jus' wasn't gwine let 'em enjoy dey freedom. Dat is
de truth, Boss.

"Atter I come back to de old home place from workin' for de army, it
wasn't long 'fore I left dar an' git me er job with er sawmill an'
worked for de sawmill peoples for about five years. One day I heered
some niggers tellin' about er white man what done come in dar gittin'
up er big lot of niggers to take to Arkansas. Dey was tellin' 'bout
what a fine place it was in Arkansas, an' how rich de land is, an' dat
de crops grow without working, an' dat de taters grow big as er
watermelon an' you never have to plant 'em but de one time, an' all
sich as dat. Well, I 'cided to come. I j'ined up with de man an' come
to Phillips County in 1875. Er heap er niggers come from Georgia at de
same time dat me an' Callie come. You know Callie, dats my old woman
whats in de shack dar right now. Us first lived on Mr. Jim Bush's
place over close to Barton. Us ain't been far off from dere ever since
us first landed in dis county. Fact is, Boss, us ain't been outen de
county since us first come here, an' us gwine be here now I know till
de Lord call for us to come on home."


FOLKLORE SUBJECTS
Name of interviewer: Watt McKinney
Subject: Superstitious beliefs
Story--Information (If not enough space on this page, add page)

This information given by: Tines Kendricks (C)
Place of residence: Trenton, Arkansas
Occupation: None
Age: 104
[TR: Personal information moved from bottom of form.]


There is an ancient and traditional belief among the Southern Negroes,
especially the older ones, that the repeated and intermitted cries of
a whippoorwill near a home in the early evenings of summer and
occurring on successive days at or about the same time and location;
or the appearance of a highly excited redbird, disturbed for no
apparent reason, is indicative of some imminent disaster, usually
thought to be the approaching death of some member of the family.

Tines Kendricks, who says that he was born the slave of Arch Kendricks
in Crawford County, Georgia, two hours before day on a certain Fourth
of July, one hundred and four years ago, recalls several instances in
his long and eventful life in which he contends the accuracy of these
forecasts was borne out by subsequent occurrences. The most striking
of these he says was the time his young master succumbed from the
effect of a wound received at the first battle of Manassas after
hovering between life and death for several days. The young master,
Sam Kendricks, who was the only son of his parents, volunteered at the
beginning of the War and was attached to the army in Virginia. He was
a very impetuous, high-spirited young man and chafed much under the
delay occasioned between the time of his enlistment and first battle,
wanting to have the trouble over with and the difficulties settled
which he honestly thought could be accomplished in the first
engagement with that enemy for whom he held such profound contempt.
Sam Kendricks, coming as he did from a long line of slave-owning
forebears, was one of those Southerners who felt that it was theirs to
command and the duty of others to obey. They would brook no
interference with the established order and keenly resented the
attitude and utterances of Northern press and spokesmen on the slavery
question. Tines Kendricks recalls the time his young master took leave
of his home and parents for the war and his remarks on departing that
his neck was made to fit no halter and that he possessed no mite of
fear for Yankee soldier or Yankee steel. Soon after the battle of
Manassas, Arch Kendricks was advised that Sam had suffered a severe
wound in the engagement. It was stated, however, that the wound was
not expected to prove fatal. This sad news of what had befallen the
young master was soon communicated throughout the entire length and
breadth of the great plantation and in the early evening of that day
Tines sitting in the door of his cabin in the slave quarters a short
distance from the master's great house heard the cry of a whippoorwill
and observed that the voice of this night bird seemed to arise from
the dense hedge enclosing the spacious lawn in front of the home.
Disturbed and filled with a sense of foreboding at this sound of the
bird, he earnestly hoped and prayed that the cry would not be repeated
the following evening, but to his great disappointment it was heard
again and nearer the house than before. On each succeeding evening
according to Tines Kendricks the call of the bird came clearly through
the evening's stillness and each time he noticed that the cry came
from a spot nearer the home until at last the bird seemed perched
beneath the wide veranda and early on the morning following, a very
highly excited redbird darted from tree to tree on the front lawn.
The redbird continued these peculiar actions for several minutes after
which it flew and came to rest on the roof of the old colonial mansion
directly above the room formerly occupied by the young master. Tines
was convinced now that the end had come for Sam Kendricks and that his
approaching death had been foretold by the whippoorwill and that each
evening as the bird approached nearer the house and uttered his night
cry just so was the life of young Sam Kendricks slowly nearing its
close and the actions of the redbird the following day was revealing
evidence to Tines that the end had come to his young master which
indeed it had as proven by a message the family received late in the
morning of this same day.


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Frank Kennedy,
                    Holly Grove, Arkansas
Age: 65 or 70?


"My parents' name was Hannah and Charles Kennedy. They b'long to
Master John Kennedy. I was raised round Aberdeen, Mississippi but they
come in there after freedom. I heard em talk but I couldn't tell you
much as where they come from. They said a young girl bout got her
growth would auction off for more than any man. They used em for cooks
and house women. I judge way they talked she be fifteen or sixteen
years old. They brought $1,600 and $2,000. If they was scared up,
where they been beat, they didn't sell off good. I knowed Master John
Kennedy.

"The Ku Klux come round but they didn't bother much. They would bother
if you stole something. Another thing they made em stay close bout
their own places and work. I don't know bout freedom.

"I been farmin' and sawmillin' at Clarendon. I gets jobs I can do on
the farms now. I got rheumatism so I can't get round. I had this
trouble five years or longer now.

"The times is worse, so many folks stealin' and killin'. The young
folks don't work steady as they used to. Used to get figured out all
you raised till now they refuse to work less en the money in sight.
They don't work hard as I allers been workin'.

"I got one girl married. I don't have no land nor home. I works for
all I have yet.

"I have voted--not lately. I think my color outer vote like the white
folks do long as they do right. The women takin' the mens' places too
much it pears like. But they may be honester. I don't know how it will
be."


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Mrs. A. (Adrianna) W. Kerns
                    800 Victory Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 85


"When they first put me in the field, they put me and Viney to pick up
brush and pile it, to pick up stumps, and when we got through with
that, she worked on her mother's row and I worked on my aunt's row
until we got large enough to have a row to ourselves. Me and Viney
were the smallest children in the field and we had one row each. Some
of the older people had two rows and picked on each row.

"My birthday is on the fourth of November, and I am eighty-five years
old. You can count back and see what year I was born in.


Relatives

"My mother's first child was her master's child. I was the second
child but my father was Reuben Dortch. He belonged to Colonel Dortch.
Colonel Dortch died in Princeton, Arkansas, Dallas County, about
eighty-six miles from here. He died before the War. I never saw him.
But he was my father's first master. He used to go and get goods, and
he caught this fever they had then--I think it was cholera--and died.
After Colonel Dortch died, his son-in-law, Archie Hays, became my
father's second master. Were all with Hays when we were freed.

"My father's father was a white man. He was named Wilson Rainey. I
never did see him. My mother has said to me many a time that he was
the meanest man in Dallas County. My father's mother was named Viney.
That was her first name. I forget the last name. My mother's name was
Martha Hays, and my grandmother's name on my mother's side was Sallie
Hays. My maiden name was Adrianna Dortch.


A Devoted Slave Husband

"I have heard my mother tell many a time that there was a slave man
who used to take his own dinner and carry it three or four miles to
his wife. His wife belonged to a mean white man who wouldn't give them
what they needed to eat. He done without his dinner in order that she
might have enough. Where would you find a man to do that now? Nowadays
they are taking the bread away from their wives and children and
carrying it to some other woman.


Patrollers

"A Negro couldn't leave his master's place unless he had a pass from
his master. If he didn't have a pass, they would whip him. My father
was out once and was stopped by them. They struck him. When my father
got back home, he told Colonel Dortch and Colonel Dortch went after
them pateroles and laid the law down to them--told them that he was
ready to kill 'em.

"The pateroles got after a slave named Ben Holmes once and run him
clean to our place. He got under the bed and hid. But they found him
and dragged him out and beat him.


Work

"I had three aunts in the field. They could handle a plow and roll
logs as well as any man. Trees would blow down and trees would have to
be carried to a heap and burned.

"I been whipped many a time by my mistress and overseer. I'd get
behind with my work and he would come by and give me a lick with the
bull whip he carried with him.

"At first when the old folks cut wood, me and Viney would pick up
chips and burn up brush. We had to pick dry peas in the fall after the
crops had been gathered. We picked two large basketsful a day.

"When we got larger we worked in the field picking cotton and pulling
corn as high as we could reach. You had to pull the fodder first
before you could pull the corn. When we had to come out of the field
on account of rain, we would go to the corn crib and shuck corn if we
didn't have some weaving to do. We got so we could weave and spin.
When master caught us playing, he would set us to cutting jackets. He
would give us each two or three switches and we would stand up and
whip each other. I would go easy on Viney but she would try to cut me
to pieces. She hit me so hard I would say, 'Yes suh, massa.' And she
would say, 'Why you sayin' "Yes suh, massa," to me? I ain't doin'
nothin' to you.'

"My mother used to say that Lincoln went through the South as a beggar
and found out everything. When he got back, he told the North how
slavery was ruining the nation. He put different things before the
South but they wouldn't listen to him. I heard that the South was the
first one to fire a shot.

"Lemme tell you how freedom came. Our master came out where we was
grubbing the ground in front of the house. My father was already in
Little Rock where they were trying to make a soldier out of him.
Master came out and said to mother, 'Martha, they are saying you are
free but that ain't goin' to las' long. You better stay here. Reuben
is dead.'

"Mother then commenced to fix up a plan to leave. She got the oxen
yoked up twice, but when she went to hunt the yoke, she couldn't find
it. Negroes were all going through every which way then. Peace was
declared before she could get another chance. Word came then that the
government would carry all the slaves where they wanted to go. Mother
came to Little Rock in a government wagon.

"She left Cordelia. Cordelia was her daughter by Archie Hays. Cordelia
was supposed to join us when the government wagon came along but she
went to sleep. One colored woman was coming to get in the wagon and
her white folks caught her and made her go back. Them Yankees got off
their horses and went over there and made them turn the woman loose
and let her come on. They were rough and they took her on to Little
Rock in the wagon.

"The Yankees used to come looking for horses. One time Master Archie
had sent the horses off by one of the colored slaves who was to stay
at his wife's house and hide them in the thicket. During the night,
mother heard Archie Hays hollering. She went out to see what was the
matter. The Yankees had old Archie Hays out and had guns poked at his
breast. He was hollering, 'No sir. I don't.' And mother came and said,
'Reuben, get up and go tell them he don't know where the horses is.'
Father got up and did a bold thing. He went out and said, 'Wait,
gentlemen, he don't know where the horses is, but if you'll wait till
tomorrow morning, he'll send a man to bring them in.' I don't know how
they got word to him but he brought them in the next morning and the
Yankees taken them off.

"Once a Rebel fired a shot at a Yankee and in a few minutes, our place
was alive with them. They were working like ants in a heap all over
the place. They took chickens and everything on the place.

Master Archie didn't have no sons large enough for the army. If he
had, they would have killed him because they would have thought that
he was harboring spies."


Interviewer's Comment

Mrs. A. (Adrianna) W. Kerns is a sister to Charles Green Dortch. Cross
reference; see his story.


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: George Key,
                    Forrest City, Arkansas
Age: 70 plus


"I was born in Fayette County, Tennessee. My mother was Henrietta
Hair. She was owned by David Hair. He had a gang of children. I was
her only child. She married just after the surrender she said. She
married Henry Key.

"One thing I can tell you she told me so often. The Yankees come by
and called her out of the cabin at the quarters. She was a brown girl.
They was going out on a scout trip--to hunt and ravage over the
country. They told her to get up her clothes, they would be by for
her. She was grandma's and grandpa's owners' nurse girl. She told them
and they sent her on to tell the white folks. They sent her clear off.
She didn't want to leave. She said her master was plumb good to her
and them all. They kept her hid out. The Yankees come slipping back to
tole her off. They couldn't find her nowhere. They didn't ax about
her. They was stealing her for a cook she thought. She couldn't cook
to do no good she said. She wasn't married for a long time after then.
She said she was scared nearly to death till they took her off and hid
her.

"I have voted but not for a long time. I'm too old to get about and
keep too sick to go to the polls to vote. I got high blood pressure.

"Times is fair. If I was a young man I would go to work. I can't
grumble. Folks mighty nice to me. I keeps in line with my kin folks
and men my age.

"The young age folks don't understand me and I don't know their ways
neither. They may be all right, but I don't know."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Lucy Key,
                    Forrest City, Arkansas
Age: 70 plus


"I was born in Marshall County, Mississippi. I seen Yankees go by in
droves. I was big enough to recollect that. Old mis', Ellis Marshall's
mother, named all the colored children on the place. All the white and
colored children was named for somebody else in the family. Aunt Mary
Marshall stayed in the house wid old mis'.

"Old mis' had a polly parrot. That thing got bad 'bout telling on us.
Old mis' give us a brushing. Her son was a bachelor. He lived there.
He married a girl fourteen or fifteen years old and Lawrence Marshall
is their son. His sister was in Texas. They said old man Marshall was
so stingy he would cut a pea in two. Every time we'd go in the orchard
old polly parrot tell on us. We'd eat the turning fruit. One day Aunt
Mary (colored) scared polly with her dress and apron till he took bad
off sick and died. Mr. Marshall was rough. If he'd found that out he'd
'bout whooped Aunt Mary to death. He didn't find it out. He'd have
crazy spells and they couldn't handle him. They would send for Wallace
and Tite Marshall (colored men on his place). They was all could do
anything wid 'em. He had plenty money and a big room full of meat all
the time.

"I recollect what we called after the War a 'Jim Crow.' It was a
hairbrush that had brass or steel teeth like pins 'ceptin' it was
blunt. It was that long, handle and all (about a foot long). They'd
wash me and grease my legs with lard, keep them from looking ashy and
rusty. Then they'd come after me with them old brushes and brush my
hair. It mortally took skin, hair, and all.

"The first shoe I ever wore had a brass toe. I danced all time when I
was a child. We wore cotton dresses so strong. They would hang you if
you got caught on 'em. We had one best dress.

"One time I went along wid a colored girl to preaching. Her fellar
walked home wid 'er. I was coming 'long behind. He helped her over the
rail fence. I wouldn't let him help me. I was sorter bashful. He
looked back and I was dangling. I got caught when I jumped. They got
me loose. My homespun dress didn't tear.

"I liked my papa the best. He was kind and never whooped us. He belong
to Master Stamps on another place. He was seventy-five years old when
he died.

"I milked a drove of cows. They raised us on milk and they had a
garden. I never et much meat. I went to school and they said meat
would make you thick-headed so you couldn't learn.

"I think papa was in the War. We cut sorghum cane with his sword what
he fit wid.

"Stamps was a teacher. He started a college before the War. It was a
big white house and a boarding house for the scholars. He had a
scholar they called Cooperwood. He rode. He would run us children.
Mama went to Master Stamps and he stopped that. He was the teacher. I
think that was toreckly after the War. Then we lived in the boarding
house. Four or five families lived in that big old house. It had
fifteen rooms. That was close to Marshall, Mississippi.

"Me and the Norfleet children drove the old mule gin together. There
was Mary, Nell, Grace. Miss Cora was the oldest. Miss Cora Marshall
married the old bachelor I told you about. She didn't play much.

"When the first yellow fever broke out, Master George Stamps sent papa
to Colliersville from Germantown. The officers stayed there. While he
was waiting for meat he would stay in the bottoms. He'd bring meat
back. Master George had a great big heavy key to the smokehouse. He'd
cut meat and give it out to his Negroes. That meat was smuggled from
Memphis. He'd go in a two-horse wagon. I clem up and look through the
log cracks at him cutting up the meat fer the hands on his place.

"I had the rheumatism but I cured it. I cupped my knee. Put water in a
cup, put a little coal oil (kerosene) on top, strike a match to it and
slap the cup to my knee. It drawed a clear blister. I got it well and
the rheumatism was gone. I used to rub my legs from my waist down'ards
with mule water. They say that is mighty good for rheumatism. I don't
have it no more.

"No sir-ree-bob, I ain't never voted and I don't aim to long as I'm in
my mind.

"Times ain't hard as they was when I was coming on. (Another Negro
woman says Aunt Lucy Key will wash or do lots of things and never take
a cent of pay for it--ed.) Money is scarce but this generation don't
know how to work. My husband gets relief 'cause he's sick and wore
out. My nephew gives us these rooms to live in. He got money. (We saw
a radio in his room and modern up-to-date furnishings--ed.) He is a
good boy. I'm good to him as I can be. Seems like some folks getting
richer every day, other folks getting worse off every day. Times look
dark that way to me.

"I been in Arkansas eight years. I tries to be friendly wid
everybody."


Interviewer: Bernice Bowden.
Person interviewed: Anna King (c)
Home: 704 West Fifth, Pine Bluff, Ark.
Age: 80


"Yes honey, I was here in slavery times. I'se gittin' old too, honey.
I was nine years old goin' on ten when the war ceasted. I remember
when they was volunteerin'. I remember they said it wasn't goin' to be
nothin' but a breakfus' spell.

"My fust marster was Nichols Lee. You see I was born in slavery
times--and I was sold away from my mother. My mother never did tell us
nothin' 'bout our ages. My white people told me after freedom that I
was 'bout nine or ten.

"When the white chillun come of age they drawed for the colored folks.
Marse Nichols Lee had a girl named Ann and she drawed me. She didn't
keep me no time though, and the man what bought me was named Leo
Andrew Whitley. He went to war and died before the war ceasted. Then I
fell to his brother Jim Whitley. He was my last marster. I was with
him when peace was declared. Yes mam, he was good to me. All my white
folks mighty good to me. Co'se Jim Whitley's wife slap my jaws
sometimes, but she never did take a stick to me.

"Lord honey, its been so long I just can't remember much now. I'se
gittin' old and forgitful. Heap a things I remember and heap a things
slips from me and is gone.

"Well honey, in slavery times, a heap of 'em didn't have good owners.
When they wanted to have church services and keep old marster from
hearin', they'd go out in the woods and turn the wash-pot upside down.
You know that would take up all the sound.

"I remember Adam Heath--he was called the meanest white man. I
remember he bought a boy and you know his first marster was good and
he wasn't used to bein' treated bad.

One day he asked old Adam Heath for a chew of tobacco, so old Adam
whipped him, and the boy ran away. But they caught him and put a bell
on him. Yes mam, that was in slavery times. Honey, I had good owners.
They didn't believe in beatin' their niggers.

"You know my home was in North Carolina. I was bred and born in
Johnson County.

"I remember seein' the soldiers goin' to war, but I never seed no
Yankee soldiers till after freedom.

"When folks heard the Yankees was comin' they run and hide their
stuff. One time they hide the meat in the attic, but the Yankees found
it and loaded it in Everett Whitley's wife's surrey and took it away.
She died just 'fore surrender.

"And I remember 'nother time they went to the smokehouse and got
something to eat and strewed the rest over the yard. Then they went in
the house and jest ramshacked it.

"My second marster never had no wife. He was courtin' a girl, but when
the war come, he volunteered. Then he took sick and died at Manassas
Gap. Yes'm, that's what they told me.

"My furst marster had a whiskey still. Now let me see, he had three
girls and one boy and they each had two slaves apiece. Ann Lee drawed
me and my grandmother.

"No mam, I never did go to school. You better _not_ go to school. You
better not ever be caught with a book in your hand. Some of 'em
slipped off and got a little learnin'. They'd get the old Blue Back
book out. Heap of 'em got a little learnin', but I didn't.

"When I fell to Jim Whitley's wife she kept me right in the house with
her. Yes mam, she was one good mistis to me when I was a child. She
certainly did feed me and clothe me. Yes mam!

"How long I been in Arkansas? Me? Let me see, honey, if I can give you
a guess. I been here about forty years. I remember they come to the
old country (North Carolina) and say, if you come to Arkansas you wont
even have to cook. They say the hogs walkin' round already barbecued.
But you know I knowed better than that.

"We come to John M. Gracie's plantation and some to Dr. Blunson
(Brunson). I remember when we got off the boat Dr. Blunson was sittin'
there and he said "Well, my crowd looks kinda puny and sickly, but I'm
a doctor and I'll save 'em." I stayed there eight years. We had to pay
our transportation which was fifty dollars, but they sure did give you
plenty of somethin' to eat--yes mam!

"No'm my hair ain't much white. My set o'folks don't get gray much,
but I'm old enough to be white. I done a heap a hard work in my life.
I hope clean up new ground and I tells folks I done everything 'cept
Maul rails.

"Lord honey, I don't know chile. I don't know _what_ to think, about
this here younger generation. Now when they raised me up, I took care
of myself and the white folks done took care of me.

"Yes mam, honey, I seed the Ku Klux. I remember in North Carolina when
the Ku Klux got so bad they had to send and get the United States
soldiers. I remember one come and joined in with the Ku Klux till he
found out who the head man was and then he turned 'em up and they
carried 'em to a prison place called Gethsemane. No mam! They never
come back. When they carried you to Gethsemane, you never come back.

"I say the Lord blest me in my old age. Even though I can't see, I set
here and praise the Lord and say, Lord, you abled me to walk and hear.
Yes, honey, I'm sure glad you come. I'm proud you thought that much of
me.

"Good bye, and if you are ever passin' here again, stop and see me."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Anna King
                    704 W. Fifth (rear), Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 82


"I used to 'member lots but you know, my remembrance got short.

"I was bred and born in Johnston County, North Carolina. I was sold
away from my mother but after freedom I got back. I had a brother was
sold just 'fore I was. My mother had two boys and three girls and my
oldest sister was sold.

"And then you know, in slavery times, when the white children got
grown, their parents give 'em so many darkies. My young Missis drawed
me.

"My fust master was such a drinker. Named Lee. Lawd a mercy, I knowed
his fust name but I can't think now. Young Lee, that was it.

"He sold me, and Leo Andrew Whitley bought me. Don't know how
much--all I know is I was sold.

"After freedom I scrambled back to the old plantation and that's the
way I found my mother.

"My last master never married. He had what they called a northern
trotter.

"Wish I was able to get back to the old country and find some of my
kin folks. If they ain't none of the old head livin', the young folks
is. I got oceans of kin folks in Sampson County.

"My husband was a preacher and he come to the old country from this
here Arkansas. He always said he was going to bring me out to this
country. He was always tellin' me 'bout Little Rock and Hot Springs.
So I was anxious to see this country. So after he died and when they
was emigratin' the folks here, I come. I 'member Dr. Blunson counted
us out after we got off the boat and he said, 'Well, my crowd looks
kinda sickly, but I'm a doctor and I'll save you.' Lawd, they
certainly come a heap of 'em. When the train uncoupled at Memphis,
some went to Texas, some to Mississippi, and some to Louisiana and
Arkansas. People hollerin' 'Goodbye' made you feel right sad.

"Some of 'em stayed in Memphis but I wouldn't stay 'cause dat's the
meanest place in the world.

"John M. Gracie had paid out his money for us and I believe in doin'
what's right. That was a plantation as sure as you bawn."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Mose King,
                    Lexa, Arkansas
Age: 81


"I was born in Richmond, Virginia. My master was Ephriam Hester. He
had a wife and little boy. We called her mistress. I forgot their
names. It's been so long ago.

"My parents named Lizzie Johnson and Andrew Kent. I had seven sisters
and there was two of us boys. When mistress died they sold mother and
my eldest sister and divided the money. I don't know her master's name
in Virginia. Mother was a cook at Ephriam Hester's. Sister died soon
as they come 'way from Virginia. I heard her talk like she belong to
Nathan Singleterry in Virginia. They put mother and Andrew Kent
together. After the surrender she married Johnson. I heard her say my
own father was 'cross the river in a free state.

"There was two row of houses on the side of a road a quarter mile long
and that is the place all the slaves lived. Ephriam Hester had one
hundred acres of wheat. Mother was the head loom. He wasn't cruel but
he let the overseers be hard. He said he let the overseers whoop 'em,
that what he hired 'em for. They had a whooping stock. It was a table
out in the open. They moved it about where they was working. They put
the heads and hands and feet in it. I seen a heap of 'em get mighty
bad whoopings. I was glad freedom come on fer that one reason. Long as
he lived we had plenty to eat, plenty to wear. We had meal, hogs,
goat, sheep and cows, molasses, corn hominy, garden stuff. We did have
potatoes. I said garden stuff.

"Ephriam Hester come to a hard fate. A crowd of cavalrymen from
Vicksburg rode up. He was on his porch. He went in the house to his
wife. One of the soldiers retched in his pocket and got something and
throwed it up on top of the house. The house burned up and him and her
burned up in it. The house was surrounded. That took place three miles
this side of Natchez, Mississippi. They took all his fine stock, all
the corn. They hauled it off. They took all the wagons. They sot all
they didn't take on fire and let it burn up. They burnt the gin and
some cotton. They burnt the loom house, the wheat house; they robbed
the smokehouse and burned it. We never got nothing. We come purt nigh
starving after then. After that round we had no use fer the Yankees. I
was learned young two wrongs don't make a right. That was wrong. They
done more wrong than that. I heard about it. We stayed till after
freedom. It was about a year. It was hard times. Seemed longer. We
went to another place after freedom. We never got a chance to get
nothing. Nothing to get there.

"In slavery times they had clog dances from one farm to another.
Paddyrollers run 'em in, give them whoopings. They had big nigger
hounds. They was no more of them after the War. The Ku Klux got to
having trouble. They would put vines across the narrow roads. The
horses run in and fell flat. The Ku Klux had to quit on that account.

"We didn't know exactly when freedom was. I went to school at
Shaffridge, two miles from Clarks store. That was what is Clarksdale,
Mississippi now. He had a store, only store in town. Old man Clark run
it. He was old bachelor and a all right fellow, I reckon. I thought
so. I went to colored teachers five or six months. I learned in the
Blue Back books. I stopped at about 'Baker (?)'.

"I farmed all my life. I got my wife and married her in 1883. We got a
colored preacher, Parson Ward. I had four children. They all dead but
one. I got two lots and a house gone back to the state. I come to see
'bout 'em today. I going to redeem 'em if I can. I made the money to
buy it at the round house. I worked there ten or twelve years. I got
two dollars ninety-eight cents a day. I hates to loose it. I have a
hard time now to live, Miss.

"I votes Republican mostly. I have voted on both sides. I tries to
live like this. When in Rome, do as Romans. I want to be peaceable wid
everybody.

"The present times is hard. I can't get a bit of work. I tries. Work
is hard fer some young folks to get yet.

"I love to be around young folks. Fer as I know they do all right. The
world looks nicer 'an it used to look. All I see wrong, times is
hard."


Interviewer: Zillah Cross Peel
Information given by: Aunt Susie King, Ex-slave.
Residence: Cane Hill, Arkansas. Washington County.
Age: about 93.


Across the Town Branch, in what is dubbed "Tin-cup" lives one of the
oldest ex-slaves in Washington county, "Aunt Susie" King, who was born
at Cane Hill, Arkansas about 1844.

"Aunt Susie" doesn't know just how old she is, but she thinks she is
over ninety, just how much she doesn't know. Perhaps the most accurate
way to get near her age would be go to the county records where one
can find the following bill of sale:

    "State of Arkansas, County of Washington, for and in
    consideration of natural affection that I have for my
    daughter, Rebecca Rich, living in the county aforesaid above
    mentioned, and I do hereby give and bequath unto her one negro
    woman named Sally and her children namely Sam, and Fill, her
    lifetime thence to her children her lawful heirs forever and I
    do warrant and forever defend said negro girl and her children
    against all lawful claims whatsoever.

    July, 1840.                           Tom Hinchea Barker,
    Witness, J. Funkhouser.

                                          Filed for record,
                                          Feb. 16, 1841.

When this bill of sale was read to "Aunt Susie" she said with great
interest,

"Yes'm, yes'm that sure was my Ma and my two brothers, Sam and Fill,
then come a 'nother brother, Allan, and then Jack and then I'm next
then my baby sister Milly Jane. Yes'm we's come 'bout every two
years."

"Yes'm, ole Missy was rich; she had lots of money, lots of lan'. Her
girl, she jes' had one, married John Nunley, Mister Ab, he married
Miss Ann Darnell, Mister Jack he married Miss Milly Holt, and Mister
Calvin he married Miss Lacky Foster. Yes'm they lived all 'round 'bout
us. Some at Rhea's Hill and some at Cane Hill," and to prove the
keenness of this old slave's mind, as well as her accuracy, one need
only to go to the county deed records where in 1849, Rebecca Rich
deeded several 40 acres tracts of land to her sons, James, Calvin,
William Jackson and Absaolum. This same deed record gives the names of
the wives of these sons just as "Aunt Susie" named them. However, Miss
Lacky Foster was "Kelika Foster."

Then Aunt Susie started remembering:

"Yes'm, my mother's name was Sally. She'd belonged to Mister Tom H.
Barker and he gived her to Miss Becky, his daughter. I think of them
all lots of days. I know a heap of folks that some times I forgot.
When the War came, we lived in a big log house. We had a loom room
back of the kitchen. I had a good mother. She wove some. We all wove
mos' all of the blankets and carpets and counterpans and Old Missey
she loved to sit down at the loom and weave some", with a gay chuckle
Aunty Susie said, "then she'd let me weave an' Old Missey she'd say I
takes her work and the loom away from her. I did love to weave, all
them bright colores, blue and red and green and yellow. They made all
the colors in the back yard in a big kettle, my mother, Sally did the
colorin'".

"We had a heap of company. The preacher came a lot of times and when
the War come Ole Missey she say if we all go with her, she'd take us
all to Texas. We's 'fraid of the Yankees; 'fraid they get us.

"We went in wagons. Ole Missey in the carriage. We never took nothin'
but a bed stead for Ole Missey. They was a great drove of we darkies.
Part time we walked, part time we rode. We was on the road a long
time. First place we stopped was Collins County, and stayed awhile I
recollect. We had lots of horses too. Some white folks drove 'long and
offered to take us away from Ole Missey but we wouldn't go. We didn't
want to leave Ole Missey, she's good to us. Oh Lord, it would a nearly
kilt her effen any body'd hit one of her darkies; I'd always stay in
the house and took care of Ole Miss. She was pretty woman, had light
hair. She was kinda punny tho, somethin' matter with her mos' all the
time, headache or toothache or something'."

"Mister Rich went down to the river swimmin' one time I heard, and got
drowned."

"Yes'm, they was good days fo' the War."

"Yes'm we stayed in Texas until Peace was made. We was then at
Sherman, Texas. Peace didn't make no difference with us. We was glad
to be free, and we com'd back to Arkansas with Ole Missey. We didn't
want to live down there. Me and my man, Charlie King, was married
after the War, and we went to live on Mister Jim Moores place. Ole
Miss giv'd my ma a cow. I made my first money in Texas, workin' for a
woman and she giv'd me five dollars."

"Yes'm after Peace the slaves all scattered 'bout."

"The colored folks today lak a whole heap bein' like they was fo' the
War. They's good darkies, and some aint so good." Me and my man had
seven children all dead but two, Bob lives with me. I don't worry
'bout food. We ain't come no ways starvin'. I have all I want to eat.
Bob he works for Missus Wade every mornin' tendin' to her flowers and
afternoons works for him self. She owns this house, lets us live in
it. She's good all right, good woman."

"I like flowers too, but ain't got no water, no more. Water's scarce.
Someone turned off the hydrant."

"I belong to the Baptist church a long while."

"Do you know Gate-eye Fisher?" When I said "yes, I went down to talk
to him last week," she said, "well, law me, Gate-eye ain't no fool.
He's the best cook as ever struck a stove. He married my baby sister,
Milly Jane's child. Harriet Lee Ann, she's my niece. She left him,
said she'd never go back no more to him. She's somewhere over in
Oklahoma."

"And did you see Doc Flowers? Yes'm, I was mos' a mother to him.

"One time my man and me heard a peckin' at the do'. We's eatin'
supper. I went to the do' and there was Doc. He and his step-pa, Ole
Uncle Ike, had a fight and Doc come to us and stayed 'bout three
years. He started cryin'."

"Yes'm my Pa and Ma had belonged to Mister John Barker, before he
giv'd my Ma to Miss Becky, my Pa was a leather worker. He could make
shoes, and boots and slippers."

"Yes'm, Good bye. Come back again honey. Yes'm I'd like a little
snuff--not the sweet kind. It makes my teeth feel better to have
snuff. I ain't got much but snags, and snuff, a little mite helps
them."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: William Kirk
                    1910 W. Sixth Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 84


"I been here ever since 1853--yes ma'm! Cose I 'member the war! I tell
you I've seen them cannon balls goin' up just like a balloon. I wasn't
big enough to work till peace was declared but they had my mammy and
daddy under the lash. One good thing 'bout my white folks, they give
the hands three months' schoolin' every year. My mammy and daddy got
three months' schoolin' in the old country. Some said that was General
Washington's proclamation, but some of 'em wouldn't hear to it. When
peace was declared, some of the niggers had as good education as the
white man. That was cause their owners had 'lowed it to 'em.

"They used to put us in cells under the house so the Yankees couldn't
get us. Old master's name was Sam Kirk and he had overseers and nigger
dogs (bloodhounds) that didn't do nothin' but run them niggers.

"I 'member one time when they say the Yankees was comin' all us
chillun, boys and girls, white and black, got upon the fence and old
master come out and say 'Get in your holes!'

"The war went on four years. Them was turrible times. I don't never
want to see no more war. Them that had plenty, time the regiment went
by they didn't have nothin'. Old mistress had lots a turkeys and hogs
and the Yankees just cleaned 'em out. Didn't have time to pick
'em--just skinned 'em. They had a big camp 'bout as long as from here
to town.

"They burned up the big house as flat as this floor. They wasn't
nothin' left but the chimneys. Oh the Yankees burned up plenty. They
burned Raleigh and they burned Atlanta--that was the southern capital.
I've seen the Yankees go right out in people's fields and make 'em
take the horses out. Then they'd saddle 'em and ride right off.

"General Grant had ten thousand nigger soldiers outside of the
Irishmen and the Dutchmen. I know General Grant looked fearful when he
come by. After surrender he had a corps pass through and notify the
people that the war was over.

"Abraham Lincoln was a war captain. He was a man that believed in
right. He was seven feet four inches high.

"I was born in North Carolina and I come here in 'sixty seven. I
worked too!"


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Betty Krump,
                    Helena, Arkansas
Age: --
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"Mother come to Helena, Arkansas from Lake Charles, Louisiana. I was
born here since freedom. She had twelve children, raised us two. She
jus' raised me en my sister. She lives down the street on the corner.
She was a teacher here in Helena years and years. I married a doctor.
I never had to teach long as he lived, then I was too old. I never
keered 'bout readin' and books. I rather tomboy about. Then I set up
housekeepin'. I don't know nothin' 'bout slavery. I know how they come
here. Two boats named Tyler and Bragg. The Yankees took 'em up and
brought 'em up to their camps to pay them to wait on them. They come.
Before 'mancipation my mammy and daddy owned by the very same old
fellar, Thomas Henry McNeil. He had a big two-story stone house and
big plantation. Mother said she was a field hand. She ploughed. He
treated 'em awful bad. He overworked 'em. Mother said she had to work
when she was pregnant same as other times. She said the Yankees took
the pantry house and cleaned it up. They broke in it. I'm so glad the
Yankees come. They so pretty. I love 'em. Whah me? I can tell 'em by
the way they talk and acts. You ain't none. You don't talk like 'em.
You don't act like 'em. I watched you yeste'd'y. You don't walk like
'em. You act like the rest of these southern women to me.

"Mother said a gang of Yankees came to the quarters to haul the
children off and they said, 'We are going to free you all. Come on.'
She said, 'My husband in the field.' They sent for 'im. He come hard
as he could. They loaded men and all on them two gunboats. The boat
was anchored south of Tom Henry McNeill's plantation. He didn't know
they was gone. When they got here old General Hindman had forty
thousand back here in the hills. They fired in. The Yankees fired! The
Yankees said they was goin' to drive 'em back and they scared 'em out
of here and give folks that brought in them gunboat houses to live in.
Mammy went to helping the Yankees. They paid her. That was 'fore
freedom. I loves the Yankees. General Hindman's house was tore down up
there to build that schoolhouse (high school). The Yankees said they
was goin' to water their horses in the Mississippi River by twelve
o'clock or take hell. I know my mammy and daddy wasn't skeered 'cause
the Yankees taking keer of 'em and they was the ones had the cannons
and gunboats too. I jus' love the Yankees fer freeing us. They run
white folks outer the houses and put colored folks in 'em. Yankees had
tents here. They fed the colored folks till little after 'mancipation.
When the Yankees went off they been left to root hog er die. White
folks been free all der lives. They got no need to be poor. I went to
school to white teachers. They left here, folks didn't do 'em right.
They set 'em off to theirselves. Wouldn't keep 'em, wouldn't walk
'bout wid 'em. They wouldn't talk to 'em. The Yankees sont 'em down
here to egercate us up wid you white folks. Colored folks do best
anyhow wid black folks' children. I went to Miss Carted and to Mrs.
Mason. They was a gang of 'em. They bo'ded at the hotel, one of the
hotels kept 'em all. They stayed 'bout to theirselves. 'Course the
white folks had schools, their own schools.

"Ku Klux--They dressed up and come in at night, beat up the men 'bout
here in Helena. Mammy washed and ironed here in Helena till she died.
I never did do much of that kinder work. I been housekeeping purty
near all my days.

"Mammy was Fannie Thompson in Richmond, Virginia. She was took to New
Orleans on a boat and sold. Sold in New Orleans. She took up wid
Edmond Clark. Long as you been going to school don't you know folks
didn't have no marryin' in slavery times? I knowed that. They never
did marry and lived together all their lives. Preacher married
me--colored preacher. My daddy, Edmond Clark, said McNeil got him at
Kentucky.

"I done told you 'nough. Now what are you going to give me? The
gover'ment got so many folks doin' so much you can't tell what they
after. Wish I was one of 'em.

"The present times is tough. We ain't had no good times since dem
banks broke her. Three of 'em. Folks can't get no credit. Times ain't
lack dey used to be. No use talking 'bout this young generation. One
day I come in my house from out of my flower garden. I fell to sleep
an' I had $17.50 in little glass on the table to pay my insurance. It
was gone when I got up. I put it in there when I lay down. I know it
was there. It was broad open daytime. Folks steals and drinks whiskey
and lives from hand to mouth now all the time. I sports my own self.
Ain't nobody give me nothin' since the day I come here. I rents my
houses and sells flowers."


Interviewer's Comment

This old woman lives in among the white population and rents the house
next to her own to a white family. The lady down at the corner store
said she tells white people, the younger ones, to call her Mrs. Krump.
She didn't pull that on me. She once told this white lady storekeeper
to call her Mrs. No one told me about her, because the lady said they
all know she is impudent talking. She is old, black, wealthy, and
arrogant. I passed her house and spied her.


FOLKLORE SUBJECTS
[HW: Ex-slave, Texarkans Dist.]
Name of Interviewer: Mrs. W. M. Ball
Subject: Folk Tales.

Information given by: Preston Kyles
Place of Residence: 800 Block. Laurel St., Texarkana, Ark.
Occupation: Minister. (Age) 81
[TR: Personal information moved from bottom of form.]


One of the favorite folk songs sung to the children of a half century
ago was "Run Nigger Run, or the Patty Roll Will Get You." Few of the
children of today have ever heard this humorous ditty, and would,
perhaps, be ignorant of its meaning. To the errant negro youths of
slave times, however, this tune had a significant, and sometimes
tragic, meaning. The "patty rolls" were guards hired by the
plantations to keep the slaves from running away. The following story
is told by an ex-slave:

"When I wuz a boy, dere wuz lotsa Indians livin' about six miles frum
de plantation on which I wuz a slave. De Indians allus held a big
dance ever' few months, an' all de niggers would try to attend. On one
ob dese osten'tious occasions about 50 of us niggers conceived de idea
of goin', without gettin' permits frum de Mahster. As soon as it gets
dark, we quietly slips outen de quarters, one by one, so as not to
disturb de guards. Arrivin' at de dance, we jined de festivities wid a
will. Late dat nite one ob de boys wuz goin' down to de spring fo' to
get a drink ob water when he notice somethin' movin' in de bushes.
Gettin' up closah, he look' again when--Lawd hab mersy! Patty rollers!
A whole bunch ob 'em! Breathless, de nigger comes rushin' back, and
broke de sad news. Dem niggers wuz scared 'mos' to death, 'cause dey
knew it would mean 100 lashes for evah las' one ob dem effen dey got
caught. After a hasty consultation, Sammy, de leader, suggested a plan
which wuz agreed on. Goin' into de woods, we cuts several pieces of
grape vine, and stretches it across de pathway, where we knowed de
patty rollers would hab to come, tien' it to trees on both sides. One
ob de niggers den starts down de trail whistlin' so as to 'tract de
patty rollers 'tention, which he sho did, fo' here dey all cum,
runnin' jus' as hard as dey could to keep dem niggers frum gettin'
away. As de patty rollers hit de grape vine, stretched across de
trail, dey jus' piles up in one big heap. While all dis commotion wuz
goin' on, us niggers makes fo' de cotton fiel' nearby, and wends our
way home. We hadn' no more'n got in bed, when de mahster begin
knockin' on de door. "Jim", he yell, "Jim, open up de doah!" Jim gets
up, and opens de doah, an de mahster, wid several more men, comes in
de house. "Wheres all de niggers?" he asks. "Dey's all heah," Jim
says. De boss walks slowly through de house, countin' de niggers, an'
sho' nuf dey wuz all dere. "Mus' hab been Jim Dixon's negroes," he
says finally.

"Yes, suh, Cap'n, dey wuz a lot happen in dem times dat de mahsters
didn't know nuthin' about."


FOLKLORE SUBJECTS
[HW: Ex-slave, Texarkana Dist., 9/5/31]
Name of Interviewer: Cecil Copeland
Subject: Apparition and Will-o'-the-Wisp.
Story--Information:

Information given by: Preston Kyles / Occupation: Minister
Place of Residence: 800 Block, Laurel St., Texarkana, Ark. (Age) 81
[TR: Personal information moved from bottom of form.]


The negro race is peculiarly susceptible to hallucinations. Most any
old negro can recall having had several experiences with "de spirits."
Some of these apparitions were doubtless real, as the citizens during
Reconstruction Days employed various methods in keeping the negro in
subjection. The organizers of the Ku Klux Klan, shortly after the
Civil War, recognized and capitalized on the superstitious nature of
the negro. This weakness in their character doubtless prevented much
bloodshed during this hectic period.

The following is a story as told by a venerable ex-slave in regard to
the "spirits":

"One day, when I wuz a young man, me an' a nigger, by de name ov
Henry, wuz huntin' in an' old field. In dem days bear, deer, turkey,
and squirrels wuz plentiful an' 'twant long befo' we had kilt all we
could carry. As we wuz startin' home some monstrous thing riz up right
smack dab in front ov us, not more'n 100 feet away. I asked Henry:
"Black Boy, does yo' see whut I see?" an' Henry say, "Nigger I hopes
yo' don't see whut I see, 'cause dey ain't no such man." But dere it
stood, wid its sleeves gently flappin' in de wind. Ovah 8 feet tall,
it wuz, an' all dressed in white. I yells at it, "Whut does yo' want?"
but it didn't say nuthin'. I yells some mo' but it jus' stands there,
not movin' a finger. Grabbin' de gun, I takes careful aim an' cracks
down on 'em, but still he don't move. Henry, thinkin' maybe I wuz too
scared to shoot straight, say: "Nigger, gib me dat gun!" I gibs Henry
de gun but it don't take but one shot to convince him dat he ain't
shootin' at any mortal bein'. Throwin' down de gun, Henry say,
"Nigger, lets get away frum dis place," which it sho' didn't take us
long to do."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Susa Lagrone
                    25th and Texas Streets, Pine Bluff, Ark.
Age: 79


"I don't know exactly how old I am but I know I was here at surrender.
I was born in Mississippi. I seen the soldiers after they come home.
They camped right there at our gate.

"I think--now I don't know, but I think I was bout six or seven when
they surrendered. I went down to the gate with Miss Sally and the
children. Old mistress' name was Sally Stanton. She was a widow woman.

"I learned to knit durin' the war. They'd give me a task to do, so
much to do a day, and then I'd have all evenin' to play.

"My father was a mechanic. He laid brick and plaster. You know in them
days they plastered the houses. He belonged to old man Frank Scott. He
was such a good worker Mr. Scott would give him all the work he could
after he was free. That was in Mississippi.

"I went to school right smart after freedom. Fore freedom the white
folks learned me my ABC's. My mistress was good and kind to me.

"When we went down to the gate to see the soldiers, I heard Miss Judy
say (she was old mistress' sister), I heard her say, 'Well, you let em
beat you' and started cryin'. I cried too and mama said, 'What you
cryin' for?' I said, 'Miss Judy's cryin'.' Mama said, 'You fool, you
is _free_!' I didn't know what freedom was, but I know the soldiers
did a lot of devilment. Had guards but they just run over them
guards.

"I think Abraham Lincoln wanted to give the people some land after
they was free, but they didn't give em nothin'--just turned em loose.

"Course we ought to be free--you know privilege is worth everything.

"After surrender my mother stayed with old mistress till next year.
She thought there wasn't nobody like my mother. When she got sick old
mistress come six miles every day to see her and brought her things
till she died.

"My mother learned to weave and spin and after we was free the white
folks give her the loom. I know I made a many a yard of cloth after
surrender. My mother was a seamstress and she learned me how to sew.

"I never did hire out--just worked at home. My mother had six boys and
six girls and they're all dead but me and my sister.

"Somebody told me I was twenty-five when I married. Had three
children--all livin'.

"I used to see the white folks lookin' at a map to see where the
soldiers was fightin' and I used to wonder how they could tell just
lookin' at that paper.

"Old mistress said after freedom, 'Now, Susa, I don't want you to
suffer for nothin.' I used to go up there and stay for weeks at a
time.

"I just got down with rheumatism here bout three or four years ago,
and you know it goes hard with me--I always been used to workin' all
my life."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Barney A. Laird
                    Brinkley, (near Moroe) Arkansas
Age: 79


"I was born in Pinola County, Mississippi. I remembers one time
soldiers come by on all black horses and had a bundle on one shoulder
strapped around under the other arm. They wore blue jackets. Their
horses was trained so they marched good as soldiers. They camped not
far from our house. There was a long string of soldiers. It took them
a long time to go by.

"One time they had a dinner in a sorter grove on a neighbor's farm.
All us children went up there to see if they left anything. We et up
the scraps. I say it was good eating. The fust Yankee crackers I ever
et was there that day. They was fine for a fact.

"Our owner was Dr. Laird. When I come to know anything his wife was
dead but his married daughter lived with him. Her husband's name was
John Balentine. My parents worked in the field and I stayed up at the
house with my old grandpa and grandma. Their house was close to the
white folks. Our houses was about on the farm. Some of the houses was
pole houses, some hewed out. The fireplace in our house burned long
wood and the room what had the fireplace was a great big room. We had
shutters at the windows. The houses was open but pretty stout and
good. We had plenty wood.

"My parents both lived on the same farm. They had seven children. My
mother's name was Caroline and my father's name was Ware A. Laird.
Mother never told us if she was ever sold. Father never was sold. He
never talked much.

"One thing I know is: My wife's pa was sold, Squire Lester, so him and
Adeline could be on the same farm. Them my wife's parents. They never
put him on no block, jes' told him to get his belongings and where to
go. I never seen nobody sold.

"Dr. Laird was good to his darkies. My whole family stayed on his
place till he died. I don't know how long. I don't know if I ever
knowed when freedom come on. We had a hard time durin' the Civil War.
That why I hate to hear about war. The soldiers tore down houses,
burnt houses. They burnt up Dr. Laird's gin. I think it burned some
cotton. They tore down fences and hauled em off to make fires at their
camps. That let the stock out what they maybe did leave an old snag.
Fust cussin' I ever heard done was one of them soldiers. I don't know
what about but he was going at it. I stopped to hear what he saying. I
never heard nobody cuss so much over nothing as ever I found out. They
had cleaned us out. We didn't have much to eat nor wear then. We did
have foe then from what they told us. The old folks got took care of.
That don't happen no more.

"I never seen a Ku Klux. I heard tell of them all my life.

"Dr. Laird was old man and John Balentine was a peaceable man. He
wanted his farm run peaceable. He was kind as could be.

"I been farming all my life. I still be doing it. I do all I can. It
is the young boys' place to take the plough handle--the making a man
out of their young strength. They don't want to do it. Some do and
some won't stay on the farm. Go to town is the cry. I got a wife and
two boys. They got families. They are on the farm. I tell them to
stay.

"I get help from the Welfare if I'm able to come get what they give
me.

"I used to pay my taxes and vote. Now if I have a dollar I have to buy
something to eat. Us darkies satisfied with the best the white folks
can do. Darkies good workers but poor managers is been the way I seen
it all my life. One thing we don't want no wars."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Arey Lamar
                    612 E. 14th Avenue, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 78
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"Yes'm, I was born in slavery days but I don't know what day. But you
know I been hustlin' 'round here a long time.

"My mother said I was a great big girl when surrender come.

"I was born in Greenville, Mississippi but I was raised down at Lake
Dick.

"I was a servant in Captain Will Nichols' house. I got a cup here now
that was Captain Nichols' cup. Now that was away back there. That's a
slavery time cup. After the handle got broke my mother used it for her
coffee cup.

"My mother's name was Jane Condray. After everything was free, a lot
of us emigrated from the old country to Arkansas. When we come here we
come through Memphis and I know I saw a pair of red shoes and cried
for mama to buy 'em for me, but she wouldn't do it.

"After I was grown and livin' in Little Rock, I bought me a pair of
red shoes. I know I wore 'em once and I got ashamed of 'em and blacked
'em.

"My brother run away when they was goin' to have that Baxter-Brooks
War and ain't been seen since.

"I was the oldest girl and never did get a education, and I hate it. I
learned to work though.

"I don't know 'bout this younger generation. It looks like they're
puttin' the old folks in the background. But I think it's the old
christian people is holdin' the world together today."


Name of Interviewer: Irene Robertson.
Person interviewed: Solomon Lambert,
                    Holly Grove, Ark., R.F.D.
Age: 89
Subject: EX-SLAVERY
Story:


"My parents belong to Jordon and Judy Lambert. They (the Jordon
family) had a big family. They never was sold. I heard 'em say that.
They hired their slaves out. Some was hired fer a year. From New Year
day to next New Year day. That was a busy day. That was the day to set
in workin' overseers and ridin' bosses set in on New Year day. My
parents' name was Fannie and Ben Lambert. They had eight children.

"How did they marry? They say they jump the broomstick together! But
they had brush brooms so I reckon that whut they jumped. Think the
moster and mistress jes havin' a little fun outen it then. The brooms
the sweep the floor was sage grass cured like hay. It grows four or
five feet tall. They wrap it with string and use that for a handle.
(Illustration-- [TR: not finished] The way they married the man ask
his moster then ask her moster. If they agree it be all right. One of
'em would 'nounce it 'fore all the rest of the folks up at the house
and some times they have ale and cake. If the man want a girl and ther
be another man on that place wanted a wife the mosters would swop the
women mostly. Then one announce they married. That what they call a
double weddin'. Some got passes go see their wife and family 'bout
every Sunday and some other times like Fourth er July. They have a
week ob rest when they lay by the crops and have some time not so busy
to visit Christmas.

"I never seen no Ku Klux. There was Jay Hawkers. They was folks on
neither side jess goin' round, robbin' and stealin', money, silver,
stock or anything else they wanted. We had a prutty good time we have
all the hands on our place at some house and dance. We made our music.
Music is natur'l wid our color. They most all had a juice (Jew's)
harp. They make the fiddle and banjo. White folks had big times too.
They had mo big gatherins than they have now. They send me to Indian
Bay once or twice a week to get the mail. I had no money. They give my
father little money long and give him some 'bout Christmas. White
folks send their darkies wid a order to buy things. I never seen a big
town till I started on that run to Texas. They took the men 450 miles
to Indian Nation to make a crop. We went in May and came back in
October. They hired us out. Mr. Jo Lambert and Mr. Beasley took us.
One of 'em come back and got us. That kept us from goin' to war. They
left the women, children and old men, too old fer war.

"How'd I know 'bout war? That was the big thing they talk 'bout. See
'em. The first I seen was when I was shuckin' corn at the corn pin
(crib) a man come up in gray clothes. (He was a spy). The way he talk
you think he a southern man 'cept his speech was hard and short. I
noticed that to begin wid. They thought other rebels in the corn pin
but they wasn't. Wasn't nobody out there but me. Then here come a man
in blue uniform. After while here come the regiment. It did scare me.
Bob and Tom (white boys) Lambert gone to war then. They fooled round a
while then they galloped off. I show was glad when the last man rid
off!

Moster Lambert then hid the slaves in the bottoms. We carried
provisions and they sent more'long. We stay two or three days or a
week when they hear a regiment comin' through or hear 'bout a scoutin
gang comin' through. They would come one road and go back another
road. We didn't care if they hid us. We hear the guns. We didn't
wanter go down there. That was white man's war. In 1862 and 1863 they
slipped off every man and one woman to Helena. I was yokin' up oxen.
Man come up in rebel clothes. He was a spy. I thought I was gone then
but and a guard whut I didn't see till he left went on. I dodged round
till one day I had to get off to mill. The Yankees run up on me and
took me on. I was fifteen years old. I was mustered in August and let
out in 1864 when it was over. I was in the Yankee army 14 months. They
told me when I left I made a good soldier. I was with the standing
army at Helena. They had a battle before I went in. I heard them say.
You could tell that from the roar and cannons. They had it when I was
in Texas. I wasn't in a battle. The Yankees begin to get slim then
they made the darkies fill up and put them in front. I heard 'em say
they had one mighty big battle at Helena. I had to drill and guard the
camps and guard at the pickets (roads into Helena). They never let me
go scoutin'. I walked home from the army. I was glad to get out. I
expected to get shot 'bout all the time. I aint seen but mighty little
difference since freedom. I went back and stayed 45 years on the
Lambert place. I moved to Duncan. Moster died foe the Civil War. Some
men raised dogs-hounds. If something got wrong they go get the dogs
and use 'em. If some of the slaves try to run off they hunt them with
the dogs. It was a big loss when a hand run off they couldn't ford
that thing. They whoop 'em mostly fer stealin'. They trust 'em in
everything then they whoop 'em if they steal. They know it wrong.
Course they did. The worse thing I ever seen in slavery was when we
went to Texas we camped close to Camden. Camden, Arkansas! On the way
down there we passed by a big house, some kind. I seen mighty little
of it but a big yard was pailened in. It was tall and fixed so they
couldn't get out. They opened the big gate and let us see. It was full
of darkies. All sizes. All ages. That was a _Nigger Trader Yard_ the
worst thing I ever seen or heard tell of in my life. I heard 'em say
they would cry 'em off certain times but you could buy one or two any
time jes by agreement. I nearly fell out wid slavery then. I studied
'bout that heap since then. I never seen no cruelty if a man work and
do right on my moster's place he be honored by both black and white.
Foe moster died I was 9 year old, I heard him say I valued at $900.00.
I never was sold.

"When I was small I minded the calves when they milk, pick up chips to
dry fer to start fires, then I picked up nuts, helped feed the stock,
learned all I could how to do things 'bout the place. We thought we
owned the place. I was happy as a bird. I didn't know no better than
it was mine. All the home I ever knowed. I tell you it was a good
home. Good as ever had since. It was thiser way yo mama's home is your
home. Well my moster's home was my home like dat.

"We et up at the house in the kitchen. We eat at the darkey houses. It
make no diffurence--one house clean as the other. It haft to be so.
They would whoop you foe your nasty habits quick as anything and
quicker. Had plenty clothes and plenty to eat. Folk's clothes made
outer more lastin' cloth than now. They last longer and didn't always
be gettin' more new ones. They washed down at the spring. The little
darkies get in (tubs) soon as they hang out the clothes on the ropes
and bushes. The suds be warm, little darkies race to get washed. Folks
raced to get through jobs then and have fun all time.

"Foe I jined the Yankees I had hoed and I had picked cotton. Moster
Lambert didn't work the little darkies hard to to stunt them. See how
big I am? I been well cared fur and done a sight er work if it piled
up so it could be seen.

(Solomon Lambert is a large well proportioned negro.) In 1870 the
railroad come in here by Holly Grove. That the first I ever seen. The
first cars. They was small.

"I never knowd I oughter recollect what all they talked but she said
they both (mother and father) come from Kentucky to Tennessee, then to
Arkansas in wagons and on boats too I recken. The Lamberts brought
them from Kentucky. For show I can't tell you no more 'bout them. I
heard 'em say they landed at the Bay (Indian Bay).

"Fine reports went out if you jin the army whut all you would get. I
didn't want to be there. I know whut I get soon as ever I got way from
them. Course I was goin' back. I had no other place to go. The
government give out rations at Indian Bay after the war. I didn't need
none. I got plenty to eat. Two or three of us colored folks paid Mr.
Lowe $1.00 a month to teach us at night. We learned to read and
calculate better. I learned to write. We stuck to it right smart
while.

"I been married twice. Joe Yancey (white) married me to my first wife
at the white folks house. The last time Joe Lambert (white) married me
in the church. I had 2 boys they dead now and 1 girl. She is living.

During slavery I had a cart I drove a little mule to. I took a barrel
of water to the field. I got it at the well. I put it close by in the
shade of a tree. Trees was plentiful! Then I took the breakfast and
dinner in my cart. I done whatever come to my lot in Indian Nation.
After the war I made a plowhand. "_Say there_, _from 1864 to 1937 Sol
Lambert farmed._" Course I hauled and cut wood, but my job is farmin'.
I share croppe. I worked fer 1/3 and 1/4 and I have rented. Farmin' is
my talent. That whar all the darkey belong. He is made so. He can
stand the sun and he needs meat to eat. That is where the meat grows.

"I got chickens and a garden. I didn't get the pigs I spoke fer. I got
a fine cow. I got a house--10-1/2 acres of ground. That is all I can
look after. I caint get 'bout much. I rid on a wagon (to town) my mare
is sick I wouldn't work her. I got a buggy. Good nough fer my ridin' I
don't come to town much. I never did.

I get a Federal soldier's pension. I tell you 'bout it. White folks
tole me 'bout it and hope me see 'bout gettin' it. I'm mighty proud of
it. It is a good support for me in my old helpless days. I'm mighty
thankful for it. I'm glad you sent me word to come here I love to help
folks. They so good to me.

"I vote a Republican ticket. I don't vote. I did vote when I was 21
years old. It was stylish then and I voted some since then along. I
don't bother with votin' and I don't know nuthin 'bout how it is done
now. I tried to run my farm and let them hired run the governmint. I
knowed my job like he knowed his job.

I come back to tell you one other thing. My Captain was Edward
Boncrow.

"I told you all I know 'bout slavery less you ask me 'bout somethin' I
might answer: We ask if we could go to white church and they tell us
they wanted certain ones to go today so they could fix up. It was
after the war new churches and schools sprung up. Not fast then.

Prices of slaves run from $1600 to $2000 fer grown to middle age. Old
ones sold low, so did young ones. $1600 was a slow bid. That is whut I
heard.


Name of Interviewer: Martin-Barker
Subject: Ex-Slave
Story--Information (If not enough space on this page add page)

This information given by: Frank Larkin
Place of Residence: RFD #1--Bx. 73
Age --
[TR: Personal information moved from bottom of form.]


I was born a slave, my owner was Mr. Rhodes of Virginia. On a large
plantation, my white folks gave a big to do, and served wine. Had corn
shuckings. Swapped help around harvesting time. I was sold when 6 or 7
years old. Sold to highest bidder. First marster gave my mother to his
white daughter and let her keep me.

I was raised as a house boy. I was always a mean boy. When I was sold
I split another boys head open with an axe. Then I runned off. They
caught me with blood hounds. My master whipped me with a cowhide whip.
He made me take my clothes off and tied me to a tree. He would use the
whip and then take a drink out of a jug and rest awhile, then he would
whip me again.

Sometimes we would set up until midnight pickin' wool. I would get so
sleepy, couldn't hardly pick de wool.

I hung up my stocking at Christmas to get gifts.

When we left de plantation, we had to get a pass to go from one
plantation to another.

We went to church, sat on de back seat of the white folks church. It
was a Baptist. Baptized in pool. White preacher said: "Obey your
master."

When I came to Arkanansas, I was sold to Mr. Larkin.


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Frank Larkin
                    1126 W. Second Avenue, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 77


"Yes ma'm, I was born in slavery times, right about 1860. I was bred
and born in Virginia--belonged to a man named Rhodes. When I was a
little fellow, me and my mother was sold separate. My mother was sent
to Texas and a man named Larkin bought me.

"I member when people was put upon the block and sold. Man and wife
might go together and might not. Yes ma'm, they sho did separate
mother and childen.

"Take a little chile, they would be worth a thousand dollars. Why old
master would just go crazy over a little boy. They knowed what they
would be worth when they was grown, and then they kept em busy.

"I can't remember no big sight in Virginia but I remember when the
hounds would run em. Some of the colored folks had mighty rough
owners.

"I remember when the Yankees come and took the best hoss my old boss
had and left old crippled hoss with the foot evil.

"And they'd get up in a tree with a spyglass and find where old boss
had his cotton hid, come down and go straight and burn it and the corn
crib and take what meat they wanted and then burn the smoke house.
Yes'm, I remember all that. I tell you them Yankees was mean. Used to
shake old mistress and try to make her tell where the money was hid.
If you had a fat cow, just shoot her down and cook what they wanted.
My old boss went to the bottoms and hid. Tried to make old mistress
tell where he was.

"Not all the old bosses was alike. Some fed good and some didn't. But
they clothed em good--heavy cloth. Old man Larkin was pretty good man.
We got biscuits every Sunday morning, other times got shorts. People
was really healthier then.

"I was brought up to work. The biggest trainin' we got was the boss
told us to go there and come here and we learned to do as we was told.
People worked in them days. A deal of em that won't work now.

"During slavery days, colored folks had to go to the same church as
the white folks and sit in the back.

"My father died a long time ago. I don't remember anything bout him
and I never did see my mother any more after she was sold.

"After the war, old boss brought me to Arkansas when I was bout twelve
years old. Biggest education I got, sit down with my old boss and he'd
make me learn the alphabet. In those times they used the old Blue Back
Speller.

"After we come to Arkansas I worked a great deal on the farm.
Farmin'--that was my trade. I staid with him four or five years. He
paid me for my work.

"Well, I hope we'll never have another war, we don't need it.

"I never had trouble votin' but one time. They was havin' a big row
between the parties and didn't want us to vote unless we voted
democratic, but I voted all right. I believe every citizen ought to
have the right to vote. I believe in people havin' the right what
belongs to em.

"I'm the father of thirteen childen by one woman--seven living
some_where_, but they ain't no service to me.

"Younger people not takin' time to study things. They get a little
education and think they can do anything and get by with it. And
there's a lot of em down here on this Cummins farm now."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Frank Larkin
                    618 E. Fifteenth, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 85


"I was somewhere 'bout twelve years old when the Civil War ended. I
was the carriage driver, fire maker, and worked in the field some.

"I was bred and born in Virginia and I was sold; I was sold. My first
old boss was a Rhodes and he sold me to a man named Larkin. See, we
had to take our names from our boss. Me and my mother both was sold. I
was somewhere between seven and eight years old.

"Then old boss give my mother to his daughter and she carried her to
Texas and he kept me. Never have seen her since.

"He was good to me sometimes but he worked us night and day. Had a
pile of wool as big as this room and we had to pick it and card it
'fore we went to bed. Old boss was sittin' right there by us. Oh,
yes'm.

"Old boss was better to me than old missis. She'd want to whip me and
he'd say he'd do it; and he'd take me down to the quarters and have a
cow-hide whip and he would whip a tree and say, 'Now you holler like
I'm whippin' you.' I'd just be a bawlin' too I'm tellin' you but he
never hit me nary a lick.

"All the chillun, when they was clearin' up new ground, had to pick up
brush and pile it up. Ever'body knowed how much he had to do. Ever'
woman knowed how much she had to weave. They made ever'thing--shoes
and all.

"Them Yankees sure did bad--burned up the cotton and the corn. I seen
one of 'em get up in a tree and take his spyglass and look all
around; directly he'd come down and went just as straight to that
cotton as a bird to its nest. Oh, yes ma'am, they burned up
everything. I was a little scared of 'em but they said they wasn't
goin' to hurt us. Old master had done left home and gone to the woods.
It was enough to scare you--all them guns stacked up and bayonets that
long and just as keen. Come in and have old missis cook for 'em.
Sometimes they'd go and leave lots to eat for the colored folks and
maybe give 'em a blanket. Wouldn't give old missis anything; try to
make her tell where the money was though.

"When they said Vicksburg was captured, old master come out hollerin'
and cryin' and said they taken Vicksburg and we was free. Some of 'em
stayed and some of 'em left. Me and my grandma and my aunt stayed
there after we was freed 'bout two years. They took care of me; I was
raised motherless.

"I farmed all my life. Never done public work two weeks in my life.
Don't know what it is.

"Old master had them blue back spellers and 'fore freedom sometimes
he'd make us learn our ABC's.

"And he'd let you go to church too. He'd ask if you got 'ligion and
say, 'Now, when the preacher ask you, go up and give him your hand and
then go to the back.' In them days, didn't have any but the white
folks' church. But I was pretty rough in them days and I didn't j'ine.

"But I tell you, you'd better not leave the plantation without a pass
or them paddyrollers would make you shout. If they kotch you and you
didn't have a pass, a whippin' took place right there.

"Oh Lord, that's been a long time. I sits here sometimes and looks
back and think it's been a long time, but I'm still livin'.

"I've always tried to keep out of trouble. 'Co'se I've had some pretty
tough times. I ain't never been 'rested fer nothin'. I ain't never
been inside of a jail house. I've had some kin folks in there though.

"I've been a preacher forty years. Don't preach much now. My lungs
done got decayed and I can't hold up. Some people thinks preachin' is
an easy thing but it's not.

"Prettiest thing I ever saw when the Yankees was travelin' was the
drums and kettledrums and them horses. It was the prettiest sight I
ever saw. Them horses knowed their business, too. You couldn't go up
to 'em either. They had gold bits in their mouths and looked like
their bridles was covered with gold. And Yankees sittin' up there with
a sword.

"Old boss had a fine saddle horse and you know the Yankees had a old
horse with the footevil and you know they turned him loose and took
old boss's saddle horse. He didn't know it though; he was in the
woods.

"I believe there is people that can give you good luck. I know a woman
that told me that I was goin' to have some good luck and it worked
just like she said. She told us I would be the onliest man on the
place that would pay out my mule and sure 'nough I was. I cleared
forty dollars outside my mule and my corn. She said I was born to be
lucky. Told me they would be lots of people work agin me but it
wouldn't do no good."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: William Lattimore
                    606 West Pullen Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 78


"Yes'm I was a slave--I was born in 1859 in Mississippi. During the
war I wasn't grown but I can remember when the Yankee soldiers come to
Canton, Mississippi. We was sittin' out in the yard and the white
folks was on the porch when they was bombardin' Jackson. We could hear
the cannons. The white people said the Yankees was tryin' to whip the
rebellion and set the niggers free. When they got done I didn't know
what had happened but I remember the colored people packed up and we
all went to Vicksburg. My father ran off and jined the Yankee army. He
was in Colonel Zeigler's regiment in the infantry. I knowed General
Grant when I seed him. I know when Abraham Lincoln died the soldiers
(Yankees) all wore that black band around their arms.

"After my father was mustered out we went to Warren County,
Mississippi to live. He worked on the halves with a schoolteacher
named Mr. Hannum. He said he was my godfather.

"One time after the war Mr. Lattimore came and wanted my father to
live with him but I didn't want him to because before the surrender
old master whipped my father over the head with a walking stick 'cause
he stayed too long and I was afraid he would whip him again.

"'Did you ever vote?' Me? Yes ma'm I voted. I don't remember who I
voted for first--my 'membrance don't serve me--I ain't got that fresh
enough in my memory. I served eight years as Justice of the Peace
after I come to Arkansas. I remember one time they put one colored man
in office and I said that's pluckin' before it is ripe. We elected a
colored sheriff in Warren County once. The white men went on his bond,
but after awhile the Ku Klux compelled them to get off and then he
couldn't make bond. He appealed to the citizens to let him stay in
office without bond but they wouldn't do it. When a man is trying to
get elected they promise a lot of things but afterwards they is just
like a duck--they swim off on the other side.

"I went to school after freedom and kept a goin' till I was married. I
was a school director when I was eighteen. I didn't have any children
and the superintendent who was very rigid and strict said 'Boy you is
not even a patron of the school.' But he let me serve. I used to visit
the school 'bout twice a week and if the teacher was not doin' right,
I sure did lift my voice against it.

"I lived in Chicot County when I first come to Arkansas and when I
moved to Jefferson County, Judge Harry E. Cook sent my reputation up
here. I ain't never peeped into a jailhouse or had handcuffs on these
hands.

"We've got to do something 'bout this younger generation. You never
saw anything sicker. They is degenerating.

"I hold up my right hand, swear to uphold the Constitution and
preserve the flag and I don't think justice is being done when they
won't let the colored folks vote. We'd like to harmonize things here.
God made us all and said 'You is my chillun.'"


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Bessie Lawsom,
                    Helena, Arkansas
Age: 76
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"I was born in Georgia. My mama was brought from Virginia to one of
the Carolina states, then to Georgia. She was sold twice. I don't
recollect but one of her masters. I heard her speak of Master
Bracknell. His wife, now I remember her well. She nursed me. I was
sickly and they needed her to work in the crop so bad. She done had a
baby leetle older than I was, so I nursed one breast and Jim the
other. She raised me and Jim together. Mama was name Sallie and papa
Mathew Bracknell. They called him Mat Bracknell. I don't know my
master's name. They had other children.

"Me and Jim dug wells out in the yard and buried all the little ducks
and chickens and made graves. We had a regular burying ground we made.
They treated us pretty good as fur as I knowed. I never heard mama
complain. She lived till I was forty years old. Papa died a few years
after freedom. He had typhoid fever. He was great to fish. I believe
now he got some bad water to drink out fishing. There was six of us
and three half children. I'm the onliest one living as I knows of. One
sister died in 1923 in Atlanta. She come to see me. She lived with big
rich folks there. She was a white man's girl. She never had so much
bad luck as we dark skin children the way it was. My papa had to go to
war with some of Master Bracknell's kin folks, maybe his wife's kin
folks, and they took him to wait on them at the battle-fields. Some
soldiers camped by at the last of the war. They stole her out. She
went to take something to a sick widow woman for old mistress. She
never got back for a week. She said she was so scared and one day when
her man, the man that claimed her, went off on a scout trip she asked
a man, seemed to be a big boss, could she go to that thicket and get
some black gum toothbrushes. He let her ride a little old broken down
horse out there. She had a bridle but she was bare back. She come home
through the pasture and one of the colored boys took the horse back
nearly to the camps and turned him loose. 'Fo'e my own papa got back
she had a white chile. Master Bracknell was proud of her. Papa didn't
make no difference in her and his children. After the War he bought a
whole bolt of cloth when he went to town. Mama would make us all a
dress alike. The Yankees whooped mama at their camp. She said she was
afraid to try to get away and that come in her mind. Old mistress
thought that widow woman was keeping her to wait on her and take care
of her small children. She wasn't uneasy and they took care of me.

"I don't recollect freedom. I heard mama say a drove come by and ask
her to come go to Atlanta; they said Yankees give 'em Atlanta. She
said she knowed if she went off papa wouldn't know where she was. She
told 'em she had two young children she couldn't leave. They went on.
She told old mistress and she said she done right not to go.

"The Yankees stole mama's feather bed. Old mistress had great big high
feather beds and big pillows. Mama had a bed in a shed room open out
on the back piazza. They put them big beds across their horses and
some took pillows and down the road they went. It was cold and the
ground froze. They made cotton beds then and the Yankees done got all
the geese and chickens. They nearly starved. The Yankees took all the
cows and stock.

"Master Bracknell was cripple. He had a store at Cross Roads. It was
twenty-five miles from Marietta, Georgia. They never troubled him like
they did old mistress. She was scared of them. She knowed if they come
and caught her gone they would set fire to the house. No, they never
burned nothing on our place but they did some in sight. I can remember
seeing big fires about at night and day time too.

"We lived on Master Bracknell's place till I was eight years old and
my sister five. We come to South, Alabama, then to Mississippi and
then up the river to Helena. I married in Jackson, Mississippi. A
white boy married us. We lived on his place and he was going to
preach. He wasn't a preacher then. Richard Moore was his name. It took
him several weeks to learn what to say. He practiced on us. He thought
a heap of me and he ask Jesse if he could marry us. He brought us a
big fine cake his mother cooked for us when he come. My husband named
Jesse Lawsom. He was raised in Louisiana. We lived together till he
died. My mother went blind before she died. His mother lived there,
then we took care of them and after he died his mother lived with me.
Now I lives with this niece here some and my daughter in Jackson. I
had fourteen children. I just got one left and grandchildren I go to
see. I make the rounds. Some of 'em good and some of them ain't no
account at tall.

"I used to take advice. They get up and leave the place. They don't
want old folks to advise 'em. If they can't get their price they sit
around and go hungry. They won't work for what I used to be glad to
get. I keep my girl on the right path and that is all I can do. My
niece don't work out but her husband works on the farm all the time.
She helps him. They go out and live till the work is done. He is off
now ploughing. Times is fast sure as you born, girl. Faster 'an ever I
seen."


Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person interviewed: Henry Lee
                    R.F.D., two and one-half miles, Palestine, Arkansas
Age: 87


"I was born close to Huntsville, Alabama during slavery. My master was
Tom Laughinghouse and Miss Fannie, his wife. They had two children,
Jarman and Mattie. He was Dr. George Laughinghouse's brother. Dr.
George lived at Forrest City.

"He brung us to the old Pope place close to Forrest City after
'mancipation. We didn't know we was free. Finally we kept hearing
folks talk, then Master Tom told us we was free. We cleared land right
on after freedom like we was slaves.

"General Lee, a white man, owned a boat on the Mississippi River. He
owned my father. We took on his name way after freedom. Mother was
Becky Laughinghouse and father was Willis Lee. They had six children.

"After I come to Arkansas I went to school three days to a white man.
He was sont here from the North somewhere.

"My folks was all black pure stock niggers and field folks same as I
is.

"Mother's owners was good to her. They give them all day Saturday to
wash and iron and cook for her folks. They got a whooping if they went
to the field Monday morning dirty. They was very good to us. I can
recollect that. They was a reasonable set of white folks. They weighed
out everything. They whooped their hands. They had a white overseer
but he wasn't hired to whoop Laughinghouse's slaves.

"They 'lowed mother to weave at her home at night. He had seven or
eight families on his farm.

"The well was a curiosity to me then and would sure be one now. We had
a walled and curbed well. A long forked pole, a short chain and a long
rope. We pulled up the water by the long forked pole. Cold! It was
good cold water. Beats our water all to pieces.

"The soldiers come up in a drove one day and ask mother for me. She
didn't let any of us go.

"Our master got killed over here close to Forrest City. We all picked
cotton, then we all went to gin. A coupling pin broke and let a wooden
block come down on him. It weighed one thousand pounds I expect. He
was spreading a sheet and smoothing the cotton. It mashed and
smothered him both. That was first of our scattering.

"The colored folks raised gardens in the fence corners. They raised a
heap of stuff that way. We lived a heap better then than now.

"My father died and mother started sharecropping. First, one-half and
then, one-third went to us. Things went on very well till the
commissary come about. The nigger got figured clean out.

"Nearly all the women of them days wore bonnets or what they called
hoods one the other. Boys wore long shirts to calf of their legs.

"We rode oxen to church. Many time rode to church and home in ox
wagon.

"Ku Kluxes followed Pattyrollers, then come on White Caps. If the
Pattyrollers kilt a slave he had to pay the master the price. The Ku
Kluxes rode at night. All of 'em's main business was to keep the
slaves at their own places and at work. Iffen the master instructed
them to keep offen his place they kept off. They never come on our
place. But though I was feared of 'em.

"I needs help and I don't git it. I applied. 'Cause a grandson helps
us a little I don't git the welfare pension. I need it and I think I
ought to git it. I worked hard, bought this house, paid my
taxes--still trying. Still they don't aid me now and I passed aiding
my own self. I think I oughten to git lef' out 'cause I help myself
when I could. I sure is left out. Been left out.

"A part of the people is accountable for the way the times is going
on. Some of them is getting it all and don't give the others no show a
tall. Times is powerful hard for some and too easy for others. Some is
turned mean and some cowed down and times hard for them what can't
work hard."


Interviewer: Miss Sallie C. Miller
Person interviewed: Mandy Lee,
                    Coal Hill, Arkansas
Age: 85


"Yes'm I was a slave. I been here. I heard the bugles blowing, the
fife beat, the drums beat, and the cannons roar. We started to Texas
but never got across the river. I don't know what town it was but it
was just across the river from Texas. My white folks was good to me. I
staid with them till they died. Missy died first, then master died. I
never was away from them. They was both good. My mammy was sold but I
never was. They said they was surrendered when we come back from
Texas. I heard the drums beat at Ft. Smith when we come back but I
don't know what they was doing. I worked in the house with the
children and in the field too. I help herd the horses. I would card
and spin and eat peaches. No, that wasn't all I had to eat. I didn't
have enough meat but I had plenty of milk and potatoes. I was born
right here in Coal Hill. I ain't never lived anywhere else except when
we went South during the war.

"Law woman I can't tell you what I think of the present generation.
They are good in their way but they don't do like we did. I never did
go naked. I don't see how they stand it.

"I could sing when I was young. We sang everything, the good and
bad."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Mary Lee
                    1308 Texas Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 74
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"I was born in 1864, March the fourth, the year before the Civil War
ended. All I know is what they told me and what I read.

"Born in Texas, but my mother and father was both born in Georgia.

"My mother said her white folks was good to her. She was the house
girl, she didn't have to work in no field.

"I went to school when I was six or eight. I don't remember which. I
had right smart schooling.

"I remember my mother's young missis run off and got married. She was
just a young girl, 'bout seventeen. That's been a long time.

"I got a book sent to me a while back. It's a Catholic book--'History
of Church and State.' Yes'm, I'm a Catholic. Used to belong to the
Methodist church, but I wouldn't be a Methodist no more. I like the
Catholics. You would too if you was one of 'em.

"I been here in Arkansas since 1891. That's goin' right on up the
road.

"I can't do much work now, my breath gets short.

"I used to make thirty-five dollars a month washin' and ironin'. Oh,
that was a long time 'fore the depression.

"I don't think nothin' of this younger generation. All goin' the same
way. Oh lord, you better let 'em alone, they won't take no
foolishness."


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Talitha Lewis
                    300 E. 21st Avenue, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 86
[Date Stamp: MAY 31 1938]


"I should say I was born in slavery times! Now if you ask me something
I don't know, I couldn't tell you, honey, 'cause I believe in people
tellin' the truth.

"In a way I know how old I is. I give what my white folks give me.
They told me I was born in 1852. Yes ma'am, my young missis used to
set down and work on me. She'd say, 'Get it in your head' 'cause I
ain't got no education.

"I 'member my old missis. Know her name as good as I do mine. Name was
Maria Whitley. After old master died, his property was divided and Jim
Whitley drawed me and my mother and my sister. Yes ma'am, it was my
sister.

"Goldsboro, North Carolina is where I was born, in Johnston County.

"Do I 'member anything 'bout peace declared? I should say I
do--'member long time 'fore it come.

"I seed so many different regiments of people I didn't know which was
which. I know the Yankees called ever'body Dinah. They'd say to me,
'Dinah, hold my horse,' and my hands would be full of bridles. And
they'd say, 'You got anything buried?' The white folks had done buried
the meat under my mother's house. And say, 'Is they good to you?' If
they hadn't a been we wouldn't a known any better than to tell it.

"I 'member they found where the meat was buried and they ripped up my
mother's feather bed and filled it full of hams and shoulders, and
there wasn't a middlin' in the lot. And kill chickens and geese! They
got ever'thing and anything they wanted.

"There was a battle-field about four miles from us where they fit at.

"Honey, I can't tell it like I know it, but I _know_ it.

"Old master was a good man. You had plenty to eat and plenty to wear.
And on Monday morning all his colored folks had clean clothes. I wish
I could tell it like I know. He was a good man but he had as mean a
wife as I ever saw. She used to be Nettie Sherrod and she _did_ _not_
like a black face. Yes ma'am, Jim Whitley was a good man but his
father was a devil.

"If Massa Jim had a hand he couldn't control, he sold him. He said he
wasn't goin' to beat 'em or have 'em run off and stay in the woods.
Yes'm, that was my master, Jim Whitley.

"His overseer was Zack Hill when peace declared.

"How long I been in Arkansas? Me? We landed at Marianna, Arkansas in
1889. They emigranted us here. They sure said they had fritter trees
and a molasses pond. They said to just shake the tree and the fritters
would fall in the pond. You know anybody that had any sense wouldn't
believe that. Yes ma'am, they sure told that lie. 'Course there was
times when you could make good money here.

"I know I is a slave time chile. I fared well but I sure did see some
that didn't.

"Our white folks had hands that didn't do nothin' but make clothes and
sheets and kivers.

"Baby, them Ku Klux was a pain. The paddyrollers was bad enough but
them Ku Klux done lots of devilment. Yes ma'am, they _done_ some
devilment.

"I worked for a white man once was a Ku Klux, but I didn't know it for
a long time. One time he said, 'Now when you're foolin' around in my
closet cleanin' up, I want you to be pertickler.' I seed them rubber
pants what they filled with water. I reckon he had enough things for a
hundred men. His wife say, 'Now, Talitha, don't let on you know what
them things is.'

"Now my father belonged to the Adkins. He and my mother was married
with a stiffcate 'fore peace declared and after peace declared they
got a license and was married just like they marry now.

"My master used to ask us chillun, 'Do your folks pray at night?' We
said 'no' 'cause our folks had told us what to say. But the Lawd have
mercy, there was plenty of that goin' on. They'd pray, 'Lawd, deliver
us from under bondage.'

"Colored folks used to go to the white folks' church. I was raised up
under the old Primitive Baptist feet washin' church. Oh, that's a
time, baby!

"What I think of the younger generation? I don't know what to think of
'em. I don't _think_--I know they is goin' too fast.

"I learned how to read the Bible after I 'fessed religion. Yes ma'am,
I can read the Bible, praise the Lawd!"


Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: Abbie Lindsay
                    914 W. Tenth Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: 84
[HW: cf. Will Glass' story, No. ----?]


"I was born June 1, 1856; the place at that time was called Lynngrove,
Louisiana. It was just about a mile from the post office, and was in
Morehouse Parish in the first ward--in the tenth ward I mean.


Relatives

"My father was named Alec Summerville. He named himself after the
Civil War. They were going around letting the people choose their
names. He had belonged to Alec Watts; but when they allowed him to
select his own name after the war, he called himself Summerville after
the town Summerville (Somerville), Alabama. His mother was named
Charlotte Dantzler. She was born in North Carolina. John Haynes bought
her and brought her to Arkansas. My father was an overseer's child.
You know they whipped people in those days and forced them. That is
why he didn't go by the name of Watts after he got free and could
select his own name.

"The name of my mother's mother was Celia Watts. I don't know my
grandfather's first name. Old man Alec Watts' father gave my mother to
him. I didn't know anything about that except what was told to me.
They bought her from South Carolina. They came to Louisiana. My father
was bought in South Carolina too. After the Haynes met the Watts,
Watts married old man Haynes' daughter. He gave my father to his
daughter, Mary Watts. She was Mary Watts after she was married. She
was Mary Haynes before. Watts' father gave my mother to Alec Watts.
That is just the way it was.

"My mother and father had three children to live. I think there were
about thirteen in all. There are just two of us living now. I couldn't
tell you where Jeffrey Summerville, my living brother, is living now.


Slave Houses

"The slaves lived in hewed-log houses. I have often seen hewed-log
houses. Have you ever seen one? You cut big logs and split them open
with a maul and a wedge. Then you take a pole ax and hack it on both
sides. Then you notch it--cut it into a sort of tongue and groove
joint in each end. Before you cut the notches in the end, you take a
broad ax and hew it on both sides. The notch holds the corners of the
house-ties every corner. You put the rafters up just like you do now.
Then you lathe the rafters and then put boards on top of the rafters.
Sometimes shingles were used on the rafters instead of boards.

"You would finish off the outside of the walls by making clay cakes
out of mud and filling up the cracks with them. When that clay got
hard, nothing could go through the walls. Sometimes thin boards were
nailed on the inside to finish the interior.


Furniture and Food

"They had planks--homemade wooden beds. They made tables and chairs.
They caned the chairs. They made the tables with four legs. You made
it just like you would make a box, adding the legs.

"A little house called the smokehouse was built in one of the corners
of the yard. They would weigh out to each one so much food for the
week's supply--mostly meat and meal, sometimes rice. They'd give you
parched meal and rye too.

"Sometimes they had the slaves cook their food in the cabins. Mostly
all the time. My people ate in the kitchen because my mother was the
cook and my father was the yard man. The others mostly cooked at
home--in their cabins.


Work

"My mother and father worked around the house and yard. Slaves in the
field had to pick a certain amount of cotton. The man had to pick from
two to three hundred pounds of cotton a day if he wasn't sick, and the
woman had to pick about one hundred fifty. Of course some of them
could pick more. They worked in a way of speaking from can till can't,
from the time they could see until the time they couldn't. They do
about the same thing now.


Recreation

"I remember the time the white folks used to make the slaves all come
around in the yard and sing every Sunday evening. I can't remember any
of the songs straight through. I can just remember them in spots.

    'Give me Jesus, you can have all the world
    In the morning when I arise, Give me Jesus.'
                                             (Fragment)

       *       *       *       *       *

    'Lie on him if you sing right
    Lie on him if you pray right
    God knows that your heart is not right
    Come, let us go to heaven anyhow.'
                                       (Fragment)

       *       *       *       *       *

    'The ark was seen at rest upon the hill
    On the hills of Calvary
    And Great Jehovah spoke
    Sanctify to God upon the hill.'
                                    (First verse)

       *       *       *       *       *

    'Peter spied the promised land
    On the hill of Calvary
    And Great Jehovah spoke
    Sanctify to God upon the hill.'
                                     (Second verse)

There was lots more that they sung.

"They could go to parties too, but when they went to them or to
anything else, they had to have a pass. When they went to a party the
most they did was to play the fiddle and dance. They had corn huskings
every Friday night, and they ground the meal every Saturday. The corn
husking was the same as fun. They didn't serve anything on the place
where I was. I never knew them to serve anything at the corn shuckings
or at the parties. Sometimes they would give a picnic, and they would
kill a hog for that.


Life Since Freedom

"Right after the war, my father hired me out to nurse. Then I stayed
around the house and helped my stepmother, and the white girls taught
me a little until I got to be thirteen years old. Then I got three
months' schooling in a regular school. I came here in 1915. I had been
living in Newport before that. Yes, I been married, and that's all you
need to know about that. I got two children: one fifty-three years
old, and the other sixty.


Opinions

"I don't have much thinking to do about the young people. It's a lost
race without a change."


Interviewer's Comment

"Mother" Lindsay is a Bible-reading, neat and clean-appearing,
pleasant-mannered business woman, a little bulky, but carrying herself
like a woman thirty years. She runs a cafe on Ninth Street and manages
her own business competently. She refers to it as "Hole in the Wall."
I had been trying for sometime to catch her away from her home. It was
almost impossible for me to get a story from her at her restaurant or
at her home.

She doesn't like to sit long at a time and doesn't like to tell too
much. When she feels quarters are a little close and that she is
telling more than she wants to, she says, "Honey, I ain't got no more
time to talk to you; I got to get back to the cafe and get me a cup of
coffee."

Will Glass, who has a story of his own, collaborated with her on her
story. He has an accurate and detailed memory of many things. He is
too young to have any personal memories. But he remembers everything
he has been told by his grandparents and parents, and they seem to
have talked freely to him unlike the usual parents of that period.


Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Rosa Lindsey
                    302 S. Miller Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 83


"I was born in Georgia and I'm 83.

"My white folks was named Abercrombie.

"I don't remember my mother and I hardly remember my father. My white
folks raised me up. I 'member my missis had me bound to her when I was
twelve. I know when my grandma come to take me home with her, I run
away from her and went back to my white folks.

"My white folks was rich. I belonged to my young missis. She didn't
'low nobody to hit me. When she went to school she had me straddle the
horse behind her. The first readin' I ever learned was from the white
folks.

"I think the Yankees took Columbus, Georgia on a Sunday morning. I
know they just come through there and tore up things and did as they
pleased.

"I stayed there a long time after the Yankees went back.

"Old master wasn't too old to go to war but he didn't go. I think he
had to dodge around to keep the Yankees from gettin' him. I think he
went to Texas but we didn't go.

"I loved my white folks 'cause I knowed more about them than anybody
else.

"I come here to Arkansas with a young white lady just married. She
'suaded me to come with her and I just stayed.

"Biggest thing I have did is washin' and ironin'. But now I am doing
missionary work in the Sanctified church.

"I don't know 'bout the younger generation. Looks like 'bout near
ever'body lost now. There's some few young people is saved now but
they ain't many."


Interviewer: Thomas Elmore Lucy
Person interviewed: William Little,
                    Atkins, Arkansas
Age: 83


"I was born on the plantation of Dr. Andrew Scott, but my old ma'ster
was Col. Ben T. Embry. The 14th of March, in the year 1855, was my
birthday. Yes suh, I was born right here at old Galla Rock! My old
Ma'ster Embry had a good many slaves. He went to Texas and stayed
about three years. Took a lot of us along, and de first work I ever
done after I was set free was pickin' cotton at $2 a hundred pounds.
Dere was seventy-five or a hundred of us freed at once. Yes suh! Den
we drove five hundred miles back here from Texas, and drove five
hundred head of stock. We was refigees--dat's de reason we had to go
to Texas.

"Father and mother both passed away a good many years ago. Oh, yes,
dey was mighty well treated while dey was in slavery; never was a
kinder mas'r anywhere dan my old mas'r. And he was wealthy, too--had
lots of land, and a store, and plenty of other property. Many of the
slaves stayed on as servants long after the War, and lived right
around here at old Galla Rock.

"No suh, I never belonged to no chu'ch; dey thought I done too much of
the devil's work--playin' the fiddle. Used to play the fiddle for
dances all around the neighborhood. One white man gave me $10 once for
playin' at a dance. Played lots of the old-time pieces like 'Turkey in
the Straw', 'Dixie', and so on.

