The German word for "German" is _Deutsch_; for "Dutch" the German is
_Holländisch_; and I presume it is from the similarity of _Deutsch_ and
_Dutch_ that this common error is so frequently committed. For the future
let it be remembered, that _Dutch_ is a term which has no relation whatever
to German; and that "High German" is that language spoken and written in
its purity, "Low German" all the dialects and mispronunciations which do
not come up to the standard of correctness.

JAMES SPENCE HARRY.

8. Arthur Street.

_Translations of the Prayer Book into French_ (Vol. vii., p. 382.; Vol.
viii., p. 343.).--Besides the editions already mentioned, a 4to. one was
published at London in 1689, printed by R. Everingham, and sold by R.
Bentley and M. Magnes. Prefixed to it is the placet of the king, dated 6th
October, 1662, with the subsequent approbation of Stradling, chaplain to
Gilbert (Sheldon), Bishop of London, dated 6th April, 1663.

It seems ("N. & Q.," Vol. vii., p. 92.) that a {479} copy is in the British
Museum; one is also in my possession.

I presume that there were other editions between the years 1663 and 1689.

H. P.

_Divining-rod_ (Vol. viii., p. 293.).--For a full account of the divining
rod see _La Physique occulte, ou Traité de la Baguette Divinatoire, &c._,
par Père L. de Vallemont, a work by no means uncommon, having passed
through several editions. Mine is "à Paris, chez Jean Boudot, avec priv.
1709, in 12^o. avec figures," with the addition of a "Traité de la
Connoissance des Causes Magnétiques, &c., par un Curieux."

A Cornish lady informs me that the Cornish miners to this day use the
divining-rod in the way represented in fig. 1. of the above-mentioned work.

R. J. R.

In the 351st number of the _Monthly Magazine_, dated March 1st, 1821, there
is a letter to the editor from W. Partridge, dated Boxbridge, Gloucester,
giving several instances of his having successfully used the divining-rod
for the purpose of discovering water. He says the gift is not possessed by
more than one in two thousand, and attributes the power to electricity.
Those persons in whose hands it will work must possess a redundancy of that
fluid. He also states that metals are discovered by the same means.

K. B.

_Slow-worm Superstition_ (Vol. vii., p. 33.).--The belief that the
slow-worm cannot die until sunset prevails in Dorsetshire. In the New
Forest the same superstition exists with regard to the brown adder. Walking
in the heathy country between Beaulieu and Christ Church I saw a very large
snake of this kind, recently beaten to death by the peasant boys, and on
remarking that the lower jaw continued to move convulsively, I was told it
would do so "till the moon was up."

An aged woman, now deceased, who had when young been severely bitten by a
snake, told me she always felt a severe pain and swelling near where the
wound had been, on the anniversary of the occurrence. Is this common? and
can it be accounted for?

W. E.

Pimperne, Dorset.

_Ravailliac_ (Vol. viii., p. 219.).--The destruction of the pyramid erected
at Paris upon the murder of Henry IV., is mentioned by Thuanus, _Hist._,
lib. 134. cap. 9. In your correspondent's Query, _Thesaur._ is, I presume,
misprinted for Thuan.

B. J.

_Lines on the Institution of the Garter_ (Vol. viii., p. 182.).--A. B. R.
says, "as also from the proverbial expression used in Scotland, and to be
found in Scott's _Works_, of 'casting a leggin girth,' as synonymous with a
female 'faux pas.'" I may mention to your correspondent (if he is not
already aware) that the expression is taken from Allan Ramsay's
continuation of _Christ's Kirk on the Green_ (edit. Leith, 1814, 1 vol. p.
101.):

 "Or bairns can read, they first maun spell,
    I learn'd this frae my mammy;
  And _coost a legen girth_ mysell,
    Lang or I married Tammie."

and is explained by the author in a note, "Like a tub that loses one of its
bottom hoops." In the west of Scotland the phrase is now restricted to a
young woman who has had an illegitimate child, or what is more commonly
termed "a misfortune," and it is probable never had another meaning.
_Legen_ or _leggen_ is not understood to have any affinity in its etymology
to the word _leg_, but is _laggen_, that part of the staves which projects
from the bottom of the barrel, or of the child's _luggie_, out of which he
sups his oatmeal _parritch_; and the _girth_, _gird_, or hoop, that by
which the vessel at this particular place is firmest bound together. Burns
makes a fine and emphatic use of the word _laggen_ in the "Birthday
Address," in speaking of the "Royal lasses dainty" (_Cunninghame_, edit.
1826, vol. ii. p. 329.):

 "God bless you a', consider now,
    Ye're unco muckle dantet:
  But ere the course o' life be thro'
    It may be bitter santet.
  An I hae seen their coggie fou,
    That yet hae tarrow't at it;
  But or the day was done, I trow,
    The _laggen_ they hae clautet."

which means, that at last, whether through pride, hunger, or long fasting,
the appetite had become so keen, that all, even to the last particle of the
_parritch_, was _clautet_, _scartit_, or scraped from the bottom of the
_coggie_, and to its inmost recesses surrounded by the _laggen girth_. Of
the motto of the garter, "Honi soit qui mal y pense," I have heard a
burlesque translation known but to few, in "_Honeys sweet quo' Mally
Spence_," synonymous with Proverbs, chap. ix. verse 17: "Stolen waters are
sweet, and bread _eaten_ in secret is pleasant."

G. N.

_Passage in Bacon_ (Vol. viii., p. 303.).--I had, partly from inadvertence,
and partly from a belief that a tautology would be created by a recurrence
to the idea of death, after the words "mortis terrore carentem," in the
preceding line, understood the verse in question to mean, "which regards
length of life as the last of Nature's gifts." On reconsideration, however,
I do not doubt that the received interpretation, which makes _spatium
extremum_ equivalent to _finem_, is the correct one.

L.

_What Day is it at our Antipodes?_ (Vol. viii., p. 102.).--A person sailing
to our Antipodes westward will lose twelve hours; by sailing thither
eastward he will gain twelve hours. If {480} both meet at the same hour,
say eleven o'clock, the one will reckon 11 A.M., the other 11 P.M.

ESTE.

_Calves' Head Club_ (Vol. viii., p. 315.).--In Hone's _Every Day Book_,
vol. ii. pp. 158, 159, 160., some more information is given on the
interesting event referred to in the Note made by MR. E. G. BALLARD. A
print is given of the scene; and the obnoxious toasts are also quoted; they
are: "The pious memory of Oliver Cromwell;" "Damn--n to the race of the
Stuarts;" "The glorious year 1648;" "The man in the mask," &c. The print is
dated 1734, which proves that the meeting at which the disturbance arose
was not the first which had taken place.

S. A. S.

Bridgewater.

_Heraldic Query_ (Vol. viii., p. 219.).--Although A. was killed in open
rebellion, I think his armorial bearings were not forfeited unless he was
subsequently attainted by act of parliament; and even in that case it is
possible that the act contained a provision that the penalty should not
extend to the prejudice of any other person than the offender. Assuming
that A. was not attainted, or that the consequences of his attainder were
thus restricted to himself, or that his attainder has been reversed, it is
clear that his lawful posterity are still entitled to his arms,
notwithstanding the acceptance by his grandson C. of a new grant, which
obviously could no more affect the title to the ancient arms than the
creation of a modern barony can destroy the right of its recipient to an
older one. The descendants of C. being thus entitled to both coats, could,
I imagine, without difficulty obtain a recognition of their right; and I
think they might either use the ancient arms alone, or the ancient and the
modern arms quarterly, precedence being given to the former. The proper
course would be to seek the licence of the crown for the resumption of the
ancient surname, as well as of the arms. Such permission would, I
apprehend, be now conceded, even though it should appear that the arms were
really forfeited.

HENRY GOUGH.

Emberton, Bucks.

_The Temple Lands in Scotland_ (Vol. viii., p. 317.).--These lands, or a
portion of them, were acquired, and afterwards transferred by sale, to Mr.
Gracie, by James Maidment, Esq., the eminent Scottish antiquary, who, in
1828-29, privately printed--

    "Templaria: Papers Relative to the History, Privileges, and Possessions
    of the Scottish Knights Templars, and their Successors, the Knights of
    St. John of Jerusalem, with Notes," &c.

This will no doubt contain all that your correspondent ABREDONENSIS could
desire upon the subject, provided he can obtain it; for the work,
professing to be printed by the author for presents, is confined to
twenty-five copies, and must therefore be rare. In 1831 was published by
Stevenson, Edinburgh, an _Historical Account of Linlithgowshire_, by the
late John Penney.[9] This is edited by Mr. Maidment, and contains a chapter
entitled an "Account of the Transmission of the United Estates of the
Templars and Hospitallers, after the dissolution of the Order in the reign
of Queen Mary;" and although the object of the editor is to notice the
charters connected with Linlithgowshire, the book contains a sketch of the
general history of the lands in question, abridged from the _Templaria_.

J. O.

[Footnote 9: Query the late George Chalmers.]

_Sir John Vanbrugh_ (Vol. viii., p. 65. &c.).--In _An Account of the Life
and Death of Mr. Matthew Henry_, published in the year 1716, his biographer
having related that he was chosen a minister of a congregation of
Dissenters in the city of Chester, and that he went there to reside on the
first day of June, 1687, goes on to state (p. 75.):

    "That city was then very happy in several worthy gentlemen that had
    habitations there; they were not altogether strangers to Mr. Henry
    before he came to live among them, but now they came to be his very
    intimate acquaintance; some of these, as Alderman Mainwaring and Mr.
    Vanbrugh, father to Sir John Vanbrugh, were in communion with the
    Church of England, but they heard Mr. Henry on the week-day lectures,
    and always treated him with great and serious respect."

This evidence serves to show that a Mr. Vanbrugh, who was living in Chester
in 1687, was the father of Sir John Vanbrugh. I have been told that in
former times there was a sugar-bakery at Chester. Did the father of Sir
John Vanbrugh carry on that business at Chester during any period of his
residence there?

N. W. S.

_Sir Arthur Aston_ (Vol. viii., p. 126.).--In reference to the Query of
your correspondent CHARTHAM, I take leave to refer him to Playfair's
_Baronetage_, vol. ii. p. 257., where a pedigree of that ancient family is
inserted. In p. 261. is a note, by which it appears that the said Sir
Arthur Aston had a daughter Elizabeth, born in Russia, and married to James
Thompson of Joyce Grove in Berkshire.

In addition thereto, I recollect seeing the copy of a deed of sale, dated
April, 1637, by which it appears that Nicholas Hercy, of Nettlebed, in co.
Oxon., sold to James Thompson of Wallingford, in co. Berkshire, "Joys
Grove," in Nettlebed aforesaid; and there is united with the same James
Thompson, apparently as a trustee, "George Tattersall the younger, of
Finchampstead in said co. of Berkshire."

{481}

I also take leave to refer your correspondent to Lysons's _Environs of
London_, vol. ii. p. 393., under head of "Fulham," where it is stated that
Sir Arthur Aston's father resided in that parish.

AN ANTIQUARY.

_Nugget_ (Vol. viii., p. 357.).--Colonel Mundy, in _Our Antipodes_, says
that the word _nugget_ was, before the days of gold digging, used by the
farmers of Australia to express a small thick bullock, such as our English
farmers would call a lumpy one, or a little great one.

A. H. WHITE.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

FORD'S HANDBOOK OF SPAIN. 1st Edition.

COTTON'S FASTI ECCLESIÆ HIBERNIÆ. Parts III., VI., VII., and VIII.

TORRIANO PIAZZA UNIVERSALE DI PROVERBI ITALIANI. London, 1668. Folio.

BIBLIOTHECA TOPOGRAPHICA BRITANNICA. Vol. IX.

ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA. 7th Edition. Vol. XXII., Part 2.

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest prices, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES." 186. Fleet Street.

Particulars of Price, &c. of the following Books to be sent direct to the
gentlemen by whom they are required, and whose names and addresses are
given for that purpose:

WELLINGTON DISPATCHES. 13 Vols. Vols. II., III., and Index. (The full price
will be given.)

SOUTHEY'S DOCTOR. Vols. III. and IV.

PATRICK'S MENSA MYSTICA.

STRICKLAND'S QUEENS OF ENGLAND. Vols. III., IV., V., VI., VII., VIII., and
X.

  Wanted by _A. Holden_, Bookseller, Exeter.

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO DIALOGUES IN THE ELYSIAN FIELDS, BETWEEN CARD. WOLSEY AND CARD.
XIMENES. To which are added Historical Accounts of Wolsey's two Colleges
and the Town of Ipswich. By Joseph Grove. London, 1761. 8vo.

  Wanted by _W. S. Fitch_, Ipswich.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDISON'S WORKS. First Edition.

JONES' (OF NAYLAND) WORKS. 13 Vols. 8vo.

WILKINSON'S ANCIENT EGYPT. Vols. IV. and V.

BYRON'S LIFE AND LETTERS. 3 Vols. 8vo.

  Wanted by _Simms & Son_, Booksellers, Bath.

       *       *       *       *       *

KANT'S LOGIC, translated by John Richardson.

HISTORIC CERTAINTIES by Aristarchus Newlight.

SONGS--"The Boatmen shout." Attwood. "Ah! godan lor felicita" (Faust).
Spohr.

  Wanted by _C. Mansfield Ingleby_, Birmingham.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPMAN'S ARCHITECTURIÆ NAVALES MERCATURIÆ. 1768. Folio. Published in
Sweden.

  Wanted by _Robert Stewart_, Bookseller, Paisley.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SPECTATOR, printed by Alex. Lawrie & Co., London, 1804. Vols. I., II.,
III., VI., VII., and VIII.

  Wanted by _J. T. Cheetham_, Firwood, Chadderton, near Oldham.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices to Correspondents.

_We beg to call the special attention of such of our readers as are
Autograph Collectors to the advertisement which appears in the present
Number, descriptive of certain family and historical papers, which have
been missed within the last twelve months from the proper custody, and
shall only be too glad to hear that by so doing we have at all contributed
to their recovery._

BOOKS WANTED. _So many of our Correspondents seem disposed to avail
themselves of our plan of placing the booksellers in direct communication
with them, that we find ourselves compelled to limit each list of books to
two insertions. We would also express a hope that those gentlemen who may
at once succeed in obtaining any desired volumes will be good enough to
notify the same to us, in order that such books may not unnecessarily
appear in such list even a second time._

ST. JOHN'S, _who asks about the_ Stafford Knot, _will see by our last
Number, p._ 454., _that it is the badge or cognizance of the Earls of
Stafford._

MR. VAN LAUN'S _Query as to the derivation of_ Huguenot _is anticipated in
our_ 6th Vol., p. 317. _Will the Note there given help him to a
satisfactory solution?_

THE TESTAMENT OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS, 1686.--_The loan of this volume is
offered by_ T. D. _to the Correspondent who advertised for it some time
since in our columns._

AMICUS VERITATIS, _who inquires respecting_ Cleanliness is next to
Godliness, _is referred to our_ 4th Vol., p. 491., _for its probable
origin._

E. G. BALLARD. _The curious tenure of being the King's_ Vautrarius, _kindly
forwarded by this Correspondent, is already printed in Blount's_ Fragmenta
Antiquitates, p. 142., _ed._ 1784.

C. E. F. _We would strongly recommend our Correspondent to adopt the paper
process described by_ DR. DIAMOND _in our first Number for the present year
(with correction of using the gallic acid, which, as stated in a subsequent
Number, was by accident omitted). Recent experience has more than ever
convinced us that if the method there laid down be_ strictly _followed, the
photographer will not meet with failures._

AN AMATEUR (Helston). MR. LYTE _is at present abroad, or we are sure he
would readily answer the Query of our Correspondent, as to whether the
chloride of barium recommended by him at p. 252., and the nitrate of lead
at p. 373., are to be the crystallised or liquid preparations._

AN AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHER (Manchester). _If you will transmit us a specimen
of the failures which you mention, especially of the waved appearance, we
will do the best to answer your Queries: it is impossible otherwise
satisfactorily to do so._

M. A. _Always use your hyposulphite of soda_ saturated; _it does not reduce
the tone of pictures near so much as when it is used dilute._

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them to
their Subscribers on the Saturday._

       *       *       *       *       *


Now ready, Two New Volumes (price 28s. cloth) of THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND and
the Courts at Westminster. By EDWARD FOSS. F.S.A.

  Volume Three, 1272-1377.
  Volume Four, 1377-1485.

Lately published, price 28s. cloth,

  Volume One, 1066-1199.
  Volume Two, 1199-1272.

    "A book which is essentially sound and truthful, and must therefore
    take its stand in the permanent literature of our country."--_Gent.
    Mag._

London: LONGMAN & CO.

       *       *       *       *       *


12mo., cloth, with Frontispiece, 2s. 6d.

THE VICAR AND HIS DUTIES: being Sketches of Clerical Life in a
Manufacturing Town Parish. By the REV. ALFRED GATTY.

    "As much a true effigy, though taken with pen and ink, as if Mr. Gatty
    had put that capital parish priest, the Vicar of Leeds, before his
    camera. To the many friends of Dr. Hook this little volume will be
    deeply interesting."--_Notes and Queries._

    "It unites the merit of lively and faithful sketching, sound
    principles, and popular style."--_Churchman's Magazine._

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUPPLEMENT TO DR. OLIVER'S MONASTICON DIOECESIS EXONIENSIS.

In the Press, and will be published, in 1 vol. folio, price 10s. 6d.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE MONASTICON DIOECESIS EXONIENSIS. Being a Collection of
Records and Instruments further illustrating the Ancient Conventual,
Collegiate, and Eleemosynary Foundations in the Counties of Devon and
Cornwall. By GEORGE OLIVER, D.D. To correspond exactly in size, paper, and
type with the original work, and to contain a large folding Map of the
Diocese of Exeter at the time of the Dissolution of Monasteries. When
published, the price will be raised.

Subscribers' Names received by A. HOLDEN, Bookseller, Exeter.

       *       *       *       *       *


{482}

XYLO-IODIDE OF SILVER, exclusively used at all the Photographic
Establishments.--The superiority of this preparation is now universally
acknowledged. Testimonials from the best Photographers and principal
scientific men of the day, warrant the assertion, that hitherto no
preparation has been discovered which produces uniformly such perfect
pictures, combined with the greatest rapidity of action. In all cases where
a quantity is required, the two solutions may be had at Wholesale price in
separate Bottles, in which state it may be kept for years, and Exported to
any Climate. Full instructions for use.

CAUTION.--Each Bottle is Stamped with a Red Label bearing my name, RICHARD
W. THOMAS, Chemist, 10. Pall Mall, to counterfeit which is felony.

CYANOGEN SOAP: for removing all kinds of Photographic Stains. Beware of
purchasing spurious and worthless imitations of this valuable detergent.
The Genuine is made only by the Inventor, and is secured with a Red Label
bearing this Signature and Address, RICHARD W. THOMAS, CHEMIST, 10. PALL
MALL, Manufacturer of Pure Photographic Chemicals: and may be procured of
all respectable Chemists, in Pots at 1s., 2s., and 3s. 6d. each, through
MESSRS. EDWARDS, 67. St. Paul's Churchyard; and MESSRS. BARCLAY & CO., 95.
Farringdon Street, Wholesale Agents.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PICTURES.--A Selection of the above beautiful Productions
(comprising Views in VENICE, PARIS, RUSSIA, NUBIA, &c.) may be seen at
BLAND & LONG'S, 153. Fleet Street, where may also be procured Apparatus of
every Description, and pure Chemicals for the practice of Photography in
all its Branches.

Calotype, Daguerreotype, and Glass Pictures for the Stereoscope.

*** Catalogues may be had on application.

BLAND & LONG, Opticians, Philosophical and Photographical Instrument
Makers, and Operative Chemists, 153. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--HORNE & CO.'S Iodized Collodion, for obtaining Instantaneous
Views, and Portraits in from three to thirty seconds, according to light.

Portraits obtained by the above, for delicacy of detail rival the choicest
Daguerreotypes, specimens of which may be seen at their Establishment.

Also every description of Apparatus, Chemicals, &c. &c. used in this
beautiful Art.--123. and 121. Newgate Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC CAMERAS.--OTTEWILL'S REGISTERED DOUBLE-BODIED FOLDING CAMERA,
is superior to every other form of Camera, for the Photographic Tourist,
from its capability of Elongation or Contraction to any Focal Adjustment,
its Portability, and its adaptation for taking either Views or
Portraits.--The Trade supplied.

Every Description of Camera, or Slides, Tripod Stands, Printing Frames,
&c., may be obtained at his MANUFACTORY, Charlotte Terrace, Barnsbury Road,
Islington.

New Inventions, Models, &c., made to order or from Drawings.

       *       *       *       *       *


IMPROVEMENT IN COLLODION.--J. B. HOCKIN & CO., Chemists, 289. Strand. have,
by an improved mode of Iodizing, succeeded in producing a Collodion equal,
they may say superior, in sensitiveness and density of Negative, to any
other hitherto published; without diminishing the keeping properties and
appreciation of half tint for which their manufacture has been esteemed.

Apparatus, pure Chemicals, and all the requirements for the practice of
Photography. Instruction in the Art.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION.--An EXHIBITION of PICTURES, by the most
celebrated French, Italian, and English Photographers, embracing Views of
the principal Countries and Cities of Europe, is now OPEN. Admission 6d. A
Portrait taken by MR. TALBOT'S Patent Process, One Guinea; Three extra
Copies for 10s.

PHOTOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION, 168. NEW BOND STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PAPER.--Negative and Positive Papers of Whatman's, Turner's,
Sanford's, and Canson Frères' make. Waxed-Paper for Le Gray's Process.
Iodized and Sensitive Paper for every kind of Photography.

Sold by JOHN SANFORD, Photographic Stationer, Aldine Chambers, 13.
Paternoster Row, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC APPARATUS, MATERIALS, and PURE CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS.

KNIGHT & SONS' Illustrated Catalogue, containing Description and Price of
the best forms of Cameras and other Apparatus. Voightlander and Son's
Lenses for Portraits and Views, together with the various Materials, and
pure Chemical Preparations required in practising the Photographic Art.
Forwarded free on receipt of Six Postage Stamps.

Instructions given in every branch of the Art.

An extensive Collection of Stereoscopic and other Photographic Specimens.

GEORGE KNIGHT & SONS, Foster Lane, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


DAGUERREOTYPE MATERIALS.--Plates, Cases. Passepartoutes. Best and Cheapest.
To be had in great variety at

McMILLAN'S Wholesale Depot, 132. Fleet Street.

Price List Gratis.

       *       *       *       *       *


HEAL AND SON'S EIDER DOWN QUILTS are made in three Varieties--the BORDERED
QUILT, the PLAIN QUILT, and the DUVET. The Bordered Quilt is in the usual
form of Bed Quilts, and is a most elegant and luxurious article. The Plain
Quilt is smaller, and useful as an extra covering on the bed, or as a
wrapper in the carriage, or on the couch. The Duvet is a loose case filled
with Eider Down as in general use on the Continent. Lists of Prices and
Sizes sent free by Post, on application to

  HEAL & SON'S Bedding Factory,
  196. Tottenham Court Road.

       *       *       *       *       *


LEEDS LIBRARY.

LIBRARIAN.--Wanted a Gentleman of Literary Attainments, competent to
undertake the duty of Librarian in the Leeds Library. The Institution
consists of about 500 Proprietary Members, and an Assistant Librarian is
employed. The hours of attendance required will be from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
daily, with an interval of two hours. Salary 120l. a year. Applications,
with Certificates of Qualifications, must be sent by letter, post paid, not
later then 1st December next, to ABRAHAM HORSFALL, ESQ., Hon. Sec., 9. Park
Row, Leeds.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE FOR NOVEMBER contains the following articles--1.
Sir Walter Raleigh at Sherborne. 2. The Pariah Girl, a Poem: by the Rev.
John Mitford. 3. Cotele, and the Edgecumbes of the Olden Time, by Mrs.
Bray, Part II. 4. The Annals of Appetite: Soyer's Pantropheon. 5. Notes on
Mediæval Art France and Germany, by J. G. Waller: Mayence, Heidelberg,
Basle, and Strasburg. 6. Remarks on the White Horse of Saxony and
Brunswick, by Stephen Martin Leake, Esq., Garter. 7. The Campaigns of
1793-95 in Flanders and Holland. Correspondence of Sylvanus Urban:
Counsels' Fees and Lawyers' Bills; Shops in Westminster Hall; The Family of
Phipps; Mr. John Knill of St Ive's; Antiquity of the Mysterious Word
"Wheedle." With Notes of the Month; Historical and Miscellaneous Reviews;
Reports of the Archæological Societies of Wales, Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Suffolk, and Essex; Historical Chronicle; and
OBITUARY, including Memoirs of Earl Brownlow, Lord Anderson, Right Hon. Sir
Frederick Adam, Adm. Sir Charles Adam, James Dodsley Cuff, Esq., Mr.
Adolphus Asher, Leon Jablonski, &c. Price 2s. 6d.

NICHOLS & SONS, 25. Parliament Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


Will be ready in November,

TURNER AND GIRTIN'S PICTURESQUE VIEWS SIXTY YEARS SINCE. Edited by THOMAS
MILLER, ESQ., Author of "Rural Sketches," &c. With Thirty Engravings of the
Olden Time, from Drawings by J. M. W. TURNER and T. GIRTIN, Portraits, &c.
Handsomely bound, price One Guinea.

HOGARTH, Haymarket, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


Fourth Edition of RUINS OF MANY LANDS. NOTICE.--A Fourth and Cheaper
Edition, Revised and considerably Enlarged, of MR. MICHELL'S "RUINS OF MANY
LANDS," with Portrait, cloth, price 4s. 6d.

This Edition contains Remarks on Layard's latest Discoveries at Nineveh,
and treats of nearly all the Ruins of Interest now in the world.

  London: WILLIAM TEGG & CO.,
  85. Queen Street, Cheapside.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO BOOK COLLECTORS.--Just published. T. MILLARD'S CATALOGUE of 10,000
VOLUMES of SECOND-HAND BOOKS. Catalogues Gratis, and Post Free. N.B.
Libraries purchased or exchanged. A discount of 2d. in the 1s. allowed on
all new books. Ency. Britt., 7th edit., by Napier, 18 gs.; another, 6th
edit., calf, 12 gs.; Ency. Met., last edit., hf. clf., 18 gs.; Penny
Cyclo., 29 vols., hf. clf. 7 gs.; Illustrated London News, to end of 1852,
cloth, 12 gs.; Stafford Gallery Collection of Pictures, 2 vols. fol., mor.
elegant, 5 gs.; Rose's Biographical Dictionary, 12 vols. 8vo. cloth, new,
4l. 8s., &c.--70. Newgate Street, City, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


TWELFTH PUBLIC DRAWING.--The Fifteenth Purchase of Land having just been
made for the CONSERVATIVE LAND SOCIETY, consisting of a Mansion and Part of
Seventy-four Acres at St. Margaret's on the Banks of the Thames, opposite
Richmond Gardens, close to Three Stations on the South-Western Railroad, it
has been resolved that the TWELFTH PUBLIC DRAWING shall take place at
Freemason's Hall, at 8 o'clock in the evening, on Thursday, November the
17th, Viscount Ranelagh in the Chair. On this occasion, 131 Shares will be
added to the Order of Rights for priority of Selection on the Society
Estates, namely, 87 by drawing, and 44 by seniority of date of Membership.
All Shares taken prior to the final numbers being placed in the wheel, will
be included in this drawing.

  CHARLES LEWIS GRUNEISEN,
                  Secretary.

       *       *       *       *       *


{483}

INDIGESTION, CONSTIPATION, NERVOUSNESS, &c.--BARRY, DU BARRY & CO.'S
HEALTH-RESTORING FOOD for INVALIDS and INFANTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE REVALENTA ARABICA FOOD, the only natural, pleasant, and effectual
remedy (without medicine, purging, inconvenience, or expense, as it saves
fifty times its cost in other remedies) for nervous, stomachic, intestinal,
liver and bilious complaints, however deeply rooted, dyspepsia
(indigestion), habitual constipation, diarrhoea, acidity, heartburn,
flatulency, oppression, distension, palpitation, eruption of the skin,
rheumatism, gout, dropsy, sickness at the stomach during pregnancy, at sea,
and under all other circumstances, debility in the aged as well as infants,
fits, spasms, cramps, paralysis, &c.

_A few out of 50,000 Cures:--_

    Cure, No. 71, of dyspepsia; from the Right Hon. the Lord Stuart de
    Decies:--"I have derived considerable benefits from your Revalenta
    Arabica Food, and consider it due to yourselves and the public to
    authorise the publication of these lines.--STUART DE DECIES."

    Cure, No. 49,832:--"Fifty years' indescribable agony from dyspepsia,
    nervousness, asthma, cough, constipation, flatulency, spasms, sickness
    at the stomach, and vomitings have been removed by Du Barry's excellent
    food.--MARIA JOLLY, Wortham Ling, near Diss, Norfolk."

    Cure, No. 180:--"Twenty-five years' nervousness, constipation,
    indigestion, and debility, from which I had suffered great misery, and
    which no medicine could remove or relieve, have been effectually cured
    by Du Barry's food in a very short time.--W. R. REEVES, Pool Anthony,
    Tiverton."

    Cure, No. 4,208:--"Eight years' dyspepsia, nervousness, debility, with
    cramps, spasms, and nausea, for which my servant had consulted the
    advice of many, have been effectually removed by Du Barry's delicious
    food in a very short time. I shall be happy to answer any
    inquiries.--REV. JOHN W. FLAVELL, Ridlington Rectory, Norfolk."

_Dr. Wurzer's Testimonial._

    "Bonn, July 19. 1852.

