Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOLUME XX., NO. 569.] SATURDAY, OCTOBER 6, 1832. [PRICE 2d.

       *       *       *       *       *


LISBON.


[Illustration: LISBON.]


Lisbon, the capital of Portugal, was called by the ancients Ulyssippo,
and the foundation is fabulously ascribed to Ulysses. The situation is
grand, on the north bank of the river Tagus, in lat. 38° 42-1/3' N.,
lon. 9° 8-1/3' W. The harbour, or rather road, of Lisbon, is one of the
finest in the world; and the quays are at once convenient and beautiful.
On entering the river, and passing the forts of St. Julian and of Bugio,
situated respectively at the extremities of the northern and southern
shores, we obtain a view of Lisbon crowning the hills on the north bank,
about three leagues distant above the mouth of the Tagus. The quintas or
villas scattered over the country, between the villages, become more
numerous the further we advance; till, at length, on approaching Belem,
an uninterrupted chain of edifices is seen extending along the margin of
the noble river, to the remotest part of the ancient capital, being a
distance of full six miles. Opposite Belem Castle, and on the southern
shore of the Tagus, is the small fort of Torre Velha. These two forts,
situated at the narrowest part of the river, guard the approach to the
capital by sea; and all vessels arriving at its port have their papers
examined at Belem Castle. The salutes of ships of war are, in like
manner, answered by its guns. Proceeding onward, we pass the Convent of
St. Geronymo, a splendid pile of Moorish architecture, "the picturesque
appearance of the scene being heightened by groups of boats peculiar in
their construction to the Tagus." From Belem we trace a range of
buildings, connecting it with Alcantara and Buenos Ayres, and finally
with the ancient city of Lisbon. Alcantara is situated at the mouth of a
narrow valley opening upon the Tagus. Upon the brow of the hill, on the
eastern side, is another of the royal residences, called the palace of
Necessiades; and, stretching across the valley, about a mile above this
point, is the far-famed aqueduct, which conveys the chief supply of
water to the capital. The new and populous quarter of Buenos Ayres
(so called from its being considered the healthiest situation around
the capital,) covers the steep hills situated in the angle formed by
the Alcantara valley and the Tagus. Miss Baillie, in her amusing
_Letters_, describes Buenos Ayres as "a suburb of Lisbon, standing
upon higher ground than the city itself, and a favourite resort of the
English, being generally considered as a cooler and more cleanly (or
rather a _less filthy_) situation than the latter." The splendid
river scenery from Belem to Lisbon, the luxuriant prospect from the
adjoining heights; the city itself, with its domes, and towers, and
gorgeous buildings--all this proud assemblage of nature and art--remind
us that

      It is a goodly sight to see
  What Heaven hath done for this delicious land!
  What fruits of fragrance blush on ev'ry tree!
  What goodly prospects o'er the hill expand;
  But man would mar them with an impious hand.

  BYRON.


The Engraving represents one of the most comprehensive views of the
city, obtained from an eminence crowned by the chapel of Nossa Senhora
da Monte. It has been copied from one of Colonel Batty's faithful
Views,[1] and its details cannot better be explained than in the words
of the clever artist:

"From this elevation, the spectator, on turning to the south, has before
him the principal part of the busy capital. The Castle Hill, crowned by
a variety of buildings, and encircled by the old walls of its Moorish
fortifications, stands conspicuously on the left. Its northern slope is
planted with olive-trees, which add to its picturesque appearance, and
afford an agreeable relief to the eye in this widely extended scene of a
dense and populous city. On the right hand is another range of heights,
less elevated than the Castle Hill, but covered with buildings, amidst
which churches, convents, and hospitals, form prominent objects. The
valley, in the centre of the view, appears from this point to be choked
up with an almost impenetrable labyrinth of houses. This is, however,
now the most regular portion of the capital. Having been that part which
suffered most severely from the great earthquake of 1755, it has since
been rebuilt upon a uniform plan, with its streets intersecting each
other at right angles. In this quarter also are the two principal
pracas, or squares, in the city. The largest of these is the Praca do
Commercio, opening to the south upon the broad expanse of the Tagus.
Here formerly stood the royal palace, which was almost instantaneously
destroyed by the same memorable earthquake. The centre of this square is
ornamented by an equestrian statue of King Joseph I. The other square is
situated a little more to the north, about the centre of the valley.
It is called the Rocio, and was formerly styled the Square of the
Inquisition, from that tribunal having held its sittings in a large
building at its northern extremity. The Castle Hill conceals from our
view a portion of the ancient city, which, it is remarkable, escaped
with comparatively trifling damage from the earthquake, though
immediately contiguous to the part just described, which, in a few
moments, was rendered a complete mass of ruins, burying thousands of the
wretched inhabitants. Beyond the Tagus, the heights of Almada are seen
bounding the view, and extending westward towards the sea."

    [1] Published by Messrs. Moon, Boys and Graves Booksellers, Pall Mall.


       *       *       *       *       *


MRS. HEMANS.

(_To the Editor_.)


In No. 550, of _The Mirror_, in some account of Mrs. Hemans, by
_The Author of a Tradesman's Lays_, it is erroneously stated that
Mrs. Hemans is a native of Denbighshire. She was born in Liverpool, and
was the daughter of Mr. George Brown, of the firm of Messrs. George and
Henry Brown, extensive merchants in the Irish trade. Mr. Brown removed
with his family, from Liverpool, to near Abergele, North Wales, where he
resided some years. He married a Miss Wagner, daughter of Paul Wagner,
Esq., a German, and a respectable merchant in Liverpool. Mrs. Hemans's
early poems were published by subscription in 1808; they were
beautifully printed in quarto, at the press of the late Mr. John
McCreery,[2] who long resided in Liverpool. Mrs. Hemans, after her
marriage, lived near St. Asaph, with her mother and brother, Sir Henry
Brown; after which she took up her residence at the village of
Wavertree, three miles from Liverpool.

_Liverpool._

A CONSTANT READER.

    [2] Mr. McCreery left Liverpool to reside in London, he died a
        short time since of cholera, at Paris.


       *       *       *       *       *


SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION.

(_To the Editor_.)


The remarks of your Correspondent, _A. Booth_, in No. 567, of
_The Mirror_, with respect to what is generally called "Spontaneous
Combustion," are very just. My present object is to show that the term
"spontaneous" as applied to the subject in question, is incorrect. Mons.
Pierre Aimee Laire, in an "Essay on Human Combustion from the abuse of
Spirituous Liquors," states that it is the breath of the individuals
coming in contact with some flame, and being thus communicated inwardly,
that is the cause of the combustion, and therefore it cannot be
spontaneous; and he cites several instances of persons addicted to
spirituous liquors being thus burnt. Moreover, it is stated that an
anatomical lecturer, at Pisa, in the year 1597, happening to hold a
lighted candle near a subject he was dissecting, on a sudden set fire to
the vapours that came out of the stomach he had just opened. In the same
year, as Dr. Ruisch, then anatomical professor at Pisa, was dissecting a
woman, and a student holding a candle to give him light, he no sooner
opened the stomach than there issued a yellow, greenish flame. Also at
Lyons, in dissecting a woman, the stomach was no sooner opened than a
considerable flame burst out and filled the room. This has been
accounted for by experiments made by Dr. Vulpari, anatomical professor
at Bologna. He affirms that any one may see, issuing from the stomach of
an animal, a matter that burns like spirits of wine, if the upper and
lower orifices are bound fast with a strong thread, and the stomach
being thus tied, be cut above and under the ligature, and afterwards
pressed with both hands, so as to make all that it contains pass on
one side, and to produce a swelling on that part which contains the
incision, which must be held with the left hand, to prevent the
inflammable air escaping. This hand being removed, and a candle applied
about an inch from the stomach, a blueish flame will issue, which will
last nearly a minute. The circumstances of the case of Grace Pitt, to
which your Correspondent refers, perfectly coincide with the foregoing
remarks. She was accustomed for several years to go down stairs after
she was undressed, to _smoke a pipe_. Her daughter, who slept with
her, did not miss her till the morning, when on going down stairs, she
found her mother's body extended _over the hearth_, and appearing
like a block of wood burning with a glowing fire, without flame. She
was, no doubt, in the act of lighting her pipe, either at the fire or
candle, and the breath issuing from her mouth during respiration, being
impregnated with the spirits she had lately drunk, caught fire, and
communicated with the animal substance, also impregnated with spirit,
and thus the body was destroyed. Indeed, in nearly all the cases of this
nature reported, the bodies have been found on the hearth, or the
persons have been left with a candle near them. The combustion of the
human body in these cases is generally entirely inward, and it is very
seldom that any of the contiguous articles are destroyed. In the
instance mentioned above, a child's clothes on one side of the woman,
and a paper screen were untouched, and the deal floor on which she lay
was not even discoloured.

The most remarkable instance of this nature on record, is that of the
Countess Cornelia Bandi; she was in the sixty-second year of her age,
and on the day before well as usual. After she was in bed she conversed
with her maid for two or three hours, and then fell asleep. The servant
on going into her chamber in the morning, saw her lady's two feet
distant from the bed, a heap of ashes, and two legs with the stockings
on. Between the latter was part of the head, but the brains, half the
skull, and the chin, were burnt to ashes, which, when taken up in the
hand, left a greasy and offensive moisture. The bed received no damage,
and the clothes were elevated on one side, as by a person rising from
beneath them. She appears to have been burnt standing, from the skull
being found between her legs; the back was damaged more than the front
of the head, partly because of the hair, and partly because in the face
there were several openings, out of which the flames are likely to
have issued. In this account it is not stated either that she was of
intemperate habits, or that a candle was left in the room with her; but
the latter is very likely, she being advanced in years; and it may be
conjectured, that in rising from her bed, she caught fire.

One Borelli observes, that such accidents often happen to great drinkers
of wine and brandy, and that it would be of much more frequent
occurrence, were it not for the natural moisture of the body.
Notwithstanding this, your readers must not think that I am opposed to
the "cheerful draught:" I would say,

  "Let each indulge his genius, each be glad,
  Jocund and free, and swell the feast with mirth.
  The sprightly bowl go cheerfully round.
  Let none be grave, nor too severely wise;
  Losses and disappointments, cares and poverty,
  The rich man's insolence, and great man's scorn,
  In wine be all forgotten."--ROWE.


_St. Pancras._

W.A.R.

       *       *       *       *       *


RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS.

       *       *       *       *       *


EARLY PARLIAMENTS.


When the Saxon government was first established in England, there
was no distinction of freehold and copyhold; the latter, according
to Blackstone, was a possession acquired by a vassal subsequent to the
Norman feudal system. Copyholders being thus considered as slaves, were,
notwithstanding their possessions, deemed unworthy of the franchise; and
from this refinement, on the arbitrary principles of the Normans, every
copyholder was deprived of a vote, unless he could claim it by some
other tenure.

The term borough originally meant a company consisting of ten families,
which were bound together as each other's pledge. Afterwards boroughs
came to signify a town, having a wall, or some sort of enclosure round;
and all places that, in old times, had the name of boroughs, it is said,
were fortified or fenced in some shape or other.

In the time of the West Saxons, a parliament was holden by King Ina,
by these words: "I, Ina, King of the West Saxons, have caused all my
fatherhood, aldermen, and wisest commons, with the goodly men of my
kingdom, to consult of weighty matters."

William the Conqueror, in the fourth year of his reign, called a
parliament, which consisted of twelve representatives for each county,
and the cities and boroughs were wholly omitted. After the battle of
Lewes, in which Henry III. was defeated by the barons, they called a
parliament, and made the king sign an order to summon four knights to
represent each county, and four for the cities of London, York, and
Lincoln. These representatives were chosen by universal suffrage of
the householders, and although the king regained his authority by the
subsequent defeat of the barons, two members for each county continued
to be elected in the same manner till the 8th of Henry VI. In the
parliament held in the 49th of Henry III., he sent writs to the nobles
and to the sheriffs of several counties, to return two knights for each
county, two citizens for each city, and two burgesses for each borough.

It was contrary to an ancient rule of the constitution, that any person
should be allowed to vote at elections who did not reside in the place
or county where the election was made; that rule says, that "ineddem
comitata commercentes et residentes" only shall vote; and this was
confirmed by an act of parliament, (1 Henry V. c. i.) but recently
repealed.

In 1429, an important change was made as to the qualifications of the
voters for knights of the shires. The voters were obliged to prove
themselves worth 40_s._ per annum. Before this time, every freeholder
might vote, and the vast concourse of electors brought on riots and
murders. Seventy pounds would, in modern days, be barely an equivalent
for our ancestors' 40_s._ The freeholders were, at the same time,
directed to choose two of the fittest and most discreet knights resident
in their county; or, if none could be found, notable esquires, gentlemen
by birth, and qualified to be made knights; but no yeoman or persons of
inferior rank.

W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.

       *       *       *       *       *


MARVELLOUS CURE OF THE TOOTHACH.

(_From a Correspondent_.)


A friend, who has recently returned from India, relates that he
received a perfect cure for the toothach, in a very remarkable way. He
had occasion to land on the Isle of Bourbon, at the time of his being
afflicted with a tormenting toothach; and a handkerchief being tied
about his head, his appearance excited the curiosity of the natives, who
approached him, and inquired, by signs and gestures, the nature of his
complaint. Having been satisfied on this point, they made him understand
that _they_ could cure him, if he would consent to their method;
which he did with great willingness, as he was maddened with pain, and
eager to make any experiment to gain relief. They first kindled a fire
on the ground with a few dry sticks, and then directed their patient to
hold the fore finger of his right hand to the tooth that was affected,
while they articulated a sort of jargon among themselves. When they had
finished, and the sticks were all burnt, they told him to withdraw his
hand, and the pain would cease. He did so, when his joy and astonishment
exceeded all bounds to find that the pain had _actually left him!_

This story may appear somewhat strange, yet I have no reason to doubt
the veracity of my friend, who supposes that the artful natives burned
some kind of herb in order to impregnate the air with its qualities,
which being admitted into the cavity of the tooth, effectually removed
the pain. He says he has never experienced a return of the complaint
since.

G.W.N.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOURNAL OF A SHERIFF OF LONDON.

(_Concluded from page 198_.)


"Wednesday, Oct. 29th. This being our grand feast day, my Lord Mayor,
Humphry Parsons, Esq., sent his summons to attend at Guildhall, by
ten o'clock, and that he would set out from thence, to Westminster,
precisely at eleven, in order to be back to our entertainment more
early. What added magnificence to this day's _Shew_ was, that his
lordship's coach was drawn by six horses, adorned with grand harnesses,
ribbons, &c., a sight never before seen on this occasion.--The Lord
Chancellor and some of the Judges dined with us; the whole entertainment
was happily conducted with great order and decency, and the company was
broken up by about one o'clock in the morning.

"Wednesday, Nov. 5th. This being the commemoration of the Gunpowder
Plot, we, the sheriff's, attended my Lord Mayor from Guildhall to St.
Paul's: and as his lordship's coach was, on this occasion, drawn as
before by six horses, which he intended to do on every public occasion,
it caused a more than ordinary concourse of people in the streets."

On Sunday, the 11th of January, Mr. Hoare, in his scarlet gown, with the
Lord Mayor, and several of the aldermen, received the holy communion,
in St. Lawrence's church, in pursuance of the statutes, to qualify
themselves to act as magistrates; and on the following day, being Plough
Monday, he attended the Lord Mayor at Guildhall, "to receive the several
presentments of the respective wardmote inquests of each ward,--and at
the same time to swear in all new constables for the ensuing year." On
Wednesday, the 14th the quarter sessions commenced, "when it is usual
for the several common councilmen to take the oaths of allegiance;"
which was done accordingly.

"Friday, February 20th. Waited on my Lord Mayor to Bow church, in my
scarlet, to hear a sermon upon the propagation of the gospel in foreign
parts; to which the Archbishop of Canterbury also came in his state
coach, and with grand solemnity, attended by seven or eight bishops, and
great numbers of gentlemen of that society."

The Lord Mayor (Humphry Parsons) died on the evening of March the 21st,
1741; on the 23rd, Daniel Lambert, Esq. was elected to succeed him, and
the same evening he was presented to the Lord Chancellor, and approved
of in the usual manner.

"Wednesday, March 15th. This day the new Lord Mayor went in grand state
and procession by land to the Tower-gate, on Tower-hill, to be there
presented to and sworn in before the Constable of the Tower, according
to the charter and ancient custom and usage when a Lord Mayor happened,
as in this case, to be chosen out of term time; and, consequently,
cannot be presented to the Barons of the Exchequer sitting at
Westminster. Just at the entrance of the Tower-gate, a large booth was
built up, with seats and benches at the upper end, in the middle of
which the right honourable Lord Cornwallis, Constable of the Tower, was
seated, attended by the officers and servants belonging to him; to whom
the Lord Mayor was conducted and presented, and sworn in the same manner
as before the Barons of the Exchequer."

On the 28th of March, being Easter Eve, the sheriff's attended the Lord
Mayor "through the streets, to collect charity for the prisoners in the
city prisons, according to annual custom;" and on the Monday following,
they accompanied his lordship, in procession, with the rest of the court
of aldermen to St. Bride's church to hear the '_Spital_ or _Hospital
Sermon_ preached before the governors of the several hospitals and
charity schools of the city; and to which "all the charity children
of the several schools, as also those of Christ's hospital, go in
procession, and are seated in the galleries." This sermon is "generally
preached by a bishop," and that on the following day, in the same church
(which is likewise attended by the corporation,) by a dean. On the third
day in Easter week, the 'Spital sermon is preached by a doctor in
divinity.

Speaking of the _Easter Entertainments_, our journalist states the
following particulars as the cause of their origin:--

"The original institution of those entertainments was occasioned by the
Lord Mayor and the two sheriffs being accustomed to, separately, ask
such of their friends who were aldermen or governors of the hospitals,
whom they saw at church, to dine with them at their own houses. But in
process of time, it was agreed that the Lord Mayor should invite all
that were at church on the first day; and the two sheriff's, in their
turn, on the next succeeding days. Hence, by degrees, they began to
invite other of their friends; and the aldermen bringing their ladies,
other ladies were also invited, so that the private houses not being
large enough, they began to entertain at their respective halls: whence
it is now brought to pass, that these Easter entertainments are become
the chiefest articles of expense both to the Lord Mayor and the two
sheriffs.

"Monday, April 6th. The sessions began at Guildhall, but the Lord Mayor
dispensed with the presence of the sheriffs, on account that we this
day were obliged to attend at Westminster, where we were to make our
proffers at the Exchequer by a tender of 40_s_.; and which was
accordingly made by one of the secondaries at the Tally-office; by
which, and the annual rent of 300_l_., the citizens of London hold
and enjoy the _Sheriffwick_ of London and Middlesex according to
their charter. Afterwards we entertained all the Exchequer officers,
according to ancient custom, with _fifty-two calves_' heads,
dressed in different manners."

On the 20th of April the sheriffs accompanied the Lord Mayor to
hold a Court Baron and Court Leet at the Mitre in St. James's parish,
in _Duke's-place_, which is "a franchise within the liberty of
London." After a jury had been sworn, &c., the names of the inhabitants
being called over, those who were absent and sent no excuse were
amerced, but those who sent "their excuses by their friends, paid only
leet pence." The court then granted licenses to the public houses, and
swore in the headboroughs, constables, and other officers.

On the 27th of May the sheriffs (by invitation, they having no concern
with the jurisdiction of the court,) attended the Lord Mayor to
Stratford, in Essex, and Greenwich in Kent, to hold "his _Court of
Conservancy_ of the navigation and fishery of the River Thames, from
Staines bridge, in Middlesex, down to the mouth of the river Medway, at
Sheerness, beyond the Nore;" he "being personally himself, by virtue of
his office, the sole Conservator." On returning, "a little after ten
o'clock," the party attempted to land at the King's Stairs at the tower,
"but they being shut, and, after waiting some time, the wardour refusing
to open them," they were obliged to proceed to the common stairs near
that fortress.

"Soon after, the major of the tower came to my Lord Mayor to acquaint
him, that 'he was sorry for the refusal of which the wardour had been
guilty, whom he had ordered to strict duty, and would oblige him to come
and ask pardon for his insolence.' Upon this apology, it was agreed that
no further notice or complaint should be made; for it is to be known
that the Lord Mayor of this city has the privilege of going through the
Tower to take water, or on his landing at the King's Stairs, sending
reasonable notice of such his intention."

At a Common Council, held on the 17th of June, it was ordered that every
person who had paid the customary fine of 400_l_. and twenty marks more
towards the maintenance of the ministers of the several prisons of this
city," with the usual fees, should be exempted for ever from serving the
office of sheriff, "unless he should at any time become an alderman."
Previously to that act, the payment of the fine excused only for one
year.

"Tuesday, June 23rd. Attended the Lord Mayor to a court of aldermen,
at which Abel Aldridge, who had been nominated for sheriff, came with
_six Compurgators_, and, (according to the act of Common Council,
Sir J. Barnard, Mayor,) swore he was not of the value of 15,000_l_. in
money and separate debts; and his Compurgators swearing also, that they
believed what he swore to be true, he was excused from serving the said
office, without payment of any fine."

On the 22nd of August the sheriffs waited on the Lord Mayor at
Guildhall, "and from thence went in procession to Smithfield, with city
officers and trumpets to proclaim Bartholomew Fair." On the 2nd of
September, "this day being kept solemn in commemoration of the fire of
London," they went to St. Paul's in their "black gowns, and no chains,
and heard a sermon on the said occasion." On the 8th of September the
sheriffs waited on the Lord Mayor, in procession, "the city music going
before, to proclaim _Southwark Fair_, as it is commonly called,
although the ceremony is no more than our going in our coaches through
the Borough, and turning round by Saint George's church, back again to
the Bridge House; and this to signify the license to begin the fair."
The journalist adds:--"On this day the sword-bearer wears a fine
_embroidered cap_, said to have been worked and presented to the
city by a monastery."

"Monday, September 21st, being St. Matthew's Day, waited on my Lord
Mayor to the great hall in Christ's Hospital, where we were met by
several of the presidents and governors of the other hospitals within
the city; and being seated at the upper end, the children passed
two by two, whom we followed to the church, and after hearing a sermon,
came back to the grammar school, where two boys made speeches in
commemoration of their benefactors, one in English, the other in Latin;
to each of whom it is customary for the Lord Mayor to give one guinea,
and the two sheriffs half-a-guinea a piece, as we did. Afterwards, the
clerk of the hospital delivered to the Lord Mayor a list of the several
governors to the several hospitals nominated the preceding year. Then
the several beadles of all the hospitals came in, and laying down their
staves on the middle of the floor, retired to the bottom of the hall.
Thereupon the Lord Mayor addressed himself to the City Marshal,
enquiring after their conduct, and if any complaint was to be made
against any one in particular; and no objection being made, the Lord
Mayor ordered them to take up their staves again: all which is done in
token of their submission to the chief magistrate, and that they hold
their places at his will, though elected by their respective governors.
We were afterwards treated in the customary manner with _sweet cakes
and burnt wine_."

The shrievalty of Mr. Hoare, and his brother officer, expired on the
28th of September, and about seven o'clock in the evening the indentures
with the new sheriffs were executed at Guildhall, "and the charge of the
gaols and all other trusts relating to this great and hazardous, though
otherwise honourable, employment, delivered over to them. And after
being regaled with _sack and walnuts_, I returned to my own house
in my private capacity, to my great consolation and comfort."

In concluding this account of a manuscript, which illustrates so many of
the customs and privileges of the city, it should be mentioned that it
includes various notices of the treats or dinners which the Lord Mayor
and the sheriffs give by turns to the judges, sergeants, &c. at the
beginning and end of the respective terms; as well as of the manner of
delivering petitions to the House of Commons, which is generally done by
the sheriff; the city having a right to present petitions by an officer
of its own, and without the intervention of any member.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NATURALIST.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NIGHTINGALE.


The nightingale is universally admitted to be the most enchanting of
warblers; and many might be tempted to encage the mellifluous songster,
but for the supposed difficulty of procuring proper food for it. In the
village of Cossey, near Norwich, an individual has had a nightingale in
cage since last April; it is very healthy and lively, and has been wont
to charm its owner with its sweet and powerful strains. The bird appears
about two years old: it has gone through this year's moulting. It is
kept in a darksome cage, with three sides wood, and the fourth wired.
The bottom of the cage is covered with moss. Its constant food is a
paste, which is composed of fresh beef or mutton, scraped fine with a
knife, and in equal portions mixed with the yolk of an egg boiled hard.
The owner, however, about once a-day, gives it also a _mealworm_;
he does not think this last dainty to be necessary, but only calculated
to keep the nightingale in better spirits. The paste should be changed
before it becomes sour and tainted.

PHILOMELOS.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES

_Abridged from the Magazine of Natural History._


_Silkworm_.--(_By a Correspondent.)_--It has occurred to me, and I have
not seen it remarked elsewhere, as a striking and interesting
peculiarity of this insect, that it does not wander about as all other
caterpillars do, but that it is nearly stationary in the open box or
tray where it is placed and fed: after consuming the immediate supply of
mulberry leaves, it waits patiently for more being provided. I apprehend
this cannot be said of any other insect whatever. This docile quality of
the worm harmonizes beautifully with its vast importance to mankind, in
furnishing a material which affords our most elegant and beautiful, if
not most useful, of garments. The same remark applies to the insect in
the fly or moth state, the female being quite incapable of flight, and
the male, although of a much lighter make, and more active, can fly but
very imperfectly; the latter circumstance ensures to us the eggs for the
following season, and thus completes the adaptation of the insect, in
its different stages, to the useful purpose it is destined to fulfil for
our advantage.

_The Possibility of introducing and naturalizing that beautiful Insect
the Fire Fly_.--It abounds not only in Canada, where the winters are
so severe, but in the villages of the Vaudois in Piedmont. These are
a poor people much attached to the English: and, at 10_s_. a dozen,
would, no doubt, deliver in Paris, in boxes properly contrived, any
number of these creatures, in every stage of their existence, and even
in the egg, should that be desired: and if twenty dozen were turned out
in different parts of England, there cannot remain a doubt but that,
in a few years, they would be common through the country; and, in our
summer evenings, be exquisitely beautiful.

Vigne, in his _Six Months in America_, says:--"At Baltimore I first
saw the fire-fly. They begin to appear about sunset, after which they
are sparkling in all directions. In some places ladies wear them in
their hair, and the effect is said to be very brilliant. Mischievous
boys will sometimes catch a bull-frog, and fasten them all over him.
They show to great advantage; while the poor frog, who cannot understand
the 'new lights' that are breaking upon him, affords amusement to his
tormentors by hopping about in a state of desperation."

_The Vampire Bat_.--Bishop Heber's opinion of the innocence of this
creature by no means agrees with what one has read of his bloodthirsty
habits; and particularly the instances given by Captain Stedman, in his
_Travels of Surinam_, who, more than once, individually, experienced
the inconvenience of the Sangrado system of blood-letting, or, more
properly, blood-taking, pursued by this practitioner.

  "Non missura cutern, nisi plena cruoris hirudo."

HOR.

  "This leech will suck the vein, until
  From your heart's blood he gets his fill."


In answer to a query, "whether the vampire of India and that of South
America be of one species," Mr. Waterton replies, "I beg to say that I
consider them distinct species. I have never yet seen a bat from India
with a membrane rising perpendicularly from the end of its nose; nor
have I ever been able to learn that bats in India suck animals, though
I have questioned many people on this subject. I could only find two
species of bats in Guiana, with a membrane rising from the nose. Both
these kinds suck animals and eat fruit; while those bats without a
membrane on the nose seem to live entirely upon fruit and insects, but
chiefly insects. A gentleman, by name Walcott, from Barbadoes, lived
high up the river Demerara. While I was passing a day or two at his
house, the vampires sucked his son a boy of about ten or eleven years
old, some of his fowls and his jack-ass. The youth showed me his
forehead at daybreak: the wound was still bleeding apace, and I examined
it with minute attention. The poor ass was doomed to be a prey to these
sanguinary imps of night: he looked like misery steeped in vinegar.
I saw, by the numerous sores on his body, and by his apparent debility,
that he would soon sink under his afflictions. Mr. Walcott told me that
it was with the greatest difficulty he could keep a few fowls, on
account of the smaller vampire; and that the larger kind were killing
his poor ass by inches. It was the only quadruped he had brought up with
him into the forest.

