Produced by Bill Brewer


PADRE IGNACIO

Or The Song of Temptation

By Owen Wister


I

At Santa Ysabel del Mar the season was at one of those moments when the
air rests quiet over land and sea. The old breezes were gone; the new
ones were not yet risen. The flowers in the mission garden opened wide;
no wind came by day or night to shake the loose petals from their stems.
Along the basking, silent, many-colored shore gathered and lingered the
crisp odors of the mountains. The dust hung golden and motionless long
after the rider was behind the hill, and the Pacific lay like a floor
of sapphire, whereon to walk beyond the setting sun into the East. One
white sail shone there. Instead of an hour, it had been from dawn till
afternoon in sight between the short headlands; and the Padre had hoped
that it might be the ship his homesick heart awaited. But it had slowly
passed. From an arch in his garden cloisters he was now watching the
last of it. Presently it was gone, and the great ocean lay empty. The
Padre put his glasses in his lap. For a short while he read in his
breviary, but soon forgot it again. He looked at the flowers and sunny
ridges, then at the huge blue triangle of sea which the opening of
the hills let into sight. "Paradise," he murmured, "need not hold more
beauty and peace. But I think I would exchange all my remaining years of
this for one sight again of Paris or Seville. May God forgive me such a
thought!"

Across the unstirred fragrance of oleanders the bell for vespers began
to ring. Its tones passed over the Padre as he watched the sea in his
garden. They reached his parishioners in their adobe dwellings near by.
The gentle circles of sound floated outward upon the smooth, immense
silence--over the vines and pear-trees; down the avenues of the olives;
into the planted fields, whence women and children began to return; then
out of the lap of the valley along the yellow uplands, where the men
that rode among the cattle paused, looking down like birds at the map
of their home. Then the sound widened, faint, unbroken, until it met
Temptation in the guise of a youth, riding toward the Padre from the
South, and cheered the steps of Temptation's jaded horse.

"For a day, one single day of Paris!" repeated the Padre, gazing through
his cloisters at the empty sea.

Once in the year the mother-world remembered him. Once in the year,
from Spain, tokens and home-tidings came to him, sent by certain beloved
friends of his youth. A barkentine brought him these messages. Whenever
thus the mother-world remembered him, it was like the touch of a warm
hand, a dear and tender caress; a distant life, by him long left behind,
seemed to be drawing the exile homeward from these alien shores. As the
time for his letters and packets drew near, the eyes of Padre Ignacio
would be often fixed wistfully upon the harbor, watching for the
barkentine. Sometimes, as to-day, he mistook other sails for hers, but
hers he mistook never. That Pacific Ocean, which, for all its hues and
jeweled mists, he could not learn to love, had, since long before his
day, been furrowed by the keels of Spain. Traders, and adventurers,
and men of God had passed along this coast, planting their colonies and
cloisters; but it was not his ocean. In the year that we, a thin strip
of patriots away over on the Atlantic edge of the continent, declared
ourselves an independent nation, a Spanish ship, in the name of Saint
Francis, was unloading the centuries of her own civilization at the
Golden Gate. San Diego had come earlier. Then, slowly, as mission
after mission was built along the soft coast wilderness, new ports
were established--at Santa Barbara, and by Point San Luis for San Luis
Obispo, which lay inland a little way up the gorge where it opened among
the hills. Thus the world reached these missions by water; while on
land, through the mountains, a road led to them, and also to many more
that were too distant behind the hills for ships to serve--a rough road,
long and lonely, punctuated with church towers and gardens. For the
Fathers gradually so stationed their settlements that the traveler might
each morning ride out from one mission and by evening of a day's fair
journey ride into the next. A lonely, rough, dangerous road, but lovely,
too, with a name like music--El Camino Real. Like music also were the
names of the missions--San Juan Capistrano, San Luis Rey de Francia, San
Miguel, Santa Ynes--their very list is a song.

So there, by-and-by, was our continent, with the locomotive whistling
from Savannah to Boston along its eastern edge, and on the western the
scattered chimes of Spain ringing among the unpeopled mountains. Thus
grew the two sorts of civilization--not equally. We know what has
happened since. To-day the locomotive is whistling also from The Golden
Gate to San Diego; but still the old mission-road goes through the
mountains, and along it the footsteps of vanished Spain are marked with
roses, and broken cloisters, and the crucifix.

But this was 1855. Only the barkentine brought to Padre Ignacio the
signs from the world that he once had known and loved so dearly. As for
the new world making a rude noise to the northward, he trusted that it
might keep away from Santa Ysabel, and he waited for the vessel that was
overdue with its package containing his single worldly luxury.

As the little, ancient bronze bell continued swinging in the tower,
its plaintive call reached something in the Padre's memory. Softly,
absently, he began to sing. He took up the slow strain not quite
correctly, and dropped it, and took it up again, always in cadence with
the bell.

[musical score appears here]

At length he heard himself, and, glancing at the belfry, smiled a
little. "It is a pretty tune," he said, "and it always made me sorry for
poor Fra Diavolo. Auber himself confessed to me that he had made it sad
and put the hermitage bell to go with it, because he too was grieved
at having to kill his villain, and wanted him, if possible, to die in a
religious frame of mind. And Auber touched glasses with me and said--how
well I remember it!--'Is it the good Lord, or is it merely the devil,
that makes me always have a weakness for rascals?' I told him it was the
devil. I was not a priest then. I could not be so sure with my answer
now." And then Padre Ignacio repeated Auber's remark in French: "'Est-ce
le bon Dieu, oui est-ce bien le diable, qui veut tonjours que j'aime
les coquins?' I don't know! I don't know! I wonder if Auber has composed
anything lately? I wonder who is singing 'Zerlina' now?"

He cast a farewell look at the ocean, and took his steps between the
monastic herbs, the jasmines and the oleanders to the sacristy. "At
least," he said, "if we cannot carry with us into exile the friends and
the places we have loved, music will go whither we go, even to an end of
the world such as this.--Felipe!" he called to his organist. "Can they
sing the music I taught them for the Dixit Dominus to-night?"

"Yes, father, surely."

"Then we will have that. And, Felipe--" The Padre crossed the chancel to
the small, shabby organ. "Rise, my child, and listen. Here is something
you can learn. Why, see now if you cannot learn it from a single
hearing."

The swarthy boy of sixteen stood watching his master's fingers, delicate
and white, as they played. Thus, of his own accord, he had begun to
watch them when a child of six; and the Padre had taken the wild,
half-scared, spellbound creature and made a musician of him.

"There, Felipe!" he said now. "Can you do it? Slower, and more softly,
muchacho mio. It is about the death of a man, and it should go with our
bell."

The boy listened. "Then the father has played it a tone too low," said
he, "for our bell rings the note of sol, or something very near it, as
the father must surely know." He placed the melody in the right key--an
easy thing for him; and the Padre was delighted.

"Ah, my Felipe," he exclaimed, "what could you and I not do if we had a
better organ! Only a little better! See! above this row of keys would be
a second row, and many more stops. Then we would make such music as has
never yet been heard in California. But my people are so poor and so
few! And some day I shall have passed from them, and it will be too
late."

"Perhaps," ventured Felipe, "the Americanos--"

"They care nothing for us, Felipe. They are not of our religion--or of
any religion, from what I can hear. Don't forget my Dixit Dominus."

The Padre retired once more to the sacristy, while the horse that
brought Temptation came over the hill.

The hour of service drew near; and as the Padre waited he once again
stepped out for a look at the ocean; but the blue triangle of water lay
like a picture in its frame of land, bare as the sky. "I think, from the
color, though," said he, "that a little more wind must have begun out
there."

The bell rang a last short summons to prayer. Along the road from the
south a young rider, leading a pack-animal, ambled into the mission and
dismounted. Church was not so much in his thoughts as food and, after
due digestion, a bed; but the doors stood open, and, as everybody was
passing within them, more variety was to be gained by joining this
company than by waiting outside alone until they should return from
their devotions. So he seated himself in a corner near the entrance, and
after a brief, jaunty glance at the sunburned, shaggy congregation, made
himself as comfortable as might be. He had not seen a face worth keeping
his eyes open for. The simple choir and simple fold, gathered for
even-song, paid him no attention--a rough American bound for the mines
was but an object of aversion to them.

The Padre, of course, had been instantly aware of the stranger's
presence. To be aware of unaccustomed presences is the sixth sense with
vicars of every creed and heresy; and if the parish is lonely and the
worshipers few and seldom varying, a newcomer will gleam out like a new
book to be read. And a trained priest learns to read keenly the faces of
those who assemble to worship under his guidance. But American vagrants,
with no thoughts save of gold-digging, and an overweening illiterate
jargon for speech, had long ceased to interest this priest, even in his
starvation for company and talk from the outside world; and therefore
after the intoning he sat with his homesick thoughts unchanged, to draw
both pain and enjoyment from the music that he had set to the Dixit
Dominus. He listened to the tender chorus that opens William Tell; and,
as the Latin psalm proceeded, pictures of the past rose between him and
the altar. One after another came these strains he had taken from operas
famous in their day, until at length the Padre was murmuring to some
music seldom long out of his heart--not the Latin verse which the choir
sang, but the original French words:

                 "Ah, voile man envie,
                     Voila mon seul desir:
                 Rendez moi ma patrie,
                     Ou laissez moi mourir."

Which may be rendered:

                 But one wish I implore,
                     One wish is all my cry:
                 Give back my native land once more,
                     Give back, or let me die.

Then it happened that his eye fell again upon the stranger near the
door, and he straightway forgot his Dixit Dominus. The face of the young
man was no longer hidden by the slouching position he had at first
taken. "I only noticed his clothes at first," thought the Padre.
Restlessness was plain upon the handsome brow, and violence was in the
mouth; but Padre Ignacio liked the eyes. "He is not saying any prayers,"
he surmised, presently. "I doubt if he has said any for a long while.
And he knows my music. He is of educated people. He cannot be American.
And now--yes, he has taken--I think it must be a flower, from his
pocket. I shall have him to dine with me." And vespers ended with rosy
clouds of eagerness drifting across the Padre's brain.


II

But the stranger made his own beginning. As the priest came from the
church, the rebellious young figure was waiting. "Your organist tells
me," he said, impetuously, "that it is you who--"

"May I ask with whom I have the great pleasure of speaking?" said the
Padre, putting formality to the front and his pleasure out of sight.

The stranger's face reddened beneath its sun-beaten bronze, and he
became aware of the Padre's pale features, molded by refinement and the
world. "I beg your lenience," said he, with a graceful and confident
utterance, as of equal to equal. "My name is Gaston Villere, and it was
time I should be reminded of my manners."

The Padre's hand waved a polite negative.

"Indeed, yes, Padre. But your music has amazed me. If you carried such
associations as--Ah! the days and the nights!"--he broke off. "To come
down a California mountain and find Paris at the bottom! The Huguenots,
Rossini, Herold--I was waiting for Il Trovatore."

"Is that something new?" inquired the Padre, eagerly.

The young man gave an exclamation. "The whole world is ringing with it!"
he cried.

"But Santa Ysabel del Mar is a long way from the whole world," murmured
Padre Ignacio.

"Indeed, it would not appear to be so," returned young Gaston. "I think
the Comedie Francaise must be round the corner."

A thrill went through the priest at the theater's name. "And have you
been long in America?" he asked.

"Why, always--except two years of foreign travel after college."

"An American!" exclaimed the surprised Padre, with perhaps a tone of
disappointment in his voice. "But no Americans who are yet come this
way have been--have been"--he veiled the too-blunt expression of his
thought--"have been familiar with The Huguenots," he finished, making a
slight bow.

Villere took his under-meaning. "I come from New Orleans," he returned,
"and in New Orleans there live many of us who can recognize a--who can
recognize good music wherever we hear it." And he made a slight bow in
his turn.

The Padre laughed outright with pleasure and laid his hand upon the
young man's arm. "You have no intention of going away to-morrow, I
trust?"

"With your leave," answered Gaston, "I will have such an intention no
longer."

It was with the air and gait of mutual understanding that the two now
walked on together toward the Padre's door. The guest was twenty-five,
the host sixty.

"And have you been in America long?" inquired Gaston.

"Twenty years."

"And at Santa Ysabel how long?"

"Twenty years."

"I should have thought," said Gaston, looking lightly at the desert
and unpeopled mountains, "that now and again you might have wished to
travel."

"Were I your age," murmured Padre Ignacio, "it might be so."

The evening had now ripened to the long after-glow of sunset. The sea
was the purple of grapes, and wine-colored hues flowed among the high
shoulders of the mountains.

"I have seen a sight like this," said Gaston, "between Granada and
Malaga."

"So you know Spain!" said the Padre.

Often he had thought of this resemblance, but never till now met any
one to share his thought. The courtly proprietor of San Fernando and the
other patriarchal rancheros with whom he occasionally exchanged visits
across the wilderness knew hospitality and inherited gentle manners,
sending to Europe for silks and laces to give their daughters; but their
eyes had not looked upon Granada, and their ears had never listened to
William Tell.

"It is quite singular," pursued Gaston, "how one nook in the world will
suddenly remind you of another nook that may be thousands of miles away.
One morning, behind the Quai Voltaire, an old, yellow house with rusty
balconies made me almost homesick for New Orleans."

"The Quai Voltaire!" said the Padre.

"I heard Rachel in Valerie that night," the young man went on. "Did you
know that she could sing, too. She sang several verses by an astonishing
little Jew violin-cellist that is come up over there."

The Padre gazed down at his blithe guest. "To see somebody, somebody,
once again, is very pleasant to a hermit!"

"It cannot be more pleasant than arriving at an oasis," returned Gaston.

They had delayed on the threshold to look at the beauty of the evening,
and now the priest watched his parishioners come and go. "How can one
make companions--" he began; then, checking himself, he said: "Their
souls are as sacred and immortal as mine, and God helps me to help
them. But in this world it is not immortal souls that we choose for
companions; it is kindred tastes, intelligences, and--and so I and my
books are growing old together, you see," he added, more lightly. "You
will find my volumes as behind the times as myself."

He had fallen into talk more intimate than he wished; and while the
guest was uttering something polite about the nobility of missionary
work, he placed him in an easy-chair and sought aguardiente for his
immediate refreshment. Since the year's beginning there had been no
guest for him to bring into his rooms, or to sit beside him in the high
seats at table, set apart for the gente fina.

Such another library was not then in California; and though Gaston
Villere, in leaving Harvard College, had shut Horace and Sophocles for
ever at the earliest instant possible under academic requirements, he
knew the Greek and Latin names that he now saw as well as he knew those
of Shakspere, Dante, Moliere, and Cervantes. These were here also; but
it could not be precisely said of them, either, that they made a part
of the young man's daily reading. As he surveyed the Padre's august
shelves, it was with a touch of the histrionic Southern gravity which
his Northern education had not wholly schooled out of him that he said:

"I fear I am no scholar, sir. But I know what writers every gentleman
ought to respect."

The polished Padre bowed gravely to this compliment.

It was when his eyes caught sight of the music that the young man felt
again at ease, and his vivacity returned to him. Leaving his chair, he
began enthusiastically to examine the tall piles that filled one side
of the room. The volumes lay piled and scattered everywhere, making
a pleasant disorder; and, as perfume comes from a flower, memories
of singers and chandeliers rose bright from the printed names. Norma,
Tancredi, Don Pasquale, La Vestale, dim lights in the fashions of
to-day, sparkled upon the exploring Gaston, conjuring the radiant halls
of Europe before him. "The Barber of Seville!" he presently exclaimed.
"And I happened to hear it in Seville."

But Seville's name brought over the Padre a new rush of home thoughts.
"Is not Andalusia beautiful?" he said. "Did you see it in April, when
the flowers come?"

"Yes," said Gaston, among the music. "I was at Cordova then."

"Ah, Cordova!" murmured the Padre.

"Semiramide!" cried Gaston, lighting upon that opera. "That was a week!
I should like to live it over, every day and night of it!"

"Did you reach Malaga from Marseilles or Gibraltar?" asked the Padre,
wistfully.

"From Marseilles. Down from Paris through the Rhone Valley, you know."

"Then you saw Provence! And did you go, perhaps, from Avignon to Nismes
by the Pont du Gard? There is a place I have made here--a little, little
place--with olive-trees. And now they have grown, and it looks something
like that country, if you stand in a particular position. I will take
you there to-morrow. I think you will understand what I mean."

"Another resemblance!" said the volatile and happy Gaston. "We both seem
to have an eye for them. But, believe me, Padre, I could never stay here
planting olives. I should go back and see the original ones--and then
I'd hasten on to Paris."

And, with a volume of Meyerbeer open in his hand, Gaston hummed:
"'Robert, Robert, toi que j'aime.' Why, Padre, I think that your library
contains none of the masses and all of the operas in the world!"

"I will make you a little confession," said Padre Ignacio, "and then you
shall give me a little absolution."

"For a penance," said Gaston, "you must play over some of these things
to me."

"I suppose I could not permit myself this luxury," began the Padre,
pointing to his operas, "and teach these to my choir, if the people had
any worldly associations with the music. But I have reasoned that the
music cannot do them harm--"

The ringing of a bell here interrupted him. "In fifteen minutes," he
said, "our poor meal will be ready for you." The good Padre was
not quite sincere when he spoke of a "poor meal." While getting the
aguardiente for his guest he had given orders, and he knew how well such
orders would be carried out. He lived alone, and generally supped simply
enough, but not even the ample table at San Fernando could surpass his
own on occasions. And this was for him indeed an occasion!

"Your half-breeds will think I am one of themselves," said Gaston,
showing his dusty clothes. "I am not fit to be seated with you." But he
did not mean this any more than his host had meant his remark about
the food. In his pack, which an Indian had brought from his horse, he
carried some garments of civilization. And presently, after fresh water
and not a little painstaking with brush and scarf, there came back to
the Padre a young guest whose elegance and bearing and ease of the
great world were to the exiled priest as sweet as was his traveled
conversation.

They repaired to the hall and took their seats at the head of the long
table. For the Spanish centuries of stately custom lived at Santa Ysabel
del Mar, inviolate, feudal, remote.

They were the only persons of quality present; and between themselves
and the gente de razon a space intervened. Behind the Padre's chair
stood an Indian to waft upon him, and another stood behind the chair of
Gaston Villere. Each of these servants wore one single white garment,
and offered the many dishes to the gente fina and refilled their
glasses. At the lower end of the table a general attendant wafted upon
mesclados--the half-breeds. There was meat with spices, and roasted
quail, with various cakes and other preparations of grain; also the
brown fresh olives and grapes, with several sorts of figs and plums,
and preserved fruits, and white and red wine--the white fifty years
old. Beneath the quiet shining of candles, fresh-cut flowers leaned from
vessels of old Mexican and Spanish make.

There at one end of this feast sat the wild, pastoral, gaudy company,
speaking little over their food; and there at the other the pale Padre,
questioning his visitor about Rachel. The mere name of a street would
bring memories crowding to his lips; and when his guest told him of a
new play he was ready with old quotations from the same author. Alfred
de Vigny they spoke of, and Victor Hugo, whom the Padre disliked. Long
after the dulce, or sweet dish, when it was the custom for the vaqueros
and the rest of the retainers to rise and leave the gente fina to
themselves, the host sat on in the empty hail, fondly talking to his
guest of his bygone Paris and fondly learning of the later Paris
that the guest had seen. And thus the two lingered, exchanging their
enthusiasms, while the candles waned, and the long-haired Indians stood
silent behind the chairs.

"But we must go to my piano," the host exclaimed. For at length they had
come to a lusty difference of opinion. The Padre, with ears critically
deaf, and with smiling, unconvinced eyes, was shaking his head, while
young Gaston sang Trovatore at him, and beat upon the table with a fork.

"Come and convert me, then," said Padre Ignacio, and he led the way.
"Donizetti I have always admitted. There, at least, is refinement.
If the world has taken to this Verdi, with his street-band music--But
there, now! Sit down and convert me. Only don't crush my poor little
Erard with Verdi's hoofs. I brought it when I came. It is behind the
times, too. And, oh, my dear boy, our organ is still worse. So old, so
old! To get a proper one I would sacrifice even this piano of mine in a
moment--only the tinkling thing is not worth a sou to anybody except its
master. But there! Are you quite comfortable?" And having seen to his
guest's needs, and placed spirits and cigars and an ash-tray within his
reach, the Padre sat himself comfortably in his chair to hear and expose
the false doctrine of Il Trovatore.

By midnight all of the opera that Gaston could recall had been played
and sung twice. The convert sat in his chair no longer, but stood
singing by the piano. The potent swing and flow of rhythms, the torrid,
copious inspiration of the South, mastered him. "Verdi has grown,"
he cried. "Verdi is become a giant." And he swayed to the beat of the
melodies, and waved an enthusiastic arm. He demanded every note. Why did
not Gaston remember it all? But if the barkentine would arrive and bring
the whole music, then they would have it right! And he made Gaston teach
him what words he knew. "'Non ti scorder,'" he sang--"'non ti scordar di
me.' That is genius. But one sees how the world moves when one is out of
it. 'A nostri monti ritorneremo'; home to our mountains. Ah, yes, there
is genius again." And the exile sighed and his spirit voyaged to distant
places, while Gaston continued brilliantly with the music of the final
scene.

Then the host remembered his guest. "I am ashamed of my selfishness," he
said. "It is already to-morrow."

"I have sat later in less good company," answered the pleasant Gaston.
"And I shall sleep all the sounder for making a convert."

"You have dispensed roadside alms," said the Padre, smiling, "and that
should win excellent dreams."

Thus, with courtesies more elaborate than the world has time for at the
present day, they bade each other good-night and parted, bearing their
late candles along the quiet halls of the mission. To young Gaston in
his bed easy sleep came without waiting, and no dreams at all. Outside
his open window was the quiet, serene darkness, where the stars shone
clear, and tranquil perfumes hung in the cloisters. But while the guest
lay sleeping all night in unchanged position like a child, up and down
between the oleanders went Padre Ignacio, walking until dawn. Temptation
indeed had come over the hill and entered the cloisters.


III

Day showed the ocean's surface no longer glassy, but lying like a mirror
breathed upon; and there between the short headlands came a sail,
gray and plain against the flat water. The priest watched through his
glasses, and saw the gradual sun grow strong upon the canvas of the
barkentine. The message from his world was at hand, yet to-day he
scarcely cared so much. Sitting in his garden yesterday, he could never
have imagined such a change. But his heart did not hail the barkentine
as usual. Books, music, pale paper, and print--this was all that was
coming to him, some of its savor had gone; for the siren voice of Life
had been speaking with him face to face, and in his spirit, deep down,
the love of the world was restlessly answering it. Young Gaston showed
more eagerness than the Padre over this arrival of the vessel that might
be bringing Trovatore in the nick of time. Now he would have the chance,
before he took his leave, to help rehearse the new music with the choir.
He would be a missionary, too: a perfectly new experience.

"And you still forgive Verdi the sins of his youth?" he said to his
host. "I wonder if you could forgive mine?"

"Verdi has left his behind him," retorted the Padre.

"But I am only twenty-five!" exclaimed Gaston, pathetically.

"Ah, don't go away soon!" pleaded the exile. It was the first
unconcealed complaint that had escaped him, and he felt instant shame.

But Gaston was too much elated with the enjoyment of each new day to
comprehend the Padre's soul. The shafts of another's pain might hardly
pierce the bright armor of his gaiety. He mistook the priest's entreaty,
for anxiety about his own happy spirit.

"Stay here under your care?" he asked. "It would do me no good, Padre.
Temptation sticks closer to me than a brother!" and he gave that laugh
of his which had disarmed severer judges than his host. "By next week I
should have introduced some sin or other into your beautiful Garden of
Ignorance here. It will be much safer for your flock if I go and join
the other serpents at San Francisco."

Soon after breakfast the Padre had his two mules saddled, and he and his
guest set forth down the hills together to the shore. And, beneath the
spell and confidence of pleasant, slow riding and the loveliness of
everything, the young man talked freely of himself.

"And, seriously," said he, "if I missed nothing else at Santa Ysabel, I
should long for--how shall I say it?--for insecurity, for danger, and
of all kinds--not merely danger to the body. Within these walls, beneath
these sacred bells, you live too safe for a man like me."

"Too safe!" These echoed words upon the lips of the pale Padre were a
whisper too light, too deep, for Gaston's heedless ear.

"Why," the young man pursued in a spirit that was but half levity,
"though I yield often to temptation, at times I have resisted it, and
here I should miss the very chance to resist. Your garden could never be
Eden for me, because temptation is absent from it."

"Absent!" Still lighter, still deeper, was this whisper that the Padre
breathed.

"I must find life," exclaimed Gaston, "and my fortune at the mines, I
hope. I am not a bad fellow, Father. You can easily guess all the things
I do. I have never, to my knowledge, harmed any one. I didn't even
try to kill my adversary in an affair of honor. I gave him a mere
flesh-wound, and by this time he must be quite recovered. He was my
friend. But as he came between me--"

Gaston stopped, and the Padre, looking keenly at him, saw the violence
that he had noticed in church pass like a flame over the young man's
handsome face.

"That's nothing dishonorable," said Gaston, answering the priest's look.
And then, because this look made him not quite at his ease: "Perhaps a
priest might feel obliged to say it was dishonorable. She and her father
were--a man owes no fidelity before he is--but you might say that had
been dishonorable."

"I have not said so, my son."

"I did what every gentleman would do." insisted Gaston.

"And that is often wrong!" said the Padre, gently and gravely. "But I'm
not your confessor."

"No," said Gaston, looking down. "And it is all over. It will not begin
again. Since leaving New Orleans I have traveled an innocent journey
straight to you. And when I make my fortune I shall be in a position to
return and--"

"Claim the pressed flower?" suggested the Padre. He did not smile.

"Ah, you remember how those things are!" said Gaston: and he laughed and
blushed.

"Yes," said the Padre, looking at the anchored barkentine, "I remember
how those things are."

For a while the vessel and its cargo and the landed men and various
business and conversations occupied them. But the freight for the
mission once seen to, there was not much else to detain them.

