It was seen that the struggle was not simply one of morals and of
rival social and industrial institutions, but was a question of
political power between the two great and opposing sections,
interested, on the one side, in manufacturing and in the raising of
food products under a system of free labor; and, on the other, in
the production of the great staples, cotton, tobacco, and sugar, by
the use of slave labor. Already the southern section had shown its
opposition to tariff and internal improvements, which the majority
of, the northern states vehemently favored. In other words, the
slavery issue was seen to be a struggle for sectional domination.

At the beginning of the nation in 1790, the population of the north
and the south was almost exactly balanced. Steadily, however, the
free states drew ahead, until in 1820 they possessed a population of
5,152,000 against 4,485,000 for the slave-holding states and
territories; and in the House of Representatives, by the operation
of the three-fifths ratio, the free states could muster 105 votes to
but 81 for the slave states. Thus power had passed definitely to the
north in the House of Representatives. The instinct for self-
preservation that led the planters to stand out against an
apportionment in their legislatures which would throw power into the
hands of non-slaveholders now led them to seek for some means to
protect the interests of their minority section in the nation as a
whole. The Senate offered such an opportunity: by the alternate
admission of free and slave states from 1802 to 1818, out of the
twenty-two states of the nation eleven were slave-holding and eleven
free. If the south retained this balance, the Senate could block the
action of the majority which controlled the lower House.

Such was the situation when the application of Missouri for
admission as a state in 1819 presented to Congress the whole
question of slavery beyond the Mississippi, where freedom and
slavery had found a new fighting-ground. East of the Mississippi the
Ohio was a natural dividing-line; farther west there appeared no
obvious boundary between slavery and freedom. By a natural process
of selection, the valleys of the western tributaries of the
Mississippi, as far north as the Arkansas and Missouri, in which
slaves had been allowed while it was a part of French and Spanish
Louisiana (no restraints having been imposed by Congress), received
an increasing proportion of the slave-holding planters. It would, in
the ordinary course of events, become the area of slave states.

The struggle began in the House of Representatives, when the
application of Missouri for statehood was met by an amendment,
introduced by Tallmadge of New York, February 13, 1819, [Footnote:
Annals of Cong., 15 Cong., 2 Sess., I., 1170.] providing that
further introduction of slavery be prohibited and that all children
born within the state after admission should be free at the age of
twenty-five years. [Footnote: See amended form in House Journal, 15
Cong., 2 Sess., 272.] Tallmadge had already showed his attitude on
this question when in 1818 he opposed the admission of Illinois
under its constitution, which seemed to him to make insufficient
barriers to slavery. Brief as was the first Missouri debate, the
whole subject was opened up by arguments to which later discussion
added but little. The speaker, Henry Clay, in spite of the fact that
early in his political career he had favored gradual emancipation in
Kentucky, led the opposition to restriction. His principal reliance
was upon the arguments that the evils of slavery would be mitigated
by diffusion, and that the proposed restriction was
unconstitutional. Tallmadge and Taylor, of New York, combated these
arguments so vigorously and with such bold challenge of the whole
system of slavery in new territories, that Cobb, of Georgia,
declared, "You have kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean
cannot put out, which seas of blood can only extinguish." [Footnote:
Annals of Cong., 15 Coneg., 2 Sess., I., 1204.]

The first clause of Tallmadge's motion was carried (February 16,
1819) by a vote of 87 to 76, and the second by 82 to 78. [Footnote:
Ibid., 1214.] Taylor was emboldened to offer (February 18) to the
bill for the organization of Arkansas territory an amendment by
which slavery should be excluded, whereupon McLane, of Delaware,
tentatively proposed that a line should be drawn west of the
Mississippi, dividing the territories between freedom and slavery.
Thus early was the whole question presented to Congress. In the
Senate, Tallmadge's amendment was lost (February 27) by a vote of 22
to 16, several northern senators adhering to the south; and Congress
adjourned without action. [Footnote: But Arkansas was organized as a
territory without restriction.]

The issue was then transferred to the people, and in all quarters of
the Union vehement discussions took place upon the question of
imposing an anti-slavery restriction upon Missouri. Mass-meetings in
the northern states took up the agitation, and various state
legislatures, including Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Ohio,
and even the slave state of Delaware, passed resolutions with
substantial unanimity against the further introduction of slaves
into the territories of the United States, and against the admission
of new slave states. Pennsylvania, so long the trusted ally of the
south, invoked her sister states "to refuse to covenant with crime"
by spreading the "cruelties of slavery, from the banks of the
Mississippi to the shores of the Pacific." From the south came
equally insistent protests against restriction. [Footnote: Niles'
Register, XVII., 296, 307, 334, 342-344, 395. 399. 400, 416; Ames,
State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 5, p. 4.]

No argument in the debate in 1819 was more effective than the speech
of Rufus King in the Senate, which was widely circulated as a
campaign document expressing the northern view. King's antislavery
attitude, shown as early as 1785, when he made an earnest fight to
secure the exclusion of slavery from the territories, [Footnote:
McLaughlin, Confederation and Constitution (Am. Nation, X.), chap.
vii.] was clearly stated in his constitutional argument in favor of
restriction on Missouri, and his speech may be accepted as typical.
[Footnote: Niles' Register, XVII., 215; King, Life and Corresp. of
King, VI., 690.] But it was also the speech of an old-time
Federalist, apprehensive of the growth of western power under
southern leadership. He held that, under the power of making all
needful rules and regulations respecting the territory and other
property of the United States, Congress had the right to prohibit
slavery in the Louisiana purchase, which belonged to the United
States in full dominion. Congress was further empowered, but not
required, to admit new states into the Union. Since the Constitution
contained no express provision respecting slavery in a new state,
Congress could make the perpetual prohibition of slavery a condition
of admission. In support of this argument, King appealed to the
precedent of the Ordinance of 1787, and of the states of Ohio,
Indiana, and Illinois, all admitted on the conditions expressed in
that ordinance. In admitting the state of Louisiana in 1812, a
different group of conditions had been attached, such as the
requirement of the use of the English language in judicial and
legislative proceedings.

The next question was the effect of the Louisiana treaty, by which
the United States had made this promise: "The inhabitants of the
ceded territory shall be incorporated in the Union of the United
States, and admitted as soon as possible, according to the
principles of the Federal constitution, to the enjoyment of all the
rights, advantages and immunities of citizens of the United States;
and in the mean time they shall be maintained and protected in the
free enjoyment of their liberty, property and the religion which
they profess." [Footnote: U. S. Treaties and Conventions, 332.] King
contended that, by the admission of Missouri to the Union, its
inhabitants would obtain all of the "federal" rights which citizens
of the United States derived from its Constitution, though not the
rights derived from the constitutions and laws of the various
states. In his opinion, the term PROPERTY did not describe slaves,
inasmuch as the terms of the treaty should be construed according to
diplomatic usage, and not all nations permitted slavery. In any
case, property acquired since the territory was occupied by the
United States was not included in the treaty, and, therefore, the
prohibition of the future introduction of slaves into Missouri would
not affect its guarantees.

Could Missouri, after admission, revoke the consent to the exclusion
of slavery under its powers as a sovereign state? Such action, King
declared, would be contrary to the obligations of good faith, for
even sovereigns were bound by their engagements. Moreover, the
judicial power of the United States would deliver from bondage any
person detained as a slave in a state which had agreed, as a
condition of admission, that slavery should be excluded.

Having thus set forth the constitutional principles, King next took
up the expediency of the exclusion of slavery from new states. He
struck with firm hand the chord of sectional rivalry in his argument
against the injustice to the north of creating new slave-holding
states, which would have a political representation, under the
"federal ratio," not possessed by the north. Under this provision
for counting three-fifths of the slaves, five free persons in
Virginia (so he argued) had as much power in the choice of
representatives to Congress and in the appointment of presidential
electors as seven free persons in any of the states in which slavery
did not exist. The disproportionate power and influence allowed to
the original slave-holding states was a necessary sacrifice to the
establishment of the Constitution; but the arrangement was limited
to the old thirteen states, and was not applicable to the states
made out of territory since acquired. This argument had been
familiar to New England ever since the purchase of Louisiana.
Finally, he argued that the safety of the Union demanded the
exclusion of slavery west of the Mississippi, where the exposed and
important frontier needed a barrier of free citizens against the
attacks of future assailants.

To the southern mind, King's sectional appeal unblushingly raised
the prospect of the rule of a free majority over a slave-holding
minority, the downfall of the ascendancy so long held by the south,
and the creation of a new Union, in which the western states should
be admitted on terms of subordination to the will of the majority,
whose power would thus become perpetual. [Footnote: King, Life and
Corresp. of King, VI., 205, 267, 279, 288, 329, 339-344, 501;
Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), X., 162, 172, 280; Tyler, Tylers,
I., 316.]

When the next Congress met, in December, 1819, the admission of
Alabama was quickly completed; and the House also passed a bill
admitting Maine to the Union, Massachusetts having agreed to this
division of the ancient commonwealth, on condition that consent
Congress should be obtained prior to March 4, 1820. The Senate,
quick to see the opportunity afforded by the situation, combined the
bill for the admission of Maine with that for the unrestricted
admission of Missouri, a proposition carried (February 16, 1820) by
a vote of 23 to 21. Senator Thomas, who represented Illinois, which,
as we have seen, was divided in its interests on the question of
slavery, and who, as the vote showed, could produce a tie in the
Senate, moved a compromise amendment, providing for the admission of
Missouri as a slave state and for the prohibition of slavery north
of 36 degrees 30' in the rest of the Louisiana purchase; and on the
next day his amendment passed the Senate by a vote of 34 to 10.

The debate in the Senate was marked by another speech of Rufus King,
just re-elected a senator from New York by an almost unanimous vote.
With this prestige, and the knowledge that the states of
Pennsylvania and New York stood behind him, he reiterated his
arguments with such power that John Quincy Adams, who listened to
the debate, wrote in his diary that "the great slave-holders in the
House gnawed their lips and clenched their fists as they heard him."
[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, IV., 522; see Cong. Globe, 30 Cong., 2
Sess., App. 63-67.]

The case for the south was best presented by William Pinkney, of
Maryland, the leader of the American bar, a man of fashion, but an
orator of the first rank. His argument, on lines that the debates
had made familiar, was stated with such eloquence, force, and
graphic power that it produced the effect of a new presentation.
Waiving the question whether Congress might refuse admission to a
state, he held that, if it were admitted, it was admitted into a
union of equals, and hence could not be subjected to any special
restriction. [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 16 Cong., 1 Sess., I., 389
et seq.] Without denying the danger of the extension of slavery, he
argued that it was not for Congress to stay the course of this dark
torrent. "If you have power," said he, "to restrict the new states
on admission, you may squeeze a new-born sovereign state to the size
of a pigmy." There would be nothing to hinder Congress "from
plundering power after power at the expense of the new states,"
until they should be left empty shadows of domestic sovereignty, in
a union between giants and dwarfs, between power and feebleness. In
vivid oratory he conjured up this vision of an unequal union, into
which the new state would enter, "shorn of its beams," a mere
servant of the majority. From the point of view of the political
theory of a confederation, his contention had force, and the hot-
tempered west was not likely to submit to an inferior status in the
Union. Nevertheless, the debates and votes in the Constitutional
Convention of 1787 seem to show that the fathers of the Constitution
intended to leave Congress free to impose limitations on the states
at admission. [Footnote: Elliot, Debates, V., 492.]

In the mean time, the House of Representatives was continuing the
discussion on the old lines. Although the arguments brought out
little that had not been stated in the first Missouri debate, they
were restated day after day with an amplitude and a bitterness of
feeling that aggravated the hostility between the rival forces. Even
under this provocation, most southern members expressed their
opinions on the morality and expediency of slavery in language that
affords a strange contrast to their later utterances: in almost
every case they lamented its existence and demanded its dispersion
throughout the west as a means of alleviating their misfortune.
Although most of the men who spoke on the point were from the
regions where cotton was least cultivated, yet even Reid, of
Georgia, likened the south to an unfortunate man who "wears a cancer
in his bosom." [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 16 Cong., 1 Sess., I.,
1025.] Tyler of Virginia, afterwards president of the United States,
characterized slavery as a dark cloud, and asked, "Will you permit
the lightnings of its wrath to break upon the South when by the
interposition of a wise system of legislation you may reduce it to a
summer's cloud?" [Footnote: Ibid., II., 1391.] John Randolph, the
ultra-southerner, was quoted as saying that all the misfortunes of
his life were light in the balance when compared with the single
misfortune of having been born a master of slaves.

In addition to the argument of "mitigation by diffusion," the south
urged the injustice of excluding its citizens from the territories
by making it impossible for the southern planter to migrate thither
with his property. On the side of the north, it was argued with
equal energy that the spread of slaves into the west would
inevitably increase their numbers and strengthen the institution.
Since free labor was unable to work in the midst of slave labor,
northern men would be effectively excluded from the territories
which might be given over to slavery. Economic law, it was urged,
would make it almost certain that, in order to supply the vast area
which it was proposed to devote to slavery, the African slave-trade
would be reopened. As the struggle waxed hot, as the arguments
brought out with increasing clearness the fundamental differences
between the sections, threats of disunion were freely exchanged.
[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 13, 53; Benton, Abridgment of
Debates, XIII., 607.] Even Clay predicted the existence of several
new confederacies. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, IV., 526.] Nor were
the extremists of the north unwilling to accept this alternative.
[Footnote:  King, Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 274, 286, 287,
387.] But the danger of southern secession was diminished because
Monroe was ready to veto any bill which excluded slavery from
Missouri. [Footnote: Cong. Globe, 30 Cong., 2 Sess., App. 67.] While
still engaged in its own debates, the House received the compromise
proposal from the Senate. At first the majority remained firm and
refused to accept it. [Footnote: Woodburn, in Am. Hist. Assoc.,
Report 1893, p. 251-297.] March 1, 1820, the House passed its own
bill imposing the restriction on Missouri, by a vote of 91 to 82. By
the efforts of the compromisers, however, a committee of conference
was arranged, which on the very next day resulted in the surrender
of the House. The vote on striking out the restriction on Missouri
was 90 to 87. New England gave 7 ayes to 33 nays; the middle states,
8 to 46; the south cast 58 votes for striking out, and none against
it; the northwest gave all its 8 votes against striking out the
restriction; while the 17 southwestern votes were solidly in favor
of admitting Missouri as a slave state.

Thus, while the southern phalanx in opposition remained firm, enough
members were won over from the northern ranks to defeat the
restrictionists. Some of these deserters [Footnote: See King, Life
and Corresp. of King, VI., 291, 329; Benton, View, I., 10; Adams,
Memoirs, V., 15, 307. Randolph applied to them the term
"doughfaces."] from the northern cause were influenced by the
knowledge that the admission of Maine would fail without this
concession; others, by the constitutional argument; others, by the
fear of disunion; and still others, by the apprehension that the
unity of the Democratic party was menaced by the new sectional
alignment, which included among its leaders men who had been
prominent in the councils of the Federalists. By the final solution,
it was agreed (134 to 42) to admit Missouri as a slave state and
Maine as a free state; while all of the rest of the territory,
possessed by the United States west of the Mississippi and north of
36 degrees 30' was pledged to freedom. Yet the fate of the measure
was uncertain, for some of Monroe's southern friends strongly urged
him still to veto the compromise. [Footnote: Cong. Globe, 30 Cong.,
2 Sess., App. 64.] The president submitted to the cabinet the
question whether Congress had the right to prohibit slavery in a
territory, and whether the section of the Missouri bill which
interdicted slavery forever in the territory north of 36 degrees 30'
was applicable only to the territorial condition, or also to states
made from the territory. John Quincy Adams notes in his diary that
"it was unanimously agreed that Congress have the power to prohibit
slavery in the Territories"; though he adds that neither Crawford,
Calhoun, nor Wirt could find any express power to that effect given
in the Constitution. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 5.] In order to
avoid the difficulty arising from the fact that Adams alone believed
the word "forever" to apply to states as well as territories, the
president modified the question so that all would be able to answer
that the act was constitutional, leaving each member to construe the
section to suit himself.

Although apparently the Missouri struggle was thus brought to a
conclusion, it is necessary to take note of two succeeding episodes
in the contest, which immediately revived the whole question,
embittered the antagonism, threatened the Union, and were settled by
new compromises. In her constitution, Missouri not only incorporated
guarantees of a slavery system, but also a provision against the
admission of free Negroes to the state. Application for admission to
the Union under this constitution in the fall of 1820 brought on a
contest perhaps more heated and more dangerous to the Union than the
previous struggle. Holding that Missouri's clause against free
Negroes infringed the provision of the federal Constitution
guaranteeing the rights of citizens of the respective states,
northern leaders reopened the whole question by refusing to vote for
the admission of Missouri with the obnoxious clause. Again the north
revealed its mastery of the House, and the south its control of the
Senate, and a deadlock followed. Under the skilful management of
Clay, a new compromise was framed, by which Missouri was required,
through her legislature, to promise that the objectionable clause
should never be construed to authorize the passage of any laws by
which any citizen of either of the states of the Union should be
excluded from the enjoyment of any of the privileges and immunities
to which such citizen was entitled under the Constitution of the
United States. This Missouri accepted, but the legislature somewhat
contemptuously added that it was without power to bind the state.
[Footnote: Niles' Register, XX., 388, cf. 300.]

While this debate was in progress, and the problem of the status of
Missouri, which had already established a constitution and claimed
to be a state, was under consideration, the question of counting the
Missouri vote in the presidential election of 1820 was raised. For
this a third compromise was framed by Clay, by which the result of
the election was stated as it would be with and without Missouri's
vote. Since Monroe had been elected by a vote all but unanimous, the
result was in either case the same; this theoretical question,
nevertheless, was fraught with dangerous possibilities. Missouri was
finally admitted by the proclamation of President Monroe, dated
August 10, 1821, more than three years from the first application
for statehood.

In a large view of American history, the significance of this great
struggle cannot be too highly emphasized. Although the danger passed
by and the ocean became placid, yet the storm in many ways changed
the coast-line of American politics and broke new channels for the
progress of the nation. The future had been revealed to far-sighted
statesmen, who realized that this was but the beginning, not the
end, of the struggle. "This momentous question," wrote Jefferson,
"like a fire bell in the night, awakened and filled me with terror.
I considered it at once as the knell of the Union. It is hushed,
indeed, for the moment. But this is a reprieve only, not a final
sentence. A geographical line, coinciding with a marked principle,
moral and political, once conceived and held up to the angry
passions of men, will never be obliterated; and every new irritation
will mark it deeper and deeper." [Footnote: Jefferson, Writings
(Ford's ed.), X., 157.]

John Quincy Adams relates a contemporaneous conversation with
Calhoun, in which the latter took the ground that, if a dissolution
of the Union should follow, the south would be compelled to form an
alliance, offensive and defensive, with Great Britain, though he
admitted that it would be returning pretty much to the colonial
state. When Adams, with unconscious prophecy of Sherman's march
through Georgia, pressed Calhoun with the question whether the
north, cut off from its natural outlet upon the ocean, "would fall
back upon its rocks bound hand and foot, to starve, or whether it
would not retain its powers of locomotion to move southward by
land," Calhoun answered that the southern states would find it
necessary to make their communities military. [Footnote: Adams,
Memoirs, IV., 530, 531.]

To Adams himself the present question was but a "title page to a
great tragic volume." He believed that, if dissolution of the Union
should result from the slavery question, it would be followed by
universal emancipation of the slaves, and he was ready to
contemplate such a dissolution of the Union, upon a point involving
slavery and no other, believing that "the Union might then be
reorganized on the fundamental principle of emancipation." "This
object," wrote he, "is vast in its compass, awful in its prospects,
sublime and beautiful in its issue. A life devoted to it would be
nobly spent or sacrificed." [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, IV., 531.]
Looking forward to civil war, he declared: "So glorious would be its
final issue, that as God shall judge me I do not say that it is not
to be desired." [Footnote: Ibid., V., 210.] But as yet he confided
these thoughts to his diary. The south was far from contented with
the compromise, and her leading statesmen, Calhoun especially, came
bitterly to regret both the concession in the matter of admitting
federal control over slavery in the territories, and the division of
the Louisiana purchase into spheres of influence which left to the
slave-holding section that small apex of the triangle practically
embraced in Arkansas. While the north received an area capable of
being organized into many free states, the south could expect from
the remaining territory awarded her only one state.

Among the immediate effects of the contest was its influence upon
Monroe, who was the more ready to relinquish the American claim to
Texas in the negotiations over Florida, because he feared that the
acquisition of this southern province would revive the antagonism of
the northern antislavery forces. [Footnote: Monroe, Writings, VI.,
127; cf. Adams, Memoirs, V., 25, 54, 68.]

The south learned also the lesson that slavery needed defense
against the power of the majority, and that it must shape its
political doctrine and its policy to this end. But it would be a
mistake to emphasize too strongly the immediate effect in this
respect. Slavery was not yet accepted as the foundation of southern
social and economic life. The institution was still mentioned with
regret by southern leaders, and there were still efforts in the
border states to put it in the process of extinction. South Carolina
leaders were still friendly to national power, and for several years
the ruling party in that state deprecated appeals to state
sovereignty. [Footnote: See chap, xviii. below.] In the next few
years other questions, of an economic and judicial nature, were even
more influential, as a direct issue, than the slavery question. But
the economic life of the south was based on slavery, and the section
became increasingly conscious that the current of national
legislation was shaped by the majority against their interests.
Their political alliances in the north had failed them in the time
of test, and the Missouri question disclosed the possibility of a
new organization of parties threatening that southern domination
which had swayed the Union for the past twenty years. [Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, IV., 529; King, Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 501;
Jefferson, Writings, X., 175, 193 n.; cf. chap. xi. below; Hart,
Slavery and Abolition (Am. Nation, XVI.), chap, xviii.]

The slavery struggle derived its national significance from the
west, into which expanding sections carried warring institutions.


CHAPTER XI

PARTY POLITICS (1820-1822)


To the superficial observer, politics might have seemed never more
tranquil than when, in 1820, James Monroe received all but one of
the electoral votes for his second term as president of the United
States. One New Hampshire elector preferred John Quincy Adams,
although he was not a candidate, and this deprived Monroe of ranking
with Washington in the unanimity of official approval. But in truth
the calm was deceptive. The election of 1820 was an armistice rather
than a real test of political forces. The forming party factions
were not yet ready for the final test of strength, most of the
candidates were members of the cabinet, and the reelection of
Monroe, safe, conciliatory, and judicious, afforded an opportunity
for postponing the issue.

As we have seen, the Missouri contest had in it the possibility of a
revolutionary division of the Republican party into two parties on
sectional lines. The aged Jefferson, keen of scent for anything that
threatened the ascendancy of the triumphant democracy, saw in the
dissolution of the old alliance between Virginia and the
"fanaticized" Pennsylvania, [Footnote: Jefferson, Writings (Ford's
ed.), X., 161, 171, 172, 177, 179, 192, 193 n., 279; King, Life and
Corresp. of King, VI., 279, 282, 290: Cong. Globe, 30 Cong., 2
Sess., App. 63-67.] in the heat of the Missouri conflict, the menace
of a revived Federalist party, and the loss of Virginia's northern
following. So hotly did Virginia resent the Missouri Compromise,
that while the question was still pending, in February, 1820, her
legislative caucus, which had assembled to nominate presidential
electors, indignantly adjourned on learning that Monroe favored the
measure. "I trust in God," said H. St. George Tucker, "if the
president does sign a bill to that effect, the Southern people will
be able to find some man who has not committed himself to our foes;
for such are, depend on it, the Northern Politicians." [Footnote:
William and Mary College Quarterly, X., 11, 15.] But the sober
second thought of Virginia sustained Monroe. On the other side,
Rufus King believed that the issue of the Missouri question would
settle "forever the dominion of the Union." "Old Mr. Adams," said
he, "as he is the first, will on this hypothesis be the last
President from a free state." [Footnote: King, Life and Corresp. of
King, 267; cf. Adams, Memoirs, IV., 528.]

The truth is that the individual interests of the south were
stronger in opposing than those of the north in supporting a
limitation of slavery; [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, IV., 533.] the
northern phalanx had hardly formed before it began to dissolve.
[Footnote: Benton, Thirty Years' View, I., 10.] Nevertheless, the
Missouri question played some part in the elections in most of the
states. In Pennsylvania, under the leadership of Duane, the editor
of the Aurora, electors favorable to Clinton were nominated on an
antislavery ticket, [Footnote: Niles' Register, XIX., 129; National
Advocate, October 27, 1820; Franklin Gazette, October 25, November
8, 1820 (election returns); Ames, State Docs. on Federal Relations,
No. 5, p. 5.] but, outside of Philadelphia and the adjacent
district, this ticket received but slight support. With few
exceptions, the northern congressmen who had voted with the south
failed of re-election.

The elections in the various states in this year showed more
political division than was revealed by the vote for president, and
they showed that in state politics the Federalist party was by no
means completely extinct. In the congressional elections the flood
of Republicanism left only isolated islands of Federalism
unsubmerged. In Massachusetts eight of the thirteen members
professed this political faith; New York returned some half-dozen
men whose affiliations were with the same party; from Pennsylvania
came a somewhat larger number; and they numbered nearly half of the
delegation of Maryland. The cities of New York and Philadelphia were
represented by Federalists, and there were three or four other
districts, chiefly in New England, which adhered to the old party.
There were also a few congressmen from the south who had been
members of this organization. On the whole, however, the Federalists
awaited the new development of parties, determined to secure the
best terms from those to whom they should transfer their allegiance.
In New England, as has already been pointed out, [Footnote: See
chap. ii. above.] the toleration movement was completing its work of
transferring power to democracy.

More important than local issues or the death throes of federalism,
was the democratic tendency revealed in the constitutional
conventions of this period. Between 1816 and 1830, ten states either
established new constitutions or revised their old ones. In this the
influence of the new west was peculiarly important. All of the new
states which were formed in that region, after the War of 1812, gave
evidence in their constitutions of the democratic spirit of the
frontier. With the exception of Mississippi, where the voter was
obliged either to be a tax-payer or a member of the militia, all the
western states entered the Union with manhood suffrage, and all of
them, in contrast with the south, from which their settlers had
chiefly been drawn, provided that apportionment of the legislature
should be based upon the white population, thus accepting the
doctrine of the rule of the majority rather than that of property.
As the flood of population moved towards the west and offered these
attractive examples of democratic growth, the influence reacted on
the older states. In her constitution of 1818, Connecticut gave the
franchise to tax-payers or members of the militia, as did
Massachusetts and New York in their constitutions of 1821. Maine
provided in her constitution of 1820 for manhood suffrage, but by
this time there was but slight difference between manhood suffrage
and one based upon tax-paying.

Webster in Massachusetts and Chancellor Kent in New York viewed with
alarm the prospect that freehold property should cease to be the
foundation of government. Kent particularly warned the landed class
that "one master capitalist with his one hundred apprentices, and
journeymen, and agents, and dependents, will bear down at the polls
an equal number of farmers of small estates in his vicinity, who
cannot safely unite for their common defense." [Footnote: Carter and
Stone, Reports of the Proceedings and Debates of the Convention of
1821, 222.] It was the new counties of New York, particularly those
of the western and northeastern frontier, which were the stronghold
of the reform movement in that state. The abolition of the council
of appointments and the council of revision by the New York
convention contributed to the transfer of power to the people. But
under the leadership of Van Buren a group of politicians, dubbed
"The Albany Regency," controlled the political machinery as
effectively as before. [Footnote: McMaster, United States, V., 373-
432; ibid., Rights of Man, 61; MacDonald, Jacksonian Democracy (Am.
Nation, XV.), chap. iv.]

The campaign for the presidency of 1824 may be said to have begun as
early as 1816. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 89.] Adams observed in
1818 that the government was assuming daily the character of cabal,
"and preparation, not for the next Presidential election, but for
the one after"; [Footnote: Ibid., IV., 193.] and by 1820, when the
political sea appeared so placid, and parties had apparently
dissolved, bitter factional fights between the friends of the rival
candidates constituted the really significant indications of
American politics. From the details of the personal struggles
(usually less important to the student of party history) one must
learn the tendency towards the reappearance of parties in this
period, when idealists believed that all factions had been fused
into one triumphant organization. In all of the great sections,
candidates appeared, anxious to consolidate the support of their own
section and to win a following in the nation. It is time that we
should survey these men, for the personal traits of the aspirants
for the presidency had a larger influence than ever before or since
in the history of the country. Moreover, we are able to see in these
candidates the significant features of the sections from which they
came.

New England was reluctantly and slowly coming to the conclusion that
John Quincy Adams was the only available northern candidate. Adams
did not fully represent the characteristics of his section, for he
neither sprang from the democracy of the interior of New England nor
did he remain loyal to the Federalist ideas that controlled the
commercial interests of the coast. Moreover, of all the statesmen
whom the nation produced, he had had the largest opportunity to make
a comparative study of government. As an eleven-year-old boy, he
went with his father to Paris in 1778, and from then until 1817,
when he became Monroe's secretary of state, nearly half his time was
spent at European courts. He served in France, Holland, Sweden,
Russia, Prussia, and England, and had been senator of the United
States from Massachusetts.

Thus Adams entered on the middle period of his career, a man of
learning and broad culture, rich in experience of national affairs,
familiar with the centers of Old-World civilization and with methods
of European administration. He had touched life too broadly, in too
many countries, to be provincial in his policy. In the minds of a
large and influential body of his fellow-citizens, the Federalists,
he was an apostate, for in the days of the embargo he had warned
Jefferson of the temper of his section, had resigned, and had been
read out of the party. The unpopularity, as well as the fame, of his
father, was the heritage of the son. Perhaps the most decisive
indication of the weakening of sectional bias by his foreign
training is afforded by his diplomatic policy. An expansionist by
nature, he had been confirmed in the faith by his training in
foreign courts. "If we are not taken for Romans we shall be taken
for Jews," he exclaimed to one who questioned the wisdom of the bold
utterances of his diplomatic correspondence.

In one important respect Adams was the personification of his
section. He was a Puritan, and his whole career was deeply affected
by the fact. A man of method and regularity, tireless in his work
(for he rose before the dawn and worked till midnight), he never had
a childhood and never tried to achieve self-forgetfulness. His
diary, printed in twelve volumes, is a unique document for the study
of the Puritan in politics. Not that it was an entirely unreserved
expression of his soul, for he wrote with a consciousness that
posterity would read the record, and its pages are a compound of
apparently spontaneous revelation of his inmost thought and of
silence upon subjects of which we would gladly know more. He had the
Puritan's restraint, self-scrutiny, and self-condemnation. "I am,"
he writes, "a man of reserved, cold, austere, and forbidding
manners." Nor can this estimate be pronounced unjust. He was a
lonely man, communing with his soul in his diary more than with a
circle of admiring friends. It was not easy for men to love John
Quincy Adams. The world may respect the man who regulates his course
by a daily dead-reckoning, but it finds it easier to make friends
with him who stumbles towards rectitude by the momentum of his own
nature. Popularity, in any deep sense, was denied him. This
deprivation he repaid by harsh, vindictive, and censorious judgments
upon his contemporaries, and by indifference to popular prejudices.
With the less lovely qualities of the Puritan aggravated by his own
critical nature, Adams found himself in a struggle for the
presidency against some of the most engaging personalities in
American history. He must win over his enemies in New England and
attach that section to his fortunes; he must find friends in the
middle states, conciliate the south, and procure a following in the
west, where Clay, the Hotspur of debate, with all the power of the
speakership behind him, and Jackson, "Old Hickory," the hero of New
Orleans, contested the field. And all the time he must satisfy his
conscience, and reach his goal by the craft and strength of his
intellect rather than by the arts of popular management. No
statesman ever handled the problems of his public career with a
keener understanding of the conditions of success.

The middle region was too much divided by the game of politics
played by her multitude of minor leaders to unite upon a favorite
son in this campaign; but De Witt Clinton, finding elements of
strength in the prestige which his successful advocacy of the Erie
Canal had brought to him throughout the region where internal
improvements were popular, and relying upon his old connections with
the Federalists, watched events with eager eye, waiting for an
opportunity which never came. Although the south saw in Rufus King's
advocacy of the exclusion of slavery from Missouri a deep design to
win the presidency by an antislavery combination of the northern
states, there was little ground for this belief. In truth, the
middle region was merely the fighting-ground for leaders in the
other sections.

In the south, Calhoun and Crawford were already contending for the
mastery. Each of them represented fundamental tendencies in the
section. Born in Virginia in 1772, Crawford had migrated with his
father in early childhood to South Carolina, and soon after to
Georgia. [Footnote: Phillips, "Georgia and State Rights," in Am.
Hist. Assoc., Report 1901, II., 95; Cobb, Leisure Labors; Miller,
Bench and Bar of Georgia; West, "Life and Times of William H.
Crawford," in National Portrait Gallery, IV.; Adams, Life of
Gallatin. 598.] Here he became the leader of the Virginia element
against the interior democracy. But in his coarse strength and
adaptability the burly Georgian showed the impress which frontier
influences had given to his state. His career in national politics
brought him strange alliances. This Georgia candidate had been no
mere subject of the Virginia dynasty, for he supported John Adams in
his resistance to France in 1798; challenged the administration of
Jefferson by voting with the Federalists in the United States Senate
against the embargo; and ridiculed the ambiguous message of Madison
when the issue of peace or war with Great Britain was under
consideration. A fearless supporter of the recharter of the national
bank, he had championed the doctrine of implied powers and denied
the right of a state to resist the laws of Congress except by
changing its representation or appealing to the sword under the
right of revolution.

Nevertheless, in the period of this volume, Crawford joined the
ranks of the southerners who demanded a return to strict
construction and insistence on state rights. In the congressional
caucus of 1816, he obtained 54 votes for the presidency against 65
for Monroe. Had not the influence of Madison been thrown for the
latter, it seems probable that Crawford would have obtained the
nomination; but his strength in building up a following in Congress
was much greater than his popularity with the people at large.
Controlling the patronage of the treasury department, he enlarged
his political influence. As the author of the four-years'-tenure-of-
office act, in 1820, he has been vehemently criticized as a founder
of the spoils system. But there are reasons for thinking that
Crawford's advocacy of this measure was based upon considerations of
efficiency at least as much as those of politics, [Footnote: Fish,
Civil Service and Patronage, 66 et seq.] and the conduct of his
department was marked by sagacity. The administration of such a man
would probably have been characterized by an accommodating spirit
which would have carried on the traditions of Monroe.

In the career of Calhoun are strikingly exhibited the changing
characteristics of the south in this era. His grandfather was a
Scotch-Irishman who came to Pennsylvania with the emigration of that
people in the first half of the eighteenth century, and thence
followed the stream of settlement that passed up the Great Valley
and into South Carolina to the frontier, from which men like Daniel
Boone crossed the mountains to the conquest of Kentucky and
Tennessee. [Footnote: Cf. Howard, Preliminaries of the Revolution
(Am. Nation, VIII.), chap. xiii.] The Calhoun family were frontier
Indian fighters, but, instead of crossing the mountains as did
Andrew Jackson, Calhoun remained to grow up with his section and to
share its changes from a community essentially western to a cotton-
planting and slave-holding region. This is the clew to his career.

In his speech in the House of Representatives in 1817, on internal
improvements, Calhoun warned his colleagues against "a low, sordid,
selfish, and sectional spirit," and declared that "in a country so
extensive, and so various in its interests, what is necessary for
the common good, may apparently be opposed to the interests of
particular sections. It must be submitted to as the condition of our
greatness." [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 14 Cong., 2 Sess., 854,
855.] This was the voice of the nationalistic west, as well as that
of South Carolina in Calhoun's young manhood.

In view of his later career, it is significant that many of those
who described him in these youthful years of his nationalistic
policy found in him a noticeable tendency to rash speculation and
novelty. "As a politician," said Senator Mills, of Massachusetts,
about 1823, he is "too theorizing, speculative, and metaphysical,--
magnificent in his views of the powers and capacities of the
government, and of the virtue, intelligence, and wisdom of the
PEOPLE. He is in favor of elevating, cherishing, and increasing all
the institutions of the government, and of a vigorous and energetic
administration of it. From his rapidity of thought, he is often
wrong in his conclusions, and his theories are sometimes wild,
extravagant, and impractical. He has always claimed to be, and is,
of the Democratic party, but of a very different class from that of
Crawford; more like Adams, and his schemes are sometimes denounced
by his party as ultra-fanatical." [Footnote: Mass. Hist. Soc.,
Proceedings, XIX., 37 (1881-1882).]

Another contemporary, writing prior to 1824, declared: "He wants, I
think, consistency and perseverance of mind, and seems incapable of
long-continued and patient investigation. What he does not see at
the first examination, he seldom takes pains to search for; but
still the lightning glance of his mind, and the rapidity with which
he analyzes, never fail to furnish him with all that may be
necessary for his immediate purposes. In his legislative career,
which, though short, was uncommonly luminous, his love of novelty,
and his apparent solicitude to astonish were so great, that he has
occasionally been known to go beyond even the dreams of political
visionaries, and to propose schemes which were in their nature
impracticable or injurious, and which he seemed to offer merely for
the purpose of displaying the affluence of his mind, and the
fertility of his ingenuity." [Footnote: Quoted by Hodgson, Letters
from North Am., I., 81.] "Calhoun," said William Wirt, in 1824,
"advised me the other day to study less and trust more to genius;
and I believe the advice is sound. He has certainly practiced on his
own precepts, and has become, justly, a distinguished man. It may do
very well in politics, where a proposition has only to be compared
with general principles with which the politician is familiar."
[Footnote: Kennedy, William Wirt, II., 143; other views of Calhoun
in MacDonald, Jacksonian Democracy, chaps, v., ix.; Hart, Slavery
and Abolition, chap. xix.; Garrison, Westward Extension (Am. Nation,
XV., XVI., XVII.).]

At the beginning of the campaign, Calhoun was the confidant and
friend of Adams, apparently considering the alternative of throwing
his influence in the latter's favor, if it proved impossible to
realize his own aspirations.

From beyond the Alleghenies came two candidates who personified the
forces of their section. We can see the very essence of the west in
Henry Clay and Andrew Jackson. Clay was a Kentuckian, with the
characteristics of his state; but, in a larger sense, he represented
the stream of migration which had occupied the Ohio Valley during
the preceding half-century. This society was one which, in its
composition, embraced elements of the middle region as well as of
the south. It tended towards freedom, but had slaves in its midst,
and had been accustomed, through experience, to adjust relations
between slavery and free labor by a system of compromise.
Economically, it was in need of internal improvements and the
development of manufactures to afford a home market. It had the
ideal of American expansion, and in earlier days vehemently demanded
the control of the Mississippi and the expulsion of the Spaniard
from the coasts of the Gulf. In the War of 1812 it sent its sons to
destroy English influence about the Great Lakes and had been
ambitious to conquer Canada.

It is an evidence of the rapidity with which the west stamped itself
upon its colonists, that although Clay was born, and bred to the
law, in Virginia, he soon became the mouth-piece of these western
forces. In his personality, also, he reflected many of the traits of
this region. Kentucky, ardent in its spirit, not ashamed of a strain
of sporting blood, fond of the horse-race, partial to its whiskey,
ready to "bluff" in politics as in poker, but sensitive to honor,
was the true home of Henry Clay. To a Puritan like John Quincy
Adams, Clay was, "in politics, as in private life, essentially a
gamester."[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 59.] But if the Puritan
mind did not approve of Henry Clay, multitudes of his fellow-
countrymen in other sections did. There was a charm about him that
fastened men to him. He was "Harry of the West," an impetuous,
willful, high-spirited, daring, jealous, but, withal, a lovable man.
He had the qualities of leadership; was ambitious, impulsive, often
guided by his intuitions and his sensibilities, but, at the same
time, an adroit and bold champion of constructive legislation. He
knew, too, the time for compromise and for concession. Perhaps he
knew it too well; for, although no statesman of this era possessed
more courageous initiative and constructive power, his tact and his
powers of management were such that his place in history is quite as
much that of the "great compromiser" as it is that of the author of
the "American system."

It is not too much to say that Clay made the speakership one of the
important American institutions. He was the master of the House of
Representatives, shaping its measures by the appointment of his
committees and his parliamentary management.[Footnote: Follett,
Speaker of the House, pp. 41-46.] By the period of our survey, with
the power of this office behind him, Clay had fashioned a set of
American political issues reflective of western and middle-state
ideas, and had made himself a formidable rival in the presidential
struggle. He had caught the self-confidence, the continental
aspirations, the dash and impetuosity of the west. But he was also,
as a writer of the time declared, "able to captivate high and low,
l'homme du salon and the 'squatter' in the Western wilderness." He
was a mediator between east and west, between north and south--the
"great conciliator." [Footnote: Grund, Aristocracy in America, II.,
213. For other views of Clay, cf. Babcock, Am. Nationality, chap.
xii.; MacDonald, Jacksonian Democracy, chap. xi.; Garrison, Westward
Extension, chap. iii. (Am. Nation, XIII., XV., XVII.).]

If Henry Clay was one of the favorites of the west, Andrew Jackson
was the west itself. While Clay was able to voice, with statesman-
like ability, the demand for economic legislation to promote her
interests, and while he exercised an extraordinary fascination by
his personal magnetism and his eloquence, he never became the hero
of the great masses of the west; he appealed rather to the more
intelligent--to the men of business and of property. Andrew Jackson
was the very personification of the contentious, nationalistic
democracy of the interior. He was born, in 1767, of Scotch-Irish
parents, who had settled near the boundary-line between North and
South Carolina, not far from the similar settlements from which,
within a few years of Jackson's birth, Daniel Boone and Robertson
went forth to be the founders of Kentucky and Tennessee. In 1788,
with a caravan of emigrants, Jackson crossed the Alleghenies to
Nashville, Tennessee, then an outpost of settlement still exposed to
the incursions of Indians. During the first seven or eight years of
his residence he was public prosecutor--an office that called for
nerve and decision, rather than legal acumen, in that turbulent
country.

The appearance of this frontiersman on the floor of Congress was an
omen full of significance. He reached Philadelphia at the close of
Washington's administration, having ridden on horseback nearly eight
hundred miles to his destination. Gallatin (himself a western
Pennsylvanian) afterwards graphically described Jackson, as he
entered the halls of Congress, as "a tall, lank, uncouth-looking
personage, with long locks of hair hanging over his face, and a cue
down his back tied in an eel-skin; his dress singular, his manners
and deportment those of a rough backwoodsman."[Footnote: Hildreth,
United States, iv., 692.] Jefferson afterwards testified to Webster:
"His passions are terrible. When I was President of the Senate, he
was a Senator, and he could never speak, on account of the rashness
of his feelings. I have seen him attempt it repeatedly, and as often
choke with rage."[Footnote: Webster, Writings (National ed.), XVII.,
371.] At length the frontier, in the person of its leader, had found
a place in the government. This six-foot backwoodsman, angular,
lantern-jawed, and thin, with blue eyes that blazed on occasion;
this choleric, impetuous, Scotch-Irish leader of men; this expert
duelist and ready fighter; this embodiment of the contentious,
vehement, personal west, was in politics to stay.[Footnote: For
other appreciations, see Babcock, Am. Nationality, chap, xvii.;
MacDonald, Jacksonian Democracy, chaps, ii., xviii.(Am. Nation,
XIII., XV.).] In the War of 1812, by the defeat of the Indians of
the Gulf plains, he made himself the conqueror of a new province for
western settlement, and when he led his frontier riflemen to the
victory of New Orleans he became the national hero, the self-made
man, the incarnation of the popular ideal of democracy. The very
rashness and arbitrariness which his Seminole campaign displayed
appealed to the west, for he went to his object with the relentless
directness of a frontiersman. This episode gave to Adams the
opportunity to write his masterly state paper defending the actions
of the general. But Henry Clay, seeing, perhaps, in the rising star
of the frontier military hero a baneful omen to his own career, and
hoping to break the administration forces by holding the government
responsible for Jackson's actions, led an assault upon him in the
Seminole debates on the floor of the House of
Representatives.[Footnote: Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation,
XIII.), chap. xvii.] Leaving Tennessee when he heard of the attack
which was meditated against him, the general rushed (1819) to this
new field of battle, and had the satisfaction of winning what he
regarded as "the greatest victory he ever obtained"--a triumph on
every count of Clay's indictment. This contest Jackson considered
"the Touchstone of the election of the next president."[Footnote: N.
Y. Publ. Library, Bulletin, IV., 160, 161; Parton, Jackson, II.,
chap. xl.] From this time the personality of the "Old Hero" was as
weighty a factor in

American politics as the tariff or internal improvements. He had now
outgrown the uncouthness of his earlier days and had become stately
and dignified in his manner. Around this unique personality there
began to gather all those democratic forces which we have noted as
characteristic of the interior of the country, reinforced by the
democracy of the cities, growing into self-consciousness and power.
A new force was coming into American life. This fiery Tennesseean
was becoming the political idol of a popular movement which swept
across all sections, with but slight regard to their separate
economic interests. The rude, strong, turbulent democracy of the
west and of the country found in him its natural leader.

All these candidates and the dominant element in every section
professed the doctrines of republicanism; but what were the orthodox
tenets of republicanism at the end of the rule of the Virginia
dynasty? To this question different candidates and different
sections gave conflicting answers. Out of their differences there
was already the beginning of a new division of parties.

The progress of events gave ample opportunity for collision between
the various factions. The crisis of 1819 and the depression of the
succeeding years worked, on the whole, in the interests of Jackson,
inclining the common people to demand a leader and a new
dispensation. Not, perhaps, without a malicious joy did John Quincy
Adams write in his diary at that time that "Crawford has labors and
perils enough before him in the management of the finances for the
three succeeding years."[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, IV., 391.] From
the negotiation of the Florida treaty in 1819, and especially from
the relinquishment by Spain of her claims to the Pacific coast north
of the forty-second parallel, the secretary of state expected to
reap a harvest of political advantage.[Footnote: Ibid., IV., 238,
273, 451, V., 53, 109, 290; Monroe, Writings, VI., 127.] But Clay,
as well as Benton and the west in general, balked his hopes by
denouncing the treaty as an abandonment of American rights; and,
although Adams won friends in the south by the acquisition of
Florida, Spain's delay of two years in the ratification of the
treaty so far neutralized the credit that the treaty was, after all,
but a feast of Tantalus. In these intervening years, when the United
States was several times on the verge of forcibly occupying Florida,
the possibility of a war with Spain, into which European powers
might be drawn, increased the importance of General Jackson as a
figure in the eyes of the public.

Next the Missouri controversy, like "a flaming sword," [Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, V., 91.]cut in every direction and affected the
future of all the presidential candidates. The hope of Crawford to
reap the reward of his renunciation in 1816 was based, not only upon
his moderation in his earlier career, which had brought him friends
among the Federalists, but also upon the prospect of attracting a
following in Pennsylvania, with the aid of the influence of
Gallatin, and in New York as the regular candidate of the party.
These hopes of northern support demanded that Crawford should trim
his sails with care, attacking the policies of his rivals rather
than framing issues of his own. But for a time the Missouri
controversy alienated both Pennsylvania and New York from the south,
and it brought about a bitterness of feeling fatal to his success in
those two states. To Clay, too, the slavery struggle brought
embarrassments, for his attitude as a compromiser failed to
strengthen him in the south, while it diminished his following in
the north. Calhoun suffered from the same difficulty, although his
position in the cabinet enabled him to keep in the background in
this heated contest. Jackson stood in a different situation. At the
time he was remote from the controversy, having his own troubles as
governor of Florida, and, as a slave-holding planter he was not
suspected by the south, while at the same time his popularity as the
representative of the new democracy was steadily winning him friends
in the antislavery state of Pennsylvania.

To Adams all the agitation was a distinct gain, since it broke the
concert between Virginia and New York and increased his chances as
the only important northern candidate. He saw--none more clearly--
the possibility of this issue as a basis for a new party
organization,[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, IV., 529.] but he saw also
that it menaced a dissolution of the Union.[Footnote: Ibid., V., 12,
13, 53.] He was not disposed to alienate the south, and he contented
himself with confiding his denunciation of slavery to the secret
pages of his diary, while publicly he took his stand on the doctrine
that the proposed restriction upon Missouri was against the
Constitution.[Footnote: Ibid., IV., 529.] As early as 1821 he
recognized that the number of candidates in the field made it almost
certain that the election would be decided by the vote of states in
the House of Representatives, where the vote of the single member
from Illinois would count as much as that of the whole delegation of
New York or Pennsylvania. What Adams needed, therefore, was to
combine New England in his support, obtain, if possible, a majority
in New York, and add the votes of a sufficient number of smaller
states to win the election.

The seventeenth Congress, which met in December, 1821, and lasted
until the spring of 1823, was one of the most ineffective
legislative bodies in the country's history. Henry Clay had returned
to Kentucky to resume the practice of the law as a means of
restoring his financial fortunes, and the importance of his
leadership was emphasized by his absence. Without mastery, and in
the absence of party discipline, Congress degenerated into a. mere
arena for the conflicts of rival personal factions, each anxious to
destroy the reputation of the candidate favored by the other.

In December, 1821, Barbour, of Virginia, was chosen speaker, by a
close vote, over Taylor, the favorite of Adams, thus transferring
the control of the congressional committees again to the south,
aided by its New York allies. The advantage to Crawford arising from
this election was partly neutralized by the fact that in this year
his partisans in Georgia were defeated by the choice of his
bitterest enemy for the governorship. It may have been this
circumstance which aroused the hope of Crawford's southern rivals
and led to the calling of a legislative caucus in South Carolina,
which, on December 18, 1821, by a close vote, nominated William
Lowndes instead of Calhoun for the presidency. Many of Calhoun's
partisans refused to attend this caucus, and the vote was a close
one (57 to 53). [Footnote: Ravenel, William Lowndes, chap, x.;
Adams, Memoirs, V., 468, 470; National Intelligencer, January 19,
1822.] Lowndes was a wealthy South Carolina planter, judicious and
dispassionate, with a reputation for fair-mindedness and wisdom that
gained him the respect of his foes as well as his friends. According
to tradition, Clay once declared that among the many men he had
known he found it difficult to decide who was the greatest, but
added, "I think the wisest man I ever knew was William
Lowndes."[Footnote: Ravenel, William Lowndes, 238.] His death, in
less than a year, removed from the presidential contest an important
figure, and from the south one of the most gifted of her sons.

As soon as the news of the nomination of Lowndes reached Washington,
a delegation of members of Congress, from various sections, secured
Calhoun's consent to avow his candidacy. His career as a tariff man
and as a friend of internal improvements had won him northern
supporters, especially in Pennsylvania, although, as South
Carolina's action showed, he was not able to control his state. The
announcement of Calhoun's candidacy turned against him all the
batteries of his rivals. Pleading the depleted condition of the
treasury, Crawford's partisans in Congress attacked the measures of
Calhoun as secretary of war. Retrenchment in the expenditures for
the army was demanded, and finally, under the leadership of
Crawford's friends, the Senate refused to ratify certain nominations
of military officers made by the president on the recommendation of
the secretary of war, giving as a reason that they were not in
accordance with the law for the reduction of the army. In the
cabinet discussion, Crawford openly supported this opposition, and
his relations with the president became so strained that, in the
spring of 1822, reports were rife that his resignation would be
demanded. [Footnote: Cf. Adams, Memoirs, V., 525.] Crawford himself
wrote to Gallatin that it would not be to his disadvantage to be
removed from office. [Footnote: Gallatin, Writings, 31., 241.]

In the summer the matter was brought to a head by a correspondence
in which Monroe indignantly intimated that Crawford had given
countenance to the allegation that the president's principles and
policy were not in sympathy with the early Jeffersonian system of
economy and state rights. Believing that Crawford was aiming at the
creation of a new party (a thing which distressed Monroe, who
regarded parties as an evil),[Footnote: Monroe, Writings, VI., 286-
291.] he made it clear that it was the duty of a cabinet officer,
when once the policy of the executive had been determined, to give
that policy co-operation and support.[Footnote: Monroe to Crawford,
August 22, 1822, MS. in N.Y. Pub. Library.] In his reply Crawford
denied that he had personally antagonized the measures of the
administration; [Footnote: Crawford to Monroe, September 3, 1822,
MS. in N.Y. Pub. Library; cf. Adams, Memoirs, VI., 390.] but he took
the ground that a cabinet officer should not attempt to influence
his friends in Congress either for or against the policy of the
government.

His assurances of loyalty satisfied Monroe and averted the breach.
It is easy to see, however, that Crawford's attitude strengthened
the feeling on the part of his rivals that he was intriguing against
the administration. They believed, whether he instigated his
partisans to oppose measures favored by the president or was unable
to restrain them, in either case he should be forced into open
opposition. [Footnote: Cf. Poinsett to Monroe, May 10, 1822, Monroe
MSS., in Library of Cong.; Adams, Memoirs, V., 315, VI., 57.] The
truth is that the government was so divided within itself that it
was difficult to determine with certainty what its policy was.
Monroe's greatest weakness was revealed at this time in his
inability to create and insist upon a definite policy. The situation
was aggravated by the president's determination to remain neutral
between the rival members of his official family, and by the loss of
influence which he suffered through the knowledge that he was soon
to lay down the presidential power.

Meanwhile, John Quincy Adams watched these intrigues with bitterness
of soul. Debarred by his Puritan principles from the open
solicitation of votes which his rivals practiced, he yet knew every
move in the game and gauged the political tendencies with the
astuteness of the politician, albeit a Puritan politician. Nor did
he disdain to make such use of his position as would win friends or
remove enemies. He proposed to Calhoun a foreign mission, suggested
the same to Clay, favored an ambassadorship for Clinton, and urged
the appointment of Jackson to Mexico. These overtures were politely
declined by the candidates, and Adams was forced to fight for the
presidency against the men whom he would so gladly have sent to
honor their country abroad.


CHAPTER XII

THE MONROE DOCTRINE (1821-1823)


The place of slavery in the westward expansion of the nation was not
the only burning question which the American people had to face in
the presidency of Monroe. Within a few years after that contest, the
problem of the independence of the New World and of the destiny of
the United States in the sisterhood of new American republics
confronted the administration. Should the political rivalries and
wars of Europe to acquire territory be excluded from the western
hemisphere? Should the acquisition of new colonies by European
states in the vast unsettled spaces of the two Americas be
terminated? These weighty questions were put to the mild Virginian
statesman; history has named his answer the Monroe Doctrine.

From the beginning of our national existence, the United States had
been pushing back Europe from her borders, and asserting neutrality
and the right to remain outside of the political System of the Old
World. Washington's farewell address of 1796, with its appeal to his
fellow-citizens against "interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe," sank deep into the popular consciousness. It did
not interfere with the process by which, piece by piece, the United
States added to its domains fragments from the disintegrating
Spanish empire; for so long as European states held the strategic
positions on our flanks, as they did in Washington's day, the policy
of separation from the nations of the Old World was one difficult to
maintain; and France and England watched the enlargement of the
United States with jealous eye. Each nation, in turn, considered the
plans of Miranda, a Venezuelan revolutionist, for the freeing of
Spanish America. In 1790 the Nootka Sound affair threatened to place
England in possession of the whole Mississippi valley and to give
her the leadership in Spanish America. [Footnote: Turner, in Am.
Hist. Rev., VII., 704, VIII., 78; Manning, Nootka Sound Controversy,
in Am. Hist. Assoc., Report, 1904, p. 281; cf. Bassett, Federalist
System (Am. Nation, XI), chap. vi.] Two years later, France urged
England to join her in freeing the colonies of Spain in the New
World;[Footnote: Sorel, L'Europe et la Revolution Francaise, II.,
384, 418, III., 17.] and when Pitt rejected these overtures, France
sent Genet to spread the fires of her revolution in Louisiana and
Florida.[Footnote: Turner, in Am. Hist. Rev., III., 650, X. 259.]
When this design failed, France turned to diplomacy, and between
1795 and 1800 tried to persuade Spain to relinquish Florida and
Louisiana to herself, as a means of checking the expansion of the
United States and of rendering her subservient to France. The
growing preponderance of France over Spain, and the fear that she
would secure control of Spanish America, led England again in 1798
to listen to Miranda's dream of freeing his countrymen, and to sound
the United States on a plan for joint action against Spain in the
New World. [Footnote: Turner, in Am. Hist. Rev., X., 249 et seq.,
276.] The elder Adams turned a deaf ear to these suggestions, and
when at last Napoleon achieved the possession of Louisiana, it was
only to turn it over to the United States. [Footnote: Sloane, in Am.
Hist. Rev., IV., 439.] Jefferson's threat that the possession of
Louisiana by France would seal the union between England and the
United States and "make the first cannon which shall be fired in
Europe the signal for the tearing up of any settlement she may have
made, and for holding the two continents of America in sequestration
for the common purposes of the united British and American nations,"
[Footnote: Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), VIII., 145.] showed how
unstable must be the American policy of isolation so long as Europe
had a lodgment on our borders. [Footnote: Cf. Channing, Jeffersonian
System (Am. Nation, XII.), chap. v.]

The acquisition of Louisiana by the United States was followed by
the annexation of West Florida; and the Seminole campaign frightened
Spain into the abandonment of East Florida. [Footnote: Babcock,
American Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.), chap. xvii.] While the
United States was thus crowding Europe back from its borders and
strengthening its leadership in the New World, Spanish America was
revolting from the mother-country. When Napoleon made himself master
of Spain in 1807, English merchants, alarmed at the prospect of
losing the lucrative trade which they had built up in the lands
which Spain had so long monopolized, supported the revolutionists
with money, while various expeditions led by English officers aided
the revolt. [Footnote: Paxson, Independence of the So. Am.
Republics, chap, iii.; Am. Hist. Rev., IV., 449, VI., 508.] At
first, failure met the efforts of the loosely compacted provinces,
made up of sharply marked social classes, separated by race
antagonisms, and untrained in self-government. Only in Buenos Ayres
(later the Argentine Confederation), where representatives of the
United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata declared their independence
in 1816, were the colonists able to hold their ground.

A new era in the revolt began, however, in 1817, when General San
Martin surprised the Spaniards by his march, from a frontier
province of La Plata, over a pass thirteen thousand feet above the
sea across the Andes to Chili. In the course of four years, with the
co-operation of Lord Cochrane (who relinquished the British service
in order to command the fleet of the insurgents on the Pacific), he
effected the liberation of Chili and of Peru. Meanwhile, in the
northern provinces the other great South American revolutionist,
Bolivar, aided by a legion of Irish and English veterans, won the
independence of Venezuela and Colombia. In July, 1822, these two
successful generals met in Ecuador; and San Martin, yielding the
leadership to the more ambitious Bolivar, withdrew from the New
World. By this date, America was clearly lost to the Latin states of
Europe, for Mexico became an independent empire in 1821, and the
next year Brazil, while it chose for its ruler a prince of the
younger line of the royal house of Portugal, proclaimed its
independence.[Footnote: Paxson, Independence of the So. Am.
Republics, chap. i.]

Although the relations between these revolutionary states and
England, both on the military and on the commercial side, were much
closer than with the United States, this nation followed the course
of events with keen interest. Agents were sent, in 1817 and 1820, to
various South American states, to report upon the conditions there;
and the vessels of the revolutionary governments were accorded
belligerent rights, and admitted to the ports of the United
States.[Footnote: Ibid., 121; Am. State Papers, Foreign, IV., 217,
818.] The occupation of Amelia Island and Galveston, in 1817, by
revolutionists, claiming the protection of the flags of Colombia and
Mexico respectively, gave opportunity for piratical forays upon
commerce, which the United States was unable to tolerate, and these
establishments were broken up by the government.[Footnote: McMaster,
United States, IV., chap. xxxiv.; Reeves, in Johns Hopkins Univ.
Studies, XXIII., Nos. 9, 10.]

President Monroe seems to have been inclined to recognize the
independence of these states on the earliest evidence of their
ability to sustain it; but the secretary of state, John Quincy
Adams, favored a policy of delay. He had slight confidence in the
turbulent, untrained republics of Latin-America, and little patience
with the idea that their revolution had anything in common with that
of the United States. At the close of 1817 he believed it
inexpedient and unjust for the United States to favor their cause,
and he urged a friend to publish inquiries into the political
morality and the right of the United States to take sides with a
people who trampled upon civil rights, disgraced their revolution by
buccaneering and piracy, and who lacked both unity of cause and of
effort. [Footnote: Letter to A. H. Everett, in Am. Hist. Rev., XI.,
112.] His own system was based on the theory that the United States.
should move in harmony with England, and, if possible, with the
other European powers in the matter of recognition; [Footnote:
Paxson, Independence of the So. Am. Republics, 149 (citing MSS. in
State Dept.)] and he perceived that Spain would be more likely to
yield Florida to the United States if the president did not
acknowledge the independence of her other provinces.

Henry Clay now came forward as the advocate of immediate recognition
of the revolutionary republics. In this he was undoubtedly swayed by
a real sympathy with the cause of freedom and by the natural
instincts of a man of the west, where antagonism to Spain was bred
in the bone. But his insistence upon immediate action was also
stimulated by his opposition to Monroe and the secretary of state.
Clay's great speech on recognition was made May 24 and 25, 1818. His
imagination kindled at the vastness of South America: "The loftiest
mountains; the most majestic rivers in the world; the richest mines
of the precious metals; and the choicest productions of the earth."
"We behold there," said he, "a spectacle still more interesting and
sublime--the glorious spectacle of eighteen millions of people
struggling to burst their chains and be free." He appealed to
Congress to support an American system by recognizing these sister
republics, and argued that, both in diplomacy and in commerce they
would be guided by an American policy and aid the United States to
free itself from dependence on Europe. His motion was lost by an
overwhelming majority, but the speech made a deep impression.
[Footnote: Annals of Cong., 15 Cong., 1 Sess., II., 1474.]

In the two years which elapsed between the negotiation and the
ratification of the Florida treaty, the president was several times
on the point of recommending the forcible occupation of Florida, but
he withheld the blow, hoping that the liberal Spanish government
established under the constitution of 1820 might be brought to give
its consent to the cession. The impetuous Clay chafed under this
delay, and on May 10, 1820, he broke forth in another speech, in
support of a resolution declaring the expediency of sending
ministers to the South American states. Charging the administration,
and especially John Quincy Adams, with subserviency to Great
Britain, he demanded that the United States should become the center
of a system against the despotism of the Old World and should act on
its own responsibility. "We look too much abroad," said he. "Let us
break these commercial and political fetters; let us no longer watch
the nod of any European politician; let us become real and true
Americans, and place ourselves at the head of the American system."
[Footnote: Annals of Cong., 16 Cong., 1 Sess., II., 2727.]

Clay was steadily gaining support in his efforts to force the hands
of the administration: his resolutions won by a fair majority, and
again, in February, 1821, he secured the almost unanimous assent of
the House to a resolution of sympathy with South America. Another
resolution, expressing the readiness of that body to support the
president whenever he should think it expedient to recognize the
republics, passed by a vote of 86 to 68, and the triumphant Clay was
placed at the head of a committee to wait on the president with this
resolution.[Footnote: Ibid., 2229, and 2 Sess., 1081, 1091; Adams,
Memoirs, V., 268]

Although the victory was without immediate effect on the
administration, which refused to act while the Florida treaty was
still unratified, Adams perceived that the popular current was
growing too strong to be much longer stemmed; the charge of
dependence upon England was one not easy to be borne, and Clay's
vision of an independent American system guided by the United States
had its influence on his mind. Five months after Clay's speech, in
1820, extolling such a system, Adams set forth similar general ideas
in a discussion between himself and the British minister over the
regulation, of the slave-trade. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 182]
By 1822, Florida was in our possession. The success of the arms of
the revolutionists was unmistakable; several governments, of
sufficient stability to warrant recognition had been erected; and it
was patent to the world that Spain had lost her colonies. Acting on
these considerations, Monroe sent a message to Congress, March 8,
1822, announcing that the time for recognition had come, and asking
for appropriations for ministers to South America. [Footnote:
Richardson, Messages and Papers, II., 116]

In the mean time, the secretary of state was confronted with
important diplomatic questions which, complicated the South American
problem. As Spanish America broke away from the mother-country, its
possessions in North America on the Pacific were exposed to seizure
by the rival powers. In 1821, when Stratford Canning, the British
minister to the United States, protested against a motion, in the
House of Representatives, that the United States should form an
establishment on the Columbia, Adams challenged any claim of England
to the shores of the Pacific. "I do not know," said he, "what you
claim nor what you do not claim. You claim India; you claim Africa;
you claim--" "Perhaps," said Canning, "a piece of the moon." "No,"
said Adams, "I have not heard that you claim exclusively any part of
the moon; but there is not a spot on THIS habitable globe that I
could affirm you do not claim; and there is none which you may not
claim with as much color of right as you can have to Columbia River
or its mouth." [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 252.]

The time had arrived when Adams's familiarity with foreign
diplomacy, his belief that a new nation must assert its rights with
vigor if it expected to maintain them, his very testiness and
irascibility, his "bull-dog fighting qualities"--in short, the
characteristics that were sources of weakness to him in domestic
politics--proved to be elements of strength in his conduct of
foreign relations. The individualism, the uncompromising nature, the
aggressiveness, and the natural love of expansion, which were traits
of John Quincy Adams, became of highest service to his country in
the diplomatic relations of the next few years.

Hardly a year elapsed after this defiance to England when Adams met
the claims of Russia likewise with a similar challenge. On September
4, 1821, the Russian czar issued a ukase announcing the claim of
Russia on the Pacific coast north of the fifty-first degree, and
interdicting to the commercial vessels of other powers the approach
on the high seas within one hundred Italian miles of this claim.
[Footnote: U. S. Foreign Relations (1890), 439.] This assertion of
Russian monopoly, which would, in effect, have closed Bering Sea,
met with peremptory refusal by Adams, and on July 17, 1823, having
in mind Russia's posts in California, he informed the minister,
Baron Tuyl, "that we should contest the right of Russia to any
territorial establishment on this continent, and that we should
assume distinctly the principle that the American continents are no
longer subjects for any new European colonial establishments."
[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 163.] After negotiations, Russia
concluded the treaty of April 17, 1824, by which she agreed to form
no establishments on the northwest coast south of latitude 54
degrees 40', and the United States reciprocally agreed to make no
establishments north of that line. At the same time Russia abandoned
her extreme claim of maritime jurisdiction.

While the Russian claims were under consideration, the question of
the future of Cuba was also giving great concern. The Pearl of the
Antilles remained in the possession of Spain when she lost her main-
land colonies. By its position, commanding both the Gulf of Mexico
and the Caribbean Sea, it was of the highest importance to the
United States as well as to the West Indian powers, England and
France. From a party in Cuba itself, in September, 1822, advances
were made to the United States for annexation, and Monroe sent an
agent to investigate, meanwhile refraining from encouraging the
movement. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 69, 72.]

George Canning, who became premier of England in September, 1822,
was convinced that no questions relating to continental Europe could
be more immediately and vitally important to Great Britain than
those which related to America. [Footnote: Stapleton, Official
Corresp. of George Canning, I., 48.] Alarmed lest the United States
should occupy Cuba, Canning, in a memorandum to the cabinet in
November, questioned whether any blow that could be struck by any
foreign power in any part of the world would more affect the
interests of England. [Footnote: Ibid., 52; Royal Hist. Soc.,
Transactions (new series), XVIII., 89] He contented himself,
however, with sending a naval force to the waters of Cuba and Puerto
Rico, with the double purpose of checking American aggressions and
protecting English commerce. This action created suspicion on the
part of the United States, and Adams issued instructions (April 28,
1823) to the American minister at Madrid, declaring that, within a
half-century, the annexation of Cuba to the United States would be
indispensable to the continuance and integrity of the Union itself.
The laws of political gravitation would, in his opinion, ultimately
bring Cuba to this country, if, in the mean time, it were not
acquired by some other power. Adams's immediate policy, therefore,
favored the retention of Cuba and Puerto Rico by Spain, but he
refused to commit the United States to a guarantee of the
independence of Cuba against all the world except that power.
[Footnote: Wharton, Digest of Am. Int. Law, I., 361-366; Latane,
Diplomatic Relations with Lat. Am., chap. iii.]

The mutual jealousies of the nations with respect to the destiny of
Cuba became, at this time, entangled with the greater question of
the intervention of the Holy Alliance in the New World. At the
Congress of Verona, in November, 1822, Austria, France, Russia, and
Prussia signed a revision of the treaty of the Holy Alliance,
[Footnote: Snow, Treaties and Topics; Seignobos, Pol. Hist. of
Europe since 1814, 762.] which had for its objects the promotion of
the doctrine of legitimacy in support of the divine right of rulers,
and the doctrine of intervention, for the purpose of restoring to
their thrones those monarchs who had been deposed by popular
uprisings, and of rehabilitating those who had been limited by
written constitutions. At Verona, the allies agreed to use their
efforts to put an end to the system of representative government in
Europe, and to prevent its further introduction. Having already
suppressed uprisings in Naples and Piedmont, the Alliance empowered
France to send troops into the Spanish peninsula to restore the
authority of the king of Spain and to put down the revolutionary
constitution of 1820. Chateaubriand, the French representative,
desired the congress to go further and intervene in Spanish America,
but this question was postponed.

Alarmed by the prospect of French power in Spain and by the proposed
extension of the system of the allies to the New World, Canning
protested against the doctrine of intervention, and determined that,
if France was to become the mistress of Spain, she should at least
not control the old Spanish empire. In the spring of 1823 he made an
unsuccessful effort to secure a pledge from France not to acquire
any Spanish-American possessions, either by conquest or by cession
from Spain. But the French government maintained its reserve, even
after England disclaimed for herself the intention of acquiring
Spanish-American territory. [Footnote: Stapleton, Political Life of
Canning, I., 19.]

Having broken with the concert of the European powers, it was
natural that England should turn to the United States, and it is
very likely that the next step of Canning was influenced by the
dispatches of the British minister to the United States, who
reported a conversation with Adams, in June, 1823, in which the
secretary strongly set forth his belief that, in view of the virtual
dissolution of the European alliance, England and the United States
had much in common in their policy. "With respect to the vast
continent of the West," said he, "the United States must necessarily
take a warm and decided interest in whatever determined the fate or
affected the welfare of its component members." But he disclaimed
any wish on the part of this country to obtain exclusive advantages
there. He urged that England ought to recognize the independence of
the revolted provinces, and he deprecated the conquest or cession of
any part of them. [Footnote: Stratford Canning to George Canning,
June 6, 1823, MSS. Foreign Office, America, CLXXVI; Adams, Memoirs,
VI., 151; cf. Reddaway, Monroe Doctrine, 83.]

The first impression of the British minister, on hearing Adams's
emphasis on the community of interests between the two nations, was
that the secretary was suggesting an alliance; and it may well have
been that Canning was encouraged by the American attitude to make
overtures to Rush, the American minister, shortly after these
dispatches must have reached him. On August 16, 1823, and three
times thereafter, Canning proposed a joint declaration by England
and the United States against any project by a European power of "a
forcible enterprise for reducing the colonies to subjugation, on the
behalf or in the name of Spain; or which meditates the acquisition
of any part of them to itself, by cession or by conquest."
[Footnote: Stapleton, Political Life of Canning, II., 24; W. C.
Ford, in Mass. Hist. Soc. Proceedings (2d series), XV., 415.]
Canning was willing to make public announcement that the recovery of
the colonies by Spain was hopeless; that the matter of recognition
was only a question of time; and that Great Britain did not aim at
the possession of any portion of them, but that it "could not see
any part of them transferred to any other power with indifference."
These professions Canning desired that the United States and England
should mutually confide to each other and declare "in the face of
the world."

Confronted with Canning's important proposition, Rush, who doubted
the disinterestedness of England, prudently attempted to exact a
preliminary recognition of the Spanish-American republics; if
Canning would agree to take this action, he would accept the
responsibility of engaging in such a declaration. [Footnote: Ford,
in Mass. Hist. Soc. Proceedings (2d series), XV., 420, 423.] Having
failed in four successive efforts to persuade Rush to join in an
immediate declaration, irrespective of prior recognition by England,
Canning proceeded alone, and, in an interview with Polignac, the
French minister in London, on October 9, 1823, he announced
substantially the principles which he had expressed to the American
minister. [Footnote: Stapleton, Political Life of Canning, II., 26.]
Polignac thereupon disclaimed for France any intention to
appropriate Spanish possessions in America, and abjured any design,
on the part of his country, of acting against the colonies by force;
but he significantly added that the future relations between Spain
and her colonies ought to form a subject of discussion between the
European powers. Acting on this idea, and in opposition to England's
wishes, an invitation was sent to Russia, Prussia, and Austria to
confer at Paris on the relations of Spain and her revolted
provinces.

Rush's despatches relating the overtures of Canning reached
President Monroe [Footnote: Ford, in Am. Hist. Rev., VII., 684.]
October 9, 1823, on the same day that Canning was interviewing
Polignac. Adams was absent from Washington at the time, and Monroe,
returning to Virginia, consulted ex-Presidents Jefferson and
Madison. He clearly intimated his own belief that the present case
might be an exception to the general maxim against entanglement in
European politics, and was evidently willing to accept the proposal
of the British government. [Footnote: Monroe, Writings, VI., 323.]

To Jefferson [Footnote: Ibid., VI., 394.] the question seemed the
most momentous since the Declaration of Independence. One nation,
most of all, he thought, could disturb America in its efforts to
have an independent system, and that nation, England, now offered
"to lead, aid, and accompany us in it." He believed that by acceding
to her proposition her mighty weight would be brought into the scale
of free government, and "emancipate a continent at one stroke."
Construing the English proposition to be a maintenance of our own
principle of "keeping out of our land all foreign-powers," he was
ready to accept Canning's invitation. He was even ready to yield his
desire for the annexation or independence of Cuba, in order to
obtain England's co-operation. Madison, [Footnote: Madison, Writings
(ed. of 1865), III., 339-341.] also, was prepared to accept the
English proposal, and to invite that government to join in
disapproval of the campaign of France in Spain and in a declaration
in behalf of the Greeks.

Thus, by a strange operation of fate, members of the "Virginia
dynasty," the traditional antagonists of England, were now willing
to accept her leadership in American affairs, and were inclined to
mingle in European concerns in opposition to the Holy Alliance. By
an equally strange chance, it was a statesman from New England, the
section traditionally friendly to British leadership, who prevented
the United States from casting itself into the arms of England at
this crisis, and who summoned his country to stand forth
independently as the protector of an American system.

When John Quincy Adams learned of Canning's proposals, he had just
been engaged in a discussion with the representative of the czar,
who informed him of the refusal of Russia to recognize the Spanish-
American republics, and expressed the hope that America would
continue her policy of neutrality.

While the cabinet had Rush's dispatches under consideration, Adams
received a second communication from the Russian minister,
expounding the reactionary ideas of the Holy Alliance. [Footnote:
Ford, in Mass. Hist. Soc. Proceedings (2d series), XV., 378, 395,
402-408.] To the secretary of state this was a challenge to defend
the American ideas of liberty. Convinces that his Country ought to
decline the overture of Great Britain and avow its principles
explicitly to Russia and France, "rather than to come in as a cock-
boat in the wake of the British man-of-war," Adams informed the
president that the reply to Russia and the instructions to Rush in
England must be part of a combined system of policy. "The ground
that I wish to take," he said, "is that of earnest remonstrance
against the interference of European powers by force with South
America, but to disclaim all interference on our part with Europe;
to make an American cause and adhere inflexibly to that." [Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, VI., 178, 194, 197, 199-212.]

In the cabinet he stood firmly against giving guarantees to England
with respect to Cuba. He heartened up his colleagues, who were
alarmed at the possibility of the spread of war to the United
States; but at the same time that he dismissed this danger as remote
he pictured to the cabinet the alarming alternatives in case the
allies subjugated Spanish America: California, Peru, and Chili might
fall to Russia; Cuba, to England; and Mexico, to France. The danger
was even at our doors, he declared, for within a few days the
minister of France had openly threatened to recover Louisiana.
[Footnote: Ibid., VI., 207; cf. Reeves, in Johns Hopkins Univ.
Studies, XXIII, Nos. 9, 10.] Such suggestions exhibit the real
significance of the problem, which in truth involved the question of
whether America should lie open to seizure by rival European
nations, each fearful lest the other gain an undue advantage. It was
time for the United States to take its stand against intervention in
this hemisphere.

Monroe was persuaded by Adams to change the first draught of his
message, in which the president criticized the invasion of Spain by
France and recommended the acknowledgment of the independence of the
Greeks, in terms which seemed to threaten war with Europe on
European questions. Even Webster and Clay, in fervent orations,
showed themselves ready to go far towards committing the United
States to an unwise support of the cause of the Greeks, which at
this time was deeply stirring the sympathy of the United States. On
the other hand, Adams stood firmly on the well-established doctrine
of isolation from Europe, and of an independent utterance, by the
United States, as the leader in the New World, of the principles of
a purely American system. In the final draught, these ideas were all
accepted, as well as the principles affirmed by Adams in his
conferences with the Russian minister.

When sent to Congress, on December 2, 1823, Monroe's message
asserted "as a principle in which the rights and interests of the
United States are involved, that the American continents, by the
free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintain,
are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future
colonization by any European powers." This was in effect the
proclamation of the end of a process that began with Columbus,
Cabot, and Cartier--the rivalry of the nations of the Old World in
the discovery, occupation, and political control of the wild lands
of the western hemisphere. The interpretation by the next
administration left the enforcement of this general principle to the
various American states according to their interests. [Footnote: See
chap. xvi. below]

The message further dealt with the determination of the United
States not to meddle with European affairs. "It is only when our
rights are invaded or seriously menaced," said Monroe, "that we
resent injuries or make preparation for our defense. With the
movements in this hemisphere we are of necessity more immediately
connected, and by causes which must be obvious to all enlightened
and impartial observers. The political system of the allied powers
is essentially different in this respect from that of America." This
declaration expressed the consciousness that there was a real
American system contrasted with that of Europe and capable of
separate existence.

Finally, the message met the immediate crisis by a bold assertion of
the policy of the United States: "We owe it, therefore, to candor
and to the amicable relations existing between the United States and
those powers to declare that we should consider any attempt on their
part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere as
dangerous to our peace and safety. With the existing colonies or
dependencies of any European power we have not interfered and shall
not interfere. But with the Governments who have declared their
independence and maintained it, and whose independence we have, on
great consideration and on just principles, acknowledged, we could
not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them, or
controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any European power
in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly
disposition toward the United States." [Footnote: Richardson,
Messages and Papers, II., 207-218; cf. Hart, Foundations of Am.
Foreign Policy, chap. vii.] Herein was the assertion of the well-
established opposition of the United States to the doctrine of
intervention as violating the equality of nations. It was the
affirmation also of the equality of the Old and the New World in
diplomatic relations, and the announcement of the paramount interest
of the United States in American affairs. [Footnote: Moore, "Non-
Intervention and the Monroe Doctrine," in Harper's Mag., CIX., 857.]

This classic statement of the position of the United States in the
New World, therefore, applied an old tendency on the part of this
country to a particular exigency. Its authorship can hardly be
attributed to any single individual, but its peculiar significance
at this juncture lay in the fact that the United States came
forward, unconnected with Europe, as the champion of the autonomy
and freedom of America, and declared that the era of European
colonization in the New World had passed away. The idea of an
American system, under the leadership of the United States,
unhampered by dependence upon European diplomacy, had been
eloquently and clearly voiced by Henry Clay in 1820. But John Quincy
Adams also reached the conception of an independent American system,
and to him belongs the credit for the doctrine that the two Americas
were closed to future political colonization. His office of
secretary of state placed him where he was able to insist upon a
consistent, clear-cut, and independent expression of the doctrine of
an American system. Monroe's was the honor of taking the
responsibility for these utterances. [Footnote: Cf. Reddaway, Monroe
Doctrine, chap, v.; and Ford, in Am. Hist. Rev., VII., 676, VIII.,
28.]

Canning afterwards boasted, "I called the New World into existence
to redress the balance of the Old." [Footnote: Stapleton, Political
Life of Canning, III., 227.] Unquestionably his determination that
"if France had Spain it should not be Spain with the Indies,"
materially contributed to make effective the protest of the United
States, and he recognized the value of the president's message in
putting an end to the proposal of a European congress. "It was
broken," said he, "in all its limbs before, but the president's
message gives it the coup de grace." [Footnote: Stapleton, George
Canning and His Times, 395.]

Nevertheless, the assertion by the United States of an American
system independent of Europe, and the proposed exclusion of Europe
from further colonization were, in truth, as obnoxious to England as
they were to France. [Footnote: Reddaway, Monroe Doctrine, 98.] "The
great danger of the time," declared Canning in 1825, shortly after
the British recognition of Mexico, "--a danger which the policy of
the European system would have fostered--was a division of the world
into European and American, republican and monarchical; a league of
worn-out governments on the one hand and of youthful and stirring
nations, with the United States at their head, on the other. WE slip
in between, and plant ourselves in Mexico. The United States have
gotten the start of us in vain, and we link once more America to
Europe." On December 17, 1824, Canning wrote: "Spanish America is
free; and if we do not mismanage our matters sadly, she is English,
and novus saeclorum nascitur ordo." [Footnote: Festing, J.H. Frere
and His Friends, 267, quoted by E.M. Lloyd, in Royal Hist. Soc.
Transactions (new series), XVIII., 77, 93.]

Later events were to reveal how unsubstantial were the hopes of the
British minister. For the present, his hands were tied by the fact
that England and the United States had a common interest in
safeguarding Spanish America; and the form of Monroe's declaration
seemed less important than its effectiveness in promoting this
result. In the United States the message was received with
approbation. Although Clay, from considerations of policy, withdrew
a resolution which he presented to Congress (January 20,1824),
giving legislative endorsement to the doctrine, [Footnote: Annals of
Cong., 18 Cong., 1 Sess., I., 1104, II., 2763.] there was no doubt
of the sympathy of the American people with its fundamental
principles. Together with the attitude of England, it put an end to
the menace of the Holy Alliance on this side of the ocean, and it
began a new chapter, yet unfinished, in the history of the
predominance of the United States in the New World.


CHAPTER XIII

INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS (1818-1824)


The transformation by which the slender line of the Indian trail
became the trader's trace, and then a road, superseded by the
turnpike and canal, and again replaced by the railroad, is typical
of the economic development of the United States. As the population
of the west increased, its surplus products sought outlets. Improved
means of communication became essential, and when these were
furnished the new lines of internal trade knitted the nation into
organic unity and replaced the former colonial dependence upon
Europe, in the matter of commerce, by an extensive domestic trade
between the various sections. From these changes flowed important
political results. [Footnote: For the earlier phase of internal
improvements, cf. Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.),
chap. xv.]

Many natural obstacles checked this process. The Appalachian
mountain system cut off the seaboard of the United States from the
interior. From the beginning, the Alleghenies profoundly influenced
the course of American history, and at one time even endangered the
permanency of the Union. In our own day the railroad has so reduced
the importance of these mountains that it is difficult for us to
realize the part which they once played in our development. Although
Webster boasted that there were no Alleghenies in his politics, we
have already seen [Footnote: See chaps, iii., vi., above.] that in
the twenties they exercised a dominant influence on the lines of
internal commerce, and compelled the pioneer farmers to ship their
surplus down the Mississippi to New Orleans and around the coast,
and thence abroad and to the cities of the north. The difficult and
expensive process of wagoning goods from Philadelphia and Baltimore
across the mountains to the Ohio Valley raised the price of
manufactured goods to the western farmer; while, on the other hand,
the cost of transportation for his crops left him little profit and
reduced the value of his lands. [Footnote: Journ. of Polit. Econ.,
VIII., 36-41.]

Under these circumstances, it was inevitable that the natural
opportunities furnished by the water system of the Great Lakes and
the widely ramifying tributaries of the Mississippi should appeal to
statesmen who considered the short distances that intervened between
these navigable waters and the rivers that sought the Atlantic.
Turnpikes and canals had already shown themselves practicable and
profitable in England, so a natural effort arose to use them in aid
of that movement for connecting east and west by ties of interest
which Washington had so much at heart. New York, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, and Virginia, all subdivided by the mountains into eastern
and western sections, fostered roads and chartered turnpike and
canal companies. Pennsylvania was pre-eminent in this movement even
before the close of the eighteenth century, subscribing large
amounts to the stock of turnpike companies in order to promote the
trade between Philadelphia and the growing population in the region
of Pittsburgh. So numerous were the projects and beginnings of roads
and canals in the nation, that as early as 1808 the far-sighted
Gallatin made his famous report for a complete national system of
roads and canals. [Footnote: Cf. Hart, Slavery and Abolition (Am.
Nation, XVI.), chap. iii.]

When New York undertook the Erie Canal in 1817 as a state
enterprise, and pushed it to such a triumphant conclusion that
before a decade after its completion its tolls repaid the cost of
construction, a revolution was effected in transportation. The
cheapness of water carriage not only compelled the freighters on the
turnpike roads to lower their charges, but also soon made it
probable that canals would supersede land transportation for heavy
freights, and even for passengers. For a time the power of
Pittsburgh and the activity of Philadelphia merchants sustained the
importance of the Pennsylvania turnpike. Until Great Lake steam
navigation developed and population spread along the shore of Lake
Erie and canals joined the Ohio and the lakes, the Erie Canal did
not reap its harvest of trade in the west. But already Pennsylvania
was alarmed at the prospect of losing her commercial ascendancy.
While New York and Philadelphia were developing canals and turnpikes
to reach the west, Baltimore was placed in an awkward position. The
attempts to improve the waters of the upper Potomac engaged the
interests of Maryland and Virginia from the days of Washington. But
the success of the Potomac Company, chartered jointly by these two
states in an effort to reach the Ohio trade, would have turned
traffic towards the city of Washington and its outlying suburbs
instead of towards Baltimore, which was already connected by a
turnpike with the Cumberland Road, so as to share with Philadelphia
in the wagon trade to the Ohio. On the other hand, Baltimore was
interested in the development of the Susquehanna's navigation, for
this river had its outlet in Chesapeake Bay, near enough to
Baltimore to make that city its entrepot; and it tapped the great
valley of Pennsylvania as well as the growing agricultural area of
south-central New York, which was not tributary to the Erie Canal.
But it was not possible to expect New York, Pennsylvania, or even
that part of Maryland interested in the Potomac to aid these
ambitions of Baltimore; and that city found itself at a disadvantage
and Maryland's interests were divided. [Footnote: Hulbert, Historic
Highways, XIII., 69 et seq.; Mills, Treatise on Inland Navig.; see
chap, xvii., below.]

Meantime, Virginia, anxious to check the western exodus from the
interior of her state, established a state fund and a board of
public works for the improvement of her rivers, including the
project of connecting the James and Kanawha. [Footnote: Babcock, Am.
Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.), chap. xv.; Adams, United States,
IX., 164.] North Carolina was agitating similar plans; [Footnote:
Murphy, Memorial on Internal Improvements; Weaver, Internal
Improvements in N. C., in Johns Hopkins Univ. Studies, XXI, 113.]
and South Carolina made appropriations for extensive improvements.

New England devoted her attention to canals along the seaboard and
up the Connecticut Valley, to give the products of the interior of
that section an outlet on the coast. Boston was feeling the
isolation from the western trade that was enriching New York, and
some voices were raised in favor of a canal to reach the Hudson; but
the undertaking was too difficult, and the metropolis of New England
devoted its energies to the ocean commerce.

Meantime, the west was urging the federal government to construct
those interstate roads and canals which were essential to the
prosperity of that section and which could not be undertaken by
jealous and conflicting states. The veto by Madison of Calhoun's
bonus bill, in 1817, [Footnote: Cf. Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am.
Nation, XIII.), chap. xvii.] was followed nine months later by
Monroe's first annual message, [Footnote: Richardson, Messages and
Papers, II., 18.] in which he stated his belief that the
Constitution did not empower Congress to establish a system of
internal improvements, and recommended an amendment to convey the
power. To Clay and the friends of internal improvements, these
constitutional scruples of the Virginia dynasty, although
accompanied by approval of the plan of a system of internal
improvements at federal expense, came as a challenge. In an
important debate on the constitutionality of national internal
improvements, in 1818, the House of Representatives, voting on four
resolutions submitted by Lowndes, of South Carolina, [Footnote:
Annals of Cong., 15 Cong., 1 Sess., I., 1249] declared that Congress
had power to appropriate money for the construction of military
roads, and of other roads, and of canals, and for the improvement of
watercourses (89 ayes to 75 nays). [Footnote: By count of names; the
Journal gives ayes 90.] But after a debate which turned on the
significance of the word "establish" in the Constitution, the House
decided against the power to construct post-roads and military roads
(81 to 84); against the power to construct roads and canals
necessary to commerce between the states (71 to 95); and against the
power to construct canals for military purposes (81 to 83).

It was clear after this debate that there was not a sufficient
majority to override the veto which might be expected from the
president. On the other hand, the majority were unwilling to hazard
the rights which they claimed to possess, by appealing to the states
for a constitutional amendment. The next year Calhoun, the secretary
of war, responding to an invitation of Congress, submitted a report
outlining a comprehensive system of internal improvements requisite
for the defense of the United States. While avoiding an opinion on
the question of constitutionality, he declared that a judicious
system of roads and canals, constructed for commerce and the mail,
would be "itself among the most efficient means for the more
complete defense of the United States"; [Footnote: Am. State Papers,
Miscellaneous, 534.] and he favored the use of the engineering corps
for surveying the routes and of federal troops for the actual work
of construction.

By 1818 the National Road [Footnote: Cf. Babcock, Am. Nationality
(Am. Nation, XIII.), chap. xv.; Young, Cumberland Road, 15; Hulbert,
Historic Highways, X., chap. i.] had been constructed from
Cumberland, on the Potomac, across the mountains to Wheeling, on the
Ohio, and two years later Congress made appropriations for a survey
of the road westward to the Mississippi River. The panic of 1819,
however, left the treasury in such a condition that it was not until
1822 that the preservation and construction of this highway was
again taken up with vigor. In that year a bill was introduced
authorizing the president to cause toll-houses, gates, and turnpikes
to be erected on the Cumberland Road, and to appoint toll-gatherers,
with power to enforce the collection of tolls to be used for the
preservation of the road. The bill further provided for a system of
fines for violation of the laws of the road. It therefore involved
the question of the right of jurisdiction as well as of
construction.

The measure passed the House of Representatives by a vote of 87 to
68. The districts along the line of the Potomac and the Ohio, and
the regions tributary to the road in Pennsylvania and western
Virginia, were almost a unit in favor of the bill. Indeed, the whole
vote of the western states, with the exception of two members from
Tennessee, was given in the affirmative. But Pittsburgh, which
feared the diversion of her western trade to Baltimore, opposed the
bill. The area along the Susquehanna which looked to Baltimore also
voted in the negative, as did the majority of the delegation from
New York, who were apprehensive of the effect of the National Road
as a rival to the Erie Canal. The Senate passed the bill by the
decisive vote of 29 to 7.

Monroe vetoed this measure, on the ground that it implied a power to
execute a complete system of internal improvements, with the right
of jurisdiction and sovereignty. Accompanying his veto (May 4,
1822), he submitted "Views on the Subject of Internal Improvements."
[Footnote: Richardson, Messages and Papers, II., 142-183; Monroe,
Writings, VI., 216; Mason, Veto Power, 85; Nelson presidential
Influence on Int. Imp. (Iowa Journal of Hist, and Politics), IV.,
29, 30.] In this elaborate disquisition, he rehearsed the
constitutional history of internal improvements, and expounded his
conception of the construction of the Constitution, and of the
relation of the states and the nation under the theory of divided
sovereignty. Although he denied to the federal government the right
of jurisdiction and construction, he asserted that Congress had
unlimited power to raise money, and that "in its appropriation, they
have a discretionary power, restricted only by their duty to
appropriate it to purposes of common defense and of general, not
local, national, not state, benefit." Nevertheless, he strongly
recommended a system of internal improvements, if it could be
established by means of a constitutional amendment. Both houses
sustained the president's veto.

Acting upon Monroe's intimation of the power to appropriate money,
and following the line of least resistance, the next year an act was
passed making appropriations for repairs of the Cumberland Road. On
March 3, 1823, also, was signed the first of the national acts for
the improvement of harbors. [Footnote: U. S. Statutes at Large,
III., 780.] The irresistible demand for better internal
communications and the development of a multitude of local projects,
chief among them a new plan for uniting Chesapeake Bay with the Ohio
by a canal along the Potomac, resulted, in 1824, in the introduction
of the general survey bill, authorizing the president to cause
surveys to be made for such roads and canals as he deemed of
national importance for commercial, military, or postal purposes.
The evident intention of the bill was to prepare a programme for
appropriations for internal improvements on a national scale, and
for subscription to the stock of companies engaged in these
enterprises. The discussion of the general survey bill brought out
the significance of the problem of transportation, and revealed the
sectional divisions of the nation in clear light.

Henry Clay made an earnest effort to commit Congress to the exercise
of the power of construction of interstate highways and canals which
could not be undertaken by individual states or by combinations of
states, and which, if built at all, must be by the nation. He
recounted the attention given by Congress to the construction of
public buildings and light-houses, coast surveys, erection of sea-
walls in the Atlantic states--"everything on the margin of the
ocean, but nothing for domestic trade; nothing for the great
interior of the country." [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 18 Cong., 1
Sess., I., 1035.] "Not one stone," he said, "had yet been broken,
not one spade of earth removed, in any Western State." He boldly
claimed that the right to regulate commerce granted as fully the
power to construct roads and canals for the benefit of circulation
and trade in the interior as it did the power to promote coastwise
traffic. His speech was a strong assertion of the right of the west
to equality of treatment with the old sections of the country. "A
new world," said he, "has come into being since the Constitution was
adopted. Are the narrow, limited necessities of the old thirteen
states, of, indeed, parts only of the old thirteen states, as they
existed at the formation of the present Constitution, forever to
remain the rule of its interpretation?" [Footnote: Annals of Cong.,
18 Cong., 1 Sess., I., 1315; Colton, Private Corresp. of Clay, 81.]

In contrast with the united attitude of the west upon internal
improvements, which Henry Clay voiced with such lofty accent, the
south showed divisions which reflected opposing economic interests
in the section. Not only were the representatives of Maryland almost
a unit in support of the bill, but also the western districts of
Virginia and North Carolina, as well as a considerable fraction of
the representatives from South Carolina and Georgia, supported the
cause of the west on this occasion.

The opposition in the south found, perhaps, its most inflexible
expression in the speech of John Randolph, [Footnote: Annals of
Cong., 18 Cong., 1 Sess., I., 1296-1311.] who, with characteristic
recklessness and irresponsibility, dragged from its closet the
family skeleton of the south, and warned his fellow slaveholders
that, if Congress possessed power to do what was proposed by the
bill, they might emancipate every slave in the United States, "and
with stronger color of reason than they can exercise the power now
contended for." He closed by threatening the formation of
associations and "every other means short of actual insurrection."
"We shall keep on the windward side of treason," said he. [Footnote:
Cf. Macon's identical views in 1818 and 1824, Univ. of North
Carolina, James Sprunt Hist. Monographs, No. 2, pp. 47, 72.]

On the other hand, McDuffie, of South Carolina, the friend and
protege of Calhoun and a later leader of the nullification forces,
supported the measure and spoke as earnestly in favor of a liberal
construction of the Constitution as any of the most enthusiastic
supporters of the bill. He declared that the constitutional
convention "did not regard the state governments as sentinels upon
the watch-towers of freedom, or in any respect more worthy of
confidence than the general government."

When the bill came to the final vote in the House of
Representatives, New England gave 12 votes in favor and 26 against;
the middle states, 37 to 26 (New York, 7 to 24); the south, 23 to
34; the west, 43 to 0. Thus the bill carried by 115 to 86. As the
map shows, the opposition was chiefly located in New England and New
York and in a fragment of the old south. The entire west, including
the southwestern slave states, with Pennsylvania and the Potomac
Valley, acted together. In the Senate, the vote stood 24 to 18. Here
New England gave an almost solid vote against the bill.

Thus by the close of Monroe's administration the forces of
nationalism seemed to have triumphed in the important field of
internal improvements. It was the line of least resistance then, as
it had been in the days of the Annapolis Convention. [Footnote:
McLaughlin, Confederation and Constitution (Am. Nation, X.), chap,
xi.]


CHAPTER XIV

THE TARIFF OF 1824 (1820-1824)


As has been shown in the last chapter, the attitude of portions of
the south towards strict construction was not inveterate upon
measures which promised advantages to that section. But the tariff
struggle revealed the spirit which arose when powers were asserted
unfavorable to any section. The failure of the tariff bill of 1820
[Footnote: See above, chap. ix.] was followed by other unsuccessful
attempts to induce a majority of Congress to revive the subject. The
messages of Monroe favored a moderate increase of duties; but it was
not until 1824, after the return of Henry Clay and his triumphant
election to the speakership, that Congress showed a protectionist
majority ably disciplined and led. [Footnote: For previous tariff
history, cf. Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.), chap.
xiv.]

The tariff bill of 1824 was supported, not as a revenue, but as a
protective measure. It proposed an increase of the duty upon iron,
hemp, cotton bagging, woolens, and cottons. Upon woolen goods, the
friends of protection desired to apply the minimum principle which
the tariff of 1816 had provided for cotton goods. But the cheap
woolens were mostly used for the clothing of southern slaves, and
the proposition for an increase of duty met with so strenuous a
resistance that in the outcome the cheap foreign goods bore a lower
rate of duty than did the high-priced products. Although the act
somewhat increased the protection upon woolen fabrics as a whole,
this was more than offset by the increased duty which was levied
upon raw wool in response to the demand of the wool-raising
interests of the country. [Footnote: Taussig, Tariff Hist., 75.]

Another struggle occurred over the protection of hemp. This product
was used both for the manufacture of the ropes essential to New
England shipping and for the cotton bagging used in the south. Thus
the shipping and the slave-holding sections were brought into union
in opposition to the provision. Nevertheless, this important
Kentucky interest received a substantial protection. The attempt to
secure a marked increase of the duty on iron bars resulted in a
compromise proposition which satisfied neither party and had little
effect upon domestic manufacture, while it increased the cost to the
consumer. The Senate amendments reduced the proposed rates on the
most important articles, so that, on the whole, the extreme
protectionists failed to carry their programme, although the bill
increased the duties upon the articles most essential to the
shipping and planting sections sufficiently to leave great
discontent. [Footnote: Stanwood, Amer. Tariff Controversies, I.,
chap. vii.]

In the debates upon this tariff, Henry Clay led the protectionist
forces, basing his arguments upon the general distress of the
country, which he explained by the loss of the foreign market for
agricultural products, and which he would remedy by building up a
home market by means of the support of manufactures--the creation of
an "American system." "We must naturalize the arts in our country,"
said he. Not the least significant portion of his plea for
protection was that in which he called attention to the great
diversity of interests--"agricultural, planting, farming,
commercial, navigating, fishing, manufacturing"--within the United
States. Some of these interests were, as he said, peculiar to
particular sections. "The inquiry should be in reference to the
great interests of every section of the Union (I speak not of minute
subdivisions); what would be done for those interests if that
section stood alone and separated from the residue of the Republic?
If they come into absolute collision with the interests of another
section, a reconciliation, if possible, should be attempted, by
mutual concession, so as to avoid a sacrifice of the prosperity of
either to that of the other." [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 18 Cong.,
1 Sess., II., 1997; cf. Clay's letter to Brooke, August 28, 1823,
Clay, Private Corresp., 81.]

Perhaps the ablest speech on the other side was that of Webster,
[Footnote: Webster, Writings (National ed.), V., 94-149.] who
ridiculed Clay's discovery. "This favorite American policy," said
he, "is what America has never tried, and this odious foreign policy
is what, as we are told, foreign states have never pursued." He
denied the existence of general depression, although he admitted
that profits were lower and prices considerably depressed. Webster's
argument included an analysis of the theory of protection as against
free-trade, in which he made a classical statement of the opposition
to protection. In short, he represented the attitude of the
commercial classes, particularly those of New England, whose
interests were injured by any restraint of the freedom of exchange.
As yet these classes exercised a dominant influence in
Massachusetts.

Senator Hayne, of South Carolina, also argued the case against the
tariff with a grasp and power of presentation that was hardly second
to that of Webster. In particular he protested against compelling
the planting regions to pay the cost of a protective system. Two-
thirds of the whole amount of the domestic exports of the United
States, he argued, were composed of cotton, rice, and tobacco, and
from this trade arose the imports of manufactured goods which paid
the revenues of the United States, and which the protective system
rendered expensive and burdensome to his section. He warned the
manufacturers that the south would repeal the system at the first
opportunity, regardless of interests that might accrue under the
proposed measure. [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 18 Cong., 1 Sess., I.,
618.]

In the speeches of some of the representatives of the south was a
note of revolt not to be found in Webster's argument. For the first
time in the discussion of the tariff, the constitutional objection
was made prominent. It was argued that the power to impose taxes and
duties was given for the purpose of raising revenue, not for the
purpose of protection. If not the letter, at least the spirit, of
the Constitution was violated, so it was charged, by this distortion
of the power of taxation. The proceedings of the constitutional
convention were recited to show that a proposition conferring the
alleged power was voted down. To this, Clay gave the reply that the
clause on which the protectionists relied was the power to regulate
commerce with foreign nations.

Even the south, however, laid less stress upon the constitutional
argument than upon the injustice to the section. McDuffie, for
example, replying to Clay, [Footnote: Ibid., II., 2400 et seq.]
argued that no one of the great sections of the country, if it were
a separate nation, could advantageously apply the system of
protection. He warned the western states that the system would make
them tributary to the Atlantic states, [Footnote: Ibid., II., 2423.]
and that they had more to lose by alienating the friendship of the
south for a system of internal improvements which should facilitate
the sale of their meat products to the south than by a union with
the manufacturing interests. With respect to the south itself, he
declared that cotton, which alone constituted one-third of the whole
export of the Union, was in danger of losing the market of England
if we ceased to take the manufactures of that country. Protesting
that the protective system would strike at the root of their
prosperity, by enhancing the cost of the clothing of their slaves
and the bagging used to cover their cotton-bales, while at the same
time it put to hazard the sale of their great staple in the English
market, he yet declared that, if the bill should pass, "even with a
majority of a single vote, I shall, as bound by my allegiance,
submit to it as one of the laws of my country."

But if this South Carolina leader represented the attitude of his
state in showing moderation at this time, [Footnote: See Ames, State
Docs, on Federal Relations, No. 4, p. 6.] not so did the free-lance
John Randolph, of Virginia. "I do not stop here, sir," said he, "to
argue about the constitutionality of this bill; I consider the
Constitution a dead letter; I consider it to consist, at this time,
of the power of the General Government and the power of the States--
that is the Constitution." "I have no faith in parchment, sir; ... I
have faith in the power of the commonwealth of which I am an
unworthy son." "If, under a power to regulate trade, you prevent
exportation; if, with the most approved spring lancets, you draw the
last drop of blood from our veins; if, secundum artem, you draw the
last shilling from our pockets, what are the checks of the
Constitution to us? A fig for the Constitution! When the scorpion's
sting is probing to the quick, shall we stop to chop logic? ...
There is no magic in this word union." While he threatened forcible
resistance, he rejoiced in the combination of the shipping and
commercial classes of New England with the south in opposition to
the measure. "The merchants and manufacturers of Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, the province of Maine and Sagadahock," said he, "repel
this bill, whilst men in hunting-shirts, with deer-skin leggings and
moccasins on their feet, want protection for manufactures."

The bill passed the House of Representatives on April 16, 1824, by
the close vote of 107 to 102, and subsequently passed the Senate by
a small majority:

          New England          Middle Region          South
          M N V M  R C T         N N P  D T         M V  N S  G T
          e H t a  I o o         Y J a  e o         d a  C C  a o
                s    n t                l t                     t
                s    n a                  a                     a
                       l                  l                     l

Ayes . . .1 1 5 1  2 5 15       26 6 24 1 57        3 1  0  0 0 4
Nays . . .6 5 0 11 0 1 23        8 0  1 0  9        6 21 13 9 7 56

          Northwest and Kentucky         Southwest
          O  I I M K  T                  T A M L T
          h  n l o y  o                  e l i a o
          i  d        t                  n a s   t     Total
          o           a                  n   s   a
                      l                          l

Ayes . . .14 2 1 1 11 29                 2 0 0 0 2      107
Nays . . . 0 0 0 0  0 0                  7 3 1 3 14     102

By this analysis and the map, it is clear that the navigating states
were in opposition, while the manufacturing states were generally in
favor of the bill. The most important textile manufacturers of
Massachusetts, however, were not advocates of protection at this
time. The grain and wool producing states gave an overwhelming vote
(91 to 9) in favor of the attempt to provide a home market. The
planting states gave but 3 votes in favor to 64 against. [Footnote:
See the analysis in Niles' Register, XXVI., 113.] By comparison with
the map of the general survey bill, it is seen that the southern
half of the west was in a state of unstable equilibrium on these
sectional issues. It joined the Ohio Valley and the middle states in
supporting a system of internal improvements, while it transferred
its support to the old south on the question of the tariff. New
England, on the other hand, although divided, tended to unite its
strength with that of the south on both these measures. In general,
the map reveals the process of forming a northern section in
opposition to the south--the union of the Ohio Valley with the
middle states against the alliance of the south Atlantic seaboard
with the Gulf states. The division of forces exhibited in the
Missouri struggle was strikingly like the division now revealed on
the tariff question.

On the whole, the tariff of 1824 was distinctly a compromise
measure. Although the ad valorem duties on cotton and woolen goods
were raised, this was balanced by the doubled duty on raw wool.
Nevertheless, it aroused the opposition of the entire planting
section, at the same time that the manufacturers of woolen goods
felt that their interests had been sacrificed. The tariff question
was, in fact, only postponed. In the history of party development,
however, Clay's system of internal improvements and tariff, as shown
in this session of Congress, had a significance not easily missed;
and state sovereignty sentiment in the south grew steadily after
these measures. [Footnote: See chapter xviii, below; cf. Antes,
State Docs, on Federal Relations, No. 4, pp. 4-13.]


CHAPTER XV

THE ELECTION OF 1824 (1822-1825)


As we have seen, [Footnote: See above, chap. x.] the dissensions in
Monroe's cabinet approached the point of rupture by the spring and
summer of 1822, when the spectacle was presented of the friends of
the secretary of the treasury making war upon the measures of the
secretary of war, and even antagonizing the president himself.
Crawford's followers gained the name of the "radicals," and declared
as their principles, democracy, economy, and reform. [Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, VI., 56; Mass. Hist. Soc., Proceedings, XIX., 40.]
Professing to represent the pure Jeffersonian republicanism of the
"Revolution of 1800," they appealed to the adherents of the Virginia
school of politics for support. [Footnote: Edwards, Illinois, 489.]
Jefferson, although refusing to come out openly, was clearly in
sympathy with Crawford's candidacy: he believed that the old parties
still continued, although under different names, and that the issue
would finally be reduced to a contest between a northern and a
southern candidate.

"You see," said he, in a letter to Gallatin, "many calling
themselves Republicans and preaching the rankest doctrine of the old
Federalists. One of the prominent candidates [Adams] is presumed to
be of this party; the other [Crawford] a Republican of the old
school, and a friend to the barrier of state rights, as provided by
the Constitution against the danger of consolidation." [Footnote:
Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), X., 235; cf. 225-227, 237, 261,
264, 280.] Pennsylvania and New York, he thought, would decide the
question, and the issue would depend upon whether or not the
"Missouri principle" became involved.

At this time parties and principles were still plastic. This is
illustrated by a letter written in the spring of 1823 to Monroe, by
John Taylor, of Caroline, the leading exponent of the orthodox
Virginia tenets of state sovereignty. The writer was evidently
stirred by the recent publication, in Calhoun's Washington organ, of
a series of letters signed A. B., [Footnote: Edwards, Illinois, 525;
National Intelligencer, April 21-23, 1823; Am. State Papers Finance,
V., 1-145.] in which Crawford was denounced for corrupt dealings
with the banks, collusion with slave-traders, and intrigues in
general. Calhoun himself had just ended a visit with Taylor when the
latter wrote, bitterly condemning the "example of obtaining the
presidency by crafty intrigues and pecuniary influence," as tending
to transfer power to a moneyed aristocracy. Neither Calhoun nor
Adams, in his opinion, was open to this objection, and neither of
them, he thought, would prefer a protective tariff to a navy as a
means of national defense. While he admitted his ignorance of
Adams's views on the subject of division of power between the
federal and state governments, he declared that Calhoun had no
advantage on this point, for although the latter professed to
consider the distribution of powers between the states and the
central authority as "a distinguishing pre-eminence in our form of
government," yet, in the opinion of Taylor, he destroyed "this pre-
eminence by endowing the federal government with a supremacy over
the state governments whenever they come in conflict." This was
important testimony, following immediately on Calhoun's visit, and
coming from the pen of a man who was primarily interested in the
question.

In spite of these objections, which would seem to be insuperable
from the point of view of this distinguished expositor of state
sovereignty, Taylor was ready to take the initiative in a movement
against Crawford, if Monroe, Jefferson, and Madison agreed. Although
as between Calhoun and Adams, he intimated that "the Missouri
question" made a distinction of considerable weight, [Footnote:
Taylor to Monroe, April 29, 1823, Monroe Papers, MSS. in Cong.
Libr.; cf. "Farmer's" attacks on Crawford as a protectionist, in
Richmond Enquirer, noted in Niles' Register, XXIV., 306. See Calhoun
to Gouverneur, April 28, 1823, N. Y. Publ. Libr., Bulletin, 1899, p.
324; Adams, Memoirs, VI., 356.] he did not press the point. James
Barbour, the other senator from Virginia, also seriously thought of
supporting Adams, [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 242, 450-452; see
also Taylor's interview with Adams, May 26, 1824, ibid., 356, 357.]
and it is clear that the secretary of state at this time was not
regarded as unsafe in the Old Dominion. In the spring and summer of
1823, however, Crawford seemed to be clearly in the lead. He was
supported by a well-organized press, which took its tone from the
Washington newspapers; and until Calhoun, in retaliation,
established a paper of his own to denounce Crawford's management of
his department, he had effective control of the most influential
organs of public opinion. [Footnote: Ibid., 47, 56, 57, 60, 62-64,
66.] He was a master of political manipulation; but among his rivals
were men of almost equal skill in this respect.

Clay was again chosen speaker, on his return to the House of
Representatives in December, 1823, by a triumphant majority, and, as
the session advanced, he and Calhoun, with all the arts of
fascinating conversation, plied the old and new members. At this
critical period in his campaign, Crawford was overwhelmed by a
stroke of paralysis (September, 1823), which wrecked his huge frame
and shattered his career. Shut in a darkened room, threatened with
blindness and the loss of speech, bled by the doctors twenty-three
times in three weeks, unable to sign his official papers with his
own hand, he was prevented from conducting his own political battle.
But he kept his courage and his purpose, concealing his real
condition from all but his most trusted intimates. Not until April,
1824, was he able to attend cabinet meetings, and within a month
after that he suffered a relapse, which prevented his active
participation in his duties until the fall. [Footnote: National
Intelligencer, September 15, 1824; Life of W. W. Seaton, 160; King,
Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 539; Adams, Memoirs, VI., 130, 270,
275, 356, 357, 387, 428, 435, 439; Univ. of North Carolina, James
Sprunt Hist. Monographs, No. 2, pp. 69, 71; Edwards, Illinois, 492.]

Adams had the New England scruples against urging his cause
personally, and took the attitude that the office of president
should come from merit, not from manipulation. [Footnote: Adams,
Memoirs, IV., 64, 242, 298, V., 89, 129, 298, 525; Dwight, Travels,
I., 266.] Moreover, he saw that the practice of soliciting votes
from members of Congress would render the executive subservient to
that body. Although his uncompromising temper unfitted him for the
tactics of political management, he was an adept in the grand
strategy of the contest, and he noted every move of his adversaries.
His replies to attacks were crushing, for he had the gift of clear
and forcible exposition. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V., 361, 496-
535, VI., 116-118; King, Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 475;
Gallatin, Writings, II., 246.] But his greatest strength in the
presidential contest lay in the fact that he was the only promising
northern candidate.

Early in the campaign, Calhoun commented on the fact that five
candidates were from the slave-holding states--a circumstance which,
in his opinion, would give Adams great advantages if he knew how to
improve them. [Footnote: Edwards, Illinois, 492.] Naturally,
therefore, Adams gained the influential support of Rufus King, the
chief antagonist of the slave section. At first decidedly hostile,
King's final adhesion was given to him, not out of personal regard,
but because he believed that the public should be aroused against
"longer submission to a Southern Master.... He is the only northern
Candidate, and as between him and the black Candidates I prefer
him." [Footnote: King, Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 508, 510.]
Steadily Adams increased his following in reluctant New England.
[Footnote: Niles' Register, XXIII., 322, 342; Clay, Private
Corresp., 98; Adams, Memoirs, VI., 235.] In New York he had an
element of strength in the fact that the population was nearly
evenly divided between the natives of that state and the settlers
from New England. Of the delegation from the state of New York in
the seventeenth Congress, for example, those who were born in New
England were about equal to those born in the state itself. Nearly
forty per cent, of the members of the New York constitutional
convention of 1821 were born in New England. [Footnote: King, Life
and Corresp. of King, VI., 413; Carter and Stone, Reports of New
York Convention, 637; Force, Calendar (1823).] The adhesion of ex-
Speaker Taylor, another of the champions of restriction in the
Missouri struggle, furnished an able manager in New York.

Even the attitude of Van Buren was for a time in doubt, for he would
gladly have retired from politics to accept a place on the bench of
the supreme court of the United States; but Adams and King pressed
his candidacy for this position in vain upon the president, and Van
Buren finally gave his full support to Crawford. [Footnote: King,
Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 512-517, 518-527; Adams, Memoirs,
VI., 168, 173; Crawford to Van Buren, August 1, 1823, Van Buren
Papers (MSS.); Am. Hist. Assoc., Report 1904, p. 178.] So little did
Adams appreciate the popular movement that was gathering about
Jackson's name, that he advised his followers to support the "Old
Hero" for the vice-presidency, "a station in which the General could
hang no one, and in which he would need to quarrel with no one. His
name and character would serve to restore the forgotten dignity of
the place, and it would afford an easy and dignified retirement to
his old age." [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 333.] In January,
1824, on the anniversary of the victory of New Orleans, Adams gave a
great ball, attended by over a thousand people, in honor of his
rival. [Footnote: Ibid., 220; Sargent, Public Men and Events, I.,
48-51.]

After Jackson's return from the governorship of Florida, in 1821,
his star steadily rose in the political horizon. His canvass was
conducted by his neighbor, Major Lewis, who was one of the most
astute politicians in American history, able subtly to influence the
attitude of his volcanic candidate and to touch the springs of
political management. On July 20, 1822, the legislature of Tennessee
formally nominated the general for the presidency. [Footnote:
Parton, Jackson, III., 20; Niles' Register, XXII., 402.]

This gave the signal of revolt by the states against the
congressional caucus. Clay rallied his own forces, and in 1822 and
1823 was nominated [Footnote: Niles' Register, XXIII., 245, 342;
Ohio Monitor, January 4, 1823; National Republican (Cincinnati),
January 14,1823; King, Life and Corresp., VI., 487; Clay, Private
Corresp., 70. ] by members of the legislatures of Missouri,
Kentucky, Ohio, and Louisiana. [Footnote: National Intelligencer,
April 12, 1823; Ky. Reporter, April 21. 1823.] Alabama nominated
Jackson; and Mississippi, by a tie vote, proposed both Adams and
Jackson. [Footnote: McMaster, United States, V., 68.] These
nominations by states showed that, however the west might be
divided, it was a unit in resistance to the selection of a president
by a combination of congressmen. It was believed that the spirit of
the Constitution was violated by this method, which made the
executive depend on the legislative body for nomination; and that a
minority candidate might win by the caucus. This became the rallying
cry of Jackson, whose canvass was conducted on the issue of the
right of the people to select their president; [Footnote: Sargent,
Public Men and Events, I., 57; Parton, Jackson, III., 17, 40, 41.]
and the prevalent discontent and industrial depression made the
voters responsive to this idea. The movement was one of permanent
significance in American history, for it represented the growth of
democracy, and led the way to the institution of the national
nominating convention.

In the fall of 1823, Tennessee returned Jackson to the Senate,
having chosen him over one of the prominent leaders of the Crawford
party, and, shortly afterwards, the legislature sent to the other
states a vigorous resolution, asking them to unite in putting down
the congressional caucus. [Footnote: Parton, Jackson, III., 21;
Niles' Register, XXV., 114, 137, 197, 292; McMaster, United States,
V., 60; Tyler, Tylers, I., 341; Richmond Enquirer, January 1, 6, 13,
1824.] In Virginia and many other states the Tennessee resolutions
gave rise to agitation which strengthened the popular feeling
against congressional dictation. [Footnote: McMaster, United States,
V., 60-62, 64; Dallinger, Nominations, 19 n., 54.] Although Adams at
first considered the congressional caucus as one of the "least
obnoxious modes of intrigue," he also finally threw his influence
against the system and announced that he would not accept a
nomination by that body. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 191, 236.]

Realizing that, in spite of his illness, Crawford could command the
largest following in Congress, the friends of all the other
candidates united their forces in an effort to prevent the meeting
of the caucus. Already it was evident to the Georgian's supporters
that the only thing that could bring him the victory was insistence
upon party unity and discipline, and on February 14, 1824, sixty-six
of the two hundred and sixteen Democrats in Congress gathered for
the last congressional caucus which nominated a president. That
these were practically all Crawford men was shown by his nomination
with only four opposing votes. [Footnote: Dallinger, Nominations,
19; Niles' Register, XXV., 388-392, 403; Hammond, Pol. Hist, of
N.Y., II., 149; McMaster, United States, V., 64; Life of W.W.
Seaton, 173; Annals of Cong., 18 Cong., I Sess., I., 358.] Gallatin
had been persuaded to return from Paris, and he received the
nomination for vice-president, in order to hold the state of
Pennsylvania in Crawford's column; but it proved a forlorn hope, for
this old companion-in-arms of Jefferson found Pennsylvania "Jackson
mad."

Calhoun, seeing that he had lost the northern state on which he had
founded his hopes of success, and despairing of making inroads upon
Crawford's southern forces after the congressional caucus, sought
his political fortunes in an alliance with his rival. [Footnote:
Clay, Private Corresp., 87.] The result was that, in a state
nominating convention held at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania (March 4,
1824), Jackson was almost unanimously nominated by that state for
president, and Calhoun was named for the vice-presidency. In vain
the managers of Crawford sought to throw discredit upon Jackson by
the publication of his correspondence with Monroe, in which he had
pleaded for recognition of the Federalists; [Footnote: Parton,
Jackson, II., 357, III., 20; Monroe, Writings.] the letters added to
his strength, and finally Gallatin was induced to withdraw from the
unequal contest, in order that an attempt might be made to persuade
Henry Clay to accept the vice-presidency under Crawford. [Footnote:
Gallatin, Works, II., 297-300; Adams, Life of Gallatin, 604; Clay,
Private Corresp., 100-103; Sargent, Public Men and Events, I., 57.]

The conflict was not entirely a matter of personal politics. Jackson
had raised the popular movement against the congressional caucus
into a distinct issue--the right of the people to choose their own
president. Clay's "American system" of internal improvements and the
protective tariff furnished others. We have seen that these subjects
were hotly debated in Congress during the spring months of 1824. As
the pre-eminent champion of these interests, Clay had a large
following in the states of the Ohio Valley, as well as in New York
The early popularity of Calhoun in Pennsylvania was also due, in
part, to his record as a friend of tariff and internal improvements.
Upon that subject, on July 3, 1824, he gave an exposition of his
constitutional principles to Garnett, of Virginia, in which he
showed some tendency to moderate his position. [Footnote: Houston,
Nullification in S. C., 143.] When interrogated upon his views in
respect to the tariff, Jackson replied, in a letter to Coleman,
avowing himself a moderate protectionist and a supporter of the
doctrine of the promotion of manufactures in order to create a home
market; and in the Senate he voted for the tariff of 1824, and in
favor of internal improvements. [Footnote: Parton, Jackson, III.,
34, 35; Niles' Register, XXVI., 245; Wheeler, Hist, of Cong., II.,
231.] Crawford was embarrassed by the need of reconciling his
southern support with his following in the middle states upon these
subjects. While his treasury reports indicated a preference for a
revenue tariff, they were sufficiently ambiguous to create
opposition in the south and a loss of support in the north. The
issue of internal improvements he evaded by professing himself in
favor of a constitutional amendment, for which he tried in vain to
secure the support of his friends in the Georgia legislature.
[Footnote: King, Life and Corresp. of King, VI., 496, 500; Niles'
Register, XXIV, 306; Gilmer, Sketches, 294.]

Adams announced that his policy with reference to the opposing
interests of the country was "conciliation, not collision"; but he
declared that there was no constitutional question involved, either
in the tariff or in internal improvements, [Footnote: Adams,
Memoirs, VI., 353, 451; cf. 343.] and he was frankly in favor of the
latter, while he professed himself satisfied with the tariff of
1824, as a reasonable compromise between the conflicting interests.
If changed at all, he believed that the tariff should be reduced. An
attempt was made to bring him into disrepute in the south for his
negotiation of a convention in 1824 with England for the
international regulation of the slave-trade. This subject had been
forced upon his reluctant attention early in his career as secretary
of state. While he was willing to join in declaring that traffic
piracy, he was very proud of his record as a steadfast opponent of
the right of search in any form. It was too valuable political
capital to be given up, even if he had not espoused the cause with
all his energy. To all propositions, therefore, for conceding the
right of search of suspected slavers, Adams had turned a deaf ear,
as he did to proposals of mixed courts to try cases of capture. But
in the convention of 1824, declaring the slave-trade piracy under
the law of nations, he had offered to concede the right of British
vessels to cruise along our coasts to intercept slavers, and this
clause the Senate struck out, whereupon England refused to ratify
it.[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 321, 338, 345; Monroe, Writings,
VII., 22; King, Life and Corresp. of King, 571, 572; DuBois, Slave
Trade, 139, 140.]

On the whole, however, while candidates were forced to declare
themselves on important questions, and while there were distinct
sectional groupings in Congress, which revealed conflicting
interests in economic policy, issues were not clearly drawn in this
campaign. Indeed, it was difficult for any one of the candidates to
stand on a clear-cut platform without losing some of the support
essential to his success. "Could we hit upon a few great principles,
and unite their support with that of Crawford," wrote his friend
Cobb, shortly before the election, "we could succeed beyond doubt."
[Footnote: Cobb, Leisure Labors, 216; Shepard, Van Buren, 92.]

As the year 1824 drew towards its close, the heat of the struggle
was transferred to New York. Nowhere was the revulsion of popular
feeling against caucus control more clearly manifested than in that
state. The feeling was aggravated by the fact that the Albany
Regency, under Van Buren, stubbornly refused to concede the popular
demand for the repeal of the state law for choice of presidential
electors by the legislature. The political machine's control of the
legislature insured New York's vote to Crawford; but if the choice
were confided to the people, no one could predict the result. Out of
these conditions a new combination sprang up in New York, which took
the name of the "People's party," and sought not only to transfer
the choice of electors to the people, but to overturn the Albany
Regency. So rapidly did the discordant elements of New York
Clintonians and anti-Clintonians combine in this party, that
Crawford's managers, in an effort to break the combination,
introduced a resolution in the legislature removing DeWitt Clinton
from his office of canal commissioner. The purpose was to split the
People's party by compelling its members to revive their old
antagonisms by taking sides for or against Clinton. Although the
resolution was carried by a decisive majority, the indignity placed
upon the champion of the Erie Canal aroused popular resentment and
increased the revolt against the Regency. In September, 1824, the
People's party met in a state convention at Utica and nominated
Clinton for governor. [Footnote: On the New York campaign, see
Rammelkamp, Am. Hist. Assoc., Report 1904, p. 177; Hammond, Pol,
Hist, of N. Y., II., chaps, xxix.-xxxii.; Weed, Autobiography, chap.
xv.; McMaster, United States, V., 71-73.]

While this campaign (which resulted in an overwhelming victory for
the People's party) was in progress, the legislature met to choose
electors. So clearly marked was the trend of public opinion that
many members broke away from their allegiance to Crawford. The
Senate nominated electors favorable to him, but in the Assembly the
Adams men predominated, although they were not in a majority. After
several days of deadlock, a combination ticket, made up of Adams
electors and certain Clay men who had been named on the Senate's
ticket, was suddenly presented to the Assembly and passed, with the
aid of Crawford men, who thought that if the matter could be brought
to a joint ballot they could then win and exclude Clay from the
contest. But the Adams men had conciliated the supporters of Clay by
guaranteeing to them five electoral votes, which were expected, if
the ultimate choice of the president should come to the House of
Representatives, to make Clay one of the three candidates before
that body. [Footnote: Clay, Private Corresp., 99, 104, 106; National
Intelligencer, September 15, 1824; Van Buren to Crawford, November
17, 1824; Van Buren Papers (Cong. Libr.).] The Clay following,
therefore, supported the Adams ticket on the joint ballot, with the
result that Adams secured 25 electors, Clay 7, and Crawford 4. When
the electoral college met in December, Clay lost three of his votes,
so that New York finally gave 26 to Adams, 5 to Crawford, 4 to Clay,
and 1 to Jackson. Thus the Adams men had failed to carry out their
agreement with the followers of Clay; had not these three Clay votes
been withdrawn he would have tied Crawford for third place.
Louisiana, although New York's electoral college voted in ignorance
of the fact, had already deserted Clay. [Footnote: N. Y. American,
December 3, 1824; N. Y. Com. Adv., December 14, 1824; Weed,
Autobiography, 128, is in error; L. E. Aylsworth, Clay in Elec. of
1824 (MS. thesis).] The choice of electors in Louisiana was made by
the legislature, in the absence of several Clay men, and the
combined Jackson and Adams ticket received a majority of only two
votes over Clay. [Footnote: Sargent, Public Men and Events, I., 67;
Niles' Register, XXVII., 257; Adams, Memoirs, VI., 446.] Thus
vanished the latter's hopes of becoming one of the three candidates
to be voted on by the House of Representatives.

In the country as a whole, Jackson received 99 electoral votes,
Adams 84, Crawford 41, and Clay 37. For the vice-presidency, Calhoun
was chosen by a vote of 182, while Sanford, of New York, received
the vote of Ohio, together with a portion of that of Kentucky and
New York; Virginia voted for Macon, of North Carolina; Georgia for
Van Buren; and scattering votes were given for Jackson and Clay. No
presidential candidate had a majority, and, in accordance with the
Constitution, the House of Representatives was to decide between the
three highest candidates.

To Clay, powerful in Congress, fell the bitter honor of deciding
between his rivals. Jackson had a decisive plurality of the
electoral vote, and even the Kentucky legislature, under the
dominance of the "relief party, "urged the representatives from that
state to cast their vote in his favor.[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs,
VI., 446.] But although Jackson was popular in the west, Clay had
long been hostile to the candidacy of this military chieftain, and
could not well alter his opinion. Moreover, Clay's presidential
ambitions stood in the way of this choice. It would not have been
easy for him to become Jackson's successor, both because of the
difficulty of electing two successive candidates from the west and
because Calhoun had already anticipated him in the alliance. With
Crawford, he was on better terms; but that candidate was clearly in
the minority, his health was gravely impaired, and his following was
made up largely of the opponents of the policies which Clay
represented.[Footnote: Ibid., VII., 4; Niles' Register, XXVII.,
386.] He determined, therefore, to use his influence in behalf of
Adams--the rival who had borne away from him the secretaryship of
state and whose foreign policy had been the target of his most
persistent attacks. On the other hand, the recognition of the
Spanish-American republics and the announcement of the Monroe
Doctrine had made Adams in a sense the heir of Clay's own foreign
policy, and, in the matter of tariff and internal improvements,
Adams was far more in accord with him than was Crawford.

As the day approached on which the House was to make its choice,
friends of Clay, including his "messmate," Letcher, of Kentucky,
sought Adams to convey to him the friendly attitude of Clay and
their hope that their chieftain might serve himself by supporting
Adams.[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 447, 457, 473-475.] They made
it perfectly clear that by this they intended to suggest for Clay a
membership in his cabinet. Without giving explicit promises, Adams
made it equally clear to these visitors that, if he were chosen by
the votes of western delegations, he should naturally look to the
west for much of the support that he should need. In short, Adams's
diary, like a book of judgment, shows that he walked perilously, if
safely, along the edge of his conscience at this time. "Incedo super
ignes,"[Footnote: Ibid., 453.] he wrote--"I walk over fires." But
his diary records no vulgar bargaining with Clay, although he talked
over with him the general principles which he would follow in his
administration.

The adhesion of Clay by no means assured Adams's election: the
result was not fully certain until the actual vote was given.
Missouri and Illinois were long in doubt,[Footnote: Ibid., 469.] and
in the case of both of these states the vote was cast by a single
person. Cook, of Illinois, was a personal friend of Adams, and,
although the plurality of the electoral vote of that state had been
in favor of Jackson, Cook, giving a strained interpretation of his
pre-election promises to follow the will of his constituency, cast
his vote in favor of Adams. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 443,
473, 476, 495; Edwards, Illinois, 261-265.] With Scott, of Missouri,
Adams made his peace in an interview wherein he gave him assurances
with respect to newspaper patronage and the retention of his
brother, a judge in Arkansas territory, who was threatened with the
loss of his office because he had killed his colleague in a duel. He
also secured the vote of Louisiana, by the one delegate who held the
balance of power; and he won the Maryland member who had its
decisive vote, by the statement given through Webster, that his
administration would not proscribe the Federalists. [Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, VI., 492, 499; Webster, Writings (National ed.),
XVII., 378.] Friends of all the other candidates were busy in
proposing combinations and making promises which cannot be traced to
their principals. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 476, 495, 513;
Clay, Private Corresp., 109, 111; Parton, Jackson, III., 56.]

When the vote was taken, Adams was found to have thirteen states,
Jackson seven, and Crawford four. [Footnote: See map.] Adams
controlled New England, New York, and the Ohio Valley, with the
exception of Indiana, together with Maryland, Missouri, and
Louisiana. The grouping of the Jackson vote showed a union of the
states of Pennsylvania and New Jersey with South Carolina,
Tennessee, and the cotton states of the southwest. The Crawford
territory included Georgia, North Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware.
Van Buren had received the electoral vote of Georgia for the vice-
presidency, and he still exercised a powerful influence in New York.
Adams had to face, therefore, the possibility of a union between two
of the ablest politicians in the nation, Calhoun and Van Buren, both
of whom saw that their political fortunes were involved in the
triumph of Andrew Jackson; and Jackson's popularity was
extraordinary even in the western states which voted for Adams. Even
as he saw victory approaching, the New England leader was filled
with gloomy forebodings over the prospects. "They are nattering for
the immediate issue," he recorded in his diary, "but the fearful
condition of them is that success would open to a far severer trial
than defeat."


CHAPTER XVI

PRESIDENT ADAMS AND THE OPPOSITION (1825-1827)


For eight years President Monroe had administered the executive
department of the federal government-years that have been called the
"Era of Good Feeling." The reader who has followed the evidences of
factional controversy among the rival presidential candidates in the
cabinet, and noted the wide-spread distress following the panic of
1819, the growing sectional jealousies, the first skirmishes in the
slavery struggle, and the clamor of a democracy eager to assert its
control and profoundly distrustful of the reigning political powers,
will question the reality of this good feeling. On the other hand,
in spite of temporary reverses, the nation as a whole was bounding
with vigor in these years of peace after war; and if in truth party
was not dead, and a golden age had not yet been given to the
American people, at least the heat of formal party contest had been
for a time allayed. The bitterness of political warfare in the four
years which we are next to consider might well make the
administration of the last of the Virginia dynasty seem peaceful and
happy by contrast.

Monroe's presidential career descended to a close in a mellow sunset
of personal approval, despite the angry clouds that gathered on the
horizon. He had grown in wisdom by his experiences, and, although
not a genius, he had shown himself able, by patient and
dispassionate investigation, to reach judgments of greater value
than those of more brilliant but less safe statesmen. Candor, fair-
mindedness, and magnanimity were attributed to him even by those who
were engaged in bitter rivalry for the office which he now laid
down. He was not rapid or inflexible in his decisions between the
conflicting views of his official family; but in the last resort he
chose between policies, accepted responsibility, and steered the
ship of state between the shoals and reefs that underlay the
apparently placid sea of the "Era of Good Feeling." How useful were
his services in these transitional years appeared as soon as John
Quincy Adams grasped, with incautious hands, the helm which Monroe
relinquished.[Footnote: On Monroe's personal traits, see Adams,
Memoirs, IV., 240 et passim; J. Q. Adams, Eulogy on the Life and
Character of James Monroe; Schouler, United States, IV., 201-207.]
"Less possessed of your confidence in advance than any of my
predecessors," wrote President Adams, in his first annual message,
"I am deeply conscious of the prospect that I shall stand more and
oftener in need of your indulgence." In his reply to the
notification of his election by the House, after adverting to the
fact that one of his competitors had received a larger minority of
the electoral vote than his own, he declared that, if his refusal of
the office would enable the people authoritatively to express their
choice, he should not hesitate to decline; [Footnote: Richardson,
Messages and Papers, II., 293.] he believed that perhaps two-thirds
of the people were adverse to the result of the election.[Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, VII., 98; cf. ibid., VI., 481.] In truth, the
position of the new president was a delicate one, and he was
destined neither to obtain the indulgence asked nor the popular
ratification which he craved. By receiving his office from the hands
of the House of Representatives in competition with a candidate who
had a larger electoral vote, he fell heir to the popular opposition
which had been aroused against congressional intrigue, and
especially against the selection of the president by the
congressional caucus. More than this, it was charged that Clay's
support was the result of a corrupt bargain, by which the Kentucky
leader was promised the office of secretary of state. This
accusation was first publicly made by an obscure Pennsylvania
member, George Kremer, who, in an unsigned communication to a
newspaper, when Clay's decision to vote for Adams was first given
out, reported that overtures were said to have been made by the
friends of Adams to the friends of Clay, offering him the
appointment of secretary of state for his aid to elect Adams; and
that the friends of Clay gave this information to the friends of
Jackson, hinting that for the same price they would close with the
Tennesseean. When these overtures, said the writer, were rejected,
Clay transferred his interest to Adams. [Footnote: Niles' Register,
XXVII., 353.]

Stung to the quick, Clay rushed into print with a denunciation of
the writer as a dastard and a liar, and held him responsible to the
laws which govern men of honor. [Footnote: Ibid., 355.] In reply to
this evident invitation to a duel, Kremer avowed his authorship and
his readiness to prove his charges. If Clay had known the identity
of his traducer, he would hardly have summoned him to the field of
honor, for Kremer was a well-meaning but credulous and thick-headed
rustic noted solely for his leopard-skin overcoat. The speaker,
therefore, abandoned his first idea, and asked of the House an
investigation of the charges, which Kremer reiterated his readiness
to prove. But when the investigating committee was ready to take
testimony, the Pennsylvania congressman refused to appear. He was,
in fact, the tool of Jackson's managers, who greatly preferred to
let the scandal go unprobed by Congress. If Clay transferred his
following to Adams, the charge would gain credence with the masses;
if he were not made secretary of state, it would be alleged that
honest George Kremer had exposed the bargain and prevented its
consummation. In vain, in two successive and elaborate addresses,
[Footnote: Address of 1825 and of 1827, in Clay, Works (Colton's
ed.), V., 299, 341.] did Clay marshal evidence that, before he left
Kentucky, he had determined to vote for Adams in preference to
Crawford or Jackson, and that there was no proof of Kremer's charge.
[Footnote: Clay, Address to the Public (1827), 52; ibid., Works
(Colton's ed.), IV., 109; Adams, Memoirs, VII., 4.] In vain was
evidence produced to show that friends of Jackson [Footnote: Clay,
Works (Colton's ed.), I., chaps. xvi., xvii.; Parton, Jackson, III.,
56, 110-116.] and Crawford [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 464, 513,
VII., 91.] solicited Clay's support by even more unblushing offers
of political reward than those alleged against Adams. To the end of
his career, the charge remained a stumbling-block to Clay's
ambitions, and the more he denounced and summoned witnesses
[Footnote: See, for example, testimony of congressmen, Niles'
Register, XXVIII., 69, 133, 134, 203; Address of David Trimble
(1828).] the more the scandal did its poisonous work.

After all, it was Adams who gave the charge immortality. Even if he
had appreciated the power of public feeling he would not have
hesitated. If the accusation was a challenge to the spirited
Kentuckian, it was a call to duty to the Puritan. Two days after his
election, Adams, asking Monroe's advice about the composition of the
cabinet, announced that he had already determined to appoint Clay
secretary of state, "considering it due," said he, "to his talents
and services to the western section of the Union, whence he comes,
and to the confidence in me manifested by their delegations."
[Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 508.] Clay spoke lightly of the
threatened opposition as a mere temporary ebullition of
disappointment at the issue of the election, [Footnote: Adams,
Memoirs, VI., 509.] and after a short interval accepted the
appointment. [Footnote: For his reasons, see Clay, Works (Colton's
ed.), IV., 114, 192.]

Up to this time Jackson had kept his temper remarkably; but now that
Adams had called to the department of state the man who made him
president, the man who justified his choice by the statement that
Jackson was a "military chieftain," the great deep of his wrath was
stirred. Clay seemed to him the "Judas of the West," and he wrote a
letter, probably for publication, passionately defending the
disinterestedness of his military services, calling attention to the
fact that Clay had never yet risked himself for his country, and
soothing himself in defeat by this consolation: "No midnight taper
burnt by me; no secret conclaves were held; no cabals entered into
to persuade any one to a violation of pledges given or of
instructions received. By me no plans were concerted to impair the
pure principles of our republican institutions, nor to prostrate
that fundamental maxim, which maintains the supremacy of the
people's will." [Footnote: Niles' Register, XXVIII., 20; Parton,
Jackson, III., 77.]

On his way back to Tennessee, he spread broadcast in conversation
his conviction that "honest George Kremer" had exposed a corrupt
bargain between Clay and Adams, [Footnote: Parton, Jackson, III.,
107.] and to this belief he stuck through the rest of his life,
appealing, when his witnesses failed him, to the stubborn fact of
Clay's appointment. [Footnote: Parton, Jackson, III., 110-116.] In
October, 1825, Tennessee renominated Jackson, who accepted, and
resigned his seat in the Senate, accompanying his action with a plea
for a constitutional amendment rendering congressmen ineligible to
office during their term of service and for two years thereafter,
except in cases of judicial appointment. The purpose was evidently
to wage a new campaign to give effect to "the will of the people."
[Footnote: Ibid., III., 95; Niles' Register, XXIX., 155.]

Although he realized that an organized opposition would be formed,
Adams sought to give a non-partisan character to his administration.
[Footnote: Richardson, Messages and Papers, II., 295-297.] In spite
of the low opinion expressed in his diary for the honesty and
political rectitude of the secretary of the treasury, he asked him
to retain his office, but Crawford refused. [Footnote: Adams,
Memoirs, VI., 506, 508.] Ascertaining that Gallatin would also
decline the place, [Footnote: Ibid., Life of Gallatin, 607;
Gallatin, Writings, II., 301.] he appointed Richard Rush, of
Pennsylvania, then serving as minister to England. Jackson's friends
made it clear that he would take unkindly the offer of the
department of war, and Adams gave that office to James Barbour, of
Virginia. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 510; cf. ibid., 450.] He
retained Southard, of New Jersey, as secretary of the navy, William
Wirt, of Virginia, as attorney-general, and McLean, of Ohio, as
postmaster-general. The latter selection proved peculiarly
unfortunate, since it gave the influence and the patronage of the
post-office to the friends of Jackson. For the mission to England,
he first selected Clinton, and after his refusal he persuaded Rufus
King to take the post. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 523.] Since
King's acceptance of the senatorship at the hands of the Van Buren
element in New York, he had been less a representative of the
Federalists than in his earlier days; but the appointment met in
some measure the obligations which Adams owed to supporters in that
party.

Far from organizing party machinery and using the federal office-
holders as a political engine, he rigidly refused to introduce
rotation in office at the expiration of the term of the incumbent--a
principle which "would make the Government a perpetual and
unintermitting scramble for office." [Footnote: Ibid., 521.] He
determined to renominate every person against whom there was no
complaint which would have warranted his removal. By this choice he
not only retained many outworn and superfluous officers and thus
fostered a bureaucratic feeling, [Footnote: Fish, Civil Service, 76-
78.] but he also furnished to his enemies local managers of the
opposition, for these office-holders were, in general, appointees of
Crawford, in his own interest, or of McLean, in the interest of
Calhoun and Jackson.

So rigidly did Adams interpret his duty in the matter that only
twelve removals altogether were made during his term. [Footnote:
Fish, Civil Service, 72.] He even retained the surveyor of the port
of Philadelphia, whose negligence had occasioned the loss of large
sums of money to the government and whose subordinates were hostile
to Adams. Under such conditions, the friends of the administration
had to contend not only against their enemies, but against the Adams
administration itself, which left its power in the hands of its
enemies to be wielded against its friends. [Footnote: Adams,
Memoirs, VII., 163.] Binns, the editor of one of the leading
administration papers, in an interview was informed that the
president did not intend to make any removals. "I bowed
respectfully," said the editor, "assuring the president that I had
no doubt the consequence would be that he himself would be removed
so soon as the term for which he had been elected had expired. This
intimation gave the president no concern." [Footnote: Parton,
Jackson, III., 92; Adams, Memoirs, VII., 154.]

Another illustration of his tenacity in this matter, even in
opposition to the wishes of Henry Clay, was his refusal to remove a
naval officer at New Orleans who had made preparations for a public
demonstration to insult a member of Congress who had assisted in
electing Adams. Clay believed that the administration "should avoid,
on the one hand, political persecution, and, on the other, an
appearance of pusillanimity." But the president refused to remove a
man for an intention not carried into effect, and particularly
because he could frame no general policy applicable to this case
which would not result in a clean sweep. Four-fifths of the custom
officers throughout the Union, he thought, were opposed to his
election. To depart in one case from the rule which he had laid down
against removals would be to expose himself to demands from all
parts of the country. [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 546.]

The president who rejected these favorite instruments of political
success was unable to find compensation in personal popularity or
the graces of manner. Cold and repellent, he leaned backward in his
desire to do the right, and alienated men by his testy and
uncompromising reception of advances. And yet there never was a
president more in need of conciliating, for already the forces of
the opposition were forming. Even before his election he had been
warned that the price of his victory would be an organized
opposition to the measures of the administration, [Footnote: Ibid.,
476, 481, 495, 506, 510.] and that Calhoun and his friends in South
Carolina and Pennsylvania would be the leaders. [Footnote: Am. Hist.
Assoc., Report 1899, II., 230, 231; Calhoun, Works, III., 51;
Sargent, Public Men and Events, I., 106, 109.]

The union of the opposition forces into a party was perfected
slowly, for between Crawford, Jackson, and Calhoun there had been
sharp rivalry. Virginia by no means relished the idea of the
promotion of the military hero; and in New York Jackson had been
sustained by Clinton in 1824 against Crawford, the candidate of Van
Buren. The Senate ratification of the nomination of Clay (March 7,
1825) foreshadowed the alliance of southern interests with those of
Pennsylvania; [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI., 525, VII., 69.] but
only fourteen votes, including that of Jackson, were mustered
against him, while among the twenty-seven who ratified the
nomination was Van Buren. By the opening of the nineteenth Congress,
in December, 1825, however, the situation might well have convinced
Adams of the need of caution. Taylor, the administration candidate
for speaker, was elected by a majority of only five against his
opponents' combined vote, and, in the Senate, Calhoun appointed
committees unfriendly to the president.

Nevertheless, in his first annual message [Footnote: Richardson,
Messages and Papers, II., 299.] Adams challenged his critics by
avowing the boldest doctrines of loose construction. The tide of
sentiment in favor of internal improvements was so strong [Footnote:
Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), X., 348.] that, to insure its
complete success, it would have been necessary only for the
executive to cease to interpose the checks which Monroe had placed
upon this movement. Prudence would have dictated to a president
anxious to enlarge his following the avoidance of irritating
utterances upon this point. But Adams characteristically threw away
his opportunity, choosing rather to make extreme proposals which he
realized had slight chance of success, and to state broad principles
of national power.

In this respect he went even further than Clay approved. [Footnote:
Adams, Memoirs, VII., 59, 61-63.] Defining the object of civil
government as the improvement of the condition of those over whom it
is established, not only did he urge the construction of roads and
canals, but, in his enlarged view of internal improvements, he
included the establishment of a national university, the support of
observatories, "light-houses of the skies," and the exploration of
the interior of the United States and of the northwest coast.
Appealing to the example of European nations, as well as of various
states of the Union, he urged Congress to pass laws for the
promotion of agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, the
"encouragement of the mechanic and of the elegant arts, the
advancement of literature, and the progress of the sciences,
ornamental and profound." "Were we," he asked, "to slumber in
indolence or fold up our arms and proclaim to the world that we are
palsied by the will of our constituents, would it not be to cast
away the bounties of Providence and doom ourselves to perpetual
inferiority?" Such a profession of faith as this sounded strangely
in the ears of Americans, respectful of their constituents and
accustomed to regard government as a necessary evil. At a stroke,
Adams had destroyed his fair prospects of winning the support of
Virginia, and, what is more, he had aroused the fears of the whole
slave-holding section.

At the beginning of 1824 the legislature of Ohio passed a resolution
in favor of the emancipation and colonization of the adult children
of slaves, and was supported by the legislatures of at least six
northern states, including Pennsylvania, while the proposal was
attacked by all the states of the lower south. [Footnote: Ames,
State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 5, p. II (with citations);
McMaster, United States, V., 204.] This followed soon after the
excitement aroused by an attempted Negro insurrection in Charleston,
[Footnote: McMaster, United States, V., 199; Atlantic Monthly, VII.,
728.] in 1822, and from the fears aroused by this plot the south had
not yet recovered. Already Governor Wilson, of South Carolina, was
sounding the alarm in a message [Footnote: December 1, 1824. Ames,
State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 5, p. 13; Niles' Register,
XXVII., 263, 292.] denouncing the Ohio proposition, and declaring
that there would be more "glory in forming a rampart with our bodies
on the confines of our territory than to be the victims of a
successful rebellion or the slaves of a great consolidated
government." Governor Troup, of Georgia, stirred by the same
proposition, and especially by a resolution which Senator King, of
New York, submitted (February 18, 1825) for the use of the funds
arising from the public lands to aid in emancipating and removing
the slaves, warned his constituents that very soon "the United
States government, discarding the mask, will openly lend itself to a
combination of fanatics for the destruction of everything valuable
in the southern country"; and he entreated the legislature, "having
exhausted the argument, to stand by its arms." [Footnote: Ames,
State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 5, p. 17; House Exec. Docs.,
19 Cong., 2 Sess., IV., No. 59, pp. 69, 70.] While Georgia was in
this frame of mind, the administration, as we shall see, [Footnote:
Chap, xviii., below.] completed the breach by refusing to permit the
survey of the Indian lands by the state, and thus forced the
followers of Crawford in Georgia to unite with their former
opponents in South Carolina.

Even in North Carolina, where there had been a considerable
sentiment in favor of Adams, [Footnote: Univ. of North Carolina,
James Sprunt Hist. Monographs, No. 2, pp. 79, 88, 106.] the
conviction grew strong that, under such a loose construction of the
Constitution as that which his message advocated, the abolition of
slavery might be effected. The venerable Senator Macon, to whom
Adams had at one time looked as a possible candidate for the vice-
presidency, believed that the spirit of emancipation was stronger
than that for internal improvements; and that the president's loose-
construction doctrine would render it possible for Congress to free
every slave. [Footnote: Ibid., 76, 106, 107.] One of the senators of
South Carolina, desirous of supporting the administration in
opposition to the Calhoun faction, begged Adams to include in his
message some passage reassuring the south in the matter of slavery,
but he received a chilling reply. [Footnote:  Adams, Memoirs, VII.,
57.] The speaker, Taylor, already obnoxious because of his previous
championship of the proposed exclusion of slavery from Missouri,
aroused the wrath of the south by presenting to the House a memorial
from a "crazy Frenchman," who invited Congress to destroy all the
states which should refuse to free their slaves. [Footnote: Ibid.,
103.] In short, there was a wide-spread though absolutely unfounded
fear that the administration favored emancipation, and that the
doctrines avowed in the message of the president gave full
constitutional pretext for such action.

On the other hand, the opposition was in no agreement on principles.
[Footnote: Univ. of North Carolina, James Sprunt Hist. Monographs,
No. 2, p. 79.] It was dangerous for the south to marshal its forces
on an issue which might alienate the support of Pennsylvania. Much
more safely could the enemies of the president press the charge that
the favorite of the people had been deprived of his rights by a
corrupt political intrigue. Consequently, a flood of proposed
amendments to the Constitution poured upon both branches of Congress
day after day, demanding the abolition of the choice of president by
the House of Representatives and the exclusion of members of
Congress from appointment to executive office during their term of
service. [Footnote: Ames, Amendments to the Const., in Am. Hist.
Assoc., Report 1896, II., 21, 106, 339, 343.]

These measures were championed by McDuffie, Benton, and other
friends of Calhoun and Jackson. Although they were undoubtedly
called out in part by a sincere desire to effect a change in a
system which was regarded as dangerous, they also served admirably
the purpose of popular agitation. In pursuance of the same policy, a
report proposing restrictions upon the executive patronage was made
in the Senate (1826) by a committee which included Benton and Van
Buren. This was accompanied by six bills, transferring a large share
of the patronage from the president to the congressmen, and
proposing the repeal of the four-year tenure of office act.
[Footnote: Fish, Civil Service, 73; McMaster, United States, V.,
432.] Six thousand copies of this report were printed for
distribution, and the Puritan president, so scrupulous in the matter
of the civil service that he disgusted his own followers, found
himself bitterly attacked throughout the country as a corrupt
manipulator of patronage.

The first fully organized opposition, however, was effected in the
debates over Adams's proposal to send delegates to the Panama
Congress, for here was a topic that permitted combined attack under
many flags. In the spring of 1825 the ministers of Mexico and
Colombia sounded Clay to ascertain whether the United States would
welcome an invitation to a congress [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, VI.,
531, 536, 542; International Am. Conference, Reports, etc., IV.,
"The Congress of 1826 at Panama," 23.] initiated by Bolivar, with
the design of consolidating the Spanish-American policy, though at
first the United States had not been included among the states
invited. [Footnote: International Am. Conference, Reports, etc.,
IV., "The Congress of 1826 at Panama," 155.] Clay was predisposed to
accept the overture, for he saw in the congress an opportunity to
complete the American system, which he had long advocated and which
appealed strongly to his idealistic view of the destiny of the new
republics. [Footnote: See chap, xi., above.] But Adams was skeptical
of the future of these new nations, and, as for an American system,
he had once (1820) declared that we had one already, "we constituted
the whole of it; there is no community of interests or of principles
between North and South America." [Footnote: Adams, Memoirs, V.,
176; cf. Am. Hist. Rev., XII., 113.]

Adams had learned something from Clay in the mean time, however, and
his own share in announcing the Monroe Doctrine inclined him to
favor the idea of such a congress, under careful restrictions, to
safeguard our neutrality and independence. So the inquiries were met
in a friendly spirit, and formal invitations were received from
Mexico, Colombia, and Central America in the fall of 1825, defining
more clearly the purposes of the congress and the mode of procedure.
[Footnote: International Am. Conference, Report, IV., 24-34.] The
explanations still left much to be desired, and it may be doubted
whether the president would have accepted the invitation had not
Clay's zeal influenced his decision.

As its proceedings finally showed, the real purpose of the congress
was to form a close union of the new republics against Spain or
other nations which might attack them or make colonial settlements
in violation of their territory, and to determine the troops and
funds to be contributed by each state for this end. Its general
assembly was to meet every two years, and, during the war, its
members were to be bound by the action of the majority. [Footnote:
International Am. Conference, Report, IV., 169 (Bolivar's
instructions); 184 (Treaty of Confederation framed by the Panama
Congress).] Such an organization was manifestly dangerous to the
predominance of the United States, and participation in it was
incompatible with our neutrality and independence. Having reason to
apprehend that the congress might go to this extent, the president,
in determining to accept the invitation, also determined so to limit
our representatives that they should have no power to commit either
our neutrality or our independent action, unless their action were
ratified by the government.

Nevertheless, the prospect of an American system from which the
United States was excluded was not a pleasing one, and certain
topics which were suggested for consideration made the situation
really critical. The presence of a large French fleet off the coast
of Cuba, in the summer of 1825, revived the apprehension of an
invasion of that island, and both Colombia and Mexico contemplated
an attack upon this remaining stronghold of Spain. The annexation of
Cuba and Puerto Rico by any of the South American republics would
unquestionably have meant the emancipation of the slaves, and
already the spectacle of the black republic of Haiti had brought
uneasiness to the south. In this juncture the administration
endeavored to persuade the South American republics to suspend their
expedition, and made overtures for Russian influence to induce Spain
to recognize the revolted republics and thus avoid the danger of
loss of her remaining possessions.

Adams sent a special message to the Senate (December 26, 1825),
nominating two delegates to the Panama Congress. He attempted to
disarm the gathering opposition by declaring that, although the
commissioning of these delegates was regarded as within the rights
of the executive, he desired the advice and consent of the Senate
and the House of Representatives to the proposed mission. Among the
topics named by Adams as suitable for discussion at the congress
were the principles of maritime neutrality, and "an agreement
between all of the parties represented at the meeting that each will
guard by its own means against the establishment of any future
European colony within its borders." This was a striking
qualification of a portion of the Monroe Doctrine, and it indicates
the anxiety of the executive not to commit the United States to any
permanent defensive alliance of the American republics. Seeing their
opportunity, however, the opposition brought in a report strongly
antagonizing the recommendation of this congress, on the ground that
it involved a departure from our time-honored policy of avoiding
entangling alliances, that the congress would really constitute a
government, and that the topics of discussion might better be
handled by negotiation with the respective states. The opposition
considered rather the purposes of the congress as contemplated by
the South American promoters than the propositions which the United
States was willing to discuss in the purely consultative body which
Adams and Clay had in mind.

The knowledge, ignored in the executive message, that the congress
proposed to deal with the problem of the slave-trade and of the
destiny of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Haiti, kindled southern
indignation at the idea of submitting the subject of slavery to the
discussion of an international tribunal. In a notable speech, Hayne
declared this an entirely "domestic question." "With respect to
foreign Nations," said he, "the language of the United States ought
to be, that it concerns the peace of our own political family, and
therefore we cannot permit it to be touched; and in respect to the
slave-holding States, the only safe and constitutional ground on
which they can stand, is, that they will not permit it to be brought
into question either by their sister States, or by the Federal
Government." [Footnote: Register of Debates, 19 Cong., 1 Sess., II.,
pt. i., 165.] "The peace of eleven States in this Union," said
Benton, "will not permit the fruits of a successful Negro
insurrection to be exhibited among them." [Footnote: Register of
Debates, 19 Cong., 1 Sess., II., pt. i., 330.]

This southern resentment against the submission of the question of
our connection with slavery and with the insurrectionary Negro
republics to the discussion of a foreign tribunal, was combined with
the opposition of northern men like Van Buren to engaging the United
States in a system for the control of American affairs by a
congress. Thus the enemies of the administration were brought into
unison. Nevertheless, the Senate assented to the mission (March 14,
1826) by a vote of 24 to 19; and, after an animated debate, the
House, by a vote of 134 to 60, made the necessary appropriations. It
was a barren victory, however, for one of the delegates died while
on his way, and the other reached Panama after the Congress had
adjourned. Although a subsequent session was to have been held at
Tacubaya, near the city of Mexico, dissensions among the Spanish-
American states prevented its meeting. [Footnote: Richardson,
Messages and Papers, II., 329; International Am. Conference, Report,
IV., 81, 113, 173-201.]


CHAPTER XVII

INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS AND FOREIGN TRADE

(1825-1829)


What Adams had nearest at heart in his administration was the
construction of a great system of roads and canals, irrespective of
local interests, for the nation as a whole. [Footnote: Wheeler,
Hist. of Cong., II., 154; Adams, Memoirs, VII., 59, VIII., 444; cf.
chap, xiii., above.] To "exalt the valleys and lay low the mountains
and the hills" appealed to his imagination. He hoped that the
increased price of the public lands, arising from the improved means
of communication, would in turn furnish a large and steadily
increasing fund for national turnpikes and canals. But the American
people were not anxious for a system of scientific administration,
either of the public domain or of internal improvements. Although
Benton could not secure sufficient support to carry his measure for
graduating the price of the public lands and donating those which
found no purchasers at fifty cents an acre, [Footnote: Meigs,
Benton, 165-172.] he voiced, nevertheless, a very general antagonism
to the management of the domain by the methods of the counting-
house. Nor was the president able to control legislation on internal
improvements. The report of the engineers appointed under the
general survey act of 1824 provided for the development of the
routes of national importance. [Footnote: State Papers, 18 Cong., 2
Sess., V., Doc. 83 (February 14, 1825); cf. ibid., 19 Cong., 2
Sess., II., Ex. Doc. No. 10 (December 7, 1826).] But local interests
and the pressure of corporations eager to receive federal
subscriptions to their stock quickly broke down the unity of the
system.

The Senate declined to take action on a resolution introduced
December 20, 1825, by Senator Van Buren, of New York, which denied
Congress the power to make roads and canals within the respective
states, and proposed a constitutional amendment for the grant of the
power under limitations. [Footnote: Register of Debates, 19 Cong., 1
Sess., II., pt. i., 20; Ames, Amendments of the Fed. Const. (Am.
Hist. Assoc., Report 1896), 71, 261.] Provision had been made in
1825 for extending the Cumberland Road from Wheeling to Zanesville,
Ohio, and for surveys through the other states of the northwest to
Missouri, and appropriations were annually made for the road, until
by 1833 it was completed as far as Columbus, Ohio. Nevertheless,
that highway was rapidly going to destruction, and a counter
project, ultimately successful, was already initiated for
relinquishing the road to the states through which it passed.
[Footnote: Young, Cumberland Road, chap. vii.; Hulbert, Historic
Highways, X.]

Over two and a third million dollars was appropriated for roads and
harbors during the administration of John Quincy Adams, as against
about one million during the administrations of all of his
predecessors combined. Acting on the line of least constitutional
resistance opened by Monroe, when he admitted the right of
appropriation for internal improvements, though not the right of
construction or jurisdiction, extensive appropriations were made for
roads and canals and for harbors on the Great Lakes and the
Atlantic. Far from accepting Adams's ideal of a scientific general
system irrespective of local or party interests, districts combined
with one another for local favors, corporations eagerly sought
subscriptions for their canal stock, and the rival political parties
bid against each other for the support of states which asked federal
aid for their roads and canals.

By the middle of this administration the popularity of internal
improvement appropriations seemed irresistible, although southern
states raised their voices against it and complained bitterly that
they were neglected. The example of the Erie Canal, which was open
by 1825, seemed to furnish proof of the success that awaited state
canal construction. States were learning that English capital was
ready for investment in such undertakings and that Congress could
donate lands and subscribe for stock.

By acts of 1825 and 1826, Pennsylvania initiated its extensive state
system of roads and canals to reach the Ohio, the central part of
New York, and the Great Lakes. [Footnote: Hulbert, Historic
Highways, XIII., chap, iv.; Worthington, Finances of Pennsylvania,
22.] The trunk line of this system united Philadelphia with
Pittsburgh by a horse railway to Columbia on the Susquehanna, thence
by a canal along that river and its tributary, the Juniata, to
Hollidaysburg, where stationary engines carried the freight over a
series of inclined planes across the thirty-six miles of mountains,
to reach the western section of the canal at Johnstown on the
Conemaugh, and so by the Allegheny to Pittsburgh. Sectional
jealousies delayed the work, and piled up a debt incurred partly for
branch canals in various parts of the state; but by 1830 over four
hundred miles of canal had been built in Pennsylvania and five
hundred more projected. Not until 1835 was the trunk line between
Philadelphia and Pittsburgh fully in operation, however, and in the
decade after 1822 the total expenditure for internal improvements in
the state amounted to nearly twenty-six million dollars, of which
over ten millions was contributed by individual subscription. But
the steam railroad proved too strong a competitor, the state was
plunged too deeply in debt, and it was not many years before the
public works were sold, and the era of the corporation opened.

Meanwhile the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal project [Footnote: Hulbert,
Historic Highways, XIII., chap, iii.; Ward, Chesapeake and Ohio
Canal (Johns Hopkins Univ. Studies, XVII.)] had gained great impetus
under the efforts of those who wished to turn the tide of western
commerce to the Potomac River. The innate difficulties of the task,
even more than the opposition of Baltimore, rendered abortive the
efforts of the Potomac Company to make the river navigable above
tide-water. But in 1823 public interest in Virginia and Maryland was
aroused by the plan of a great canal to run alongside of the Potomac
to its upper streams, and thence to connect with the Monongahela or
Youghiogheny in order to reach the Ohio. At a convention which met
in Washington in the fall of 1823, Maryland, Virginia, and the
District of Columbia were largely represented by delegates
enthusiastic over this new highway to the west. Even Baltimore
acquiesced in the undertaking after a provision giving the right to
tap the canal by a branch to that city, so that her western trade
should not be diverted to the Potomac cities.

By 1826 the company was duly chartered by Virginia and Maryland;
Pennsylvania's consent was also obtained; and the financiering of
the enterprise seemed feasible by joint subscription to the stock by
Maryland, Virginia, the District of Columbia, and the federal
government. Under the general survey act of 1824, the route was
surveyed, including an extension to Lake Erie by way of a canal from
the Ohio. But when, in 1826, the board of engineers published its
estimate of the cost of the canal, it was seen that the larger plans
were doomed, for the total cost was placed at over twenty-two
million dollars. This was practically prohibitive, for the whole
capital stock of the Chesapeake and Ohio Company was only six
millions. Congress made a million-dollar subscription to the stock
of the company, but only the eastern section of the canal could be
begun; the completion of navigation between the coal-fields on the
upper Ohio and Cumberland on the Potomac must be postponed.

Baltimore's interest in the grand design of canal communication
between that city and Pittsburgh quickly disappeared. Nearer to the
Ohio Valley than any other seaport, she had built turnpikes to
connect with the national road, and thus shared with Philadelphia
the western trade. But now New York and Pennsylvania were
undertaking canal systems which were certain in the long run to
destroy the advantages of Baltimore. In desperation, her far-sighted
and courageous merchants inaugurated the plan of a railroad across
the mountains to the Ohio, grasping the idea that as the canal had
shown its superiority over the turnpike, so this new device would
win the day over the canal. In 1827 and 1828 charters for the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad were granted by Maryland, Virginia, and
Pennsylvania.

At Washington, on July 4, 1828, President Adams stripped off his
coat, amid the cheers of the crowd, and thrust the spade into the
ground in signal of the beginning of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal;
but on the same day a rival celebration was in progress at
Baltimore, where the venerable signer of the Declaration of
Independence, Charles Carroll of Carrollton, placed the foundation-
stone to commemorate the commencement of the Baltimore and Ohio
Railroad, first of the iron bonds between the east and the west.
When Adams thus won the plaudits of the people for his evidence of
ability to break the conventions of polite society and use a
laborer's tool, it was perhaps the only time that he and democracy
came into sympathetic touch. But he was aiding in a losing cause,
for, though Carroll was a man of the past, destiny was working on
the side of the movement which he represented. In the field of
transportation, the initiative of individuals and of corporations
during the next two generations proved superior to that of state or
nation.

In the mean time, Ohio, eager to take advantage of the competition
of these rival routes from New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and
Washington, and wishing to develop the central region of the state,
undertook in 1825 a state system of canals connecting the Ohio with
Lake Erie. [Footnote: Morris, Internal Improvement in Ohio (Am.
Hist. Assoc., Papers, III.), 107; see also McClelland and
Huntington, Ohio Canals.] The Ohio Canal began at Portsmouth and
followed the valleys of the Scioto and the Cuyahoga to Cleveland,
while another canal extended from Cincinnati along the Miami to
Dayton. By branches connecting with the Pennsylvania system, this
net-work of water-ways was intended to give alternative outlets for
the rapidly growing surplus of the state. Wheat which sold for from
twenty-five to thirty-seven cents per bushel in central Ohio in 1825
brought double the amount in 1832 when the canal began to be
effective; and it sold for a higher price a hundred miles west of
Pittsburgh than it did sixty miles to the east of that city, where
water transportation was lacking. [Footnote: Quar. Jour. of Econ.,
XVII., 15; Dial, in Ohio Archaeological and Hist. Soc.,
Publications, XIII., 479.] An example of the rivalry of the
followers of Adams and of Jackson in conciliating western interests
is furnished in the case of Ohio, just prior to the campaign of
1828, when each party in Congress persisted in supporting its own
bill donating lands for the canals of that state. Owing to the fear
of each that the other party would gain the credit of the measure,
both bills were passed, and Ohio received double the amount
originally asked. [Footnote: Benton, Abridgment, X., 197 n.] It was
small wonder that Indiana, Illinois, and other western states
memorialized Congress for aid in their own plans for canals.

The activity of the states, no longer waiting for the federal
government to construct a national system; the rapidly growing
demand for the relinquishment of the national road to the states
within which it lay; and the activity of corporations, all pointed
to a new era in internal improvements. The states were ready to
receive appropriations, but they preferred to build their own roads
and dig their own canals. The state and the corporation were
replacing the national government as the controlling power in
internal improvements, and Adams's conception of a national system
of turnpikes and canals had failed.

Nor was President Adams successful in carrying out a system of
complete maritime reciprocity. After the War of 1812, Great Britain
and the United States agreed upon the abolition of discriminating
duties on ships or products engaged in the trade between the two
countries; [Footnote: Cf. Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation,
XIII.), chap. xvi.] but England reserved her right to exempt her
American possessions from this reciprocity. By excluding the ships
of the United States from the trade with the English West Indies,
England denied a profitable avocation to American ship-owners;
while, at the same time, the liberal arrangements of the United
States permitted her vessels freely to enter the ports of this
country with their cargoes of English manufactures, and to carry
thence to the West Indies lumber, flour, and provisions to exchange
for the molasses and sugar of the islands.

This ability to make a triangular voyage, with profits on each
transaction, gave such advantage to British ships that they were
able to carry on the trade between the United States and England at
a rate below that which American vessels could afford. Driven to
seek some remedy, the Yankee merchants and skippers turned to the
Orient. The trade with China and the East Indies developed rapidly,
and our tonnage registered for foreign trade increased from 583,000
tons in 1820 to 758,000 in 1828. [Footnote: Marvin, American
Merchant Marine, chap. ix.] Ninety per cent. of our foreign commerce
was carried in our own vessels, and, from this point of view,
American shipping enjoyed one of the most prosperous periods in its
history. [Footnote: Pitkin, Statistical View (ed. of 1835), 363;
Soley, "Maritime Industries," in Shaler (ed. of 1894), United
States, I., 538.] Smuggling was extensively carried on in the West
Indies, and a war of retaliatory legislation in regard to shipping
characterized the whole decade.

In 1825 Parliament passed a somewhat obscure act which opened the
ports on a more liberal system of reciprocity. To nations without
colonies she offered the same shipping rights in her colonies which
such nations gave to England and her possessions. The act provided
that it must be accepted within a year by nations who desired to
avail themselves of its provisions. President Adams preferred to
deal with the question by diplomacy, and Congress neglected to pass
the legislation necessary to accept the offer. When Gallatin, who
had been sent to England to treat of this matter, opened his
negotiations in 1826, he was informed that it was too late. The
stipulated time having elapsed, American vessels were definitely
excluded from the West Indies in 1826 by orders in council.
[Footnote: Adams, Gallatin, 615-620; cf. MacDonald, Jacksonian
Democracy (Am. Nation, XV.), 201.] In the campaign of 1828 Adams was
blamed for the failure to seize this opportunity, but the generally
prosperous condition of our shipping not only moderated the
discontent, but even led to a law (May 24, 1828) intended to place
American vessels in complete control of our foreign commerce by
providing for the abolition, by proclamation of the president, of
all discriminating duties against such nations as should free ships
of the United States from corresponding discriminations. In the long
run, this reciprocity act proved a mistake; the end of Adams's
administration marked the beginning of a decline in the prosperity
of the merchant marine. [Footnote: Soley, in Shaler, United States,
I., 540.]

American commerce during this period by no means kept pace with the
growing wealth and population of the country. [Footnote 2: Sterns,
Foreign Trade of the United States, 1820-1840, in Jour. Pol. Econ.,
VIII., 34, 452.] As we have seen, the staple states produced the
lion's share of the domestic exports, and the internal exchange
favored by the protective tariffs restrained the foreign
importations. Aside from the depression in 1821, following the panic
of 1819, and the extraordinary rise in 1825, the exports in general
exhibited no marked increase or decline between 1820 and 1829.
Imports showed a value of nearly seventy-four and one-half million
dollars in 1820, ninety millions in 1825, and sixty-seven millions
in 1829. [Footnote 3: Soley, in Shaler, United States, I., 538; cf.
Pitkin, Statistical View (ed. of 1835), 177; W. C. Ford, in Depew,
One Hundred Years of Am. Commerce, I., 23.] During the whole of
Adams's administration, New York preserved its easy lead in domestic
exports, although, as the west leaped up to power, New Orleans rose
rapidly to a close second in exports of domestic origin. The
southern cities retained merely the same proportion of the exports
of domestic origin which they had in 1820, in spite of the great
increase of cotton production. New York and New Orleans gained a
large fraction of this trade, and Massachusetts changed its
proportion of domestic exports only slightly during the whole
decade. Over three-fourths of the cotton went to the British Isles,
while almost all the pork and beef, and two-thirds of the flour,
went to the West Indies, South America, and Great Britain's American
colonies. [Footnote: Pitkin, Statistical View, 121-137.]

The statistics of commerce repeat the same story of increasing
national self-dependence which was told by the development of
manufactures, internal trade, and transportation, and even by the
diplomatic policy of the United States. The nation was building an
empire of its own, with sections which took the place of kingdoms.
The west was already becoming the granary of the whole country. But
in the development of this "American system," the navigating
portions of New England and the staple states of the south and
southwest found themselves at a disadvantage. Their interest lay in
a free exchange across the ocean.

Although many minor treaties of commerce and navigation were
negotiated by Clay during this administration, all his other
diplomatic efforts met with failure, among them attempts to purchase
Texas and to procure a treaty with England for the rendition of
fugitive slaves who had escaped to Canada--strange evidences of the
political concessions of the northern president.


CHAPTER XVIII

REACTION TOWARDS STATE SOVEREIGNTY (1816-1829)


From the close of the War of 1812, an increasing reaction was in
progress in various states against the ardent nationalism which
characterized the country at that time. The assertion of the
doctrine of state sovereignty by the Hartford Convention in 1814
[Footnote: Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.), chap. xv.]
so aroused the other sections of the country that particularism was
for the time discredited. Leaders of Virginia politics even approved
a rumor that Madison would march troops against New England; Judge
Roane, later a champion of Virginia's sovereignty, denounced the
"anarchical principles" of the section. [Footnote: Randolph-Macon
College, John P. Branch Hist. Papers, II., 18.] In that period, when
Calhoun and the other leading statesmen of South Carolina supported
the protective tariff and the bonus bill, when Madison, the author
of the Virginia resolutions of 1798, signed the bill for the
recharter of the national bank, when Chief-Justice Marshall, a son
of Virginia, was welding firm the bonds of nationalism in his great
series of decisions limiting the powers of the states and developing
the doctrine of loose construction of the Constitution, [Footnote:
Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.), chap. xviii.] and when
New England itself was explaining away the particularistic purposes
of the Hartford Convention, it might well seem that the days of
state sovereignty had come to an end.

Even then, however, the pendulum was starting to swing in the
opposite direction. The crisis of 1819 and the decisions of the
supreme court asserting the constitutionality of the national bank
under the broad national conception of the Constitution, produced
protests and even resistance from various states whose interests
were most affected. Ohio in 1819 forcibly collected a tax on the
branch bank of the United States, in defiance of Marshall's decision
rendered earlier in the year in the case of McCulloch vs. Maryland;
and in 1821 her legislature reaffirmed the doctrines of the Virginia
and Kentucky resolutions, and passed an act withdrawing the
protection of the laws of the state from the national bank,
[Footnote 2: Ames, State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 3, p. 5.]
and even persisted in her resistance after the decision (Osborn vs.
Bank of U. S., 1824) against the state. But the proceeds of the tax
were ultimately restored. Nor was Ohio alone in her opposition to
this decision. Kentucky was almost equally excited, and Senator R.
M. Johnson made a vain attempt in 1821 to procure an amendment to
the Constitution providing that in controversies in which a state
was a party the Senate of the United States should have appellate
jurisdiction. [Footnote: Annals of Cong., 17 Cong., I Sess., I., 23,
68, 96; Ames, State Docs., No. 3, p. 17; Ames, Amendments to the
Const., in Am. Hist. Assoc., Report 1896, II., 161; Niles' Register,
XVII., 289, 311, 447.] Judge Roane, chief-justice of Virginia, in a
series of papers in the Richmond Enquirer, challenging the
nationalistic reasoning of the court, asserted that the Constitution
resulted from a compact between the states, [Footnote 2: Randolph-
Macon College, John P. Branch Hist. Papers, II., 106-121.] and in
this attack he was heartily supported by Jefferson. [Footnote 3:
Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), X., 140, 189, 229.] Justice
Marshall, in Cohens vs. Virginia [Footnote 4: 6 Wheaton, 264.]
(1821), decided that the supreme court had appellate jurisdiction in
a case decided by the state court where the Constitution and the
laws of the United States were involved, even though a state was a
party.

Virginia's attorneys maintained, on the contrary, that the final
construction of the Constitution might be given by the courts of
every state in the Union; and Judge Roane, whose own decision had
been overturned, again appealed to his fellow-citizens in a strong
series of articles. Again Jefferson denounced the consolidating
tendencies of the judiciary, "which, working like gravity without
any intermission, is to press us at last into one consolidated
mass." Virginia entered her solemn protest against the decision, and
her House of Delegates reaffirmed the argument of Virginia's
counsel, and asserted that neither the government of the state nor
of the United States could press the other from its sphere. In
effect, Virginia's position would have given the state a veto on the
will of the federal government, by the protection which her courts
could have extended to the individual subject to her jurisdiction
under the interpretation placed by the state upon the Constitution.
[Footnote: Randolph-Macon College, John P. Branch Hist. Papers, II.,
28; Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), IX., 184; cf. ibid., X.
passim; Madison, Writings, III., 217-224; Ames, State Docs. on
Federal Relations, No. 3. p. 15; Niles' Register, XX., 118; 6
Wheaton 385.] The leading expositor of Virginia reaction in this
period was John Taylor of Caroline, the mover of the resolutions of
1798. His "Construction Construed", published in 1820, was
introduced by a preface in which the editor said: "The period is
indeed by no means an agreeable one. It borrows new gloom from the
apathy which seems to run over so many of our sister states. The
very sound of State Rights is scarcely ever heard among them; and by
many of their eminent politicians is only heard to be mocked at."
Taylor himself was led to write the book by the agitation over the
Missouri question and the case of McCulloch vs. Maryland. One of its
purposes was to insist that sovereignty was not divided between the
separate spheres of the state and federal government, but rested
rather in the people of the several states. Two years later, in his
"Tyranny Unmasked", Taylor developed the idea that the division of
the power of the people between the federal and state governments
would be nugatory if either Congress or the supreme court could
exclusively determine the boundaries of power between the states and
the general government. His remedy for usurpation was the "state
veto," which was to be "no mere didactic lecture," but involved the
right of resisting unconstitutional laws. He met the difficulty that
the people of one state would construe the Constitution for the
people of all the states, by the answer that it was the lesser evil.
[Footnote: Taylor, Tyranny Unmasked, 258, 262.] Again in 1823, in
his "New Views of the Constitution", he expounded the same ideas,
and dwelt upon the position of the states as the defenders of
separate geographical interests against oppression by the majority
of the nation. He saw a grave danger in the relinquishment to
Congress of the power to deal with local and dissimilar geographical
interests by loose-construction legislation upon such subjects as
banks, roads, canals, and manufactures. It would tend to produce
geographical combinations; sections by combining would exploit and
oppress the minority; "Congress would become an assembly of
geographical envoys from the North, the South, and the West."
Against these evils, the Constitution, according to his view, had
provided by confining geographical interests within state lines
instead of "collecting them into one intriguing arena." The states,
reposing on their sovereignty, would interpose a check to oppressive
action and to the combination of sectional interests against the
minority. [Footnote 1: Taylor, New Views (ed. of 1823), 261 et seq.]

Not a theory of government, however, but a political exigency called
out a working principle of state rights. When the industrial policy
of the government fell under the complete control of the north, and
the social system of the south seemed to be menaced, state
sovereignty controlled the southern policy. The increase in
popularity of Clay's American system of internal improvements and a
protective tariff aroused the apprehensions of the whole planting
section; the struggle over the admission of Missouri taught the
south the power of an unfriendly national majority; and, in 1822, a
threatened insurrection of the Negroes at Charleston brought home to
the whole section, and particularly to South Carolina, the dangers
arising from an agitation of the question of slavery. [Footnote 2:
Cf. Hart, Slavery and Abolition (Am. Nation, XVI.), chap. viii.] In
the irritated condition and depression of this section, the triumph
of loose construction principles and the possible election of a
northern president seemed to presage not only the sacrifice of their
economic interests, but even the freeing of their slaves. [Footnote
3: See the resolutions of Virginia, December 23, 1816, in Ames,
State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 5, p. 3.] The colonization
society, which in its origin had been supported by southern men,
became an object of denunciation by the lower south after the
Missouri controversy and the insurrection of 1822. The opposition
was intensified by the disposition of the society, towards the close
of the period, to advocate emancipation, as well as the removal of
the existing free Negroes. [Footnote: Cf. Hart, Slavery and
Abolition (Am. Nation, XVI.), chap. xiv.]

In Virginia the doctrine of state rights was supported by the
friends of Crawford, and, in general, by the older portion of the
state. In her western counties, however, where a movement was in
progress for a constitutional convention to redistribute political
power so that the populous interior should not be subordinated to
the slave-holding minority of the coast, there was a strong
sentiment in favor of the constitutionality and expediency both of
federal internal improvements and the tariff. Nevertheless,
Virginia's voice was determined by the ascendancy of the old-time
plantation interests. In 1825, Jefferson suggested that the
legislature of Virginia should pass a set of resolutions, declaring
the internal-improvement laws null and void. He advised, however,
that, at the same time, the issue should be avoided by an act of the
Virginia legislature validating these congressional laws [Footnote
2: Jefferson, Writings (Ford's ed.), X., 348-352; Ames, State Docs.
on Federal Relations, No. 4, p. 8.] until action could be taken on a
carefully guarded proposal to amend the Constitution so as to grant
the right. This was the last effort of Jefferson to stay the tide of
internal improvements which was sweeping opposition before it, and
even he withdrew his project before it was acted on. His death (July
4, 1826) removed from Virginia the most influential advocate of
state sovereignty and the greatest of the Virginia dynasty since
Washington. On the same day John Adams died. The men who made the
declaration of independence were passing away, but the spirit of
that epoch was reviving in the south.

South Carolina was the theatre of a conflict between the old-time
forces of nationalism, of which Calhoun had been the most prominent
exponent, and the newer tendencies which would safeguard the
interests of the commonwealth by appealing to the doctrine of state
sovereignty. [Footnote: Houston, Nullification in S. C., chap. iv. ]
At first, the conservative party was in the ascendancy. In 1820 the
House of Representatives of South Carolina passed a resolution which
deprecated the system of protection as premature and pernicious, but
admitted that Congress possessed the power of enacting all laws
relating to commerce, and lamented the practice "of arraying upon
the questions of national policy the states as distinct and
independent sovereignties in opposition to, or (what is much the
same thing), with a view to exercise a control over the general
government"; [Footnote 2: Ames, State Docs. on Federal Relations,
No. 4, p. 3.] and, as late as 1824, the same body passed resolutions
declaring that the man "who disseminates doctrines whose tendency is
to give an unconstitutional preponderance to State, or United
States' rights, must be regarded as inimical to the forms of
government under which we have hitherto so happily lived"; and that
"the People have conferred no power upon their state legislature to
impugn the Acts of the Federal Government or the decisions of the
Supreme Court of the United States." [Footnote: Ames, State Docs. on
Federal Relations, No. 4, p. 6.] The state Senate was already
controlled by the opponents of national power, led by Judge Smith;
and the next year the Lower House also fell under their dominance.

The attitude of McDuffie illustrates the transitional conditions in
South Carolina. In 1821 he published a pamphlet supporting a liberal
construction of the powers of Congress, and refuting the "ultra
doctrines respecting consolidation and state sovereignty." [Footnote
2: Defense of a Liberal Construction, etc., by "One of the People."
Reprinted in Philadelphia, 1831. To this pamphlet, Governor Hamilton
had prefixed "an encomiastic advertisement."] In 1824, also, he
supported the constitutionality and expediency of the general survey
act, and repudiated the idea that the state governments were "in any
respect more worthy of confidence than the General Government."
[Footnote 3: Annals of Cong., 18 Cong., I Sess., 1372.] But he
opposed the tariff of 1824, and in 1825 he voted against specific
measures for internal improvement. Soon after this he joined the
ranks of the advocates of state sovereignty, and, together with
Hamilton and Hayne, so far outstripped the leaders of that faction
that Judge Smith and his friends found themselves in a conservative
minority against the ultra doctrines of their former opponents.
Doubtless the reversal of South Carolina's attitude was accelerated
by the slavery agitation which followed the emancipation proposition
of Ohio, already mentioned, and by the contest over the Negro seamen
act, [Footnote: Passed December 21, 1822. See Ames, State Docs. on
Federal Relations, No. 5, p. 12; cf. Hart, Slavery and Abolition
(Am. Nation, XVI.), chap. xix.] a measure by which South Carolina,
in consequence of the plot at Charleston, required that free Negroes
on vessels entering a port of South Carolina should be imprisoned
during the sojourn of the ship. The act brought out protests, both
from other states and from Great Britain, whose subjects were
imprisoned; and it was declared unconstitutional by Adams's
attorney-general and by the federal courts nevertheless, it remained
unrepealed and continued to be enforced. [Footnote 2: McMaster,
United States, V., 200-204, 417.] The Senate of South Carolina met
the situation, at the close of 1824, by resolutions affirming that
the duty of preventing insurrections was "paramount to all laws, all
treaties, all constitutions," and protesting against any claims of
right of the United States to interfere with her domestic
regulations in respect to the colored population. [Footnote 3: Ames,
State Docs. on Federal Relations, No. 5, p. 14.]

Georgia, a few years later (December, 1827), in opposition to the
Colonization Society, [Footnote 4: Ibid., 17, 19.] vehemently
asserted her rights, and found the remedy no longer in remonstrance,
but in "a firm and determined union of the people and the states of
the south" against submission to interference. Already Georgia had
placed herself in the attitude of resistance to the general
government over the question of the Indians within the state. From
the beginning of the nation, the Indians on the borders of the
settled area of Georgia were a menace and an obstacle to her
development. Indeed, they constituted a danger to the United States
as well: their pretensions to independence and complete sovereignty
over their territory were at various times utilized by adventurers
from France, England, and Spain as a means of promoting the designs
of these powers. [Footnote: Am. Hist. Rev., X., 249.] Jackson drove
a wedge between the Indian confederacies of this region by his
victories in the War of 1812 and the cessions which followed.
[Footnote: Babcock, Am. Nationality (Am. Nation, XIII.), chaps, ii.,
xvii.] Although, in 1821, a large belt of territory between the
Ocmulgee and Flint rivers was ceded by the Creeks to Georgia, the
state saw with impatience some of the best lands still occupied by
these Indians in the territory lying between the Flint and the
Chattahoochee.

The spectacle of a stream of Georgia settlers crossing this rich
Indian area of their own state to settle in the lands newly acquired
in Alabama and Mississippi provoked Georgia's wrath, and numerous
urgent calls were made upon the government to carry out the
agreement made in 1802, [Footnote: Phillips, "Georgia and State
Rights," in Am. Hist. Assoc., Report 1901, II., 34.] by completing
the acquisition of these Indian lands. Responding to this demand, a
treaty was made at Indian Springs in February, 1825, by which the
Creeks ceded all of their lands in Georgia; but when Adams came to
the presidency he was confronted with a serious situation arising
from this treaty. Shortly after it had been ratified, Mclntosh, a
principal chief of the Lower Creeks, who had signed the treaty,
contrary to the rule of the tribe and in spite of the decision to
sell no more land, was put to death; and the whole treaty was
repudiated by the great body of the Creeks, as having been procured
by fraud and made by a small minority of their nation. The
difficulty arose from the fact that the various villages of these
Indians were divided into opposing parties: the Upper Creeks, living
chiefly along the forks of the Alabama, on the Tallapoosa and the
Coosa in Alabama, constituting the more numerous branch, were
determined to yield no more territory, while the principal chiefs of
the Lower Creeks, who dwelt in western Georgia, along the Flint and
Chattahoochee branches of the Appalachicola, were not unfavorable to
removal.

When Governor Troup, of Georgia, determined to survey the ceded
lands, he was notified that the president expected Georgia to
abandon the survey until it could be done consistently with the
provisions of the treaty. Although the treaty had given the Creeks
until September, 1826, to vacate, Governor Troup informed General
Gaines, who had been sent to preserve peace, that, as there existed
"two independent parties to the question, each is permitted to
decide for itself," and he announced that the line would be run and
the survey effected. The defiant correspondence which now ensued
between the governor and the war department doubtless reflected the
personal hot-headedness of Troup himself, but Georgia supported her
governor and made his defiances effective. He plainly threatened
civil war in case the United States used force to prevent the
survey. [Footnote: Ames, State Docs on Federal Relations, No. 3, pp.
25-31; Phillips, "Georgia and State Rights," in Am. Hist. Assoc.,
Report 1901, II., 58-60; 40 (map).]

On investigation, President Adams reached the conclusion that the
treaty was wrongfully secured, and gave orders for a new
negotiation. This resulted in the treaty of Washington, in January,
1826, supplemented by that of March, 1826, by which the Creek
Indians ceded all of their lands within the state except a narrow
strip along the western border. This treaty abrogated the treaty of
Indian Springs and it provided that the Indians should remain in
possession of their lands until January 1, 1827. Throughout the
whole of these proceedings Georgia was bitterly incensed. Claiming
that the treaty of Indian Springs became operative after its
ratification, and that the lands acquired by it were thereby
incorporated with Georgia and were under her sovereignty, the state
denied the right of the general government to reopen the question.
"Georgia," said Troup, "is sovereign on her own soil," and he
entered actively upon the survey of the tract without waiting for
the date stipulated in the new treaty. When the surveyors entered
the area not ceded by the later treaty, the Indians threatened to
use force against them, and at the beginning of 1827 another heated
controversy arose. The president warned the governor of Georgia that
he should employ, if necessary, "all the means under his control to
maintain the faith of the nation by carrying the treaty into
effect." Having done this, he submitted the whole matter in a
special message to Congress. [Footnote: February 5, 1827.
Richardson, Messages and Papers, II., 370.]

