As a matter of fact Gladys had been told about Peter's shameful past
before she married him; Guffey had told her, and she had told Peter
that Guffey had told her, she had reminded Peter of it many, many
times. But the actual sight of one of these "nationalized women" had
driven her into a frenzy, and it was a week before peace was
restored in the Gudge family. Meantime poor Peter was buffeted by
storms of emotion, both at home and in his office. They were getting
ready the first Red train, and it seemed as if every foreign Red
that Peter had ever known was besieging him, trying to get at him
and harrow his soul and his conscience. Sadie Todd's cousin, who had
been born in England, was shipped out on this first train, and also
a Finnish lumberman whom Peter had known in the I. W. W., and a
Bohemian cigar worker at whose home he had several times eaten, and
finally Michael Dubin, the Jewish boy with whom he had spent fifteen
days in jail, and who had been one of the victims of the black-snake
whippings.

Michael made no end of wailing, because he had a wife and three
babies, and he set up the claim that when the "bulls" had raided his
home they had stolen all his savings, two or three hundred dollars.
Peter, of course, insisted that he could do nothing; Dubin was a Red
and an alien, and he must go. When they were loading them on the
train, there was Dubin's wife and half a hundred other women,
shrieking and wringing their hands, and trying to break thru the
guards to get near their loved ones. The police had to punch them in
the stomachs with their clubs to hold them back, and in spite of all
these blows, the hysterical Mrs. Dubin succeeded in breaking thru
the guards, and she threw herself under the wheels of the train, and
they were barely able to drag her away in time to save her life.
Scenes like this would, of course, have a bad effect upon the
public, and so Guffey called up the editors of all the newspapers,
and obtained a gentleman's agreement that none of them would print
any details.


Section 84


All over the country the Red trains were moving eastward, loaded
with "wobblies" and communists, pacifists and anarchists, and a
hundred other varieties of Bolsheviks. They got a shipload together
and started them off for Russia--the "Red Ark" it was called, and
the Red soap-boxers set tip a terrific uproar, and one Red clergyman
compared the "Red Ark" to the Mayflower! Also there was some Red
official in Washington, who made a fuss and cancelled a whole block
of deportation orders, including some of Peter's own cases. This,
naturally, was exasperating to Peter and his wife; and on top of it
came another incident that was still more humiliating.

There was a "pink" mass meeting held in American City, to protest
against the deportations. Guffey said they would quite probably raid
the meeting, and Peter must go along, so as to point out the Reds to
the bulls. The work was in charge of a police detective by the name
of Garrity, head of what was called the "Bomb Squad"; but this man
didn't know very much, so he had the habit of coming to Peter for
advice. Now he had the whole responsibility of this meeting, and he
asked Peter to come up on the platform with him, and Peter went.
Here was a vast audience--all the Red fury which had been pent up
for many months, breaking loose in a whirlwind of excitement. Here
were orators, well dressed and apparently respectable men, not in
any way to be distinguished from the born rulers of the country,
coming forward on the platform and uttering the most treasonable
sentences, denouncing the government, denouncing the blockade
against Russia, praising the Bolshevik government of Russia,
declaring that the people who went away in the "Soviet Ark" were
fortunate, because they were escaping from a land of tyranny into a
land of freedom. At every few sentences the orator would be stopped
by a storm of applause that broke from the audience.

And what was a poor Irish Catholic police detective to make of a
proposition like that? Here stood an orator declaring: "Whenever any
form of government becomes destructive to these ends, it is the
right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new
government, laying its foundations on such principles and organizing
its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect
their safety and happiness." And Garrity turned to Peter. "What do
you think of that?" he said, his good-natured Irish face blank with
dismay.

Peter thought it was the limit. Peter knew that thousands of men all
over America had been sent to prison for saying things less
dangerous than that. Peter had read many sets of instructions from
the office of the Attorney-General of the United States, and knew
officially that that was precisely the thing you were never under
any circumstances permitted to say, or to write, or even to think.
So Peter said to Garrity: "That fellow's gone far enough. You better
arrest him." Garrity spoke to his men, and they sprang forward on
the platform, and stopped the orator and placed him and all his
fellow-orators under arrest, and ordered the audience out of the
building. There were a couple of hundred policemen and detectives on
hand to carry out Garrity's commands, and they formed a line with
their clubs, and drove the crowd before them, and carted the
speakers off in a patrol wagon. Then Peter went back to Guffey's
office, and told what he had done--and got a reception that reminded
him of the time Guffey had confronted him with the letter from Nell
Doolin! "Who do you think that was you pinched?" cried Guffey.
"He's the brother of a United States senator! And what do you think
he was saying? That was a sentence from the Declaration of
Independence!"


Peter couldn't "get it"; Peter was utterly lost. Could a man go
ahead and break the law, just because he happened to be a brother of
a United States senator? And what difference did it make whether a
thing was in the Declaration of Independence, if it was seditious,
if it wasn't allowed to be said? This incident brought Guffey and
the police authorities of the city so much ridicule that Guffey got
all his men together and read them a lecture, explaining to them
just what were the limits of the anti-Red activities, just who it
was they mustn't arrest, and just what it was they couldn't keep
people from saying. For example, a man couldn't be arrested for
quoting the Bible.

"But Jesus Christ, Guffey," broke in one of the men, "have all of us
got to know the Bible by heart?"

There was a laugh all round. "No," Guffey admitted, "but at least be
careful, and don't arrest anybody for saying anything that sounds as
if it came from the Bible."

"But hell!" put in another of the men, who happened to be an
ex-preacher. "That'll tie us up tighter than a jail-sentence! Look
what's in the Bible!"

And he proceeded to quote some of the things, and Peter knew that he
had never heard any Bolshevik talk more outrageous than that. It
made one realize more than ever how complicated was this Red
problem; for Guffey insisted, in spite of everything, that every
word out of the Bible was immune. "Up in Winnipeg," said he, "they
indicted a clergyman for quoting two passages from the prophet
Isaiah, but they couldn't face it, they had to let the fellow go."
And the same thing was true of the Declaration of Independence;
anybody might read it, no matter how seditious it was. And the same
thing was true of the Constitution, even tho the part called the
Bill of Rights declared that everybody in America might do all the
things that Guffey's office was sending them to jail for doing!

This seemed a plain crazy proposition; but Guffey explained it as a
matter of politics. If they went too far, these fellows would go out
and capture the votes from them, and maybe take away the government
from them, and where would they be then? Peter had never paid any
attention to politics before this, but both he and Gladys realized
after this lecture that they must broaden their view-point. It was
not enough to put the Reds in jail and crack their skulls, you had
to keep public sympathy for what you were doing, you had to make the
public understand that it was necessary, you had to carry on what
was called "propaganda," to keep the public aware of the odiousness
of these cattle, and the desperate nature of their purposes.

The man who perceived that most clearly was the Attorney-General of
the country, and Guffey in his lecture pointed out the double nature
of his activities. Not merely was the Attorney-General breaking up
the Communist and the Communist Labor parties and sending their
members to jail; he was using the funds of his office to send out an
endless stream of propaganda, to keep the country frightened about
these Red plots. Right now he had men in American City working over
the data which Guffey had collected, and every week or two he would
make a speech somewhere, or would issue a statement to the
newspapers, telling of new bomb plots and new conspiracies to
overthrow the government. And how clever he was about it! He would
get the pictures of the very worst-looking of the Reds, pictures
taken after they had been kept in jail for weeks without a shave,
and with the third degree to spoil their tempers; and these pictures
would be spread on a sheet with the caption: "MEN LIKE THESE WOULD
RULE YOU." This would be sent to ten thousand country newspapers all
over the nation, and ninety-nine hundred would publish it, and
ninety-nine million Americans would want to murder the Reds next
morning. So successful had this plan proven that the
Attorney-General was expecting to be nominated for President by
means of it, and all the agencies of his department were working to
that end.

The same thing was being done by all the other agencies of big
business all over the country. The "Improve America League" of
American City was publishing full-page advertisements in the
"Times," and the "Home and Fireside Association" of Eldorado was
doing the same thing in the Eldorado "Times," and the "Patriot's
Defense Legion" was doing the same thing in the Flagland "Banner."
They were investigating the records of all political candidates, and
if any of them showed the faintest tinge of pink, Guffey's office
would set to work to rake up their records and get up scandals on
them, and the business men would contribute a big campaign fund, and
these candidates would be snowed under at the polls. That was the
kind of work they were doing, and all Guffey's operatives must bear
in mind the importance of it, and must never take any step that
would hamper this political campaign, this propaganda on behalf of
law and order.


Section 85

