Against this dangerous man governments are taking the most strenuous
precautions. Victoria offers to hand over the exiles to Napoleon, and
messages of compliment are passed from one throne to the other. But that
gift did not take place. The English royalist Press applauded, but the
people of London would have none of it. The great city muttered thunder.
Majesty clothed in probity--that is the character of the English nation.
That good and proud people showed their indignation, and Palmerston and
Bonaparte had to be content with the expulsion of the exiles.

During the whole long night of my exile I never lost Paris from my view.
When Europe and even France were in darkness, Paris was never hidden.
That is because Paris is the frontier of the future, the visible
frontier of the unknown. All of to-morrow that can be seen to-day is in
Paris. The eyes that are searching for progress come to rest on Paris,
for Paris is the city of light.


_VI.--After the Exile_


This triology, "Before, During, and After the Exile," is no work of
mine, it is the doing of Napoleon III. He it is who has divided my life
in this way, observing, as one might say, the rules of art. Returning to
my country on September 5, 1870, I found the sky more gloomy and my duty
more clamant than ever.

Though it is sad to leave the fatherland, to return to it is sometimes
sadder still; and there is no Frenchman who would not have preferred a
life-long banishment, to seeing France ground beneath the Prussian heel,
and the loss of Metz and Strasburg. This was an invasion of barbarians;
but there is another menace that is not less formidable. I mean the
invasion of our land by darkness, an invasion of the nineteenth century
by the middle ages. After the emperor, the pope; after Berlin, Rome;
after the triumph of the sword, the triumph of night. For the light of
civilisation may be extinguished in either of two ways, by a military or
by a clerical invasion. The former threatens our mother, France; the
latter our child, the future.

A double inviolability is the most precious possession of a civilised
people--the inviolability of territory and the inviolability of
conscience; and as the soldier violates the first, so does the priest
violate the other. Yet the soldier does but obey his orders and the
priest his dogmas, so that there are only two who are ultimately
culpable--Caesar, who slays, and Peter, who lies. There is no religion
which has not as its aim to seize forcibly the human soul, and it is to
attempts of this kind that France is given up to-day.

One may say, indeed, that in our age there are two schools, and that
these two schools sum up in themselves the two opposed currents which
draw civilisation, the one towards the future and the other towards the
past. One of these schools is called Paris and the other Rome. Each of
them has its book; the one has the "Declaration of the Rights of Man,"
the other has the "Syllabus"; and the first of these books says "Yes" to
progress, but the second of them says "No." Yet progress is the footstep
of God.

Paris means Montaigne, Rabelais, Pascal, Corneille, Molière,
Montesquieu, Diderot, Rousseau, Voltaire, Mirabeau, Danton. Rome, on the
other hand, means Innocent III., Pius V., Alexander VI., Urban VIII.,
Arbuez, Cisneros, Lainez, Guillandus, Ignatius.

To educate is nothing less than to govern; and clerical education means
a clerical government, with a despotism as its summit and ignorance as
its foundation.

Rome already holds Belgium, and would now seize Paris. We are witnesses
of a struggle to the death. Against us is all that manifold power which
emerges from the past, the spirit of monarchy, of superstition, of the
barrack and of the convent; we have against us temerity, effrontery,
audacity, and fear. On our side there is nothing but the light. That is
why the victory will be with us. For to enlighten is to deliver. Every
increase in liberty involves increased responsibility. Nothing is graver
than freedom; liberty has burdens of her own, and lays on the conscience
all the chains which she unshackles from the limbs. We find rights
transforming themselves into duties. Let us therefore take heed to what
we are doing; we live in a difficult time and are answerable at once to
the past and to the future. The time has come, in this year 1876, to
replace commotions by concessions. That is how civilisation advances.
For progress is nothing other than revolution effected amicably.

Therefore, legislators and citizens, let us redouble our good-will. Let
all wounds be healed, all animosities extinguished; by overcoming hatred
we shall overcome war; let no disturbance that may come be due to our
fault. Our task of entering into the unknown is difficult enough without
angers and bitterness. I am one of those who hope from that unknown
future, but only on condition that we make use from the first of every
means of pacification that is in our power. Let us act with the virile
kindness of the strong.

Let us then calm the nations by peace, and the hearts of men by
brotherhood, and let us never forget that we are ourselves responsible
for this last half of the nineteenth century, and that we are placed
between a great past, the Revolution of France, and a great future, the
Revolution of Europe.

       *       *       *       *       *


MARTIN HUME


The Courtships of Elizabeth


     Major Martin Andrew Hume, born in London on December 8, 1847,
     and educated at Madrid, comes of an English family, the
     members of which have resided in Spain for a hundred years. He
     began life in the British Army, from which he retired with the
     rank of major. Major Hume was appointed editor of the Spanish
     state papers published by the Record Office; he is also
     lecturer in Spanish History and Literature at Cambridge, and
     examiner and lecturer in Spanish at the Birmingham University.
     He has written numerous works on the history of Spain; but
     perhaps he is best known for his historical studies of the
     Tudor period, of which may be mentioned "The Courtships of
     Queen Elizabeth," "The Love Affairs of Mary Queen of Scots,"
     and "The Wives of Henry VIII." In the first-named work,
     published in 1896, Major Hume has presented an exceedingly
     interesting human document, and classified a tangled mass of
     material. The epitome here presented has been prepared for THE
     WORLD'S GREATEST BOOKS by the author himself.


_I.--Foreign Philandering_


The greatest diplomatic game ever played on the world's chessboard was
that consummate succession of intrigues which, for nearly half a
century, was carried on by Queen Elizabeth and her ministers with the
object of playing off one great Continental power against another for
the benefit of England and Protestantism, with which the interests of
the queen were inextricably involved. Those in the midst of the strife
worked mostly for immediate aims, and neither saw, nor cared, for the
ultimate results; but we, looking back, see that out of that tangle of
duplicity there emerged a new era of civilisation and a host of vigorous
impulses which move us to this hour.

The victory of England in that struggle meant the dominance of modern
ideas of liberty and of the imperial destiny of our race, and it seems
as if the result could only have been attained in the peculiar
combination of circumstances and persons then existing. Elizabeth
triumphed as much by her weakness as by her strength. Honest Cecil kept
his hand upon the helm so long because the only alternative to him was
the greedy crew of councillors eager for foreign bribes. Without
Leicester as a permanent matrimonial possibility, the queen could never
have held the balance between her foreign suitors; and, but for the
follies of Mary Stuart, the English Catholics would not have been
subjected so easily, whilst the religious dissensions in France and the
character of Philip II. aided Elizabeth's diplomacy. Elizabeth was more
than once betrothed in her childhood to aid her father's policy, but
when Henry died, in 1547, his younger daughter was unbetrothed.

During her residence with the Queen-Dowager, Catharine Parr, who soon
married Thomas, Lord Seymour, the fourteen-year-old girl was exposed to
peril from the designs of the ambitious Seymour. The indecorous romping,
perhaps innocent at first, that took place between her and her married
host provided grave scandal which touched even the honour of the girl,
and her keen wits alone saved her on this occasion from disgrace. Her
crafty reticence served her well, when the intrigues of Wyat, Courtenay,
and the French party threatened Mary's throne; but when Mary was
married, the Spanish party at once became interested in securing
Elizabeth to their side by her marriage. Mary's jealousy, and
Elizabeth's own determination not to be made a tool, frustrated Philip's
attempt to marry the princess to his cousin, the Duke of Savoy; and when
the Protestant Swedes clandestinely offered her the hand of Prince Eric,
her discreet wariness again protected her from the dangerous proposal.

When Mary lay dying, Feria, the Spanish ambassador, hurried to Hatfield
to salute the rising sun, and hinted even thus early that Elizabeth
might marry her powerful Spanish brother-in-law. But she resented his
patronage, and though she coquetted, as usual, with the proposal of
marriage, she took care not to pledge herself or submit England to
foreign dictation. To Spain it was vital that England should be at her
bidding. If the queen could not marry Philip, surely she could only wed
one of his Austrian cousins; or, if not, then England must be conquered
by the sword. All that Elizabeth wanted was time, and tardy Philip
played into her hands. One English noble after the other was taken up
and dropped, in the intervals of foreign philandering. Lord Arundel,
foolish, old, and vain, had high hopes; Sir William Pickering's chances
looked bright, and France and Spain sought to patronise each English
candidate in his turn, especially Lord Robert Dudley, the queen's friend
from childhood, though he was already married to Amy Robsart.

At length, after many days of dallying, great Philip decided to
sacrifice himself for Spain and marry his enigmatical sister-in-law. She
must, of course, renounce Protestantism and all the laws that made her
legally a queen; which was absurd, as Feria soon saw, and frankly told
his master. So then Philip half-heartedly patronised the suit of his
Austrian cousin, the Archduke Charles. If the latter would be an
obedient Spanish instrument he could have Philip's support; but German
Lutherans and English Protestants had also to be considered, and
Elizabeth's court was divided into those who feared any consort not
wholly Protestant and those who were eager for any marriage that
shielded England from Spanish attack.

Elizabeth thought she could avoid the latter danger without marriage at
all, so she dexterously played with all her suitors, English and
foreign, while strengthening her position and gaining popularity.
Sometimes she swore she would never marry, and the next day would grow
sentimental over the archduke, or flirted with Dudley--keeping them all
in suspense and afraid of offending her. The French, having no
marriageable prince of their own, supported Dudley, or any other English
candidate whom they could use against Spain; whilst Dudley himself
pretended to favour the archduke, till matters looked serious, and then
found means of frustrating him, often to Elizabeth's rage, for she
wished to play her own deep game unhampered. She knew she could always
choke off the Austrian when she wished by making fresh religious
demands. The English nobles were furious at Dudley's selfish manoeuvres
to keep the queen unwed till he was free, and they planned to marry the
queen to Arran, the next heir of Scotland. This looked promising for
months, but Dudley and his sister, Lady Sidney, checked the plan.


_II.--The Nine Years' Comedy_


In September, 1559, Dudley and his sister warmly took up the archduke's
cause, and assured Quadra, the Spanish ambassador, that if the suitor
would flatter the queen by coming to England on chance, she would marry
him. But Elizabeth and Cecil, though they hinted much, would not clearly
confirm Dudley's promise, and Philip and the emperor dared not expose
the archduke to the risk of being repulsed. The English nobles, in good
faith, urged the archduke's suit, and said that Dudley was plotting to
kill his wife and marry the queen; but they and the Spanish ambassador
were outwitted at every point by Elizabeth's diplomacy, and through 1559
and 1560 all the rivals were kept between hope and fear.

Then, in September 1560, the long-predicted murder of Amy Robsart set
Dudley free, and made the nobles and Cecil more anxious than ever that
the archduke should be bold, take the risk, and come to England. The
queen, to weaken the new friendship between France and Spain, herself
again pretended eagerness for the Austrian's coming; but the trick was
stale now, and neither Philip nor the emperor believed her. To checkmate
Dudley the Protestants were actively urging the suit of Eric of Sweden,
when, in January 1561, the former made a bold bid for Spanish support.
He was, he said, quite innocent of his wife's death, and he promised
Quadra that if the King of Spain would urge his (Dudley's) suit upon the
queen, England should send envoys to the Council of Trent, receive a
papal legate, and become practically Catholic. He might promise, but
such a thing was impossible, and Cecil, when he learnt of the intrigue,
promptly embroiled matters and spoilt the plan.

Elizabeth, too, saw whither she was drifting, and by pretended levity
turned it into a joke. At one time she invited the old Spanish bishop to
marry her to Dudley, and next day said she would never marry at all. But
she never ceased to flirt with Dudley, who, when his intrigue with Spain
fell through, cynically appealed to the French Protestants for support.
They were in no position to help him, and by January 1562, he was
cringing to Spain, and pretending to be Catholic. But English Catholics
hated him, and he was now no fit instrument for Philip.

In her own court it was firmly believed that Elizabeth was secretly
married to Dudley--it was high time, said the gossips; but in truth the
international importance of her marriage was now (1562-63) partially
obscured by that of the widowed Mary Queen of Scots. Before the latter
were dangled Eric of Sweden, the Archduke Charles, the Earl of Arran,
and Darnley; but the match which Mary most wished for, and the most
threatening to Elizabeth, was that with the vicious young lunatic, Don
Carlos, the heir of Philip of Spain. The match with Darnley, too, as he
was in the English succession, was distasteful to Elizabeth; but in
order to divert the Spanish match--which, really, though she knew it
not, was out of the question--she pretended to favour Darnley's suit at
first.

In order still more to avert the Catholic alliance, Elizabeth sent
active help to the French Huguenots, and drew closer to the Protestants
of Germany and Holland, where distrust of their Spanish sovereign was
already brewing. In these circumstances, Elizabeth for the first time
could defy Spain, and Quadra, accused of conspiring against the queen,
was expelled the country. When the Darnley match for Mary Stuart looked
too serious, Elizabeth diverted it for a time by proposing that
Dudley--now Earl of Leicester--should marry Mary. It was, of course, but
a trick, through which the Scottish queen saw, with the object of
preventing the Darnley marriage and discrediting Mary in the eyes of
foreign princes; but it served its turn for a time.

In July 1564, when the league of France and Spain again menaced her,
Elizabeth set her cap at the boy Don Carlos, and even swore to the
Spanish ambassador that she was really a Catholic.

The further to alienate the Catholic powers from each other, she
simultaneously approached the emperor to revive the proposal of marriage
with the Archduke Charles, and to Catherine de Medici to drop a hint
that she--Elizabeth--might marry the young King of France, Charles IX.,
a youth barely half her age--anything to prevent a combination against
her and the marriage of Don Carlos with Mary Stuart. Catherine de Medici
had her own reasons at the time for smiling upon Elizabeth's suggestion.
She did not wish to be bound too tightly to Spain and the Catholics, for
fear of the Huguenots; and in February 1565, she wrote to Elizabeth,
saying that she would be the happiest of mothers if she could see her
dearly beloved sister of England married to her son, Charles IX.

Elizabeth was full of maidenly hesitation. She was too old for him;
perhaps he would not think her beautiful, and so on; but she took care
to say that there was no one else she could marry, as she would not wed
a subject. The Huguenots actively pushed the proposal, and Leicester
pretended to favour it, though Cecil was against it on many grounds. But
it was never seriously meant. It brought the Huguenots to Catherine's
side on the eve of her voyage to renew the Catholic league with Philip,
and it brought the Archduke Charles once more forward as a suitor for
Elizabeth's hand. When it had thus served its purpose, the idea of the
mature English queen marrying the boy Charles IX. was dropped.

The Austrian's new advances were looked upon somewhat askance by Spain,
until his attitude towards religion was assured, and, to have a second
string, the Spanish ambassador, Guzman, affected to favour Leicester's
suit. Cecil and the conservative nobles were sincere now in their
advocacy of the archduke, and between the two parties Elizabeth steered
coquettishly and diplomatically, modestly urging the archduke's coming,
and yet flirting desperately with Leicester. The breach between the
English nobles was profound, as all but Leicester wished the question of
the queen's marriage and succession to be settled; and Leicester's
chances were stronger than ever when it became clear, late in 1565, that
the archduke would not come to England without a firm pledge. The French
played off Leicester, too, against the archduke; sometimes even again
suggesting their own king when Leicester's star waxed pale.

Later, in 1566, the Lords and Commons urged the queen to marry, even
Leicester joining in the remonstrance. But Elizabeth wished to play the
game in her own way, and soundly scolded them. She did not mean to marry
the archduke, or perhaps anyone, but whilst she kept him dangling, she
knew she need not fear the Catholic combination. Soon all danger from
that quarter disappeared for a time. Philip was in death struggle with
his Protestant subjects in Holland; civil war was again raging in
France, and Mary Stuart was a disgraced prisoner in the hands of her
enemies. In the nine years that Elizabeth had carried on the marriage
comedy she had kept the balance whilst England was growing stronger.
Now, in 1568, she could afford to rest from her labours until danger
from abroad again loomed.


_III.--Catholics and Heretics_


The peace of St. Germain in 1570 ended the long religious war in France,
and the Guises and Catholics there, free from the strife, planned the
rescue of the imprisoned Mary Stuart by force, and her marriage with the
Duke of Anjou, the heir and brother of Charles IX. This was a danger
both to Elizabeth and to the Huguenots, and was at once counteracted by
their bringing forward the suggestion that the Queen of England might
marry Anjou. He was, it is true, a fanatical Catholic, but the Huguenots
thought that with England as a bait, and the powerful mind of Elizabeth
to guide him, the youth might change his views. Leicester offered his
help--for he knew the match was unlikely--and soon Catherine de Medici's
agents were busy by Elizabeth's side. Elizabeth, as usual, was coy and
maidenly. She was too old, she said, the thought of marriage was
shocking to her; but, withal, the courtship went on actively. Anjou's
charms and rumoured gallantries were the staple gossip at her court, and
Elizabeth never tired of hearing praises of her young suitor.

But soon the Guises and the Catholic League took fright, and urged Anjou
not to be drawn into a match with a heretic too old for him. Better,
said they, win England by force and marry Mary. To England the marriage,
or a similar one, seemed really necessary. The Catholics at home and
abroad were busily plotting against Elizabeth. Philip and Alba were
ready to connive at her murder; the Protestants in Holland and France
were powerless, and this match with Anjou seemed the only way to meet
the danger. Anjou, under Catholic influence, was scornful, whilst
Catherine, anxious for the greatness of her favourite son, was in
despair at his "assottedness."

Lord Buckhurst went, as ambassador to Paris, to forward the match in
March 1571; but it soon became evident that Elizabeth could never
concede the terms demanded by the French on religion. For many months
the Huguenots, and Walsingham, as Elizabeth's ambassador, tried to
reconcile the differences; and Catherine's agents in England laboured
hard in the same cause. Elizabeth herself was ambiguous, though loving,
and sometimes even Anjou was almost persuaded by his mother to accept
the English crown matrimonial at the price demanded. For Elizabeth it
was necessary to keep up the pretence at all costs, for the Spaniards
were plotting her murder; and to split the Catholic party whilst
secretly aiding the rebel Netherlanders seemed her only chance of
safety. On one occasion, when Spain and France drew together, Elizabeth
professed to be willing to marry Anjou on his own terms; but the prince
grew ever more opposed to the match, and in January 1572, Catherine
suddenly suggested that, as Anjou was so bigoted on religion, her
youngest son, Alençon, might marry Elizabeth on any conditions she
liked.

The lad was but seventeen--a swarthy, pock-marked youth--and Elizabeth
was inclined at first to resent the way in which Anjou had flouted her.
She was thirty-nine, and her vanity was wounded; but yet the friendship
or neutrality of France was vital to her. "How tall is he?" she asked
Cecil. "About as tall as I am," replied the elderly minister. "As tall
as your grandson, you mean!" snapped the queen. But Walsingham, Smith,
and the French envoys plied her busily with descriptions of Alençon's
manly charms, and a treaty between France and England was settled by
which the Huguenots for a time became paramount in France conjointly
with the marriage of the Huguenot Henry of Navarre with Margaret, the
king's sister. Feasts and cordiality were the rules on both sides of the
Channel now, and the Huguenot leaders urged the Alençon match with
Elizabeth with all their force. In reply to all these offers, Elizabeth
replied that, though the discrepancy of age was a great drawback, yet
the pock-marks on the suitor's face were a greater objection still; yet
if he would let her see him, without a pledge, she might like him. She
would never, she said, marry a man she had not seen.

But already Charles IX. and his mother were chafing under the Huguenot
yoke and cooling towards England. They were determined not to be drawn
by their new treaty with England into war with Spain; so, under the
pretence of keeping up the negotiations for the Alençon match, they sent
the youth La Mole to England in the autumn of 1572, really for the
purpose of dissociating France from the Huguenot-English aid to the
Protestant Netherlanders. La Mole was a gallant young lover, with whom
Elizabeth was charmed, and when he played the vicarious wooer for
Alençon, she could not make enough of him. But whilst he was
philandering with her at Kenilworth, and she was losing patience at his
political mission, there fell like a thunderbolt the awful news of the
massacre of St. Bartholomew at Navarre's fatal wedding. At once the
scene changed. La Mole and the French envoy hurried away amidst curses
upon all false Frenchmen. Elizabeth, in a panic, smiled upon Spaniards
again, and, for a time, the project of a French consort for her slept.

But not for long. Alençon had no part in the massacre, and was known to
favour Huguenots. He wrote a fervent love-letter to Elizabeth, and
proposed to escape to England; whilst his agent Maisonfleur joined with
Mauvissière, the official French ambassador, in wooing Elizabeth anew
for Alençon and for France. Gradually the parties drew together again,
for Catherine was already alarmed at the effect of St. Bartholomew. All
the Protestant world was arming, the English ports were full of
privateers to attack Catholic shipping, and aid in plenty was being sent
from England to the Huguenots of Rochelle and the rebel Dutchmen.

France could therefore not afford to quarrel with England, but Anjou and
Charles IX. took care to hold Alençon tight, that he might not escape
and strengthen the Protestant cause in union with Elizabeth, whilst they
still kept up the appearance of marriage negotiations. Elizabeth was
ever on the alert to serve her cause, and in March 1573, said she would
go no further in the Alençon match unless the Protestants in Rochelle
were allowed fair terms and the siege raised. Anjou, already tired of
the war, consented, and soon afterwards Catherine asked whether
Elizabeth would now proceed with the Alençon plan. The lad had grown
much, she said, and his budding beard covered some of his facial
imperfections. It was settled that the prince should make a flying visit
to Dover, but soon Catherine began to make fresh conditions. It would be
such a shame to them, she said, if her son went and returned unmarried.


_IV.--The Lovelorn Alençon_


In the meanwhile, Alençon's love-letters to his mature flame grew
warmer; but much as Elizabeth liked such attentions, she dreaded to go
too far. Charles IX. was sinking fast, and the next heir was Anjou. With
Alençon for heir-presumptive of France, the position would be changed;
and once more the queen began to get doubtful about those unfortunate
pock-marks on her lover's face. Once Alençon planned with Henry of
Navarre to escape from his mother's custody and make a dash for England
on his own account, but Catherine held him firmly.

Both the Huguenots and the French king wished for the marriage, but each
party frustrated the other because their objects were different. When
the French ambassador, therefore, asked Elizabeth when Alençon might
come to see her, she refused to name a time, because she knew secretly
that a great Huguenot movement in France was pending, and she wished
Alençon to be there as figurehead at the time--the very thing that the
official French Government wished to avoid. The projected movement was
betrayed and suppressed, and Alençon's life was for a time in danger;
but when Henry III. (Anjou) was seated on the throne, Alençon kept
openly a rival court to that of his brother, and the Huguenots around
the prince were at deadly feud with the minions of the king.

At last the crisis came. Alençon escaped from Paris in disguise, pursued
by his mother, and, joining the Huguenots in arms, defied the king and
the Guises. France was not big enough to hold both brothers in peace,
and Catherine told Alençon that as Elizabeth seemed so ready to help him
and his Huguenots, he ought to reopen the marriage negotiations. But
Alençon was useless to England as a counterbalance to Spain unless
France herself could be pledged as well, and Elizabeth considered it
safest for the time, since that could not be done, to feign a new
cordiality with Philip.

The Catholic party in France was again paramount, and by bribery and
Catherine's diplomacy, Alençon and his friends were bought over. For the
next three years the young prince held aloof from affairs, but in 1578
the hollow truce ended; he was suspected and placed under arrest, all
his friends being cast into the Bastille. In February, 1578, Alençon
broke his prison and fled, and all France was plunged into turmoil.
Elizabeth was profoundly moved. The keynote of English policy was the
exclusion of France from Flanders, and if Alençon was secretly supported
in his action by his brother, then Elizabeth must oppose to the death
any interference in Flanders.

And so began the long and clever juggle by which she used Alençon's
ambition to wed her as a means to compass her ends without marrying him.
Huguenots flocked to Alençon's standard, whilst he sent by every post
love-lorn epistles to Elizabeth, praying her to aid him to free Flanders
from the bloodthirsty Spaniards. On July 7, 1578, Alençon entered
Flanders with his army, and Elizabeth, still full of distrust of
Frenchmen, feigned to Spaniards her deep disapproval, whilst she took
care that many English and Germans in her pay slipped into Flanders at
the same time, to prevent any French national domination. Presently,
persuaded that Alençon had no secret pact with his brother, Elizabeth
took Alençon and the Flemish revolt into her own hands, and effusively
welcomed Alençon's envoys who came to promote his love suit.

He chose for his emissary one Jehan Simier, an experienced gallant, who
soon wooed Elizabeth to such good purpose that she fell violently in
love with the messenger, as well as with his absent master. Protestant
England took fright at the pending marriage of the queen with a papist
of half her age. Simier, whom she called her "monkey," had bewitched
her, said the courtiers, and remonstrances from all sides came to the
queen.


_V.--The Battle of Wits_


Alençon's demands were high, but Elizabeth seems really for once to have
lost her head, and but for the strong opposition of her Council, might
have been drawn into the marriage. Simier, seeing the deadlock, decided
to bring Alençon over at all risks. Leicester, deadly jealous, tried to
assassinate Simier, who revenged himself by divulging to the queen
Leicester's secret marriage. Elizabeth was beside herself with rage, and
more in love than ever with Alençon and his envoy. At length, in August
1579, the young French prince, in disguise, suddenly appeared at
Greenwich. The queen's vanity was flattered, and though the visit was
supposed to be secret, she hardly left her young lover, whilst he, to
judge by his letters, was as badly smitten as she. But though she
promised him marriage, he had to return with little else, and as soon as
he had gone she found many good reasons for delay and hesitation.

In October 1580, a new Catholic combination forced Elizabeth's hands,
and she promised greater help to Alençon's project, whilst trying to
draw France also into open war with Spain. The combat of wits was keen
and cynical, each party trying to pledge the other and to keep free
himself. A great French embassy came to England in April 1581, to
negotiate an alliance and the queen's marriage with Alençon, who had now
re-entered Flanders and was immersed in the struggle against the
Spaniards. The discussions in England were becoming interminable, for
the French ambassadors asked hard terms, when Alençon, in June 1581,
losing patience, suddenly rushed over to England to plead his own cause
independently of his brother's envoys, whom he distrusted with good
reason. This suited Elizabeth, for it made Alençon more dependent upon
her, and again she sent her lover back full of great promises to help
him.

In August Alençon again entered Flanders, depending entirely upon
Elizabeth for support, and thenceforward he looked alone to his marriage
with her for his salvation. She was sparing, and the poor prince retired
to France in September. In desperation he came to England again to press
for money and marriage in November 1581; and for months the love-making
was fast and furious. Frantic prayers, sighs, and tears on his part were
answered by kisses and promises on hers, but she gave as little money as
would serve to get rid of him. On February 1, 1582, Alençon sailed for
Holland to Elizabeth's professed grief and real joy; and thenceforward
the prince, first in Flanders as sovereign, and afterwards in France a
fugitive, supplicated and threatened his betrothed for money, and ever
more money. But Elizabeth had now taken the Netherlands revolt into her
own hands, and thenceforward her French lover was useless to her there.
So, though she still kept up the pretence of her willingness to marry
him on impossible conditions, and drove the poor creature to love-lorn
despair, Alençon had served his matrimonial purpose before he died, in
1584, and Elizabeth's courtships with a political object came to an end.
She and England were strong enough now to face her possible foes without
fear.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Love Affairs of Mary Queen of Scots


     Mary Queen of Scots was one of the most remarkable women who
     ever presided over the destinies of a nation. She was born at
     Linlithgow on December 8, 1542, a few days before the death of
     her father, James V., thus becoming a queen before she was a
     week old. Her complex personality and varied accomplishments
     have inspired many and various historians, but it has remained
     for Major Martin Hume to demonstrate the historical fatality
     of Mary's love affairs. In "The Love Affairs of Mary Queen of
     Scots," published in 1903, Major Hume gives a convincing and
     logical reason for Mary's political failure, inasmuch as it
     did not spring from her goodness or badness as a woman, but
     from a certain weakness of character. This epitome has been
     prepared by Major Hume himself.


_I.--Betrothed in her Cradle_


When in the great hall at Worms, on that ever-memorable April day in
1521, before the panic-stricken princes, Luther insolently flung at the
emperor his defiance of the mediaeval church, the crash, though all
unheard by the ears of men, shook to their base the crumbling
foundations upon which, for hundreds of years, the institutions of
Europe had rested. The sixteenth century thenceforward was a period of
disintegration and reconstruction, in which fresh lines of cleavage
between old political associates were opened, new affinities were
formed, and the international balance re-adjusted.

In the long struggle of the house of Aragon, and its successor, Charles
V., with France for the domination of Italy, the only effectual
guarantee against England's actively aiding its traditional ally, the
ruler of Spain and Flanders, against its traditional enemy, France, was
for the latter country to keep a tight hold of its alliance with
Scotland, by means of which English force might be diverted at any time.
The existence of the Scottish "back door" to England, with the ever
probable enemy behind it, had long been a check upon English power, and
a humiliation to English kings in their efforts to hold the balance
between the Continental rivals. But with the spread of Lutheranism in
Germany and Henry VIII.'s defiance of the Papacy, the Catholic powers,
drawn together in the face of common danger, found a fresh bond of union
in their orthodoxy which partially superseded old rivalries.

In these circumstances the English policy, which had aimed at the
control of Scottish foreign relations to the exclusion of French
influence, became not only desirable as it always had been, but vitally
necessary to preserve England's independence.

Henry VIII.'s policy towards Scotland had been that of _divide et
impera_, and a series of royal minorities and the greed and poverty of
the semi-independent Scottish nobles had aided him. The rout of the
Scots at Solway Moss, and the pathetic passing of the gallant James V.,
leaving his new-born daughter, Mary, as queen (December 1542), seemed at
length to place Scotland in England's power. The murder of Cardinal
Beaton, the bribery of the Douglases, and the marriage of Lennox with
Henry's sister were all subsequent moves in the same game. Mary was
betrothed in her cradle to the heir of England, and France, whose sheet
anchor for centuries had been the "auld alliance" with the Scots,
appeared to be helpless against a coalition of England and the emperor.

Thenceforward, England's main object was to keep a tight grip upon
Scotland by religion or otherwise, while at first France, and
subsequently the Catholic league, strove ceaselessly, with the help of
Mary Stuart, to free Scotland from English influence. The marriage
juggle of Elizabeth was largely inspired by her Scottish aims, and if
the fortuitous adjustment of her qualities kept England Protestant, and
France wavering for all those critical years, if she secured the
inactivity of Spain, the resistance of Protestant Holland, and the
freedom of navigation by her skilful statecraft, her rival Mary Stuart
was a hardly less powerful factor in the final triumph of England by
reason of certain defects in her character, the consequences of which
are dealt with in this book.

Mary possessed a finer and nobler nature than Elizabeth; she was a woman
of higher courage and greater conviction, more generous, magnanimous,
and confiding, and, apart from her incomparably greater beauty and
fascination, she possessed mental endowments fully equal to those of the
English queen. But, whilst caution and love of mastery in Elizabeth
always saved her from her weakness at the critical moment, Mary Stuart
possessed no such safeguards, and was periodically swept along
helplessly by the irresistible rush of her amorous passion.

French intrigue and money, aided by the queen-regent of Scotland, Mary
of Guise, succeeded, after Henry's death and Somerset's invasion of
Scotland, in gaining firm hold upon Scotland, and Mary, as the betrothed
wife of the dauphin Francis, was carried to France in 1548, at the age
of six, to be reared by her cunning kinsmen of Lorraine, and made, as it
was hoped, a future powerful instrument to aid Catholic French objects
against England, and the reformation in France and elsewhere. As she
grew towards womanhood in the bravest and most amorous court in Europe,
the queen-dauphiness became a paragon of beauty, charm, accomplishments,
the theme of poets, the despair of lovers innumerable worshipping her
from afar.

The boy Francis de Valois, to whom she was affianced, was a poor,
bilious, degenerate weakling, stunted in figure, uncomely of face. He
was shy and timid, shunning active exercises, and though at the time of
his marriage (1558) he was too young to have been actively engaged in
the vices of the outwardly devout court, he appears to have been fully
alive to the desirability of his bride. Mary was precocious and
ambitious; she was surrounded by profligates, male and female, and,
though she can hardly have been in love with her young husband, she
appears to have been fully reconciled to the union.

With unsurpassed magnificence the wedding of Mary and Francis took place
in Paris, but it signified to the world much more than the wedding of a
boy and girl. So far as men could see, it meant the triumph of the papal
Guises in France, and a death-blow to Protestant hopes of ranging
Scotland on the side of the reformation.


_II.--Intrigue, Plot, and Intrigue_


Francis died after sixteen months reign, and Mary Stuart and her Guisan
uncles, hated jealously by the queen-mother, Catharine de Medici, and by
the reforming Bourbons, fell, for a time, into the background. Mary can
hardly have loved her puny boy husband, but she nursed him night and day
in his long sickness and his death so affected her that "she would not
receive any consolation, but, brooding over her disasters with constant
tears and passionate, doleful lamentations, she universally inspired
deep pity." She had, indeed, lost much besides her royal husband; and in
a poem written by her afterwards, the waste of her youth in widowhood,
the loss of her great position as Queen of France, and her powerlessness
any longer to enforce her rule in Scotland by French power, are the main
burden of her complaints against Providence, not pity for the husband
she had lost.

The Guises were loath to surrender power without a struggle, and as soon
as Francis died they sought to sell their niece in marriage again. Their
first idea was for her to marry her child-brother-in-law, the new King
Charles IX., but Catharine de Medici at once stopped that plan, though
the boy himself was anxious for it and Mary was not averse. That
failing, Cardinal Lorraine turned to the heir of Spain, Don Carlos, as a
husband for her. This would have been a death-blow to Elizabeth, and
Philip feigned to listen to it; but all the strength and cunning of
Huguenots and Protestants, joined by those of Catharine and Elizabeth,
were brought into play against this threatening move, and Mary went to
Scotland with a sinking, sad, and angry heart in 1561, fearing her
uncouth subjects, foreign to her now, vexed with the Protestant party
for standing in the way of her ambitious marriage, and determined to
oppose Elizabeth to the utmost in her designs against the independence
of Scotland.

With these views, gay and winsome though she was, it was not long before
Mary was at issue with her dour Protestant subjects and their spokesman,
John Knox. It was hoped by her brother, James Stuart (Murray), and
Secretary Lethington that a _modus vivendi_ might be found by persuading
Elizabeth to secure to Mary the English succession in case she herself
died childless, on the undertaking of Mary that her marriage and policy
should be dictated by England; but it was not Elizabeth's plan to pledge
the future of England, and her nimble evasiveness drove the Scottish
statesmen to despair.

Brawls and bitterness grew in Mary's court around the Catholicism of the
queen, and English money and intrigue were freely lavished to set
Scotland by the ears. Half the nobles were disaffected, and Murray and
Lethington, having failed to secure Scottish interests by moderate
counsels and the conciliation of Elizabeth, were forced to take a strong
course. Of foreign suitors Mary had many, some promoted by the
Protestants, some by the Pope and the Guises, while the Catholics of
England were secretly intriguing to force Elizabeth's hand by arranging
Mary's marriage with young Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, eldest son of
Margaret, Countess of Lennox, niece of Henry VIII., who lived at
Elizabeth's court. Cecil's spies were everywhere, and the plot was soon
known and stopped by Elizabeth, violently angry with her kinswoman for
listening to such a scheme.

But Murray and Lethington, in desperation, were aiming at higher game
even than this. They were Protestant, they had tried their best to win
Elizabeth's recognition; but they were Scotsmen first, and if their
country was to be independent it must have a great ally behind it.
France was out of the question while the Guises were in the shade and
Catharine was queen-mother. So the ministers of Mary turned their eyes
to the Protestant heir of the Catholic king. Elizabeth soon heard of
this, too, and suddenly pretended to be in favour of the Darnley match
for Mary, while she developed the most cordial friendship for Mary
herself; for the Guises had again become paramount in France, and
Elizabeth could not afford to flout all the Catholic interests at once.

That danger soon passed, for the Huguenots flew to arms, and Guise was
murdered, Mary losing thus her principal prop abroad. And Lethington now
pushed vigorously what seemed to be Scotland's only chance of
safety--the marriage of Mary with the semi-idiot heir of Spain.

The English Catholics were drawn into the plot. "Only let Mary marry the
heir of Spain, and we will salute her as our leader," said they. But
Elizabeth soon gained wind of it, as usual, and was ready with her
antidote--a most extraordinary one--the proposal that Mary should wed
her own lover, Lord Robert Dudley, with the assurance of the English
succession after Elizabeth's death without issue. It was a mere feint,
of course, but it divided Scotland, and unsettled Mary herself.

Meanwhile, Philip, with his leaden methods, was pondering and seeking
fresh pledges and guarantees from the English Catholics. Before his
temporising answer came Elizabeth had frightened Mary's advisers into
doubt, while she was holding the English Catholics in check by dangling
Darnley and Dudley before Mary's eyes, and swearing deadly vengeance if
she married the Spaniard.

Elizabeth's first aim was to embroil Mary's prospects by discrediting
her in the eyes of foreign powers. To this end was directed the offer
alternately of Dudley and Darnley as a husband, and Elizabeth's pretence
of shocked reprobation of Mary in connection with Chastelard's escapade.
It must be confessed that Mary's imprudence aided Elizabeth's object,
and the sour bigotry of Knox, which looked upon all gaiety as a sin,
served the same purpose. All this drove the unhappy queen more and more
into the arms of the Catholic party as her only means of defence.


_III.--Prudence Overcome by Passion_


The intrigue to wed Mary to the Spanish prince was met by Elizabeth
cordially taking up Lady Lennox, and her son, Darnley, who by many was
now regarded as the intended heir of England, and was held out to Mary
as an ideal husband for her. So long as she had hopes of the Spanish
prince she gave but evasive answers; but late in 1564 the cunning
diplomacy of Catharine and the falseness of Cardinal Lorraine had
diverted that danger; and Philip gave Mary to understand that the match
with his son was impossible, Mary's great hope had been founded upon
this marriage. Unless she could have a foreign Catholic husband strong
enough to defy Elizabeth she knew that she must make terms with
Elizabeth's enemies, the English Catholics, and thus bring pressure to
bear upon her by internal dissensions.

It was a dangerous game to play, for it meant conspiracy; and so long as
the Lennoxes and their effeminate, lanky son were basking in Elizabeth's
favour, the English queen held her trump card. But Lady Lennox was
intriguing and ambitious, the head of English Catholic disaffection, and
could only be held to Elizabeth's side by delusive hopes of the English
succession for her son. Lennox himself, with some misgiving, was allowed
to go to Scotland to claim his forfeited estates, and there, to
Elizabeth's anger, was received with marked respect, which made the
English queen hold Darnley and his mother more firmly than ever, and
again push forward Dudley as a suitor for Mary's hand. Anxious to get
Darnley to Scotland, not necessarily to marry him, but as a useful
instrument, Mary feigned willingness to accept Dudley; and, in face of
this, Elizabeth was induced to allow young Darnley to go to Scotland for
a short time, ostensibly on business of the family estates.

In February 1565, Darnley, aged nineteen, crossed the border, to the
dismay of the English agents in Scotland. It was soon after Mary had
received news that the Spanish match was at an end, and she was ready
for a new plan to circumvent Elizabeth. Darnley as a husband would bring
to her the support of English Catholics, and a new claim to the English
crown. So when her eyes first lit upon the fair stripling at Wemyss
Castle, she looked upon him with favour as "the properest tall man she
ever saw." He was on his best behaviour, and danced delightfully with
the queen. Up to this time Mary had played her game with self-command
and policy, but now for the first time her heart ran away with her, and
she took a false step.

To have married Darnley as part of a transaction with Elizabeth, and
with the approval of her own Protestant subjects, would have been a
master-stroke. But she fell in love with the "long lad," and could not
wait for negotiation; so she at once sent off to pray King Philip to
support her with money and men against England and the Protestants if
she married Darnley and became the tool of Spain. Philip, nothing loth,
consented, and welcomed the coming union as a Catholic alliance and a
powerful weapon against Elizabeth. Mary thus made herself the head of a
vast Catholic conspiracy looking to Spain for support, and Elizabeth was
furious both with Mary and Darnley for having apparently beaten her at
her own cunning game.

How Elizabeth sought a diversion, at first by new matrimonial schemes of
her own, has been told elsewhere, but her more effectual weapon was to
arouse the fears of Scottish Protestants, and breed dissension in Mary's
realm. "The young fool," Darnley, insolent and proud of his new
greatness, offended all the nobles, whilst Mary grew daily more
infatuated with him. They were married in July 1565, and the great
conspiracy against Elizabeth and Protestantism was complete. Already the
Scottish Protestant lords were in a panic, and after an abortive rising,
they fled before Mary's bold attack, taking refuge in England.

The queen herself led her forces, armed and mounted, with her stripling
husband by her side; but she was followed close by the shaggy, stern,
martial figure of James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell, just returned from
exile to serve her; and upon him she looked with kindling eyes as a
stouter man than the fribble she had wed. Mary had now apparently
triumphed by her Darnley marriage, but the avalanche was gathering to
crush her. She looked mainly to Spain and the Pope for help, and had all
Protestantism against her, led by Elizabeth, whose hate and fury knew no
bounds. It was a duel now of life or death between two systems and two
women, one with a heart and the other without; and, as usual, the
heartless won.

English money and skill honeycombed Scottish loyalty. Darnley, vicious,
vain, and passionate, was an easy prey to intrigue. The tools of England
whispered in his ear that his wife was too intimate with the Italian
secretary Rizzio, who had conducted the correspondence with the Catholic
powers. Darnley, who had earned his wife's contempt already, was beside
himself with jealousy, and himself led the Protestant conspirators and
friends of England, who murdered Rizzio in the queen's presence at
Holyrood (March 1566). From that hour Darnley's doom was sealed.

He had thought to be king indeed now, but Mary outwitted him; for she
recalled her exiled lords, welcomed her brother Murray, and threw
herself into the arms of Darnley's Protestant foes, the very men who had
risen in arms against the marriage. As she fled by night with Darnley
after Rizzio's murder, to betray him, she swore over Rizzio's new-made
grave that a "fatter one" than he should lie there ere long. Whether she
knew of the plot of his foes to murder her husband is not proved, but
she almost certainly did so, and welcomed the deed when it was done. She
made no pretence of love for him after Rizzio's death, and her husband
repaid her coldness by sulky loutishness and bursts of drunken violence.
Mary's conduct toward Bothwell, too, began to arouse scandal. By
November 1566, matters had reached a crisis, and Mary, at Kelso, said
that unless she was freed from Darnley she would put an end to herself.
She spoke not to deaf ears. Morton, and the rest of Rizzio's slayers and
bitter enemies, were pardoned, and the deadly bond was signed.


_IV.--Dire Infatuation_


On February 9, 1567, as the doomed consort lay sick and sorry outside
Edinburgh at the lone house of Kirk o' Field, he was, done to death by
Bothwell and the foes of the Lennoxes; and Mary Stuart's first true love
affair was ended in tragedy. But already the second was in full blast.
Bothwell had recently married; he was disliked by the Scottish nobles,
and the queen's constant association with him had already brought
discredit upon her. There had been a good political excuse for her union
with Darnley, but Bothwell could bring no support to her cause; for his
creed was doubtful, and he had no friends. Nothing, indeed, but the
infatuation of an amorous woman for a brutally strong man could have so
blinded her to her own great aims as to make her take Bothwell, the
prime mover of Darnley's murder, for her husband.

As soon as the crime was known, all fingers were pointed to Bothwell and
the queen as the murderers, and Protestants everywhere hastened to cast
obloquy upon Mary for it. But for the nobles' jealousy of Bothwell, and
the religious animus, probably Darnley's death would soon have been
forgotten or condoned; but as it was, Scotland blazed out in
denunciation of it, and though Bothwell was put upon a mock trial and
acquitted, the hate against him grew, especially when he arranged to
divorce his wife in April 1567, and, ostensibly by force, but clearly by
Mary's connivance, abducted the queen and bore her off to his castle of
Dunbar.

On her return to Edinburgh a few weeks later Mary publicly married
Bothwell--she swore afterwards against her will, but, in any case, to
the anger and disgust of her subjects. She found her new husband an
arrogant tyrant rather than her slave, and he watched her closely. The
dire infatuation of the lovelorn woman soon wore off, and again she
sighed to be free; but it was too late, for the Catholic powers stood
aloof from her now that she had married a divorced man, and all her
nobles had abandoned her. So Mary clung to Bothwell still, for he was
strong, and all Scotland cried shame upon her.

In June, Mary and her husband, fearing attack or treachery, fled from
Edinburgh Castle, which at once opened its gates to Morton and the rebel
lords. A parley was sent to Mary offering submission if she would leave
Bothwell to his fate. She indignantly refused, for she feared the lords
and hated Morton. Bothwell was strong, she thought, and he was the
father of her unborn child; be might protect her. So by Bothwell's side
she rode out at the head of the border clansmen, and met the rebel army
at Carberry Hill, hard by Edinburgh.

It was agreed that the dispute should be decided by the single combat
between Bothwell and Lindsay, but before the duel began Mary's bordermen
became disordered, and then she knew that all was lost. Kirkaldy of
Grange came from her opponents to parley with her and offer safety for
her, but not for Bothwell. Whilst they were speaking, Bothwell attempted
to murder Grange; and when Mary forbade such treachery, he lost his
nerve and began to whimper. In a moment the scales fell from Mary's
eyes. This man was but a lath painted like steel. His strength was but a
lie, and he was unworthy of her. She turned from him in contempt, and
surrendered to the lords; while Bothwell fled, and unhappy Mary saw him
no more.


_V.--Langside and After_


Cursed by crowds, who reviled her as a murderess and adulteress, Mary
was led, a captive, to her capital. By night, to save her from the fury
of the mob, she was smuggled out of Edinburgh and lodged, a prisoner, in
the island fortress of Lochleven. During her long incarceration there
the story of her wrongs and sufferings stirred the Catholics at home and
abroad in her favour, and her friends and foes were again sharply
divided according to their religious creeds. The rulers of Scotland,
too, headed by her brother Murray, were far from easy; for the Catholics
were strong, and foreign crowned heads looked black at those who kept a
sovereign in durance. So attempts were made to conciliate her by
proposing marriage with some harmless Scottish noble, conjoined with her
abdication. But her heart was high still, and she would bate no jot of
her queenship; rather would she exercise her glamour upon her gaolers
and escape to power and sovereignty again. Her fascination was
irresistible, and Murray's half-brother, young George Douglas, a mere
lad, fell a victim to her smiles. Once more Mary fell in love, and
proposed to marry the youth who had endeavoured to aid her escape.

Murray was shocked, and had his brother expelled the castle; but in
April 1568 the faithful George planned her evasion of the guard and
joyfully welcomed her on the shore of the lake. To her standard flocked
the Catholic lords, and, safe at Hamilton, Mary, again a queen, swore
vengeance upon her foes. On her way with her army to Dumbarton she met
Murray's force at Langside, near Glasgow. She had been strong at
Carberry Hill with Bothwell at her side. Here she was weak, for no man
of weight or character was with her, and as her men wavered she turned
rein and fled.

For sixty miles on bad roads she struggled on, almost without sleep, and
living on beggar's fare. With no adviser or woman near her, in her panic
and despair she took the fatal resolve and crossed the Solway into
Elizabeth's realm, trusting to the magnanimity of the woman whom she had
tried to ruin and supplant. Again her heart had deceived her. Elizabeth
had no pity for a vanquished foe, and for the rest of her miserable
life, well nigh a score of years, Mary Stuart was a prisoner. But in all
those years she never ceased to plot and plan for the overthrow of
Elizabeth and her own elevation to the Catholic throne of all Britain.

Amidst her many weapons, that of marriage and her personal fascination
were not forgotten. Twice, at least, she tried to make her love affairs
serve her political ambition. Poor, feckless Norfolk was drawn by his
vanity and ambition into her net. Love epistles, breathing eternal
devotion, passed between them, but murder was behind it all--the murder
of Elizabeth, and the subjection of England to Spain to work Mary's
vengeance on her foes, and Norfolk lost his head deservedly.

Again she dreamed of marrying the Christian champion, Don Juan of
Austria, and conquering and ruling over a Catholic England. But this
plot, too, was discovered, and Don Juan, like all the rest of Mary's
lovers, died miserably. Mary thenceforward was the centre of Spain's
great conspiracy against England's queen, but she sought the end no more
by love; for that had failed her every time she tried. She and her cause
were beaten because her heart of fire was pitted against a heart of ice,
and she lost all because she loved too much.

       *       *       *       *       *


WASHINGTON IRVING


Life of Christopher Columbus


     Washington Irving, American historian and essayist, was born
     on April 3, 1783, in New York, of a family which came
     originally from Scotland. He knew Europe well, and was equally
     at home in London, Paris, and Madrid; he held the offices, in
     1829, of Secretary to the American Embassy in London, and, in
     1842, of American Minister in Spain. He was deeply interested
     in Spanish history, and besides the "Life and Voyages of
     Christopher Columbus," he wrote "The Voyages of the Companions
     of Columbus," "The Conquest of Granada," "The Alhambra," and
     "Legends of the Conquest of Spain." He was an industrious man
     of letters, having an excellent style, wide knowledge, and
     pleasant humour. His chief work was the "Life of George
     Washington," of which we give an epitome elsewhere. Other
     writings include "A History of New York, by Diedrich
     Knickerbocker," the celebrated "Sketch Book," "Bracebridge
     Hall," "Tales of a Traveller," and a "Life of Goldsmith."
     Irving did not marry, and died on November 28, 1859, in his
     home at Sunnyside on the Hudson River, and is buried at
     Tarrytown. The "Life of Columbus" was published in 1828 and is
     now obtainable in a number of popular editions.


_The Years of Waiting_


Christopher Columbus was born in Genoa about 1435, of poor but reputable
parents. He soon evinced a passion for geographical knowledge, and an
irresistible inclination for the sea. We have but shadowy traces of his
life till he took up his abode in Lisbon about 1470. His contemporaries
describe him as tall and muscular; he was moderate and simple in diet
and apparel, eloquent, engaging, and affable. At Lisbon he married a
lady of rank, Doña Felipa. He supported his family by making maps and
charts.

Portugal was prosecuting modern discovery with great enthusiasm, seeking
a route to India by the coast of Africa; Columbus's genius conceived the
bold idea of seeking India across the Atlantic. He set it down that the
earth was a terraqueous globe, which might be travelled round. The
circumference he divided into twenty-four hours. Of these he imagined
that fifteen hours had been known to the ancients; the Portguese had
advanced the western frontier one hour more by the discovery of the
Azores and the Cape de Verde Islands; still, about eight hours remained
to be explored. This space he imagined to be occupied in great measure
by the eastern regions of Asia. A navigator, therefore, pursuing a
direct course from east to west, must arrive at Asia or discover
intervening land.

The work of Marco Polo is the key to many of the ideas of Columbus. The
territories of the Great Khan were the object of his search in all his
voyages. Much of the success of his enterprise rested on two happy
errors; the imaginary extent of Asia to the east, and the supposed
smallness of the earth. Without these errors he would hardly have
ventured into the immeasurable waste of waters of the Atlantic.

A deep religious sentiment mingled with his thoughts; he looked upon
himself as chosen from among men, and he read of his discovery as
foretold in Holy Writ. Navigation was still too imperfect for such an
undertaking; mariners rarely ventured far out of sight of land. But
knowledge was advancing, and the astrolabe, which has been modified into
the modern quadrant, was being applied to navigation. This was the one
thing wanting to free the mariner from his long bondage to the land.

Columbus now laid his great project before the King of Portugal, but
without success. Greatly disappointed, he sailed to Spain, hoping to
receive the patronage of Ferdinand and Isabella. It was many months
before he could even obtain a hearing; his means were exhausted, and he
had to contend against ridicule and scorn, but the royal audience was at
length obtained. Ferdinand assembled learned astronomers and
cosmographers to hold a conference with Columbus. They assailed him with
citations from the Bible. One objection advanced was, that should a ship
ever succeed in reaching India, she could never come back, for the
rotundity of the globe would present a mountain, up which it would be
impossible to sail. Finally, after five years, the junta condemned the
scheme as vain and impossible.

Columbus was on the point of leaving Spain, when the real grandeur of
the subject broke at last on Isabella's mind, and she resolved to
undertake the enterprise. Articles of agreement were drawn up and signed
by Ferdinand and Isabella. Columbus and his heirs were to have the
office of High Admiral in all the seas, lands, and continents he might
discover, and he was to be viceroy over the said lands and continents.
He was to have one-tenth of all profits, and contribute an eighth of the
expense of expeditions. Columbus proposed that the profits from his
discoveries should be consecrated to a crusade.


_The First Voyage_

(August, 1492--March, 1493)


Columbus set out joyfully for Palos, where the expedition was to be
fitted out. He had spent eighteen years in hopeless solicitation, amidst
poverty, neglect, and ridicule. When the nature of the expedition was
heard, the boldest seamen shrank from such a chimerical cruise, but at
last every difficulty was vanquished, and the vessels were ready for
sea. Two of them were light, half-decked caravels; the Santa Maria, on
which Columbus hoisted his flag, was completely decked. The whole number
of persons was one hundred and twenty.

Columbus set sail on August 3, 1492, steering for the Canary Islands.
From there they were wafted gently over a tranquil sea by the trade
wind, and for many days did not change a sail. The poor mariners
gradually became uneasy at the length of the voyage. The sight of small
birds, too feeble to fly far, cheered their hearts for a time, but again
their impatience rose to absolute mutiny. Then new hopes diverted them.
There was an appearance of land, and the ships altered their course and
stood all night to the south-west, but the morning light put an end to
their hopes; the fancied land proved to be an evening cloud.

Again the seamen broke forth into loud clamours, and insisted on
abandoning the voyage. Fortunately, the following day a branch with
berries on it floated by; they picked up also a small board and a carved
staff, and all murmuring was now at an end. Not an eye was closed that
night. Columbus took his station on the top of the cabin. Suddenly,
about ten o'clock, he beheld a light. At two in the morning the land was
clearly seen, and they took in sail, waiting for the dawn. The great
mystery of the ocean was revealed.

When the day dawned, Columbus landed, threw himself upon his knees,
kissed the earth, and returned thanks to God. Rising, he drew his sword,
displayed the royal standard, and took possession in the names of the
Castillian sovereigns, naming the island San Salvador. It is one of the
Bahama Islands, and still retains that name, though also called Cat
Island.

The natives thought that the ships had descended from above on their
ample wings, and that these marvellous beings were inhabitants of the
skies. They appeared to be simple and artless people, and of gentle and
friendly dispositions. As Columbus supposed that the island was at the
extremity of India, he called them Indians. He understood them to say
that a king of great wealth resided in the south. This, he concluded,
could be no other than Cipango, or Japan. He now beheld a number of
beautiful islands, green, level, and fertile; and supposed them to be
the archipelago described by Marco Polo. He was enchanted by the lovely
scenery, the singing of the birds, and the brilliantly colored fish,
though disappointed in his hopes of finding gold or spice; but the
natives continued to point to the south as the region of wealth, and
spoke of an Island called Cuba.

He set sail in search of it, and was struck with its magnitude, the
grandeur of its mountains, its fertile valleys, sweeping plains, stately
forests, and noble rivers. He explored the coast to the east end of
Cuba, supposing it the extreme point of Asia, and then descried the
mountains of Hayti to the south-east. In coasting along this island,
which he named Hispaniola, his ship was carried by a current on a
sandbank and lost. The admiral and crew took refuge in one of the
caravels. The natives, especially the cacique Guacanagari, offered him
every assistance. The Spanish mariners regarded with a wistful eye the
easy and idle existence of these Indians, who seemed to live in a golden
world without toil, and they entreated permission to remain.

This suggested to Columbus the idea of forming the germ of a future
colony. The cacique was overjoyed, and the natives helped to build a
fort, thus assisting to place on their necks the yoke of slavery. The
fortress and harbour were named La Navidad.

Columbus chose thirty-nine of those who volunteered to remain, charged
them to be circumspect and friendly with the natives, and set sail for
Spain. He encountered violent tempests, his small and crazy vessels were
little fitted for the wild storms of the Atlantic; the oldest mariners
had never known so tempestuous a winter, and their preservation seemed
miraculous. They were forced to run into Tagus for shelter. The King of
Portugal treated Columbus with the most honourable attentions. When the
weather had moderated he put to sea again, and arrived safely at Palos
on March 15, having taken not quite seven months and a half to
accomplish this most momentous of all maritime enterprises.

Columbus landed and walked in procession to the church to return thanks
to God. Bells were rung, the shops shut, and all business suspended. The
sovereigns were dazzled by this easy acquisition of a new empire. They
addressed Columbus as admiral and viceroy, and urged him to repair
immediately to court to concert plans for a second expedition. His
journey to Barcelona was like the progress of a sovereign, and his
entrance into that city has been compared to a Roman triumph. On his
approach the sovereigns rose and ordered him to seat himself in their
presence. When Columbus had given an account of his voyage, the king and
queen sank on their knees, and a _Te Deum_ was chanted by the choir of
the royal chapel. Such was the manner in which the brilliant court of
Spain celebrated this sublime event.

The whole civilised world was filled with wonder and delight, but no one
had an idea of the real importance of the discovery. The opinion of
Columbus was universally adopted that Cuba was the end of Asia; the
islands were named the West Indies, and the vast region was called the
New World.


_The Second Voyage_

(September, 1493--June, 1496)


Extraordinary excitement prevailed about the second expedition, and many
hidalgos of high rank pressed into it. They sailed from Cadiz in
September 1493; all were full of animation, anticipating a triumphant
return. When they reached La Navidad they found the fortress burnt. At
length, from some natives they heard the story of the brawls of the
colonists between themselves, and their surprise and destruction by
unfriendly Indians. Columbus fixed upon a new site for his colony, which
he named Isabella. Two small expeditions were sent inland to explore,
and returned with enthusiastic accounts of the promise of the mountains,
and Columbus sent to Spain a glowing report of the prospects of the
colony.

Soon, however, maladies made their appearance, provisions began to fail,
and murmuring prevailed among the colonists. In truth, the fate of many
of the young cavaliers, who had come out deluded by romantic dreams, was
lamentable in the extreme. Columbus arranged for the government of the
island, and set sail to explore the southern coast of Cuba, supposing it
to be the extreme end of Asia. He had to contend with almost incredible
perils, and was obliged to return. Had he continued for two or three
days longer he would have passed round the extremity of Cuba; his
illusion would have been dispelled, and a different course given to his
subsequent discoveries.

During his absence from Isabella the whole island had become a scene of
violence and discord. Margarite, the general left in charge of the
soldiers, and Friar Boyle, the apostolical vicar, formed a cabal of the
discontented, took possession of certain ships, and set sail for Spain,
to represent the disastrous state of the country, and to complain of the
tyranny of Columbus. The soldiers indulged in all kinds of excesses, and
the Indians were converted from gentle hosts into vindictive enemies.

Meanwhile, a commissioner was sent out to inquire into the distress of
the colony and the conduct of Columbus. He collected all complaints, and
returned to Spain, Columbus sailing at the same time. Never did a more
miserable crew return from a land of promise.

The vessels anchored at Cadiz, and a feeble train of wretched men
crawled forth, emaciated by diseases. Contrary to his anticipation,
Columbus was received with distinguished favour. Thus encouraged, he
proposed a further enterprise, and asked for eight ships, which were
readily promised; but it was not until May 1498, that he again set sail.


_The Third Voyage_

(May, 1498--October, 1500)


From the Cape de Verde Islands, Columbus steered to the south-west,
until he arrived at the fifth degree of north latitude. The air was like
a furnace, the mariners lost all strength and spirit, and Columbus was
induced to alter his course to the northwest. After sailing some
distance they reached a genial region with a cooling breeze and serene
and clear sky. They descried three mountains above the horizon; as they
drew nearer, they proved to be united at the base, and Columbus,
therefore, named this island La Trinidad. He coasted round Trinidad, and
landed on the mainland, but mistook it for an island. He was astonished
at the body of fresh water flowing into the Gulf of Paria, and came to
the conclusion that it must be the outpouring of a great unknown
continent stretching to the south, far beyond the equator. His supplies
were now almost exhausted, and he determined to return to Hispaniola.

He found the island in a lamentable situation. A conspiracy had been
formed against his viceroy, and the Indians, perceiving the dissensions
among the Spaniards, threw off their allegiance. After long negotiations
Columbus was forced to sign a humiliating capitulation with the rebels.
Meanwhile, every vessel that returned from the New World came freighted
with complaints against Columbus. The support of the colony was an
incessant drain upon the mother country. Was this compatible, it was
asked, with the pictures he had drawn of the wealth of the island?

Isabella herself at last began to entertain doubts about Columbus, and
the sovereigns decided to send out Don Francisco del Bobadilla to
investigate his conduct. This officer appears to have been needy,
passionate, and ambitious. He acted as if he had been sent out to
degrade the admiral, not to inquire into his conduct. He threw Columbus
into irons, and seized his arms, gold, jewels, books, and most secret
manuscripts. Columbus conducted himself with characteristic magnanimity,
and bore all indignities in silence. Bobadilla collected testimony
sufficient, as he thought, to ensure the condemnation of Columbus, and
sent him a prisoner to Spain.

The arrival of Columbus at Cadiz, in chains, produced almost as great a
sensation as his first triumphant return. A general burst of indignation
arose. The sovereigns sent orders that he should be instantly set at
liberty, and promised that Columbus should be reinstated in all his
dignities. But Ferdinand repented having invested such great powers in
any subject, and especially in a foreigner. Plausible reasons were given
for delaying his reappointment, and meanwhile Don Nicholas de Ovando was
sent out to supersede Bobadilla.


_The Fourth Voyage_

(May, 1502--November, 1504)


Columbus's thoughts were suddenly turned to a new enterprise. Vasco da
Gama had recently reached India round the Cape of Good Hope, and immense
wealth was poured by this route into Portugal. Columbus was persuaded
that the currents of the Caribbean Sea must pass between Cuba and the
land which he had discovered to the south, and that this route to India
would be more easy and direct than that of Vasco da Gama. His plan was
promptly adopted by the sovereigns, and he sailed in May 1502, on his
last and most disastrous voyage. He steered to Hispaniola, but was not
permitted to land, and then coasted along Honduras and down the Mosquito
Coast to Costa Rica. Here he found gold among the natives, and heard
rumours of Mexico. He continued beyond Cape Nombre de Dios in search for
the imaginary strait, and then gave up all attempt to find it.

Possibly he knew that another voyager, coasting from the eastward, had
reached this point. He turned westward to search for the gold-mines of
Veragua, and attempted unsuccessfully to found a settlement there. As
his vessels were no longer capable of standing the sea, he ran them
aground on Jamaica, fastened them together, and put the wreck in a state
of defence. He dispatched canoes to Hispaniola, asking Ovando to send a
ship to relieve him, but many months of suffering and difficulty elapsed
before it came.

Columbus returned to Spain in November 1504. Care and sorrow were
destined to follow him; his finances were exhausted, and he was unable,
from his infirmities, to go to court. The death of Isabella was a fatal
blow to his fortunes. Many months were passed by him in painful and
humiliating solicitation for the restitution of his high offices. At
length he saw that further hope of redress from Ferdinand was vain. His
illness increased, and he expired, with great resignation, on May 20,
1506.

Columbus was a man of great and inventive genius, and his ambition was
noble and lofty. Instead of ravaging the newly-found countries, he
sought to found regular and prosperous enterprises. He was naturally
irritable and impetuous, but, though continually outraged in his
dignity, and foiled in his plans by turbulent and worthless men, he
restrained his valiant and indignant spirit, and brought himself to
forbear and reason, and even to supplicate. His piety was genuine and
fervent, and diffused a sober dignity over his whole deportment.

He died in ignorance of the real grandeur of his discovery. What visions
of glory would have broken upon his mind could he have known that he had
indeed discovered a new continent! And how would his spirit have been
consoled, amidst the afflictions of age and the injustice of an
ungrateful king, could he have anticipated the empires which would arise
in the world he had discovered; and the nations, towns, and languages,
which were to revere and bless his name to the latest posterity!

       *       *       *       *       *


Life of George Washington


     This great historical biography was Washington Irving's
     principal work. It was founded chiefly upon George
     Washington's correspondence, which is preserved in manuscript
     in the archives of the United States Government. Irving worked
     at it intermittently for many years; and it was published in
     successive sections during the last years of his life, 1855 to
     1859, while he was living in retirement with his nieces at
     Sunnyside, on the Hudson River.


The De Wessyngton family, of the county of Durham, in feudal times,
produced many men of mark in the field and in the cloister, and at a
later period the Washingtons were intrepid supporters of the unfortunate
House of Stuart. Compromised by this allegiance, two brothers, John and
Andrew, uncles of Sir Henry Washington, the gallant defender of
Worcester, emigrated to Virginia in 1657, and purchased lands in
Westmoreland County, by the River Potomac. John, who became military
leader of the Virginians against the Indians, was great-grandfather of
the illustrious George Washington.

George, born February 22, 1732, in a homestead on Bridges Creek, was the
eldest son of Mary Ball, second wife of Augustine Washington. Two
half-brothers, Lawrence and Augustine, survived from the first marriage;
and Mary had three other sons and two daughters. George received his
first education in an "old field school-house," taught by the parish
sexton; but the chief influences of his boyhood were the morality of his
home and the military ardour of the colonists against the Spanish and
the French. Lawrence, his eldest brother, had a captaincy in the
colonial regiment which fought for England in the West Indies, in 1740,
and the boy's whole mind was turned to war.

His father died when he was eleven years old, and George was sent to
live with his married brother Augustine. Here he attended school, was
eager in the acquirement of knowledge, and became expert in all athletic
exercises. He very nearly entered on a naval career, but at his mother's
earnest entreaty renounced the project, and returning to school, studied
land-surveying.

Lawrence, his brother, having married into the Fairfax family, George
came under the notice of Lord Fairfax, owner of immense tracts of
country, who was so pleased with the lad's character and accomplishments
that he entrusted him with the task of surveying his possessions. At the
age of sixteen George Washington set out into the wilderness, and
acquitted himself so well that he was appointed public surveyor. He thus
gained an intimate knowledge, and of the ways of the Indians.

The English and French governments were at this time making conflicting
claims to the Ohio valley, and their agents were treating with the
various Indian tribes. At length the French prepared to enforce their
claim by arms, and Washington received, in 1751, a commission as
adjutant-general over a military district of Virginia. In October, 1753,
he was sent by Governor Dinwiddie on a mission to the French commander,
from which he returned in the following January; and his conduct on this
occasion, when he had to traverse great distances of unknown forest at
midwinter, and to cope with the craft of white men and savages alike,
marked him out as a youth fitted for the most important civil and
military trusts.


_Conflicts with the French_


Washington was for the first time under fire in April, 1754, when he had
been sent, as second in command of the colonial forces, to take charge
of a fort on the Ohio. He fell in with a French party of spies, whom his
small force, with Indian assistance, put to flight. His fort, named Fort
Necessity, was defended by three hundred men, but was attacked in July
by a greatly superior force of French and Indians, and Washington had to
capitulate, marching out with the honours of war.

When it was determined, the same autumn, by the Governor and the British
Secretary of State, that the colonial troops should be reduced to
independent companies, so that there should no longer be colonial
officers above the rank of captain, Washington, in accordance with the
dawning republicism of America, resigned his commission, and settling at
Mount Vernon, prepared to devote himself to agriculture. But in 1755,
General Braddock was sent out to undertake energetic operations against
the French, and Washington accepted the General's offer of a position
on his staff.

It was now that the eminent Benjamin Franklin did such great service to
the British arms by organizing transport, and listened with astonishment
to Braddock's anticipations of easy victory. The young aide-de-camp also
warned the English soldier in vain. On July 9 Braddock's force was
utterly routed by the French and Indians, and the general himself was
slain. This reverse did away with all belief, throughout the colonies,
in the power of British arms, and prepared the way for the independence
that was to follow.

On August 14 George Washington was appointed to the supreme command of
the Virginian forces, with his headquarters at Winchester, and was
occupied in the defence of a wide frontier with an insufficient force,
until the expedition against Fort Duquesne in 1758, when he planted the
British flag on its smoking ruins, and put an end to the French
domination of the Ohio.

His marriage to Mrs. Martha Custis, a young and wealthy widow, was
celebrated on January 6, 1759; he took his seat in the House of
Burgesses at Williamsburg, and established himself at Mount Vernon to
develop his estates. A large Virginia estate, in those days, was a
little empire.


_The Dawn of Independence_


The definitive treaty of peace between France and England was signed at
Fontainebleau in 1763; but the tranquility of the colonies was again
broken by an Indian insurrection, known as Pontiac's war. Washington had
no part in its suppression, but he was soon to be called again to the
defence of his country.

He was in his place in the House of Burgesses on May 29, 1765, when the
claims of Britain to tax the colony were first repudiated, and it was
declared that the General Assembly of Virginia had the exclusive right
to tax the inhabitants, and that whoever maintained the contrary should
be deemed an enemy to the colony. These resolutions were the signal for
general applause throughout the continent.

The repeal, in 1766, of the objectionable Stamp Act only postponed the
crisis, which became acute when the port of Boston was closed by
Parliament, because of the resistance of that city to the importation of
East Indian tea. A General Congress of deputies from the several
colonies was convened for September 5, 1773, at Philadelphia, in which
Washington took part, and a Federal Union of the colonies was then
established. The English commander, General Gage, struck the first blow
against popular liberties, in the engagement at Lexington, April 18,
1775, and on June 15 Washington was unanimously elected
commander-in-chief of the American forces.

Two days later was fought, outside Boston, the heroic battle of Bunker's
Hill, and on the 21st Washington set out from Philadelphia to the seat
of war, where he laid a strict siege about Boston, with a view to
forcing the British to come out. An English ship having bombarded the
American port of Falmouth, an act was passed by the General Court of
Massachusetts, encouraging the fitting out of armed vessels to defend
the coast of America, and granting letters of marque and reprisal. In
October a conference of delegates was held, under Washington's
presidency, of which Benjamin Franklin was a member, with regard to a
new organisation of the army; and a new force of twenty-two thousand was
formed, every soldier being enlisted for one year only.

Montreal had been captured by an American expedition, and Washington was
now looking forward to equal success in an expedition against Quebec. He
was further encouraged by the capture, by one of his cruisers, of a
brigantine laden with munitions of war, including a huge brass mortar.
His wife joined the camp before Boston, and the eventful year was closed
with festivities.

But the gallant attempt on Quebec, in which Montgomery fell, was
frustrated, and the siege of Boston dragged on uneventfully, until the
Americans, in March, seized Dorchester Heights, and made the town no
longer tenable. On the 17th there were in Boston Harbor seventy-eight
ships and transports casting loose for sea, and twelve thousand
soldiers, sailors and refugees, hurrying to embark. The flag of thirteen
stripes, the standard of the Union, floated above the Boston forts,
after ten tedious months of siege.

The eminent services of Washington throughout this arduous period, his
admirable management by which, in the course of a few months, an
undisciplined band of husbandmen became soldiers, and were able to expel
a brave army of veterans, commanded by the most experienced generals,
won the enthusiastic applause of the nation. A unanimous vote of thanks
was passed to him in Congress.


_Declaration of Independence_


Despatches from Canada continued to be disastrous, and the evacuation of
that country was determined on in June, 1776. The great aim of the
British was now to get possession of New York and the Hudson, and to
make them the basis of military operations. While danger was gathering
round New York, and its inhabitants were in mute suspense and fearful
anticipations, the General Congress at Philadelphia was discussing with
closed doors the greatest question ever debated in America. A resolution
was passed unanimously, on July 2, "that these United Colonies are, of
right ought to be, free and independent States."

The fourth of July is the day of national rejoicing, for on that day the
"Declaration of Independence," that solemn and sublime document, was
adopted. Tradition gives a dramatic effect to its announcement. It was
known to be under discussion, but the closed doors of Congress excluded
the populace. They awaited, in throngs, an appointed signal. In the
steeple of the state-house was a bell, bearing the portentous text from
Scripture, "Proclaim liberty throughout all the land, unto all the
inhabitants thereof." A joyous peal from that bell gave notice that the
bill had been passed. It was the knell of British domination.

Washington hailed the Declaration with joy. It was but a formal
recognition of a state of things which had long existed, but it put an
end to all those temporizing hopes of reconciliation which had clogged
the military action of the country. On July 9, he caused it to be read
at the head of each brigade of the army. "The general hopes," said he,
"that this important event will serve as a fresh incentive to every
officer and soldier, to act with fidelity and courage, as knowing that
now the peace and safety of his country depend, under God, solely on the
success of our arms; and that he is now in the service of a state
possessed of sufficient power to reward his merit, and advance him to
the highest honours of a free country." and again: "The general hopes
and trusts that every officer and man will endeavour so to live and act
as becomes a Christian soldier, defending the dearest rights and
liberties of his country."


_The Winning of Independence_


But the exultation of the patriots of New York was soon overclouded.
British warships, under Admiral Lord Howe, were in the harbour on July
12, and affairs now approached a crisis. Lord Howe came "as a mediator,
not as a destroyer," and had prepared a declaration inviting communities
as well as individuals to merit and receive pardon by a prompt return to
their duty; it was a matter of sore regret to him that his call to
loyalty had been forestalled by the Declaration of Independence.

The British force in the neighbourhood of New York, under General Howe,
brother of the Admiral, was about thirty thousand men; the Americans
were only about twenty thousand, for the most part raw and
undisciplined, and the sectional jealousies prevalent among them were
more and more a subject of uneasiness to Washington. On August 27 the
American force was defeated with great loss in the battle of Long
Island, and was withdrawn from the island by a masterly night retreat;
this led to the loss of New York and the Hudson River to the British.
Reverse followed reverse; Washington was driven by the British arms from
one point after another; many of the chief American cities were taken;
and on September 26, 1777, General Sir William Howe marched into
Philadelphia and thus occupied the capital of the confederacy. But
Washington still maintained his characteristic equanimity. "I hope," he
said, "that a little time will put our affairs in a more flourishing
condition."

This anticipation was soon to be fulfilled. General Burgoyne had been
advancing from the north with a large force of British and Hessian
troops, but was compelled by General Gates, with a superior American
force, to capitulate on October 17,1777. By this capitulation the
Americans gained a fine train of artillery, seven thousand stand of
arms, and a great quantity of clothing, tents, and military stores of
all kinds; and the surrender of Burgoyne struck dismay into the British
army on the Hudson River.

But the struggle for independence was still to continue for four years
of incessant military operations, and it was not until the surrender of
Yorktown, on October 19, 1781, by Lord Cornwallis, that Britain gave up
hope of reducing her rebel colonies. When the redoubts of Yorktown were
taken, Washington exclaimed, "The work is done, and well done!"

A general treaty of peace was signed in Paris on January 20, 1783; and
in March of that year Sir Guy Carleton informed Washington that he was
ordered to proclaim a cessation of hostilities by sea and land. On April
19, the anniversary of the battle of Lexington, thus completing the
eighth year of the war, Washington issued a general order to the army in
these terms--"The generous task for which we first flew to arms being
accomplished, the liberties of our country being fully acknowledged and
firmly secured, and the characters of those who have persevered through
every extremity of hardship, suffering, and danger, being immortalised
by the illustrious appellation of 'the patriot army,' nothing now
remains but for the actors of this mighty scene to preserve a perfect,
unvarying consistency of character through the very last act, to close
the drama with applause, and to retire from the military theatre with
the same approbation of angels and men which has crowned all their
former virtuous actions."

Writing, on June 8, to the Governors of the several States, he
said--"The great object for which I had the honour to hold an
appointment in the service of my country being accomplished, I am now
preparing to return to that domestic retirement which, it is well known,
I left with the greatest reluctance; a retirement for which I have never
ceased to sigh, through a long and painful absence, and in which, remote
from the noise and trouble of the world, I meditate to pass the
remainder of life in a state of undisturbed repose."


_The Years of Peace_


Washington returned to Mount Vernon on Christmas Eve, 1783, and busied
himself with the care of his estates. He had never ceased to be the
agriculturist; through all his campaigns he had kept himself informed of
the course of rural affairs at Mount Vernon. By means of maps on which
every field was laid down and numbered, he was enabled to give
directions for their several cultivation, and to receive accounts of
their several crops. No hurry of affairs prevented a correspondence with
his agent, and he exacted weekly reports. He now read much on
agriculture and gardening, and corresponded with the celebrated Arthur
Young, from whom he obtained seeds of all kinds, improved ploughs, plans
for laying out farmyards, and advice on various parts of rural economy.

His active day at Mount Vernon began some time before dawn. Much of his
correspondence was despatched before breakfast, which took place at
half-past seven. After breakfast he mounted his horse and rode off to
various parts of his estate; dined at half-past two; if there was no
company he would write until dark; and in the evening he read, or amused
himself with a game of whist.

The adoption of the Federal Constitution opened another epoch in the
life of Washington. Before the official forms of an election could be
carried into operation, a unanimous sentiment throughout the Union
pronounced him the nation's choice to fill the presidential chair. The
election took place, and Washington was chosen President for a term of
four years from March 4, 1788. An entry in his diary, on March 16,
says--"I bade adieu to Mount Vernon, to private life, and to domestic
felicity; and with a mind oppressed with more anxious and painful
sensations than I have words to express, set out for New York with the
best disposition to render service to my country in obedience to its
call, but with less hope of answering its expectations."

The weight and influence of his name and character were deemed all
essential to complete his work; to set the new government in motion, and
conduct it through its first perils and trials. He undertook the task,
firm in the resolve in all things to act as his conscience told him was
"right as it respected his God, his country, and himself." For he knew
no divided fidelity, no separate obligation; his most sacred duty to
himself was his highest duty to his country and his God.

His death took place on December 14, 1799, at Mount Vernon.

The character of Washington may want some of the poetical elements which
dazzle and delight the multitude, but it possessed fewer inequalities
and a rarer union of virtues than perhaps ever fell to the lot of one
man. Prudence, firmness, sagacity, moderation, an overruling judgement,
an immovable justice, courage that never faltered, patience that never
wearied, truth that disdained all artifice, magnanimity without alloy.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOSEPHUS


Autobiography


     Flavius Josephus was born in Jerusalem in 37 A.D. His father,
     Matthias, was a priest, and his mother belonged to the
     Asmonean princely family. So distinguished was he as a student
     that, at the age of twenty-six, he was chosen delegate to
     Nero. When the critical juncture arose for his nation, through
     the rebellion excited by the cruelties of Gessius Florus, the
     Roman procurator, Josephus was appointed governor of Galilee
     The insurrection proved fatal, for Vespasian by his invasion
     rendered resistance hopeless. Subsequently he lived in Rome,
     and the date of his death is unknown. The works of this writer
     are monumental. He wrote his vivid "Wars of the Jews" in both
     Hebrew and Greek. His "Antiquities of the Jews" traces the
     whole history of the race down to the outbreak of the great
     war. Scaliger, one of the acutest of mediaeval critics,
     declares that in his writings on the affairs of the Jews, and
     even on those of foreign nations, Josephus deserves more
     credit than all the Greek and Roman writers put together. His
     fidelity and veracity are as universally admitted as his
     direct and lucid style is generally admired. His account of
     his own life and career is a masterpiece in this category of
     literature, for it is written with blended modesty and
     naïveté. In many passages of this "Autobiography" he does not
     hesitate to assume great credit for his own courage, probity,
     and skill, but in each case the justification is manifest, for
     he constantly refers to the tortuous and treacherous
     machinations of his virulent enemies. The "Autobiography" is
     from beginning to end a thrilling and wonderful romance of
     real life, for the hairbreadth escapes of this extraordinary
     man are among the most singular recitals in the whole world of
     adventure. The whole story is unique, as was the noble
     individuality of the man himself.


_I.--Priest of the Blood-Royal_


The family from which I, Flavius Josephus, am derived is not an ignoble
one, but hath descended all along from the priests. I am not only sprung
from a sacerdotal family in general, but from the first of the
twenty-four courses of the Jewish priests, and I am of the chief family
of that course also. With us, to be of the sacerdotal dignity is an
indication of the splendour of a family. But, further, by my mother I am
of the royal blood; for the children of Asmonaeus, from whom that family
was derived, had both the office of the high-priesthood and the dignity
of a king for a long time together.

My father Matthias, to whom I was born in the first year of the reign of
Gaius Caesar, was not only eminent in Jerusalem, our greatest city, on
account of his nobility, but had a higher commendation on account of his
righteousness. I was brought up with my brother Matthias. As a child I
gained a great reputation through my love for learning, and, when I was
about fourteen years of age, was frequently asked by the high-priests
and chief men of the city my opinion about the accurate understanding of
points of the law.

In my twenty-sixth year I took a voyage to Rome. My object was to plead
before Caesar the cause of certain excellent priests whom Felix, then
procurator of Judaea, had put in bonds on a trivial pretext. I was
desirous to procure deliverance for them, not only because they were of
my own friends, but because I heard that they sustained their piety
towards God under their afflictions, and that they simply subsisted on
figs and nuts.

Our voyage was an adventurous one, for the ship was wrecked in the
Adriatic Sea, and we that were in it, being about six hundred in number,
swam all night for our lives. I and about eighty others were saved by a
ship of Cyrene. When I had thus escaped, and was come to Puteoli, I
became acquainted with an actor named Alityrus, much beloved by Nero,
but a Jew by birth. Through his interest I became known to Poppaea,
Caesar's wife, and having, through her, procured the liberty of the
priests, besides receiving from her many presents, I returned to
Jerusalem.

Now I perceived that many innovations were begun, and that many were
cherishing hopes of a revolt from the Romans.


_II.--The Prelude to the Great Crisis_


So I retired to the inner court of the Temple. Yet I went out of the
Temple again, after Menahem and the chief members of the band of robbers
were put to death, and abode among the high-priests and the chief of the
Pharisees. But no small fear seized upon us when we saw the people in
arms, while we were not able to restrain the seditious. We hoped that
Gessius Floras would speedily arrive with great forces. But on his
arrival he was defeated with great loss.

The disgrace that fell upon him became the calamity of our whole nation,
for it elevated the hopes of conquering the Romans on the part of those
who desired war. But another cause of the revolt arose in Syria from the
cruel treatment of the Jews in many cities, where they showed not the
least disposition towards rebellion. About 13,000 were treacherously
slain in Scythopolis, and the Jews in Damascus underwent many miseries;
but of these events accounts are given in the books of the Jewish War.

I was now sent, together with two other priests, Joazar and Judas, by
the principal men of Jerusalem, to Galilee, to persuade the ill men
there to lay down their arms, and to teach them that it were better for
us all to wait to see what the Romans would do. I came into Galilee, and
found the people of Sepphoris in no small agony about their country, by
reason that the Galileans had resolved to plunder it, because of their
friendship with the Romans, and because they had made a league with
Cestius Gallus, the president of Syria. But I quieted their fears. Yet I
found the people of Tiberias ready to take arms, for there were three
factions in that city.

The first faction, with Julius Capellus for the head, was composed of
men of worth and gravity, and advised the city to continue in allegiance
to the Romans; the second faction, consisting of the most ignoble
persons, was determined for war. But as for Justus, the head of the
third faction, though he pretended to be doubtful about war, yet he was
really desirous of innovation, as supposing that he should gain power by
the change of affairs.

By his harangues Justus inflamed the minds of many of the people,
persuading them to take arms, and then he went out and set fire to the
villages that belonged to Gadara and Hippos, on the border of Tiberias,
and of the region of Scythopolis.

Gamala persevered in its allegiance to the Romans, under the persuasion
of Philip, the son of Jacimus, who was governor of the city under King
Agrippa. He reminded the people of the benefits the king had bestowed on
them, and pointed out how powerful the Romans were, and thus he
restrained the zeal of the citizens.

Now, as soon as I was come into Galilee, and had ascertained the state
of affairs, I wrote to the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem asking for their
direction. They replied that I should remain there; and that, if my
fellow-delegates were willing, I should join with them in the care of
Galilee. But these my colleagues, having gotten great riches from those
tithes which as priests were their dues, and were given to them,
determined to return to their own country. Yet when I desired them to
stay to settle public affairs, they complied, and we removed from
Sepphoris to Bethmanus, a village four furlongs from Tiberias, whence I
sent messengers to the senate of that city, asking that the principal
men should come to me.


_III.--Governor of Galilee_


When the chief men of Tiberias were come, I told them I was sent as a
legate from the people at Jerusalem, in order to persuade them to
destroy that house which Herod the tetrarch had built in Tiberias, and
which, contrary to our laws, contained the figures of living creatures.
I desired that they would give us leave to do so; but for a good while
they were unwilling, only being overcome by long persuasion. Then Jesus,
son of Sapphias, one of the leaders of sedition, anticipated us and set
the palace on fire, thinking that as some of the roofs were covered with
gold, he should gain much money thereby. These incendiaries also
plundered much furniture; then they slew all the Greeks who dwelt in
Tiberias, and as many others as were their enemies.

When I understood this state of things, I was greatly provoked, and went
down to Tiberias and took care of all the royal furniture that could be
recovered from such as had plundered it. Next I committed it to ten of
the chief senators. From thence I and my fellow-delegates went to
Gischala to John, to learn his designs, and soon discovered that he was
for innovations, for he wished me to give him authority to carry off the
corn that belonged to Caesar, and to lay it in the villages of Upper
Galilee. Though I refused, he corrupted my colleagues with money, and so
I, being out-voted, held my tongue. By various other cunning
contrivances which I could not prevent, John gained vast sums of money.
But when I had dismissed my fellow-delegates I took care to have arms
provided and the cities fortified. My first care was to keep Galilee in
peace, so I made friends of seventy of the principal men, and took them
on my journeys as companions, and set them to judge causes.

I was now about thirty years of age, in which time of life it is
difficult to escape from the calumnies of the envious. Yet did I
preserve every woman free from injury; I despised and refused presents;
nor would I take the tithes due to me as a priest. When I twice took
Sepphoris by force, and Tiberias four times, and Gadara once, and when I
had subdued and captured John, who had laid treacherous snares for me, I
did not punish with death either him or others. And on this account I
suppose it was that God, Who is never unacquainted with those that do as
they ought to do, delivered me still out of the hands of my enemies, and
afterwards preserved me when I fell into many perils.

At this time, when my abode was at Cana, a village of Galilee, John came
to Tiberias and stirred a revolt against me, so that my life was in
danger. I escaped only by fleeing down the lake in a ship to Taricheae,
whence I proceeded to Sepphoris. John returned to Gischala, where he
continued to cultivate bitter hatred against me. Through the
machinations of himself and Simon, a chief man in Gadara, all Galilee
was filled with rumours that their country was about to be betrayed by
me to the Romans.

Hereby I again incurred extreme peril, but I took a bold course. Dressed
in a black garment, with my sword hung at my neck, I went to face, in
the hippodrome, a multitude of the citizens of Taricheae, and addressed
them in such terms that, though some wished to kill me, these were
overcome by the rest.

Although the multitude returned to their homes, yet the robbers and
other authors of the tumult, afraid lest I might punish them, took six
hundred armed men and came to burn the house where I abode. Thinking it
ignoble to run away, I resolved to expose myself to danger; so I shut
myself up in an upper room, and asked that one of them should be sent up
to me, by whom I would send out to them money from the spoils I had
taken.

When they had sent in one of their boldest, I had him whipped severely,
and commanded one of his hands to be cut off and hung about his neck. In
this case he was put out, and those who had sent him, affrighted at the
supposition that I had more armed men about me than they had,
immediately fled.

I dealt in like manner with Clitus, a young man of Tiberias, who was the
author of a fresh sedition in that city. Since I thought it not
agreeable to piety to put one of my own people to death, I called to
Clitus himself, and said to him, "Since thou deservest to lose both thy
hands for thine ingratitude to me, be thou thine own executioner, lest
by refusal to do so thou undergo a worse punishment."

When he earnestly begged me to spare one of his hands, it was with
difficulty that I granted it. So, in order to prevent the loss of both
his hands, he willingly took his sword and cut off his own left hand;
and this put an end to the sedition.


_IV.--The Failure of His Foes_


The people of Gamala wrote to me, asking that I would send them an armed
force, and also workmen to raise up the walls of their city, and I
acceded to each of their requests. I also built walls about many
villages and cities in Upper and Lower Galilee, besides laying up in
them much corn. But the hatred of John of Gischala grew more violent by
reason of my prosperity. He sent his brother Simon to Jerusalem with a
hundred armed men to induce the Sanhedrin to deprive me of my
commission; but this was not an easy thing to do, for Ananus, one of the
chief priests, demonstrated that many of the people bore witness that I
had acted like an excellent general.

Yet Ananus and some of his friends, corrupted by bribes, secretly agreed
to expel me out of Galilee, without making the rest of the citizens
acquainted with what they were doing. Accordingly they sent four men of
distinction down to Galilee to seek to supersede me in ruling the
province.

These were to ask the people of Galilee what was their reason of their
love to me. If the people alleged that it was because I was born at
Jerusalem, that I was versed in the law, and that I was a priest, then
they were to reply that they also were natives of Jerusalem, that they
understood the law, and that two of them were priests. To Jonathan and
his companion were given 40,000 drachmae out of the public money, and a
large band of men was equipped with arms and money to accompany them.

But wonderful was what I saw in a dream that very night. It seemed to me
that a certain person stood by me, and said, "O Josephus, put away all
fear, for what now afflicts thee will render thee most happy, and thou
shalt overcome all difficulties! Be not cast down, but remember that
thou art to fight the Romans."

When I had seen this vision I arose, intending to go down to the plain
to meet a great multitude who, I knew, would be assembled, for my
friends, on my refusal had dispatched messengers all around to inform
the people of Galilee of my purpose to depart. And when the great
assembly of men, with their wives and children, saw me, they fell on
their faces weeping, and besought me not to leave them to be exposed to
their enemies.

When I heard this, and saw what sorrow affected the people, I was moved
with compassion, and promised that I would stay with them, thinking it
became me to undergo manifold hazards for the sake of so great a
multitude. So I ordered that five thousand of them should come to me
armed, and that the rest should depart to their own homes.

It was not long before Vespasian landed at Tyre, and King Agrippa with
him. How he then came into Galilee, and how he fought his first battle
with me near Taricheae, and how, after the capture of Jotapata, I was
taken alive and bound, and how I was afterward loosed, with all that was
done by me in the Jewish war, and during the siege of Jerusalem, I have
accurately related in the books concerning the "Wars of the Jews."

When the siege of Jotapata was over, and I was among the Romans, I was
kept with much care, by means of the great respect that Vespasian showed
me. After being freed from my bonds I went to Alexandria, where I
married. From thence I was sent, together with Titus, to the siege of
Jerusalem, and was frequently in danger of being put to death. For the
Jews desired to get me into their power to have me punished, and the
Romans, whenever they were beaten, thought it was through my treachery.
But Titus Caesar was well acquainted with the uncertain fortune of war,
and returned no answer to the soldiers' solicitation against me.

When Titus was going away to Rome he made choice of me to sail along
with him, and paid me great respect And when we were come to Rome I had
great care taken of me by Vespasian, for he gave me an apartment in his
own house.

When Vespasian was dead, Titus kept up the same kindness which his
father had shown me, and Domitian, who succeeded, still augmented his
respects to me; nay, Domitia, the wife of Caesar, continued to show me
many kindnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART


Life of Sir Walter Scott


     John Gibson Lockhart was born in Scotland in 1794. He received
     part of his education at Glasgow, part at Oxford, and in 1816
     he became an advocate at the Scotch bar. As one of the chief
     supporters of Blackwood's Magazine, he began to exhibit that
     sharp, bitter wit which was his most salient characteristic.
     In 1820 he married the eldest daughter of Sir Walter Scott,
     and for this reason, perhaps no one has been better qualified
     to write the biography of the great novelist. Lockhart's "Life
     of Sir Walter Scott" is a biography in the best sense of the
     word--one which has been ranked even with Boswell's "Johnson."
     It reveals to the reader the inmost personality of the man
     himself, and no life from first to last could better afford
     such complete revelation. Moreover, the "Life" was a labour of
     love, Lockhart himself receiving not a fraction of its very
     considerable proceeds, but resigning them absolutely to
     Scott's creditors. Published in seven volumes in 1838, in
     every respect it is the greatest of all Lockhart's books.
     Lockhart died in 1854.


_Early Years_


Sir Walter Scott was distantly connected with ancient families both on
his father's and his mother's side. His father, Walter Scott, a Writer
to the Signet in Edinburgh, was a handsome, hospitable, shrewd and
religious man, who married, in 1758, Anne, eldest daughter of Dr. John
Rutherford, professor of medicine in Edinburgh University. The Scotts
had twelve children, of whom only five survived early youth.

The subject of this biography was born on August 15, 1771, in a house at
the head of the College Wynd. He was a healthy child, but when eighteen
months old was affected with a fever which left a permanent lameness in
the right leg. With a view to curing this weakness he was sent to live
with his paternal grandfather, at the farm house of Sandy-Knowe near
Dryburgh Abbey, in the extreme south of Berwickshire.

Here, in the country air, he became a sturdy boy, and his mind was
stored with the old Broder tales and songs. In his fourth year he was
taken to London by sea, and thence to Bath, where he remained about a
year for the sake of the waters, became acquainted with the venerable
John Home, author of "Douglas," and was introduced by his uncle, Capt.
Robert Scott, to the delights of the theatre and "As You Like It."

From his eighth year Scott lived at his father's house in George Square,
Edinburgh. His lameness and solitary habits had made him a good reader,
and he used to read aloud to his mother, Pope's translation of Homer and
Allan Ramsay's "Evergreen;" his mother had the happiest of tempers and a
good love of poetry. In the same year he was sent to the High School,
Edinburgh, under the celebrated Dr. Adam, who made him sensible of the
beauties of the Latin poets.

After his school years, the lad, who had become delicate from rapid
growth, spent half a year with an aunt, Miss Janet Scott, at Kelso. He
had now awaked to the poetry of Shakespeare and of Spenser, and had
acquired an ample and indiscriminate appetite for reading of all kinds.
To this time at Kelso he also traced his earliest feeling for the
beauties of natural objects. The love of Nature, especially when
combined with ancient ruins, or remains of our forefathers' piety or
splendour, became his insatiable passion.

He was then sent to classes in the Faculty of Arts in Edinburgh
University; and in 1785 was articled to his father and entered upon the
wilderness of law. Though he disliked the drudgery of the office, he
loved his father and was ambitious, and the allowance which he received
afforded the pleasures of the circulating library and the theatre. His
reading had now extended to the great writers in French, Spanish and
Italian literature. Distant excursions on foot or on horseback formed
his favorite amusement, undertaken for the pleasure of seeing romantic
scenery and places distinguished by historic events.

In 1790, Scott determined, in accordance with his father's wishes, to
become an advocate, and assumed the gown on July 11, 1792. His personal
appearance at this time was engaging. He had a fresh, brilliant
complexion, his eyes were clear and radiant, and the noble expanse of
his brow gave dignity to his whole aspect. His smile was always
delightful, and there was a playful intermixture of tenderness and
gravity well calculated to fix a lady's eye. His figure, except for the
blemish in one limb, was eminently handsome, and much above the usual
stature; and the whole outline was that of extraordinary vigour, without
a touch of clumsiness.


_The Poet's Education_


I do not know when his first attachment began; its object was Margaret,
daughter of Sir John and Lady Jane Stuart Belcher, of Invermay. But
after Scott had for several years nourished the dream of union with this
lady, his hopes terminated in her being married to the late Sir William
Forbes, of Pitsligo, a gentleman of the highest character, who lived to
act the part of a generous friend to his rival throughout the distresses
of 1826 and 1827.

After being admitted an advocate, Scott undertook many excursions to
various parts of Scotland, gaining that intimate knowledge of the
country, and its people and traditions, which appears in his poems and
novels. Thus, he visited Northumberland, and made a close inspection of
the battle-field of Flodden, and on another journey studied the Saxon
cathedral of Hexam. During seven successive years he made raids, as he
called them, into the wild and inaccessible district of Liddesdale,
picking up the ancient "riding ballads" preserved among the descendants
of the moss-troopers. To these rambles he owed much of the materials of
his "Minstrelsy of the Border," and here he came to know Willie Elliot,
the original of Dandie Dinmont. Another expedition, into Galloway,
carried him into the scenery of Guy Mannering. Stirlingshire, Perthshire
and Forfarshire became familiar ground to him, and the scenery of Loch
Katrine especially was associated with many a merry expedition. His
first appearance as counsel in a criminal court was at the Jedburgh
assizes, where he helped a veteran poacher and sheep-stealer to escape
through the meshes of the law.

In June, 1795, Scott was appointed one of the curators of the Advocate's
Library and became an adept in the deciphering of old manuscript. His
highlands and border raids were constantly suggesting inquiries as to
ancient local history and legend, which could nowhere else have been
pursued with equal advantage.

In the same year, a rhymed translation of Burger's "Lenore," from his
pen, was shown by him to Miss Cranstoun, afterwards Countess of
Purgstall, who was delighted and astonished at it. "Upon my word," she
wrote in a letter to a friend, "Walter Scott is going to turn out a
poet--something of a cross I think between Burns and Gray." This lady
had the ballad elegantly printed in April, 1796, and Scott thus made his
first appearance as an author. In October, this translation, together
with that of the "Wild Huntsman," also from Burger, was published
anonymously in a thin quarto by Manners and Miller, of Edinburgh. The
little volume found warm favour: its free, masculine and lively style
revealing the hand of a poet.


_Marriage_


In July, 1797, Scott set out on a tour to the English lakes, accompanied
by his brother John and Adam Fergusson, visiting Tweeddale, Carlisle,
Penrith, Ullswater and Windermere, and at length fixing their
headquarters at Gilsland, a peaceful and sequestered little watering
place.

He was riding one day with Fergusson when they met, some miles away from
home, a young lady on horseback, whose appearance instantly struck both
of them so much, that they kept her in view until they had satisfied
themselves that she was staying in Gilsland. The same evening there was
a ball, at which Scott was introduced to Charlotte Margaret Carpenter.

Without the features of a regular beauty, she was rich in personal
attractions; a fairy-like form; a clear olive complexion; large, deep
eyes of Italian brown; a profusion of silken tresses, raven-black; her
address mingling the reserve of a pretty young Englishwoman with a
certain natural archness and gaiety that suited well her French accent.
A lovelier vision, as all who remember her youth have assured me, could
hardly be imagined, and from that hour the fate of the poet was fixed.

She was the daughter of Jean Charpentier, of Lyons, a devoted royalist,
who died in the beginning of the Revolution; Madame Charpentier had died
soon after bringing her children to London; and the Marquis of Downshire
had become their guardian. Miss Charpentier was now making a summer
excursion under the care of the lady who had superintended her
education.

In an affectionate and dutiful letter Scott acquainted his mother with
his purpose of marriage, and Miss Carpenter remained at Carlisle until
her destiny was settled. The lady had a considerable private income,
amounting to about £500 a year; the difficulties presented by the
prudence and prejudices of family connections were soon overcome; and
the marriage took place in St. Mary's, Carlisle, on December 24, 1797.
Scott took his bride to a lodging in George Street, Edinburgh, the house
which he had taken not being quite ready, and the first fortnight
convinced her husband's family that she had the sterling qualities of a
wife.

Their house in South Castle Street, soon after exchanged for one in
North Castle Street, which he inhabited down to 1826, became the centre
of a highly agreeable circle; the evenings passed in a round of innocent
gaiety; and they and their friends were passionately fond of the
theatre. Perhaps nowhere else could have been formed a society on so
small a scale as that of Edinburgh at this time, including more of
vigorous intellect, varied information, elegant tastes, and real virtue,
affection and mutual confidence.

In the summer of 1798, Scott hired a cottage at Lasswade, on the Esk,
about six miles from Edinburgh, having a garden with a most beautiful
view. In this retreat they spent several happy summers, receiving the
visits of their chosen friends from the neighbouring city, and wandering
amidst some of the most romantic scenery of Scotland.


_Early Poems_


In February, 1799, a London Bookseller named Bell, brought out Scott's
version of Goethe's tragedy, "Goetz von Berlichingen of the Iron Hand,"
having purchased the copyright for twenty-five guineas. This was the
first publication that bore Scott's name. In March of that year he took
his wife to London, and met with some literary and fashionable society;
but his chief object was to examine the antiquities of the Tower and
Westminster, and to make researches among the manuscripts of the British
Museum. He found his "Goetz" favourably spoken of by the critics, but it
had not attracted general attention.

About this time Scott wrote a play entitled "House of Aspen" which,
having been read and commended by the celebrated actress, Mrs. Esten,
was put in rehearsal by Kemble for the stage. But the notion was
abandoned; and discovering the play thirty years after among his papers,
Scott sent it to the "Keepsake" of 1829.

His return to Scotland was hastened by the news of his father's death,
and his mother and sister spent the following summer and autumn in his
cottage at Lasswade. This summer produced his first serious attempt in
verse, "Glenfinlas," which was followed by the noble ballads, "Eve of
St. John," "The Grey Brother" and "Fire-King"; and it was in the course
of this autumn that he first visited Bothwell Castle, the seat of
Archibald, Lord Douglas, whose wife, and her companion, Lady Louisa
Stuart, were among his dearest friends through life.

During a visit to Kelso, before returning to Edinburgh for the winter,
Scott renewed an acquaintance with a classfellow of his boyhood, Mr.
James Ballantyne, who was now printer and editor of a weekly paper in
his native town. Scott showed him some of his poems, expressed his
wonder that his old friend did not try to get some bookseller's printing
and suggested a collection of old Border ballads. Ballantyne printed for
him a few specimens to show to the booksellers; and thus began an
experiment which changed the fortunes of both Scott and Ballantyne.

Soon after the commencement of the Winter Session, the office of
Sheriff-depute of Selkirkshire became vacant, and the Duke of Buccleuch
used his influence with Mr. Henry Dundas, afterwards Viscount Melville,
to procure it for Scott. The appointment to the Sheriff ship was made on
December 16, 1799. It brought him an annual salary of £300; the duties
of the office were far from heavy; the small pastoral territory was
largely the property of the Duke of Buccleuch; and Scott turned with
redoubled zeal to his project of editing the ballads, many of which
belong to this district. In this design he found able assistants in
Richard Heber and John Leyden. During the years 1800 and 1801, the
"Minstrelsy" formed his chief occupation.

The duties of the Sheriffship took him frequently to Ettrick Forest, and
on such occasions he took up his lodging at the little inn at
Clovenford, a favourite fishing station on the road from Edinburgh to
Selkirk. Here he was within a few miles of the values of Yarrow and
Ettrick. On one of his excursions here, penetrating beyond St Mary's
Lake, he found hospitality at the farmhouse of William Laidlaw, through
whom he came to know James Hogg, a brother poet hardly conscious of his
powers.

The first and second volumes of the "Minstrelsy" appeared in January,
1802, from the house of Cadell and Davies in the Strand, and formed
Scott's first introduction as an original writer to the English public.
Their reception greatly elated Ballantyne, the printer, who looked on
his connection with them as the most fortunate event in his life. The
great bookseller, Longman, repaired to Scotland soon after this, and
purchased the copyright of the "Minstrelsy," including the third volume;
and not long afterwards James Ballantyne set up as a printer in
Edinburgh, assisted by a liberal loan from Scott.


_Scott's Chief Poems_


The "Edinburgh Review" was begun in 1802, and Scott soon became a
contributor of critical articles for his friend Mr. Jeffrey, the elder.
His chief work was now on "Sir Tristram," a romance ascribed to Thomas
of Ercildoune; but "The Lay of the Last Minstrel" was making progress in
1803, when Scott made the acquaintance of Wordsworth and his sister,
under circumstances described by Dorothy Wordsworth in her Journal. In
the following May, he took a lease of the house of Ashestiel, with an
adjoining farm, on the southern bank of the Tweed, a few miles from
Selkirk; and in the same month "Sir Tristram" was published by Constable
of Edinburgh. Captain Robert Scott, his uncle, died in June, leaving him
the house of Rosebank near Kelso, which Scott sold for £5000.

"The Lay of the Last Minstrel" was published in the first week of 1805,
and its success at once decided that literature should form the main
business of Scott's life. Its design arose originally from the
suggestion of the lovely Countess of Dalkeith, who had heard a wild,
rude legend of Border _diablerie_, and sportively asked him to make it
the subject of a ballad. He cast about for a new variety of diction and
rhyme, and having happened to hear a recitation of Coleridge's
unpublished "Christabel" determined to adopt a similar cadence. The
division into cantos was suggested by one of his friends, after the
example of Spenser's "Faery Queen." The creation of the framework, the
conception of the ancient harper, came last of all. Thus did "The Lay of
the Last Minstrel" grow out of the "Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border."
The publishers were Longman of London, and Constable of Edinburgh, and
the author's share of profits came to £769.

It was at this time that Scott took over a third share in Ballantyne's
business, a commercial tie which bound him for twenty years. Its
influence on his literary work and his fortunes was productive of much
good and not a little evil. Meanwhile, he entered with the zest of an
active partner into many publishing schemes, and exerted himself in the
interests of many authors less fortunate than himself.

With the desire of placing his financial position on a more substantial
basis, Scott had solicited the office of Clerk of Session; and after
some difficulties, during which he visited London and was received by
the Princess of Wales, he was installed in that position on March 8,
1806, and continued to discharge its duties with exemplary regularity
for twenty-five years.

The progress of "Marmion" was further interrupted by Scott's appointment
as secretary to a Commission for the improvement of Scottish
Jurisprudence, but the poems appeared at last in February, 1808. It
received only very qualified praise from Jeffrey, but I think it may be
considered on the whole Scott's greatest poem, and its popularity was
from the very first extraordinary.

In April of the same year William Miller of Albemarle Street published
Scott's great edition of Dryden, with a biography, in eighteen volumes;
and the editor's industry and critical judgement were the subject of a
laudatory article by Hallam in the "Edinburgh Review."

Scott was now engaged in a vast multiplicity of business. He was
preparing an edition of Swift for Constable, establishing his own
partner as a publisher in Edinburgh under the title of "John Ballantyne
and Co., Booksellers," and was projecting a new periodical of sound
constitutional principles, to be known as the "Quarterly Review,"
published by Murray in London and by Ballantyne in Edinburgh. In
connection with the latter enterprise Scott and Mrs. Scott went up to
London for two months in the Spring of 1809, and enjoyed the society of
Coleridge, Canning, Croker, and Ellis. The first "Quarterly" appeared
while he was in London, and contained three articles from his pen. At
this time also he prevailed on Henry Siddons, the nephew of Kemble, to
undertake the lease and management of the Edinburgh Theatre; and
purchasing a share himself, became an acting trustee, and for many years
took a lively concern in the Edinburgh company.

Early in May, 1810, "The Lady of the Lake" came out, like her two elder
sisters, in all the majesty of quarto, at the price of two guineas, the
author receiving two thousand guineas for the copyright. The whole
country rang with the praises of the poet, and crowds set off to view
the scenery of Loch Katrine. The critics were in full harmony with one
another and with the popular voice.


_The Waverley Novels_


On returning, in 1810, from an excursion to the Islands of the western
Scottish coast, where he had been collecting impressions for "The Lord
of the Isles," Scott was searching one morning for fishing-flies in an
old desk at Ashestiel, when he came across a forgotten manuscript,
written and abandoned five years before. It contained the first two
chapters of "Waverley." He submitted it to Ballantyne, whose opinion was
on the whole against completion of the novel, and it was again laid
aside.

Although his publishing venture had begun to wear a bad aspect, Scott
was now in receipt of £1300 a year as Clerk of Session, and when the
lease of Ashestiel ran out in May, 1811, he felt justified in
purchasing, for £4000, a farm on the banks of the Tweed above Galafoot.
This farm, then known as "Garty Holes," became "Abbotsford," so called
because these lands had belonged of old to the great Abbey of Melrose;
and in his own mind Scott became henceforth the "Laird of Abbotsford."

The last days at Ashestiel were marked by a friendly interchange of
letters with Lord Byron, whose "Childe Harold" had just come out, and
with correspondence with Johanna Baillie and with Crabbe. At Whitsuntide
the family, which included two boys and two girls, moved to their new
possession, and structural alterations on the farmhouse began.

The poem "Rokeby" appeared in January, 1813. A month or two later the
crisis in the war affected credit aniversally, and many publishing
firms, including that of the Ballantynes, were brought to extremity. The
difficulty was relieved for a time by the sale of copyrights and much of
the stock to Constable, on the understanding that the publishing concern
should be wound up as soon as possible. But Scott was preparing fresh
embarrassments for himself by the purchase of another parcel of land; a
yet more acute crisis in the Ballantyne firm forced him to borrow from
the Duke of Buccleuch; and when planning out his work for the purpose of
retrieving his position he determined to complete the fragment of
"Waverley."

The offer of the post of poet-laureate was made to Scott at this time,
but holding already two lucrative offices in the gift of the Crown, he
declined the honour and suggested that it should be given to Southey,
which was accordingly done. The "Swift" in nineteen volumes, appeared in
July, 1814, and had a moderate success.

"Waverley," of which Scott was to receive half the profits, was
published by Constable in July, 1814, without the author's name, and its
great success with the public was assured from the first. None of
Scott's intimate friends ever had, or could have, the slightest doubt as
to its parentage, and when Mr. Jeffrey reviewed the book, doing justice
to its substantial merits, he was at no pains to conceal his conviction
of the authorship. With the single exception of the "Quarterly," the
critics hailed it as a work of original creative genius, one of the
masterpieces of prose fiction.

From a voyage to the Hebrides with the Commissioners of the Northern
Lighthouses, Scott returned in vigour to his desk at Abbotsford, where
he worked at "The Lord of the Isles" and "Guy Mannering." The poem
appeared in January and the novel in February, 1815. "The Lord of the
Isles" never reached the same popularity as the earlier poems had
enjoyed, but "Guy Mannering" was pronounced by acclamation to be fully
worthy of the honours of "Waverley." In March, Scott went to London with
his wife and daughter, met Byron almost daily in Murray's house, and was
presented to the Prince Regent, who was enchanted with Scott, as Scott
with him. A visit to Paris in July of the same year is commemorated in
"Paul's Letters to His Kinsfolk." Scott's reputation had as yet made
little way among the French, but the Duke of Wellington, then in Paris,
treated him with kindness and confidence, and a few eminent Frenchmen
vied with the enthusiastic Germans in their attentions to him.

"The Antiquary" came out early in 1816, and was its author's favourite
among all his novels. The "Tales of my Landlord," published by Murray
and Blackwood, appeared in December, and though anonymous was at once
recognized as Scott's. The four volumes included the "Black Dwarf" and
"Old Mortality." A month later followed a poem, "Harold the Dauntless."
The title of "Rob Roy" was suggested by Constable; and the novel was
published on the last day of 1817.

During this year the existing house of Abbotsford had been building, and
Scott had added to his estate the lands of Toftfield, at a price of
£10,000. He was then thought to be consolidating a large fortune, for
the annual profits of his novels alone had, for several years, been not
less than the cost of Toftfield.

Having been asked by the Ballantynes to contribute to the historical
department of the "Annual Register," I often had occasion now to visit
Scott in his house in Castle Street, where I usually found him working
in his "den," a small room behind the dining parlour, in company with
his dog, Maida. Besides his own huge elbow-chair, there were but two
others in the room, and one of these was reserved for his amanuensis, a
portrait of Claverhouse, over the chimneypiece, with a Highland target
on either side and broadswords and dirks disposed star-fashion round
them. A venerable cat, fat and sleek, watched the proceedings of his
toaster AND Maids with dignified equanimity.


_Abbotsford_


The house of Abbotsford was not completed, and finally rid of carpenters
and upholsterers, until Christmas, 1824; but the first time I saw it was
in 1818, and from that time onwards Scott's hospitality was extended
freely not only to the proprietors and tenants of the surrounding
district, but to a never-ending succession of visitors who came to
Abbotsford as pilgrims. In the seven or eight brilliant seasons when his
prosperity was at its height, he entertained under his roof as many
persons of distinction in rank, in politics, in art, in literature, and
in science, as the most princely nobleman of his age ever did in the
like space of time. It is not beyond the mark to add that of the eminent
foreigners who visited our Island within this period, a moiety crossed
the Channel mainly in consequence of the interest in which his writings
had invested Scotland, and that the hope of beholding the man under his
own roof was the crowning motive with half that moiety. His rural
neighbours were assembled principally at two annual festivals of sport;
one was a solemn bout of salmon fishing for the neighbouring gentry,
presided over by the Sheriff; and the other was the "Abbotsford Hunt," a
coursing field on a large scale, including, with many of the young
gentry, all Scott's personal favourites among the yeomen and farmers of
the surrounding country.

Notwithstanding all his prodigious hospitality, his double official
duties as Sheriff and Clerk of Session, the labours and anxieties in
which the ill-directed and tottering firm of Ballantyne involved him,
the keen interest which he took in every detail of the adornment of the
house and estate of Abbotsford, and finally, notwithstanding obstinate
and agonizing attacks of internal cramp which were undermining his
constitution, Scott continued to produce rapidly the wonderful series of
the Waverley Novels. "The Bride of Lammermoor," "Legend of Montrose" and
"Ivanhoe" appeared in 1819, "The Monastery," "The Abbot" and
"Kenilworth" in 1820, "The Pirate" in 1821, "The Fortunes of Nigel" in
1822, "Peveril of the Peak," "Quentin Durward" and "St. Ronan's Well" in
1823, and "Redgauntlet" in 1824. His great literary reputation was
acknowledged by a baronetcy conferred in 1820, and by the most
flattering condescensions on the part of King George IV on his visit to
Edinburgh in 1822.


_The End of All_


Scott's Diary from November, 1825, shows dear forebodings of the
collapse of the houses of Constable and Ballantyne. In a time of
universal confidence and prosperity, the banks had supported them to an
extent quite unwarranted by their assets or their trade, and as soon as
the banks began to doubt and to enquire, their fall was a foregone
conclusion. In December, Scott borrowed £10,000 on the lands of
Abbotsford, and advanced that sum to the struggling houses; on January
16, 1826, their ruin, and Scott's with them, were complete. Scott
immediately placed his whole affairs in the hands of three trustees, and
by the 26th all his creditors had agreed to a private trust to which he
mortgaged all his future literary labours.

On March 15, he left for the last time his house in Castle Street; on
April 3; "Woodstock" was sold for the creditors' behoof, realising
£8228; on May 15, Lady Scott died, after a short illness, at Abbotsford.
"I think," writes Scott in his Diary, "my heart will break. Lonely,
aged, deprived of all my family--all but poor Anne; an impoverished,
embarrassed man, deprived of the sharer of my thoughts and counsels, who
could always talk down my sense of the calamitous apprehensions which
break the heart that must bear them alone. Even her foibles were of
service to me, by giving me things to think of beyond my weary
self-reflections."

An expedition to Paris, in October, to gather materials for his "Life of
Napoleon." was a seasonable relief. On his return through London, the
King undertook that his son, Charles Scott, then at Oxford, should be
launched in the diplomatic service. The elder son, heir to the
baronetcy, was now with his regiment in Ireland.

The "Life of Buonaparte" was published in June, 1827, and secured high
praise from many, among whom was Goethe. It realised £18,000 for the
creditors, and had health been spared him, Scott must soon have freed
himself from all encumbrances. Before the close of 1829 he had published
also the "Chronicles of the Canongate," "Tales of a Grandfather," "The
Fair Maid of Perth" and "Anne of Geirstein," but he had been visited
also by several threatenings of apoplexy, and on February 15, 1830, was
prostrated by a serious attack. Recovering from this illness, Scott
resigned his office as Clerk of Session, and during the rest of the year
produced a great quantity of manuscript, including the "Letters on
Demonology and Witchcraft," and the series of "Tales of a Grandfather"
dealing with French history. April, 1831, brought with it a distinct
stroke of paralysis, yet both "Castle Dangerous" and "Count Robert of
Paris" were finished in the course of the year.

Sailing in October, in the "Barham," Sir Walter Scott visited Malta and
Naples, and came to Rome in April, 1832. In May he set out for home by
Venice, Munich and the Rhine, but his companions could hardly prevail on
him to look at the interesting objects by the way, and another serious
attack fell upon him at Nimeguen. He reached London on June 13, and on
July 7 was carried on board the steamer for Leith, and was at Abbotsford
by the 11th. Here the remains of his strength gradually declined, and
his mind was hopelessly obscured.

As I was dressing on the morning of September 17, a servant came to tell
me that his master had awoke in a state of composure and consciousness,
and wished to see me immediately. I found him entirely himself, though
in the last extreme of feebleness. "Lockhart," he said "I may have no
more than a minute to speak to you. My dear, be a good man--be
virtuous--be religious--be a good man. Nothing else will give you any
comfort when you come to lie here." He scarcely afterwards gave any sign
of consciousness, and breathed his last on September 21, in the presence
of all his children.

His funeral was unostentatious but the attendance was very great. He was
laid in the Abbey of Dryburgh, by the side of his wife, in the sepulchre
of his ancestors.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Life of Robert Burns


     John Gibson Lockhart was born, a son of the manse, at
     Cambusnethan, Lanarkshire, on July 14, 1794. Receiving his
     early education in Glasgow, he went, at sixteen, with a
     scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford. In 1816 he was called
     to the Scottish Bar; but literature occupied him more than
     law, and as early as 1819 he wrote the once popular "Peter's
     Letters to his Kinsfolk." Next year he married Scott's eldest
     daughter, Sophia. Lockhart was a leading contributor to the
     early "Blackwood," where his fine translations of Spanish
     ballads first appeared, and he edited the "Quarterly Review"
     from 1825 to 1853. He died at Abbotsford on November 25, 1854,
     and was buried at Scott's feet in Dryburgh Abbey. Lockhart's
     forte was biography, and his "Life of Scott" ranks beside
     Boswell's "Johnson." The "Life of Burns" was published first
     in Constable's "Miscellany" in 1828, when the whole impression
     was exhausted in six weeks. It passed through five editions
     before the author's death. Though many lives of Burns have
     appeared since, with details unknown to Lockhart, his
     biography is in many respects the best we possess, and is
     never likely to be superseded. Even Mr. Henley is "glad to
     agree with Lockhart." It is this book that is the subject of
     Carlyle's famous essay on Burns.


_I.--The Poet in the Making_


Robert Burns was born on January 25, 1759, in a clay cottage at Alloway,
two miles south of Ayr, and near the "auld brig o' Doon." His father,
William Burnes, or Burness--for so he spelt his name--was from
Kincardineshire. When Robert was born he had the lease of a seven-acre
croft, and had intended to establish himself as a nurseryman. He was a
man of notable character and individuality, immortalised by his son as
"the saint, the father, and the husband" of "The Cottar's Saturday
Night." "I have met with few," said Burns, "who understood men, their
manners, and their ways, equal to my father." Agnes Brown, the poet's
mother, is described as a very sagacious woman, with an inexhaustible
store of ballads and traditionary tales, upon which she nourished
Robert's infant imagination, while her husband attended to "the
weightier matters of the law."

When Burns was between six and seven, his father removed to the farm of
Mount Oliphant, two miles from the Brig o' Doon. But the soil was poor,
and the factor--afterwards pictured in "The Twa Dogs"--so harsh and
unreasonable, that the tenant was glad to quit. In 1777 he removed about
ten miles to the larger and better farm of Lochlea, in the parish of
Tarbolton. Here, after a short interval of prosperity, some trouble
arose about the conditions of the lease. The dispute involved William
Burnes in ruin, and he died broken-hearted in February, 1784.

Meanwhile, at the age of six, Robert, with his brother Gilbert, was
learning to read, write, and sum under the direction of John Murdoch, an
itinerant teacher, who has left an interesting description of his pupil.

"Gilbert always appeared to me to possess a more lively imagination,"
says Murdoch, "and to be more of the wit, than Robert. I attempted to
teach them a little church-music. Here they were left far behind by all
the rest of the school. Robert's ear, in particular, was remarkably
dull, and his voice untunable. It was long before I could get them to
distinguish one tune from another. Robert's countenance was generally
grave and expressive of a serious, contemplative, and thoughtful mind.
Gilbert's face said, 'Mirth, with thee I mean to live;' and, certainly,
if any person who knew the two boys had been asked which of them was the
more likely to court the muses, he would never have guessed that Robert
had a propensity of that kind."

When Murdoch left the district, the father himself continued to instruct
the boys; but when Robert was about thirteen he and Gilbert were sent,
"week about, during a summer quarter," to the parish school of
Dalrymple. The good man could not pay two fees, or his two boys could
not be spared at the same time from the farm!

"We lived very poorly," says the poet. "I was a dexterous ploughman for
my age; and the next eldest to me was a brother [Gilbert], who could
drive the plough very well, and help me to thrash the corn. A
novel-writer might perhaps have viewed these scenes with some
satisfaction, but so did not I." Burns's person, inured to daily toil,
and continually exposed to every variety of weather, presented, before
the usual time, every characteristic of robust and vigorous manhood. He
says himself that he never feared a competitor in any species of rural
exertion; and Gilbert, a man of uncommon bodily strength, adds that
neither he, nor any labourer he ever saw at work, was equal to him,
either in the cornfield or on the thrashing-floor.

Before his sixteenth year Burns had read a large amount of literature.
But a collection of songs, he says significantly, "was my _vade mecum_.
I pored over them, driving my cart, or walking to labour, song by song,
verse by verse; carefully noticing the true, tender, or sublime from
affectation or fustian." It was about this date that he "first committed
the sin of rhyme." The subject was a "bewitching creature," a partner in
the harvest field, and the song was that beginning "Once I loved a
bonnie lass."

After this, though much occupied with labour and love, he found leisure
occasionally to clothe the various moods of his mind in verse. It was as
early as seventeen that he wrote the stanzas which open beautifully, "I
dream'd I lay where flowers were springing," and also the ballad, "My
father was a farmer upon the Carrick border," which, years afterwards,
he used to con over with delight, because of the faithfulness with which
it recalled to him the circumstances and feelings of his opening
manhood. These are the only two of his very early productions in which
there is nothing expressly about love. The rest were composed to
celebrate the charms of those rustic beauties who followed each other in
the domain of his fancy, or shared the capacious throne between them.
The excursions of the rural lover form the theme of almost all the songs
which Burns is known to have produced about this period; and such of
these juvenile performances as have been preserved are beautiful. They
show how powerfully his boyish fancy had been affected by the old rural
minstrelsy of his own country, and how easily his native taste caught
the secret of its charm.

In 1781, despairing of farming, he went to Irvine to learn flax-dressing
with a relative. He was diligent at first, but misfortune soon overtook
him. The shop where he was engaged caught fire, and he "was left, like a
true poet, not worth a sixpence." Gilbert Burns dates a serious change
in his character and conduct from this six months' residence in the
seaport town. "He contracted," he says, "some acquaintance of a freer
manner of thinking than he had been accustomed to, whose society
prepared him for overleaping the bounds of rigid virtue which had
hitherto restrained him."

He had certainly not come unscathed out of the society of those persons
of "liberal opinions" with whom he consorted in Irvine; and he expressly
attributes to their lessons the scrape into which he fell soon after "he
put his hand to plough again." He was compelled, according to the then
all but universal custom of rural parishes in Scotland, to do penance in
church, before the congregation, in consequence of the birth of an
illegitimate child. But not the amours, or the tavern, or drudging
manual labour could keep him long from his true calling. "Rhyme," he
says, "I had given up [on going to Irvine], but meeting with Fergusson's
'Scottish Poems,' I strung anew my wildly sounding lyre with emulating
vigour." It was probably this accidental meeting with Fergusson that in
a great measure finally determined the Scottish character of his poetry.


_II.--The Loves of a Peasant Poet_


Just before their father's death, Robert and Gilbert took the cold and
ungrateful farm of Mossgiel, in the parish of Mauchline, to which the
family now removed. The four years of Burns's connection with this place
were the most important of his life. It was then that his genius
developed its highest energies; on the works produced in these years his
fame was first established, and must ever continue mainly to rest; it
was then also that his personal character came out in all its brightest
lights, and in all but its darkest shadows; and indeed from the
commencement of this period the history of the man may be traced, step
by step, in his own immortal writings.

Burns now began to know that Nature had meant him for a poet; and
diligently, though as yet in secret, he laboured in what he felt to be
his destined vocation. He was never more productive than at this time,
when he wrote such skits on the kirk and its associates as "The Twa
Herds" (pastors), "Holy Willie's Prayer," "The Holy Fair," and "The
Ordination." "Hallowe'en," a descriptive poem, perhaps even more
exquisitely wrought than "The Holy Fair," also belongs to the Mossgiel
period, as does an even more notable effort.

Burns had often remarked to his brother that there was something
peculiarly venerable in the phrase, "Let us worship God," used by a
decent, sober head of a family introducing family worship. To this
sentiment we are indebted for "The Cottar's Saturday Night," the hint of
the plan and title of which were taken from Fergusson's "Farmer's
Ingle." It is, perhaps, of all Burns's pieces, the one whose exclusion
from the collection, were such a thing possible nowadays, would be the
most injurious, if not to the genius, at least to the character of the
man. In spite of many feeble lines and some heavy stanzas, it appears to
me that even his genius would suffer more in estimation by being
contemplated in the absence of this poem than of any other single
performance he has left us. Loftier flights he certainly has made, but
in these he remained but a short while on the wing, and effort is too
often perceptible; here the motion is easy, gentle, placidly undulating.

Burns's art had now reached its climax; but it is time to revert more
particularly to his personal history. In this his loves very nearly
occupy the chief place. That they were many, his songs prove; for in
those days he wrote no love-songs on imaginary heroines. "Mary Morison,"
"Behind yon hills where Lugar flows," and "On Cessnock banks there lives
a lass," belong to this date; and there are three or four inspired by
Mary Campbell--"Highland Mary"--the object of by far the deepest passion
Burns ever knew, a passion which he has immortalised in the noblest of
his elegiacs, "To Mary in Heaven."

Farming had, of course, to engage his attention as well as love-making,
but he was less successful in the one than in the other. The first year
of Mossgiel, from buying bad seed, the second from a late harvest, he
lost half his crops. In these circumstances, he thought of proceeding to
the West Indies. Presently he had further cause for contemplating an
escape from his native land. Among his "flames" was one Jean Armour, the
daughter of a mason in Mauchline, where she was the reigning toast. Jean
found herself "as ladies wish to be that love their lords." Burns's
worldly circumstances were in a most miserable state when he was
informed of her condition, and he was staggered. He saw nothing for it
but to fly the country at once.

Meanwhile, meeting Jean, he yielded to her tears, and gave her a written
acknowledgment of marriage, valid according to Scottish law. Her
father's wrath was not appeased thereby. Burns, confessing himself
unequal to the support of a family, proposed to go immediately to
Jamaica in search of better fortunes. He offered, if this were rejected,
to abandon his farm, already a hopeless concern, and earn at least bread
for his wife and children as a day labourer at home. But nothing would
satisfy Armour, who, in his indignation, made his daughter destroy the
written evidence of her "marriage."


_III.--Burns at His Zenith_


Such was his poverty that he could not satisfy the parish officers; and
the only alternative that presented itself to him was America or a gaol.
A situation was obtained for him in Jamaica, but he had no money to pay
his passage. It occurred to him that the money might be raised by
publishing his poems; and a first edition, printed at Kilmarnock in
1786, brought him nearly £20, out of which he paid for a steerage
passage from the Clyde. "My chest was on the road to Greenock," he
tells; "I had composed the last song I should ever measure in Caledonia,
'The gloomy night is gathering fast,' when a letter from Dr. Blacklock
to a friend of mine overthrew all my schemes, by opening new prospects
to my poetic ambition."

Blacklock, the blind divine upon whom Johnson "looked with reverence,"
had read the newly published poems, and it was his praise of them that
directly prevented Burns from expatriating himself. "His opinion that I
would meet with encouragement in Edinburgh fired me so much that away I
posted for that city, without a single acquaintance, or a single letter
of introduction. The baneful star that had so long shed its blasting
influence in my zenith for once made a revolution to the nadir." In
Edinburgh, which Burns reached in November, 1786, he was introduced by
Blacklock to all the _literati_, and within a fortnight he was writing
to a friend: "I am in a fair way of becoming as eminent as Thomas à
Kempis or John Bunyan; and you may expect to see my birthday inscribed
among the wonderful events in the Poor Robin and Aberdeen Almanacks,
along with the Black Monday and the Battle of Bothwell Bridge."

But he bore his honours in a manner worthy of himself. "The attentions
he received," says Dugald Stewart, "from all ranks and descriptions of
persons were such as would have turned any head but his own. I cannot
say that I could perceive any unfavourable effect which they left on his
mind." Scott, then a lad of fifteen, met him, and wrote a vivid
description of his appearance:

"His person was strong and robust; his manners rustic, not clownish; a
sort of dignified plainness and simplicity, which received part of its
effect, perhaps, from one's knowledge of his extraordinary talents. His
features are represented in Mr. Nasmyth's picture, but to me it conveys
the idea that they are diminished as if seen in perspective. I think his
countenance was more massive than it looks in any of the portraits. I
would have taken the poet, had I not known what he was, for a very
sagacious country farmer of the old Scotch school--_i.e._, none of your
modern agriculturists, who keep labourers for their drudgery, but the
_douce gudeman_ who held his own plough. There was a strong expression
of sense and shrewdness in all his lineaments; the eye alone, I think,
indicated the poetical character and temperament. It was large, and of a
dark cast, which glowed (I say literally _glowed_) when he spoke with
feeling or interest. I never saw such another eye in a human head,
though I have seen the most distinguished men of my time. His
conversation expressed perfect self-confidence, without the slightest
presumption. He was like a farmer dressed in his best to dine with the
laird. I do not speak in _malam partem_ when I say I never saw a man in
company with his superiors in station and information more perfectly
free from either the reality or the affectation of embarrassment. I was
told that his address to females was extremely deferential, and always
with a turn either to the pathetic or humorous, which engaged their
attention particularly. I have heard the late Duchess of Gordon remark
this."

It needs no effort of imagination to conceive what the sensations of an
isolated set of scholars, almost all either clergymen or professors,
must have been in the presence of this big-boned, brawny stranger, with
his great flashing eyes, who had forced his way among them from the
plough-tail at a single stride; and it will always be a reflection in
their honour that they suffered no pedantic prejudices to interfere with
their reception of the poet.

Shortly after his arrival he arranged with Creech, the chief bookseller
in Edinburgh, to undertake a second edition of his poems. This was
published in March, 1787, the subscribers numbering over 1,500. Out of
money thus derived, he provided a tombstone for the neglected grave of
Robert Fergusson, his "elder brother in the muses," in the Canongate
churchyard. Then he decided to visit some of the classic scenes of
Scottish history and romance. He had as yet seen but a small part of his
own country, and this by no means among the most interesting, until,
indeed, his own poetry made it equal, on that score, to any other.
Various tours were, in fact, undertaken, the chief being, however, in
the Border district and in the Highlands. Usually he returned to
Edinburgh, partly to be near his jovial intimates, and partly because,
after the excitement attending his first appearance in the capital, he
found himself incapable of settling down contentedly in the humble
circle at Mossgiel.


_IV.--The Clarinda Romance_


During the winter of 1787--1788, he had a little romance with Mrs.
McLehose, the beautiful widow to whom he addressed the song, "Clarinda,
mistress of my soul," and a series of letters which present more
instances of bad taste, bombastic language, and fulsome sentiment than
could be produced from all his writings besides. It was the same lady
who inspired the lines which furnished Byron with a motto, and Scott
declared to be "worth a thousand romances ":

    Had we never loved so kindly
    Had we never loved sae blindly,
    Never met--or never parted,
    We had ne'er been broken-hearted.

At this time the publication of Johnson's "Scots Musical Museum" was
going on in Edinburgh; and Burns, being enlisted as a contributor,
furnished many of his best songs to that work. From his youth upwards he
had been an enthusiastic lover of the old minstrelsy and music of his
country; but he now studied both subjects with better opportunities and
appliances than he could have commanded previously; and it is from this
time that we must date his ambition to transmit his own poetry to
posterity, in eternal association with those exquisite airs which had
hitherto, in far too many instances, been married to verses that did not
deserve to be immortal. Later, beginning in 1792, he wrote about sixty
songs for George Thomson's collection, many of which, like "Auld Lang
Syne" and "Scots Wha Hae," are in the front rank of popularity. The
letters he addressed to Thomson are full of interesting detail of
various kinds. In one he writes:

"Until I am complete master of a tune in my own singing, such as it is,
I can never compose for it. My way is this. I consider the poetic
sentiment correspondent to my idea of the musical expression--then
choose my theme--compose one stanza. When that is composed, which is
generally the most difficult part of the business, I walk out, sit down
now and then, look out for objects in Nature round me that are in unison
or harmony with the cogitations of my fancy and workings of my bosom,
humming every now and then the air, with the verses I have framed. When
I feel my muse beginning to jade, I retire to the solitary fireside of
my study, and there commit my effusions to paper; swinging at intervals
on the hind legs of my elbow-chair, by way of calling forth my own
critical strictures, as my pen goes. Seriously this, at home, is almost
invariably my way."

But to return. During his second winter in Edinburgh, Burns met with a
hackney coach accident which kept him to the house for six weeks. While
in this state he learned from Mauchline that his intimacy with Jean
Armour had again exposed her to the reproaches of her family. The father
sternly turned her out of doors, and Burns had to arrange about a
shelter for her and his children in a friend's house. In the meantime,
through the influence of some sympathisers, he had been appointed an
officer of excise. "I have chosen this," he wrote, "after mature
deliberation. It is immediate bread, and, though poor in comparison of
the last eighteen months of my existence, 'tis luxury in comparison of
all my preceding life." However, when he settled finally with Creech
about his poems, he found himself with between £500 and £600; and he
retained his excise commission as a _dernier ressort_, to be used only
if a reverse of fortune rendered it necessary.

He decided now to exchange Mossgiel for Ellisland farm, about six miles
from Dumfries. As soon as he was able to leave Edinburgh, he had hurried
to Mossgiel and gone through a justice-of-peace marriage with Jean
Armour. Burns, with all his faults, was an honest and a high-spirited
man, and he loved the mother of his children. Had he hesitated to make
her his wife, he must have sunk into the callousness of a ruffian, or
that misery of miseries, the remorse of a poet.

Some months later he writes that his marriage "was not, perhaps, in
consequence of the attachment of romance, but I have no cause to repent
it. If I have not got polite tattle, modish manners, and fashionable
dress, I am not sickened and disgusted with the multiform curse of
boarding-school affectation; and I have got the handsomest figure, the
sweetest temper, the soundest constitution, and the kindest heart in the
country." It was during the honeymoon, as he calls it, that he wrote the
beautiful "O a' the airts the wind can blaw." He used to say that the
happiest period of his life was the first winter at Ellisland, with wife
and children around him. It was then that he wrote, among other songs,
"John Anderson, my Jo," "Tarn Glen," "My heart's in the Highlands," "Go
fetch to me a pint of wine," and "Willie brewed a peck o' maut."

But the "golden days" of Ellisland were short. Burns's farming
speculations once more failed, and he had to take up his excise
commission. "I am now," says he, "a poor rascally gauger, condemned to
gallop two hundred miles every week to inspect dirty ponds and yeasty
barrels." Both in prose and verse he has recorded the feelings with
which he first followed his new vocation, and his jests on the subject
are uniformly bitter. It was a vocation which exposed him to temptations
of the kind he was least likely to resist. His extraordinary
conversational powers led him into peril wherever he went. If he entered
an inn at midnight, after all the inmates were in bed, the news of his
arrival circulated from the cellar to the garret; and ere ten minutes
had elapsed, the landlord and all his guests were assembled round the
ingle; the largest punch-bowl was produced; and "Be ours this night--who
knows what comes to-morrow?" was the language of every eye in the circle
that welcomed him.

At home, too, lion-gazers from all quarters beset him; they ate and
drank at his cost, and often went away to criticise him and his fare, as
if they had done Burns and his black bowl great honour in condescending
to be entertained for a single evening with such company. Among others
who called on him was Captain Grose, the antiquary, and it is to this
acquaintance that we owe "Tam o' Shanter," which Burns believed to be
the best of all his productions.


_V.--Closing Years of the Poet's Life_


Towards the close of 1791 he gave up his farm, and procuring an excise
appointment to the Dumfries division, removed to the county town. His
moral course from this time was downwards. "In Dumfries," says Heron,
speaking from personal knowledge, "his dissipation became still more
deeply habitual. He was here exposed more than in the country to be
solicited to share the riot of the dissolute and idle." His intemperance
was, as Heron says, in fits; his aberrations were occasional, not
systematic; they were all to himself the sources of exquisite misery in
the retrospect; they were the aberrations of a man whose moral sense was
never deadened, of one who encountered more temptations from without and
from within than the immense majority of mankind, far from having to
contend against, are even able to imagine; of one, finally, who prayed
for pardon, where alone effectual pardon could be found.

In how far the "thoughtless follies" of the poet did actually hasten his
end, it is needless to conjecture. They had their share, unquestionably,
along with other influences which it would be inhuman to characterise as
mere follies. In these closing years of his life he had to struggle
constantly with pecuniary difficulties, than which nothing could have
been more likely to pour bitterness intolerable into the cup of his
existence. His lively imagination exaggerated to itself every real evil;
and this among, and perhaps above, all the rest; at least, in many of
his letters we find him alluding to the probability of his being
arrested for debts, which we now know to have been of very trivial
amount.

In 1795 he was greatly upset by the death, in his absence, of his
youngest child. Writing in January, 1796, he says: "I had scarcely begun
to recover from that shock, when I became myself the victim of a most
severe rheumatic fever, and long the die spun doubtful, until, after
many weeks of a sick-bed, it seems to have turned up life, and I am
beginning to crawl across my room, and once indeed have been before my
own door in the street."

But a few days after this Burns was so imprudent as to join a festive
circle at a tavern dinner, where he remained till about three in the
morning. The weather was severe, and he, being too much intoxicated,
took no precaution in thus exposing his debilitated frame to its
influence. It has been said that he fell asleep upon the snow on his way
home. The result was an acute return of his rheumatism, and his health
gradually got worse. He went to the Solway for sea-bathing, but came
back to Dumfries "visibly changed in his looks, being with difficulty
able to stand upright and reach his own door."

It soon became known that he was dying, and the anxiety, not of the rich
and the learned only, but of the mechanics and peasants, exceeded all
belief. Wherever two or three people stood together their talk was
solely of Burns. His good humour was unruffled, and his wit never
forsook him; but he repressed with a smile the hopes of his friends, and
told them he had lived long enough. The fever increased, and his
strength diminished, and he died on July 21, 1796. His funeral, attended
by ten or twelve thousand people, was an impressive and mournful sight.
The grave was at first covered by a plain tombstone; but a costly
mausoleum was subsequently erected on the most elevated site which the
churchyard presented. Thither the remains of the poet were solemnly
transferred on June 5, 1815.

It requires a graver audacity of hypocrisy than falls to the share of
most men to declaim against Burns's sensibility to the tangible cares
and toils of his earthly condition; there are more who venture on broad
denunciations of his sympathy with the joys of sense and passion.

That some men in every age will comfort themselves in the practice of
certain vices, by reference to particular passages both in the history
and in the poetry of Burns, there is all reason to fear; but surely the
general influence of both is calculated, and has been found, to produce
far different effects. The universal popularity which his writings have
all along enjoyed among one of the most virtuous of nations is of itself
a decisive circumstance.

On one point there can be no controversy; the poetry of Burns has had
most powerful influence in reviving and strengthening the national
feelings of his countrymen. Amidst penury and labour his youth fed on
the old minstrelsy and traditional glories of his nation, and his genius
divined that what he felt so deeply must belong to a spirit that might
lie smothered around him, but could not be extinguished. Burns "knew his
own worth, and reverenced the lyre." But he ever announced himself, as a
peasant, the representative of his class, the painter of their manners,
inspired by the same influences which ruled their bosoms; and whosoever
sympathised with his verse had his soul opened for the moment to the
whole family of man.

Short and painful as were his years, Burns has left behind him a volume
in which there is inspiration for every fancy and music for every mood;
which lives, and will live in strength and vigour, "to soothe," as a
generous lover of genius has said, "the sorrows of how many a lover, to
inflame the patriotism of how many a soldier, to fan the fires of how
many a genius, to disperse the gloom of solitude, appease the agonies of
pain, encourage virtue, and show vice its ugliness." In this volume,
centuries hence as now, wherever a Scotsman may wander he will find the
dearest consolation of his exile.

       *       *       *       *       *


MARTIN LUTHER


Table Talk


     Martin Luther, "the monk who shook the world," was born Nov.
     10, 1483, at Eisleben, in Germany. In 1507 he was ordained a
     priest, and became popular almost immediately as a preacher. A
     visit to Rome shocked him, and in revolt against the practice
     of raising money by the sale of indulgences, he began his
     career as a reformer. In 1518 he was summoned to Rome to
     answer for his opinions, which now included a total denial of
     the right of the Pope to forgive sins. He proceeded to attack
     the whole doctrinal system of the Roman Catholic Church. For
     this he was denounced in a papal bull and his writings were
     condemned to be burned. In 1525 he married an escaped nun.
     That Luther was a true child of his age may be seen in the
     selections made from his "Table Talk." His shrewdness, humour,
     plain bold speech, and his change of belief from an infallible
     Church to an infallible Bible there appear, as also do his
     narrowness of knowledge, asperity of temper, and
     susceptibility to superstition. He must be judged by the mind
     of his times, not by modern standards. We give some of his
     strong opinions that have not borne the wear and tear of later
     ages; but they are more than balanced by teaching what is
     beautiful, as well as true. Luther died on February 18, 1546.


_God's Word and Book_


That the Bible is God's word and book I prove thus. Infinite potentates
have raged against it, and sought to destroy and uproot it--King
Alexander the Great, the princes of Egypt and Babylon, the monarchs of
Persia, of Greece, and of Rome, the Emperors Julius and Augustus--but
they nothing prevailed; they are all gone and vanished, while the book
remains and will remain. Who has thus helped it? Who has thus protected
it against such mighty forces? No one, surely, but God Himself, who is
the Master of all things.

The Holy Scriptures are full of divine gifts and virtues. The books of
the heathen taught nothing of faith, hope, or charity; they present no
idea of these things; they contemplate only the present, and that which
man, with the use of his material reason, can grasp and comprehend. Look
not therein for aught of hope and trust in God. But see how the Psalms
and the Book of Job treat of faith, hope, resignation, and prayer; in a
word, the Holy Scripture is the highest and best of books, abounding in
comfort under all afflictions and trials. It teaches us to see, to feel,
to grasp, and to comprehend faith, hope, and charity far otherwise than
mere human reason can, and when evil oppresses us it teaches how these
virtues throw light upon the darkness.

The multitude of books is a great evil. There is no measure or limit to
the fever for writing. The Bible is now buried under so many
commentaries that the text is nothing regarded. I could wish all my
books were buried nine ells deep in the ground by reason of the ill
example they will give. I would not have those who read my books, in
these stormy times, devote one moment to them that they would otherwise
have consecrated to the Bible itself.


_God's Dealing with Us_


How should God deal with us? Good days we cannot bear, evil we cannot
endure. Gives He riches unto us--then we are proud, so that no man can
live by us in peace; nay, we will be carried on heads and shoulders, and
will be adored as gods. Gives He poverty to us--then are we dismayed,
impatient, and murmur against Him.

God only, and not wealth, maintains the world; riches merely make people
proud and lazy. Great wealth cannot still hunger, but rather occasions
more dearth, for where rich people are there things are always dear.
Moreover, money makes no man right merry, but much rather pensive and
full of sorrow; for riches, says Christ, are thorns that prick people.
Yet is the world so made that it sets therein all its joy and felicity,
and we are such unthankful slovens that we give God not so much as a
_Deo Gratias_, though we receive of Him overflowing benefits, merely out
of His goodness and mercy. No man can estimate the great charge God is
at only in maintaining birds and such creatures, comparatively nothing
worth. I am persuaded that it costs Him yearly more to maintain only the
sparrows than the revenue of the French king amounts to.


_Points from "Popedom"_


I much marvel that the pope extols his church at Rome as the chief,
whereas the church at Jerusalem is the mother; for there Christian
doctrine was first revealed. Next was the church at Antioch, whence the
Christians have their name. Thirdly, was the church at Alexandria; and
still before the Romish were the churches of the Galatians, of the
Corinthians, Ephesians, Philippians. Is it so great a matter that St.
Peter was at Rome? Which, however, has never yet been proved, nor ever
will be, whereas our blessed Saviour Christ Himself was at Jerusalem,
where all the articles of our Christian faith were made.

Prayer in popedom is mere tongue-threshing; not prayer but a work of
obedience. Hence the confused sea of howling and babbling in cells and
monasteries, where they read and sing the psalms and collects without
any spiritual devotion. Though I had done no more but only freed people
from that torment, they might well give me thanks for it.

Kings and princes coin money only out of metals, but the pope coins
money out of everything--indulgences, ceremonials, dispensations,
pardons; 'tis all fish comes to his net. 'Tis only baptism escapes him,
for children come into the world without clothes to be stolen or teeth
to be drawn.


_Patristic Literature_


I will not presume to criticise too closely the writings of the fathers,
seeing they are received of the church and have great applause, but
whoso reads Chrysostom will find he digresses from the chief points, and
proceeds on other matters, saying nothing, or very little, of that which
pertains to the business. St. Jerome wrote upon Matthew, upon the
Epistles to the Galatians, and Titus, but, alas, very coldly. Ambrose
wrote six books upon the first book of Moses, but they are very poor.

We must read the fathers cautiously, and lay them in the gold balance,
for they often stumbled and went astray. Gregory expounds the five
pounds mentioned in the Gospel, which the husbandman gave to his servant
to put to use, to be the five senses, which the beasts also possess. The
two pounds he construes to be the reason and understanding. Faithful
Christians should heed only the embassy of our blessed Saviour Christ,
and what He says.

None of the fathers of the church made mention of original sin until
Augustine came, who made a difference between original and actual sin,
namely, that original sin is to covet, to lust, and to desire, which is
the root and cause of actual sin.


_Hints for Preachers_


The good preacher should know when to make an end. A preacher that will
speak everything that comes into his mind is like a maid that goes to
market, and, meeting another maid, makes a stand, and they hold together
a goose-market.

I would not have preachers in their sermons use Hebrew, Greek, or
foreign languages, for in the church we ought to speak as we use to do
at home, the plain mother tongue, which everyone is acquainted with. It
may be allowed in courtiers, lawyers, advocates, etc., to use quaint,
curious words. St. Paul never used such high and stately words as
Demosthenes and Cicero used.

Ambition is the rankest poison to the church when it possesses
preachers. It is a consuming fire.

When I preach I sink myself deep down. I regard neither doctors nor
magistrates, of whom are here in this church above forty; but I have an
eye to the multitude of young people, children, and servants, of whom
are more than two thousand. I preach to those. Will not the rest hear
me?


_Time's Forelock_


It is said Occasion has a forelock, but it is bald behind. Our Lord has
taught this by the course of nature. A farmer must sow his barley and
oats about Easter; if he defer it till Michaelmas it were too late. When
apples are ripe they must be plucked from the tree or they are spoiled.
Procrastination is as bad as over-hastiness. There is my servant Wolf,
when four or five birds fall upon the bird-net he will not draw it; but
says, "Oh, I will stay until more come." Then they all fly away, and he
gets none.

Occasion is a great matter. Terence says well, "I came in time, which is
the chief thing of all." Julius Caesar understood Occasion; Pompey and
Hannibal did not. Boys at school understand it not, therefore they must
have fathers and masters, with the rod, to hold them thereto, that they
neglect not time and lose it. Many a young fellow has a school stipend
for six or seven years, during which he ought diligently to study, but
he thinks, "Oh, I have time enough yet." But I say, "No, fellow; what
little Jack learns not great John learns not." Occasion salutes thee,
and reaches out her forelock to thee, saying, "Here I am, take hold of
me." Thou thinkest she will come again. Then says she, "Well, seeing
thou wilt not take hold of my top, take hold of my tail," and therewith
she flings away.


_Modern Luxury_


Whereto serve or profit such superfluity, such show, such ostentation,
such extraordinary luxurious kind of life as is now come upon us? If
Adam were to return to earth, and see our mode of living, our food,
drink, and dress, how would he marvel. He would say: "Surely this is not
the world I was in?" For Adam drank water, ate fruit from the trees,
and, if he had any house at all, 'twas a hut supported by four wooden
forks; he had no knife or iron, and he wore simply a coat of skin. Now
we spend immense sums in eating and drinking, now we raise sumptuous
palaces, and decorate them with a luxury beyond all comparison. The
ancient Israelites lived in great moderation and quiet. Boaz says: "Dip
thy bread in vinegar and refresh thyself therewith."


_Ministers and Matrimony_


I advise in everything that ministers interfere not in matrimonial
questions. First, because we have enough to do in our own office;
secondly, because these affairs concern not the church, but are temporal
things, pertaining to temporal magistrates; thirdly, because such cases
are in a manner innumerable; they are very high, broad, and deep, and
produce many offences, which may tend to the shame and dishonour of the
Gospel. Moreover, we are therein ill dealt with--they draw us into the
business, and then, if the issue is evil, the blame is laid altogether
upon us. Therefore, we will leave them to the lawyers and magistrates.


_Miscellaneous Topics_


Philip Melancthon showing Luther a letter from Augsburg wherein he was
informed that a very learned divine, a papist of that city, was
converted, and had received the Gospel, Luther said, "I like best those
that do not fall off suddenly, but ponder the case with considerate
discretion, compare together the writing and arguments of both parties,
and lay them on the gold balance, and in God's fear search after the
upright truth; and of such fit people are made, able to stand in
controversy. Such a man was St. Paul, who at first was a strict Pharisee
and man of works, who stiffly and earnestly defended the law; but
afterwards preached Christ in the best and purest manner against the
whole nation of the Jews."

As all people feel they must die, each seeks immortality here on earth,
that he may be had in everlasting remembrance. Some great princes and
kings seek it by raising great columns of stone and high pyramids, great
churches, costly and glorious palaces and castles. Soldiers hunt after
praise and honour by obtaining famous victories. The learned seek an
everlasting name by writing books. With these and such like things
people think to be immortal. But as to the true everlasting and
incorruptible honour and eternity of God, no man thinks or looks after
these things.

When two goats meet on a narrow bridge over deep waters how do they
behave? Neither of them can turn back again, and neither can pass the
other because the bridge is too narrow. If they should thrust one
another they might both fall into the water and be drowned. Nature,
then, has taught them that if one lays himself down and permits the
other to go over him both remain without hurt. Even so, people should
endure to be trod upon rather than to fall into discord with one
another.


_Strong Opinions Outworn by Time_


I should have no compassion on witches; I would burn all of them. We
read in the old law that the priests threw the first stone at such
malefactors. Our ordinary sins offend and anger God. What then must be
His wrath against witchcraft, which we may justly designate high treason
against divine majesty, a revolt against the infinite power of God. The
maladies I suffer are not natural but devils' spells.

Luther, taking up a caterpillar, said: "'Tis an emblem of the devil in
its crawling, and bears his colours in its changing hue."

The devil plagues and torments us in the place where we are most tender
and weak. In Paradise he fell not upon Adam, but upon Eve. It commonly
rains where it was wet enough before.

The anabaptists pretend that children, not as yet having reason, ought
not to receive baptism. I answer: That reason in no way contributes to
faith. Nay, in that children are destitute of reason they are all the
more fit and proper recipients of baptism. For reason is the greatest
enemy that faith has; it never comes to the aid of spiritual things.

I always loved music. A schoolmaster ought to have skill in music, or I
would not regard him; neither should we ordain young men as preachers
unless they have been well exercised in music.

Erasmus of Rotterdam is the vilest miscreant that ever disgraced the
earth. He made several attempts to draw me into his snares, and I should
have been in danger but that God lent me special aid. Erasmus was
poisoned at Rome and at Venice with epicurean doctrines. His chief
doctrine is that we must carry ourselves according to the time, or, as
the proverb goes, hang the cloak according to the wind. I hold Erasmus
to be Christ's most bitter enemy.

I never work better than when I am inspired by anger. When I am angry I
can write, pray, and preach well, for then my whole temperament is
quickened, my understanding sharpened, and all mundane vexations and
temptations depart.


_Characteristic Sayings_


When the abbot throws the dice, the whole convent will play.

When men blaspheme we should pray and be silent, and not carry wood to
the fire.

When Jesus Christ utters a word, He opens His mouth so wide that it
embraces all heaven and earth, even though that word be but in a
whisper.

When I lay sucking at my mother's breast I had no notion how I should
afterwards eat, drink, and live. Even so we on the earth have no idea
what the life to come will be.

The two sins, hatred and pride, deck and trim themselves out as the
devil clothed himself in the Godhead. Hatred will be godlike; pride will
be truth. These two are right deadly sins; hatred is killing, pride is
lying.

A scorpion thinks that when his head lies hid under a leaf he cannot be
seen; even so the hypocrites and false saints think, when they have
hoisted up one or two good works, all their sins therewith are covered
and hid.

Luther, holding a rose in his hand, said, "'Tis a magnificent work of
God. Could a man make but one such rose as this he would be thought
worthy of all honour, but the manifold gifts of God lose their value in
our eyes from their very infinity."

       *       *       *       *       *


MIRABEAU


Memoirs


     Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, Comte de Mirabeau, was born at Bignon,
     near Nemours, on March 9, 1749, and died at Paris on April 2,
     1791. His father was a most eccentric and tyrannical
     representative of the French aristocracy, and Honoré, a
     younger son, inherited something of his violent temperament,
     but was endowed with real genius. Entering the army, young
     Mirabeau soon displayed an erratic disposition by eloping with
     the young wife of an aged nobleman. He fled to Holland, but
     was captured and imprisoned. Being at length liberated, he
     turned to literature and politics, and soon gained celebrity
     in both. His magnificent oratorical powers brought him rapidly
     to the front in the period immediately anterior to the
     outbreak of the Revolution. Mirabeau's "Memoirs, by Himself,
     his Father, his Uncle, and his Adopted Son," published in
     eight volumes in 1834, contain no original writings by
     Mirabeau himself, except in the shape of extracts from his
     speeches, letters, and pamphlets. The following epitome has
     been prepared from the French text.


_I.--"The Hurricane"_


The Marquis of Mirabeau, father of Honoré Gabriel, the subject of these
memoirs, was endowed with a mind of great power, rendered fruitful by
the best education. He had, however, become independent at too early an
age, and this had brought into play his natural inordinate vanity.

Honoré Gabriel, since so famous under the name of the Count of Mirabeau,
was the fifth child of the marquis. Destined to be the most turbulent
and active of youths, as well as the most eloquent of men and the
greatest orator of his day, Gabriel was born with one foot twisted and
his tongue tied, in addition to which his size and strength were
extraordinary, and already two molars were formed in his jaw. At the age
of three the boy nearly lost his life from small-pox, and was thus
disfigured greatly for life; while the other children were, like the
parents, gifted with wonderful beauty.

Young Gabriel was a most precocious child, and he received an excellent
education. At the age of seven he was confirmed by a cardinal, but his
childhood was difficult of control, and chastisement from his father and
tutor was continual. His inquisitiveness was irrepressible. He relates
that at the family supper after his confirmation, "they explained to me
that God could not make contradictions--for instance, a stick with only
one end. I asked whether a stick which had but one end was not a
miracle. My grandmother never forgave me."

Placed under the kindly teaching of the Abbé Choquart in a military
school of high repute in Paris, Gabriel made marvellously rapid
progress, assiduously exercising his memory, which afterwards became a
prodigious repository of the most diversified knowledge.

On July 10, 1767, Gabriel entered the army, joining the Marquis of
Lambert's regiment. The young volunteer, who was now eighteen, behaved
well, and speedily gave evidence of the military talents he afterwards
displayed. But a quarrel arose over a love affair, which led to harsh
punishment by his colonel. The incident was bitterly resented by his
father, who condemned him without hearing his side of the matter, and
actually procured his imprisonment in the fortress of the Isle of Rhé.

When the young soldier came out of prison he unwittingly offended an
officer at Rochelle, who had been dismissed the service. The result was
a duel, in which the aggressor was wounded. Gabriel was appointed to
service in Corsica, with the rank of second-lieutenant, and here he
distinguished himself by his zeal, his military talents, and his
constant application.

Young Mirabeau was, in September, 1770, transferred to Limousin, in west
Central France. Such was his energy that he was called "the hurricane."
Now began a series of troubles caused by bitter quarrels between his
parents, who were openly at variance. Each sought to gain an adherent in
their son, who was condemned to witness the wickedness and folly of both
in their ungovernable passion. The effect on the character of the young
count was deplorable.

Then ensued a singular episode. The marquis had determined that Gabriel
should marry before the age of twenty-three, and had fixed on Mary Emily
de Covet, only daughter of the Marquis de Marignane, eighteen years of
age, for his son's bride. She was plain, yet attractive, with a sweet
smile, fine eyes, and beautiful hair, and was gay, lively, sensible,
mild, and very amiable. Having been neglected by her father and
ill-treated by her mother, she showed no disinclination to marriage, and
in 1772 young Mirabeau obtained the hand of the wealthy heiress.

No sooner was the young count married than every attempt was made to
ruin him. He received no property with his bride, and his avaricious
father refused to advance him any money for necessary expenses. His
father-in-law offered to lend him 60,000 livres, but his father's
consent was indispensable, and this was sternly refused. Mirabeau,
harassed by creditors, was dragged into lawsuits, and his embarrassments
only set his father entirely against him. The marquis actually procured
a _lettre de cachet_, obliging his son to leave the home he had set up,
and to confine himself to the little town of Manosque.

Here domestic sorrow and the most painful circumstances assailed the
young exile. But these did not prevent him from pursuing serious studies
and composing his first work, the "Essay on Despotism." Misfortunes
accumulated. Chastising with a horsewhip a baron who grossly insulted
him, the count was again imprisoned, this time in the Château d'If, a
gloomy citadel on a barren rock near Marseilles.

On May 25, 1770, Mirabeau was transferred to the Castle of Joux, near
Pontarlier, where, on June 11, 1775, festivities were held, as at other
places, to honour the coronation of Louis XVI. Here Mirabeau enjoyed a
sort of half freedom, being allowed to visit in Pontarlier, and the
event ensued which, it must sorrowfully be owned, tarnished his name. In
a word, we see Mirabeau "ruin himself," by a fatal intimacy with the
young wife of the aged Marquis of Monnier. The two fled to Dijon, where
Mirabeau surrendered himself at the castle.

He was released after a short time and went on to Geneva, nearly
perishing in a storm on the lake. Returning to Pontarlier, he was joined
by Sophie Monnier, and the two left for Holland, and arrived at
Amsterdam on October 7, 1776. Mirabeau was naturally obliged to draw his
principal means of subsistence from his literary labours, and this,
perhaps, had been his motive for choosing Holland as his residence, for
at that period the Dutch booksellers entered largely into literary
speculations.

Mirabeau and Sophie Monnier were arrested at Amsterdam on May 14, 1777.
Both were brought to France. She was placed in a convent at
Monilmontant, and Mirabeau was deposited on June 7 in the donjon of
Vincennes, and was subjected to every sort of privation, remaining in
confinement for forty-two months. His release marked the end of his
private life; his public and political life was about to begin.


_II.--Into Political Life_


The "Essay on Despotism" had been the first sign of Mirabeau's political
vocation, and the most singular instance, perhaps, of a war audaciously
declared against despotism by a young man bearing its yoke. The keynote
is that though the _natural_ man may not be inclined to despotism, the
_social_ man assuredly is disposed to be a despot. This spirit,
maintains Mirabeau, exists even in republics.

In 1784 Mirabeau visited England. One of his motives was to collect
materials for his "Considerations on the Order of Cincinnatus," a
treatise dealing with Washington and American independence. He was
greatly delighted with English scenery. "It is here," he says, "that
nature is improved, not forced. All tells me that here the people are
something; that every man enjoys the development and free exercise of
his faculties, and that I am in another order of things."

But he proceeds: "I am not an enthusiast in favour of England, and I now
know sufficient of that country to tell you that if its constitution is
the best known, the application of this constitution is the worst
possible; and that if the Englishman is as a social man the most free in
the world, the English people are the least free of any."

He resided in England from August to February, 1785. During that brief
period he began to write his "History of Geneva," and he showed his
versatility by composing for a young refugee clergyman a sermon on the
immortality of the soul. By the gift of this sermon he drew the exiled
preacher from poverty, for it was the means of obtaining for him a
lucrative appointment.

Mirabeau sent forth from Paris several most able pamphlets on banking
and on share companies. These were written with energy and often with
violence. As they attacked many private interests they aroused against
their author much hatred, insult, and calumny. He was accused of
venality, though he was attacking and driving to despair powerful
stock-jobbers, who would have paid him magnificently for silence, could
he have been bought.

In July, 1785, Mirabeau went to Berlin. It is a singular fact that in
his various journeys some accident always befel him. On the way to
Berlin an attempt was made to assassinate him by some unknown enemies,
but he safely reached the German capital. King Frederick the Great, now
very aged, no longer received foreigners, yet he replied to a letter
from Mirabeau and fixed a day for seeing him at Potsdam.

Mirabeau informed the king that he had come to seek permission to study
the great military manoeuvres, and that he hoped to push on to Russia.
During this period he worked like a labourer all day at his writings.
Part of his time he spent at supper parties of the most tiresome
etiquette. The same laborious habits attended him everywhere, in prison
and in freedom, in his own country and in other lands. It was in Germany
that he conceived the idea of his treatise on "The Reform of the Jews,"
which is acknowledged to be one of his best works.

Frederick the Great died on August 17, 1786. Feeling that he could do
nothing useful, Mirabeau resolved at the close of 1786 to quit Berlin.
He was urged also by a special motive in which he took pride, and which
he thus described in a letter: "My heart has not grown old, and if my
enthusiasm is damped, it is not extinguished. I have fully experienced
this to-day. I consider one of the best days of my life that on which I
received an account of the convocation of the notables, which no doubt
will not long precede that of the National Assembly. In this I see a new
order of things which may regenerate the monarchy. I should deem myself
a thousand times honoured in being even the junior secretary of this
assembly, of which I had the happiness of giving the first idea."

Mirabeau was prodigiously occupied at Berlin. He often did not retire to
rest till one in the morning, but regularly rose at five, even in the
midst of severe winter. Without anything on but a simple quilted
dressing-gown, without stockings or waistcoat, he worked away without
even calling up his servant to light a fire. Besides his correspondence
in cypher, which occupied him much, he worked assiduously at his
"Prussian Monarchy," which was published in 1788.

On departing from Berlin the count wrote a most eloquent letter of
counsel to King Frederick William, appealing to him to cultivate peace,
reminding him that his illustrious predecessor had conquered the
admiration of mankind but never won their love, commending him not to
extend the direct action of the royal power to matters which did not
require it, advising him not to govern too much, and exhorting him to
abolish military slavery; that is to say, the obligation then imposed on
every Prussian to serve as a soldier from the age of eighteen to sixty
or more, which forced men to go to the battle-field like cattle to the
slaughterhouse.

In the same remarkable document Mirabeau raises his voice against the
harsh laws which arbitrarily deprived Prussians of freedom to leave the
country. The tyrannical prohibition of emigration excited his vehement
protest, and he proceeded also to denounce to the new king the right of
seizing the property of deceased foreigners, and demanded for burghers
the freedom of purchasing the estates of nobles. He urged Frederick
William to abolish the prerogatives claimed by nobles and the helotism
of all who were not noble, and suggested that judges should be appointed
for life and justice rendered free of expense.


_III.--For King and People_


It was chiefly the meeting of the notables which had hastened Mirabeau's
return to Paris. He felt that his proper place was in the centre of the
great events announced and begun by this convocation. After the
undignified and inglorious prodigality of the previous reign, which had
laid the foundation of serious financial vicissitudes, the young King
Louis XVI. had brought with him to the throne the private virtues of a
good and honest man, but not the qualities of a sovereign.

Though economic to excess himself, he nevertheless suffered to exist and
even to increase around him those dilapidations which at last ruined the
resources of the state. He had no confidence in himself, and Mirabeau
respectfully reproached him with his fatal timidity. Nothing was done
either to increase revenue or diminish expenditure.

The possessors of privilege and representatives of personal interest,
the courtiers, the great lords, and the parliaments strenuously resisted
all reforms and then drove from office the best intentioned, the most
virtuous, and the ablest ministers whom the young king, in the sincerity
of his patriotism, had chosen on his accession, in deference to public
feeling. Among these ministers were Malesherbes, Turgot, Necker, and
Calonne.

Mirabeau returned to Paris on January 27, 1787. He at once published
that famous "Address to the Notables," in which he denounced the whole
corrupt system of finance and in which he demanded local provincial
administrations. This and his "Denunciation of Stock-jobbing" made great
impression on the public mind.

Nevertheless, the "Denunciation" displeased the government, and the
author was much persecuted. He learned that he was to be arrested and
sent, not to the Bastille, but to a remote provincial fortress, where he
would have been lost to public notice. So he escaped from Paris to
Liège, whence he again attacked the administration of Calonne and the
policy of Necker, declaring that loans should have been effected on
methods less onerous for the state.

His exile from Paris was of brief duration, for friends intervened. But
Mirabeau returned only to renew and intensify his attacks. He remained,
however, only for a short time, for on May 24, 1787, he set out on a
third journey to Prussia, in order to complete his great work on the
"Prussian Monarchy." Returning to France, he reached Paris in September.
Five months had elapsed since the assembling of the notables. The
eloquent Leominie de Brienne, Archbishop of Toulouse, had been the most
brilliant figure in the conclave. The first assembly broke up on July
27, 1787. Though gathered by the privileged orders, patriotism had
raised its voice within it, and the archbishop, as prime minister, had
failed to direct the new current aright.

Mirabeau disapproved of what had taken place in his absence, and
declined to be employed by the administration, but he offered to
undertake any foreign mission in the exercise of the king to which he
might be appointed. The application was unsuccessful. The crisis
approached nearer and nearer. Archbishop Brienne passed rapidly from
violence to weakness. Mirabeau refused to countenance his plans for
contracting a new loan of 420 millions. The king was resisted by an
almost unanimous opposition, headed by the Duke of Orleans, and the loan
was refused at a memorable sitting.

Mirabeau exhorted the government to announce in precise and solemn terms
the convocation of the States-General in 1789, that bankruptcy might be
averted and the national honour saved. Said he: "The year in which the
king assembles the nation will be the finest in his life. Everybody
knows that he has been deceived, and could not help being so, and
everybody will do justice to his intentions. The assembled nation has a
right to vote a tax. In future the nation alone will raise up its
political fortunes."

Mirabeau saw that the nation ought to be trusted. He strenuously
contended for a policy in accordance with this conviction. But he
indefatigably continued his literary labours, sending forth pamphlet
after pamphlet, one against the prison system in vogue, another
demanding the liberty of the Press, in which he extolled the example of
England. He became increasingly impatient with the ineptitude of the
government, for the affairs of the state were lapsing into desperate
disorder, and the public discontent was being steadily aggravated.

The aim of Mirabeau was at one and the same time to support the monarchy
and to subvert the influences by which the throne was environed. He was
solicitous of securing popular freedom, but regarded the monarchy as the
only form of rule suitable for France in that age, and was led to adopt
that peculiar statesmanship identifying the royal interest with the
popular cause. Though ready to give his life for the people, he did not
hesitate to risk his popularity by his fidelity to the throne.


_IV.--President of the National Assembly_


The immediate causes of the Revolution were now in full operation.
Mirabeau, attempting to practise his own doctrine of the freedom of the
Press, turned journalist and brought out a gazette. The famous National
Assembly opened on May 5, 1789. He then entered on a career of immense
political energy, beginning by issuing a stirring and eloquent "Address
to the French People." This was especially a reply to a reactionary
protest on the part of the clergy.

Soon there were disturbances everywhere. The Bastille was stormed by the
furious Parisians and demolished. Just at this time Mirabeau lost his
father, and the event overwhelmed him with grief. He refused to stand
for election as mayor of Paris. But he brought about a constitutional
organisation of the municipality, and delivered a splendid series of
orations on various abuses, such as plural voting, iniquitous
monopolies, etc. Yet he proved his studious moderation by strenuously
declaiming against the famous "Declaration of the Rights of Man,"
pronouncing it inopportune and perilous. His heroic harangues provoked
disorder in his audience dangerous to himself. But his courage was
dauntless, for even when the king and his chief minister abandoned the
royal prerogative, Mirabeau defended it.

Throughout the terrible events of 1789 Mirabeau was consistent as a
loyalist and as a patriot. But disappointment awaited his generous
illusions, for the vacillation of the king rendered the outlook
hopeless.

At the end of January, 1791, he was appointed president of the National
Assembly, which, during the stormy period of its existence during
twenty-one months, had already had forty-two presidents.

He exercised his functions with consummate skill, but the end of his
wonderful life was at hand. He had been in weak health from the very
first sittings of the Assembly, his condition causing constant anxiety
to his intimate friends and his admirers. He was depressed by sad
presentiments, and was in constant apprehension of assassination, for it
was well-known that there were plots against his life. After a brilliant
oration, the great tribune went home exhausted, and, indeed, dying.

One of his last experiences was a pathetic interview with Talleyrand,
with whom he had often crossed swords in debate. His weakness dated from
February, 1788, when he was attacked with violent internal pains, and
was bled to such an extent by a surgeon that he never recovered his
wonderful natural vitality. After much suffering, endured with the most
heroic fortitude, he passed away as if in sleep, with a sweet smile on
his features. France mourned the loss of the greatest orator that had
ever graced her tribune. His funeral was celebrated at St. Genevieve
with splendid ceremonial. The verdict of those best qualified to judge
was that Mirabeau was the most remarkable man of the eighteenth century,
and that his premature death, soon after the outbreak of the Revolution,
led to the overthrow of a monarchy which he alone could have saved.

       *       *       *       *       *


THOMAS MOORE


Life of Byron


     Thomas Moore, the Irish poet, was born in Dublin on May 28,
     1779, was educated at Trinity College, and studied for the Bar
     at the Middle Temple. At twenty-one years of age he published
     a translation of Anacreon, and his reputation was further
     established by his love-poems, under the pseudonym of Thomas
     Little, in 1801. He received in 1803 an official post in
     Bermuda, but entrusted his duties there to a substitute, by
     whose defalcations he was later embarrassed. He was married at
     thirty-one to a beautiful and amiable actress, Bessy Dyke, and
     lived very happily for most of his life in Wiltshire, but with
     an interval of a few years in Paris. In 1835 he received a
     literary pension of £300, to which a Civil List pension of
     £100 was added in 1850. He died on February 25, 1852.
     Undoubtedly, Moore's most important contribution to prose
     literature was his "Letters and Journals of Lord Byron,"
     published in 1830, six years after the poet's death; as
     payment he received £4,200. Although the work was frankly and
     even severely criticised in many quarters, it did a great deal
     to put Byron right with public opinion. Certainly no literary
     contemporary was better fitted to write the biography of his
     friend than Moore, who, moreover, had been marked for this
     work by a free gift of Byron's own memoirs.


_I.--Ancestors and Early Days_


It has been said of Lord Byron that he was prouder of being a descendant
of those Byrons of Normandy, who accompanied William the Conqueror into
England, than of having been the author of "Childe Harold." The remark
is not altogether unfounded, for the pride of ancestry was a feature of
his character; and justly so, for his line was honourably known on the
fields of Cressy, Bosworth, and Marston Moor; and in the faithful
royalist, Sir John Biron, afterwards Lord Biron, throughout the Civil
Wars.

In 1784, the father of the poet, Captain John Byron, nephew of the fifth
Lord Byron, with the sole object of relieving his debts, married, as his
second wife, Miss Catherine Gordon, a wealthy lady of illustrious
Scottish ancestry. Her fortune was swallowed up, and she was reduced to
£150 a year, before she gave birth, on January 22, 1788, in Holles
Street, London, to her first and only child, George Gordon Byron. The
boy was somewhat deformed, one of his feet being twisted.

In 1790, we find the unhappy parents living in separate lodgings in
Aberdeen; and this estrangement was followed by complete separation, the
worthless Captain Byron proceeding to France, where he died in the
following year. The mother, a woman of the most passionate extremes,
sent the boy to day school and grammar school. His schoolmates remember
him as lively, warm-hearted, and more ready to give a blow than to take
one. To summer excursions with his mother in the Highlands the poet
traces his love of scenery and especially of mountainous countries; and
he refers many years after, still with keen feeling, to a little girl,
Mary Duff, for whom, in his eighth year, he cherished a consuming
attachment. So early were his sensibilities dominant.

On the death, in 1794, of the grandson of the old lord, little George
stood in immediate succession to the peerage; in May, 1798, the fifth
Lord Byron died at Newstead Abbey, and the boy's name was called in
school with the title "Dominus." The Earl of Carlisle was appointed his
guardian in chancery, and in the same summer, Lord Byron, in his
eleventh year, took possession, with his mother, of the seat of his
ancestors. The next year Mrs. Byron was placed on the Civil List for a
pension of £300 a year. Removing to London, she placed George at school
with Dr. Glennie at Dulwich, but thwarted the progress of his education
with her fondness and self-will, until Lord Carlisle gave up all hope of
ruling her. It was at this period that a boyish love for Margaret
Parker, his cousin, who died shortly after, led Byron into the practice
of verse.

From 1801 to 1805, from thirteen years of age to seventeen, George was
at Harrow, where he sat beside Peel, the future statesman. This period
of ardent friendship with his fellows includes also the romantic
affection, in 1803, for Miss Chaworth, heiress of Annesley, near
Newstead, who looked on her admirer as the mere schoolboy that he was.
Leaving Harrow with the reputation of an idler who would never learn,
Byron was entered at Trinity College, Cambridge, in October, 1805. His
vacations were spent with his mother at Southwell, and her explosions of
temper, in which she would throw poker and tongs, alienated him
increasingly. In vacation and in term alike he read with extraordinary
avidity and variety, wrote a great deal of verse, and in November, 1806,
printed a small volume of poems for private circulation.

He was a frank and vivid correspondent; his letters to Miss Pigot, of
Southwell, and others, are full of the liveliest descriptions of the
Cambridge days. At this time Byron was painfully shy of new faces, and
perpetually mortified on account of his poverty. He rose, and retired to
rest, very late. He was very fond of the exercises of swimming, riding,
shooting, fencing, and sparring; greatly devoted to his dogs, delighted
in music, and was known as remarkably superstitious. Of his charity and
kindheartedness there was no end. Always conscious of his deformity, and
terribly afraid of becoming corpulent, he was sedulously careful of his
person and dress.

"Hours of Idleness," Byron's first published volume, came out while he
was at the university, and was received by the "Edinburgh Review" with a
contempt which stung him to the quick. With intervals of dissipation in
London and at Brighton, Byron threw himself, at Newstead, into the
preparation of a satirical revenge, training himself for it by a deep
study of the writings of Pope. After his coming of age, in 1809, he went
up to London with his satire, and on March 13 took his seat in the House
of Lords. A few days later "English Bards and Scotch Reviewers" was the
talk of the town. Wild festivities at Newstead followed its publication,
and on July 2 Byron sailed from Falmouth in the Lisbon packet.


_II.--The Poet Finds Himself_


Lord Byron was absent from England for two years, and in the solitude of
his nights at sea and in his lone wanderings through Greece he had
leisure and seclusion to look within himself, and there catch the first
glimpses of his glorious mind. His deep passion for solitude grew to
full power; the varied excitement of his travels invigorated his
character and stored his imagination with impressions, and his inborn
sadness rose from a querulous bitterness to the grandeur of his later
melancholy.

His letters show him on Parnassus, where a flight of eagles seemed an
omen of his destiny; at Athens, where he lodged with the mother of the
"Maid of Athens"; standing among the ruins of Ephesus and the mounds of
Troy; swimming the Hellespont in honour of Leander; at Constantinople,
where the prospect of the Golden Horn seemed the fairest of all; at
Patras, in the woeful debility of fever; and again at Athens, making
acquaintance with Lady Hester Stanhope and "Abyssinian" Bruce. Through
all these varied scenes his mind was brooding on the verses of the
"Childe Harold."

On Byron's return to England, in July, 1811, that poem was placed in Mr.
Murray's hands, and thus was laid the foundation of a long connection
between author and publisher. Mrs. Byron died on August 1. With all her
faults she had loved her son deeply, and he could at least look back
upon dutiful and kindly behaviour to her. It was in November that I
first had the pleasure of meeting the poet at dinner, and what I chiefly
remarked was the nobleness of his air, his beauty, the gentleness of his
voice and manner, and his marked kindness. From our first meeting our
acquaintance quickly ripened into friendship.

On February 27, 1812, a day or two before the appearance of "Childe
Harold," Byron made the first trial of his eloquence in the House of
Lords, and it was on this occasion that he made the acquaintance of Lord
Holland. The subject of debate was the Nottingham Frame-breaking Bill.
Workmen were rioting and wrecking because their labour had been
displaced by the introduction of machinery, and Byron's view was that
"we must not allow mankind to be sacrificed to improvements in
mechanism"--"the maintenance of the industrious poor is of greater
consequence than the enrichment of monopolists"--"I have seen the state
of these miserable men, and it is a disgrace to a civilised country."
The speech was well received. The impression produced two days later by
Byron's "Childe Harold" was as instantaneous as it has proved deep and
lasting. Even the dashes of scepticism, with which he darkened his
strain, served only to heighten its success. The Prince Regent had the
poet presented to him, and the author of "Marmion" offered his praise.
In the following May appeared the wild and beautiful fragment, "The
Giaour." This new offspring of his genius was hailed with wonder and
delight, and on my rejoining him in town this spring, I found an intense
enthusiasm for Byron throughout the literary and social world. But his
mind was already turning to freedom and solitude, and his third and last
speech in the House of Lords was made in June.


_III.--Byron's Unfortunate Marriage_


Byron's restlessness is reflected throughout his "Journal," which he
began at this time. He had dreams of living in the Grecian Islands and
of adopting an Eastern manner of life; but in December, 1813, when "The
Bride of Abydos" was published, he was still feverishly dissipating
himself in England.

A significant entry in the "Journal" says: "A wife would be the
salvation of me," and Lord Byron became a suitor for the hand of Miss
Milbanke, a relative of Lady Melbourne. His proposal was not at first
accepted, but a correspondence ensued between them, and in September,
1814, after the appearance of "The Corsair" and "Lara," they became
formally affianced. I was much in his society at this time, and was
filled with foreboding anxieties, which the unfortunate events that
followed only too fully justified. At the end of December he set out for
Seaham, the seat of Sir Ralph Milbanke, the lady's father, and on
January 2, 1815, was married. On March 8, he wrote to me from Seaham:
"Bell is in health, and unvaried good-humour and behaviour."

Lord Byron's pecuniary embarrassments now accumulated upon him, and just
a year after his marriage, and shortly after the birth of their
daughter, I received a letter which breathed a profound melancholy, due
partly to his difficulties, but more, I thought, to a return of the
restless and roving spirit. I replied: "Do tell me you are happier than
that letter has led me to fear, and I shall be satisfied." It was only a
few weeks later that Lady Byron adopted the resolution of parting from
him. She had left London in January on a visit to her father, and Byron
was to follow her. They had parted in the utmost kindness; she wrote him
a letter, full of playfulness and affection, on the road; but
immediately on her arrival her father wrote to acquaint Lord Byron that
she would return to him no more. At the time when he had to stand this
unexpected shock, his financial troubles, which had led to eight or nine
executions in his house within the year, had arrived at their utmost;
and at a moment when, to use his own expression, he was "standing alone
on his hearth, with his household gods shivered around him," he was also
doomed to receive the startling intelligence that the wife who had just
parted with him in kindness, had parted with him for ever.

I must quote from a letter he wrote me in March: "The fault was not in
my choice, unless in choosing at all; for I do not believe--and I must
say it in the very dregs of all this bitter business--that there ever
was a better, or even a brighter, a kinder, or a more amiable and
agreeable being than Lady Byron. I never had any reproach to make her
while with me. Where there is blame, it belongs to myself, and if I
cannot redeem, I must bear it."


_IV.--Wanderings and Work_


On April 25, 1816, being now twenty-eight years of age, Byron took final
leave of England, and sailed with two servants for Ostend. His route, by
Flanders and the Rhine, may be traced in his matchless verses. He
settled in Geneva, where he met Shelley and Mrs. Shelley; they boated on
the lake and walked together, and Byron's susceptible mind was deeply
influenced by his mystical companion. We may discover traces of that
vague sublimity in the third canto of "Childe Harold," and traces also
of Mr. Wordsworth's mood which Byron absorbed from Shelley's favourite
author.

From November, 1816, his letters are dated from Venice. "This has always
been, next to the East, the greenest island of my imagination, and it
has not disappointed me." They are considerably taken up with love
affairs of an irregular kind, and contain also many vivid pictures of
Venetian society and manners. "Manfred" was completed in 1817, and was
followed by the fourth canto of "Childe Harold." Margarita Cogni was the
reigning favourite of Byron's unworthy harem at this time; and his poem
of "Don Juan," now begun, most faithfully and lamentably reflects every
whim and passion that, like the rack of autumn, swept across his mind.

But April, 1819, brought a revulsion against all this libertine way of
living, and brought also the dawn of the only real love of his whole
life. Lord Byron had first met the Countess Guiccioli in the autumn of
1818, when she made her appearance, three days after her marriage, at
the house of the Countess Albrizzi, in all the gaiety of bridal array,
and the first delight of exchanging a convent for the world. She has
given her impressions of their meeting: "His noble and exquisitely
beautiful countenance, the tone of his voice, his manners, the thousand
enchantments that surrounded him, rendered him so superior a being to
any whom I had hitherto seen, that it was impossible he should not have
left the most profound impression upon me."

In June, Byron joined her at Ravenna, and for the next three years
remained devotedly attached to her. She struck me, during our first
interview, when I visited them at La Mira, as a lady not only of a style
of beauty singular in an Italian, as being fair-complexioned and
delicate, but also as being highly intelligent and amiable.

A letter to me from Pisa, dated August 27, 1822, has a mournful
interest: "We have been burning the bodies of Shelley and Williams on
the seashore. You can have no idea what an extraordinary effect such a
funeral pile has, with mountains in the background and the sea before."
Another, of November 17, to Lady Byron, shows that if the author of it
had not right on his side, he had at least most of those good feelings
which generally accompany it. "I have to acknowledge the receipt of
Ada's [their daughter's] hair; this note will reach you about her
birthday.... We both made a bitter mistake; but now it is over, and
better so.... I assure you that I bear you now no resentment
whatever.... Whether the offence has been solely on my side, or
reciprocal, or on yours chiefly, I have ceased to reflect on any but two
things--that you are the mother of my child, and that we shall never
meet again."

Byron was thirty-five years old when from his exile at Genoa he turned
his eyes to Greece, where a spirit was now rising such as he had imaged
forth in dreams of song, but hardly could have dreamed that he should
have lived to see it realised. He longed to witness, and very probably
to share in, the present triumphs of liberty on those very fields where
he had gathered for immortality such memorials of the liberty of the
past. Lord Byron was in touch with the committee concerned with Grecian
liberty in May, 1823, and two months later sailed with his party on July
14.

Arriving at Cephalonia he made a journey to Ithaca for a few days. His
confidence in the Greek cause was soon clouded; the people were grossly
degenerate, and he saw that the work of regeneration must be slow. To
convince the government and the chiefs of the paralysing effect of their
dissensions, to inculcate the spirit of union, to endeavour to humanise
the feelings of the belligerents on both sides, so as to take from the
war the character of barbarism--these, with the generous aid of his
money, were the objects of his interference.

At length the time for action arrived, and, leaving Cephalonia, Byron
landed at Missolonghi on January 4, 1824. He was welcomed with all
honour, and at the end of the month received a formal commission from
the government as commander of the expedition against Lepanto, a
fortified town. This design was a failure, and Byron occupied himself
with the fortification of Missolonghi, and with the formation of a
brigade for the next campaign.

But his health had lately been giving way; he was living in little
better than a swamp; and one day, after exposure to a heavy shower, he
was seized with acute pains. On April 11, the illness, now recognised as
rheumatic fever, increased, and on the 19th he was no more. The funeral
took place in the Church of St. Nicholas, Missolonghi, on April 22, and
the remains were carried to England on the brig Florida, and buried,
close to those of his mother, in the village church of Hucknall.


_V.--A Bewildering Personality_


Can I clear away some of the mists that hang round my friend, and show
him as worthy of love as he was of admiration? The task is not an easy
one. In most minds some one influence governs, from which all secondary
impulses are found to radiate, but this pivot of character was wanting
to Lord Byron. Governed at different moments by totally different
passions, and impelled sometimes, as in his excess of parsimony in
Italy, by springs of action never before developed in his nature, he
presents the strangest contradictions and inconsistencies, a bewildering
complication of qualities.

So various, indeed, were his moral and intellectual attributes, that he
may be pronounced to have been not one, but many. It was this multiform
aspect that led the world to compare him with a medley host of
personages: "within nine years," as he playfully records, "to Rousseau,
Goethe, Young, Aretino, Timon of Athens, Dante, Petrarch, Satan,
Shakespeare, Buonaparte, Tiberius, Æschylus, Sophocles, Euripides,
Harlequin, Henry VIII., Mirabeau, Michael Angelo, Diogenes, Milton,
Alfieri, and many others."

But this very versatility, which renders it so difficult to fix the
fairy fabric of his character, is itself the clue to whatever was most
dazzling in his might, or startling in his levity, or most attractive or
most repellent in his life and genius. A variety of powers almost
boundless, and a pride no less vast in displaying them; an unusual
susceptibility and an uncontrolled impetuosity--such were the two great
sources of all that varied spectacle of his life--unchecked feeling and
dominant self-will.

Great versatility of power will hardly be found without a tendency to
versatility of principle. Byron was fully aware, not only of this
characteristic quality of his nature, but also of its danger to
singleness of character; and this consciousness had the effect of
keeping him in a general line of consistency, throughout life, on
certain great subjects, and helped him to preserve unbroken the greater
number of his personal attachments. But, except in some few respects, he
gave way to his versatile humour without scruple or check; and it was
impossible but that such a range of will and power should be abused. Is
it to be wondered at that in the works of one thus gifted and carried
away we should find, without any design of corrupting on his side, evil
too often invested with a grandeur which belongs intrinsically but to
good?

Nay, it will be found that even the strength and impressiveness of
Byron's poetry is sometimes injured by a capricious and desultory
quality due to this very pliancy of mind. It may be questioned whether a
concentration of his powers would not have afforded a grander result. It
may be that, if Lord Byron had not been so actively versatile, he would
have been, not less wonderful, but more great.

Again, this love of variety was one of the most pervading weaknesses,
not only to his poetry, but of his life. The pride of personating every
kind of character, evil as well as good, influenced his ambition and his
conduct; and to such a perverse length did he carry this fancy for
self-defamation that, if there was any tendency to mental derangement,
it was in this point that it manifested itself. I have known him more
than once, as we have sat together, to throw out dark hints of his past
life with an air of gloom and mystery designed to awaken interest; and I
have little doubt that, to produce effect at the moment, there is hardly
any crime so dark or so desperate of which, in the excitement of acting
upon the imaginations of others, he would not have hinted that he had
been guilty. It has sometimes occurred to me that the occult cause of
his lady's separation from him may have been nothing more, after all,
than some imposture of this kind, some dim confession of undefined
horror.

But the over-frankness with which he uttered every chance impression of
the moment was by itself enough to bring his character unfavourably
before the world. Which of us could bear to be judged by the unnumbered
thoughts that course like waves of the sea through our minds and pass
away unuttered and even unowned by ourselves? To such a test was Byron's
character, throughout his life, exposed.

Yet, to this readiness in reflecting all hues, whether of the shadows or
lights of our variegated existence, Lord Byron owed his personal
fascination. His social intercourse was perfectly charming, because
whoever was with him occupied for the moment all his thoughts and
feelings. Even with the casual acquaintance of the hour his heart was on
his lips, ready to give away every secret of his life.

To my assertion that "at no time of his life was Lord Byron a confirmed
unbeliever" it has been objected that his writings prove the direct
contrary. But this is to confuse the words "unbeliever" and "sceptic,"
the former of which implies decision of opinion, and the latter only
doubt. Many passages in his "Journal" show doubt strongly inclined to
belief. "Of the immortality of the soul it appears to me there can be
little doubt." "I have often been inclined to materialism in philosophy,
but could never bear its introduction into Christianity, which appears
to me essentially founded upon the soul." Here are doubt and unrest, but
not unbelief.

And so I conclude my labours, undertaken at the wish of my friend, and
leave his character to the judgement of the world. Let it be remembered
that through life, with all his faults, he never lost a friend; that
those about him in his youth, whether as companions, teachers, or
servants, remained attached to him to the last; that the woman to whom
he gave the love of his maturer years idolises his name; and that, with
a single unhappy exception, those who were brought into relations of
amity with him have felt towards him a kind regard in life, and retain a
fondness for his memory.

       *       *       *       *       *


JAMES COTTER MORISON


Life and Times of St. Bernard


     James Augustus Cotter Morison, English essayist and historian,
     was born in London on April 20, 1832, and was the son of the
     inventor and proprietor of "Morison's Pills." His first years
     were spent in Paris, where he laid the foundation of his
     intimate knowledge of the French people. After graduating at
     Oxford, he wrote for the "Saturday Review" and other papers,
     and in 1863 brought out his "Life and Times of Saint Bernard."
     His other chief work is entitled "The Service of Man: an Essay
     towards the Religion of the Future," published in 1886. He had
     projected an historical study of France under Louis XIV., but
     never completed it. He died on February 26, 1888. Morison was
     a Positivist, and had many friends in that group, and his rich
     mind and genial temper endeared him to several of the leading
     literary men of his time, such as George Meredith, Mark
     Pattison and Matthew Arnold.


_I.--The Early Days of a Useful Life_


Saint Bernard was born in 1091, and died in 1153. His life thus almost
coincides with the central portion of the Middle Ages. He saw the First
and Second Crusades, the rising liberties of the communes, and the
beginnings of scholasticism under Abelard. A large Church reformation
and the noblest period of monasticism occurred in his day, and received
deep marks of his genius.

He was the son of Tesselin, a wealthy feudal baron of Burgundy,
remarkable for his courage, piety, justice and modesty. Alith, his
mother, was earnest, loving and devout, and full of humility and
charity. His earliest years were passed amid the European fervour of the
First Crusade; and as he grew from boyhood into youth--at which time his
mother died--he made choice of the monastic profession. His friends
vainly tried to tempt him aside into the pursuit of philosophy; but his
commanding personal ascendancy brought his brothers and friends to
follow him instead into the religious life. Having assembled a company
of about thirty chosen spirits, he retired into seclusion with them for
six months, and then, in 1113, at the age of twenty-two, led them within
the gates of Citeaux.

This community, founded fifteen years before, and now ruled by Stephen
Harding, an Englishman from Dorsetshire, was exceedingly austere,
keeping Saint Benedict's rule literally. Here Bernard's uncompromising
self-mortification, and his love of, and communion with, Nature, showed
themselves as the chief characteristics of his noble spirit. "Believe
me," he said to a pupil, "you will find something far greater in the
woods than you will in books; stones and trees will teach you that which
you will never learn from masters." The arrival of Bernard and his
companions was a turning-point in the history of Citeaux; and the
monastery had to send out two colonies, to La Ferté and Pontigny, and in
1115 a third, under Bernard himself, to Clairvaux. Here, in a deep
umbrageous valley, traversed by a limpid stream, the thirteen pioneers
built a house little better than a barn. Their privations were great.
Beech-nuts and roots were at first their main support; but soon the
sympathy of the surrounding country brought sufficiency for their frugal
needs. Bernard was consecrated Abbot of Clairvaux by the Bishop of
Chalons, the renowned William of Champeaux, with whom he established a
deep friendship.

His labours, anxieties and austerities had well-nigh brought Bernard to
the grave, when the good bishop, finding him inflexible, went to
Citeaux, and, prostrating himself before Stephen Harding, begged and
obtained leave to direct and manage Bernard for one year only. The young
abbot obeyed his new director absolutely, and lived in a cottage apart
from the monastery "at leisure for himself and God, and exulting, as it
were, in the delights of Paradise."

William of St. Thierry and other chroniclers, telling of Clairvaux at
this time, are fervid in their reverence and praise. "Methought I saw a
new heaven and a new earth" ... "the golden age seemed to have revisited
the world" ... "as you descended the hill you could see it was a temple
of God; the still, silent valley bespoke the unfeigned humility of
Christ's poor. In this valley full of men, where one and all were
occupied with their allotted tasks, a silence, deep as that of night,
prevailed. The sounds of labour, or the chants of the brethren in the
choral service, were the only exceptions. The order of this silence
struck such a reverence even into secular persons that they dreaded
breaking it even by pertinent remarks."

Saint Benedict's rule had reference only to a single religious house;
but Abbot Stephen of Citeaux united in one compact whole all the
monasteries which sprang from the parent stock of Citeaux, and
established an organised system of mutual supervision and control. A
general chapter was held annually in September, and every Cistercian
abbot whose monastery was in France, Italy or Germany was bound to
attend every year; those from Spain, every two years; those from
Ireland, Scotland, Sicily and Portugal, every four years; those from
Norway, every five years; and those from Syria and Palestine, every
seven years. The "Charter of Charity," promulgated by this chapter for
the guidance of the Cistercian Order, is a brief but pregnant document,
which quite explains its success.


_II.--A Great Preacher and Essayist_


About 1119, Bernard, who had resumed the duties of abbot, began the
career of literary and ecclesiastical activity--the wide and impassioned
correspondence, the series of marvellous sermons--which have won for him
the title of the Last of the Fathers. His early essays are vigorous, but
lack judgement and skill; they are stiff and rhetorical, and far removed
from the tender poetry of his later writings. Three years later we find
Bernard credited with many miracles, narrated by William of St. Thierry,
who afterwards retired to become a monk at Signy, where he wrote his
record of the saint. It was then regarded as natural that a man of
eminent piety should work miracles; and we ought to accept these
stories, in their native crudity and simplicity, not as true, but as
significant. Belonging to the time, as much as feudal castles and mail
armour do, they form part of a picture of it.

With the exception of a visit to La Grande Chartreuse, and of another to
Paris, where he preached the "true philosophy" of poverty and contempt
of the world to the schools distracted by scholastic puzzles, Bernard
remained a secluded monk of a new and humble Order. But already, in his
thirty-fifth year, the foundations had been laid of that authority which
enabled him to quell a widespread schism, to oppose a formidable
heretic, and to give the strongest impulse to the Second Crusade. His
power was growing, chiefly by his voluminous correspondence. He wrote to
persons of all classes on all subjects; his letters afford to the
historian a wide repertory of indubitable facts, and show what was the
part played at that time by the spiritual power--that of a divine
morality and superior culture coming into conflict with, and strong
enough to withstand, a vigorous barbarism. These epistles are full of
commonsense and clear, practical advice, and often give us a glimpse of
the human, as distinct from the ascetic, element in monastic life. They
show how men could pass pleasant and thoughtful days amid the barbarism
of the time.

The feudal fighting, plundering and slaying seemed to spectators of that
time, and doubtless to Bernard also, as fixed and unalterable, part of
the nature of things. Louis VI., King of France, had spent his life in a
succession of sieges, forays and devastations, as one feudal lord among
others often more powerful than he. But generally he was in the right,
and his enemies in the wrong; he generally fought for justice and mercy,
and they for power and for plunder. The feudal aristocracy was now at
the zenith of its power, and the peasant was oppressed by injustice,
taxation and forced labour. Only the Church, and she only on grand
occasions, could stand up for the poor; but now the royal power made
common cause with Church and poor, and was rewarded by a gain in extent
and in influence. Yet even Louis, whose whole life showed respect for
the spiritual power, had some disagreement with the Bishop of Paris and
with the Archbishop of Sens, so that the two ecclesiastics placed the
kingdom under interdict, and fled to Citeaux. Thence Bernard, with an
astonishing tone of authority, called upon his king to do justice; and
Louis was on the point of restoring the stolen property. Pope Honorius,
however, sent letters to the king, raising the interdict, and thereupon
Bernard turned his fearless indignation upon the supreme pontiff
himself. "We speak with sadness; the honour of the Church has been not a
little blemished in the time of Honorius."

The same intrepidity is shown in Bernard's controversy with the monks of
Cluny, an abbey of pre-eminent power and moral authority, so that Louis
had called it the "noblest member of his kingdom." Pontius, its abbot,
having fallen into ways of pride and extortion, had been induced from
Rome to resign his abbacy, and to promise a pilgrimage to the Holy Land;
but soon afterwards he fell upon the monastery with an armed force, and
ruled there like a robber chieftain. This scandalous outrage was soon
reported at Rome, and the sacrilegious usurper was excommunicated and
banished. Bernard seized the moment when laxity of observance of the
rule had produced its bitterest fruit to break out in remonstrances and
warnings, as well to his own Cistercians as to the Cluniacs, on the
decline of the genuine monastic spirit. The invective of what he calls
his "Apology" spares neither the softness, nor the ostentation, nor the
avarice, of religious houses. It condemns even their stately
sanctuaries. "The walls of your church are resplendent, but the poor are
not there." It recalls the erring monasteries to real mortification. In
another early treatise, "The Degrees of Humility and of Pride," the
modes of pride are exhibited forcibly, and with not a little humour.
Curiosity, thoughtless mirth, mock humility, and other symptoms of the
protean vice are painted by a master.

But Bernard's period of retirement was drawing to a close; he was
becoming indispensable to his contemporaries. In 1128 he was called to
the Council of Troyes, at which the Order of Knights Templars was
founded, and wrote a treatise in praise of the "new warfare," called the
"Exhortation to the Knights of the Temple." He was brought, again, to
the council convened by Louis VI. at Étampes to decide between the
claims of the rival Popes in the Papal schism. The council opened by
unanimous consent that Bernard's judgement should decide their views;
and without hesitation he pronounced Innocent II. the lawful Pope, and
Peter Leonis, or Anacletus II., a vain pretender. He bore the same
testimony, in the presence of Innocent, before Henry I. of England, at
Chartres, and before Lotharius, the German Emperor, at Liège. The Pope
visited Clairvaux, where he was moved to tears at the sight of the
tattered flock of "Christ's poor," then presided at the Council of
Rheims, 1131, and continued his journey into Italy, still accompanied by
the Abbot of Clairvaux. Bernard, convinced that the cause of Innocent
was the cause of justice and religion, set no bounds to his advocacy of
it in letters to kings, bishops and cities. Such was now the fame of his
sanctity that on his approach to Milan the whole population came out to
meet him.

He returned to Clairvaux in 1135, where he found the community all
living in Christian amity, and again retired to a cottage in the
neighbourhood for rest and reflection. "Bernard was in the heavens,"
says Arnold of Bonnevaux; "but they compelled him to come down and
listen to their sublunary business." The buildings were too small for
their constantly growing numbers, and a convenient site had been found
in an open plain farther down the valley. Bishops, barons and merchants
came to the help of the good work; and the new abbey and church rose
quickly.

To Bernard's forty-fifth year belong the "Sermons on the Canticles." In
the auditorium, or talking-room of the monastery, the abbot, surrounded
by his white-cowled monks, delivered his spiritual discourses. A strange
company it was: the old, stooping monk and the young beginner, the lord
and the peasant, listening together to the man whose message they
believed came from another world.


_III.--St. Bernard and the Second Crusade_


In the meanwhile, the affairs of the Papacy had not improved--Innocent
was still an exile from his see. Worst of all, the monastery of Monte
Casino, the head and type of Western monarchism, had declared for
Anacletus, the anti-Pope; and in 1137 Bernard set out for Italy, visited
Innocent at Viterbo, and proceeded to Rome. As he advanced, Anacletus
was rapidly deserted by his supporters, and shortly afterwards solved
the difficulty by his death. So ended the schism; and Bernard left Rome
within five days after finishing his work. With broken health and
depressed spirits he returned to Clairvaux. His brother Gerard, who had
shared his journey, died soon after they reached home; and Bernard's
discourse on that event is one of the most remarkable funeral sermons on
record. The monk had not ceased to be a loving and impassioned man.

Towards the end of 1139, the heresies of Peter Abelard, brought to his
notice by William of St. Thierry, called the Abbot of Clairvaux again
into public controversy. He implored Pope and cardinals to stay the
progress of a second Arius. Abelard was at this time sixty-one years
old, Bernard's senior by twelve years, and was without a rival in the
schools. The two men were such that they could not but oppose one
another; they looked at the shield from opposite sides; reconciliation,
however desirable, could be only superficial. Bernard met Abelard, and
"admonished him secretly." He well knew to what epoch this subtle mind,
with its "human and philosophic reasons," was about to lead; his quick
ear caught the distant thunder-roll of free inquiry. The heresies of
Peter de Bruis and the rebellion of Arnold of Brescia had already marked
the beginning of the great change. At last Bernard unwillingly yielded
to Abelard's challenge to a public dispute at Sens; but his speech had
hardly begun when Abelard rose in his place, refused to hear more, and
appealed to Rome. He never reached Rome, but remained a penitent monk at
Cluny, reconciled to his great antagonist.

Bernard was fifty-five years of age, and old for his years, when the
Pope delegated to him the office of preaching the Second Crusade. Pale
and attenuated to a degree which seemed almost supernatural, his
contemporaries discovered something in the mere glance of his eyes which
filled them with wonder and awe. When his words of love, aspiration and
sublime self-sacrifice reached their ears, they were no longer masters
of themselves or of their feelings. A great meeting had been convened by
Pope and king at Vézelay, on Easter, 1146. Bernard, attended by the
king, spoke from a platform erected on a hill; there was a shout of
"Crosses! Crosses!" and the preacher scattered a sheaf of these badges
among the people. The spiritual mind of Europe had spoken through
Bernard, and now the military mind spoke through Louis VII. He called
upon France to destroy the enemies of God. Then Bernard preached the
Crusade through France and Germany, welcomed everywhere by almost
unparalleled enthusiasm and attended by miraculous signs.

Bernard was shortly to die; but he had first to bear the trial of being
reviled as the author of the calamities which had overtaken the Crusade.
Why had he preached it and prophesied success if this was to be the
event? A murmur of wrath against him was heard from the broad population
of Europe. It was during this dark time that he began his largest
literary work, the five books "De Consideratione," addressed to his
disciple, Eugenius III., a powerful and elaborate plea against the
excessive centralization of all administration and decisions into the
hands of the Papal Court. Bernard called this period "the season of
calamities." He discovered that his secretary had been forging his name
and used his authority to recommend men and causes most unworthy of his
patronage. His health was such that he could take no solid food; sleep
had left him; his debility was extreme. Pope Eugenius died in July,
1153; and Bernard had no wish to stay behind. "I am no longer of this
world," he said; and on August 20 he passed away.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN MORLEY


Life of Richard Cobden


     In an age when many have gained the double distinction of
     eminence in statesmanship and in letters, the name of Lord
     Morley stands out as that of a man so illustrious in both
     provinces that it is hard to decide in which he has earned the
     greater fame. We are here concerned with him as a brilliant
     English man of letters. The "Life of Cobden" was published in
     1881, when John Morley was in the height of his literary
     activity. Born at Blackburn on December 24, 1838, and educated
     at Cheltenham and Oxford, he had entered journalism, had
     edited the "Pall Mall Gazette" and the "Fortnightly Review,"
     and had followed up his first book--a monograph on Burke--by a
     remarkable study of Voltaire, and by his work entitled "On
     Compromise." Political preoccupations drew him somewhat away
     from literature after 1881; but in 1901 he published his book
     on Cromwell, which was followed two years later by the
     monumental "Life of Gladstone."


_I.--On the Road_


Heyshott is a hamlet in a sequestered corner of West Sussex, not many
miles from the Hampshire border. Here, in an old farmhouse, known as
Dunford, Richard Cobden was born on June 3, 1804. His ancestors were
yeomen of the soil, and, it is said, with every appearance of truth,
that the name can be traced in the annals of the district as far back as
the fourteenth century.

Cobden's father, a man of soft and affectionate disposition, but wholly
without the energy of affairs, met with financial disaster in 1814, and
relatives charged themselves with the maintenance of his dozen children.
Richard was sent by his mother's brother-in-law, a merchant in London,
to a school in Yorkshire. Here he remained for five years, a grim and
desolate time, of which he could never afterwards endure to speak. In
1819 he was received as a clerk in his uncle's warehouse in Old Change;
and at the age of twenty-one he was advanced from the drudgery of the
warehouse to the glories of the road. What made the life of a traveller
specially welcome to Cobden was the gratification that it offered to the
master-passion of his life, an insatiable desire to know the affairs of
the world.

In 1826, his employer failed, and for some months Cobden had to take
unwelcome holiday. In September he found a situation, and again set out
on the road with his samples of muslin and calico prints. Two years
afterwards, in 1828, he and two friends determined to begin business on
their own account. They arranged with a firm of Manchester
calico-printers to sell goods on commission; and so profitable was the
enterprise that in 1831 the partners determined to print their own
goods, and took an old factory at Sabden in Lancashire.

Cobden's imagination was struck by the busy life of the county with
which his name was destined to be so closely bound up. "Manchester," he
writes with enthusiasm, "is the place for all men of bargain and
business." His pen acquires a curiously exulting animation as he
describes the bustle of its streets, the quaintness of its dialect, the
abundance of its capital, and the sturdy veterans with a hundred
thousand pounds in each pocket, who might be seen in the evening smoking
clay pipes and calling for brandy-and-water in the bar-parlours of
homely taverns. He prospered rapidly in this congenial atmosphere; but
it is at Sabden, not at Manchester, that we see the first monument of
his public spirit--a little stone school-house, built as the result of
an agitation led by him with as much eager enthusiasm as he ever threw
afterwards into great affairs of state.

Between 1833 and 1836 Cobden's character widened and ripened with
surprising quickness. We pass at a single step from the natural and
wholesome egotism of the young man who has his bread to win to the wide
interests and generous public spirit of the good citizen. His first
motion was towards his own intellectual improvement, and early in life
he perceived that for his purposes no preparation could be so effective
as that of travel. In 1833 and 1834 he visited the Continent; in 1835,
the United States; and in 1836 and 1837 he travelled to Egypt, the
Levant, and Turkey.

In the interval between the two latter journeys he made what was
probably his first public speech, at a meeting to further the demand of
a corporation for Manchester. The speech is described as a signal
failure. "He was nervous," says the chronicler, "confused, and in fact
practically broke down, and the chairman had to apologise for him."

He was much more successful in two pamphlets he published at this time,
"England, Ireland, and America," and "Russia," in which he opened the
long struggle he was to wage against the restriction of commerce, and
the policy of intervention in European feuds. It is no strained
pretension to say that already Richard Cobden, the Manchester
manufacturer, was fully possessed of the philosophic gift of feeling
about society as a whole, and thinking about the problems of society in
an ordered connection.


_II.--The Corn Laws_


In 1837, Cobden was invited to become candidate for the borough of
Stockport. Although he threw himself into the struggle with all his
energy, on the day of election he was found to be at the bottom of the
poll. Four years later he was returned for Stockport by a triumphant
majority. But in 1841 he was no longer a rising young politician; he had
become the leading spirit of a national agitation.

In October, 1838, a band of seven men met at an hotel in Manchester, and
formed a new Anti-Corn-Law Association. They were speedily joined by
others, including Cobden, who from this moment began to take a prominent
part in all counsel and action. The abolition of the duties on corn was
the single object of Cobden's political energy during the seven years
that followed, and their destruction was the one finished triumph with
which his name is associated.

After the rejection in the following year by a large majority of Mr.
Villiers' motion that the House of Commons should consider the act
regulating the importation of corn, the association developed into a
League of Federated Anti-Corn-Law Associations in different towns and
districts. The repealers began the work of propagandism by sending out a
band of economic missionaries, who were not long in discovering how
hardly an old class interest dies. In many districts neither law nor
equity gave them protection. The members of the league were described in
the London Press as unprincipled schemers, as commercial and political
swindlers, and as revolutionary emissaries, whom all well-disposed
persons ought to assist the authorities in putting down.

Before he entered Parliament, Cobden re-settled his business by entering
into partnership with his brother Frederick, and married (May, 1840) a
young Welsh lady, Miss Catherine Ann Williams. In Parliament Cobden was
instantly successful. His early speeches produced that singular and
profound effect which is perceived in English deliberative assemblies
when a speaker leaves party recriminations, abstract argument, and
commonplaces of sentiment, in order to inform his hearers of telling
facts in the condition of the nation.

But Cobden's parliamentary work was at this time less important than his
work as an agitator. If in one sense the Corn Laws did not seem a
promising theme for a popular agitation, they were excellently fitted to
bring out Cobden's peculiar strength. It was not passion, but
persuasiveness, to which we must look for the secret of his oratorical
success. Cobden made his way to men's hearts by the union which they saw
in him of simplicity, earnestness, and conviction, with a singular
facility of exposition. Then men were attracted by his mental alacrity,
by the instant readiness with which he turned round to grapple with a
new objection.

His patience in acquiring and shaping matter for argument was surpassed
by his inexhaustible patience in dealing with the mental infirmities of
those whom it was his business to persuade. He was wholly free from the
unmeasured anger against human stupidity which is itself one of the most
provoking forms of that stupidity.


_III.--Cobden and Bright_


In the autumn of 1841, Cobden and Bright made that solemn compact which
was the beginning of an affectionate and noble friendship that lasted
without a cloud or a jar until Cobden's death.

"On the day when Mr. Cobden called upon me," said Bright, "I was in the
depths of grief, I might almost say of despair; for the light and
sunshine of my house had been extinguished. All that was left on earth
of my young wife, except the memory of a sainted life and of a too brief
happiness, was lying still and cold in the chamber above us. Mr. Cobden
called upon me as a friend, and addressed me, as you might suppose, with
words of condolence. After a time he looked up, and said, 'There are
thousands of houses in England at this moment where wives, mothers, and
children are dying of hunger. Now,' he said, 'when the first paroxysm of
your grief is past, I would advise you to come with me, and we will
never rest till the Corn Law is repealed.' I accepted his invitation."

Although the agitation for repeal was in Cobden's mind only a part of
the broad aims of peace and social and moral progress for which he
strove, he was too practical to put forth his thoughts on too many
subjects at once. He confined his enthusiasm to repeal until repeal was
accomplished. But his efforts left him no time to attend to his own
business, which was falling to pieces under the management of his
brother Frederick. In the autumn of 1845 he felt compelled to give up
his work as an agitator on account of his private affairs, but Bright
and one or two friends procured the money that sufficed to tide over the
emergency.

The cause was now on the eve of victory. The autumn of 1845 was the
wettest in the memory of man. For long the downpour never ceased by
night or by day; it was the rain that rained away the Corn Laws. The bad
harvest and the Irish potato famine brought the long hesitation of Sir
Robert Peel to an end. Soon after the opening of the session of 1846, he
announced his proposals.

The repeal of the Corn Laws was to be total, but not immediate. For
three years there was to be a lowered duty on a sliding scale, and then
the ports were to be opened entirely. "Hurrah! Hurrah!" wrote Cobden to
his wife on June 26, "the Corn Bill is law, and now my work is done!"


_IV.--In the Cause of Peace_


Cobden was now absent from England for fourteen months, travelling on
the Continent. His reception was everywhere that of a great discoverer
in a science which interests the bulk of mankind much more keenly than
any other, the science of wealth. People looked on him as a man who had
found out a momentous secret. He had interviews with the Pope, with
three or four kings, with ambassadors, and with all the prominent
statesmen. He never lost an opportunity of speaking a word in season.
They were not all converted, but they all listened to him; and they all
taught him something, whether they chose to learn anything from him in
return or not.

On his return he joined with Bright in an agitation for financial and
parliamentary reform. While he believed in an extension of the franchise
as a means of attaining the objects he had in view, he was essentially
an economical, a moral, and a social reformer. He was never an
enthusiast for mere reform in the machinery. He made it his special
mission to advocate financial reform, and left the advocacy for
franchise extension very largely to his colleague.

Retrenchment was the keynote of the financial reform urged by Cobden;
and retrenchment involved the furtherance of international peace and the
reduction of British armaments by means of the abandonment of the policy
of intervention in European disputes and the policy of "clinging to
colonies," with the consequent expenditure upon colonial defence. From
1846 to 1851 Lord Palmerston was at the Foreign Office, and was
incessantly active in the affairs of half the countries of Europe. To
this policy of interference Cobden offered resolute opposition. He was
especially energetic in protesting against the lending to Austria and
Russia of money that was in effect borrowed to repay the cost of the
oppressive war against Hungary. It is impossible not to admire the
courage, the sound sense, and the elevation with which Cobden thus
strove to diffuse the doctrine of moral responsibility in connection
with the use of capital.

In 1852, a Protectionist Ministry under Lord Derby came into power, and
the Anti-Corn Law League was revived. The danger, however, soon passed
away; the Derby Ministry made no attempt to interfere with freedom of
trade, and ere the year ended gave place to the Aberdeen Ministry.
Cobden's policy of peace and retrenchment, however, became more and more
unpopular. Cobden's urgent feeling about war was not in any degree
sentimental. He opposed war because war and the preparation for it
consumed the resources which were required for the improvement of the
temporal condition of the population. But in the inflamed condition of
public opinion his arguments were powerless.

The invasion panic of 1853 was followed in 1854 by the Crimean War, and
in opposing that war Cobden and Bright found themselves absolutely
alone.

"The British nation," said Lord Palmerston, "is unanimous in this
matter. I say unanimous, for I cannot reckon Cobden, Bright, and Co. for
anything." His estimate was perfectly correct; Cobden and Bright had the
whole world against them. The moral fortitude, like the political
wisdom, of these two strong men, stands out with a splendour that
already recalls the great historic types of statesmanship and
patriotism.


_V.--Cobden as Treaty-Maker_


In 1857, Cobden was compelled to retire for a time from politics. He
vigorously opposed the Chinese War, and succeeded in defeating Lord
Palmerston's Government in the House of Commons. Lord Palmerston, with
his usual acuteness and courage, at once dissolved parliament, and in
the General Election his victory was complete. The Manchester School was
routed. Cobden, who contested Huddersfield, was heavily beaten; and at
Manchester itself Bright was at the bottom of the poll. Cobden went to
his home at Dunford, in Sussex, and remained there nearly two years.
Once more he was afflicted with financial trouble. An unfortunate land
speculation at Manchester, and certain investments in American
railroads, had again brought him into difficulties, from which he was
ultimately rescued by a munificent gift of £40,000 from subscribers
whose names he never knew.

The General Election of 1859 was held while Cobden was absent in the
United States, and on his return he found that he had been chosen member
for Rochdale. To his surprise, he also received from his old enemy,
Palmerston, an offer of the Presidency of the Board of Trade. Cobden,
who had consistently refrained from accepting any office, courteously
declined.

But he was none the less able to render a great service to the new
Government. Mr. Bright, in a parliamentary speech, incidentally asked
why, instead of lavishing the national substance in armaments, they did
not go to the French Emperor and attempt to persuade him to allow his
people to trade freely with ours. The idea of a commercial treaty
occurred to M. Chevalier on reading the speech, and he wrote in this
sense to Cobden, who was strongly impressed by the notion. He opened his
mind to Gladstone, who was then Chancellor of the Exchequer; and, as the
outcome, Cobden went to Paris in the autumn of 1859 as unofficial
negotiator of a treaty.

The negotiation was long and tedious. Cobden had to convert the emperor
to his views, and to await the reconciliation of the various French
interests that were opposed to freedom of trade. It was not until
November, 1860, that Cobden's labours were concluded. England cleared
her tariff of protection, and reduced the duties which were retained for
revenue on the two French staples of wine and brandy. France, on her
part, replaced prohibition by a series of moderate duties.

Palmerston offered Cobden a choice between a baronetcy and a Privy
Councillorship as a reward for his services. He replied begging
permission most respectfully to deny himself the honour. "An
indisposition to accept a title," he wrote, "being in my case rather an
affair of feeling than of reason, I will not dwell further on the
subject."


_VI.--The Last Days of Cobden_


When Cobden returned to England his public position had more than
recovered the authority and renown which had been seriously impaired by
his unpopular attitude on the Russian war. But he and Bright were soon
involved in an almost angrier conflict than before with the upper and
middle classes, on account of their championship of the North in the
American Civil War.

The remaining years of his life were largely spent in systematic
onslaughts upon the policy of Lord Palmerston, and in opposition to
military expenditure. It was with the purpose of resisting a Canadian
fortification scheme that he made his last journey to London in March,
1865. On his arrival he was seized by a sharp attack of asthma;
bronchitis supervened, and it became evident that he would not recover.
On the morning of Sunday, April 2, Bright took his place by the side of
the dying man. As the bells were ringing for the morning service the
mists of death began to settle heavily on his brow, and his ardent,
courageous, and brotherly spirit soon passed tranquilly away.

He was buried by the side of his son in the little churchyard at
Lavington, on the slope of the hill among the pine-woods. "Before we
left the house," Bright has told us, "standing by me, and leaning on the
coffin, was his sorrowing daughter, one whose attachment to her father
seems to have been a passion scarcely equalled among daughters. She
said, 'My father used to like me very much to read to him the Sermon on
the Mount. His own life was, to a large, extent, a sermon based upon
that best, that greatest of all sermons. His was a life of perpetual
self-sacrifice.'"

       *       *       *       *       *


SAMUEL PEPYS


Diary

