These kinds, the specific names of which are not only descriptive, but
amply embrace the group, are much added to by flowers having other names
and minor distinctions, the latter, for the most part, being only shades
or mixtures of colour--as crimson, pink, white, and bicolours. The
florets in many kinds are exceedingly pretty, from the way in which they
are tipped and shaded; notably, a new variety that was sent me under the
name of Dresden China. These sorts having different tints are usefully
named with "florists'" names--as Pearl, Snowball, Rob Roy, Sweep, Bride,
&c. I may say that I have long grown the Daisy largely, Bride and Sweep
being the favourite kinds; both are robust growers, very hardy and
early. Bride is the purest white, with florets full, shining, and well
reflexed; rather larger than a florin, and when fully developed has a
half globular appearance; another good point is its flower stalks being
4in. to 5in. long, which renders it serviceable as cut bloom. Sweep is
not quite so large, though a good-sized Daisy, it also opens more flat;
its colour, however, is first rate, it is the darkest crimson Daisy I
ever saw, is of a quilled form and very full. Its chief point is its
constant colour; if the florets are examined, they are the same deep
crimson underneath as on the face of the flower; this, together with its
long stalks, renders it useful, too, in a cut state.

[Illustration: FIG. 19. BELLIS PERENNIS FISTULOSA.

(One-third natural size.)]

To grow this useful flower well and render it doubly valuable by having
it in bloom in mid-winter, requires three things: First, timely
transplanting; secondly, rich soil; thirdly, partial shade; these
conditions will be more briefly and, perhaps, clearly explained, if I
state my method. At the end of May or fore part of June, plenty of good
rotten stable manure is wheeled into the bush-fruit quarters; it is
worked in with a fork, so as to do as little damage as possible to the
bush roots. A line is drawn, and the old Daisy roots which have just
been taken up are trimmed by shortening both tops and roots. They are
severely divided, and the pieces planted 6in. apart in rows 8in.
asunder. In such a cool, moist situation they soon form good tufts, and
I need scarcely say that the dressing of manure has also a marked effect
on the fruit crop. A planting so made is not only a cheerful carpet of
greenery during winter, but is well dotted over with bloom. The plants
being well established in rich soil, and having the shelter of the
bushes during summer and winter, are the conditions which have conduced
to such early flowers. This is the method I have adopted for years, and
both Daisies and fruit have been invariably good crops. I ought,
however, to say that beds more exposed, together with the fact that the
Daisy roots have to be transplanted in October or November, never flower
so early, from which it will be seen that the treatment explained hardly
applies to such bedding; but where a breadth of bloom is required, say,
for cutting purposes, I know no better plan. As cut bloom the daisy is
charming in glass trays on a bed of moss, or even in small bouquets,
mixed with the foliage of pinks, carnations, and rosemary. Such an
arrangement has at least the merit of sweet simplicity, and somehow has
also the effect of carrying our thoughts with a bound to spring-time.

The ancient names for this "old-fashioned" flower were "Little Daisies"
and "Bruisewoorte." The latter name, according to Gerarde, was applied
for the following reasons: "The leaues stamped, taketh away bruses and
swellings proceeding of some stroke, if they be stamped and laide
thereon, whereupon it was called in olde time Bruisewoorte. The iuice
put into the eies cleereth them, and taketh away the watering;" and here
is a dog note: "The same given to little dogs with milke, keepeth them
from growing great."

Flowering period, February to July.


Bocconia Cordata.

_Syn._ MACLEAYA CORDATA; _Nat. Ord._ PAPAVERACEÆ.


A hardy herbaceous perennial from China. It is a tall and handsome
plant; its fine features are its stately habit, finely-cut foliage, and
noble panicles of buds and flowers; during the whole progress of its
growth it is a pleasing object, but in the autumn, when at the height of
7ft. it has become topped with lax clusters of flowers, over 2ft. long,
it is simply grand. There are other names in trade lists, as _B.
japonica_ and _B. alba_, but they are identical with _B. cordata_;
possibly there may be a little difference in the shades of the flowers,
but nothing to warrant another name. Having grown the so-called species
or varieties, I have hitherto found no difference whatever; and of the
hardy species of this genus, I believe _B. cordata_ is the only one at
present grown in English gardens. During spring and early summer this
subject makes rapid growth, pushing forth its thick leafy stems, which
are attractive, not only by reason of their somewhat unusual form, but
also because of their tender and unseasonable appearance, especially
during spring; it is rare, however, that the late frosts do any damage
to its foliage. It continues to grow with remarkable vigour until, at
the height of 5ft. or more, the flower panicles begin to develop; these
usually add 2ft. or more to its tallness.

The flowers are very small but numerous, of an ivory-white colour; they
are more beautiful in the unopened state, when the two-sepalled calyx
for many days compresses the tassel-like cluster of stamens. Each half
of the calyx is boat-shaped, and before they burst they have the form
and colour of clean plump groats; as already hinted, the stamens are
numerous, and the anthers large for so small a flower, being spathulate.
As soon as the stamens become exposed, the calyx falls, and in a short
time--a few hours--the fugacious anthers disappear, to be followed only
a little later by the fall of the filaments; there is then left a naked
but headed capsule, half the size of the buds, and of the same colour;
they may be traced on the panicle in the illustration (Fig. 20). From
the fading quality of the above-named parts, the buds and capsules
chiefly form the ornamental portion of the compound racemes.

[Illustration: FIG. 20. BOCCONIA CORDATA.

(About one-twentieth natural size; blossom, one-half natural size.)]

The leaves are from 8in. to 10in. in diameter, the largest being at the
base of the tall stems; their outline, as the specific name implies, is
heart-shaped, but they are deeply lobed and dentate, in the way of the
fig leaf, but more profusely so; they are stalked, of good substance,
glaucous, nearly white underneath, which part is also furnished with
short stiff hairs. The glaucous hue or farina which covers the
leaf-stalks and main stems has a metallic appearance, and is one of its
pleasing features as a decorative plant. For many weeks the flowers
continue to be developed, and from the deciduous quality of the fading
parts, the panicles have a neat appearance to the last. In a cut state
the long side branches of flowers, more than a foot long, are very
effective, either alone or when mixed with other kinds, the little
clusters of white drop-like buds being suitable for combination with the
choicest flowers.

As a decorative specimen for the more ornamental parts of the garden,
and where bold subjects are desired, there are few herbaceous things
that can be named as more suitable; from the day it appears above the
ground, to and throughout its fading days in the autumn, when it has
pleasing tints, it is not only a handsome but distinct form of plant; as
an isolated specimen on the lawn, or by frequented walks, it may be
grown with marked effect; if too nearly surrounded with other tall
things, its beauty is somewhat marred; but wherever it is planted it
should have a good fat loam of considerable depth. I ought not to omit
saying that it forms a capital subject for pot culture; plants so
treated, when 12in. or 18in. high, no matter if not then in flower, are
very useful as window or table plants; but of course, being herbaceous,
they are serviceable only during their growing season; they need not,
however, be a source of care during winter, for they may with safety be
plunged outside in a bed of ashes or sand, where they will take care of
themselves during the severest weather.

It may be propagated by cuttings taken from the axils of the larger
leaves during early summer; if this method is followed, the cuttings
should be pushed on, so that there are plenty of roots before the winter
sets in. I have found it by far the better plan to take young suckers
from established plants; in good rich soil these are freely produced
from the slightly running roots; they may be separated and transplanted
any time, but if it is done during summer they will flower the following
season. Tall as this subject grows, it needs no supports; neither have I
noticed it to be troubled by any of the garden pests.

Flowering period, September to August.


Bulbocodium Trigynum.

_Syns._ COLCHICUM CAUCASICUM _and_ MERENDERA
CAUCASICUM; _Nat. Ord._ MELANTHACEÆ.


This pretty miniature bulbous plant is very hardy, flowering in winter.
It is a scarce flower, and has recently been represented as a new plant.
As a matter of fact, it is not new, but has been known under the above
synonymous names since 1823, when it was brought from the Caucasus. In
general appearance it is very different from the _Colchicum_ (Sprengle),
as may be seen by the drawing (Fig. 21), and _Merendera_ (Bieberstein)
is only another Spanish name for _Colchicum_. The new name, authorised
by Adams, may have been the cause, all or in part, of its being taken
for a new species. The specific name may be presumed to be in reference
to either its deeply-channelled, almost keeled leaves, which have the
appearance of three corners, or in allusion to the triangular way in
which they are disposed. It is a desirable flower for several
reasons--its earliness, durability, rich perfume, and intrinsic beauty.

[Illustration: FIG. 21. BULBOCODIUM TRIGYNUM.

(Full size.)]

The little plant, at the height of 2in., produces its rather large
flowers in ones and twos in February, and they last for many days in
perfect form. The scent reminds one of the sweet honey smell of a white
clover field during summer. The colour is very pale lilac, nearly white;
the tube takes on a little greenness; it is also divided, though the
slits are invisible until the bloom begins to fade. The corolla, of
irregular segments, is 1½in. across when expanded; the stamens are half
the length of the petal-like segments, and carry anthers of exquisite
beauty, especially when young, then they are orange colour, divided like
a pair of half-opened shells, and edged with chocolate; the styles are a
delicate pale green, and rather longer than the stamens. The leaves, as
already stated, are channelled, broadest at the base, tapering to a
point, which is rather twisted; they are 2in. long during the blooming
period, of a deep green colour, stiff, but spreading, forming a pretty
accurate triangle. This description, together with the cut, will suggest
both the uses and positions in which it should be planted; if a single
blossom, when brought indoors, proves strongly fragrant, it is easy to
imagine what a clump must be in the garden. Like those of the colchicum,
its flowers are quickly developed; the leaves grow longer afterwards,
and die off in summer.

It thrives in a sandy loam or leaf soil, in a sunny part, and increases
itself at the roots like the saffrons.

Flowering period, February and March.


Bulbocodium Vernum.

SPRING BULBOCODIUM, _or_ SPRING SAFFRON; _Nat. Ord._
MELANTHACEÆ.


In mild winters, sheltered positions, and light vegetable soil, this
bulbous plant may be seen in blossom from January to March. The flowers
appear before the leaves, and may, at the first glance, be taken for
lilac-coloured croci. Up to a certain stage, however, the colour
gradually improves in the direction of purple, and where there are
established patches it is no inconsiderable part of the effect caused by
this desirable winter flower to see it a mass of bloom in many shades,
ranging from white (as in the bud state) to a lively purple. It is an
old plant in English gardens, and is largely found wild in mid-Europe.
It came from Spain as early as 1629. Still, it is not generally known or
grown; but within the last few years it has come to the fore, with a
host of other hardy and early-flowering subjects. The natural order in
which it is classed includes many beautiful genera, both as regards
their floral effect and anatomical structures. _Veratrum_, _Uvularia_,
and _Colchicum_ are, perhaps, the more familiar, and the last-mentioned
genus is a very nearly allied one. A feature of the genus _Bulbocodium_
is implied by the name itself, which means "a wool-covered bulb." This
quality, however, will be more observable when the bulb is in a dormant
state; it exists under the envelope. The crocus or saffron-like flowers
are aptly named "Spring Saffron," though there is a great botanical
difference to be seen between this genus and that of _Colchicum_ when
the flower is dissected. The bloom is produced from the midst of an
ample sheath, and overlapping leaves, which are only just visible in the
early season of this year; the corolla of six petal-like divisions is
2in. to 3in. across when expanded, and of various shades and colours, as
already stated; the segments are completely divided, being continued
from the throat of the corolla to the ovary by long tapering bases,
called nails, claws, or ungues. The leaves are stout, broadly
strap-shaped, channelled, and of a deep green colour. The bulb is rather
small; its form resembles that of the autumn crocus, as also does its
mode of growth and reproduction.

The early blossoms of this bulb soon disappear, and though the roots are
all the better for being well ripened, a thin patch of some of the finer
annuals sown in spring amongst their withering leaves will not do much
harm, and will prove useful as gap-stoppers. Another good way is to grow
these dwarf bulbous flowers with a carpet of creepers, of which there
are scores in every way suitable; and where nothing else is available or
to be grown with success, the small-leaved ivy will answer well. The
dwarf phloxes, however, are more useful; their browned spreading
branches form a neutral but warm-looking ground to the purple blossoms;
besides, by the time all trace of the Bulbocodium has shrivelled up,
they begin to produce their sheets of bloom. All such prostrate forms
not only preserve dwarf winter flowers from the mud, but otherwise give
effect to the borders. This bulb thrives best in light soil, well
drained; in sheltered nooks it may be had in flower a month earlier than
in exposed parts. Under such conditions it increases very fast, and the
bulbs may be transplanted with advantage every other year after the tops
have died off. In stiff or clay-like soil it dwindles and dies.

Flowering period, January to March.


Calthus Palustris Flore-pleno.

DOUBLE MARSH MARIGOLD; _Old Common Name_, "MEADOW
BOOTES"; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


The typical, or single-flowering variety of this plant is a British
species, and a rather common one; but the pleasing habit and bright,
finely-formed, orange-yellow flower of this double kind renders it a
suitable plant for any garden. It is herbaceous and perennial, and loves
boggy situations. It is, however, very accommodating, and will be found
to do well in ordinary garden soil, especially if it be a stiffish loam;
clayey land is well adapted for it. No matter what kind of weather
prevails, it has always a neat and fresh appearance. By the illustration
(Fig. 22) the reader will doubtless recognise its familiar form. As
already stated, its flowers are orange-yellow, very full, with petals
evenly arranged; they are 1in. across, and produced on round, short,
hollow stems, seldom more than 9in. high. The forked flower stalks are
furnished with embracing leaves, differing very much from the others,
which are stalked, heart-shaped, nearly round, and evenly-toothed. All
the foliage is of a rich dark shining green colour. Strong specimens
produce flowers for a long time, fully two months, and frequently they
burst into blossom again in the autumn. Individual flowers are very
lasting, and, moreover, are very effective in a cut state. It is a
robust grower, providing it is not in light dry soil; it seems with me
to do equally well fully exposed to sunshine and in partial shade, but
both positions are of a moist character.

[Illustration: FIG. 22. CALTHUS PALUSTRIS FLORE-PLENO.

(One-half natural size.)]

It has long fleshy roots, which allows of its being transplanted at any
time, early spring being the best, to increase it. The crowns should be
divided every three years, when there will be found to be ample roots to
each one.

Flowering period, April to June.


Calystegia Pubescens Flore-pleno.

_Nat. Ord._ CONVOLVULACEÆ.


This double Convolvulus is a somewhat recent introduction from China; it
is hardy and perennial. So distinct are its large flesh-coloured flowers
that they are often taken at the first glance, when cut, for double
pyrethrums or chrysanthemums, but, seen in connection with the plant,
the form of foliage and climbing or twining habit of the bindweed soon
enable the most casual observer of flowers to recognise its genus.

The flowers are 2in. to 3in. across, petals long, narrow, wavy, and
reflexed; these are well held together by the five-parted calyx, further
supported by a bract of two small but stout leaves. The flower stalks
are round and wiry, 3in. or 4in. long; they are produced all along the
twining stems, which are only of the moderate length of 5ft. or 6ft. The
leaves are of the well-known Convolvulus form.

I find it a good plan to grow this subject amongst tall and early
flowering plants, such as lupins, foxgloves, and lilies, the old stems
of which form ample supports for the climber; moreover, they are
rendered less unsightly from being thus furnished anew with leaf and
flower, even though not their own. Another method is in early summer to
place a short twiggy branch over the pushing growths; it will soon
become covered, and if not too large, the ends of the shoots will
slightly outgrow the twigs and hang down in a pleasing manner. The plant
should be started in light sandy loam and have a warm situation,
otherwise flowers will be scarce and the whole specimen have a weedy
appearance. When once it becomes established, it will be found to spread
rapidly by means of its running roots, which, unless checked, will soon
become a pest. I simply pull out all growths except such as shoot up in
the desired position, and so continue to treat them as weeds throughout
the growing season. Stems furnished with flowers a yard or more long, in
a cut state, make rich festoons; single blooms (the smaller ones) look
well as "buttonholes," being neat and effective, without gaudiness. I
ought to state that a succession of flowers is kept up for fully three
months; this fact adds not a little to the value of this handsome
flesh-coloured bloomer. Roots may be transplanted at any time; the
smallest piece will produce a blooming plant the first season, if put
into a proper soil and situation.

Flowering period, July to September.


Campanula Grandis.

GREAT BELLFLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ CAMPANULACEÆ.


A hardy herbaceous perennial from Siberia, growing to a height of 3ft.
Its flowers are large, bright, and numerous; well-established clumps
will present masses of bloom for more than a month with average weather.
As a large showy subject there are few plants more reliable, or that can
in any way excel it, more especially for town gardens. It is a rampant
grower, quickly covering large spaces by means of its progressive roots;
in gardens or collections where it can only be allowed a limited space,
the running habit of the roots will doubtless prove troublesome, and
often such free growers, however handsome they may be otherwise, are
esteemed common, which should not be. The proper thing to do would be to
give these vigorous and fine flowering subjects such quarters as will
allow them their natural and unrestrained development.

The flowers of _C. grandis_ are more than 1in. across the corolla, the
five segments being large and bluntly pointed, of a transparent
purple-blue colour, and very enduring; they are arranged on short
stalks, which issue from the strong upright stems. They form little
tufts of bloom at every joint for a length of nearly 2ft.; the
succession, too, is well kept up. Buds continue to form long after the
earliest have opened. The leaves are 4in. to 8in. long and ¾in. wide,
lance-shaped, stalkless, and finely toothed. They are arranged in round
tufts on the unproductive crowns, and they remain green throughout the
winter.

As regards soil, any kind will do; neither is the question of position
of any moment beyond the precaution which should be taken against its
encroachments on smaller subjects. In the partial shade of shrubs it not
only flowers well but proves very effective. Useful as this plant is in
the garden, it becomes far more so in a cut state. When it is needful to
make up a bold vase or basket of flowers for room decoration, it can be
quickly and effectively done by a liberal use of its long, leafy, but
well-bloomed spikes; five or six of them, 2ft. to 3ft. long, based with
a few large roses, pæonies, or sprays of thalictrum, make a noble
ornament for the table, hall, or sideboard, and it is not one of the
least useful flowers for trays or dishes when cut short. Propagated by
division at any time, the parts may be planted at once in their blooming
quarters.

Flowering period, June and July.


Campanula Latifolia.

BROAD-LEAVED BELLFLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ CAMPANULACEÆ.


A British species, very much resembling _C. grandis_, but somewhat
taller, and flowering a little earlier; the latter quality has induced
me to mention it, as it offers a fine spike for cutting purposes before
the above is ready.

Culture, uses, and propagation, the same as for _C. grandis_.

Flowering period, June and July.


Campanula Persicifolia.

PEACH-LEAVED BELLFLOWER; _Old Common Names_,
"PEACH-BELS" _and_ "STEEPLE-BELS"; _Nat. Ord._
CAMPANULACEÆ.


This good "old-fashioned" perennial has had a place in English gardens
for several hundred years; it is still justly and highly esteemed. It is
a well-known plant, and as the specific name is descriptive of the
leaves, I will only add a few words of Gerarde's respecting the flowers:
"Alongst the stalke growe many flowers like bels, sometime white, and
for the most part, of a faire blewe colour; but the bels are nothing so
deepe as they of the other kindes, and these also are more delated and
spred abroade then any of the reste." The varieties include single blue
(type) and white, double blue, and different forms of double white.

In all cases the corolla is cup or broad bell shaped, and the flowers
are sparingly produced on slightly foliaged stems, 18in. to 3ft. high;
there are, however, such marked distinctions belonging to _C. p. alba
fl.-pl._ in two forms that they deserve special notice; they are very
desirable flowers, on the score of both quaintness and beauty. I will
first notice the kind with two corollas, the inner bell of which will be
more than an inch deep, and about the same in diameter. The outer
corolla is much shorter, crumpled, rolled back, and somewhat marked with
green, as if intermediate in its nature between the larger corolla and
the calyx. The whole flower has a droll but pleasing form, and I have
heard it not inaptly called "Grandmother's Frilled Cap." The other kind
has five or more corollas, which are neatly arranged, each growing less
as they approach the centre. In all, the segments are but slightly
divided, though neatly formed; this flower is of the purest white and
very beautiful, resembling a small double rose. It is one of the best
flowers to be found at its season in the borders, and for cutting
purposes I know none to surpass it; it is clean and durable. So much are
the flowers esteemed, that the plant is often grown in pots for forcing
and conservatory decoration, to which treatment it takes kindly.

In the open all the above varieties grow freely in any kind of garden
soil, but if transplanted in the autumn into newly-dug quarters they
will in every way prove more satisfactory; this is not necessary, but if
cultivation means anything, it means we should adopt the best-known
methods of treatment towards all the plants we grow, and certainly some
of the above Bellflowers are deserving of all the care that flowers are
worth.

Flowering period, July to September.


Campanula Pyramidalis.

PYRAMIDAL _or_ CHIMNEY CAMPANULA; _Nat. Ord._
CAMPANULACEÆ.


This herbaceous perennial is a very old flower in this country; it came
from Carniola in the year 1594. It is very hardy, and for several months
together it continues to produce its large lively blue flowers,
beginning in July and lasting until stopped by frosts. At no time is it
in finer form than in September; at the height of from 5ft. to 7ft. it
proves richly effective amongst the blooming hollyhocks, where, as
regards colour, it supplies the "missing link" (see Fig. 23).

The flowers are a light bright blue colour, and 1in. to 1½in. across.
The corolla is bell-shaped, the five divisions being deeply cut, which
allows the flower to expand well; the calyx is neat and smooth, the
segments long and awl-shaped; the flower stalks are short, causing the
numerous erect branches to be closely furnished with bloom during
favourable weather. The leaves of the root are very large and stalked,
of irregular shape, but for the most part broadly oval or lance-shaped.
The edges are slightly toothed, having minute glands; those of the stems
are much smaller, sessile, and long egg-shaped; all the foliage is
smooth, and of a dark green colour; the main stems are very stout, and
sometimes grow to the height of 7ft. Vigorous plants will send up
several of these, from which a great number of small ones issue, all
assuming an erect habit; blooming specimens are hardly anything else
than a wand-like set of flowered stems, and though it is advisable to
stake them, I have seen them bend and wave during high winds without
damage.

[Illustration: FIG. 23. CAMPANULA PYRAMIDALIS.

(One-twentieth natural size; _a_, one-half natural size.)]

In the borders and shrubbery this is a very effective subject; it is
amongst herbaceous plants what the Lombardy poplar is amongst forest
trees--tall, elegant, and distinct. Its use, however, is somewhat
limited, owing to the stiffness of the stems and the shortness of the
flower stalks; but when grown in pots--as it often is--for indoor
decoration, it proves useful for standing amongst orange and camellia
trees. It has very strong tap roots, and enjoys a deep rich loam. Not
only does it look well among trees, but otherwise the partial shade of
such quarters seems conducive to finer bloom.

Flowering period, July to October.

_C. p. alba_ is a white flowering variety of the above species; its
other points of distinction are its smaller-sized leaves and much paler
green colour, by which alone the plants may be easily recognised from
the type. This variety may be grown with good effect in pots or the
border; it scarcely gets so tall as the blue form, but looks well by the
side of it.

The readiest way to increase these plants is to take the young and dwarf
growths from the woody crown of the roots, paring off a little of the
bark with each. If these are put in sandy loam during the warm growing
season and kept shaded for a few days, they will very soon make plenty
of roots; this method in no way damages the flowers. Another way is by
seed, but seedlings are two years before they bloom.


Campanula Speciosa.

SHOWY HAREBELL; _Nat. Ord._ CAMPANULACEÆ.


A comparatively new species, brought from Siberia in 1825, and sometimes
called _C. glomerata dahurica_. It is a good hardy plant, perennial and
herbaceous, and one of the earliest to flower. It has a distinct
appearance; it nearly resembles _C. aggregata_, but the latter does not
flower until several weeks later. Apart from its likeness to other
species of the genus, it is a first-class border flower, having large
bells of a fine deep purple colour, and, unlike many of the Harebells,
is not over tall, but usually about a foot high, having a neat habit.
The flowers are arranged in dense heads, whorl fashion, having very
short stalks; they are nearly 2in. long and bell shaped. The leaves
(radical) are oval heart-shaped and stalked; those of the stems are
sessile; the whole plant is hairy and robust. This is one of the flowers
which can hardly be planted out of place in any garden, excepting
amongst the rare and very dwarf alpines; it is not only true to its
name, "showy," but handsome. It will grow and flower well in the worst
soil and needs no sort of care; it would be fine in lines by a
shrubbery, and is effective in bold clumps; and though a new kind, it
belongs to a race of "old-fashioned" flowers, amongst which it would mix
appropriately. Increased by division in autumn.

Flowering period, June and July.


Campanula Waldsteiniana.

_Nat. Ord._ CAMPANULACEÆ.


A rare and distinct alpine species from Carinthia. It proves perfectly
hardy in this climate. For the rock garden it is a gem of the first
water, its habit being dwarf, dense, and rigid; floriferous as many of
the Bellflowers are, I know none to excel this one. As may be observed
in the following description, there are not a few distinctive traits
about it, which, more or less, go to make it a desirable subject for
rare and choice collections.

The flowers are a glistening bluish-lilac, erect, and ¾in. across when
fully expanded. The corolla can hardly be said to be bell-shaped, as the
five divisions are two-thirds of its depth, which allows it, when full
blown, to become nearly flat, and as the segments are equal, sharply
cut, and pointed, the flower has a star-like appearance. The little
calyx is cup-shaped, angular, and has small, stout, horn-like segments,
which are bent downwards. Each flower has a pedicel about 1in. long,
which springs from the axils of the main stem leaves; the stems seldom
exceed the height of 4in. or 5in., and they are exceedingly fine,
thready, as also are the pedicels; they are, moreover, of zigzag form,
from node to node. The leaves are ¾in. long, and less than ½in. wide,
ovate or nearly cordate, partially folded, and sometimes reflexed at the
ends, nearly stalkless, slightly toothed, smooth, of good substance and
a peculiar grey-green colour. The foliage for two or three weeks is
completely hidden by the large number of flowers, during which time it
is a most attractive subject.

I grow it with other dwarf Campanulas in a collection bed, where it
compares well with the finest, such as _C. pulla_, _C. muralis_, and _C.
Zoysii_, for effectiveness. Having proved it to thrive well in light
sandy soil of a vegetable character, I have not tried it otherwise; it
enjoys a sunny situation. The site should be well drained; it will
endure nothing like stagnant moisture--its peculiar roots would indicate
this fact, they are not only tender and fleshy, but thick and of a
pith-like nature, and, as I have never been able to gather any seed, and
the propagation has to be carried out by root division, there requires
to be a careful manipulation of these parts, for not only do they split
and break with the least strain, but when so mutilated they are very
liable to rot. I have found it by far the better plan to divide this
plant after it has begun to grow in March or April, when its fine
shining black shoots, which resemble horse hairs in appearance, are
about ½in. high. Slugs are fond of this plant; a dressing once a week of
sand and soot, when it begins to grow, will keep them off.

Flowering period, July and August.


Centaurea Montana.

MOUNTAIN KNAPWEED; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This is an "old-fashioned" and favourite flower. Every one must be
familiar with its thistle-like formed flowers; it is sometimes called
the large or perennial Cornflower and also the Large Bluebottle. The
blue variety has been grown in English gardens since 1596. There are now
white and pink coloured varieties, all rampant growers, very hardy and
perennial. They are in every way superior to the annual kind, which is
so largely grown, the flowers being more than twice the size, and
produced two months earlier; the blooming period is maintained until
late autumn.

The flowers, as before hinted, are thistle-shaped; the pericline or knob
just under the florets is cone-shaped, covered with evenly set and
pointed scales, green, edged with a brown margin, set round with short
bristle-like teeth. The florets of the outer ring are 1½in. long,
tubular half their length, the wider portion being five to seven cut;
the centre florets are short and irregular, richly tinted with pink at
their bases; the whole flower or ray, when expanded, is 3in. across.
They are produced on stems over 2ft. long and of a somewhat procumbent
habit, angular and branched near the tops; the leaves are 3in. to 6in.
long, lance-shaped, entire and decurrent, giving the stems a winged
appearance. They are of a greyish colour--nappy--whence the name
Knapweed.

This vigorous species, with its white and pink varieties, may be grown
in any kind of soil. It requires plenty of room; a two-year-old plant
will form a specimen a yard in diameter under favourable conditions. The
effect is good when all the three colours are grown near each other in
bold pieces. They yield an unfailing supply of flowers, which are of a
very useful type; in fact, the more they are cut the more they seem to
bloom, and it is a good plan to cut short half the stems about June.
They will (in a week or two) produce new shoots and large flowers in
abundance, the gain being flowers of extra size during autumn.

Propagated by division of the roots any time.

Flowering period, June to September.


Centranthus Ruber.

_Syn._ VALERIANA RUBER--RED VALERIAN; _Nat. Ord._
VALERIANACEÆ.


This is a strong and vigorous garden plant, with a somewhat shrubby
appearance; it is herbaceous, perennial, and sometimes classed as a
British species, therefore hardy; but though its classification among
British plants is justifiable, it is only so on the ground of its being
a naturalised subject, its original habitats being in the South of
Europe. It is a favourite and "old-fashioned" flower, and it fully
justifies the estimation in which it is held, the flowers being produced
in large bunches of a fine rich colour, which are very durable. Its
shrubby habit is not one of its least recommendations; seen at a
distance--which it easily can be--it might be taken for a ruby-coloured
rhododendron, to which, of course, it has no resemblance when closely
inspected. It grows 2ft. high or more.

The flowers are a bright ruby colour, very small, but closely massed in
great numbers, borne in corymbs, terminal and much branched; "the
calyx-limb, at first revolute, afterwards expanded into a feather-like
pappus;" the corolla is tubular, long, slender, and spurred; the
segments or petals are small and uneven, both in form and arrangement;
the germen is long; anther prominent and large for so small a flower,
viz., ¾in. long and hardly ¼in. in diameter. The stems are stout, round,
hollow, and glaucous; they are furnished with leaves of various shapes
at the nodes, as lance-shaped, long oval, heart-shaped and plain,
elliptical and pointed, wavy and notched, and arrow-shaped, lobed, and
toothed. The root leaves are mostly ovate, lanceolate, and entire. The
whole plant is smooth and glaucous. From the description given, it may
readily be seen that when in flower it will be effective--massive heads
of ruby flowers topping a shrub-like plant of shining foliage and
glaucous hue. It is eminently fitted for lines or borders where other
strong growers are admitted. In a cut state the flowers are very useful;
they are strongly scented, something like the lilac, with just a
suspicion of Valerian in it. I ought not to omit mention of its extra
brightness as seen by gaslight--this fact adds much to its value for
indoor decoration.

It may be grown in any kind of garden soil, needing nothing at any time
in the way of special treatment; but if it is supplied with a little
manure it will pay back with interest, in the form of extra-sized
bunches and brighter flowers.

_C. r. albus_ is a white-flowering kind of the above; its main points of
difference are its paler green foliage, smaller sized corymbs, shorter
growth, and rather later season of bloom.

_C. r. coccinea_ is another kind; the specific name is misleading. It is
not scarlet, but nearer a rose colour, and when compared with the
typical colour it appears much inferior; still, it is a good variety.
All the three colours, when grown side by side, are very showy when in
bloom.

This species, with its varieties, may be easily propagated by root
divisions at any time from late summer to spring; the long fleshy roots
should not be broken more than can be helped; every piece with a crown
on it will make a flowering plant the first season.

Flowering period, June to September.


Cheiranthus Cheiri.

COMMON WALLFLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ CRUCIFERÆ.


This well-known evergreen shrub (see Fig. 24) is more or less hardy in
our climate, according to the conditions under which it is grown.
Although a native of the South of Europe, it rarely happens, however
severe the winter may be in this country, that we are totally deprived
of the favourite bouquet of Wallflowers in winter or early spring, while
it is equally true that, during the hard weather of one or two recent
winters, in numerous gardens every plant was killed. In favourable
seasons its blooms are produced throughout winter, but the full blow
comes in April. Three hundred years ago it was known by its present
name; in this respect it is a rare exception, as most flowers have many
and widely different names, especially the "old-fashioned" sorts, so
that often the varied nomenclature hinders the identification of the
species. At one time the Wallflower was called the "Gillyflower," but
the name is now only applied to a biennial and single-flowered variety
of the stock--a near relation of the Wallflower. More than 200 years ago
Parkinson wrote, "Those Wallflowers that, carrying beautiful flowers,
are the delights and ornaments of a garden of pleasure."

[Illustration: FIG. 24. CHIERANTHUS CHEIRI.

(One-fourth natural size.)]

Of its well-known beauties, as regards its form, colour, varieties, and
delicious perfume, description is needless, though I may say, in
passing, that its fragrance renders it of value to those whose olfactory
nerve is dead to the scent of most other flowers.

Two errors are frequently committed in planting the Wallflower; first,
at the wrong time, when it is nearly a full-grown specimen and showing
its flowers; next, in the wrong way, as in rows or dotted about. It
should be transplanted from the seed beds when small, in summer or early
autumn, and not in ones and twos, but in bold and irregular groups of
scores together; anything like lines or designs seems out of harmony
with this semi-wildling. There is another and very easy method which I
should like to mention, as a suggestion--that of naturalisation; let
those near ruins, quarries, and railway embankments and cuttings,
generously scatter some seed thereon during the spring showers, when the
air is still; in such dry situations this flower proves more hardy than
in many gardens. Moreover, they serve to show it to advantage, either
alone or in connection with other shrubs, as the whin, which flowers at
the same time; here, too, it would be comparatively safe from being
"grubbed up."

Flowering period, January to June.


Cheiranthus Marshallii.

MARSHALL'S WALLFLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ CRUCIFERÆ.


A distinct and very hardy hybrid, being shrubby and tree-like in shape,
but withal very dwarf. From the compact habit, abundance and long
duration of its flowers, it is well suited for showy borders or lines.
It is not yet well known, but its qualities are such that there can be
no wonder at its quickly coming to the front where known.

It differs from the common Wallflower in being more dwarf and
horizontally branched, while the leaves are more bent back, hairy, and
toothed; immediately below the floriferous part of the stem the leaves
are more crowded, the stems more angular, the flowers much less, not so
straggling, and of a dark orange colour. Other hybrids in the same way
are being produced, differing mostly in the colour of the flowers, as
lemon, greenish-yellow, copper, and so on.

Plants a year old are so easily raised from cuttings, and form such neat
specimens, that a stock cannot be otherwise than very useful in any
garden; besides, they lift so well that transplanting may be done at any
time. My finest specimens have been grown from their cutting state, on a
bed of sifted ashes liberally mixed with well-rotted stable manure; in
such light material they have not only done well, but, when a few roots
were required, they lifted large balls without leaving any fibre in the
ground. To have good stout stock before winter sets in, slips should be
taken from the old plants as soon as they have done flowering; dibble
them into light but well enriched soil, and give water in droughty
weather only.

I ought to mention that this dwarf Wallflower, and also its allied
kinds, are capital subjects for very dry situations; on old walls and
the tops of outhouses they not only do well, but prove decorative
throughout the year. In such places plants will live to a great age, and
sow their own seed freely besides.

Flowering period, May and June.


Chionodoxa Luciliæ.

SNOW GLORY; _Nat. Ord._ LILIACEÆ.


A hardy bulbous perennial, from Asia Minor. It has only been cultivated
about four years in English gardens; still it has been proved to be as
hardy as the squills, which it very much resembles. Mr. Maw, who
discovered and introduced it, found it "near the summit of the
mountain," which (though it is a native of a much warmer climate than
ours) may account for its hardy character. That it is a most beautiful
flower is beyond doubt, but there are those who think it has been
overpraised. It should not, however, be forgotten that Mr. Maw's
description of it was from a sight of it in masses, a state in which it
can hardly have been judged yet in this country, as until very recently
the bulbs were very expensive. It has, however, taken kindly to our
climate, and is likely to increase fast, when it may be seen to greater
advantage.

It grows to the height of 6in. or 8in.; the flower scapes, which are
rather slender, are somewhat shorter than the foliage, the flowers being
longer in the petals than the squills, almost star-shaped, and nearly
1in. across; later on they reflex. Their colour is an intense blue,
shading to white in the centre of the flower. The flowers are produced
in numbers, from three to six on a stem, having slender pedicels, which
cause the flowers to hang slightly bell fashion. The leaves, from their
flaccidness and narrowness, compared with the squills, may be described
as grassy. The bulbs are a little larger than the kernel of a cob nut,
nearly round, having satiny skins or coats.

It may be grown in pots, and forces well if allowed first to make good
roots, by being treated like the hyacinth. It should be kept very near
the glass. It has also flowered fairly well in the open border fully
exposed, but in a cold frame, plunged in sand and near the glass, it has
been perfection. Single bulbs so grown in "sixties" pots have done the
best by far.

All the bulbs hitherto experimented with have been newly imported; very
different results may possibly be realised from "home-grown" bulbs. It
is also probable that there may be varieties of this species, as not
only have I noticed a great difference in the bulbs, but also in the
flowers and the habit of plant. This I have mentioned to a keen
observer, and he is of the same opinion; be that as it may, we have in
this new plant a lovely companion to the later snowdrops, and though it
much resembles the squills, it is not only sufficiently distinct from
them, but an early bloomer, which we gladly welcome to our gardens. It
seems to do well in equal parts of peat, loam, and sand, also in leaf
soil and sand.

Flowering period, March and April.


Chrysanthemum.

_Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


The flowers to which I would now refer the reader are of no particular
species, but, like several other genera, this genus has been
considerably drawn upon or utilised by the hybridiser, and the species,
looked upon from a florist's point of view, have been much improved
upon by their offspring. Not only are Japan and China the homes of the
finer flowering species, but in these countries the Chrysanthemum has
been esteemed and highly cultivated for centuries; in fact, such a
favourite is this flower with the Chinese, that they have treated it
with many forms of their well-known art in matters horticultural, and
when the flower was brought to this country it would doubtless be in a
form improved by them. It reached this country nearly 100 years ago, and
was known by the names _C. indicum_ and _C. sinense_; about the same
time a species from the East Indies was called _C. indicum_. This
flower, from the time of its introduction, has been justly appreciated;
and by the skill of several cultivators we have a largely increased
number of forms and colours. Still, there are certain distinctions kept
up amongst the varieties, and they are commonly known by such names as
"large-flowering," "pompon, or small-flowered," "early flowering,"
"anemone-flowered," and "Japanese." These names, besides being somewhat
descriptive, are otherwise useful to the amateur who may wish to grow a
representative collection, and where there is convenience it is
desirable to do so in order to observe their widely different forms and
colours, as well as to enjoy a long succession of bloom.

So well is the Chrysanthemum known that little could be usefully said of
it by way of description; but well as it is known and easy as its
culture is, there are few things in our gardens that show to greater
disadvantage. This should not be with a subject which offers such range
of habit, colour, and period of blooming; and when such is the case,
there must be some radical mistake made. The mistake I believe to be in
the selection, and that alone. If so, the remedy is an easy matter. Let
me ask the reader to remember three facts: (1) Many sorts grown in pots
and flowered under glass are unfitted for the borders or open garden.
(2) The later flowering varieties are of no use whatever for outside
bloom. (3) Of the early blooming section, not only may the finest
varieties be grown with marked effect, but they, as a rule, are of more
dwarf habit, and will afford abundance of bloom for cutting purposes for
nearly two months. Selections are too often made from seeing the fine
sorts in pots; let it be understood that all are perfectly hardy, but
owing to their lateness, their utility can only be realised under
artificial conditions. I am not now considering pot, but garden kinds,
and no matter what other rules may be observed, if this is overlooked it
will be found that though the plant may grow finely and set buds in
plenty, they will be so late as to perish in their greenness by the
early frosts; on the other hand, of the early section, some will begin
to bloom in August, and others later, each kind, after being covered
with flowers for several weeks, seeming to finish naturally with our
season of flowers.

There is nothing special about the culture of this very hardy and
rampant-growing plant, but I may add that, though it will stand for many
years in one place, and flower well too, it is vastly improved by
division of the roots in autumn or early spring every second year. The
earth of its new site should be deeply dug and well enriched with stable
manure; it will not then matter much what sort of soil it is--the more
open the situation the better. How grandly these decorate the borders
when in masses! and as a cut flower I need hardly say that there are few
to excel the Chrysanthemum, either as an individual bloom or for bouquet
and other work.

I do not frequently make mention of many florists' flowers by name, but
in this case I think I may usefully name a few varieties: Andromeda,
cream coloured, Sept.; Captain Nemo, rosy purple, Aug.; Cassy, pink and
white, Oct.; Cromatella, orange and brown, Sept.; Delphine Caboche,
reddish mauve, Aug.; Golden Button, small canary yellow, Aug.;
Illustration, soft pink to white, Aug.; Jardin des Plantes, white,
Sept.; La Petite Marie, white, good, Aug.; Madame Pecoul, large, light
rose, Aug.; Mexico, white, Oct.; Nanum, large, creamy blush, Aug.;
Précocité, large, orange, Sept.; Soeur Melaine, French white, Oct.;
St. Mary, very beautiful, white, Sept. These, it will be seen, are
likely to afford a variety and succession of bloom.

Flowering period, August to November.


Cichorium Intybus.

_Syns._ C. PERENNE _and_ C. SYLVESTRE--WILD
SUCCORY _or_ CHICORY; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This herbaceous perennial is a native plant, in many parts being very
common. Not only, however, do many not know it as a wild flower, but we
have the facts that under cultivation it is a distinct and showy plant,
and that of late it has come into great request. Its flowers are a
pleasing blue, and produced on ample branches, and for mixing with other
"old-fashioned" kinds, either in the borders or as cut blooms, they are
decidedly telling; for blending with other Composites it has its value
mainly from the fact that blues are rare in September; the China asters
are too short in the stalk for cutting purposes, and many of the tall
perennial starworts are neither bright nor well disposed. I may also
mention another proof of its decorative quality--it is not common
(_i.e._, wild) in my district, and a plant being cultivated in my garden
for its flowers has been so much admired that it is likely to have other
patrons, and in many instances it is being introduced into gardens where
the choicest flowers are cultivated. I am bound, however, to say that
when not in flower it has the appearance of the commonest weed.

Its flowers are produced when 2ft. to 6ft. high. They are of a fine
glistening blue colour, 1in. to 1½in. across, and in the way of a
dandelion flower, but stalkless individually, being disposed in ones,
twos, and threes, somewhat distantly in the axils of the leaves, and all
over the numerous and straggling branches. The leaves are rough, of a
dingy green colour, and variously shaped, Gerarde's description being as
follows: "Wilde Succori hath long leaues, somewhat snipt about the edges
like the leaues of sow thistle, with a stalke growing to the height of
two cubits, which is deuided towarde the top into many braunches. The
flowers grow at the top blewe of colour; the roote is tough and woodie,
with many strings fastened thereto."

I find this plant not only enjoys a half shady place, but if it is so
placed that its quick growing branches can mix with those of other
subjects in a trellis or other supports, its coarser parts will not only
be partially hidden, but the rich coloured flowers will show to
advantage. I may mention that mine is mixed with Virginian creeper on
wires, and the effect may easily be imagined. It will do in any kind of
garden soil, but if deeply dug and well manured the flowers are vastly
improved. Propagated by seed or division of the stout tap roots.

Flowering period, August to September.


Clethra Alnifolia.

ALDER-LEAVED CLETHRA; _Nat. Ord._ ERICACEÆ.


A hardy deciduous shrub, and mentioned in connection with herbaceous
perennials because of its rich flowers and dwarf habit. It is a native
of North America, having been grown in this country for 150 years; it is
not so often met with as it ought to be, though much esteemed. It
becomes very productive of flowers when only 2ft. high, but grows
somewhat taller when well established; it is more valuable than common
from its floriferousness, during late summer to the end of the season.

Let me at once state that its winning point is the delicious scent of
its pure white flowers; it is very powerful, and like that of the lilac
and alder combined; the racemes are 2in. or 3in. long, and compactly
formed of short-stalked flowers less than ½in. across; they are of good
substance, and in form resemble the lilac flower minus the tube; the
flower stems are somewhat woody, and foliaged to the base of the spike
or raceme. The leaves are of varying sizes, oval, lance-shaped, and
short-stalked, distinctly veined and slightly wrinkled, sharp but finely
toothed, of a dark shining green colour on the upper and a greyish-green
on the under side. The whole shrub is somewhat rough to the touch; the
habit is bushy and branching, increasing in size from suckers; the
numerous twiggy side shoots of the previous year's growth produce the
flowers.

It enjoys a light soil and sunny situation, and it may be planted
anywhere in the shrubbery or borders as a first-class flowering subject.
Its scent loads the air for some distance around, and pleasantly reminds
one of spring flowers. Such sweet-smelling flowers are not too plentiful
in September, and I know not a better one than this amongst hardy
flowers for the late season. Its odour is fine and full; a single sprig
now by me proves almost too much for the confinement of a room. This
quality is invaluable in small flowers that can be freely cut, which,
moreover, as in this case, are otherwise suitable for bouquet work.
Propagated by cuttings and division of the suckers, taken when growth
has ceased; if put in sandy loam and a warm situation, they will become
rooted during the following spring.

Flowering period, August and September.


Colchicum Autumnale.

MEADOW SAFFRON; _Common Name_, AUTUMNAL CROCUS; _Nat.
Ord._ MELANTHACEÆ.


A native bulbous perennial (see Fig. 25). The Colchicums are often
confounded with the autumn-flowering species of croci, which they much
resemble when in bloom; the similarity is the more marked by the
absence, from both, of their leaves in that season, otherwise the leaves
would prove to be the clearest mark of difference. Botanically they are
far removed from each other, being of different orders, but there is no
need to go into such distinctions, not, at any rate, in this case.

[Illustration: FIG. 25. COLCHICUM AUTUMNALE

(about one-sixth natural size.)]

The flowers are well known and they need not be described further than
by saying they are in form crocus-like, but much longer in the tubes and
of a bright mauve-purple colour. The bulbs have no resemblance to the
crocus whatever, being often four times the size of the crocus corms.
Moreover, they are pear-shaped and covered with flaky wrappers of a
chestnut brown colour; if examined, these coverings will be found, near
the neck of the bulb, to be very numerous and slack fitting, extending
above the ground, where they have the form of decayed or blackened
foliage; a singular fact in connection with the roots is, they are not
emitted from the base of the bulb, but from the side of the thickened or
ovate part, and are short and tufty. In early spring the leaves, which
are somewhat like the daffodil, but much broader and sheathed, are
quickly grown; at the same time the fruit appears. In summer the foliage
suddenly turns brown, and in the autumn nothing is seen but blackened
foliage, which is very persistent, and which, a little later, acts as
sheaths for the long-tubed flowers. Unless the weather be very
unfavourable, these flowers last a long time--fully two weeks. The
double variety, which is somewhat scarce, is even more lasting, and I
may add, it is a form and colour so softly and richly shaded that it is
nothing short of exquisite; but the single variety, now more especially
under notice, is also capable of agreeably surprising its friends when
used in certain ways, for instance, as follows: A tray of the bright
green and nearly transparent selaginella, so common in all greenhouses,
should form the ground for twos or threes of these simple but elegant
Saffron flowers; no other should be placed near--their simplicity forms
their charm. It will be seen that the robust but soft-coloured flower of
the meadows harmonises finely with the more delicately grown moss. In
other ways this fine autumnal flower may be used with pleasing effect in
a cut state, and it blends well with the more choice exotics. This is
more than can be said of many hardy flowers, and it is fortunate that
during dull weather, when we are driven from our gardens, there are
still some flowers which may be hastily gathered and so arranged indoors
as to give us all the pleasure which only such flowers can yield at such
a season.

I find this subject to do well in any situation, but I think the blooms
are a richer colour if grown under partial shade. The bulbs should not
be disturbed if abundance of flowers are wanted; but if it is found
desirable to propagate them, the bulbs may be lifted every two or three
years, when the tops have withered, and when there will probably be
found a goodly crop of young tubers.

Flowering period, September and October.


Colchicum Variegatum.

_Nat. Ord._ MELANTHACEÆ.


This comes from Greece, nevertheless it is perfectly hardy; it is not
only peculiarly pretty when closely examined, but a truly handsome
flower, either as cut bloom or seen in groups in a growing state.
Compared with _C. autumnale_, it is shorter in the tube, or more dwarf;
still, it is a larger flower, and its rosy purple petals, or divisions
of the corolla, are more spear-shaped, and each from 2in. to 3in. long;
they have a stout and almost white mid-rib, the other parts of the
segments being distinctly and beautifully chequered with white and rosy
purple; the tube is stout, and of transparent whiteness; the foliage
less than that of the British species, and more wavy. The habit of the
flowers is erect, and during sunshine they become flatly expanded, when
they will be 4in. to 5in. across, being 3in. to 4in. high. It is a very
durable flower, lasting at least a fortnight, and many are produced
from one bulb, appearing in succession, so that the blooming period is
well extended; it braves the worst weather with little or no damage.
Unlike the longer-tubed varieties, it is never seen in a broken state,
and it is this which mainly renders it superior. Either as a cut flower,
or a decorative subject for the borders or rockwork, it is a first-rate
plant, being neat and showy.

It enjoys a sandy loam in a moist but warm situation; at the base of a
small rockwork having a southern aspect it flourishes to perfection; it
can hardly be planted wrongly provided there is no stagnant moisture.
Propagated like _C. autumnale_, than which it is of slower increase.

Flowering period, September and October.


Coreopsis Auriculata.

EAR-LEAVED COREOPSIS; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 26. COREOPSIS AURICULATA.

(One-fourth natural size.)]

The oldest species of the genus grown in English gardens; its flowers
are yellow, but dotted at the base of the ray florets. The leaves, as
implied by the name, are dissimilar to other species, being lobed and
having ear-like appendages; but this feature is far from constant, and
otherwise the leaves differ, being sub-sessile and oval-lance-shaped
(see Fig. 26). It came from North America as long ago as 1699. Slugs are
very fond of these plants, and in winter more especially, when the
dormant eyes are not only in a green, but exposed state; they should be
watched after, or during one mild night the whole may be grazed off, to
the great injury of the plant.

Its habit, uses, culture, and propagation are the same as for _C.
tenuifolia_.


Coreopsis Grandiflora.

LARGE-FLOWERED COREOPSIS; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


In many parts this resembles _C. lanceolata_, its main distinction being
implied by its name. The flowers are larger and the ray florets more
deeply cut; it is also bolder in the foliage, and the stems grow nearly
as strong as willows. It is an abundant bloomer, and a good specimen is
a glorious object during the autumn. It comes from North America, but my
experience of it is that it is not so hardy as _C. lanceolata_ and _C.
auriculata_.

Habit, uses, culture, and propagation, as for _C. lanceolata_.


Coreopsis Lanceolata.

SPEAR-LEAVED COREOPSIS; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This form of bright yellow flower is in great favour during August, but
that is not all. The various kinds of this genus are plants of the
easiest culture, and their rich flowers are produced in great quantities
from midsummer to the time the frosts begin. This species has been said
to be only of a biennial character; it is, however, understood generally
to be perennial, though not quite so hardy as others which come from the
colder climates of America. It was imported from Carolina in 1724, and
in this country proves hardy in selected situations, where its roots are
comparatively dry in winter, and I may add that it proves a true
perennial.

When the plant has attained the height of a foot it begins to flower;
each bloom has a long pedicel, nearly naked, also round and smooth. The
flowers are a shining yellow colour, and nearly 3in. across; the florets
of the ray are flatly arranged, shield-shaped, pleated, and
four-toothed, the teeth being sometimes jagged; the disk is small for so
large a flower; the florets brown and yellow. The double involucrum,
common to the genus, has its upper set of bracteoles rolled outward;
they are of a brownish colour; the lower set are green and wheel-shaped
during the period of a perfect ray, and they alternate with the upper
ones. The leaves, as may be inferred from the specific name, are
lance-shaped, 2in. to 6in. long, smooth and entire; they are attenuated
to the stems, which they more or less clasp. The habit of the plant is
much branched, but only slightly at base; it becomes top-heavy from the
numerous shoots near the top, which cause it to be procumbent; otherwise
this subject would rank with tall growers. It is one of the most useful
flowers, both, in the garden and when cut, the long stalks in both cases
adding much to its effectiveness; its form and brightness are sure to
commend it, no matter whether it happens to be a fashionable flower or
otherwise. It is at once a bold and delicate form, and one that
harmonises with any other kinds and colours.

It should be grown in deeply-dug and well-enriched earth, and, as
already hinted, the drier the situation the more safely will it winter.
Not only that, but on raised beds or banks sloping to the full sunshine
it will also flower to perfection. All its family, so far as I have
proved them, hate excessive moisture. Its propagation may be by
division, as in this damp climate it does not seem to ripen seed, but I
have found sometimes not a little difficulty in dividing the woody
roots, as frequently there is only one stem below the surface with
roots. When there are more the difficulty is lessened, but I have
noticed that the stronger branches which are weighted to the ground form
rudimentary roots where in contact with the earth. These may either be
pegged and covered with soil, or cut off and made into cuttings,
removing most of the tops. If the latter is done during August they will
become well rooted before the frosts appear.

Flowering period, July to October.


Coreopsis Tenuifolia.

SLENDER-LEAVED COREOPSIS; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


Hardy, herbaceous, and perennial; a native of North America, and a
distinct species, from its finely-cut foliage and small, dark,
orange-yellow flowers. For several weeks it has a few flowers, but
during September it literally covers itself with bloom, so that it is
one of the most pleasing objects in the garden.

It grows 2 ft. high; each flower has a long nearly nude stalk, slender
but wiry; the flowers are 1½in. across, and of a deep yellow colour; the
florets of the ray are more distant from each other than is the case
with many of the genus; the disk is small, dark brown, but changing from
the appearance and disappearance of the yellow seed organs. The foliage,
as may be seen by the illustration (Fig. 27), is deeply and finely cut,
of a dark green colour, and so arranged that each node has a nearly
uniform dressing; the main stems are slender, and bend gracefully with
the least breeze, and otherwise this plant proves a lively subject. Its
habit is bushy and very floriferous, and it is well worth a place in
every garden. It cannot fail to win admiration; even when growing, and
before the flowers appear, it is a refreshing plant to look upon. In a
cut state, the bloom, if taken with long stems, is well adapted for
relieving large and more formal kinds. Tastes differ, and in, perhaps,
nothing more than floral decorations; all tastes have a right to a share
of indulgence, and in claiming my privilege in the use of this flower,
I should place two or three sprays (stems) alone in a glass or bright
vase, but there might be added a spike of the cardinal flower or a pair
of single dahlias and a falling spray of the Flame nasturtium
(_Tropæolum speciosum_).

This plant should have a rich soil, sunny aspect, and a raised or
well-drained site, and this is all it needs; it is not a subject to
increase fast; not only, however, may it be easily divided, but if
properly done after the tops have died down, the smallest pieces will
make good blooming stock the first season.

[Illustration: FIG. 27. COREOPSIS TENUIFOLIA.

(One-sixth natural size; _a_, half natural size.)]

Flowering period, August and September.


Cornus Canadensis.

CANADIAN CORNELL, _or_ DOGWOOD; _Nat. Ord._
CORNACEÆ.


This pretty herbaceous plant is sometimes said to be a British species;
its specific name, however, somewhat forbids that opinion. _C. suecica_,
which is British, is very similar in all its parts, and the two may have
been confounded. They flower, however, at very different dates, _C.
Canadensis_ beginning in June and continuing until well into autumn;
during the month of August the flowers are in their finest form and
greatest numbers. It grows 6in. to 8in. high, and notwithstanding its
dwarfness, it proves a most attractive object, being not only
conspicuous for so small a plant, but chastely beautiful.

[Illustration: FIG. 28. CORNUS CANADENSIS.

(One-half natural size.)]

The flowers are exceedingly small, strictly speaking, and are arranged
in a minute umbel in the midst of a bract of four white pink-tinted
leaves; these latter are commonly taken for the petals, and, as may be
seen in the illustration (Fig 28), the real flowers will only appear as
so many stamens; but at their earlier stage these are of a yellowish
colour; later the purplish style becomes prominent and imparts that
colour to the umbel, and, in due time, small fruit are formed. All the
while the bract of pleasing white leaves remain in unimpaired condition;
they are arranged in two pairs, one of larger size than the other,
somewhat heart-shaped and bluntly-pointed, richly tinted at their edges
and tips with a bright pink colour, and forming a flower-like bract
1½in. across the broadest part. The bract and pedicels of the umbel all
spring from the extremity of a peduncle 1½in. long, square, but of wiry
character; this grows from the midst of a whorl of six leaves, and
sometimes only four. They are in pairs, one pair being larger than their
fellows, and are from 1½in. to 2in. long, elliptical-oblong, entire,
smooth, waved, distinctly veined, tinted with pink at the tips and
edges, and of a pale apple-green colour. On the stem, below the whorl of
leaves, there is one pair more, varying only in size, being rather less.
The habit of the species is neatness itself. From the slightly creeping
roots, the perennial stems are produced separately, forming compact
colonies of bright foliage, topped with its lively bracts.

It is a suitable plant for the moist parts of rockwork, where it may be
grown with such things as _Cardamine trifolia_, _Galax aphylla_, _Pyrola
rotundifolia_, and _Salix reticulata_, and it would form a rich edging
to choice dwarf plants, more especially if the position were
gutter-formed, as it loves moisture in abundance. In such positions as
those just mentioned, together with a light vegetable soil, this plant
will grow to perfection, and that it is worth a proper place is
evidenced by its long-continued blooming. Many flowers come and go
during its period of attractiveness, and, after the summer flush, it is
one to remain, braving alike the hot sunshine and heavy rain. Its
propagation is by division of the roots in autumn or very early spring.

Flowering period, June to October.


Corydalis Lutea.

YELLOW FUMITORY; _Nat. Ord._ FUMARIACEÆ.


A native herbaceous perennial, though somewhat rare in a wild state. As
grown in gardens, where it seems to appreciate cultural attentions, it
proves both useful and effective, especially when placed in partial
shade (when its foliage has an almost maiden-hair-like appearance), or
as an edging it proves both neat and beautiful.

It seldom exceeds a foot in height. The flowers are small, a yellow,
white and green mixture, the yellow predominating; they are produced in
loose spare racemes, on well-foliaged diffuse stems, which are also
angular; the calyx is composed of two leaves; the petals are four,
forming a snapdragon-like flower. The leaves are bipinnate, leaflets
wedge-shape, trifoliate, and glaucous; the foliage very dense, having a
pretty drooping habit. It flowers all summer, and is one of the most
useful plants in a garden to cut from, the foliage being more valuable
than the flowers.

Its native habitats are said to be old walls and ruins, but I have
proved it for years to do grandly in ordinary garden soil, both exposed
and in the shade of fruit trees. When once established it propagates
itself freely by seed. I ought to add that it answers admirably grown in
pots for window decoration, the rich foliage nearly hiding the pot.

Flowering period, May to October.


Corydalis Nobilis.

NOBLE _or_ GREAT-FLOWERED CORYDALIS; _Nat. Ord._
FUMARIACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 29. CORYDALIS NOBILIS.

(One-half natural size; blossom, natural size.)]

A hardy tuberose perennial, imported from Siberia in 1783. It is one of
that section of the Fumitories called "Hollowe Roote," the
appropriateness of which name is most amply illustrated in the species
now under consideration. If, in the first or second month of the year, a
strong specimen is examined, the long and otherwise stout tuberous root
will be found, immediately under the healthy and plump crown, to be not
only hollow, but so decayed that the lower and heavy fleshy parts of the
root, which are attached to the crown by a narrow and very thin portion
of the root bark, in such a way as to suggest that the lower parts might
as well be cut off as useless--but, let me say, do not cut it. If it is
intended to replant the specimen, let it go back to "Mother Earth" with
all its parts, deformed as some may seem to us; otherwise _Corydalis
nobilis_ will be anything but a noble plant at the flowering season; it
may not die, but it will probably make for itself another "hollowe
roote" before it produces any flowers, The habit and form of this plant
are perfect (see Fig. 29), and there are other points of excellence
about it which cannot be shown by an engraving, in the way of the
arrangements of colours and shades. Seldom does the little plant, so
full of character, exceed a height of 8in. The specimen from which the
drawing was made was 7in., and grown fully exposed in a pot plunged in
sand. Another plant, grown on rockwork, "high and dry," is about the
same size, but it looks better fed. Probably the long roots are short of
depth in pots, and the amount of decay may soon poison the handful of
mould contained therein. Be that as it may, the specimens grown in pots
have a hungry appearance compared with those less confined at the roots.

The flowers are a pleasing mixture of white, yellow, brown, and green.
The four petals are of such a shape and so arranged as to form a small
snapdragon-like flower. These are densely produced in a terminal cluster
in pyramid form on the stout and richly-foliaged stem; dense as is the
head of flowers, every floret is alternated with a richly-cut leaf, both
diminishing in size as they near the top. The older flowers become
yellow, with two petals tipped with brown, the younger ones have more
white and green, and the youngest are a rich blend of white and green;
the head or truss is therefore very beautiful in both form and colour,
and withal exquisitely scented, like peach blossom and lilac. The leaves
are stalked bipinnate; leaflets three-parted, cut, and glaucous; there
are few plants with more handsome foliage, and its beauty is further
enhanced by the gracefully bending habit of the whole compound leaf. The
flowers are too stiff for cutting, and otherwise their fine forms,
colours, and perfume cannot well be enjoyed unless the plants are grown
either in pots or at suitable elevations on rockwork, the latter being
the more preferable way. The long blooming period of this plant adds not
a little to its value, lasting, as it does, quite a month, the weather
having little or no effect on the flowers.

Any kind of sweet garden soil seems to do for it, and its propagation is
carried out by careful root division.

Flowering period, April to June.


Corydalis Solida.

_Common Name_, FUMITORY; _Nat. Ord._ FUMARIACEÆ.


This is said to be a British species, but it is a doubtful, as well as
somewhat scarce one. Though but a small plant of the height of 6in. or
8in., it is very effective, being compact with finely-cut foliage of a
pale glaucous green, and the stems pleasingly tinted. For some weeks in
early spring it forms a graceful object on rockwork, where it seems to
thrive well.

The flowers, which are purple, are not showy; still, they are effective
from the way in which they are borne, as the illustration (Fig. 30) will
show. Its specific name is in reference to its root, which is bulbous
and solid. Many of the Fumitories have remarkably hollow roots, and one
of the old names of this genus is written "Hollowe roote." When the
flowers fade the whole plant withers, nothing being left but the bulbous
roots to complete their ripening; still, this should not hinder its
extensive cultivation, because it not only appears in its best form when
flowers are rare, but also because it is so pleasingly distinct.

[Illustration: FIG. 30. CORYDALIS SOLIDA.

(One-half natural size.)]

I find it to do well on rockwork, also in well-drained borders of light
loam. It should be allowed to increase until it forms good-sized tufts,
which it soon does. To propagate it, it is only necessary to divide the
tubers any time from July to October.

Flowering period, February to May.


Crocus Medius.

_Nat. Ord._ IRIDACEÆ.


This is a charming kind, seldom seen and, perhaps, little known; the
name would imply that it is a variety having equal traits of two other
forms. It blooms in January and the flowers appear without any foliage.
So well is the Crocus known, it will only be needful to state the more
striking features of the one under notice.

The flowers are produced on tubes 3in. to 5in. long, and stoutly formed;
the colour is a shaded lilac-purple, striped with darker lines; the
petals or divisions of the perianth are 1½in. long and ½in. broad,
shining or satiny, and become well expanded during the short moments of
winter sunshine; the stamens are half the length of perianth, of a fine
deep orange colour, and covered with a thick coat of pollen all their
visible length. In rich contrast with these is the style, with its tuft
of filaments of a bright orange scarlet colour. From this description it
will be seen that the flower is a rather small Crocus, but from the soft
tints of the perianth, and more pronounced and bright colours of the
seed organs, it is one of much beauty. These features, added to the
facts of the bloom appearing in winter and having the scent of wild
roses, are sure to render it a favourite kind wherever grown. The leaves
are short and narrow, almost grassy.

It enjoys a light but rich loam and sunny aspect, and increases itself
freely by offsets of the matured corms, clumps of which may be divided
after the foliage has withered.

Flowering period, January.


Cyananthus Lobatus.

_Nat. Ord._ POLEMONACEÆ.


A small plant with a large flower, a veritable gem; no collection of
choice alpines can be complete without this species. A native of Chinese
Tartary, brought to this country in 1844, where it proves perfectly
hardy in the most exposed parts of the open garden; it is herbaceous and
perennial; its large and brilliant flowers are very beautiful, but all
its other parts are small, as may be seen in the illustration (Fig. 31).
It is seldom met with except in collections of rare plants, but there is
no reason why it should not be more commonly grown, as its requirements
are now well understood. It is not a showy subject, but, when examined,
it proves of exquisite beauty.

The flowers are of a bright purple-blue colour, over an inch across, the
petals being of good substance, tongue-shaped, and falling backwards,
when the china-like whiteness about the top of the tube becomes more
exposed; the calyx is very large, nearly egg-shaped, having five
finely-pointed and deeply-cut segments; the bulky-looking part, which
has an inflated appearance, is neatly set on a slender stem, and densely
furnished with short black hairs of even length; this dusky coat has a
changeable effect, and adds not only to the character, but also to the
beauty of the flower. The small attenuated leaves are alternate and
laxly arranged on the flower stems, which are 6in. to 12in. long, round,
and nearly red. Each leaf is less than 1in. long, distinctly lobed with
five or more lobes, and all the edges are turned back, causing the
foliage to appear thick and well finished; the foliage of the stems not
bearing flowers is more closely set. The habit of the plant is
procumbent; stems contorted, and producing solitary flowers.

[Illustration: FIG. 31. CYANANTHUS LOBATUS.

(Natural size.)]

It should be grown on rockwork, where its stems can nestle between the
stones and its roots find plenty of moisture, as in a dip or hollowed
part; the long and fleshy roots love to run in damp leaf mould and
sand. The position should be open and sunny, in order to have flowers.
Cuttings may be taken during summer, and struck in sandy peat kept
moist, or strong roots may be divided. The latter method is the less
desirable, not only because of jeopardising the parent stock but also
because strong roots show to greater advantage when not separated.

Flowering period, September and October.


Cypripedium Calceolus.

ENGLISH LADY'S SLIPPER; _Nat. Ord._ ORCHIDACEÆ.


This well-known terrestrial orchid is a rare British plant, very
beautiful, and much admired, so much so, indeed, that many desire to
grow it. It happens, however, that it seldom thrives under cultural
treatment, and seems to prefer a home of its own selection, but its
habitats are said now to be very few in Great Britain, it having been
hunted out and grubbed up everywhere. Fortunately, it can be grown in
gardens, and in good form, though rarely seen thus. To see well-grown
flowers of this orchid either makes us feel more contented with our own
climate or strongly reminds us of others where the most gorgeous
varieties of flowers and fruit grow wild. It is large and striking,
fragrant, and very beautiful; no one can see it, especially in a growing
state, without being charmed by its freshness and simplicity; it also
forms one of the finest specimens for the student in botany, and in
every way it is a plant and flower of the highest merit (see Fig. 32).
It should be in all collections of choice plants, and every amateur
should persevere until he succeeds in establishing it.

[Illustration: FIG. 32. CYPRIPEDIUM CALCEOLUS.

(One-third natural size.)]

Under cultivation it flowers in early May, at a height of 9in. to 12in.;
the flowers are composed of a calyx of three brownish-purple sepals,
which have only the appearance of two, from the fact of the lower two
being joined or grown together, and even so combined they are somewhat
less than the upper sepal. The division may be observed at the tips,
though in some specimens it is microscopic--in the one now by me it is
hardly the eighth of an inch. Two petals; these are cross-form in
relation to the sepals, of the same colour, and a little longer--about
2in.--narrow, drooping, pointed, and slightly twisted when a few days
old; lip, "blown out like a slipper," shorter than the sepals,
compressed, richly veined, and lemon yellow. The seed organs are
curious, the stigma being foot-stalked, peltate, and placed between and
above the anthers. The leaves are pale green, very hairy, many-ribbed,
stem-clasping, alternate, ovate, and slightly wavy; the lower ones are
5in. or 6in. long and 2in. to 3in. wide, and pointed. The root is
creeping, the fibres stout, long, wiry, and bent. During spring the
plant makes rapid growth, and seldom bears more than one flower; for the
first time a plant produced two with me in 1882. They are sweetly
scented, like the primrose.

Many amateurs, who have otherwise proved their knowledge of the
requirements of plants by growing large and choice collections, have
failed to establish this after many trials; and were it not for the fact
that with me it is growing in various positions and under different
modes of treatment, and that it has so grown for several years, I think
I should not have ventured to give hints to experienced horticulturists.
In my opinion, four conditions are strictly necessary in order to
establish this native orchid in our garden: (1) A strong specimen with a
goodly portion of the rhizoma attached; (2) Firm or solid planting
during autumn; (3) Moist situation; (4) Shade from the mid-day sun.
Further information may be best given by stating the _modus operandi_:
Several years ago a number of good roots were planted in sandy loam of a
calcareous nature. They were put in somewhat deeply, the roots carefully
spread out, and the soil made solid by repeated waterings, the position
being shaded by an apple tree. They are now well established, and only
receive a top dressing of leaves and manure to keep them cool and moist
in summer. At the same time a number were potted deeply in loam, peat,
and broken oyster shells; when filling in the compost, it, too, was
washed to the roots, so as to make all solid by frequent applications;
the pots have always been kept in cool and shady quarters, and plunged;
they bloom well every season. I have likewise found another plan to
answer well. In a moist corner make up a low-lying bed of sand and peat,
mostly sand, plant 9in. deep, and make all solid, as before, by water.
When the growths appear on the surface, water with weak liquid manure,
and if shade does not exist from the mid-day sun, some should be
provided; in this way I am now growing my finest specimens; but if once
the roots become dry, the plants will suffer a serious check. I feel
equally confident that the roots enjoy a firm bed, but it should be of
such material that they can freely run in it.

Flowering period, May and June.


Daphne Cneorum.

TRAILING DAPHNE; _Common and Poetical Name_, GARLAND
FLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ THYMELACEÆ.


An alpine shrub from Austria; dwarf, evergreen, and having a tendency to
creep. It is deservedly a great favourite; it wins admiration by its
neat and compact form and its dense and numerous half-globular heads of
rosy pink flowers, which are exceedingly fragrant, in the way of the old
clove carnation, but more full.

[Illustration: FIG. 33. DAPHNE CNEORUM.

(One-fourth natural size; (1) flower, full size.)]

The flower buds are formed during the previous season of growth, like
those of the rhododendron; for many days before the flowers open the
buds have a very pleasing appearance, being closely packed and
coral-like; when all the florets are expanded they form a half-globular
head 1in. to 1½in. across, being of a lively pink colour. The flowers
are composed of a tubular calyx, four-parted; leaves inversely ovate,
lanceolate, pointed, and entire; about an inch long, and narrow; of a
dark green colour and much substance, being arranged in circular form on
the round and somewhat wiry, tough stems, which in time become very long
and bare.

In order to grow this shrub well, three conditions are needful, viz., a
moderately pure atmosphere, exposure to full sunshine, and plenty of
moisture; it also prefers peat or vegetable soil, but this is not
strictly needful if the other conditions are present. I have grown the
specimen, from part of which the illustration (Fig. 33) was drawn, for
four years in rich loam, without a particle of peat, but the roots have
been protected against drought by large stones at the base of small
rockwork. Doubtless, peat, where it is plentiful, used in addition to
the above compost, would prove beneficial. After a few years' growth in
one position, bushes which have become long and bare in the stems may be
transplanted with advantage, laying in the stems to a moderate depth,
from which new roots will issue the first season; this is also the
readiest way of propagation. February or September would be suitable
months for such operation, but the latter would probably interfere with
its flowering at that time, when frequently a second but spare crop is
produced.

Flowering periods, April and May, and again in September.


Daphne Mezereum.

MEZEREON; _Old Names_, SPURGE-FLAX, GERMAN
OLIVE-SPURGE, _and_ DWARF BAY; _Nat. Ord._
THYMELACEÆ.


This is a dwarf deciduous shrub, which produces its welcome flowers in
great abundance whilst bare of leaves; it is a British species, though
not occurring generally, yet it is pretty well known from its extensive
cultivation as a garden shrub. The flowers are very desirable, from the
way in which they are produced in knotted clusters on the long stems;
they appear in winter; moreover, they are of a hardy and durable nature
and very sweetly scented. As a shrub it is very suitable for any sized
garden, being dwarf--2ft. to 4ft. In some parts it is a general
favourite, and may be seen in almost every garden; such patronage is
well merited, as it not only enlivens the garden at a dead season, but
it heralds spring time and furnishes long sprigs of wallflower-scented
blossom as cut bloom, which shows to advantage by gaslight.

There are interesting facts in connection with this shrub that add to
its charm. It was esteemed of old of great virtue; all its parts are hot
and biting, more especially the berries, of which it was said that "if a
drunkard do eate--he cannot be allured to drinke any drinke at that
time: such will be the heate of his mouth and choking in the throte."
Its wood is very soft and tough, and cannot easily be broken; this,
however is a quality common to the genus. The berries are poisonous to
man, but birds are so fond of them that they are rarely allowed to
become ripe, at least, such is the case near towns. The seeds of this
and allied species are used in the South of Europe as a yellow dye for
wool. From its importance, the shrub has been long and widely known, and
both its botanical and common names are numerous; for these, however,
the reader may not care. It is seldom called by any other than its
specific name, Mezereon, which Gerarde describes as English-Dutch.

Its flowers, which are purple, come on the otherwise naked stems of last
season's growth, lateral fashion, in threes mostly, and sometimes the
blossomed stems will be over a foot in length; the flowers are ½in.
long, sessile and funnel-shaped; the limb four-cut; sweet smelling and
very durable. The berries are the size of a small pea, bright green at
first, then turning to red, and ultimately to a nearly black colour. The
leaves--lance-shaped, smooth, and deciduous--appear after the flowers.
The habit is branched and erect, forming neat bushes. In a wild state it
flowers in March and April, but under cultivation it is much earlier.

In the garden it may be planted under other trees, where it proves one
of a scarce class of shade-loving flowering shrubs; it also does well in
open quarters. In gardens, where its fruit is unmolested, it is,
perhaps, more attractive than when in blossom, as then the foliage adds
to its beauty. The flowers in a cut state are serviceable, pretty, and
desirable from their sweetness; long sprigs mixed with lavender or
rosemary form a winter bouquet not to be despised; or, it may be placed
in a vase, with a few small-leaved ivy trails and a spray of evergreen
bamboo (Metake). Gerarde's description of this shrub will, doubtless, be
read with interest: "The braunches be tough, limber, and easie to bend,
very soft to be cut; whereon do grow long leaves like those of priuet,
but thicker and fatter. The flowers come foorth before the leaves,
oftentimes in the moneth of Januarie, clustering togither about the
stalks at certain distances, of a whitish colour tending to purple, and
of a most fragrant and pleasant sweet smell. After come the smal
berries--of an exceeding hot and burning taste, inflaming the mouth and
throte of those that do taste thereof, with danger of choking."

Flowering period, February to April.

There is a variety called _D. M. album_; the only difference from the
typical form is implied by the name, the flowers being white. It also is
in bloom at the same time as the species.

_D. M. autumnale_ is another variety, which, however, blooms in the
autumn; the flowers are red; it is a native of Europe.

These shrubs enjoy a light but moist soil of a vegetable nature, but
they also thrive in a sandy loam. They may be increased by seed, or,
more quickly, by grafting on stocks of spurge laurel; cuttings may be
rooted, but are uncertain.


Dentaria Digitata.

TOOTHWORT; _Nat. Ord._ CRUCIFERÆ.


A hardy, tuberous perennial, native of Switzerland, but long cultivated
in British gardens, and decidedly "old-fashioned."

Imagine a spray of pale purple wallflower, and that will give some idea
of the form and colour of its flowers, which are produced on round wiry
stems, nearly a foot high, in terminal racemes. The leaves, which are
produced mostly in threes on a stem, have a channelled petiole, and, as
the specific name denotes, are spread out like fingers, mostly of five
parts; a five-cut leaf of a Christmas rose will give a fair notion of
the form, but the Toothwort leaves are less, not so thick, and more
herb-like than the hellebore; they are also finely, deeply, but
irregularly toothed. The roots are of singular form, almost like human
teeth, arranged as scales, whence the name Toothwort. Its first
appearance above ground is in February, when the young growths are bent
or folded like those of the anemone, and in genial seasons it will
flower early in March.

It loves both a little shade and moisture. I grow it at the base of a
bit of rockwork, in black or leaf mould; the aspect is south-east, but
an old sun-dial screens it from the mid-day sun. The whole plant has a
somewhat quaint appearance, but it has proved a great favourite. When
the tops have died down the roots can safely be lifted, cut in lengths
of one or two inches, and then replanted. It also produces seed freely,
but from the easy method of increase by root division, I have not had
occasion to experiment with seed.

Flowering period, March to May.


Dianthus Deltoides.

MAIDEN PINK; _Old Names_, "WILD GILLOFLOWER,"
"VIRGIN-LIKE PINKE," "MAIDENLY PINKE"; _Nat. Ord._
CARYOPHYLLACEÆ--SILENACEÆ.


A British species of perennial character, never failing to bloom for a
long period when it meets with a suitable home in our gardens--as in
positions similar to those described for _Erysimum pumilum_. Seen either
wild or in gardens it is much admired; it bears but simple flowers, but
therein consists its beauty.

As Gerarde says, "Virgin-like Pinke is like unto the rest of the garden
pinkes in stalkes, leaves, and rootes. The flowers are of a blush
colour, whereof it tooke his name, which sheweth the difference from the
other." It is about the most simple form of the Pink tribe. The flowers
are a little over ½in. across, of a rose colour or pleasing blush. It
grows nearly a foot high in some soils, but in a poor compost it is more
dwarf and floriferous. The flower stems are much divided near the tops,
and capable of producing a good effect from their numbers of bright
flowers. The leaves are small, scarcely 1in. long, linear,
lance-shaped, and of a dark green colour; they are closely arranged on
decumbent stems, which sometimes are more than 1ft. long. The habit is
compact, both as regards leaves, stems, and flowers.

For all such places as afford dryness at the roots this is a suitable
plant as a constant bloomer of effective colour. When once it has become
established it seeds freely, and the young plants may be seen in the
walks for yards around the parent stock. It is one of those happy
subjects that can take care of themselves, either braving its enemies or
having none.

In its wild state it blooms from the sixth to the tenth month, both
inclusive; but with cultural attention and during favourable winters, it
has been seen in flower to the end of the year.

Flowering period, June to October.


Dianthus Hybridus.

_Syn._ D. MULTIFLORUS; MULE PINK; _Nat. Ord._
CARYOPHYLLACEÆ.


Hardy and evergreen. The specific name of this variety is not at all
descriptive, and it may be better to at once give its common name of
Mule Pink, of which there are various colours, as bright scarlet, rose
and pure white, all very double and neat flowers.

It is the double rose kind which has induced me to speak of this section
of the Pink and Sweetwilliam family. I dare say many will be surprised
when I state that my strongest plant of this has been in flower more
than two years. Severe as the 1881 winter was, when the plant was clear
of snow it was seen to have both flowers and buds--in fact, for two
years it has flowered unceasingly; the other varieties are not such
persistent bloomers. The genus to which these hybrids belong is very
numerous, and includes Carnations, Picotees, garden and alpine Pinks and
Sweetwilliams. They are all remarkable for their fresh green and
glaucous foliage and handsome flowers. Some species or varieties are
amongst the "old-fashioned" garden plants of Parkinson's time, and all
are characterised by an exquisite perfume. The Latin name of this genus
is a very happy one, meaning "divine flower," in reference to its
fragrance. Nearly every form and colour of Dianthus are popular
favourites, and hardly any garden is without some of them.

The Mule Pink is supposed to have been produced from _D. barbatus_ and
_D. plumarius_; be that as it may, the features of both are distinctly
seen in it: the colour and partial form of the foliage, the form of
stems, and clustered arrangement of the buds much resemble _D. barbatus_
or Sweetwilliam; whilst the stout reflexed and pointed features of the
leaves, and the general form of the small but double flowers resemble
_D. plumarius_, or the garden Pink. To this description of _D. hybridus_
I will only add that in both foliage and flowers there is more
substance than in either of its reputed parents, and the habit of the
plant is semi-trailing or procumbent, as seen in specimens three years
old. It is rather more difficult to grow than the common Pink. Any
position or soil will not answer; it does well on rockwork, where it can
hardly suffer from damp, so much disliked by all the genus; but if thus
planted, it should be where its thickly-foliaged stems cannot be turned
over and wrenched by strong winds. It may be grown in borders in sandy
loam; and if such borders are well drained, as they always should be for
choice flowers, there will be little to fear as to its thriving. Such an
excellent flower, which, moreover, is perpetually produced, deserves
some extra care, though, beyond the requirements already mentioned, it
will give very little trouble.

To increase it, the readiest way is to layer the shoots about midsummer,
half cutting through the stems, as for Carnations; thus treated, nice
plants will be formed by October, when they may be lifted and
transplanted to their blooming quarters; and I may here state that a
line of it, when in flower, is richly effective. A good style also is to
make a bold clump by setting ten or twelve plants 9in. apart. Another
mode of propagation is to take cuttings at midsummer and dibble them
into boxes of leaf soil and sand. Keep them shaded and rather close for
a week or more. If the boxes could be placed in a cucumber frame, the
bottom heat and moisture would be a great help to them. The object to
aim at should be not only to root the cuttings, but to grow them on to
fair-sized plants for putting out in the autumn. To do this, when the
cuttings are rooted they should be planted 6in. apart in a bed made up
of well decayed manure and sand, in which it will be seen that they will
make plenty of roots and become sturdy plants. The wireworm and slugs
are both very fond of Pinks and Carnations. Slugs should be trapped, but
the wireworm, unfortunately, has often done the mischief before we
become aware of its presence, and even then it is a troublesome pest to
get rid of. I find nothing more useful than stirring and digging the
soil as soon as there is room to work with a spade or fork; the worm
cannot endure frequent disturbance, and such operations are otherwise
beneficial to the plants.

Flowering period, May to September.


Dodecatheon Jeffreyanum.

_Nat. Ord._ PRIMULACEÆ.


This is a distinct and noble species. The older leaves are more
spoon-shaped, at least a foot long, rather narrow, not toothed, of a
reddish colour at the base, and the mid-rib pale green, almost
straw-colour; the flower scape is also reddish, but the flowers are
fewer. As a foliage plant this species is very effective.

All the Dodecatheons make a rapid growth in spring, their scapes being
developed with the leaves; the genus will continue in flower for two
months, after which time, however, their foliage begins to dry up. They
should, therefore, be planted with other subjects of later growth and
blooming, so as to avoid blank spaces. The overshading foliage of other
things will do them no harm, as it will be only for a season. The
position should be moist and somewhat sheltered from high winds, or the
stout and tender flower stems will be snapped off. The soil should be of
a vegetable character and retentive of moisture. My specimens are grown
in leaf soil and loam, in a dip of small rockwork. All the kinds were
planted that a large flat stone, which we had ready, would so fit to, or
over, them as to secure their roots against drought. This I find a good
plan with moisture-loving subjects, where suitable positions are not
otherwise readily offered. Besides, the varieties so grown have a
pleasing appearance, and for purposes of comparison are very handy.
Their propagation is easy. The crowns may be divided either in spring or
autumn, the latter being the best time, as then probably each piece will
flower the following spring.

Flowering period, April to June.


Dodecatheon Meadia.

SHOOTING STAR, _or_ AMERICAN COWSLIP; _Nat. Ord._
PRIMULACEÆ.


A distinct and pretty herbaceous perennial, very hardy and floriferous.
Those who do not readily recognise it by any of the above names, may do
so by the illustration (Fig. 34). It has long been grown in English
gardens--nearly 150 years--its habitat being North America. Not only
does it do well in this climate, but since its introduction several
improved varieties of this species have been produced, which are both
good and distinct. A brief notice of them will not be out of place here,
but first the general description may as well be given.

[Illustration: FIG. 34. DODECATHEON MEADIA.

(One-sixth natural size.)]

The flowers much resemble the Cyclamen, but they are only about
one-fourth the size; the calyx is five-parted; the corolla has five
stout petals inserted in the tube of calyx; they are well reflexed and
rather twisted; their colour is purplish-lilac, but at the base of the
petals there is a rich blending of maroon and yellow. The seed organs
are very long, compact, and pointed, giving the appearance of shooting
stars. The flowers are arranged in fine clusters on a scape more than a
foot high, each flower having a rather long, wiry, and gracefully
bending pedicel; all of them spring from one centre. The leaves are
radical, oblong, smooth, dented, and wavy, about 8in. long and nearly
3in. broad.

_D. M. albiflorum_ I do not grow, but from what I remember of it, it
differs from the above only in being less vigorous and in having white
flowers.

_D. M. elegans_.--Shorter and broader in leaf, and roundly toothed;
flower stems shorter, umbels more numerously flowered, bloom deeper in
colour.

_D. M. giganteum_ has a very large leaf, much larger than the typical
form of the species, and of a pale green colour, and in all other
respects it is larger, being also more than a week earlier in flower.

Flowering period, April to June.


Dondia Epipactis.

_Syns._ ASTRANTIA EPIPACTIS _and_ HACQUETIA EPIPACTIS;
_Nat. Ord._ UMBELLIFERÆ.


This is a little gem, perhaps rather overdone with too many big names;
still, this choice, hardy, herbaceous perennial is worth knowing by all
its titles. Never more than 6in. high, its singular flowers are very
attractive; they spring from the ground almost abruptly, are
greenish-yellow and leafy in appearance--in fact, what at first sight
might seem to be the petals are really but whorled bracts, which embrace
the tiny umbels of flowers. Soon after the flowers the leaves begin to
appear, unfolding like many of the anemones, each one springing from the
root only; they also are of a peculiar colour and shape, being
three-lobed and finely notched.

It will stand any amount of rough weather, always having a fresh
appearance when above ground. It forms a choice specimen for pot culture
in cold frames or amongst select rock plants; it should be grown in
mostly vegetable mould, as peat or leaf mould, and have a moist
position. Not only is it a slow-growing subject, but it is impatient of
being disturbed; its propagation should therefore only be undertaken in
the case of strong and healthy clumps, which are best divided before
growth commences in February.

Flowering period, April and May.


Doronicum Caucasicum.

LEOPARD'S-BANE; _Syn._ D. ORIENTALE; _Nat. Ord._
COMPOSITÆ.


The specific name denotes sufficiently whence this comes. It is hardy,
herbaceous, and perennial, and one of those plants which deserves to be
in every garden; its general appearance is that of a tender plant, from
the pale but fine delicate green of its foliage, a somewhat uncommon
shade for so early a season. It begins to flower in March in a warm
situation in the garden, when only a few inches high, and it goes on
growing and flowering until summer, when it is nearly 2ft. high. A
glance at Fig. 35 will give a fair idea of its habit.

[Illustration: FIG. 35. DORONICUM CAUCASICUM.

(One-third natural size.)]

The flowers, which are bright yellow, are 2½in. across, produced one at
a time, though the leafy stems are well supplied with buds in various
stages of development. The leaves, besides being so rich in colour, are
of handsome forms, being variously shaped, some having long stalks,
others none; all are finely toothed and heart-shaped; the radical ones
come well out and form a good base, from which the flower stems rise,
and they in their turn serve to display the richly veined and ample
foliage which clasps them to near their tops. Although this species is
not a very old plant in English gardens, it belongs to a genus, several
species of which are very "old-fashioned," and, consequently, it shares
the esteem in which such subjects are held at the present time.

If left alone, after being planted in fairly good soil, it will soon
grow to a bold specimen. Plants three years old are 2ft. across;
rockwork or ordinary borders are alike suitable for it, but if planted
on the former, it should be of a bold character, so as to harmonise. I
have observed that neither grubs nor slugs seem to meddle with this
plant, which is certainly a rare recommendation. Its propagation may be
carried out at almost any time.

Flowering period, March to July.


Echinacea Purpurea.

_Syn._ RUDBECKIA PURPUREA; PURPLE CONE-FLOWER; _Nat.
Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


In the autumn season one is almost confined to Composites, but in this
subject there is, at any rate, a change, as regards colour. Yellows are
indispensable, but then predominate too strongly. The flower under
notice is a peculiar purple with greenish-white shadings. This will
doubtless sound undesirable, but when the flower is seen it can hardly
fail to be appreciated. It is much admired; in fact it is stately,
sombre, and richly beautiful--not only an "old-fashioned" flower, but an
old inhabitant of English gardens, coming, as it did, from North America
in the year 1699. In every way the plant is distinct; it does not
produce many flowers, but they individually last for several weeks, and
their metallic appearance is a fitting symbol of their durability. They
begin to expand in the early part of September, and well-established
plants will have bloom until cut off by frost.

The flowers are borne at the height of 2ft. to 3ft., and are produced
singly on very thick, rigid stalks, long, nearly nude, grooved,
furnished with numerous short, bristle-like hairs, and gradually
thickening up to the involucrum of the flower. Said involucrum is
composed of numerous small leaves, a distinguishing trait from its
nearest relative genus _Rudbeckia_. The receptacle or main body of the
flower is very bulky; the ray is fully 4in. across, the florets being
short for so large a ray; they are set somewhat apart, slightly
reflexed, plaited, and rolled at the edges, colour reddish-purple,
paling off at the tips to a greyish-green; the disk is very large,
rather flat, and furnished with spine-like scales, whence the name
_Echinacea_, derived from _echinus_ (a hedgehog). In smelling this
flower contact should therefore be avoided; it is rather forbidding; the
disk has changeable hues of red, chocolate, and green. The leaves of the
root are oval, some nearly heart-shaped, unevenly toothed, having long
channelled stalks; those of the stems are lance-shaped, distinctly
toothed, of stouter substance, short stalked, and, like those of the
root, distinctly nerved, very rough on both sides, and during September
quickly changes to a dark, dull, purple colour. The habit of the plant
is rather "dumpy;" being spare of foliage, thick and straight in the
stems, which are drum-stick like; it is for all that a pleasing subject
when in flower; I consider the blooms too stiff for cutting, more
especially as they face upwards.

Unlike many species of its order, it is somewhat fickle. I have lost
many plants of it; it likes neither shade nor too much moisture;
latterly I have found it to do well in a sunny situation, in deep rich
loam and vegetable soil mixed. If planted with other ray flowers it
forms a fine contrast, and when once it has found suitable quarters the
more seldom it is disturbed the better. It may be propagated by
division, which may be more safely done after growth has fairly started
in spring, or it may be done at the sacrifice of the flowers in late
summer or early autumn, before growth or root action has ceased.

Flowering period, September to end of October.


Edraianthus Dalmaticus.

_Nat. Ord._ CAMPANULACEÆ.


A rare and beautiful alpine species, from Dalmatia and Switzerland. At
the end of July it is one of the most distinct and charming flowers in
the rock garden, where it not only finds a happy home, but, by its neat
and peculiar habit, proves a decorative subject of much merit. This
desirable plant (see Fig. 36) is quite hardy in this climate, being
herbaceous and perennial; it has, however, the reputation of being
difficult to manage, but, like numerous other things, when once its
requirements and enemies are found out, the former supplied and
protection from the latter afforded, it proves of easy management. In
some instances these conditions may, though stated in such few words,
prove comprehensive; but in this case it is not so. The position and
soil it most seems to enjoy may be readily afforded in any garden, as we
shall shortly see; but, so far as my experience goes, the slugs are its
most persistent enemies. Especially when in flower do they make long
journeys to reach it; they go over sand and ashes with impunity, and
often the beautiful tufts of bloom are all grazed off in one night. I
had occasion to fetch in from the garden the specimen now before me,
and, when brought into the gaslight, a large slug was found in the
midst of the grassy foliage, and a smaller one inside one of the bell
flowers. The "catch and kill 'em" process is doubtless the surest
remedy, and three hours after sunset seems to be the time of their
strongest muster. Not only does this plant suffer from slugs when in
flower, but perhaps equally as much when in its dormant state,
especially if the winter is mild; then I have noticed the somewhat
prominent crowns eaten entirely off, and it is not unlikely that this
plant has come to have the name of a fickle grower, from being the
favourite prey of slugs.

[Illustration: FIG. 36. EDRAIANTHUS DALMATICUS.

(One-half natural size.)]

It is not more than 4in. high under any conditions in this climate, and
more often only 3in. in height. From the thrift-like tufts of foliage
there radiates a set of stout round flower stalks, which are 3in. to
4in. long, and rest on the ground; the large heads of flowers are erect;
the stalks are red, and furnished with short stout hairs and short
foliage, the latter becoming sere long before the bloom fades. The
crowded heads of "bells" are of pale purple colour, in the style of the
bell-flower; they are an inch in length, the corolla being somewhat
deeply divided; eight to twelve form the terminal cluster, and they have
a fleshy calyx, with very long and persistent segments; the lower part
can scarcely be seen for the ample and somewhat peculiar bract which
closely embraces the whole cluster; said bract springs from the much
thickened stalk and is composed of half leaf and half scale-like forms,
arranged in two or more circles; the scales feather off with the
leaf-like appendage, the latter being reflexed, but the whole is
furnished with spines. The foliage of a well-grown specimen is arranged
in tufts, the whole having a grass-like appearance. The leaves are 2in.
to 4in. long, rough and hairy on the upper side, smooth and shining
underneath, the edges having rather long hairs their whole length; the
main root is long, thick, and somewhat woody.

To grow this plant well, it requires a good deep loam for its long
roots, and a surfacing of grit will be of benefit, as the crowns should
be clear of the damp loam. This elevation of the crowns is natural to
the plant, and should be provided for. The position cannot well be too
exposed, provided the deep searching roots can find plenty of moisture.
On rockwork this subject may be planted with considerable effect. If put
between large stones in upright positions, the plant will show its
pretty form to advantage. The spoke-like flower stalks, radiating from
the rich dark green tufts of foliage, are very pleasing. It may be
propagated by offsets from strong and healthy plants. Care should be
taken not only to have all the roots possible with each crown, but the
young stock should be carefully established in pots before planting in
the open. Shade and careful watering will be needful; too much of the
latter will render rot inevitable. Soon as the flowering period is past
is the best time to divide the roots, which should not be done too
severely.

Flowering period, July and August.


Epigæa Repens.

CREEPING _or_ GROUND LAUREL; _Nat. Ord._
ERICACEÆ.


A hardy evergreen creeper, long since imported into this country from
North America (1736), but only within the last few years has it won much
favour. At the present time it is much sought after. It has the
reputation of being a ticklish subject to grow. Many have had it and
lost it, and those who still retain a specimen are loth to mutilate it
for increase. This may to some extent account for the present demand for
and difficulty experienced in obtaining it. For the last three years,
hard as the seasons have been within that time, its flowers have been
produced in great abundance on my specimen.

Usually it flowers in this climate in April, but when winter has
continued open and genial, its blooms are produced as early as the
middle of March, and they are in their full beauty in early April. They
are white, delicately tinged with pink, of much substance and wax-like
appearance. They are small, not unlike in form the lilac flower, but
rather more open at the corolla and shorter in the tube. They are
arranged in one-sided, elongated bunches, which rest on the ground, the
blossoms peeping through the foliage. I must not omit to mention perhaps
the most desirable property of this species--viz., the perfume of its
flowers, which is strong, aromatic, and refreshing. The leaves are
cordate, ovate, and entire, nearly 2in. long, slightly drawn or
wrinkled, and covered with stiffish hairs. They are arranged on
procumbent branches, all, like the flowers, facing upwards. To see the
clusters of waxy flowers these branches must be raised, when it will be
seen that the flower stalks issue from the axils of the leaves all along
the branches. In a cut state the flowers are more than useful; they are,
from their delicious, scent, a great treat. The plant is a suitable
companion to the ledums, kalmias, gaultherias, and other genera of its
own order.

Its culture, in this climate at least, has, from all accounts, proved
rather difficult, so that it may be said to require special treatment;
such, at any rate, has been my experience of it. Suitable soil, aspect,
shelter, moisture, and position, all seem necessary for the well-doing
of this plant. It deserves them all, and, let me add, they may all be
easily afforded. The list of requirements may seem formidable on paper,
but to put them into practice is but a trifling affair. My specimen is
grown in leaf mould, a little loam mixed in with it, and fine charcoal
instead of sand, but sand will answer nearly as well; the aspect is
east, it is sheltered from the west by a wall, the north by
rhododendrons, and the south by a tall andromeda. Moreover, its position
is one that is sunken between small mounds, where moisture collects, and
is never wanting; and when the specimen was first planted a large
sandstone was placed over its roots to further secure them against
drought; under these conditions it has thriven and flowered well, and
afforded many offshoots. I attribute its well-doing mainly to the
sheltered aspect and even state of moisture, but doubtless all the
conditions have helped its growth. Its propagation is best carried out
by earthing up about the collar, so as to induce the branches to become
rooted, or they may be pegged near the extremities like carnation
layers, but they will be two years, probably, before they can be safely
lifted.

Flowering period, middle of March to end of April.


Eranthis Hyemalis.

_Syn._ HELLEBORUS HYEMALIS; WINTER ACONITE; _Nat.
Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This, though well known and a general favourite, is not seen in the
broad masses which ought to characterise its culture.

It is nearly related to the Christmas roses, and, like them, flowers in
winter, the bright golden blossoms suddenly appearing during sunshine
close to the earth. A little later the involucrum becomes developed, and
is no unimportant feature. It forms a dark green setting for the sessile
flower, and is beautifully cut, like the Aconite. There are other and
very interesting traits about this little flower that will engage the
study of botanists.

It enjoys a moist soil, somewhat light; also a little shade. In such
quarters not only do the tubers increase quickly, but the seed
germinates, and if such positions are allowed it, and garden tools kept
off, there will soon be a dense carpet of golden flowers to brighten the
wintry aspect of the open garden. Many things in the way of deciduous
flowering shrubs may be grown with them, their bareness in winter and
shade during summer favouring their enjoyment and growth. Early in the
summer they die down. From that time the tubers may be lifted and
transplanted. Such work should be finished in early autumn, or the roots
will not have time to establish themselves for the first winter's bloom.

Flowering period, December to February.


Erica Carnea.

WINTER HEATH; _Nat. Ord._ ERICACEÆ.


A well-known, hardy, evergreen shrub, belonging to a genus comprising
many hundreds of species and varieties, which, for the most part,
however, are not hardy in this country, being natives of the Cape. The
genus is most numerously and beautifully illustrated in _Loddige's
Botanical Cabinet_. This might be thought to have no claim to
consideration in this book, but I introduce it because of its great
value in the spring garden, and because in all respects it may be
cultivated like an ordinary border plant, which is saying a deal for one
of the Heath family.

_Erica carnea_ comes to us from Germany, but it has so long been grown
in this country that it would appear to have become naturalised in some
parts. In the latter part of March it is to be seen in its full beauty;
the flowers are reddish-purple, abundantly produced on short leafy
stems, and arranged in racemes, drooping; the foliage is of the
well-known Heath type; the whole shrub has a procumbent habit, rarely
growing more than a foot high; its fine deep green foliage, compact
habit, and bright enduring flowers are its chief recommendations; the
latter often last six weeks in good form and colour, so that little more
needs to be said in its praise.

It can hardly be planted in a wrong position--on rockwork, in borders,
or shrubberies, fully exposed, or otherwise, it proves a cheerful
object, whilst as an edging shrub it is second to none, excelling box by
the additional charm of its flowers. Not long since I was struck by the
way in which the common vinca had interlaced itself with a few bushes
of this Heath, both being in full bloom at the same time; the effect was
truly fine, the red of the Heath and pale blue flowers of the periwinkle
being so numerous and set on such a fine bright green carpet, of two
distinct types of foliage, that to my mind they suggested a most
pleasing form of spring bedding, and also one of semi-wildness, which,
for quiet beauty, more laboured planting could certainly not excel. Most
Ericas require peaty soil; in the case of this, however, it is not
necessary. Doubtless it would do well in peat, but I have ever found it
to thrive in ordinary loam or garden soil, so that I have never planted
it otherwise, except where peat has been the most handy. It is also
easily propagated, carrying, as it does, plenty of root as well as earth
with each rooted stem; these only need to be carefully divided and
transplanted in showery weather, just before the new growths commence
being the best time. An annual top dressing of leaf mould is very
beneficial.

Flowering period, February to April.


Erigeron Caucasicus.

CAUCASION FLEABANE; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


Herbaceous and perennial. This species is a somewhat recent introduction
compared with some of the same genus which may be called old varieties,
from having been introduced as early as 1633, as in the case of _E.
graveolens_. Moreover, the genus is represented by such British species
as _E. acris_, _E. alpinus_, and _E. uniflorus_. The variety now under
notice is, as its specific name implies, a native of the Caucasus, first
brought into this country about sixty years ago. It is a pleasing
subject when in flower, and is certainly worth growing.

Its daisy-shaped flowers are less than an inch across, and when fully
matured of a rosy purple colour; but, perhaps, the most interesting and
attractive features about this plant are the various forms and colours
of its flowers at their different stages of development; just before
opening, the buds are like miniature birds' nests formed of white
horsehairs, all arranged in the same way, _i.e._, round the bud, but the
points are turned into the centre--these are the unexpanded florets; the
next stage of development may be seen in buds, say, two days older, when
a few of the florets have sprung from the nest form, and have the
appearance of mauve-coloured spiders' legs laid over the bud; gradually
they (being dense and numerous) expand in a similar manner, outgrowing
their angularity, and at the same time deepening in colour, until at
length we see the rosy-purple, daisy-shaped, and feathery flower with a
yellowish centre. These pleasing flowers are borne in loose masses on
stems nearly 2ft. high, and remain in bloom all the summer through.

About the middle of August a large plant was divided, and the flowers
were then cut away. The young stock so propagated were in flower in the
following June. I may here appropriately name an experiment I tried on
this species two years ago. It was sent to me as the dwarf _Aster
dumosus_, which it much resembles in the leaves, these being
spoon-shaped from the roots, the others tongue-shaped and stem-clasping,
but rougher and lighter green. I also saw it was not woody enough in the
stem for the Michaelmas daisy. It was then near flowering, and the
winter was just upon us, so, in order to get the flowers out, I covered
it with a bell glass, slightly tilted. It flowered, and continued to
flower throughout the winter with such shelter, and doubtless many of
our fine late-blooming perennials, by such simple contrivances, might
have their flowers protected or produced at a much later date than
otherwise.

Flowering period, June to October.


Erigeron Glaucum.

_Syn._ CONYZA CHILENSIS; GLAUCOUS FLEABANE, _or_
SPIKENARD; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This very beautiful species is far from common. There are many facts in
connection with it which render it of more than ordinary value and
interest. It is sometimes classed as an alpine; probably that is only an
inference, or it may be so considered by some, from its dwarf habit and
suitable association with alpines. It is not an alpine; it comes from
South America, and though that climate differs so widely from ours, the
plant grows and winters to perfection in this country.

One of its main distinctions is its somewhat shrubby and evergreen
character; of the whole genus, so far as it is at present comprehended,
it is the only species with such traits; its foliage, too, is of
leathery substance, and compares oddly with the herb-like leaves of its
relatives; it is, moreover, as indicated by its specific name, of a
glaucous hue; and otherwise, as may be seen in the following
description, there exist well marked dissimilarities. But, what is of
more importance, when viewed as a garden subject or an ornamental
flower, it is one of the most useful as well as distinctly beautiful, as
much from the fact that it produces its flowers in two crops, which
extend over six or seven months of the year, as from their numbers and
showiness.

The flowers are nearly 2in. across the ray, the florets being of a
pleasing lilac-purple, and rather short, owing to the large size of the
disk, which is often nearly an inch in diameter; this part of the flower
is more than usually effective, as the disk florets become well
developed in succession, when they have the appearance of being dusted
with gold; the scales, which are set on the swollen stem, are of a
substantial character; the numerous imbricate parts, which are covered
with long downy hairs pointing downwards, give the body of the flower a
somewhat bulky appearance. It will be observed that I have made no
mention of the Conyza traits of divided ray florets and reflexed scales,
simply because they do not exist in this species, and though there are
other Conyza traits about the plant, notwithstanding its almost
isolating distinctions from other Erigerons, it would seem to have more
properly the latter name, and which is most often applied to it. The
flower stems, which produce the flowers singly, seldom exceed a height
of 12in.; they are stout, round, and covered with soft hairs, somewhat
bent downwards. They spring from the parts having new foliage, and for a
portion--about half--of their length are furnished with small leaves,
which differ from those on the non-floriferous parts of the shrub,
inasmuch as they have no stalks. The leaves are produced in compact
tufts on the extremities of the old or woody parts of the shrub, which
become procumbent in aged specimens; the leaves vary in length from 2in.
to 4in. long, and are roundly spoon-shaped, also slightly and distantly
toothed, but only on the upper half; they are stout, ribbed, clammy, and
glaucous. The habit of the shrub is much branching, dense, and
prostrate; its foliage has a pleasant, mentha-like odour, and the
flowers have a honey smell.

This subject may occupy such positions as rockwork, borders of the
shrubbery, or beds of "old-fashioned" flowers. Its flowers, being, as
taste goes at the present time, of a desirable form, will prove very
serviceable as cut bloom. A good loam suits it to perfection, and no
flower will better repay a good mulching of rotten manure. Its
propagation, though easy, is somewhat special, inasmuch as its woody
parts are stick-like and bare of roots, until followed down to a
considerable depth, therefore the better plan is either to take
advantage of its prostrate habit by pegging and embedding its branches,
or, as I have mostly done, take cuttings with a part of the previous
season's wood to them, put them well down in deeply-dug light soil, and
make them firm. If this plan is followed, it should be done during the
summer, so that the cuttings will have time to root before winter sets
in. The layering may be done any time, but if in spring or summer,
rooted plants will be ready for the following season.

This subject begins to flower in June, and, as already hinted, it
produces two crops of flowers; the first are from the parts which have
been green and leafy through the winter, the second from the more
numerous growths of the new season, and which are grandly in bloom in
August; not only are the latter more effective as regards numbers and
colour, but the fuller habit or more luxuriant condition of the shrub
render the specimens more effective in late summer.


Eryngium Giganteum.

GREAT ERYNGO; _Nat. Ord._ UMBELLIFERÆ.


This hardy species was brought from the Caucasus in 1820. The genus,
though not commonly patronised as garden subjects, are, nevertheless,
highly ornamental, and when well grown much admired. Specimens are of
various heights, according to position and nature of the soil; under
ordinary conditions they will be 2ft. to 3ft. high at the blooming
period.

[Illustration: FIG. 37. ERYNGIUM GIGANTEUM.

(One-tenth natural size.)]

As will be inferred from the order to which the Eryngium belongs, the
flowers are aggregate, of a changeable blue, and arranged in cone-shaped
heads 1½in. long; the heads are neatly embraced by an ample bract of
prickly leaves; the main flower stem is well and evenly branched (see
Fig. 37), each node being furnished with leaves which clasp the stems;
they are, like those of the flower bract, deeply cut and prickly; the
radical leaves are very different, long stalked, large heart-shaped and
toothed, of good substance and a glossy green colour. The whole plant
has a rather stiff appearance, the flower stems, together with the stem
leaves, are of a pleasing hue, nearly the colour of blue note paper;
this is characteristic of several of the genus, and adds greatly to
their effect. Specimens look well with a grassy foreground or in
borders.

Their culture is easy, provided the soil is of a light nature; a sunny
position is needful, in order to have the tops well coloured. Propagate
by division of strong and healthy clumps when dormant. Wireworm and grub
are fond of the roots; when the plants appear sickly, these pests should
be looked for.

Flowering period, August and September.


Erysimum Pumilum.

FAIRY WALLFLOWER, _or_ DWARF TREACLE-MUSTARD; _Nat.
Ord._ CRUCIFERÆ.


One of the alpine gems of our rock gardens, not in the sense of its
rarity, because it grows and increases fast. It came from Switzerland
about sixty years ago, and for a long time was esteemed as a biennial,
but it is more--it is perennial and evergreen; at any rate its new
branches take root, and so its perennial quality is established. Let the
reader imagine a shrub, 3in. high, much branched, and densely furnished
with pale green foliage, which hides all its woody parts, forming itself
into cushions, more or less dotted over with minute canary-yellow
flowers, and he will then only have a poor idea of the beauty of this
pretty alpine. It flowers in summer, autumn, and winter, and in certain
positions both its habit and flowers show to most advantage at the
latter season. At no other time during the year have my specimens looked
so fresh and beautiful as in January. This I have proved repeatedly to
be the result of position, shortly to be explained.

The flowers are produced in terminal racemes, are scarcely ½in. across,
cruciform in the way of the Wallflower, greenish-yellow, and delicately
scented. The leaves vary in shape on the various parts of the branches,
some being lance-shaped and others nearly spoon-shaped; the lower ones
being all but entire, and the upper ones, which are arranged in
rosettes, distinctly toothed. They seldom exceed an inch in length, more
often they are only half that size, but much depends on the position and
soil. In summer the foliage is greyish-green; later it is almost a
bright or clear green, the latter being its present colour. The habit is
branching and compact, by which it adapts itself to crevices and uneven
parts in a pleasing manner; and not only does it best adorn such places,
but from the fact of their dryness, they are better suited to the
requirements of this little shrub.

A sandy loam, such as will not bake, suits, and if mixed with a few
stones all the better--this will be found ample food for it; poor soil
and a dry situation grow this subject in its finest form. I may perhaps
usefully give the method by which my specimen is grown, after
experimenting with it in various parts of the garden, and also the
substance of a few notes I made of it. In pots the fine roots soon
formed a matted coat next the sides, when the foliage would turn sickly
and yellow, so that, useful as the practice is of growing alpines in
pots, it does not answer in this case. On rockwork, in vegetable soil,
this low shrub grew taller, being less woody, and was killed by severe
weather. On the flat, in borders, in rich soil, it did well for a
season, then damped off, a branch or two together. On the flat, in sand
alone, it does well, also on the top of a wall, such being a position
especially provided for hardy sempervivums and a few cacti. A bit of the
Fairy Wallflower was tried there in a thin layer of sandy loam, and for
two years my finest specimen has occupied that position, flowering more
or less throughout the winter. Where there are old walls or rockwork it
should be introduced. A ready and effective way of planting it is to get
a sod of grass 3in. thick; measure with the eye the size of the
interstice in the side of a wall, partly cut through the sod on the
earthy side, open it by bending, and insert the roots of a small
specimen; close up, and cram the planted sod tightly into the selected
opening. In one season the shrub so planted will have a snug and pretty
appearance. It is self-propagating, from the fact of its lower branches
rooting where they touch the soil. These may be taken any time and
planted separately.

Flowering period, April to winter.


Erythronium Dens-canis.

DOG'S-TOOTH VIOLET; _Nat. Ord._ LILIACEÆ.


A hardy bulbous perennial. There are several varieties of this species,
and all are very handsome.

The variety shown at Fig. 38 is the large white-flowering kind; others
have yellow, pale purple, and lilac-coloured blooms. All are produced
singly on stems 4in. or 5in. long, and gracefully bending. During bright
weather the divisions of the lily-like flowers become reflexed and
otherwise show themselves to advantage. Their foliage forms a rich
setting for the flowers, being variously coloured with red, brown, and
different shades of green, all charmingly blended or marbled. The leaves
are broad and oval, and open out flatly, so that their beauties can be
well seen; if they are grown amongst the very dwarf sedums or mosses,
they look all the better and are preserved from splashes. Two leaves,
one stem, one flower, and one bulb constitute a whole plant; both
flowers and foliage remain in beauty for a long time.

I have them growing in various positions and soils, and I think they
most enjoy a vegetable mould, with full exposure to the sun, but they
should not lack moisture; they seem to increase more rapidly in peat
than in any other compost. They should not be disturbed more than
necessary, and when they are, autumn is the best time to transplant.

[Illustration: FIG. 38. ERYTHRONIUM DENS-CANIS.

(Large white variety. One-half natural size.)]

Flowering period, March and April.


Euonymus Japonicus Radicans Variegata.

VARIEGATED ROOTING SPINDLE TREE; _Nat. Ord._
CELASTRACEÆ.


It is probable that the genus _Euonymus_ is more generally known than
that of _Celastrus_, from which the order takes its name; besides, the
latter is composed of unfamiliar genera, so it is more likely that the
reader will not care about any reference to them; it may concern him
more to know that the above somewhat long name belongs to a very dwarf
hardy evergreen shrub, having a neat habit and very beautiful foliage.
This variety is one of many forms which come under the name _E.
japonicus_, none of which, however, have long been cultivated in this
country, the date of the introduction of the type being 1804. The genus
is remarkable for the number of its species having ornamental foliage,
and not less so, perhaps, for the insignificance of their flowers. The
species under notice (_E. japonicus_) in cultivation has proved
sportive, which habit has been taken advantage of, whence the numerous
forms, including the one I have selected for these remarks. Some of the
Spindle Trees do not flower in this climate, and others, which do,
produce no seed; these facts are in connection with the more finely
leaf-marked sorts, and it may be inferred that such unfruitfulness
arises from their hybrid nature or abnormal tendency, as seen in
"sports."

The typical form is a tree growing 20ft. high, producing small white
flowers, but of the variegated kind under notice established specimens
have ever failed to show the least sign of flowering, though otherwise
well developed and of good habit. The leaves are nearly oval, ½in. to
1½in. long, sometimes oblong, sharply serrulated, of stout leathery
substance, smooth, and much variegated in colour. The markings are
mostly on and near the edges, and take the form of lines and marblings.
The tints are a mixture of white, yellow, and pink, inclining to purple;
these are variously disposed on a dark green ground. The arrangement of
the leaves is crowded and panicled on the recent shoots, which are twice
and thrice branched; from the shortness and twisted shape of the leaf
stalks, the branchlets have a compressed appearance. The old stems are
round, wiry, 9in. to 18in. long, prostrate, and emit roots like the ivy
when they come in contact with suitable surfaces, whence the name
"_radicans_." The habit of the shrub, from its dense and flattened
foliage, fine colour, and persistent nature, together with its dwarfness
and rooting faculty, all go to render it one of the finest rock shrubs
for winter effect. The wetness of our climate only seems to make it all
the brighter, and it is also without that undesirable habit of rooting
and spreading immoderately.

It enjoys a sunny situation and enriched sandy loam. Where such
conditions exist it may be planted with good effect as a permanent
edging to walks or beds; as such it may be clipped once or twice a year,
but I may add that it is worth the extra time required for pruning with
a knife, as then the leaves are not cut in two and the outline is left
less formal. By such treatment the foliage is kept thick to the base of
the shrub. The summer prunings may be pricked into sandy loam in a
shady part, where they will root and become useful stock for the
following spring, or strong examples may be pulled to pieces of the
desired size.


Festuca Glauca.

BLUE GRASS; _Nat. Ord._ GRAMINEÆ.


This comes from the warm climate of Southern Europe, but is a perfectly
hardy grass in this country; it is highly ornamental, irrespective of
its flowers, and is useful in several ways. With me it is grown somewhat
largely, and both professional and amateur gardeners have quickly
appreciated its effectiveness, but it has been amusing to see their want
of faith when told that "it stands out all winter." It belongs to a
section of grasses of fine quality as fodder for cattle, all enjoying
good soil of a light and rich nature. Its main features as a garden
subject are its distinct blue colour and dense graceful habit; these
qualities, however, are greatly dependent on the quality of soil, which
must be positively rich. Its bloom is of no value ornamentally, being
much like that of some of our common meadow grasses, and it will be as
well to remove it in order that the grass may be all the brighter and
more luxuriant. The blades, if they can be so called, are reed-like, but
very fine, 6in. to 12in. long, densely produced, and gracefully bending.
The glaucous quality is most pronounced, and quite justifies the common
name Blue Grass. More need not be said to show that this must be
effective in a garden, especially where bedding and the formation of
bold lines are carried out; as single tufts, on rockwork, or in the
borders, it looks well; whilst as an edging to taller grasses and
bamboos it shows all to advantage. It is also often grown in pots in
greenhouses, where it proves useful for drooping over the edges of the
stage; but if it once obtains a place in the garden and is well grown,
the amateur will see in it a suitable subject for many and varied uses.

Wherever it is planted the soil should be made sandy and fat with
manure; in this the long roots are not only warmer, but they amply
support a rapid growth and metallic lustre. As the roots can easily be
lifted from the light soil without damage, this grass may be divided any
time when increase is needful.

Flowering period, summer.


Fritillaria Armena.

_Nat. Ord._ LILIACEÆ.


A charming little hardy bulbous perennial, which, although as yet a
comparative stranger in this country, bids fair to find a place not only
in our gardens, but in the list of the choicest spring favourites, such
as lily of the valley, snowdrops, snowflake, and squills, being of the
same or nearly allied order, as well as of corresponding stature. Its
yellow flowers, too, highly commend it, as, with the exception of the
yellow crocus, we have not a very dwarf spring flower of the kind, and,
as may be seen by the illustration (Fig. 39), it differs widely from the
crocus in every way.

[Illustration: FIG. 39. FRITILLARIA ARMENA.

(One-half natural size.)]

This is a really charming species; its dark yellow flowers are large for
so small a plant, being more than an inch across when expanded by
sunshine, but its more common form is bell-shape; one, and sometimes
more flowers are produced on the upright, smooth, leafy stem, which is
less than 6in. high. The leaves are alternate linear, sharply pointed,
smooth, and glaucous: Such dwarf flowers always show to most advantage,
as well as keep cleaner, where carpeted with suitable vegetation; the
dark green _Herniaria glabra_ would be perfection for this glaucous
plant.

It seems happy where growing fully exposed in ordinary garden soil, but
it is not unlikely that it may require more shade, in common with other
Fritillaries, for, as before hinted, it is yet in its trial stage. I am,
however, pretty certain of its hardiness, but not about the best mode of
culture and propagation.

Flowering period, April and May.


Funkia Albo-marginata.

_Common Name_, WHITE-EDGED PLANTAIN-LEAVED LILY; _Nat. Ord._
LILIACEÆ.


A hardy herbaceous perennial from Japan, of but recent introduction,
than which there are few more useful subjects to be found in our
gardens. It combines with its wealth of foliage a bold spike of pleasing
lilac flowers, the former, as implied by the specific name, being edged
with a white line, which is broad and constant, this quality being all
the more commendable from the fact that many variegations are anything
but reliable. Speaking of this as a decorative plant for the garden, it
may be said to be one of the best; however placed, it has a neatness and
beauty which are characteristic, especially when used in lines, and has
become well established; from early spring, when the fresh young leaves
appear, until the autumn is well advanced, this plant upholds a fine
appearance independent of its flowers; they are, however, not wanting
in beauty, produced as they are on stems nearly 2ft. high, and nude with
the exception of one or two very small leaves. The floral part of the
stem will be 8in. or more in length; the flowers are numerous, 2in.
long, trumpet-shaped, drooping, and so arranged that all fall in one
direction; the colour is lilac, with stripes of purple and white; each
flower is supported by a bract, which, like the foliage, is margined
with white. The leaves are 6in. to 8in. long, oval-lanceolate, waved and
ribbed, of a dark green colour, margined with white; the leaf stalks are
stout, 6in. long, and broadly channelled.

Flowering period, June to August.


Funkia Sieboldii.

SIEBOLD'S PLANTAIN-LEAVED LILY; _Nat. Ord._ LILIACEÆ.


This is a grand plant; the lily-like flowers alone are sufficient to
commend it, but when we have them springing from such a glorious mass of
luxuriant and beautiful foliage, disposed with a charming neatness
rarely equalled, they are additionally effective. The illustration (Fig.
40) gives a fair idea of the form and dimensions of a specimen three
years ago cut from the parent plant, when it would not have more than
two or three crowns, so it may be described as very vigorous; and, as if
its beauties were not sufficiently amplified by flowers and form of
foliage, the whole plant is of a rich glaucous hue, rendering it still
more conspicuous and distinct. It is herbaceous and perfectly hardy,
though it comes from the much warmer climate of Japan, whence are all
the species of _Funkia_. It is a comparatively new plant in English
gardens, having been introduced into this country only about fifty
years; still, it is pretty widely distributed, thanks, doubtless, to its
exceptionally fine qualities. I know no plant more capable of
improvement as regards size than this; if set in rich deep soil, it will
in a few years grow to an enormous specimen. One so treated in my garden
is 4ft. to 5ft. in diameter, and about the same height when the
flower-stems are fully developed. I should, however, add that this is an
unusual size, but it, nevertheless, indicates what may be done by high
culture.

The flowers are produced on nude stems, 2ft. or 4ft. high, being
arranged in somewhat short and irregular one-sided spikes; they spring
singly from the axils of rather long bracts (see Fig. 40) and have long
bending pedicels, which cause the flowers to hang bell fashion; their
colour is a soft pale lilac, nearly white. Size, 1in. to 2in. long, and
bell or trumpet shaped. They are of good substance, and last a long time
in fine form. The leaves have radical stalks, nearly 2ft. long in
well-grown specimens, gracefully bending and deeply channelled; they are
from 8in. to 12in. long, and about half as wide, long heart-shaped,
somewhat hooded, waved, distinctly ribbed, and evenly wrinkled;
glaucous and leathery. The outer foliage is so disposed that the tips
touch the ground; it is abundantly produced, forming massive tufts. The
long fleshy roots denote its love of a deep soil; a moist but
well-drained situation suits it, and manure may be used--both dug in
and as a top dressing--with marked advantage. The natural beauty of this
subject fits it for any position--the lawn, shrubbery, borders, beds, or
rockwork can all be additionally beautified by its noble form; grown in
pots, it becomes an effective plant for the table or conservatory. The
flowers in a cut state are quaint and graceful, and the leaves are even
more useful; these may be cut with long stalks and stood in vases in
twos and threes without any other dressing, or, when desired, a few
large flowers may be added for a change, such as a panicle of _Spiræa
aruncus_, a large sunflower, or a spike or two of gladioli. Leaves so
cut may be used for weeks; after they have become dusty they may be
sponged, when they will appear fresh, like new-cut ones.

[Illustration: FIG. 40. FUNKIA SIEBOLDII.

(One-eighth natural size.)]

In the propagation of this plant certain rules should be observed,
otherwise the stock of young plants will prove stunted and bad in
colour. Do not divide any but strong and healthy clumps, taking care not
to damage more roots than can be helped; do not divide too severely, but
let each part be a strong piece of several crowns, and after this they
should be allowed to make three years' growth in a good, rich, deep soil
before they are again disturbed, and thereby the stock will not only be
of a vigorous character, but always fit for use in the most decorative
parts of the garden.

Flowering period, July to September.


Galanthus Elwesii.

ELWES'S GALANTHUS _or_ SNOWDROP; _Nat. Ord._
AMARYLLIDACEÆ.


This is a splendid species or variety, whichever it may be, said to be
the finest of all the Snowdrops; it is a new kind and not yet much
known. My impressions of it last spring were not in accordance with such
reports, but I ought to add that, though the bulbs were fresh when sent
me, they had only been planted less than a year, when they flowered
somewhat feebly.

Flowering period, February and March.

All the Snowdrops may be propagated by seed or division of crowded
clumps--after all the tops have died off is the proper time; the longer
the delay, the worse for next season's bloom, as new root action sets in
about that period.


Galanthus Imperati.

IMPERIAL SNOWDROP; _Nat. Ord._ AMARYLLIDACEÆ.


I have only recently flowered this kind. It is said by Mr. W. Robinson
to be double the size of _G. nivalis_, which estimate is probably
correct, judging from the blooms which I have obtained. With me the
bulbs seem either not to have a happy home, or they may have suffered
from the vicissitudes of transport from the genial climate of Italy. The
publisher of this book informs me that he flowered _G. imperati_ the
first year in the open borders, from some bulbs procured from Messrs.
Collins Bros., and that the blossoms were highly scented, as of elder
flowers.

Flowering period, February and March.


Galanthus Nivalis.

COMMON SNOWDROP, EARLY BULBOUS VIOLET, _and_ FAIR
MAIDS OF FEBRUARY; _Nat. Ord._ AMARYLLIDACEÆ.


One of the most charming members of the British flora; a native of our
fields and orchards, so beautiful as to be beyond description, and,
fortunately, so common as to need none (see Fig. 41). It belongs to a
noble order of bulbous plants, the genera of which are numerous, as are
the species too, in perhaps an increased proportion. Comparatively few
are hardy in our climate, and very few indeed are natives of this
country, so that in this respect the Snowdrop, if not a rare flower, is
a rare representative in our flora of the order _Amaryllidaceæ_.

[Illustration: FIG. 41. GALANTHUS NIVALIS.

(One-half natural size.)]

It may be useful to give a few of the better-known genera to which
_Galanthus_ is so nearly related: _Amaryllis_, _Nerine_, _Crinum_,
_Vallota_, _Pancratium_, _Alstroemeria_, and _Narcissus_. The
last-named genus is more nearly allied than any of the other genera
mentioned; not only does it resemble the Galanthus in style, early
period of bloom, and habit of becoming double, but also for the general
hardiness of its species, a feature not usual in their order.

The literal meaning of the generic name is "Milk Flower." The title with
such a pleasing reference was given by Linnæus. The specific
name--meaning white--may, for two reasons, seem unnecessary; first,
because milk is white, and again, because no other than white-flowered
species are known. All the three common names are happy ones: "Snowdrop"
and "Fair Maids of February" are appropriate both to the season and a
pretty flower; "Bulbous Violet" pleasantly alludes to its sweetness; all
are poetical, as if this lovely flower had the same effect on the
different minds of those (including Linnæus) who first gave them. A
dropped name for the Snowdrop was that of "Gilloflower"; Theophrastus,
the father of natural history, gave it the name of "Violet" (_Viola
alba_ or _V. bulbosa_)--that would be 2100 years ago! The bulbs should
be planted by thousands; they will grow anywhere and in any kind of
soil; the demand for their blossom is ever increasing, and Snowdrops, as
everybody knows, are always in place, on the grass, border, or window
sill, or for table; they may be used as emblems of either grief or joy;
they are sweetly pure and attractive, without showiness.

Flowering period, February to April.


Galanthus Plicatus.

FOLDED GALANTHUS; _Nat. Ord_. AMARYLLIDACAÆ.


A species from the Crimea; compared with our native kind, it is larger
in the grass, having also other, but very slight, points of difference.
The main one is implied by its name, "plicatus," or folded; its leaves
are furrowed, which causes it to have a folded appearance.

Culture and flowering period, the same as for the other species.


Galanthus Redoutei.

REDOUTE'S GALANTHUS; _Nat. Ord._ AMARYLLIDACEÆ.


This is by far the most distinct form, having broad grass-green foliage.
It is somewhat late in flowering (during March and April), and not so
free as others.


Galax Aphylla.

_Syn._ BLANDFORDIA CORDATA; HEART-LEAVED GALAX; _Nat.
Ord._ PYROLACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 42. GALAX APHYLLA.

(One-sixth natural size; 1, natural size.)]

Nearly 100 years ago this charming little plant was imported from North
America; still, it is rarely seen, notwithstanding that rock-gardens
have long been popular. On rockwork it not only thrives well, but
appears to great advantage. No rock-garden should be without it. It is a
rare and beautiful subject, remarkably distinct and pleasing; it is
perfectly hardy, also perennial and herbaceous; but its last-named
characteristic should be qualified, inasmuch as the old leaves remain in
good form and colour until long after the new ones are fully grown, so
that there are always two sets of foliage. Viewed in this light, it may
be called an evergreen plant; moreover, it is one of those plants which
the artist can scarcely do justice to, for though the illustration (Fig.
42) depicts faithfully its neat habit and handsome foliage, the living
plant makes a better impression. I said it was rare, but this is less in
the sense of scarcity than because it is little known and seldom seen;
it is also quite distinct from any other plant, and the only species of
the genus.

Its milk-white flowers, which, though very simple, are richly effective,
are produced on tall, nude stems, 18in. high, round, wiry, and nearly
amber-coloured. They are arranged in a dense spike, 6in. to 8in. long;
the corolla is ¼in. across, and composed of five petals; the calyx has a
short tube and five sepals; the leaves are heart-shaped, nearly round,
evenly toothed, and sometimes glandular; of leathery substance, and
somewhat stiff, smooth, shining, and richly veined or nerved. The leaves
of various ages differ in colour; the old ones are dark green,
conspicuously reticulated; the new, but perfectly-developed ones, are
pale green, with a ray of yellowish-green next the edges; the growing
ones are nearly red, and all the serrated edges are hemmed with a nearly
scarlet line, always brightest at the points of the teeth. This
finely-tinted foliage is elegantly disposed by means of the stalks,
which bend in various ways; they vary in length from 4in. to 8in., and
are all radical; they are round, wiry, and once grooved. The bloom lasts
for several weeks in good form, and the foliage is always beautiful,
more especially in the autumn, when it glows like polished mahogany.
Such a plant can hardly fail to please when well grown, but it must be
so developed.

This lovely plant certainly requires a little special treatment, but
that is easy and simple; in fact, it scarcely can be called special. It
may be put in a few words--damp, but not sour vegetable soil, and very
slight shade. My specimen, from which the drawing was taken, is growing
in a little dip at the base of a small rockery, below the level of the
walk, which acts as a watershed; the soil is nearly all leaf mould--a
small portion of loam, and I ought to add that there is a moderate
quantity of small charcoal incorporated with it, which will doubtless
assist in keeping the soil sweet. There cannot, therefore, be much
difficulty in setting up these conditions; the charcoal may not be
necessary, but an annual top-dressing with it will meet the case of such
plants as grow in low damp situations. The propagation of this species
is very easy in the case of well-grown clumps, which, when dug up in the
autumn and thoroughly shaken, will come asunder into many small and
well-rooted crowns; these only require to be replanted separately, under
similar conditions to those by which they were produced. No attempt
should be made to divide other than perfectly healthy clumps.

Flowering period, July and August.


Galega Officinalis.

OFFICINAL GOAT'S-RUE; _Nat. Ord._ LEGUMINOSÆ.


A grand "old-fashioned" flower. It is 314 years since this plant was
brought from Spain; it is perfectly hardy and herbaceous. Both it and
its varieties are among the most useful subjects of the flower garden;
they grow to shrub-like bushes, have elegant foliage, and an abundance
of bloom, which continues until late autumn. Specimens have a clean and
healthy appearance, and though they grow to the height of 4ft., they
give no trouble, requiring neither tying nor supports. From their large
quantities of flowers they are exceedingly gay; but it is for the
handsome stems in a cut state that they should be most prized. These,
cut 18in. long, and placed singly in pots or vases, are truly noble,
more especially by gaslight.

As will be inferred from the order to which _Galega_ belongs, the
flowers are pea-flower-shaped, about ½in. or more long, and the same
broad. They are of a pleasing, but undecided blue colour, arranged in
long conical racemes, on stout, round stalks, as long as the leaves,
which are pinnate, having a terminal odd one. The leaflets are evenly
arranged in pairs, mostly in six pairs; they are each about 2in. long,
lance-shaped, mucronate, entire, smooth, and glaucous. The floriferous
character of the plant may be inferred from the fact that, after the
raceme fades, there pushes from the axil a peduncle, which, in a short
time, produces many other racemes.

_G. o. alba_, a variety of the above, grows 4ft. high, and is an
abundant bloomer; flowers superb for cutting purposes. For culture, see
_G. Persica lilacina_.

Flowering period, July to September.


Galega Persica Lilacina.

_Nat. Ord._ LEGUMINOSÆ.


This is a lovely species of _Galega_ imported little more than fifty
years ago from Persia. Perfectly hardy; in general form it corresponds
with _G. officinalis_. The following are its distinctions: More dense
racemes of lilac flowers, a foot less tall, leaflets shorter and
broader--in fact, oval, oblong, somewhat twisted or edged up in the
arrangement, and often without the terminal leaflet.

The above Goat's-rues are of the simplest culture; they will do in any
soil, but if they are liberally treated they will repay it. A fat loam
and sunny situation are what they delight in. They may remain year after
year in one position, but I find them to do better in every way if they
are divided the second year; it should be done in summer, so that they
can make a little growth in their new quarters before winter sets in. In
order to carry out this, the older plants (I divide half my stock one
year, the other half the year following) should be cut over near the
ground, though they may be in full bloom. Divide the roots into several
strong pieces, and replant them in soil deeply dug and where they are
intended to flower; they will bloom finely the following season.

Flowering period, July to September.


Gentiana Acaulis.

GENTIANELLA; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


A hardy, evergreen creeper, its creeping stems running immediately under
the surface. This is a remarkably beautiful plant, and the wonder is
that it is not grown in every garden. The most attractive features, when
in flower, of this dwarf Gentian are its immensely large blooms and neat
shining green foliage (see Fig. 43). It is easily identified, there
being not another species like it, and certainly very few to equal it
for beauty and service; it forms one of the best edgings for beds and
borders. Many report that it is difficult to grow, which may be the case
in some gardens from one cause or other, whilst in many places it runs
like quick-grass.

[Illustration: FIG. 43. GENTIANA ACAULIS.

(One-fourth natural size.)]

Flowers, dark bright blue, large, long bell-shaped, but not drooping;
tube, five-angular, nearly 3in. long; corolla, five-limbed, and an inch
or more wide; the stems are seldom more than 3in. long, square,
furnished with small opposite leaves, and terminated with one flower on
each. That part of the foliage which sends up the flower is arranged in
rosette form, the leaves being stout, flat, and acutely lance-shaped.
Anywhere or everywhere may this subject be planted; it is always bright,
even in winter, and when there are no flowers upon it it forms a rich
covering for the otherwise bare ground; its blooms will each keep good a
week. They are rarely produced in great numbers at one time, but the
plants will continue for a long while to yield them sparingly.

I find _G. acaulis_ to thrive well at the base of rockwork, as an edging
to a flat bed, and in the gutters of the garden walks--it likes
moisture. To me this is clearly proved by other plants, which, in all
respects but one, are treated the same, the exceptional condition being
that they are planted on the sloping face of rockwork, where they
scarcely grow and never bloom. With reference to soil, rich or silky
loam is best for it, but any kind, if sweet and retentive, will do. Its
propagation may be effected by division of the rooted creeping stems
after they have made four leaves. Very early in spring is a good time to
do this, but neither these nor the old plant, if it has been much
disturbed, will flower the same season after being so mutilated.

Flowering period, May to July.


Gentiana Asclepiadea.

SWALLOW-WORT-LEAVED GENTIAN; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


A tall and beautiful alpine species from Austria, very hardy and
herbaceous. It has long had a place in English gardens--fully 250
years--and is described by Parkinson in his "Paradise of Flowers." The
tall stems are very showy, having an abundance of shining dark green
foliage, amongst which nestle the large and bright purple-blue flowers;
it is a subject that looks well at a distance, and, as a rule, flowers
with that quality are of the greatest value for borders and cutting
purposes.

It grows nearly 2ft. high; the stems are round, erect, short-jointed,
and very leafy; the flowers are produced on a third of their length,
they are stalkless, and spring from the axils of the leaves in pairs;
the calyx is ½in. long, tubular, angled, and having fang-shaped
segments; the corolla is also tubular and angled, somewhat bellied, the
divisions being deeply cut and reflexed; the whole flower will be fully
1½in. long. The inside of the corolla is striped with white and various
shades of blue and purple. The leaves are 2in. long, oval, lance-shaped,
distinctly ribbed, somewhat lobed at the base, and stem-clasping, which
gives the pair of leaves a joined or perfoliate appearance; the nodes
are short, or near together, the lower ones being the more distant,
where also the leaves are much smaller; the foliage is a glossy dark
green colour, the whole plant having a sombre but rich effect.

From the fact that the long stems are top-heavy and of a brittle
character, a sheltered position should be given to this plant, or the
wind will snap them off. It ought not to have stakes, as they would mar
its good form. A fat loam and a moist situation will suit this Gentian
to perfection, and it may be planted with other strong herbaceous things
in the borders, where it should be allowed to grow to large specimens.
It is one of the quickest growers of its genus, few species of which can
be grown in too large quantities. When it is needful to increase this
subject, it maybe done more readily than the propagation of some
Gentians--the roots are more easily separated. It should, however, be
carefully done, and early spring is the best time; or if the autumn
should be a dry season and the tops die off early, it may be done then.

Flowering period, July and August.


Gentiana Burseri.

BURSER'S GENTIAN; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


A hardy perennial species, of a bold but neat habit, while the flowers
and foliage combine in rendering it a first-class decorative subject. It
is a recent introduction, having been brought from the Pyrenees in 1820;
it is seldom seen in flower gardens, where it certainly deserves to be.

Its flowers are not brilliant, but they are effective from their size,
number, and persistency; they are produced in whorls on stout round
stems 18in. high, but only on the three or four upper joints. Each
flower is 1½in. long, lemon-yellow, tubular, angular, having four to six
segments, widely separated, and furnished with a membrane at each
separation. The segments, and also the tube, are dotted with dark brown
spots; each flower is tightly folded in a somewhat one-sided membranous
calyx and borne erect. They occur in pairs mostly, but with several
pairs in a whorl. They have very short pedicels, and the whorl is
supported by a bract of stem-clasping leaves, cupped, and variously
shaped, as ovate and beaked; there are also supplementary bracteoles.
The leaves of the root very much resemble the plantain leaf, also that
of _G. lutea_, having longish ribbed and grooved petioles or stalks;
they are 5in. to 6in. long, and over 3in. broad, egg-shaped, entire,
veined longitudinally, and slightly wrinkled; they are of a dark green
colour, shining, and of good substance. The leaves of the stems, as
already stated, are stem-clasping, and differ in shape. The flowers keep
in good form for two or three weeks, and otherwise this rigid
bright-foliaged Gentian proves very ornamental.

I find it to do well in vegetable soil in a moist quarter. Most of the
members of this genus enjoy plenty of moisture at their roots, and this
specimen is no exception. A flat stone will form a good substitute for a
damp situation if placed over the roots; besides, such a method of
growing this and others of the tall Gentians will allow of their being
planted on rockwork, or otherwise, near the more frequented walks,
where they must always prove pleasing from their bold and shining
foliage, to say nothing of their striking flowers. The propagation of
this species should be effected by division of the roots, which are very
strong. Each crown should have as much of the more fibrous roots
retained as possible, and the parts to be severed should be cut with a
very sharp knife; it also ripens seed plentifully.

Flowering period, June to August.


Gentiana Cruciata.

CROSS-LEAVED GENTIAN; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


An interesting species from Austria, and one of the "old-fashioned"
plants of English gardens, having been cultivated in this country for
nearly 300 years. Gerarde gives a faithful and full description of it,
which I will quote: "Crossewoort Gentian hath many ribbed leaues spred
upon the ground, like unto the leaues of sopewroot, but of a blacker
green colour; among which rise vp weak iointed stalks, trailing or
leaning towarde the grounde. The flowers growe at the top in bundels,
thicke thrust togither, like those of sweete Williams, of a light blew
colour. The roote is thicke, and creepeth in the grounde farre abroade,
whereby it greatly increaseth." Its height seldom exceeds 10in., and it
is to be commended because it is one of the Gentians that are easily
grown, and is handsome withal. It may be planted in either vegetable or
loamy soil--the common border seems to suit it; it spreads much faster
than any of the other Gentians I know, with the exception of _G.
acaulis_, and it is in broad masses one sees it to greatest advantage.
Propagated by division any time.

Flowering period, June and July.


Gentiana Gelida.

ICE-COLD GENTIAN; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


This species comes from Siberia, and has been grown in this country for
nearly eighty years. It is a very beautiful species, the whole plant
being handsome; it grows nearly a foot high.

The flowers are produced in terminal clusters, one large flower being
surrounded by a whorl of smaller ones; they are of a rich purplish-blue
inside the corolla, which is rotate; the segments (mitre-shaped) and the
spaces between are prettily furnished with a feathery fringe; the wide
tube is also finely striped inside; the calyx is tubular, having long
awl-shaped segments; the stems are procumbent, firm (almost woody),
short jointed, and thickest near the top. The leaves are of a dark
shining green colour, from 1½in. to 2in. long, smallest at the root end,
and finishing next the flowers with the largest, which are
lance-shaped, the lower ones being heart-shaped; they are closely
arranged in pairs, are sessile, and at right angles with the stem.

It seems to enjoy a shady damp corner in rockwork, where its distinct
forms and neat habit appear to advantage. It should be planted in
vegetable soil, such as peat or well-decayed leaves mixed with sand. It
cannot endure drought at the roots. It is a slow-growing plant, but very
floriferous; the flowers last fully a fortnight in good form, the
weather, however rough or wet, seeming to have no effect on them. In a
cut state it is exquisite, but those who properly value the Gentians,
especially the slow growers, will hardly care to cut away the stems, as,
by doing so, not only will the plant be checked, but next year's growth
will prove reduced in both number and vigour. It is propagated by root
division when in a dormant state. I have also successfully transplanted
this kind after it has made considerable growth, but the roots have been
carefully guarded against dryness.

Flowering period, June to August.


Gentiana Verna.

SPRING ALPINE FELWORT; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


A native evergreen creeper. This plant has many synonymous names in old
books. It is now, however, well known by the above Latin name. Let me at
once say that it is a matchless gem. Its flowers are such as to attract
the notice of any but a blind person. It is said to be rare now in this
country, still, I think it is far from being extinct in its wild state.
Be that as it may, it is fortunate that it can be easily cultivated, and
nothing in a garden can give more pleasure. Its flowers are blue--but
such a blue! the most intense, with a large and sharply defined white
eye, and though only ½in. across, one on each stem, and 3in. high, they
are grandly effective. It has a tubular, angled calyx; corolla five-cut.
The leaves are oval, nearly 1in. long, and half as broad; dark shining
green and of leathery substance. The radical leaves are crowded into a
nearly rosette form.

By many this Gentian is considered difficult to grow, but if a proper
beginning is made it proves to be of the easiest management. Very
suitable places may be found for it in, not _on_, rockwork, where good
fat loam forms the staple soil; little corners, not _above_ the ground
level, but on, or better still, _below_ the ground level, are sure to
meet its requirements; on the edge of a border, too, where moisture
collects in the small gutter, has proved a suitable position for it.
But, perhaps, the most successful way of growing it is in pots, for, as
with _Trientalis Europa_ and other root creepers, when so treated more
compact specimens are obtained. It is important to begin with
properly-rooted plants, the crowns of which are often 2in. to 3in. below
the surface; from these spring the numerous, bare, yellow, wiry stems,
too often taken for roots, whereas the main roots are still deeper, very
long for so small a plant, and furnished with silky feeders. Good crowns
potted in rich fibrous loam and plunged in sand, fully exposed, with an
unstinted supply of water, is the substance of the simple treatment my
plants receive the year round; they are still in the 3in. and 4in. pots
in which they were placed three years ago, and during spring they are
covered with flowers. When a pot is lifted out of the sand in which it
is plunged, the fine long silky roots are seen to have made their way
through the hole. Spring is the best time to plant.

Flowering period, April to June.


Geranium Argenteum.

SILVERY CRANE'S-BILL: _Nat. Ord._ GERANIACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 44. GERANIUM ARGENTEUM.

(One-half natural size.)]

A hardy perennial alpine from the South of Europe, introduced in 1699.
It is, therefore, an old plant in this country, and is one of the gems
of the rock garden; very dwarf, but effective, as may be seen by the
illustration (Fig. 44). The foliage is of a distinct and somewhat
conglomerate character, besides being of a silvery-grey colour.
Well-grown specimens of this charming Crane's-bill look remarkably well
against dark stones. Its flowers are large for so small a plant, and
wherever it finds a suitable home it cannot fail to win admiration. In
borders of rich soil it is grown to the height of about six inches, but
in drier situations, as on the upper parts of rockwork, it is more
dwarf.

The flowers are fully an inch in diameter when open, cup-shaped, and
striped in two shades of rose colour; the unopened flowers are
bell-shaped and drooping; they are borne on long naked pedicels, bent
and wiry, oftentimes two on a stem; calyx five-cleft, segments concave;
petals five, equal and evenly arranged. The leaves are produced on long,
bent, wiry stalks, the outline is circular, but they are divided into
five or seven lobes, which are sub-divided and irregular, both in size
and arrangement; they have a silky appearance, from being furnished with
numerous fine hairs or down. The plant continues to flower for many
weeks, but, as may be judged, it is, otherwise than when in flower,
highly attractive. To lovers of ornamental bedding this must prove a
first-rate plant. As an edging to beds or borders of choice things it
would be pleasingly appropriate, and, indeed, anywhere amongst other
dwarf flowers it could not be other than decorative.

It thrives well in a good depth of loam, its long tap-roots going a long
way down. If, therefore, it is planted on rockwork, suitable provision
should be made for this propensity. The propagation of the plant is not
so easy, from the fact that it makes large crowns without a
corresponding set of roots, and its seed is scarce and often taken by
birds before ripened. Moreover, the seedlings do not always come true;
still, it seems the only mode of propagation, unless the old plants have
plenty of time allowed them to spread and make extra roots. Latterly I
have gathered the seeds before the capsules burst--in fact, whilst
green--and, after carrying them in the waistcoat pocket for a few days,
they have been sown in leaf soil and sand, and germinated freely. When
the seedlings have made a few leaves the deteriorated forms may be
picked out readily.

Flowering period, May to July.


Gillenia Trifoliata.

_Syn._ SPIRÆA TRIFOLIATA _and_ S.
TRILOBA--THREE-LEAVED GILLENIA; _Nat. Ord._
ROSACEÆ.


A hardy herbaceous perennial from North America, imported in 1713. The
main features about this plant are its elegant form and rich tints. The
illustration (Fig. 45) may give some idea of the former quality, but to
realise the latter the reader should see a living specimen in the form
of a bold clump. There is a wild beauty about this subject which it is
not easy to describe; as a flower it is insignificant, but the way in
which the flowers are disposed on the slender stems, blending with a
quaintly pretty foliage, neither too large nor dense, renders them
effective in their way. It is, however, only as a whole that it can be
considered decorative, and it should be well grown.

[Illustration: FIG. 45. GILLENIA TRIFOLIATA.

(One-sixth natural size; blossom, full size.)]

Although most nearly related to the spiræas the distinctions from that
genus are very marked, notably the very slender stems and large flowers,
which are produced singly on rather long-bending pedicels, almost as
fine as thread, and, like the stems, of a bright brown (nearly ruddy)
colour. The flowers form a lax panicle, interspersed with a little
foliage. The calyx is a bright brown colour, rather large and
bell-shaped. It contrasts finely with the five long, narrow petals,
which are white, tinted with red; they are also irregular in form and
arrangement, somewhat contorted. The leaves, as implied by the specific
name, are composed of three leaflets; they have very short stalks, and
the leaflets are all but sessile, lance-shaped, finely toothed or
fringed, ribbed, and somewhat bronzed. Perhaps it is most useful in a
cut state; the sprays, even if they have but one or two flowers on them,
are charming for vase work. I may say the calyx is persistent, and after
the petals have fallen they not only increase in size, but turn a fine
red colour, and so render the sprays additionally effective.

To grow this plant well it should have a deep soil; it also loves
moisture, and, as already hinted, partial shade; it is a steady grower,
far from rampant, like the spiræas. This is a capital subject to grow
near or under "leggy" shrubs and trees, where, in semi-shade, it is not
only at home, but proves very attractive. It may be propagated by
division, the best time being early in the year, just before growth
commences.

Flowering period, June to August.


Gynerium Argenteum.

PAMPAS _or_ SILVERY GRASS; _Nat. Ord._
GRAMINEÆ.


This handsome grass is well known, at least, its feathery plumes are,
from the fact of their being imported largely in a dry state for
decorative purposes. It has not been grown long in this country, and,
perhaps, it is not generally known that it endures our climate as an
outdoor plant; in most parts of Great Britain, however, it proves hardy.
As far north as Yorkshire I have seen it in the form of specimens 8ft.
high; my own examples are yet young--two and three years old--and are
only just beginning to flower, at the height of 3ft. to 4ft., diameter
about the same. It is a native of South America, occurring mostly on the
prairies; it is also found in other parts where there are swamps and
high temperatures. This would lead us to have doubts as to its
suitableness for English gardens, but facts prove it to have elastic
qualities in this respect. It proves at all times to be a noble ornament
in gardens of moderate size.

In its growing or green state it is a distinct and pleasing object, but
it is at its greatest beauty when it has ripened its tall and silky
plumes, which glisten in the sunshine and are of a silvery-grey colour,
and when also the very long and narrow grass has become browned and
falls gracefully, more or less curling under the tufts. All its parts
are persistent, and, as a specimen of ripe grass, it is not only
ornamental in itself, but it gives a warm effect to its surroundings
during winter. Under favourable conditions it will grow 10ft. or 12ft.
high, but it is seldom that it attains a height of more than 8ft. or
9ft. As an illustration (Fig. 46) is given, further description is not
needed. I may add that if it is not "laid" by heavy snows, it keeps in
good form until the new grass begins to grow in the following spring.

I find it to do well in light earth, well enriched with stable manure,
the soil having a more than ordinary quantity of sand in it; the
position is such as can have a good supply of moisture, being near walks
that drain to it. In stiffish loam a strong clump was planted three
years ago, but it has never looked healthy. The best positions for it
are well-prepared shrubbery borders; there it contrasts finely with the
greenery, and receives some protection from the high winds. It may be
increased by division of healthy roots, when the grass is ripe, but it
ought not to be cut off.

[Illustration: FIG. 46. GYNERIUM ARGENTEUM.

(One-twentieth natural size.)]

The plumes appear in August, and will keep in good condition till the
weather changes to a wintry character.


Harpalium Rigidum.

_Syn._ HELIANTHUS RIGIDUS--RIGID SUNFLOWER; _Nat.
Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


One of the most effective and beautiful flowers to be seen in autumn; it
would be hard to mention another at any period of the year that gives
more satisfaction and pleasure than this does, either as a decorative
plant or a cut flower. A bold specimen, 4ft. through, is truly fine, and
not only those who seldom visit a garden, but amateurs well versed in
flowers, are alike charmed with its rich and stately blossoms. Most
people know what a Sunflower is; many of them are coarse and almost
ugly; but though the present subject is of the family, it is supremely
distinct; it is without the formal character in its ray, and also the
herby leafiness of many of its genus, its large, clean, shining, golden
flowers, mounted on slender, ruddy, long, and nearly nude stalks, not
only render it distinct, but impart an elegance to this species, which
is all its own. It grows 4ft. high, is a comparatively new kind in
English gardens, and comes from North America; still, it has become
widely known and appreciated, in fact a universal favourite, so much so
that, although it increases fast, the demand for it is not yet
satisfied; it is, doubtless, a flower for every garden.

The flowers are 4in. across, glistening golden yellow, and formed of a
deep ray and small disk; the florets of the ray are 1½in. long and more
than ½in. broad, they are incurved at their points, but reflexed at
their edges, and are handsomely ribbed or pleated; they are arranged in
two or three rays in each flower, and irregularly disposed; the florets,
being well apart, not only seem to give the bloom body, but also an
artistic informality and lightness. The florets of the disk are
chocolate colour, whence issue twirled filamentary forms, which impart
to the centre of flower the appearance of being netted with a golden
thread. The scaly involucre is formed of numerous small members of a
dark olive-green colour, neatly arranged and firmly clasping the whole
flower. The pedicels are long, round, covered with short stiff hairs,
and thickened at the involucre; the stems are very rough, rigid, hard,
and brown or ruddy on the sunny side, sometimes twisted and nude, with
the exception of a solitary rudimentary leaf. The main stems have many
axillary branches. The leaves of the root are few, 5in. or 6in. long,
and oval. Those of the stems more lance-shaped, sessile, and slightly
dentate, or toothed, lessening in size as they get higher; all the
leaves are very thick, three-veined, and remarkably hispid, being almost
as coarse as sandpaper to the touch. I have also observed another
peculiarity about the leaves, when they have been taken from the plant
for an hour or more, _i.e._, they have a most elastic property. Very
often the leaves may be seen in trios, whence spring three side
branches, surrounding the upright and central one. The habit of the
whole specimen is very rigid, with the exception of the flowers, which
are slightly nodding; the tallest growths need no stakes, and the
species enjoys a happy immunity from insect pests, probably by reason of
its hispid character. As already stated, as a garden subject this is one
of the most useful; it shows grandly in front of evergreens, and
associates well with lilies. In borders of tall perennials, or in
conspicuous but distant situations, such as are visible from the doors
or windows of the house, or as isolated clumps, on or near the lawn,
this fine Sunflower may be planted with satisfactory results; in fact,
it cannot be planted wrong, provided it is kept away from small
subjects. In a cut state it is of such value that it cannot be
overpraised--a branch with four fully blown flowers and others nearly
out, requires no assistance as a table decoration. Its blooms have the
quality of keeping clean, doubtless from the smoothness of the florets.

The cultural requirements are few. Any garden soil will do for it, but
if deeply dug and well enriched with stable manure, so much the better;
it should have a fairly open situation; it is not only a Sunflower in
name and form, but it enjoys sunshine. It is self-propagating, and runs
freely at the roots, immediately under the surface; the thick stolons
form knobby crowns at their extremities, out of and from under which the
roots issue, going straight and deep down, and so forming an independent
plant.

Flowering period, August and September.


Hedera Conglomerata.

CONGLOMERATE IVY; _Nat. Ord._ ARALIACÆ.


I do not introduce this as a flowering subject, but as a dwarf
ornamental shrub; it differs so much from all other species and
varieties of Ivy, and is so beautiful withal, that I trust no further
apology is needed for giving it a place amongst decorative plants and
shrubs. I have not been able to learn its habitat or origin; its stunted
tree-like shape, together with other peculiarities, would indicate that
it is a species; be that as it may, it has long had a place in English
gardens, and yet it is seldom met with--it would be hard to explain why.
On a bit of rockwork I have grown a specimen for nearly five years, and
it was an old shrub when planted, yet it is not more than 2ft. in
diameter and 1ft. high. It is much admired, and many notes have been
taken of it. For rockwork, it is one of the best dwarf evergreen shrubs
I know.

It has very small leaves, densely arranged in flat or one-sided wreaths.
They seldom exceed 1in. in diameter, and are of various forms, as
heart-shaped, sagittate, oval, tri-lobed, and so on. Some are notched,
others slightly toothed, but many are entire. All are waved or
contorted, wrinkled and thickened at the edges, where the younger leaves
show a brown line; the under sides are pale green, and furnished with
short stiff brown hairs, as also are the stout leaf stalks. The upper
side of the foliage is a dark glossy green, with shadings of brown. In
substance the leaves are leathery, inclining to stiffness. The stunted
branches have a cork-like appearance as regards the bark, are diffuse,
curiously bent, and sometimes twisted loosely together. It is of slow
growth, more especially in the upward direction, and though provision
may be made for it to cling and climb, and it has also well-formed roots
on the branchlets, still, it assumes more the tree-shape. I never saw or
heard of its flowering, much less that it ever produced seed; if it does
not seed we are not only deprived of an ornamental feature belonging to
the genus from the absence of berries, but it proves that it is only a
variety of some species.

It may be grown in any kind of sandy soil, and nothing special whatever
is needed. An open sunny situation will favour its form and colour of
foliage; under trees I have found it to produce larger leaves of plainer
shape and more even colour. During the winter it becomes a conspicuous
object on rockwork, where it seems most at home. It may be propagated by
cuttings, and spring is a suitable season to lay them in; in well dug
light soil they soon make plenty of roots.


Helianthus Multiflorus.

MANY-FLOWERED SUNFLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This fashionable flower is glaringly showy. Still, it is not wanting in
beauty; moreover, it belongs to an "old-fashioned" class, and is itself
a species which has been grown for nearly 300 years in English gardens.
It was brought from North America in the year 1597, and during the whole
of its history in this country, it can hardly ever have been more
esteemed than it is to-day; it is very hardy, and in every way a
reliable subject. Everybody knows the Sunflower, therefore no one will
care to read a description of it; still, one or two remarks may,
perhaps, be usefully made in the comparative sense, as this is a
numerous genus. Many of the Sunflowers are annuals, to which this and
others of a perennial character are much superior, not only in being
less trouble and not liable to be out of season from mismanagement in
sowing and planting, as with the annual sorts, but from the fact that
their flowers are of better substance and far more durable; they are
also less in size and more in number--two points of great gain as
regards their usefulness as cut bloom. They are, besides, better
coloured, and the flowering season more prolonged. Well-established
specimens, two or three years old, will, in average weather, last in
good form for fully six weeks. The colour (yellow) is common to the
Sunflowers. This species has flowers which vary much in size, from 2in.
to 6in. across, and they are produced on stems 3ft. to 6ft. high, well
furnished with large heart-shaped leaves of a herb-like character,
distinctly nerved, toothed, and rough.

Flowering period, August and September.

_H. m. fl.-pl._ is, of course, the double form of the above, the disk
being represented by a mass of florets considerably shorter than those
of the ray proper. The flowers are not produced in such large numbers as
with the typical form, neither does the plant grow so tall, but the
foliage is a little larger; these constitute all the points of
difference which I have noticed. These forms of Sunflower are very
effective--nowhere, perhaps, so much as amongst shrubs. The plants lift
well, carrying a good ball that facilitates their being placed in pots
even when in bloom, when, as I have lately seen, they may be used in a
most telling manner with potted shrubs in large halls, corridors, and
public buildings. In such places they get no sun to make them droop, and
a good watering keeps them as fresh as if they had not been disturbed.
Of the usefulness of this flower in a cut state nothing whatever need be
said--who has not tried it? Doubtless, when it becomes unfashionable it
will have fewer patrons, but it will be the same flower, richly
beautiful--æsthetic. No special culture is needed, any kind of garden
soil will suit it; if well enriched, all the better. Any situation will
do but one too densely shaded. Propagated by splitting the roots after
the plants have done flowering, or in spring.

Flowering period, August and September.


Helianthus Orygalis.

GRACEFUL SUNFLOWER; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


Yet another Sunflower, and one, too, of the common yellow colour, and
not otherwise attractive, as may be seen by the illustration (Fig.
47)--of course, I am now referring to the flower only. There are,
however, features about this species which all must admire; stems 7ft.
high, furnished with bright foliage, in the manner indicated, are not
mean objects, even if topped with but a common yellow composite. This is
a native of North America, and of recent introduction; it is a distinct
species, and for foliage a prince among its fellows. I know not another
to nearly approach it, _H. angustifolius_ being perhaps the nearest, but
that species has never with me proved of more than a biennial character,
and its leaves, though long and narrow, are irregular and herby.

The flowers need not be further described beyond saying that they are
borne on short side shoots, near the top of the main stems, but they
harmonise with the general arrangement of foliage, and, indeed, from
their bract-like leafiness, somewhat enrich it. This is one of the
latest-blooming Sunflowers. The leaves are 5in. to 8in. long, and ½in.
to 1in. wide, the lower half on the stems droop, though they are of good
substance; the upper half bend gracefully, and, from their close
arrangement, all but hide the stem. At the axils of the larger leaves,
tufts of smaller (much smaller) leaves appear, causing the long stems to
be top-heavy. Still, they wave and bend during the strongest winds
without supports or damage. It will be seen that the usefulness of this
plant consists in its distinct form and tallness, and that it is
effective is without doubt. Among low shrubs, or with other tall things,
will prove suitable quarters for it.

[Illustration: FIG. 47. HELIANTHUS ORYGALIS.

(One-eighth natural size; flower, one-fourth natural size.)]

Any kind of soil will do, shelter from the wind being the most
important, and perhaps the only point to study when planting. It is
propagated by root divisions when the tops have withered.

Flowering period, September and October.


Helleborus Abchasicus.

ABCHASIAN HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This is a native of the Caucasus, and in this climate, where it has been
cultivated about fifteen years, it retains its foliage through the
winter in a green state. It is a free grower, and flowers well, having a
somewhat slender habit. It is sometimes described as having green
flowers, but more often as having purple ones. It may be useful to
remember that there are varieties, and it is likely that, even in the
so-called green flowers, traces of purple will be seen. Not only is it a
fact that this species, like _H. purpurascens_ and _H. niger_, is far
from fixed as regards depth of colour, but it is said to be one of the
parent forms of some of the fine hybrids. These considerations may help
to reconcile the apparently conflicting descriptions as regards bloom
colour.

The flower stems are 12in. to 18in. high, distantly forked twice, and of
a purplish colour. The flowers are produced in threes and fours on each
of the branchlets, are inclined to purple, over 2in. across, and
nodding; sepals oval, waved, and set well apart at the outer ends;
petals scale-like, green, and numerous; anthers a beautiful delicate
yellow; leaves of the flower stems few, small, and of irregular form,
notched, finely serrate, and of a purplish-green shade; in their young
state more especially does the purple prevail on the under surface--they
are, in fact, nearly the colour of the flowers. The radical leaves are
many, nearly a foot in diameter, of a dark green colour, and leathery
substance; the leaflets are rather distant from each other, forming a
noble pedate leaf; they are somewhat one-sided, slightly waved, sharply
and regularly toothed nearly all their length. From this description it
will be inferred that this is one of the most distinct species, and such
is truly the case. Moreover, it has a bold and rich effect. The older
radical foliage, with its long stalks, is for the most part spread on
the ground, when the new erect flower stems, furnished with small leaves
and nodding buds and blossoms, all of a shining purplish colour, form a
peculiar but pleasing contrast, not nearly so marked in any other
species with which I am acquainted. There is a variety called _H. A.
purpureus_, in allusion to the colour of the flowers being a little more
purple.

This Abchasian species and its varieties are not widely distributed;
they are to be obtained, and need no longer be found only in rare
collections. It is desirable in every way for the garden, where it forms
a most ornamental object during winter. Its flowers last for four or
five weeks, and in a cut state they form rich companion bloom to the
white Christmas Rose.

A good fat loam suits them; the position should be rather shady and
moist, but by all means well drained. A top dressing of good rotten
manure, after all have done blooming, about the end of March, is a great
help to them. All the Hellebores may be easily increased by root
divisions, but the stock should be strong and healthy. Roots affected
with the least rot or canker should be discarded, as from their slowness
of growth they will not be worth garden space. Seed may also be raised,
but unless sown as soon as it is ripe germination is less certain, and
always slower in proportion to the length of time it has been kept dry.
I may add that, in February (1883), I noticed a pot, sown with Hellebore
seed in February of 1880; a few were just pushing through the mould. The
seed was sold to me as the produce of 1879. Since 1880 I have sown seed
ripened on plants that were bloomed for indoor decoration, it being
ready about February. From this I had nice little plants in less than
twelve months. But by seed the process of propagation is slow, and not
advisable unless the object is to obtain new varieties--a very easy
matter, by the way, with this family, if the simple rules of
cross-hybridising are applied.

All the Christmas Roses should be so planted that they may be
conveniently shaded during their blooming time. They mostly flower
during the dullest part of the year, and the blossom, more especially
the white kinds and those with metallic hues, unless protected, become
damaged with mud splashes. Hand-lights or bell-glasses should be freely
used.

Flowering period, January to March.


Helleborus Antiquorum.

ANCIENT HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


In what sense this specific name is applied, or which meaning of the
word is supposed to be exemplified in this plant, I have no means of
being certain. It is very probable that the name is in reference to its
"old-fashioned," but beautiful, flowers; that they are "worthy,"
"dearer, more acceptable," and of "more esteem and account," is likely
to be the verdict of every amateur who grows this kind successfully, for
a more lovely flower could hardly be desired--large, white, softly toned
with pink and grey. Sepals very large, incurved, overlapping each other,
having the appearance of being semi-double, and being of good substance.
The petals are small, short, of a lively green, and numerous. It is a
bold and effective flower, but to see it in its full beauty it should be
gathered spotlessly clean, as grey and pink tints are ugly when soiled.
The leaves accompanying the flowers are of the previous season's growth,
and are produced on slender round stalks, 1ft. to 1½ft. long, and much
thickened at their junction with the leaves. The latter are nearly a
foot across, pedate, or palm-shaped; the segments or leaflets are
sub-divided and of irregular form, but mostly ovate, lance-shaped,
finely and sharply toothed, and of a dull green colour. In a rich and
free loam this kind proves a good grower, and when, in January, it is
putting up its flower stalks, the buds being well developed and coloured
from the time they appear above the earth, furnished with "floral leaf,"
in which respect it differs from the common Christmas Rose, it causes a
pleased surprise that such a pure and delicate looking blossom can
develop and mature in the depth of winter. As a cut flower by many it
would be preferred to the better-known _H. niger_, not only for its
antique tints, but for the fine cup form, which is constant, and the
overlapping, incurved edges of the sepals. Altogether, its form is
distinct, and when used in small glasses as single specimens, or, at
most, accompanied only by a fern frond or a few blades of grass, it is a
charming object.

Cultivation, as for _H. Abchasicus_.

Flowering period, January to April.


Helleborus Bocconi.

BOCCON'S HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This, by many, is believed to be a species, but as such is
unauthenticated. It is classed as a variety of _H. purpurascens_,
compared with which, however, there are some well-marked distinctions.
It is sometimes called _H. multifidus_, a name that suits it well, as
being descriptive of its irregularly slashed foliage. It has but
recently been brought under cultivation, and was found a native of the
Apennines of Etruria. It proves perfectly hardy in this climate, and
flowers in mid-winter unless the season is very severe. As will be
inferred from its near relationship to _H. purpurascens_, like that
species it has non-persistent foliage, and the flower stems with their
floral leaves appear before the leaves of the root. As a species or
variety, whichever it may be, its more marked features are to be seen in
the form or cut of the leaves.

As a garden flower it is not showy, yet it stands out well in a group;
the nodding cup-shaped bloom is a bright green colour, and, for a time,
the outer sides of the sepals only are seen; but when the flowers are
more fully expanded, the numerous and somewhat long stamens (which are a
creamy-white) seem to nearly fill the cup; to my mind, its greatest
charm is in the fragrant odour which it yields, resembling that of elder
flowers. A single blossom, if plucked dry and when in its prime, scents
a small room; at such a stage, the anthers are loaded with pollen, and
the tubular petals are richly charged with nectar. True, these
last-named qualities are common to the genus, but when they are coupled
with that of a sweet perfume, and produced by an open-air plant in
winter, such a plant, be its blossoms green or red, is too valuable to
be neglected. The flowers are borne on stems 6in. to 12in. high, which
are twice and thrice branched or forked, having six to twelve blossoms
on a stem. The flowers are bright green, nearly 2in. across, cup-shaped,
and drooping. The sepals are somewhat oval, concave, and overlapping;
petals very short, pale green, and evenly arranged; stamens
creamy-white; styles green. The flowers are supported by floral leaves,
which are much divided, in the way of those of _H. purpurascens_, but
the segments are more irregular in shape. The radical leaves have long
stems, and are palmate; divisions lobed. It dies down entirely during
the autumn. Being a vigorous grower and free bloomer, and the flowers
very durable withal, it should be largely grown for the sake of its
sweet-scented blossoms for cutting purposes. There is an allied variety
cultivated under the name of _H. B. angustifolia_ (narrow-leaved).
Assuming that _H. Bocconi_ is a species, this is a variety but slightly
removed from the typical form, inasmuch as the latter is not only much
cut in the floral and radical leaves, but the shape is uncertain. This
form, then, which, at least by its name, claims a specific feature in
the cut of leaf, may be somewhat difficult to identify, more especially
as there are no other dissimilarities of note. Seen, however, as a
well-grown specimen, the feature of narrow foliage is not only manifest,
but the plant is very effective.

Cultivation and flowering period, the same as with _H. Abchasicus_.


Helleborus Colchicus.

COLCHICAN HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


A new species from Asia Minor. This is a strong grower and blooms well.
The flowers vary in size and shade, but it may be said to be distinct in
form and pronounced in colour, the latter being an uncommon feature with
the Hellebores; either growing or cut it is indispensable to a group.
Moreover, it is one of the best flowers of the genus, and would stand
high even in a selection of the best six; it is one that should have a
place in every collection.

It flowers amongst the previous season's foliage on branched stems; the
sepals are somewhat round and flat, which gives the flower a stiff
appearance. Still, from their unusual deep purple colour and the yellow
stamens, together with the manner in which the sepals overlap each
other, the flower is a most effective one; the petals are a bright
green, and blend harmoniously with the yellow and purple parts. The
leaves are very large, pedate, dentate, and distinctly veined. In a
young state the foliage is richly coloured or tinted with "bloom." It
enjoys a rich sandy loam and summer shade.

Cultivation, the same as for _H. Abchasicus_.

Flowering period, January to March.


Helleborus Cupreus.

COPPERY HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


Notwithstanding its peculiar colour, as implied by the name, this is a
pleasing border flower; moreover, the somewhat large flowers are also
numerous; blossoms 3in. across, arranged in clusters of four and six,
and handsomely furnished with new foliage, are no mean things in the
depth of winter. The specific name of this Hellebore, though applicable,
is not so definite as some, inasmuch as the colour to which it refers is
that of several other species and varieties; there may be rather more of
the metallic hue in our subject, but it is so slight as to be outside
the pale of notice to the florist. The Coppery Hellebore is a native of
mid-Europe, and is one of recent introduction into this country, where
it proves hardy but annually dies down. It grows and flowers freely in
January, the flower stalks appearing before the radical foliage, and
attaining a height of nearly a foot.

The flower stems are a palish green, with purplish markings, are twice
branched and furnished with floral leaves; the latter have ample
stipules and seven longish divisions, which are well spread out,
distinctly veined underneath, and coarsely toothed. The flowers are 2in.
to 3in. across, sepals pointed, overlapping for about half their length,
and well expanded; their outsides are of a purplish colour, which
extends along the stalk; the inner surface of the sepals is a yellowish
green, the whole being suffused with a metallic hue or "bloom"; the
stamens and anthers are a creamy white, the petals short and
apple-green. The flowers droop gracefully, and are rendered all the more
pleasing by the floral leaves which immediately support them. The leaves
of the root are large and pedate, the divisions wide apart and unevenly
toothed; the under sides are distinctly veined with purplish-brown when
in a young state. The habit is robust, and the bloom is produced well
above the radical foliage. There is a peculiar beauty about a strong
flowering specimen which would hardly be expected from the above
description, and it is even more difficult for me to do it justice.

In a cut state a whole stem, with its flowers in different stages of
development, is fine. The youngest rosy-purple buds, about the size of a
cob nut; the more opened bell-shaped forms, just showing both the inner
and outer colours of the sepals; these surmounted by the longer-stalked,
fully expanded, but drooping flower, with its tassel-like bunch of
stamens, and all finely interspersed with young leaves of two distinct
colours, according to the side which meets the eye--all go to make it a
charming decoration for indoors, and if cut clean it deserves a place
for the whole week or more during which it remains in good form.

Cultivation, as for _H. Abchasicus_.

Flowering period, January to March.


Helleborus Dumetorum.

BUSHY HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


One of the less showy species. It comes from Hungary, and has been grown
in this country about seventy years. It entirely renews its foliage
yearly, the flower stems appearing before the radical leaves. The
flowers are small, green, and drooping; the sepals are roundish. The
flower stems are twice branched, full-flowered, and furnished with the
"cut floral leaf," which is nearly stalkless and palmate. The root
leaves are very smooth and pedate. The bright green flowers mix well
with others, but where Hellebores are grown in limited varieties this
may be omitted without loss as regards floral beauty.

Cultivation, as for _H. Abchasicus_.

Flowering period, February and March.


Helleborus Foetidus.

STINKING HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This is a native species, distinct, ornamental, and evergreen. Its name
may, with some, prevent its being planted in the pleasure garden, but
its foetid odour is not perceptible unless sought for. It is mostly
found wild in this country in chalky districts, and it occurs largely in
the southern parts of Europe. Though poisonous, it is a valuable herb.
Its value as a garden subject consists in its dark evergreen foliage,
good habit, and handsome panicles of bloom. The latter is produced under
cultivation in mid-winter. It never fails to flower then if the position
is a sheltered one. In its wild state the flowers appear in March. It
belongs to that section of the Hellebores which have leafy stems and
many flowers; its grows 2ft. high, and never seems to rest, but goes on
making new leaves throughout winter.

The flowers are produced in clusters larger than a man's hand, and are
of a green colour, the sepals edged with brown, which turns to a
purplish tint; they are nearly an inch across, well cupped, and mostly
hang bell-fashion; the leaves are much smaller than those of most
Hellebores, pedate, smooth, of stout substance and dark green colour;
the divisions of the leaves are narrow and numerous. The foliage is
persistent, and keeps green until after the new has appeared; it bends
downwards in a pleasing manner, and the leafy stems have a palm-like
appearance. These, when topped with panicles of flowers, though they be
green ones, are worthy objects for any garden. It is a suitable plant
for mixing with deciduous shrubs; bold specimens of it enliven such
borders by their shining greenery, and they are of greatest service when
most needed, for in such sheltered quarters they are pretty sure to
flower during winter; and the summer shade, if not too dense, will
prove more beneficial to them than otherwise.

Cultivation, ordinary garden soil.

Flowering period, December to April.


Helleborus Guttatus.

SPOTTED HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This is one of the newer species or varieties; its main distinction is
well implied by the specific name. The flowers are fully 2in. across,
and white; the sepals are spotted with purple; the petals are more
constant than in some species, and of a rich green colour; flowers are
produced on stems having the floral leaf; the buds are a greenish white,
but very beautiful. The foliage is smaller than that of most kinds; the
leaves are radical, rather short-stalked, pedate, and divisions narrow;
they are of a leathery substance and a dark green colour. This is a free
bloomer, a fact which, together with those of its winter-blooming habit
and distinct flowers, renders it a valuable acquisition to the open
garden. Either cut or growing, it is very lasting.

Cultivation, as for _H. Abchasicus_.

Flowering period, January to March.


Helleborus Niger.

BLACK HELLEBORE, _or_ CHRISTMAS ROSE; _Nat. Ord._
RANUNCULACEÆ.


A hardy, herbaceous perennial. It came from Austria in 1597. In favoured
situations it proves evergreen; there is nothing black to be seen about
a growing plant, and it has often puzzled its admirers as to the cause
of its specific name, which is in reference to the black roots of a year
or more old. It would appear, moreover, that this is not the true "Black
Hellebore" of the ancients (see remarks under _H. Orientalis_). This
"old-fashioned" flower is becoming more and more valued. That it is a
flower of the first quality is not saying much, compared with what might
be said for it; and, perhaps, no plant under cultivation is capable of
more improvement by proper treatment (see Fig. 48). Soil, position, and
tillage may all be made to bear with marked effect on this plant, as
regards size and colour of flowers and season of bloom. We took its most
used common name--Christmas Rose--from the Dutch, who called it
Christmas Herb, or Christ's Herb, "because it flowereth about the birth
of our Lord Iesus Christ," and we can easily imagine that its beautiful
form would suggest the other part of its compound name, "rose." In
sheltered parts, where the soil is deep and rich, specimens will grow a
foot high and begin to bloom in December, continuing until March.

The individual flowers last a long time in perfection, either on the
plant or in a cut state; they vary somewhat in their colour, some being
more brown on the outer side of the sepals, and others much suffused
with pink; but under glass, whether in the shape of a bell glass in the
open garden, or a greenhouse, they mature to a pure white; their form is
somewhat like that of a single rose, but may be more properly compared
to a flower of its own order--the single pæonia. It is composed of five
sepals, and is 2in. to 3in. across, being white or rose-coloured; these
sepals form a corolla-like calyx; the petals are very short and tubular,
nestling down amongst the tassel-like bunch of stamens; the flowers are
produced on stout leafless scapes, having one or two bracteæ; for the
most part the flowers are in ones or pairs, but sometimes there may be
seen three, and even four, on a scape. The leaves are radical, having
stout, round stalks; they are large and pedate in shape, stout, and of
leathery substance. The habit of the plant is neat, growing into rounded
tufts.

[Illustration: FIG. 48. HELLEBORUS NIGER.

(One-quarter natural size.)]

In suitable quarters it proves a quick grower, whilst in ungenial
situations it will hardly increase, though it is seldom killed. As it
happens that its flowers are produced at a most unfavourable time for
keeping them clean, they should be covered with some kind of glass
shelters, or, where the soil is retentive, the roots may be lifted with
large balls of earth to them, and be placed in a cool greenhouse well up
to the light. It would, however, be a mistake to adopt this plan where
the soil is loose, and during the lifting operation will fall from the
roots; and it is also a mistake to expect flowers from newly-planted
roots. Where its fine bloom is required at Christmas, good roots should
have been planted fully a year previously. Doubtless many an amateur
will herein recognise his failing point when expecting Christmas Roses
from roots planted only a month before, and sometimes less. True, the
buds are there, and fine ones, too, perhaps, but the plants, unless
transferred with a good ball, suffer a check which it will take at least
a year to outgrow. It is a good plan to grow this flower in good-sized
pots, which should be plunged in a shady part of the garden all the
year, with the exception of the blooming period; but even with pots well
grown and showing plenty of buds, the mistake is often made of suddenly
placing them in heat, immediately over hot pipes or flues, the heat from
which shrivels the buds and foliage too. Though the Hellebores are
amongst our best flowers for forcing, it should be done gently in an
atmosphere constantly kept humid.

As a cut bloom, the Christmas Rose vies with the eucharis and
pancratium. For vase work, or used about the person, it is a flower that
wins the greatest admiration, and it is no unusual thing for cut flowers
to last indoors quite a fortnight.

_H. n. angustifolius_ (narrow-leaved Hellebore) has smaller flowers than
the type. The divisions of the leaves or leaflets are narrower, whence
its name. The foliage is of a pale or apple green, whereas that of the
type is very dark. It was introduced in the same year as its reputed
parent. As a foliage plant it is very handsome, the leaves bending
gracefully, and the whole specimen having a neat appearance.

_H. n. maximus_ is the largest Christmas Rose, and is a truly grand
variety; the flowers are 4in. and 5in. across. The illustration (Fig.
49) is one-fourth natural size. The scapes are very stout, and produce
several flowers, which are held well above the foliage; like those of
the type, they, too, are tinted with a pink colour, which passes away
when the flowers are a week or so old. The foliage is remarkably bold,
having thick, round, and beautifully marked stalks. Well-established
specimens have a shrub-like effect, being nearly 2ft. high, and richly
furnished to the ground. The half-blown buds of this variety are
exquisitely beautiful, and vary somewhat in form according to their age;
some resemble a nearly blown tulip, and others a rosebud. As
buttonholes, backed with a frond of maidenhair, they are charming. A
whole scape, having one fully-blown flower and several buds, is the most
perfect and beautiful decoration imaginable for a lady's hair. This
variety is at its best in the month of December, being a little earlier
than the typical form.

[Illustration: FIG. 49. HELLEBORUS NIGER MAXIMUS.

(One-quarter natural size.)]

All these kinds should be grown in moist and rather shady quarters;
under trees not too densely foliaged will suit them; the soil should be
a deep rich loam. I may mention that all my Hellebores are grown under
"nurses," _i.e._, suitable small trees. I use walnut. About eighteen
species and varieties are planted under six small trees, 4ft. high. The
reasons why I use walnut are, that they leaf late in spring and lose
their leaves early in autumn, so affording the greater amount of light
during the flowering time of the Hellebores, and screening them in
summer from the sun with their ample but not over thick foliage; a cut
under the trees once a year with a sharp spade keeps them dwarf and
prevents their making too many strong roots. Without saying that
Hellebores should be grown in this way, it will serve to show how they
may be conveniently shaded. Nothing could well look more happy under
such treatment, and, once properly planted, they give no further trouble
than a mulching of rotten manure in spring, when all the kinds have
finished flowering. Christmas Roses are easily raised from seed,
provided it is sown as soon as ripe, but plants so raised are two or
three years before they flower. The quicker method of increase is by
division of the roots. This can only be done successfully when the old
stock is in robust health. Pieces of roots taken from old and unhealthy
specimens will remain in the ground for twelve months as immovable as
stones, whereas the least bits of clean young growths will form nice
blooming plants the first year.

Flowering period, December to March.


Helleborus Odorus.

SWEET-SCENTED HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


Like all the Hellebores, excepting the white-flowered _H. niger_ and its
varieties, this has, until very recently, been much neglected,
notwithstanding that its name implies the rare and desirable quality of
a sweet odour; moreover, it is of easy culture, very hardy, and a free
bloomer. It is a native of Hungary, and was introduced to English
gardens in 1817. It is like _H. purpurascens_, only its flowers are
green; it even more strongly resembles our native _H. viridis_. All its
foliage is renewed annually. It belongs to the section having stems
few-flowered, forked, and bearing floral leaves. It grows 9in. to 12in.
high.

The flowers are green, small, nodding, and scented. The sepals are
nearly round, and overlap each other. The flowers are produced at long
intervals on the twice-branched, stout, pale green stems; they are
supported by prettily-cut leaves, having lance-shaped segments, finely
serrated, also having large stipules. The radical leaves are palmate,
covered with a fine down on the under surface. The segments are oblong,
undivided, and at the base quite entire, but finely toothed near the
top. The bloom lasts a long time, either cut or in the growing state.
There is nothing very distinct to the eye about this species, but it is
to be commended for the sweetness of its flowers.

Like other Hellebores, it should be grown in a shady place, where there
is a good depth of rich sandy loam. Propagated by division of healthy
stock at almost any period.

Flowering period, February to March.


Helleborus Olympicus.

OLYMPIAN HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This comes from a Grecian habitat, as the specific name denotes; still
it is perfectly hardy in this climate, and it deserves a place in every
garden. It is not so old in English gardens as some kinds, and may not
be much known; at any rate, it is seldom met with; but, from the fact
of its coming into bloom in the first month of the year, and having
finely-formed purple flowers, it is a desirable companion to the white
Christmas Rose; it is variously stated to have white and purple flowers,
both statements being authorised; they are produced in spare clusters on
stems a foot high; the buds are charming objects, of a ruddy-brown
colour, and the size of a big filbert; they are rather close together,
and supported by a "cut floral leaf." The leaves are well divided and
almost palm-shaped, the leaflets being ovate and toothed. It is a free
grower, and never fails to bloom well too.

Cultivation and flowering period, the same as with _H. niger_.


Helleborus Orientalis.

EASTERN HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


Sometimes also called the Lenten Rose, as it may often be seen in flower
during Lent, though it is no uncommon thing for it to bloom in January
in favoured situations and mild winters. This is a very old species
which has long been known to botanists, but it has only recently been
introduced into this country. It is a native of the Levant, is plentiful
on mountains and near Thessalonica and Constantinople. It has gone under
the name of _H. officinalis_, and as such was, as it still is, the shop
Hellebore of the East. As a garden flower it is to be recommended as one
of the best of the genus; the colour is often a fine rose variously
tinted, and the blooms are of good size. It is, however, a species
respecting which there is still considerable misconception. One
authority says the leaves die off and again appear with the flowers;
another classes it with the group "leaves not annually dying"; then one
says, "the greenish-white blossoms are tinted at the margin with
purple"; another, that the flowers are "rose-coloured"; whilst botanical
descriptions, usually so taunting to the florist as regards
blossom-colour, are no exceptions in this case. "Sepals oval, coloured,"
does not point out very clearly the information desired. Many of the
species of Hellebore are known to produce flowers varying more or less
in colour; and we also know that an individual blossom, during the long
period in which the sepals keep good, often changes its tints and
colours, but we are scarcely prepared to hear that a species has
greenish-white flowers, whilst we have always seen a rosy or rosy-purple
one produced. Still, the information from another source, that _H.
orientalis_ is a species intermediate between _H. niger_ and _H.
viridis_, would seem to favour the greenish-white as the typical colour;
be that as it may, it is most likely that the more desirable
rosy-flowered variety will prevail in flower gardens, that being the
general recognised colour of the type, and moreover, one which renders
it pleasingly distinct in the whole genus. There are hybrid kinds which
have been raised from this species crossed with _H. viridis_ and,
perhaps, others, and some of them have greenish-white flowers; but they
should not be confounded with the species under notice. These varieties
have received such names as _H. orientalis elegans_, _H. o.
viridescens_, and _H. o. punctatus_. If hybrids are to be honoured with
specific names, it will require much care to avoid confusion, and it is
just possible that some such causes have led to the various descriptions
above referred to. The type under notice is fairly distinct, and the
amateur having a slight acquaintance with the Hellebore family will have
little difficulty in making it out.

The flowers are produced on forked stems, and are accompanied by
finely-cut floral leaves, nearly sessile and palmate; the radical leaves
are large, pedate, downy underneath, having long stalks, and remaining
green throughout winter. The habit is to push the stout flower stems
well up above the foliage, sometimes as high as 18in.; the flowers are
very durable, at least the major parts--as the sepals--are, the stamens
and petals falling somewhat sooner than those of most species; if
different positions are given to a few specimens, flowers may be had
from Christmas to Lent, according to amount of shelter or exposure
therein obtained for the plants.

There are facts connected with this plant, as other than a garden
subject, which can hardly fail to be generally interesting. "This is the
Black Hellebore of the ancients," so that, though _H. niger_ bears the
name and is known to be largely possessed of properties similar to those
of the oriental species, it is proved to be wrongly applied. So much was
claimed by ancient doctors for the Black Hellebore as a medicine in
mania, epilepsy, dropsy, and other ills to which mortals are heirs, that
naturally the true plant was sought with much zeal. Dr. Woodville
laments the want of proper descriptions of plants and the consequences,
and in his "Botany," p. 51, points out some ridiculous errors made in
reference to the Black Hellebore previous to 1790; he gives the names of
many plants which had been mistaken for it and actually employed, and he
assumes that at the time of his writing all such errors had not only
been discovered, but corrected, by what he then described as, and we now
call by the name of, _H. niger_, being the true Black Hellebore; and
after all, the potent herb of the ancients has been identified in a
plant (a near relation, it is true) other than the white Christmas
Rose--it may be some time before we come to think of our present subject
as the true Black Hellebore, especially when an otherwise popular
species bears the name.

Cultivation, as for _H. niger_.

Flowering period, December to April.


Helleborus Purpurascens.

PURPLISH HELLEBORE; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


A native of Podolia and Hungary, introduced sixty to seventy years ago.
It belongs to the section whose flowers appear before the root leaves,
having branched flower stalks and the cut floral leaf. It is a dwarf
kind, and varies very much; I have now an established specimen in bloom
at the height of 3in., and others at 8in. or 9in. It also differs in the
depth of bloom-colour; some of its flowers may be described as
purplish-green and others as greenish-purple, slaty and dove-coloured;
others have a tinge of red more visible. The flowers are few, on
twice-forked stems, are 2in. or more across, and commonly, as the name
implies, of a purplish colour; the inner surface of the sepals is a
slaty shade, the purple prevailing on the outer surface; the form of the
flower is nearly round and slightly cupped, from the nearly round or
kidney shaped sepals, which neatly overlap each other, and are also
incurved at the edges; the petals are very short and green; the stamens
and anthers of a creamy white; the floral leaf is nearly stalkless;
segments unevenly toothed. The radical leaves are "pubescent on the
under surface, palmate, with the segments cuneated at the base, and from
three to five lobed at the apex." The habit is robust and free blooming;
the flowers slightly droop, and, though the colours are not showy, they
are attractive from the way in which they are borne on the straight
stems and the absence of the larger leaves. It is a desirable species
for the garden; a few specimens grown amongst a mass of the "winter
aconite" are enough to make one forget that it is winter.

Cultivation, as for _H. niger_.

Flowering period, February to April.


Hepatica Angulosa.

_Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This is a very distinct species. It comes from North America, and is
twice the size of _H. triloba_ in all its parts; the leaves are more
cut, and very woolly; the flowers are bright mauve, and 1½in. across.
All the Hepaticas are slow growers, but _H. angulosa_ is the more
vigorous. Some say they should be grown in peat, but I never saw them so
fine in peat as in strong loam, well drained and manured; they are the
better with slight shade. I do not object to peat, as possibly it may be
more suitable than the natural soil of some gardens. Still, if I had to
make up a compost for Hepaticas, I should freely use strong loam on a
well-drained site. With me they have been in flower nearly three months,
commencing in February.

It seems desirable to increase these fine spring flowers, but they are
most impatient of being disturbed, and, after all, the increase can
exist in no finer form than in big clumps, though when they are to be
propagated the roots should be divided before the new leaves are
produced, which is during the blooming period. A deeply-dug and
well-manured plot should be prepared for them, and their long roots
should not be doubled up in the least; they both need and deserve great
care.

Flowering period, February to April.


Hepatica Triloba.

_Syns._ ANEMONE TRILOBA _and_ ANEMONE HEPATICA; _Nat.
Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 50. HEPATICA TRILOBA.

(One-third natural size.)]

The well-known common Hepatica, of which there are so many beautiful
varieties. It is a hardy perennial, one of the "old-fashioned" flowers
of English gardens, and is said by some to be a British species; anyhow,
it was well known and admired in this country 300 years ago.
Well-established specimens form neat tufts of three-lobed leaves on long
stems, which are not evergreen in this climate, though the Hepaticas are
known to be so in North America, one of their most extensive habitats.
Here, under cultivation, they produce much finer flowers, and more of
them. The cut (Fig. 50), however, shows the foliage in more perfect form
than it is commonly seen to be in this climate during the period of
bloom, when the old is usually sered, and the new scarcely visible. The
varieties of _H. triloba_ differ only in the colour and form of their
flowers, there being blue, purple, white, and pink. Of the first and
last named there are double varieties as well.

Cultivation, the same as for _H. angulosa_.

Flowering period, February to April.

_H. t. splendens_ is a charming Windflower, and one which, from its
extra brilliancy, is sure to become a favourite, as, indeed, the whole
genus _Anemone_ is. It is a new variety of _H. triloba_, and is yet
somewhat scarce, differing from the more generally known kinds of the
same species in only two points, so that, beyond the mention of them, no
other description is needful: (1) Its flowers are single red, but so
much deeper in colour, brighter, and of better substance, as to be quite
distinct, and merit the name "_splendens_." (2) It flowers earlier than
the commoner red kind. This handsome seedling of the common Hepatica is
very suggestive of what can be done by raising seed from
carefully-selected sorts, and within the last few years something has
been done in that direction, so that in a little time we may expect to
see other good varieties. I may add that seedlings are three years
before they bloom, and even longer before a proper idea can be formed of
their qualities.

Cultivation, the same as for _H. angulosa_.

Flowering period, February to March.


Hesperis Matronalis Flore-pleno.

DOUBLE SWEET ROCKET, _or_ DAMES' VIOLET; _Nat. Ord._
CRUCIFERÆ.


There are several double forms of this very popular old flower, such as
purple, ruby, and pure white, the last named being by far the greatest
favourite. A few years ago it was said to be very scarce, and in some
parts of the country it certainly was so, but when the present taste for
the good old flowers became general, it was not only found, but quickly
propagated, so that now the double white Sweet Rocket may be had
everywhere, and certainly no more beautiful flower can occupy the garden
borders, its perfume being strong and deliciously fragrant. The parent
plant of these double kinds is widely distributed over Europe; all are
perfectly hardy.

They vary in height from 12in. to 18in., branching candelabra-like, the
flowers being produced in terminal spikes, arranged in the way of, and
very much resembling, the double stocks--in fact, the Hesperis used to
be called "Queene's Gilloflower." The leaves may be briefly described as
oval, lance-shaped, toothed, and veined; dark green, and often spotted
or blotched. Gerarde's description, too, may be given, as it is always
pleasant to recognise the old plants of 300 years ago: "Dames' Violets
hath great large leaues of a darke greene colour, somewhat snipt about
the edges; among which spring up stalks of the height of two cubites,
set with such like leaves; the flowers come foorth at the toppe of the
branches--like those of the Stock Gilloflower, of a verie sweete smell."

These desirable flowers have a long blooming period, and their
cultivation is simple; there is, however, one special point to be
observed, otherwise these double kinds will die off. It should be
remembered that they produce no seed, and propagation must be carried
out by divisions of the roots and cuttings; old plants, too, have a
habit of forming their perennial crowns nearly out of the soil, so that
the roots going down from them are often bare and unestablished; the
older parts, too, are frequently attacked by ground vermin. No doubt
these causes would tend greatly to the former scarcity of the finer
kinds, but all the difficulties, if they can be called such, may be
overcome by the very simple process of either putting in cuttings like
wallflower slips during summer, or, as soon as the old plants are past
their best bloom, dividing and replanting the various parts deeper,
whereby all of them, however small, will make good plants the following
season.

This mode of keeping up the stock will be found to make the plants
vigorous and free blooming, and also will prove a remedy for the
complaint so often given expression to in such words as "I lost all my
double Sweet Rockets; I cannot keep them above two years."

Flowering period, June to August.


Heuchera.

ALUM-ROOT; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


This is a small genus of hardy perennials suitable for the decoration of
the English garden from their bold and finely-shaped leaves, which are
well marked with various pleasing tints, also because of their perpetual
verdure and neat habit. It takes its name from J. H. de Heucher, a
botanist. The species, as many of them as are known, are from American
habitats; nearly all have been introduced within the last sixty years;
the well-known _H. Americana_, however, is an old plant in English
gardens, having been cultivated for 223 years. The order, as given
above, together with the illustration figuring one of the species (see
Fig. 51), will give some idea of the usefulness of the genus, especially
when it is remembered that in the depth of winter the foliage is fresh,
and even in a growing state.

The flowers are of little value for ornamental purposes; they are very
small and numerous, and are arranged in panicles or racemes, on rather
tall and mostly leafless stems, round, and somewhat wiry; calyx, petals,
and stamens have a mixed appearance, the whole flower being of a dingy
colour, often resembling some of the panicled bloom of meadow grass,
when seen at a short distance; the calyces, however, are persistent,
they crown the capsules; these and the naked stems, from their durable
nature, mar the beauty of the foliage for several weeks, unless cut off.
The plants are more ornamental without the flowers, as they impart a
seedy appearance; at no time does the foliage show to more advantage
than in January, when most herbaceous plants are dormant, and when their
handsome tufts are alike beautiful, either bedewed with fogs,
crystallised with hoar-frost, or glittering in the sunshine. As a genus,
_Heuchera_ is sometimes placed after _Saxifraga_ and before that of
_Tiarella_; the latter it much resembles, as well as the genera
_Mitella_ and _Tellima_. Anyone knowing these will at once admit the
usefulness of the plants under notice.

Not only do they make good edgings or lines to borders, but the leaves
in a cut state are of great service for table decoration, doing duty
repeatedly around dishes, &c., either with or without flowers; after
being so used, if placed in water, they may be kept a fortnight in good
form. I am told that the leaves are sold in Covent Garden Market for
similar purposes. I have seen them used in the autumn with the large
white anemone, and in winter with the Christmas rose, one flower
arranged and tied on the face of a single leaf. These placed round
dishes, &c., have a pretty effect.

They grow freely in any kind of soil, excepting stiff clay, and are
readily increased by division of the crowns. This may be done any time,
but, perhaps, spring is the best.

The Heucheras bloom from May to August.


Heuchera Americana.

AMERICAN HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


The flowers of this species are a dull or reddish purple. The foliage is
rough and clammy; the form of leaf resembles that of _H. glabra_ (see
Fig. 51), but the colour is a lighter green. All the genus are of an
astringent nature, but this species is remarkably so, and in its native
country has earned for the family the name of "Alum-root."

For cultivation and flowering period see _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Cylindrica.

CYLINDRICAL-SPIKED HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


This is much in the way of _H. Richardsoni_, with the distinction
indicated by the name, the flowers being arranged evenly round the spike
like a cylinder.

For cultivation and flowering period see _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Drummondi.

DRUMMOND'S HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


A tall kind, with leaves of handsome shape (heart-shaped and lobed) and
greener than most varieties.

Cultivation and flowering period are described under _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Glabra.

SMOOTH HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 51. HEUCHERA GLABRA.

(One-sixth natural size.)]

This was introduced in 1824 from North America. The foliage is bold and
abundant; the illustration (Fig. 51) not only gives a good idea of the
form and habit of foliage, but fairly represents the whole genus, as
seen during the late (1882) season. This species has dull pinkish
flowers; the scapes have a few leaves; root leaves are 2in. to 5in. in
diameter, heart-shaped, lobed, toothed, smooth, and of a dark
bronzy-green colour. The leaf stalks are long and slender; the habit
very neat.

Cultivation and flowering period are described under _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Lucida.

SHINING-LEAVED HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


A very dwarf species, not more than 3in. or 4in. high; the foliage a
clear bright green, nearly kidney-shaped, lobed, and roundly toothed.
The fresh appearance of its prostrate leaves, which are 2in. across,
forms a pleasing object in mid-winter.

Cultivation and flowering period, as given under _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Metallica.

_Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


This was presented to me in 1881 by a lady, who informed me that it was
introduced by the late Miss Hope. It is a beautiful plant; the hues
somewhat justify the name, but to the touch the leaves are more like a
soft fabric, as cloth or velvet. The flowers are of no value, but the
foliage is bloom of no mean order, so much so, that everyone stops to
admire this handsome plant.

Cultivation and flowering period, as given under _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Micrantha.

SMALL-FLOWERED HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


From Columbia. Flowers a yellowish-green; leaves nearly round, bluntly
lobed, crenate or round toothed, the teeth horned or pointed; the colour
is inclined to auburn during autumn, but it varies, and for a botanical
description it would be hard to state a particular colour. The gardener,
however, will find in this a most useful plant, where different forms
and tints of foliage are desirable. Into the sub-tropical garden it may
be introduced with good effect. I may add that the leaf stalks are 9in.
to 12in. long, also of a rich brown colour, and the leaves are 3in. to
5in. across.

Cultivation and flowering period, as described under _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Purpurea.

_Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


This seems to be a less known or newer variety. If the name has
reference to the colour of the foliage, it is not inappropriate. The
bold leaves are a dark green, shading to a bronze, then a purple, the
whole having a soft downy effect. It is a charming kind.

Cultivation and flowering period, the same as for the _Heuchera_.


Heuchera Ribifolia.

CURRANT-LEAVED HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


This is another dwarf kind, producing such leaves as the name denotes.
Of this species the only useful feature for a garden seems to be its
habit of neatly carpeting the ground under deciduous trees. It has also
a remarkably fresh appearance during winter.

Cultivation and flowering period, as for other _Heucheras_.


Heuchera Richardsoni.

RICHARDSON'S HEUCHERA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


A taller variety than _H. Drummondi_. The most striking distinctions are
the pale green colour of the young leaves contrasting with the bronzed
appearance of the older ones, and the larger size of its flowers, which,
however, are green.

Cultivation and flowering period, as for other species.


Houstonia Coerulea.

BLUETS; _Nat. Ord._ GENTIANACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 52. HOUSTONIA COERULEA.

(Natural size.)]

Hardy and evergreen. This pretty little shining plant never exceeds a
height of 3in. Like most species of this order, both flowers and foliage
have much substance and endure for a long time in perfection, but its
neat form and bright parts most commend it--it almost sparkles in both
leaf and flower. This species, as implied by the specific name, bears a
blue flower, but there is a variety (_H. c. alba_ or _H. albiflora_)
which bears white flowers, from a specimen of which the illustration
(Fig. 52) is drawn, and, as the colour of the flower is the only
dissimilarity, a description of the typical form will in all other
respects apply to both.

The flowers, which are produced singly on slender stems 2in. high, are
composed of a four-toothed calyx; corolla, four petals, or four-toothed
and funnel-shaped; when fully expanded each flower is ½in. across, and
shows a distinct yellow eye. The leaves of the root are spathulate,
those of the stems opposite and lanceolate; all the parts are shown of
the natural size in the illustration.

All the known Houstonias are natives of North America; still, our
winters seem to kill strong plants. From an impression that the plants
were destroyed by insects amongst their roots and foliage, I had several
tufts lifted, well shaken out, and divided in the autumn; they were
replanted in leaf soil and sand and kept rather moist. When planting
them, all amongst the roots was thickly strewn with dry silver sand, so
as to leave no space for the lodgment of vermin; the results were fine,
fresh, green tufts throughout the following winter, which, however, was
not severe; still, the plants not so treated dwindled and were
unhealthy, whereas the others were finely in bloom, the subject of the
drawing being one of them. These minute plants do well and look well
wedged between large stones on rockwork, where they flower nearly all
the year round; they also form pretty pot specimens under cold frame
treatment; and they may be used with good effect for surfacing the pots
in which other hardy but tall and bare stemmed things--such as
lilies--are grown.

The mode of propagation has been indicated by the above autumnal
treatment.

Flowering period, April to July.


Hutchinsia Alpina.

_Syn._ LEPIDIUM ALPINUM; _Nat. Ord._ CRUCIFERÆ.


An alpine species, from South Europe, which may be said to be evergreen
in this climate, and, according to my experience of it, flowering
throughout the year. Though found in some gardens to be difficult to
establish, when it finds a suitable home it becomes a pretty addition.

This alpine seldom exceeds 2in. in height. The flowers are a glistening
white and very small, produced in numerous heads, and they are very
enduring; the calyx is concave and falls off; the four petals are
inversely ovate; the little leaves are deeply lobed, of a pale shining
green colour, with plenty of substance; its habit is spreading or
creeping. Neither slugs nor any other pests seem to meddle with it. It
may be transplanted at any time, and the mode of propagation may be
gathered from the following remarks.

Probably because its name implies its alpine character, some may be
misled to plant it on rockwork; whether that be so or not, I so tried
it, and found it would not grow in such a situation. A bed of dwarf and
moisture-loving subjects was being planted, in which a bit of this
Hutchinsia was dibbled, and it found a home in the moist vegetable soil.
For two or three years I do not remember to have seen it, or the
seedlings, without flowers; its pretty, dwarf, rue-like foliage grew so
thickly that it threatened to kill the edging of gentianella and such
things as _Polemonium variegatum_, the double cuckoo-flower, and the
little _Armeria setacea_; it also filled the walks, and its long wiry
roots have been eradicated with difficulty. From this it will be seen
how much depends, with some plants, on the position in which they are
placed.


Hydrangea Paniculata Grandiflora.

LARGE-PANICLED HYDRANGEA; _Nat. Ord._ SAXIFRAGACEÆ.


This dwarf shrub is perfectly hardy and deciduous; it comes from Japan,
and is one of the best hardy things I have come across for some time. It
is quite a new introduction, and has many fine qualities; the fact of
its producing immense clusters of white flowers, 12in. long and 12in. in
circumference, as well-established plants, is enough to induce its
extended cultivation; but when it is stated that its clusters are
numerous and durable, that the shrub begins to flower in summer and
continues in great beauty until damaged by frosts, it will doubtless be
recorded on the lists of desiderata of those who do not possess it. The
usefulness of such a subject is notable not only to the gardener who has
a keen eye to artistic effect, but to the lover of showy flowers (see
Fig. 53).

The flowers are male and female kinds, and, as is usual with the genus,
the fruitful ones are interspersed with unfruitful, being shorter in the
stalks and nearly covered over by the latter, which are much larger; in
fact, they are not the true flowers from a botanist's point of view, but
with the florist it is exactly the opposite; their colour is white, more
or less tinted with pink, which, if the autumn season proves fine and
dry, becomes purple. As the name denotes, the bloom is arranged in
massive panicles, pyramidal form, 6in. to 12in. long, and 4in. to 8in.
in diameter. They slightly bend with the great weight, but are otherwise
well supported by the woody stems. The latter are somewhat short, seeing
they carry such large clusters. The leaves are oval, subcordate
(varying), distinctly ribbed, and finely toothed, also varying much in
size. The habit of the shrub is much branched, of strong growth, and
very floriferous. The flowering shoots issue from the hard wood of the
previous season's growth. In the shrubbery it is very attractive, its
flowers out-numbering, out-measuring, and out-lasting most of its
neighbours. Kept dwarf, what a grand bedder it would make! Grown in pots
it is a first-class indoor subject. It has that rare quality, even when
in small pots, of being adapted for the company of large ferns, palms,
&c., from the great size of its panicles, and I need scarcely say that
for cutting purposes it is valuable, more especially in decorations
which are not closely viewed.

[Illustration: FIG. 53. HYDRANGEA PANICULATA GRANDIFLORA.

(One-tenth natural size); blossom, natural size.]

The culture of this shrub is very simple; it does best in rich loam. The
situation should be sunny, that it may well ripen its wood. In order to
have clusters of large size, it should be closely pruned, like roses, by
which treatment the bush may also be kept in the desired form. Its
propagation is by cuttings; they should be of fairly well-ripened wood
of the last season's growth. The degree of ripeness, like that of such
things as roses and fuchsias, may vary according to the method by which
the cuttings are to be treated. Half-ripened shoots will root well in a
little heat; the harder wood will root equally well, but more slowly, in
the open in sandy loam.

Flowering period, July to end of September.


Hypericum Calycinum.

LARGE-CALYXED ST. JOHN'S WORT, _or_ ROSE OF SHARON;
_Nat. Ord._ HYPERICACEÆ.


A very ornamental deciduous shrub, but often green throughout the
winter. This I claim the privilege of introducing amongst herbaceous
perennials; it is a well-known and favourite "old-fashioned" flower, in
fact, a native of Ireland. The old name for it was "Cup St. John's
Wort." In July it is in splendid form, and, familiar as we are with it,
it never fails to win admiration. How charming are its large, shining,
golden blossoms, nestling amongst the bright but glaucous foliage! the
bundled tassels composed of numerous filamentary stamens glistening like
threads of gold; and though often seen one can never tire of it. As a
flower, it is distinct in form, showy, and richly effective.

It grows to the height of 1ft. or 18in.; the flowers are 4in. across, of
a rich golden-yellow colour, and produced singly on the very leafy stems
which, at the base or at their more woody parts, are square, the upper
parts being nearly round. Short flower-stalks issue from the side and
near the top, a small new growth being produced in juxtaposition with
the blossom, the said growth being composed of half-a-dozen or so
smaller-sized leaves of a pale apple-green, charmingly suffused with a
glaucous hue. The calyx of five sepals is very large, whence the
specific name, and each sepal is nearly round and cupped, whence the old
common name, "Cup St. John's Wort"; the five petals are 2in. long and
widely apart; stamens very numerous, long, thready, and arranged in
tufts. These are very beautiful, and form the most conspicuous part of
the flower; like the other seed organs, and also the petals, they are of
a rich, glistening, yellow colour. The leaves are closely arranged in
pairs, opposite, and nearly sessile; they are 2in. to 3in. long, and
about 1in. broad, oval-oblong, blunt, smooth, and leathery. When young,
they are as above described, but when older, they are of a dark, shining
green colour, and somewhat reflexed. The under sides are finely
reticulated or veined, and sometimes the foliage is spotted with brown.
The habit of the shrub is neat, the short stems being numerous and
semi-prostrate, forming dense, even masses of verdant foliage.

Such a subject as this cannot be too highly esteemed on the score of the
merits already set forth; but there are other good qualities which I
will briefly refer to presently. There can be little doubt that the fine
parts and many uses, decorative and otherwise, of most of the
"old-fashioned" flowers have much to do with the high and continued
esteem in which they are held. Not one of the least recommendations of
this St. John's Wort is that it can be grown with great success under
the shade of trees. It is one of the very few subjects that will bloom
freely in such situations. It is, therefore, very valuable; besides, as
regards its period of flowering, it comes in nicely after the vincas are
over. These two genera are, perhaps, the best hardy flowering shrubs we
possess for planting in the shade of trees. I scarcely need add that for
more open situations, as rockwork and borders, it is in every way
suitable.

To the lover of cut flowers this must prove one of the most
satisfactory, not only because of its beauty, but also because they are
produced for fully three months--into September--and they are sweetly
scented, like wallflowers. A flower-topped stem forms a perfect and
unique decoration for a lady's hair; sprays in small vases are
exquisite, whilst a bowlful for the table (without any other flower) is
very fine indeed--let the reader try these simple styles of decoration.
Also, mixed with other flowers, it is one of the most telling; none of
the yellow exotics can excel it. It is now before me, with a few sprays
of the pink sweet pea and a bold spike of the white variety of
goat's-rue; the blend is both delicate and effective. As a cut flower it
can hardly be misused, provided it is not crowded.

Its culture is simple. Any sort of garden soil suits it, but it prefers
a sandy loam. A winter top dressing of stable litter will help to
produce greater luxuriance and a longer succession of flowers. It
quickly and broadly propagates itself by means of its creeping roots;
these may be at any time chopped off, with a sharp spade, in strong
pieces, which, if planted in deeply-dug loam, will make blooming
specimens for the following season.

Flowering period, July to September.


Iberis Correæfolia.

_Nat. Ord._ CRUCIFERÆ.


This is a hybrid and much improved variety of the well-known evergreen
and shrubby Candytuft, often called "Everlasting Candytuft." A more
pronounced remove from its parents could hardly be found in any plant or
shrub than is this. There are evident improvements in colour, size, and
habit, both in foliage and flowers. It is also a robust grower and
perfectly hardy, in these respects being very different from _I.
Gibraltarica_. None of the shrubby Candytufts can compare with this for
usefulness and beauty; it comes into flower in May, and is in its
greatest beauty in early June. It remains in fine form for fully four
weeks. At first the flowers seem small, but later they form broad masses
of dazzling whiteness, the corymbs being the size of a crown piece. Not
only is this wholly distinct from its relatives, but it is one of the
most useful flowers and evergreen shrubs which can be introduced to a
garden. It cannot be planted wrong as regards either soil or situation.
It forms a rich surfacing subject, all the year round, to other tall
plants, as lilies, &c. It looks well as a front specimen in the
shrubbery, makes an effective and neat appearance at the angles of
walks, or as an edging it may be cut and trimmed as a substitute for a
grass verge; it thrives on sunny or almost sunless outhouse tops, and on
rockwork it is superb; moreover, it grows fairly well in reeky towns,
and though its white flowers may be soiled the day they open, its bright
green leaves and dense habit render it a pleasing object.

The flowers are arranged in flat heads at first, but as the stems become
elongated and the succession of buds open, a long round cluster is
formed by the old flowers remaining (as they do for weeks), such heads
or spikes sometimes being 3in. long. There is much substance in the
petals, which causes them to glisten in strong light; the flower stems
are produced 5in. or 6in. above the foliage, their total height rarely
exceeding a foot. The leaves are numerous, of a dark shining green
colour; in length 1½in., and over ¼in. broad near the ends; their shape
is spathulate, obtuse, entire, and smooth; the new set of foliage
contrasts pleasingly with the old, and its growth is completed during
the flowering period; the woody and slender branches are numerous and
procumbent.

Besides the positions already mentioned, in which this shrub may
usefully be planted, there is none more so, perhaps, than that of rough
or unsightly corners, where, if it is provided with a little loam, it
will soon adapt its form to the surroundings. The flowers in a cut state
are not only sweet-smelling, but very useful where white bloom is needed
in quantity, as for church decorations. _I. correæfolia_ can scarcely be
said to need cultural treatment, but it is useful to bear in mind that
it may be much more finely bloomed if generously treated, which simply
consists in nothing more than giving it a sunny place and sandy loam,
well enriched with old manure. Specimens so treated, which were cuttings
only two years ago, are now 2ft. in diameter, and covered densely with
large flowers; and how lovely some of the pretty weeds which have sprung
up amongst the bushes, and mingle their flowers among the masses of
white, appear--such as Spring Beauty (Claytonia), pink flowers; the
Maiden Pink (_Dianthus deltoides_), rose; Self-heal (_Prunella
pyrenaica_), purple; and the forget-me-nots! This comparatively new
Candytuft is as easily increased as grown, by either layers or cuttings;
the latter may be put in almost any time, early spring being the best;
if put in in June, no better quarters can be given than under the shade
of shrubs, where the soil is sandy loam.

Flowering period, middle of May to middle of June.


Iris Foetidissima.

GLADDON, GLADWIN, _or_ SPURGE-WORT; _Nat. Ord._
IRIDACEÆ.


A British species, occurring largely in some parts, in shady woods and
swampy places near the sea. It is evergreen and of a pleasing form
throughout the year. Its flowers are of a dull colour, and not likely to
be much esteemed, more especially when in midsummer there are so many
beautiful kinds around; still, it merits a place in our gardens. Its
handsome berry-like seeds, which are so attractively conspicuous in
December, are much more desirable than its flowers, ready as they are
for our use at Christmas time.

It grows 2 ft. high, and is a water-loving plant, but may be easily
grown in the more moist parts of the garden. The large pod is
three-cornered; the husks having turned brown, become divided, and
expose to view the large, orange-coloured seeds, which, later, turn to a
reddish-brown. They are held in the husks for many weeks and strong
winds do not displace them; they are very effective amongst the dark
green foliage, and may be cut if desired, as they often are, for indoor
decoration. They may be used in a hundred different ways, but never do
they show to more advantage than when cut with long stems and placed in
a vase with some of their own dark green sword-shaped leaves; these
last-named, by the way, may be appropriated throughout the winter as a
dressing for other flowers. There need be no difficulty in growing this
species, for if the soil is not naturally moist in summer, a thick
dressing of rotten stable manure will meet the case. As a matter of
fact, my specimen is grown in a bed fully exposed to the sun; the soil
is well drained, and stone-crops are grown in the next bed to it; no
water is ever given to established plants, and still the Gladwin is well
fruited; the soil is deeply tilled, and there is a thick covering of
manure. It is easily propagated by division of the roots in autumn or
early spring.

Flowering period, June to August.


Isopyrum Gracilis.

SLENDER ISOPYRUM; _Nat. Ord._ RANUNCULACEÆ.


This is a hardy herbaceous plant, of great beauty. The flowers are not
showy, but their great numbers and arrangement render them of importance
in what may be termed a fine-foliaged subject. The Isopyrums are very
nearly related to the thalictrums or rues, and this one greatly
resembles the maidenhair-like section, one of which it is often taken
for. There is, however, an important botanical difference between the
two genera: the thalictrums have no calyx, and the Isopyrums have.
Still, as the flowers of both are very small, that feature is not very
observable. As a decorative plant it may be classed with the
maidenhair-like rues, and the illustration may be said to give a fair
idea of three or four species.

[Illustration: FIG. 54. ISOPYRUM GRACILIS.

(One-eighth natural size; 1, leaflet, full size.)]

The Isopyrum under notice grows 12in. or 15in. high, and produces its
dark brown flowers on slender, well-branched stems, forming feathery
panicles, which have a graceful appearance. The flowers are very small,
and composed of a five-cleft calyx, five equal petals, and numerous
long, pendent seed-organs; the stems are elegantly furnished with the
fine-cut foliage. The leaves are large, but the leaflets small, as may
be seen by the one given, full size, in the drawing (Fig. 54), being
somewhat cordate, lobed, and dentate; they have hair-like stalks, which
add to their elegance of arrangement, and their glaucous colour further
enhances their effectiveness.

This light and diffuse subject may be usefully planted to relieve other
kinds; in beds or lines it looks well, having a lace-like effect; as a
cut flower or spray it nearly equals maidenhair, and for mixing with
large flowers, it perhaps excels. Either cut or in the growing state it
is very durable. It may be grown in average garden soil, but to have it
fine, it should be given vegetable soil and a moist situation, not
shaded. It is propagated by seeds or division of the roots in autumn.

Flowering period, July and August.


Jasminum Nudiflorum.

NUDE-FLOWERED JASMINE; _Nat. Ord._ JASMINACEÆ.


[Illustration: FIG. 55, JASMINUM NUDIFLORUM.

(One-third natural size.)]

This was brought to this country from China a little less than forty
years ago, and, as proof of its sterling worth, it is already in
extensive use. The whole genus is a favourite one; but there is a
special and most attractive feature about this species that is sure to
render it desirable to all--it flowers freely in mid-winter, and it does
so in the open garden. Like many of the genus, this species comes from a
very warm climate, and for a time it was grown in glasshouses as a
tender shrub, where it flowered during the winter months. It is now
found to be a perfectly hardy subject, not only withstanding our most
trying seasons without the least injury, but also proving true to the
month of December as the period when it begins to produce its numerous
golden flowers. It is a climbing deciduous shrub, though it has neither
the habit of clinging nor twining.

