Produced by Brendan O'Connor, Jonathan Ingram, Sam W. and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


                  BLACKWOOD'S
              EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.


       *       *       *       *       *

     No. CCCXXXVI. OCTOBER, 1843. VOL. LIV.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.


    MILL'S LOGIC.
    MY COUNTRY NEIGHBOURS.
    TRAVELS OF KERIM KHAN.
    THE THIRTEENTH; A TALE OF DOOM.
    REMINISCENCES OF SYRIA.
    THE FATE OF POLYCRATES.
    MODERN PAINTERS.
    A ROYAL SALUTE.
    PHYSICAL SCIENCE IN ENGLAND.
    CHRONICLES OF PARIS. THE RUE ST DENIS.
    THE LAST SESSION OF PARLIAMENT.


MILL'S LOGIC.[1]

    [1] A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive;
    being a connected view of the Principles of Evidence,
    and the Methods of Scientific Investigation. By John
    Stuart Mill. In two volumes. London: Parker.


These are _not_ degenerate days. We have still strong thinkers amongst
us; men of untiring perseverance, who flinch before no difficulties,
who never hide the knot which their readers are only too willing that
they should let alone; men who dare write what the ninety-nine out of
every hundred will pronounce a _dry_ book; who pledge themselves, not
to the public, but to their subject, and will not desert it till their
task is completed. One of this order is Mr John Stuart Mill. The work
he has now presented to the public, we deem to be, after its kind, of
the very highest character, every where displaying powers of clear,
patient, indefatigable thinking. Abstract enough it must be allowed to
be, calling for an unremitted attention, and yielding but little, even
in the shape of illustration, of lighter and more amusing matter; he
has taken no pains to bestow upon it any other interest than what
searching thought and lucid views, aptly expressed, ought of
themselves to create. His subject, indeed--the laws by which human
belief and the inquisition of truth are to be governed and
directed--is both of that extensive and fundamental character, that it
would be treated with success only by one who knew how to resist the
temptations to digress, as well as how to apply himself with vigour to
the solution of the various questions that must rise before him.

    "This book," the author says in his preface, "makes no
    pretence of giving to the world a new theory of our
    intellectual operations. Its claim to attention, if it
    possess any, is grounded on the fact, that it is an
    attempt not to supersede, but to embody and systematize,
    the best ideas which have been either promulgated on its
    subject by speculative writers, or conformed to by
    accurate thinkers in their scientific enquiries.

    "To cement together the detached fragments of a subject,
    never yet treated as a whole; to harmonize the true
    portions of discordant theories, by supplying the links
    of thought necessary to connect them, and by
    disentangling them from the errors with which they are
    always more or less interwoven--must necessarily require
    a considerable amount of original speculation. To other
    originality than this, the present work lays no claim.
    In the existing state of the cultivation of the
    sciences, there would be a very strong presumption
    against any one who should imagine that he had effected
    a revolution in the theory of the investigation of
    truth, or added any fundamentally new process to the
    practice of it. The improvement which remains to be
    effected in the methods of philosophizing, [and the
    author believes that they have much need of
    improvement,] can only consist in performing, more
    systematically and accurately, operations with which, at
    least in their elementary form, the human intellect, in
    some one or other of its employments, is already
    familiar."

Such is the manly and modest estimate which the author makes of his
own labours, and the work fully bears out the character here given of
it. No one capable of receiving pleasure from the disentanglement of
intricacies, or the clear exposition of an abstruse subject; no one
seeking assistance in the acquisition of distinct and accurate views
on the various and difficult topics which these volumes embrace--can
fail to read them with satisfaction and with benefit.

To give a full account--to give any account--of a work which traverses
so wide a field of subject, would be here a futile attempt; we should,
after all our efforts, merely produce a laboured and imperfect
synopsis, which would in vain solicit the perusal of our readers. What
we purpose doing, is to take up, in the order in which they occur,
some of the topics on which Mr Mill has thrown a new light, or which
he has at least invested with a novel interest by the view he has
given of them. And as, in this selection of topics, we are not bound
to choose those which are most austere and repulsive, we hope that
such of our readers as are not deterred by the very name of logic,
will follow us with some interest through the several points of view,
and the various extracts we shall present to them.

_The Syllogism._--The logic of _Induction_, as that to which attention
has been least devoted, which has been least reduced to systematic
form, and which lies at the basis of all other modes of reasoning,
constitutes the prominent subject of these volumes. Nevertheless, the
old topic of logic proper, or deductive reasoning, is not omitted, and
the first passage to which we feel bound, on many accounts, to give
our attention, is the disquisition on the syllogism.

Fortunately for us it is not necessary, in order to convey the point
of our author's observations upon this head, to afflict our readers
with any dissertation upon _mode_ or _figure_, or other logical
technicalities. The first form or _figure_ of the syllogism (to which
those who have not utterly forgotten their scholastic discipline will
remember that all others may be reduced) is familiar to every one, and
to this alone we shall have occasion to refer.

    "All men are mortal.
    A king is a man;
    Therefore a king is mortal."

Who has not met--what young lady even, though but in her teens, has
not encountered some such charming triplet as this, which looks so
like verse at a distance, but, like some other compositions,
approximates nothing the more on this account to poetry? Who has not
learnt from such examples what is a _major_, what a _middle term_, and
what the _minor_ or conclusion?

As no one, in the present day, advises the adoption, in our
controversies, of the syllogistic forms of reasoning, it is evident
that the value of the syllogism must consist, not in its practical
use, but in the accurate type which it affords of the process of
reasoning, and in the analysis of that process which a full
understanding of it renders necessary. Such an analysis supplies, it
is said, an excellent discipline to the mind, whilst an occasional
reference to the form of the syllogism, as a type or model of
reasoning, insures a steadiness and pertinency of argument. But is the
syllogism, it has been asked, this veritable type of our reasoning?
Has the analysis which would explain it to be such, been accurately
conducted?

Several of our northern metaphysicians, it is well known--as, for
example, Dr Campbell and Dugald Stewart--have laid rude hands upon the
syllogism. They have pronounced it to be a vain invention. They have
argued that no addition of knowledge, no advancement in the
acquisition of truth, no new conviction, can possibly be obtained
through its means, inasmuch as no syllogism can contain any thing in
the conclusion which was not admitted, at the outset, in the first or
major proposition. The syllogism always, say they, involves a _petitio
principii_. Admit the major, and the business is palpably at an end;
the rest is a mere circle, in which one cannot advance, but may get
giddy by the revolution. According to the exposition of logicians
themselves, we simply obtain by our syllogism, the privilege of saying
that, in the _minor_, of some individual of a class, which we had
said, in the _major_, already of the whole class.

Archbishop Whately, our most distinguished expositor and defender of
the Aristotelian logic, meets these antagonists with the resolute
assertion, that their objection to the syllogism is equally valid
against _all reasoning whatever_. He does not deny, but, on the
contrary, in common with every logician, distinctly states, that
whatever is concluded in the minor, must have been previously admitted
in the major, for in this lies the very force and compulsion of the
argument; but he maintains that the syllogism is the true type of all
our reasoning, and that therefore to all our reasoning, the very same
vice, the very same _petitio principii_, may be imputed. The
syllogism, he contends, (and apparently with complete success,) is but
a statement in full of what takes place mentally even in the most
rapid acts of reasoning. We often suppress the major for the sake of
brevity, but it is understood though not expressed; just as in the
same manner as we sometimes content ourselves with merely implying the
conclusion itself, because it is sufficiently evident without further
words. If any one should so far depart from common sense as to
question the mortality of some great king, we should think it
sufficient to say for all argument--the king is a man!--virtually
implying the whole triplet above mentioned:--

    "All men are mortal.
    The king is a man;
    Therefore the king is mortal."

"In pursuing the supposed investigation, (into the operation of
reasoning,)" says Archbishop Whately, "it will be found that every
conclusion is deduced, in reality, from two other propositions,
(thence called _Premisses_;) for though one of these may be and
commonly is suppressed, it must nevertheless be understood as
admitted, as may easily be made evident by supposing the _denial_ of
the suppressed premiss, which will at once invalidate the argument;
_e.g._ if any one, from perceiving that 'the world exhibits marks of
design,' infers that 'it must have had an intelligent author,' though
he may not be aware in his own mind of the existence of any other
premiss, he will readily understand, if it be _denied_ that 'whatever
exhibits marks of design must have had an intelligent author,' that
the affirmative of that proposition is necessary to the solidity of
the argument. An argument thus stated regularly and at full length, is
called a syllogism; which, therefore, is evidently not a peculiar
_kind of argument_, but only a peculiar _form_ of expression, in which
every argument may be stated."--_Whately's Logic_, p. 27.

"It will be found," he continues, "that all valid arguments whatever
may be easily reduced to such a form as that of the foregoing
syllogisms; and that consequently the principle on which they are
constructed is the UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLE of reasoning. So elliptical,
indeed, is the ordinary mode of expression, even of those who are
considered as prolix writers,--_i.e._ so much is implied and left to
be understood in the course of argument, in comparison of what is
actually stated, (most men being impatient, even to excess, of any
appearance of unnecessary and tedious formality of statement,) that a
single sentence will often be found, though perhaps considered as a
single argument, to contain, compressed into a short compass, a chain
of several distinct arguments. But if each of these be fully
developed, and the whole of what the author intended to imply be
stated expressly, it will be found that all the steps, even of the
longest and most complex train of reasoning, may be reduced into the
above form."--P. 32.

That it is not the office of the syllogism to discover _new_ truths,
our logician fully admits, and takes some pains to establish. This is
the office of "other operations of mind," not unaccompanied, however,
with acts of reasoning. Reasoning, argument, inference, (words which
he uses as synonymous,) have not for their object our advancement in
knowledge, or the acquisition of new truths.

"Much has been said," says Archbishop Whately, in another portion of
his work, "by some writers, of the superiority of the inductive to the
syllogistic methods of seeking truth, as if the two stood opposed to
each other; and of the advantage of substituting the _Organon_ of
Bacon for that of Aristotle, &c. &c., which indicates a total
misconception of the nature of both. There is, however, the more
excuse for the confusion of thought which prevails on this subject,
because eminent logical writers have treated, or at least have
appeared to treat, of induction as a kind of argument distinct from
the syllogism; which, if it were, it certainly might be contrasted
with the syllogism: or rather the whole syllogistic theory would fall
to the ground, since one of the very first principles it establishes,
is that _all_ reasoning, on whatever subject, is one and the same
process, which may be clearly exhibited in the form of syllogisms.

"This inaccuracy seems chiefly to have arisen from a vagueness in the
use of the word induction; which is sometimes employed to designate
the process of _investigation_ and of collecting facts, sometimes the
deducing an inference _from_ those facts. The former of these
processes (_viz._ that of observation and experiment) is undoubtedly
_distinct_ from that which takes place in the syllogism; but then it
is not a process of _argumentation_: the latter again _is_ an
argumentative process; but then it is, like all other arguments,
capable of being syllogistically expressed."--P. 263.

"To prove, then, this point demonstratively, (namely, that it is not
by a process of reasoning that new truths are brought to light,)
becomes on these data perfectly easy; for since all reasoning (in the
sense above defined) may be resolved into syllogisms; and since even
the objectors to logic make it a subject of complaint, that in a
syllogism the premises do virtually assert the conclusion, it follows
at once that no new truth (as above defined) can be elicited by any
process of reasoning.

"It is on this ground, indeed, that the justly celebrated author of
the _Philosophy of Rhetoric_ objects to the syllogism altogether, as
necessarily involving a _petitio principii_; an objection which, of
course, he would not have been disposed to bring forward, had he
perceived that, whether well or ill founded, _it lies against all
arguments whatever_. Had he been aware that the syllogism is no
distinct kind of argument otherwise than in form, but is, in fact,
_any_ argument whatever stated regularly and at full length, he would
have obtained a more correct view of the object of all reasoning;
_which is merely to expand and unfold the assertions wrapt up, as it
were, and implied in those with which we set out_, and to bring a
person to perceive and acknowledge the full force of that which he has
admitted; to contemplate it in various points of view; _to admit in
one shape what he has already admitted in another_, and to give up and
disallow whatever is inconsistent with it."--P. 273.

Now, what the Archbishop here advances appears convincing; his
position looks impregnable. The syllogism is not a peculiar mode of
reasoning, (how could it be?)--if any thing at all, it must be a
general formula for expressing the ordinary act of reasoning--and he
shows that the objections made by those who would impugn it, may be
levelled with equal justice against all ratiocination whatever. But
then this method of defending the syllogism, (to those of us who have
stood beside, in the character of modest enquirers, watching the
encounter of keen wits,) does but aggravate the difficulty. Is it
true, then, that in every act of reasoning, we do but conclude in one
form, what, the moment before, we had stated in another? Are we to
understand that such is the final result of the debate? If so, this
act of reasoning appears very little deserving of that estimation in
which it has been generally held. The great prerogative of intelligent
beings (as it has been deemed,) grants them this only--to "admit in
one shape what they had already admitted in another."

From the dilemma in which we are here placed, the Archbishop by no
means releases, or attempts to release us: he seems (something too
much after the manner and disposition generally attributed to masters
in logic-fence,) to have rested satisfied with foiling his opponents
in their attack upon the exact position he had bound himself to
defend. He saves the syllogism; what becomes, in the controversy, of
poor human reason itself, is not his especial concern--it is as much
their business as his. You do not, more than I, he virtually says to
his opponents, intend to resign all reasoning whatever as a mere
inanity; I prove, for my part, that all reasoning is capable of being
put into a syllogistic form, and that your objection, if valid against
the syllogism, is equally valid against all ratiocination. You must
therefore either withdraw your objection altogether, or advance it at
your peril; the difficulty is of your making, you must solve it as you
can. Gentlemen, you must muzzle your own dog.

In this posture of affairs the author of the present work comes to the
rescue. He shall speak in his own words. But we must premise, that
although we do not intend to stint him in our quotation--though we
wish to give him all the sea-room possible; yet, for a _full_
development of his views, we must refer the reader to his volumes
themselves. There are some disquisitions which precede the part we are
about to quote from, which, in order to do complete justice to the
subject, ought to find a place here, as well as in the author's
work--but it is impossible.

    "It is universally allowed, that a syllogism is vicious,
    if there be any thing more in the conclusion than was
    assumed in the premisses. But this is, in fact, to say,
    that nothing ever was, or can be, proved by syllogism,
    which was not known, or assumed to be known, before. Is
    ratiocination, then, not a process of inference? And is
    the syllogism, to which the word reasoning has so often
    been represented to be exclusively appropriate, not
    really entitled to be called reasoning at all? This
    seems an inevitable consequence of the doctrine,
    admitted by all writers on the subject, that a syllogism
    can prove no more than is involved in the premisses. Yet
    the acknowledgment so explicitly made, has not prevented
    one set of writers from continuing to represent the
    syllogism as the correct analysis of what the mind
    actually performs in discovering and proving the larger
    half of the truths, whether of science or of daily life,
    which we believe; while those who have avoided this
    inconsistency, and followed out the general theorem
    respecting the logical value of the syllogism to its
    legitimate corollary, have been led to impute
    uselessness and frivolity to the syllogistic theory
    itself, on the ground of the _petitio principii_ which
    they allege to be inherent in every syllogism. As I
    believe both these opinions to be fundamentally
    erroneous, I must request the attention of the reader to
    certain considerations, without which any just
    appreciation of the true character of the syllogism, and
    the functions it performs in philosophy, appears to me
    impossible; but which seem to me to have been overlooked
    or insufficiently adverted to, both by the defenders of
    the syllogistic theory, and by its assailants.

    "It must be granted, that in every syllogism, considered
    as an argument to prove the conclusion, there is a
    _petitio principii_. When we say--

        'All men are mortal.
        Socrates is a man;
            THEREFORE
        Socrates is mortal'--

    it is unanswerably urged by the adversaries of the
    syllogistic theory, that the proposition, Socrates is
    mortal, is presupposed in the more general assumption,
    All men are mortal; that we cannot be assured of the
    mortality of all men, unless we were previously certain
    of the mortality of every individual man; that if it be
    still doubtful whether Socrates, or any other individual
    you choose to name, be mortal or not, the same degree of
    uncertainty must hang over the assertion, All men are
    mortal; that the general principle, instead of being
    given as evidence of the particular case, cannot itself
    be taken for true without exception, until every shadow
    of doubt which could affect any case comprised with it,
    is dispelled by evidence _aliundè_, and then what
    remains for the syllogism to prove? that, in short, no
    reasoning from generals to particulars can, as such,
    prove any thing; since from a general principle you
    cannot infer any particulars, but those which the
    principle itself assumes as foreknown.

    "This doctrine is irrefragable; and if logicians, though
    unable to dispute it, have usually exhibited a strong
    disposition to explain it away, this was not because
    they could discover any flaw in the argument itself, but
    because the contrary opinion seemed to rest upon
    arguments equally indisputable. In the syllogism last
    referred to, for example, or in any of those which we
    previously constructed, is it not evident that the
    conclusion may, to the person to whom the syllogism is
    presented, be actually and _bona fide_ a new truth? Is
    it not matter of daily experience that truth previously
    undreamt of, facts which have not been, and cannot be,
    directly observed, are arrived at by way of general
    reasoning? We believe that the Duke of Wellington is
    mortal. We do not know this by direct observation, since
    he is not yet dead. If we were asked how, this being the
    case, we know the Duke to be mortal, we should probably
    answer, because all men are so. Here, therefore, we
    arrive at the knowledge of a truth not (as yet)
    susceptible of observation, by a reasoning which admits
    of being exhibited in the following syllogism--

            'All men are mortal.
        The Duke of Wellington is a man;
                THEREFORE
        The Duke of Wellington is mortal.'

    "And since a large portion of our knowledge is thus
    acquired, logicians have persisted in representing the
    syllogism as a process of inference or proof; although
    none of them has cleared up the difficulty which arises
    from the inconsistency between that assertion and the
    principle, that if there be any thing in the conclusion
    which was not already asserted in the premisses, the
    argument is vicious. For it is impossible to attach any
    serious scientific value to such a mere salvo, as the
    distinction drawn between being involved _by
    implication_ in the premisses, and being directly
    asserted in them. When Archbishop Whately, for example,
    says that the object of reasoning is 'merely to expand
    and unfold the assertions wrapt up, as it were, and
    implied in those with which we set out, and to bring a
    person to perceive and acknowledge the full force of
    that which he has admitted,' he does not, I think, meet
    the real difficulty requiring to be explained; namely,
    how it happens that a science like geometry _can_ be all
    'wrapt up' in a few definitions and axioms. Nor does
    this defence of the syllogism differ much from what its
    assailants urge against it as an accusation, when they
    charge it with being of no use except to those who seek
    to press the consequence of an admission into which a
    man has been entrapped, without having considered and
    understood its full force. When you admitted the major
    premiss, you asserted the conclusion, 'but,' says
    Archbishop Whately, 'you asserted it by implication
    merely; this, however, can here only mean that you
    asserted it unconsciously--that you did not know you
    were asserting it; but if so, the difficulty revives in
    this shape. Ought you not to have known? Were you
    warranted in asserting the general proposition without
    having satisfied yourself of the truth of every thing
    which it fairly includes? And if not, what, then, is the
    syllogistic art but a contrivance for catching you in a
    trap, and holding you fast in it?'

    "From this difficulty there appears to be but one issue.
    The proposition, that the Duke of Wellington is mortal,
    is evidently an inference, it is got at as a conclusion
    from something else; but do we, in reality, conclude it
    from the proposition--All men are mortal? I answer, No.

    "The error committed is, I conceive, that of overlooking
    the distinction between the two parts of the process of
    philosophizing--the inferring part and the registering
    part; and ascribing to the latter the functions of the
    former. The mistake is that of referring a man to his
    own notes for the _origin_ of his knowledge. If a man is
    asked a question, and is at the moment unable to answer
    it, he may refresh his memory by turning to a memorandum
    which he carries about with him. But if he were asked
    how the fact came to his knowledge, he would scarcely
    answer, because it was set down in his note-book.

    "Assuming that the proposition, The Duke of Wellington
    is mortal, is immediately an inference from the
    proposition, All men are mortal, whence do we derive our
    knowledge of that general truth? No supernatural aid
    being supposed, the answer must be, from observation.
    Now, all which men can observe are individual cases.
    From these all general truths must be drawn, and into
    these they may be again resolved; for a general truth is
    but an aggregate of particular truths--a comprehensive
    expression, by which an indefinite number of individual
    facts are affirmed or denied at once. But a general
    proposition is not merely a compendious form for
    recording and preserving in the memory a number of
    particular facts, all of which have been observed.
    Generalization is not a process of mere naming, it is
    also a process of inference. From instances which we
    have observed, we feel warranted in concluding, that
    what we found true in those instances holds in all
    similar ones--past, present, and future, however
    numerous they may be. We, then, by that valuable
    contrivance of language, which enables us to speak of
    many as if they were one, record all that we have
    observed, together with all that we infer from our
    observations, in one concise expression; and have thus
    only one proposition, instead of an endless number, to
    remember or to communicate. The results of many
    observations and inferences, and instructions for making
    innumerable inferences in unforeseen cases, are
    compressed into one short sentence.

    "When, therefore, we conclude, from the death of John
    and Thomas, and every other person we ever heard of in
    whose case the experiment had been fairly tried, that
    the Duke of Wellington is mortal like the rest, we may,
    indeed, pass through the generalization, All men are
    mortal, as an intermediate stage; but it is not in the
    latter half of the process--the descent from all men to
    the Duke of Wellington--that the _inference_ resides.
    The inference is finished when we have asserted that all
    men are mortal. What remains to be performed afterwards
    is merely deciphering our own notes.

    "Archbishop Whately has contended, that syllogizing, or
    reasoning from generals to particulars, is not,
    agreeably to the vulgar idea, a peculiar mode of
    reasoning, but the philosophical analysis of the mode in
    which all men reason, and must do so if they reason at
    all. With the deference due to so high an authority, I
    cannot help thinking that the vulgar notion is, in this
    case, the more correct. If, from our experience of John,
    Thomas, &c. who once were living, but are now dead, we
    are entitled to conclude that all human beings are
    mortal, we might surely, without any logical
    inconsequence, have concluded at once, from those
    instances, that the Duke Wellington is mortal. The
    mortality of John, Thomas, and Company, is, after all,
    the whole evidence we have for the mortality of the Duke
    of Wellington. Not one iota is added to the proof by
    interpolating a general proposition. Since the
    individual cases are all the evidence we can possess;
    evidence which no logical form into which we choose to
    throw it can make greater than it is; and since that
    evidence is either sufficient in itself, or, if
    insufficient for one purpose, cannot be sufficient for
    the other; I am unable to see why we should be forbidden
    to take the shortest cut from these sufficient premisses
    to the conclusion, and constrained to travel the 'high
    _priori_ road' by the arbitrary fiat of logicians. I
    cannot perceive why it should be impossible to journey
    from one place to another, unless 'we march up a hill
    and then march down again.' It may be the safest road,
    and there may be a resting-place at the top of the hill,
    affording a commanding view of the surrounding country;
    but for the mere purpose of arriving at our journey's
    end, our taking that road is perfectly optional: it is a
    question of time, trouble, and danger.

    "Not only _may_ we reason from particulars to
    particulars, without passing through generals, but we
    perpetually do so reason. All our earliest inferences
    are of this nature. From the first dawn of intelligence
    we draw inferences; but years elapse before we learn the
    use of general language. The child who, having burnt his
    fingers, avoids to thrust them again into the fire, has
    reasoned or inferred, though he has never thought of the
    general maxim--fire burns. He knows from memory that he
    has been burnt, and on this evidence believes, when he
    sees a candle, that if he puts his finger into the flame
    of it, he will be burnt again. He believes this in every
    case which happens to arise; but without looking, in
    each instance, beyond the present case. He is not
    generalizing; he is inferring a particular from
    particulars.--Vol. I. p. 244.

    "From the considerations now adduced, the following
    conclusions seem to be established:--All inference is
    from particulars to particulars: General propositions
    are merely registers of such inferences already made,
    and short formulæ for making more: The major premiss of
    a syllogism, consequently, is a formula of this
    description; and the conclusion is not an inference
    drawn _from_ the formula, but an inference drawn
    _according to_ the formula: the real logical antecedent,
    or premisses being _the particular facts from which the
    general proposition was collected by induction_. * * *

    "In the above observations, it has, I think, been
    clearly shown, that although there is always a process
    of reasoning or inference where a syllogism is used, the
    syllogism is not a correct analysis of that process of
    reasoning or inference; which is, on the contrary, (when
    not a mere inference from testimony,) an inference from
    particulars to particulars; authorized by a previous
    inference from particulars to generals, and
    substantially the same with it: of the nature,
    therefore, of Induction. But while these conclusions
    appear to me undeniable, I must yet enter a protest, as
    strong as that of Archbishop Whately himself, against
    the doctrine that the syllogistic art is useless for the
    purposes of reasoning. The reasoning lies in the act of
    generalisation, not in interpreting the record of that
    act; but the syllogistic form is all indispensable
    collateral security for the correctness of the
    generalisation itself."--P. 259.

By this explanation we are released from the dilemma into which the
syllogistic and non-syllogistic party had together thrown us. We can
acknowledge that the process of reason can be always exhibited in the
form of a syllogism, and yet not be driven to the strange and
perplexing conclusion that our reasoning can never conduct us to a new
truth, never lead us further than to admit in one shape what we had
already admitted in another. We have, or may have, it is true, a
_major_ in all our ratiocination, implied, if not expressed, and are
so far syllogistic; but then the real premiss from which we reason is
the amount of experience on which that major was founded, to which
amount of experience we, in fact, made an addition in our _minor_, or
conclusion.

But while we accept this explanation, and are grateful for the
deliverance it works for us, we must also admit, (and we are not aware
that Mr Mill would controvert this admission,) that there is a large
class of cases in which our reasoning betrays no reference to this
anterior experience, and where the usual explanation given by teachers
of logic is perfectly applicable; cases where our object is, not the
discovery of truth for ourselves, but to convince another of his
error, by showing him that the proposition, which in his blindness or
prejudice he has chosen to contradict, is part and parcel of some
other proposition to which he has given, and is at all times ready to
give, his acquiescence. In such cases, we frequently content ourselves
with throwing before him this alternative--refuse your _major_, to
which you have again and again assented, or accept, as involved in it,
our _minor_ proposition, which you have persisted in controverting.

It will have been gathered from the foregoing train of observation,
that, in direct contradistinction to Archbishop Whately, who had
represented induction (so far as it consisted of an act of
ratiocination) as resolvable into deductive and syllogistic reasoning,
our author has resolved the syllogism, and indeed all deductive
reasoning whatever, ultimately into examples of induction. In doing
this, he is encountered by a metaphysical notion very prevalent in the
present day, which lies across his path, and which he has to remove.
We allude to the distinction between contingent and necessary truths;
it being held by many philosophical writers that all necessary and
universal truths owe their origin, not to experience (except as
_occasion_ of their development,) and not, consequently, to the
ordinary process of induction, but flow from higher sources--flow
immediately from some supreme faculty to which the name of reason has
by some been exclusively appropriated, in order to distinguish it from
the understanding, the faculty judging according to sense. We will
pause a while upon this topic.


_Contingent and Necessary Truths._--Those who have read Mr Whewell's
treatise on the _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, will remember
that there is no topic which that author labours more sedulously to
inculcate than this same distinction between contingent and necessary
truths; and it is against his statement of the doctrine in question,
that Mr Mill directs his observations. Perhaps the controverted tenets
would have sustained a more equal combat under the auspices of a more
practised and more complete metaphysician than Mr Whewell; but a
difficulty was probably experienced in finding a statement in any
other well-known English author full and explicit. Referring ourselves
to Mr Whewell's volumes for an extract, in order to give the
distinction here contended against the advantage of an exposition in
the words of one who upholds it, we are embarrassed by the number
which offer themselves. From many we select the following statement:--

"Experience," says Mr Whewell, "must always consist of a limited
number of observations. And, however numerous these may be, they can
show nothing with regard to the infinite number of cases in which the
experiment has not been made. Experience, being thus unable to prove a
fact to be universal, is, as will readily be seen, still more
incapable of proving a fact to be necessary. Experience cannot,
indeed, offer the smallest ground for the necessity of a proposition.
She can observe and record what has happened; but she cannot find, in
any case, or in any accumulation of cases, any reason for what _must_
happen. She may see objects side by side, but she cannot see a reason
why they must be ever side by side. She finds certain events to occur
in succession; but the succession supplies, in its occurrence, no
reason for its recurrence. She contemplates external objects; but she
cannot detect any internal bond which indissolubly connects the future
with the past, the possible with the real. To learn a proposition by
experience, and to see it to be necessarily true, are two altogether
different processes of thought.

"But it may be said, that we do learn, by means of observation and
experience, many universal truths; indeed, all the general truths of
which science consists. Is not the doctrine of universal gravitation
learned by experience? Are not the laws of motion, the properties of
light, the general properties of chemistry, so learned? How, with
these examples before us, can we say that experience teaches no
universal truths?

"To this we reply, that these truths can only be known to be
_general_, not universal, if they depend upon experience alone.
Experience cannot bestow that universality which she herself cannot
have, and that necessity of which she has no comprehension. If these
doctrines are universally true, this universality flows from the
_ideas_ which we apply to our experience, and which are, as we have
seen, the real sources of necessary truth. How far these ideas can
communicate their universality and necessity to the results of
experience, it will hereafter be our business to consider. It will
then appear, that when the mind collects from observation truths of a
wide and comprehensive kind, which approach to the simplicity and
universality of the truths of pure science; she gives them this
character by throwing upon them the light of her own fundamental
ideas."--_Whewell_, Vol. I. p. 60.

Accordingly, Mr Whewell no sooner arrives at any truth which admits of
an unconditional positive statement--a statement defying all rational
contradiction--than he abstracts it from amongst the acquisitions of
experience, and throwing over it, we suppose, the light of these
fundamental ideas, pronounces it enrolled in the higher class of
universal and necessary truths. The first laws of motion, though
established through great difficulties against the most obstinate
preconceptions, and by the aid of repeated experiments, are, when
surveyed in their present perfect form, proclaimed to be, not
acquisitions of experience, but truths emanating from a higher and
more mysterious origin.[2]

    [2] Necessary truths multiply on us very fast. "We
    maintain," says Mr Whewell, "that this equality of
    _mechanical action and reaction_ is one of the
    principles which do not flow from, but regulate, our
    experience. A mechanical pressure, not accompanied by an
    equal and opposite pressure, can no more be given by
    experience than two unequal right angles. With the
    supposition of such inequalities, space ceases to be
    space, form ceases to be form, matter ceases to be
    matter." And again he says, "_That the parallelogram of
    forces is a necessary truth_;" a law of motion of which
    we surely can _conceive_ its opposite to be true. In
    some of these instances Mr Whewell appears, by a
    confusion of thought, to have given to the _physical
    fact_ the character of necessity which resides in the
    mathematical formula employed for its expression.
    Whether a moving body would communicate motion to
    another body--whether it would lose its own motion by so
    doing--or what would be the result if a body were struck
    by two other bodies moving in different directions--are
    questions which, if they could be asked us prior to
    experience, we could give no answer whatever to--which
    we can easily conceive to admit of a quite different
    answer to that which experience has taught us to give.

This distinction, which assigns a different mental origin to truths,
simply because (from the nature of the subject-matter, as it seems to
us) there is a difference with regard to the sort of certainty we feel
of them, has always appeared to us most unphilosophical. It is
admitted that we arrive at a general proposition through experience;
there is no room, therefore, for quibbling as to the meaning of the
term experience--it is understood that when we speak of a truth being
derived from experience, we imply the usual exercise of our mental
faculties; it is the step from a general to a universal proposition
which alone occasions this perplexing distinction. The dogma is
this--that experience can only teach us by a limited number of
examples, and therefore can never establish a universal proposition.
But if _all_ experience is in favour of a proposition--if no
experience has occurred even to enable the imagination to conceive its
opposite, what more can be required to convert the general into a
universal proposition?

Strange to say, the attribution of these characteristics of
universality and necessity, becomes, amongst those who loudly insist
upon the palpable nature of the distinction we are now examining, a
matter of controversy; and there are a class of scientific truths, of
which it is debated whether they are contingent or necessary. The
only test that they belong to the latter order is, the impossibility
of conceiving their opposites to be the truth; and it seems that men
find a great difference in their powers of conception, and that what
is impossible with one is possible with another. But (wisely, too)
passing this over, and admitting that there is a distinction (though
a very ill-defined one) between the several truths we entertain of
this nature; namely, that some we find it impossible, even in
imagination, to contradict, whilst of others we can suppose it
possible that they should cease to be truths--does it follow that
different faculties of the mind are engaged in the acquisition of
them? Does nothing depend on the nature of the subject itself? "That
two sides of a triangle," says Mr Whewell, "are greater than the
third, is a universal and necessary geometrical truth; it is true of
all triangles; it is true in such a way that the contrary cannot be
conceived. _Experience could not prove such a proposition._"
Experience is allowed to prove it of this or that triangle, but not
as an inseparable property of a triangle. We are at a loss to
perceive why the same faculties of the mind that can judge, say of
the properties of animal life, of organized beings, cannot judge of
the properties of a figure--properties which must immediately be
conceived to exist the moment the figure is presented to the
imagination. We say, for instance, of any animal, not because it is
this or that animal, a sheep or an ox, but simply _as_ animal, that
it must sustain itself by food, by the process of assimilation. This,
however, is merely a contingent truth, because it is in our power to
conceive of organized beings whose substance shall not wear away, and
consequently shall not need perpetual restoration. But what faculty
of the mind is unemployed here that is engaged in perceiving the
property of a triangle, that _as_ triangle, it must have two sides
greater than the third? The truths elicited in the two cases have a
difference, inasmuch as a triangle differs from an animal in this,
that it is impossible to conceive other triangles than those to which
your truth is applicable, and therefore the proposition relating to
the triangle is called a necessary truth. But surely this difference
lies in the subject-matter, not in the nature of our mental
faculties.

But we had not intended to interpose our own lucubrations in the place
of those of Mr Mill.

    "Although Mr Whewell," says our author, "has naturally
    and properly employed a variety of phrases to bring his
    meaning more forcibly home, he will, I presume, allow
    that they are all equivalent; and that what he means by
    a necessary truth, would be sufficiently defined, a
    proposition the negation of which is not only false, but
    inconceivable. I am unable to find in any of Mr
    Whewell's expressions, turn them what way you will, a
    meaning beyond this, and I do not believe he would
    contend that they mean any thing more.

    "This, therefore, is the principle asserted: that
    propositions, the negation of which is inconceivable, or
    in other words, which we cannot figure to ourselves as
    being false, must rest upon evidence of higher and more
    cogent description than any which experience can afford.
    And we have next to consider whether there is any ground
    for this assertion.

    "Now, I cannot but wonder that so much stress should be
    laid upon the circumstance of inconceivableness, when
    there is such ample experience to show that our capacity
    or incapacity for conceiving a thing has very little to
    do with the possibility of the thing in itself; but is
    in truth very much an affair of accident, and depends
    upon the past habits and history of our own minds. There
    is no more generally acknowledged fact in human nature,
    than the extreme difficulty at first felt in conceiving
    any thing as possible, which is in contradiction to
    long-established and familiar experience, or even to old
    and familiar habits of thought. And this difficulty is a
    necessary result of the fundamental laws of the human
    mind. When we have often seen and thought of two things
    together, and have never, in any one instance, either
    seen or thought of them separately, there is by the
    primary law of association an increasing difficulty,
    which in the end becomes insuperable, of conceiving the
    two things apart. This is most of all conspicuous in
    uneducated persons, who are, in general, utterly unable
    to separate any two ideas which have once become firmly
    associated in their minds, and, if persons of cultivated
    intellect have any advantage on the point, it is only
    because, having seen and heard and read more, and being
    more accustomed to exercise their imagination, they
    have experienced their sensations and thoughts in more
    varied combinations, and have been prevented from
    forming many of these inseparable associations. But this
    advantage has necessarily its limits. The man of the
    most practised intellect is not exempt from the
    universal laws of our conceptive faculty. If daily habit
    presents to him for a long period two facts in
    combination, and if he is not led, during that period,
    either by accident or intention, to think of them apart,
    he will in time become incapable of doing so, even by
    the strongest effort; and the supposition, that the two
    facts can be separated in nature, will at last present
    itself to his mind with all the characters of an
    inconceivable phenomenon. There are remarkable instances
    of this in the history of science; instances in which
    the wisest men rejected as impossible, because
    inconceivable, things which their posterity, by earlier
    practice, and longer perseverance in the attempt, found
    it quite easy to conceive, and which every body now
    knows to be true. There was a time when men of the most
    cultivated intellects, and the most emancipated from the
    dominion of early prejudice, could not credit the
    existence of antipodes; were unable to conceive, in
    opposition to old association, the force of gravity
    acting upwards instead of downwards. The Cartesians long
    rejected the Newtonian doctrine of the gravitation of
    all bodies towards one another, on the faith of a
    general proposition, the reverse of which seemed to them
    to be inconceivable--the proposition, that a body cannot
    act where it is not. All the cumbrous machinery of
    imaginary vortices, assumed without the smallest
    particle of evidence, appeared to these philosophers a
    more rational mode of explaining the heavenly motions,
    than one which involved what appeared to them so great
    an absurdity. And they, no doubt, found it as impossible
    to conceive that a body should act upon the earth at the
    distance of the sun or moon, as we find it to conceive
    an end to space or time, or two straight lines inclosing
    a space. Newton himself had not been able to realize the
    conception, or we should not have had his hypothesis of
    a subtle ether, the occult cause of gravitation; and his
    writings prove, that although he deemed the particular
    nature of the intermediate agency a matter of
    conjecture, the necessity of _some_ such agency appeared
    to him indubitable. It would seem that, even now, the
    majority of scientific men have not completely got over
    this very difficulty; for though they have at last
    learned to conceive the sun _attracting_ the earth
    without any intervening fluid, they cannot yet conceive
    the sun _illuminating_ the earth without some such
    medium.

    "If, then, it be so natural to the human mind, even in
    its highest state of culture, to be incapable of
    conceiving, and on that ground to believe impossible,
    what is afterwards not only found to be conceivable, but
    proved to be true; what wonder if, in cases where the
    association is still older, more confirmed, and more
    familiar, and in which nothing even occurs to shake our
    conviction, or even to suggest to us any conception at
    variance with the association, the acquired incapacity
    should continue, and be mistaken for a natural
    incapacity? It is true our experience of the varieties
    in nature enables us, within certain limits, to conceive
    other varieties analogous to them. We can conceive the
    sun or moon falling, for although we never saw them
    fall, nor ever perhaps imagined them falling, we have
    seen so many other things fall, that we have innumerable
    familiar analogies to assist the conception; which,
    after all, we should probably have some difficulty in
    framing, were we not well accustomed to see the sun and
    moon move, (or appear to move,) so that we are only
    called upon to conceive a slight change in the direction
    of motion, a circumstance familiar to our experience.
    But when experience affords no model on which to shape
    the new conception, how is it possible for us to form
    it? How, for example, can we imagine an end to space and
    time? We never saw any object without something beyond
    it, nor experienced any feeling without something
    following it. When, therefore, we attempt to conceive
    the last point of space, we have the idea irresistibly
    raised of other points beyond it. When we try to imagine
    the last instant of time, we cannot help conceiving
    another instant after it. Nor is there any necessity to
    assume, as is done by the school to which Mr Whewell
    belongs, a peculiar fundamental law of the mind to
    account for the feeling of infinity inherent in our
    conception of space and time; that apparent infinity is
    sufficiently accounted for by simple and universally
    acknowledged laws."--Vol. I. p. 313.

Mr Mill does not deny that there exists a distinction, as regards
ourselves, between certain truths (namely, that of some, we cannot
conceive them to be other than truths,) but he sets no value on this
distinction, inasmuch as there is no proof that it has its counterpart
in things themselves; the impossibility of a thing being by no means
measured by our inability to conceive it. And we may observe, that Mr
Whewell, in consistency with the metaphysical doctrine upon space and
time which he has borrowed from Kant, ought, under another shape, to
entertain a similar doubt as to whether this distinction represent any
real distinction in the nature of things. He considers, with Kant,
that space is only that _form_ with which the human mind invests
things--that it has no other than this merely mental existence--is
purely subjective. Presuming, therefore, that the mind is, from its
constitution, utterly and for ever unable to conceive the opposite of
certain truths, (those, for instance, of geometry;) yet as the
existence of space itself is but a subjective truth, it must follow
that all other truths relating to it are subjective also. The mind is
not conversant with things in themselves, in the truths even of
geometry; nor is there any positive objective truth in one department
of science more than another. Mr Whewell, therefore, though he
advocates this distinction between necessary and contingent truth with
a zeal which would seem to imply that something momentous, or of
peculiar interest, was connected with it, can advocate it only as a
matter of abstract metaphysical science. He cannot participate in that
feeling of exaltation and mystery which has led many to expatiate upon
a necessary and absolute truth which the Divine Power itself cannot
alter, which is equally irresistible, equally binding and compulsory,
with God as with man. Of this spirit of philosophical enthusiasm Mr
Whewell cannot partake. Space and Time, with all their properties and
phenomena, are but recognized as the modes of thought of a human
intelligence.

We have marked a number of passages for annotation and extract--a far
greater number than we can possibly find place for alluding to. One
subject, however, which lies at the very basis of all our science, and
which has received a proportionate attention from Mr Mill, must not be
amongst those which are passed over. We mean the law of _Causation_.
What should be described as the complete and adequate notion of a
cause, we need not say is one of the moot points of philosophy.
According to one school of metaphysicians, there is in our notion of
cause an element not derived from experience, which, it is confessed
on all hands, can teach us only the _succession_ of events. Cause,
with them, is that invisible power, that mysterious bond, which this
succession does but signify: with other philosophers this succession
constitutes the whole of any intelligible notion we have of cause. The
latter opinion is that of Mr Mill; at the same time the question is
one which lies beyond or beside the scope of his volumes. He is
concerned only with phenomena, not with the knowledge (if such there
be) of "things in themselves;" that part, therefore, of our idea of
cause which, according to all systems of philosophy, is won from
experience, and concerns phenomena alone, is sufficient for his
purpose. That every event has a cause, that is, a previous and
uniformly previous event, and that whatever has happened will, in the
like circumstances, happen again--these are the assumptions necessary
to science, and these no one will dispute.

Mr Mill has made a happy addition to the usual definition of cause
given by that class of metaphysicians to which he himself belongs, and
which obviates a plausible objection urged against it by Dr Reid and
others. These have argued, that if cause be nothing more than
invariable antecedence, then night may be said to be the cause of day,
for the one invariably precedes the other. Day does succeed to night,
but only on certain conditions--namely, that the sun rise. "The
succession," observes Mr Mill, "which is equivalent and synonymous to
cause, must be not only invariable but unconditional. We may define,
therefore," says our author, "the cause of a phenomenon to be the
antecedent, or the concurrence of antecedents, upon which it is
invariably and _unconditionally_ consequent."--Vol. I. p. 411.

A dilemma may be raised of this kind. The universality of the law of
causation--in other words, the uniform course of nature--is the
fundamental principle on which all induction proceeds, the great
premise on which all our science is founded. But if this law itself be
the result only of experience, itself only a great instance of
induction, so long as nature presents cases requiring investigation,
where the causes are unknown to us, so long the law itself is
imperfectly established. How, then, can this law be a guide and a
premiss in the investigations of science, when those investigations
are necessary to complete the proof of the law itself? How can this
principle accompany and authorise every step we take in science, which
itself needs confirmation so long as a process of induction remains to
be performed? Or how can this law be established by a series of
inductions, in making which it has been taken for granted?

Objections which wear the air of a quibble have often this
advantage--they put our knowledge to the test. The obligation to find
a complete answer clears up our own conceptions. The observations
which Mr Mill makes on this point, we shall quote at length. They are
taken from his chapter on the _Evidence of the Law of Universal
Causation_; the views in which are as much distinguished for boldness
as for precision.

After having said, that in all the several methods of induction the
universality of the law of causation is assumed, he continues:--

    "But is this assumption warranted? Doubtless (it may be
    said) _most_ phenomena are connected as effects with
    some antecedent or cause--that is, are never produced
    unless some assignable fact has preceded them; but the
    very circumstance, that complicated processes of
    induction are sometimes necessary, shows that cases
    exist in which this regular order of succession is not
    apparent to our first and simplest apprehension. If,
    then, the processes which bring these cases within the
    same category with the rest, require that we should
    assume the universality of the very law which they do
    not at first sight appear to exemplify, is not this a
    real _petitio principii_? Can we prove a proposition by
    an argument which takes it for granted? And, if not so
    proved, on what evidence does it rest?

    "For this difficulty, which I have purposely stated in
    the strongest terms it would admit of, the school of
    metaphysicians, who have long predominated in this
    country, find a ready salvo. They affirm that the
    universality of causation is a truth which we cannot
    help believing; that the belief in it is an instinct,
    one of the laws of our believing faculty. As the proof
    of this they say, and they have nothing else to say,
    that every body _does_ believe it; and they number it
    among the propositions, rather numerous in their
    catalogue, which may be logically argued against, and
    perhaps cannot be logically proved, but which are of
    higher authority than logic, and which even he who
    denies in speculation, shows by his habitual practice
    that his arguments make no impression on himself.

    "I have no intention of entering into the merits of this
    question, as a problem of transcendental metaphysics.
    But I must renew my protest against adducing, as
    evidence of the truth of a fact in external nature, any
    necessity which the human mind may be conceived to be
    under of believing it. It is the business of human
    intellect to adapt itself to the realities of things,
    and not to measure those realities by its own capacities
    of comprehension. The same quality which fits mankind
    for the offices and purposes of their own little life,
    the tendency of their belief to follow their experience,
    incapacitates them for judging of what lies beyond. Not
    only what man can know, but what he can conceive,
    depends upon what he has experienced. Whatever forms a
    part of all his experience, forms a part also of all his
    conceptions, and appears to him universal and necessary,
    though really, for aught he knows, having no existence
    beyond certain narrow limits. The habit, however, of
    philosophical analysis, of which it is the surest effect
    to enable the mind to command, instead of being
    commanded by, the laws of the merely passive part of its
    own nature, and which, by showing to us that things are
    not necessarily connected in fact because their ideas
    are connected in our minds, is able to loosen
    innumerable associations which reign despotically over
    the undisciplined mind; this habit is not without power
    even over those associations which the philosophical
    school, of which I have been speaking, regard as connate
    and instinctive. I am convinced that any one accustomed
    to abstraction and analysis, who will fairly exert his
    faculties for the purpose, will, when his imagination
    has once learned to entertain the notion, find no
    difficulty in conceiving that in some one, for instance,
    of the many firmaments into which sidereal astronomy now
    divides the universe, events may succeed one another at
    random, without any fixed law; nor can any thing in our
    experience, or in our mental nature, constitute a
    sufficient, or indeed any, reason for believing that
    this is nowhere the case. The grounds, therefore, which
    warrant us in rejecting such a supposition with respect
    to any of the phenomena of which we have experience,
    must be sought elsewhere than in any supposed necessity
    of our intellectual faculties.

    "As was observed in a former place, the belief we
    entertain in the universality, throughout nature, of the
    law of cause and effect, is itself an instance of
    induction; and by no means one of the earliest which any
    of us, or which mankind in general, can have made. We
    arrive at this universal law by generalisation from many
    laws of inferior generality. The generalising propensity
    which, instinctive or not, is one of the most powerful
    principles of our nature, does not indeed wait for the
    period when such a generalisation becomes strictly
    legitimate. The mere unreasoning propensity to expect
    what has been often experienced, doubtless led men to
    believe that every thing had a cause, before they could
    have conclusive evidence of that truth. But even this
    cannot be supposed to have happened until many cases of
    causation, or, in other words, many partial uniformities
    of sequence, had become familiar. The more obvious of
    the particular uniformities suggest and prove the
    general uniformity; and that general uniformity, once
    established, enables us to prove the remainder of the
    particular uniformities of which it is made up. * * *

    "With respect to the general law of causation, it does
    appear that there must have been a time when the
    universal prevalence of that law throughout nature could
    not have been affirmed in the same confident and
    unqualified manner as at present. There was a time when
    many of the phenomena of nature must have appeared
    altogether capricious and irregular, not governed by any
    laws, nor steadily consequent upon any causes. Such
    phenomena, indeed, were commonly, in that early stage of
    human knowledge, ascribed to the direct intervention of
    the will of some supernatural being, and therefore still
    to a cause. This shows the strong tendency of the human
    mind to ascribe every phenomenon to some cause or other;
    but it shows also that experience had not, at that time,
    pointed out any regular order in the occurrence of those
    particular phenomena, nor proved them to be, as we now
    know that they are, dependent upon prior phenomena as
    their proximate causes. There have been sects of
    philosophers who have admitted what they termed Chance
    as one of the agents in the order of nature by which
    certain classes of events were entirely regulated; which
    could only mean that those events did not occur in any
    fixed order, or depend upon uniform laws of causation.
    * * *

    "The progress of experience, therefore, has dissipated
    the doubt which must have rested upon the universality
    of the law of causation, while there were phenomena
    which seemed to be _sui generis_; not subject to the
    same laws with any other class of phenomena, and not as
    yet ascertained to have peculiar laws of their own. This
    great generalisation, however, might reasonably have
    been, as it in fact was by all great thinkers, acted
    upon as a probability of the highest order, before there
    were sufficient grounds for receiving it as a certainty.
    For, whatever has been found true in innumerable
    instances, and never found to be false after due
    examination in any, we are safe in acting upon as
    universal provisionally, until an undoubted exception
    appears; provided the nature of the case be such that a
    real exception could scarcely have escaped our notice.
    When every phenomenon that we ever knew sufficiently
    well to be able to answer the question, had a cause on
    which it was invariably consequent, it was more rational
    to suppose that our inability to assign the causes of
    other phenomena arose from our ignorance, than that
    there were phenomena which were uncaused, and which
    happened accidentally to be exactly those which we had
    hitherto had no sufficient opportunity of
    studying."--Vol. II. p. 108.


_Hypotheses._--Mr Mill's observations on the use of hypotheses in
scientific investigation, except that they are characterized by his
peculiar distinctness and accuracy of thought, do not differ from the
views generally entertained by writers on the subject. We are induced
to refer to the topic, to point out what seems to us a harsh measure
dealt out to the undulatory theory of light--harsh when compared with
the reception given to a theory of Laplace, having for its object to
account for the origin of the planetary system.

We had occasion to quote a passage from Mr Mill, in which he remarks
that the majority of scientific men seem not yet to have completely
got over the difficulty of conceiving matter to act (contrary to the
old maxim) where it is not; "for though," he says, "they have at last
learned to conceive the sun _attracting_ the earth without any
intervening fluid, they cannot yet conceive the sun _illuminating_ the
earth without some such medium." But it is not only this difficulty
(which doubtless, however, is felt) of conceiving the sun illuminating
the earth without any medium by which to communicate its influence,
which leads to the construction of the hypothesis, either of an
undulating ether, or of emitted particles. The analogy of the other
senses conducts us almost irresistibly to the imagination of some such
medium. The nerves of sense are, apparently, in all cases that we can
satisfactorily investigate, affected by contact, by impulse. The nerve
of sight itself, we know, when touched or pressed upon, gives out the
sensation of light. These reasons, in the first place, conduct us to
the supposition of some medium, having immediate communication with
the eye; which medium, though we are far from saying that its
existence is established, is rendered probable by the explanation it
affords of optical phenomena. At the same time it is evident that the
hypothesis of an undulating ether, assumes a fluid or some medium, the
existence of which cannot be directly ascertained. Thus stands the
hypothesis of a luminiferous ether--in what must be allowed to be a
very unsatisfactory condition. But a condition, we think, very
superior to the astronomical speculation of Laplace, which Mr Mill,
after scrutinizing the preceding hypothesis with the utmost
strictness, is disposed to treat with singular indulgence.

    "The speculation is," we may as well quote throughout Mr
    Mill's words, "that the atmosphere of the sun originally
    extended to the present limits of the solar system: from
    which, by the process of cooling, it has contracted to
    its present dimensions; and since, by the general
    principles of mechanics, the rotation of the sun and its
    accompanying atmosphere must increase as rapidly as its
    volume diminishes, the increased centrifugal force
    generated by the more rapid rotation, overbalancing the
    action of gravitation, would cause the sun to abandon
    successive rings of vaporous matter, which are supposed
    to have condensed by cooling, and to have become our
    planets.

    "There is in this theory," Mr Mill proceeds, "no unknown
    substance introduced upon supposition, nor any unknown
    property or law ascribed to a known substance. The known
    laws of matter authorize us to suppose, that a body
    which is constantly giving out so large an amount of
    heat as the sun is, must be progressively cooling, and
    that by the process of cooling it must contract; if,
    therefore, we endeavour, from the present state of that
    luminary, to infer its state in a time long past, we
    must necessarily suppose that its atmosphere extended
    much further than at present, and we are entitled to
    suppose that it extended as far as we can trace those
    effects which it would naturally leave behind it on
    retiring; and such the planets are. These suppositions
    being made, it follows from known laws that successive
    zones of the solar atmosphere would be abandoned; that
    these would continue to revolve round the sun with the
    same velocity as when they formed part of his substance,
    and that they would cool down, long before the sun
    himself, to any given temperature, and consequently to
    that at which the greater part of the vaporous matter of
    which they consisted would become liquid or solid. The
    known law of gravitation would then cause them to
    agglomerate in masses, which would assume the shape our
    planets actually exhibit; would acquire, each round its
    own axis, a rotatory movement; and would in that state
    revolve, as the planets actually do, about the sun, in
    the same direction with the sun's rotation, but with
    less velocity, and each of them in the same periodic
    time which the sun's rotation occupied when his
    atmosphere extended to that point; and this also M.
    Comte has, by the necessary calculations, ascertained to
    be true, within certain small limits of error. There is
    thus in Laplace's theory nothing hypothetical; it is an
    example of legitimate reasoning from a present effect to
    its past cause, according to the known laws of that
    case; it assumes nothing more than that objects which
    really exist, obey the laws which are known to be obeyed
    by all terrestrial objects resembling them."--Vol. II.
    p. 27.

Now, it seems to us that there is quite as much of hypothesis in this
speculation of Laplace as in the undulatory theory of light. This
atmosphere of the sun extending to the utmost limits of our planetary
system! What proof have we that it ever existed? what possible
grounds have we for believing, what motive even for imagining such a
thing, but the very same description of proof given and rejected for
the existence of a luminiferous ether--namely, that it enables us to
explain certain events supposed to result from it? Nor is the thing
here imagined any the less a novelty, because it bears the old name of
an atmosphere. An atmosphere containing in itself all the various
materials which compose our earth, and whatever else may enter into
the composition of the other planets, is as violent a supposition as
an ether, not perceptible to the senses except by its influence on the
nerves of sight. And this cooling down of the sun! What fact in our
experience enables us to advance such a supposition? We might as well
say that the sun was getting hotter every year, or harder or softer,
or larger or smaller. Surely Mr Mill could not have been serious when
he says, that "the known laws of matter authorize us to suppose, that
a body which is constantly _giving out so large an amount of heat_ as
the sun is, must be progressively cooling"--knowing, as we do, as
little how the sun occasions heat as how it produces light. Neither
can it be contended that because no absolutely new substance, or new
property of matter, is introduced, but a fantastic conception is
framed out of known substances and known properties, that therefore
there is less of rash conjecture in the supposition. In fine, it must
be felt by every one who reads the account of this speculation of
Laplace, that the only evidence which produces the least effect upon
his mind, is the corroboration which it receives from the calculations
of the mathematician--a species of proof which Mr Mill himself would
not estimate very highly.

Many are the topics which are made to reflect a new light as Mr Mill
passes along his lengthened course; we might quote as instances, his
chapters on _Analogy_ and the _Calculation of Chances_: and many are
the grave and severe discussions that would await us were we to
proceed to the close of his volumes, especially to that portion of his
work where he applies the canons of science to investigations which
relate to human nature and the characters of men. But enough for the
present. We repeat, in concluding, the same sentiment that we
expressed at the commencement, that such a work as this goes far to
redeem the literature of our age from the charge of frivolity and
superficiality. Those who have been trained in a different school of
thinking, those who have adopted the metaphysics of the transcendental
philosophy, will find much in these volumes to dissent from; but no
man, be his pretensions or his tenets what they may, who has been
accustomed to the study of philosophy, can fail to recognize and
admire in this author that acute, patient, enlarged, and persevering
thought, which gives to him who possesses it the claim and right to
the title of philosopher. There are few men who--applying it to his
own species of excellence--might more safely repeat the _Io sono
anche!_ of the celebrated Florentine.


MY COUNTRY NEIGHBOURS.


People are fond of talking of the hereditary feuds of Italy--the
factions of the Capulets and Montagues, the Orsini and Colonne--and,
more especially, of the memorable _Vendette_ of Corsica--as if hatred
and revenge were solely endemic in the regions of

    "The Pyrenean and the river Po!"

Mere prejudice! There is as good hating going on in England as
elsewhere. Independent of the personal antipathies generated by
politics, the envy, hatred, and malice arising out of every election
contest, not a country neighbourhood but has its raging factions; and
Browns and Smiths often cherish and maintain an antagonism every whit
as bitter as that of the sanguinary progenitors of Romeo and Juliet.

I, for instance, who am but a country gentleman in a small way--an
obscure bachelor, abiding from year's end to year's end on my
insignificant farm--have witnessed things in my time, which, had they
been said and done nearer the tropics, would have been cited far and
near in evidence of the turbulence of human passions, and that "the
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked." Seeing
that they chanced in a homely parish in Cheshire, no one has been at
the trouble to note their strangeness; though, to own the truth, none
but the actors in the drama (besides myself, a solitary spectator) are
cognizant of its incidents and catastrophe. I might boast, indeed,
that I alone am thoroughly in the secret; for it is the spectator only
who competently judges the effects of a scene; and merely changing the
names, for reasons easily conceivable, I ask leave to relate in the
simplest manner a few facts in evidence of my assertion, that England
has its Capuletti e Montecchi as well as Verona.

In the first place, let me premise that I am neither of a condition of
life, nor condition of mind, to mingle as a friend with those of whose
affairs I am about to treat so familiarly, being far too crotchety a
fellow not to prefer a saunter with my fishing-tackle on my back, or
an evening tête-à-tête with my library of quaint old books, to all the
good men's feasts ever eaten at the cost of a formal country visit.
Nevertheless, I am not so cold of heart as to be utterly devoid of
interest in the destinies of those whose turrets I see peering over
the woods that encircle my corn-fields; and as the good old
housekeeper, who for these thirty years past has presided over my
household, happens to have grandchildren high in service in what are
called the two great families in the neighbourhood, scarcely an event
or incident passes within their walls that does not find an echo in
mine. So much in attestation of my authority. But for such an
introduction behind the scenes, much of the stage business of this
curious drama would have escaped my notice, or remained
incomprehensible.

I am wrong to say the two great "families;" I should have said the two
great "houses." At the close of the last century, indeed, our parish
of Lexley contained but one; one which had stood there since the days
of the first James, nay, even earlier--a fine old manorial hall of
grand dimensions and stately architecture, of the species of mixed
Gothic so false in taste, but so ornamental in effect, which is
considered as betraying the first symptoms of Italian innovation.

The gardens extending in the rear of the house were still more
decidedly in the Italian taste, having clipped evergreens and avenues
of pyramidal yews, which, combined with the intervening statues,
imparted to them something of the air of a cemetery. There were
fountains, too, which, in the memory of man, had been never known to
play, the marble basins being, if possible, still greener than the
grim visages of the fauns and dryads standing forlorn on their
dilapidated pedestals amid the neglected alleys.

The first thing I can remember of Lexley Hall, was peeping as a child
through the stately iron gratings of the garden, that skirted a
by-road leading from my grandfather's farm. The desolateness of the
place overawed my young heart. In summer time the parterres were
overgrown into a wilderness. The plants threw up their straggling arms
so high, that the sunshine could hardly find its way to the quaint old
dial that stood there telling its tale of time, though no man
regarded; and the cordial fragrance of the strawberry-beds, mingling
with entangled masses of honeysuckle in their exuberance of midsummer
blossom, seemed to mock me, as I loitered in the dusk near the old
gateway, with the tantalizing illusions of a fairy-tale--the
Barmecide's feast, or Prince Desire surveying his princess through the
impermeable walls of her crystal palace.

But if the enjoyment of the melancholy old gardens of Lexley Hall were
withheld from _me_, no one else seemed to find pleasure or profit
therein. Sir Laurence Altham, the lord of the manor and manor-house,
was seldom resident in the country. Though a man of mature years, (I
speak of the close of the last century,) he was still a man of
pleasure--the ruined hulk of the gallant vessel which, early in the
reign of George III., had launched itself with unequalled brilliancy
on the sparkling current of London life.

At that time, I have heard my grandfather say there was not a mortgage
on the Lexley estate! The timber was notoriously the finest in the
county. A whole navy was comprised in one of its coppices; and the
arching avenues were imposing as the aisles of our Gothic minsters.
Alas! it needed the lapse of only half a dozen years to lay bare to
the eye of every casual traveller the ancient mansion, so long

    "Bosom'd high in tufted trees,"

and only guessed at till you approached the confines of the
court-yard.

It was hazard that effected this. The dice-box swept those noble
avenues from the face of the estate. Soon after Sir Laurence's coming
of age, almost before the church-bells had ceased to announce the
joyous event of the attainment of his majority, he was off to the
Continent--Paris--Italy--I know not where, and was thenceforward only
occasionally heard of in Cheshire as the ornament of the Sardinian or
Austrian courts. But these tidings were usually accompanied by a
shaking of the head from the old family steward. The timber was to be
thinned anew--the tenants to be again amerced. Sir Laurence evidently
looked upon the Lexley property as a mere hotbed for his vices. At
last the old steward turned surly to our enquiries, and would answer
no further questions concerning his master. My grandfather's small
farm was the only plot of ground in the parish that did not belong to
the estate; and from him the faithful old servant was as careful to
conceal the family disgraces, as to maintain the honour of Sir
Laurence's name in the ears of his grumbling tenants.

The truth, however, could not long be withheld. Chaisefuls of
suspicious-looking men in black arrived at the hall; loungers,
surveyors, auctioneers--I know not what. There was talk in the parish
about foreclosing a mortgage, no one exactly understood why, or by
whom. But it was soon clear that Wightman, the old steward, was no
longer the great man at Lexley. These strangers bade him come here and
go there exactly as they chose, and, unhappily, they saw fit to make
his comings and goings so frequent and so humiliating, that before the
close of the summer the old servitor betook himself to his rest in a
spot where all men cease from troubling. The leaves that dreary autumn
fell upon his grave.

According to my grandfather's account, however, few even of his
village contemporaries grieved for old Wightman. They felt that
Providence knew best; that the old man was happily spared the
mortification of all that was likely to ensue. For before another year
was out the ring fence, which had hitherto encircled the Lexley
property, was divided within itself; a paltry distribution of about a
hundred acres alone remaining attached to the old hall. The rest was
gone! The rest was the property of the foreclosee of that hateful
mortgage.

Within view of the battlements of the old manor-house, nearly a
hundred workmen were soon employed in digging the foundations of a
modern mansion of the noblest proportions. The new owner of the
estate, though only a manufacturer from Congleton, chose to dwell in a
palace; and by the time his splendid Doric temple was complete, under
the name of Lexley Park, the vain-glorious proprietor, Mr Sparks, had
taken his seat in Parliament for a neighbouring borough.

Little was known of him in the neighbourhood beyond his name and
calling; yet already his new tenants were prepared to oppose and
dislike him. Though they knew quite as little personally of the young
baronet by whom they had been sold into bondage to the unpopular
clothier--him, with the caprice of ignorance, they chose to prefer.
They were proud of the old family--proud of the hereditary lords of
the soil--proud of a name connecting itself with the glories of the
reign of Elizabeth, and the loyalty shining, like a sepulchral lamp,
through the gloomy records of the House of Stuart. The banners and
escutcheons of the Althams were appended in their parish church. The
family vault sounded hollow under their head whenever they approached
its altar. Where was the burial-place of the manufacturer? In what
obscure churchyard existed the mouldering heap that covered the
remains of the sires of Mr Jonas Sparks? Certainly not at Lexley!
Lexley knew not, and cared not to know, either him or his. It was no
fault of the parish that its young baronet had proved a spendthrift
and alienated the inheritance of his fathers; and, but that he had
preserved the manor-house from desecration, they would perhaps have
ostracized him altogether, as having lent his aid to disgrace their
manor with so noble a structure as the porticoed façade of Lexley
Park!

Meanwhile the shrewd Jonas was fully aware of his unpopularity and its
origin; and, during a period of three years, he allowed his
ill-advised subjects to chew, unmolested, the cud of their discontent.
Having a comfortable residence at the further extremity of the county,
he visited Lexley only to overlook the works, or notice the placing of
the costly new furniture; and the grumblers began to fancy they were
to profit as little by their new masters as by their old. The steward
who replaced the trusty Wightman, and had been instructed to legislate
among the cottages with a lighter hand, and distribute Christmas
benefaction in a double proportion, was careful to circulate in the
parish an impression that Mr Sparks and his family did not care to
inhabit the new house till the gardens were in perfect order, the
succession houses in full bearing, and the mansion thoroughly
seasoned. But the Lexleyans guessed the truth, that he had no mind to
confront the first outbreak of their ill-will.

Nearly four years elapsed before he took possession of the place; four
years, during which Sir Laurence Altham had never set foot in the
hall, and was heard of only through his follies and excesses; and when
Mr Sparks at length made his appearance, with his handsome train of
equipages, and surrounded by his still handsomer family, so far from
meeting him with sullen silence, the tenantry began to regret that
they had not erected a triumphal arch of evergreens for his entrance
into the park, as had been proposed by the less eager of the
Althamites.

After all, their former prejudice in favour of the young baronet was
based on very shallow foundations. What had he ever done for them
except raise their rents, and prosecute their trespasses? It was
nothing that his forefathers had endowed almshouses for their support,
or served up banquets for their delectation--Sir Laurence was an
absentee--Sir Laurence was as the son of the stranger. The fine old
kennel stood cold and empty, reminding them that to preserve their
foxes was no longer an article of Lexley religion; and if any of the
old October, brewed at the birth of the present baronet, still filled
the oaken hogsheads in the cellars of the hall, what mattered it to
them? No chance of their being broached, unless to grace the funeral
feast of the lord of the manor.

To Jonas Sparks, Esq. M.P., accordingly, they dedicated their
allegiance. A few additional chaldrons of coals and pairs of blankets,
the first frosty winter, bound them his slaves for ever. Food, physic,
and wine, were liberally distributed to the sick and aged whenever
they repaired for relief to the Doric portico; and, with the usual
convenient memory of the vulgar, the Lexleyans soon began to remember
of the Altham family only their recent backslidings and ancient feudal
oppressions: while of the Sparkses they chose to know only what was
evident to all eyes--viz., that their hands were open and faces
comely.

Into their hearts--more especially into that of Jonas, the head of the
house--they examined not at all; and were ill-qualified to surmise the
intensity of bitterness with which, while contemplating the beauty and
richness of his new domain, he beheld the turrets of the old hall
rising like a statue of scorn above the intervening woods. There stood
the everlasting monument of the ancient family--there the emblem of
their pride, throwing its shadow, as it were, over his dawning
prosperity! But for that force of contrast thus afforded, he would
scarcely have perceived the newness of all the objects around him--the
glare of the fresh freestone--the nakedness of the whited walls. A few
stately old oaks and elms, apparently coeval with the ancient
structure, which a sort of religious feeling had preserved from the
axe, that they might afford congenial shade to the successor of its
founder, seemed to impart meanness and vulgarity to the tapering
verdure of _his_ plantations, his modern trees--his pert poplars and
mean larches--his sycamores and planes. Even the incongruity between
his solid new paling and the decayed and sun-bleached wood of the
venerable fence to which it adjoined, with its hoary beard of silvery
lichen, was an eyesore to him. Every passer-by might note the limit
and circumscription dividing the new place from the ancient seat of
the lords of the manor.

Yet was the landscape of Lexley Park one of almost unequalled beauty.
The Dee formed noble ornament to its sweeping valleys; while the noble
acclivities were clothed with promising woods, opening by rich vistas
to a wide extent of champaign country. A fine bridge of granite,
erected by the late Sir Windsor Altham, formed a noble object from the
windows of the new mansion; and but for the evidence of the venerable
pile, that stood like an abdicated monarch surveying its lost
dominions, there existed no external demonstration that Lexley Park
had not from the beginning of time formed the estated seat of the
Sparkses.

The neighbouring families, if "neighbouring" could be called certain
of the nobility and gentry who resided at ten miles' distance, were
courteously careful to inspire the new settler with a belief that they
at least had forgotten any antecedent state of things at Lexley; for
they had even reason to congratulate themselves on the change. Jonas
had long been strenuously active in the House of Commons in promoting
county improvements. Jonas was useful as a magistrate, and invaluable
as a liberal contributor to the local charities. During the first five
years of his occupancy, he did more for Lexley and its inhabitants
than the half-dozen previous baronets of the House of Altham.

Of the man he had superseded, meanwhile, it was observed that Mr
Sparks was judiciously careful to forbear all mention. It might have
been supposed that he had purchased the estate of the Crown or the
Court of Chancery, so utterly ignorant did he appear of the age,
habits, and whereabout of his predecessor; and when informed by Sir
John Wargrane, one of his wealthy neighbours, that young Altham was
disgracing himself again--that at the public gaming-tables at Toplitz
he had been a loser of thirty thousand pounds--the cunning _parvenu_
listened with an air of as vague indifference as if he were not
waiting with breathless anxiety the gradual dissipation of the funds,
secured to the young spendthrift by the transfer of his estate, to
grasp at the small remaining portion of his property. Unconsciously,
when the tale of Sir Laurence's profligacy met his ear, he clenched
his griping hand, as though it already recognized its hold upon the
destined spoil, but not a word did he utter.

Meanwhile, the family of the new squire of Lexley were winning golden
opinions on all sides. "The boys were brave--the girls were fair," the
mother virtuous, pious, and unpretending. It would have been
scandalous, indeed, to sneer to shame the modest cheerfulness of such
people, because their ancestors had not fought at the Crusades. By
degrees, they assumed an honourable and even eminent position in the
county; and the first time Sir Laurence Altham condescended to visit
the county-palatine, he heard nothing but commendations and admiration
of the charming family at Lexley Park.

"Charming family!--a Jonas Sparks, and charming!" was his
supercilious reply. "I rejoice to find that the _fumier_ I have been
forced to fling on my worn-out ancestral estate is fertilizing its
barrenness. The village is probably the better for the change. But, as
regards the society, I must be permitted to mistrust the attractions
of the brood of a Congleton manufacturer."

The young baronet, who now, though still entitled to be called young,
was disfigured by the premature defeatures of a vicious life,
mistrusted it all the more, when, on visiting the old hall, he was
forced to recognize the improvements effected in the neighbouring
property (that he should be forced to call it "_neighbouring_!") by
the judicious administration of the new owner. It was impossible to
deny that Mr Sparks had doubled its value, while enhancing its
beauties. The low grounds were drained, the high lands planted, the
river widened, the forestry systematically organized. The estate
appeared to have attained new strength and vigour when dissevered from
the old manor-house; whose shadow might be supposed to have exercised
a baleful influence on the lands wherever it presided.

But it was not his recognition of this that was likely to animate the
esteem of Sir Laurence Altham for Mr Jonas Sparks. On the contrary, he
felt every accession of value to the Lexley property as so much
subtracted from his belongings; and his detestation of the upstarts,
whose fine mansion was perceptible from his lordly towers--like a blot
upon the fairness of the landscape--increased with the increase of
their prosperity.

Without having expected to take delight in a sojourn at Lexley Hall--a
spot where he had only resided for a few weeks now and then, from the
period of his early boyhood--he was not prepared for the excess of
irritation that arose in his heart on witnessing the total
estrangement of the retainers of his family. For the mortification of
seeing a fine new house, with gorgeous furniture, and a pompous
establishment, he came armed to the teeth. But no presentiments had
forewarned him, that at Lexley the living Althams were already as much
forgotten as those who were sleeping in the family vault. The sudden
glow that pervaded his whole frame when he chanced to encounter on the
highroad the rich equipage of the Sparkses; or the imprecation that
burst from his lips, when, on going to the window of a morning to
examine the state of the weather for the day, the first objects that
struck him was the fair mansion in the plain below, laughing as it
were in the sunshine, the deer grouped under its fine old trees, and
the river rippling past its lawns as if delighting in their
verdure----Yes! there was decided animosity betwixt the hill and the
valley.

Every successive season served to quicken the pulses of this growing
hatred. Whether on the spot or at a distance, a thousand aggravations
sprang up betwixt the parties: disputes between gamekeepers, quarrels
between labourers, encroachments by tenants. Every thing and nothing
was made the groundwork of ill-will. To Sir Laurence Altham's
embittered feelings, the very rooks of Lexley Park seemed evermore to
infringe upon the privileges of the rookery at Lexley Hall; and when,
in the parish church, the new squire (or rather his workmen, for he
was absent at the time attending his duties in Parliament)
inadvertently broke off the foot of a marble cherub, weeping its
alabaster tears, at the angle of a monument to the memory of a certain
Sir Wilfred Altham, of the time of James II., in raising the woodwork
of a pew occupied by Mr Sparks's family, the rage of Sir Laurence was
so excessive as to be almost deserving of a strait-waistcoat.

The enmity of the baronet was all the more painful to himself that he
felt it to be harmless against its object. In every way, Lexley Park
had the best of it. Jonas Sparks was not only rich in a noble income,
but in a charming wife and promising family. Every thing prospered
with him; and, as to mere inferiority of precedence, it was well known
that he had refused a baronetcy; and many people even surmised that,
so soon as he was able to purchase another borough, and give a seat in
Parliament to his second son, as well as resign his own to the eldest,
he would be promoted to the Upper House.

The only means of vengeance, therefore, possessed by the vindictive
man whose follies and vices had been the means of creating this
perpetual scourge to his pride, was withholding from him the purchase
of the remaining lands indispensable to the completion of his estate,
more especially as regarded the water-courses, which, at Lexley Park,
were commanded by the sluices of the higher grounds of the Hall; and
mighty was the oath sworn by Sir Laurence, that come what might,
however great his exigencies or threatening his poverty, nothing
should induce him to dispose of another acre to Jonas Sparks. He was
even at the trouble of executing a will, in order to introduce a
clause imposing the same reservation upon the man to whom he devised
his small remaining property--the heir-at-law, to whom, had he died
intestate, it would have descended without conditions.

"The Congleton shopkeepers," muttered he, (whenever, in his solitary
evening rides, he caught sight of the rich plate-glass windows of the
new mansion, burnished by the setting sun,) "shall never, never lord
it under the roof of my forefathers! Wherever else he may set his
plebeian foot, Lexley Hall shall be sacred. Rather see the old place
burned to the ground--rather set fire to it with my own hands--than
conceive that, when I am in my grave, it could possibly be subjected
to the rule of such a barbarian!"

For it had reached the ears of Sir Laurence--of course, with all the
exaggeration derived from passing through the medium of village
gossip--that a thousand local legends concerning the venerable
mansion, sanctified by their antiquity in the ears of the family,
afforded a fertile source of jesting to Jonas Sparks. The Hall
abounded in concealed staircases and iron hiding-places, connected
with a variety of marvellous traditions of the civil wars; besides a
walled-up suite of chambers, haunted, as becomes a walled-up suite of
chambers; and justice-rooms and tapestried-rooms, to which the long
abandonment of the house, and the heated imaginations of the few
menials left in charge of its desolate vastness, attributed romances
likely enough to have provoked the laughter of a matter-of-fact man
like the owner of Lexley Park. But neither Sir Laurence nor his old
servants were likely to forgive this insult offered to the family
legends of a house which had little else left to boast of. Even the
neighbouring families were displeased to hear them derided; and my
grandfather never liked to hear a joke on the subject of the
coach-and-four which was said to have driven into the court-yard of
the Hall on the eve of the execution of the rebel lords in 1745,
having four headless inmates, who were duly welcomed as guests by old
Sir Robert Altham. Nay, as a child, I had so often thrilled on my
nurse's knees during the relation of this spectral visitation, that I
own I felt indignant if any one presumed to laugh at a tale which had
made me quake for fear.

Among those who were known to resent the familiar tone in which Mr
Sparks had been heard to criticise the pomps and vanities exhibited at
Lexley Hall by the Althams of the olden time, was a certain General
Stanley, who, inhabiting a fine seat of his own at about ten miles'
distance, was fond of bringing over his visitors to visit the old
Hall, as an interesting specimen of county antiquity. _He_ knew the
peculiarities of the place, and could repeat the traditions connected
with the hiding-places better than the housekeeper herself; and I have
heard her say it was a pleasure to hear him relating these historical
anecdotes with all the fire of an old soldier, and see his venerable
grey hair blown about as he stood with his party on the battlements,
pointing out to the ladies the fine range of territory formerly
belonging to the Althams. The old lady protested that the general was
nearly as much grieved as herself to behold the old mansion so shorn
of its beams; and certain it is, that once when, on visiting the hall
after Sir Laurence had been some years an absentee, he found the grass
growing among the disjointed stones of the cloisters and justice-hall,
he made a handsome present to one of the housekeeper's nephews, on
condition of his keeping the purlieus of the venerable mansion free
from such disgraceful evidences of neglect.

All this eventually reached the ears of the baronet; but instead of
making him angry, as might have been expected, from one so tetchy and
susceptible, he never encountered General Stanley, either in town or
country, without demonstrations of respect. Though too reserved and
morose for conversation, Sir Laurence was observed to take off his hat
to him with a respect he was never seen to show towards the king or
queen.

About this time I began to take personal interest in the affairs of
the neighbourhood, though my own were now of a nature to engross my
attention. By my grandfather's death, I had recently come into the
enjoyment of the small inheritance which has sufficed to the happiness
of my life; and, renouncing the profession for which I was educated,
settled myself permanently at Lexley.

Well do I remember the melancholy face with which the good old rector,
the very first evening we spent together, related to me in confidence
that he had three years' dues in arrear to him from Lexley Hall; but
that so wretched was said to be the state of Sir Laurence's
embarrassments, that, for more than a year, his dread of arrest had
kept him a close prisoner in his house in London.

"We have not seen him here these six years!" observed Dr Whittingham;
"and I doubt whether he will ever again set foot in the county. Since
an execution was put into the Hall, he has never crossed the
threshold, and I suspect never will. Far better were he to dispose of
the property at once! Dismembered as it is, what pleasure can it
afford him? And, since he is unlikely to marry and have heirs, there
is less call upon him to retain this remaining relic of family pride;
yet I am assured--nay, have good reason to know, that he has refused a
very liberal offer on the part of Mr Sparks. Malicious people do say,
by the way, that it was by the advice of Sparks's favourite attorneys
the execution was enforced, and that no means have been left
unattempted to disgust him with the place. Yet he is firm, you see,
and persists in disappointing his creditors, and depriving himself of
the comforts of life, merely in order that he may die, as his fathers
did before him--the lord of Lexley Hall!"

"I don't wonder!" said I, with the dawning sentiments of a landed
proprietor--"'Tis a splendid old house, even in its present state of
degradation; and, by Jove! I honour his pertinacity."

Thus put upon the scent, I sometimes fancied I could detect wistful
looks on the part of my prosperous neighbour of the Park, when, in the
course of Dr Whittingham's somewhat lengthy sermons, he directed his
eyes towards the carved old Gothic tribune, containing the family-pew
of the Althams, in the parish church; and, whenever I happened to
encounter him in the neighbourhood of the Hall, his face was so
pointedly averted from the house, as if the mere object were an
offence. I could not but wonder at his vexation; being satisfied in my
own mind, that sooner or later the remaining heritage of the
spendthrift must fall to his share.

Judge, therefore, of my surprise, when one fine morning, as I
sauntered into the village, I found the whole population gathered in
groups on the little market-place, and discovered from the incoherent
exclamations of the crowd, that "the new proprietor of the Hall had
just driven through in a chaise-and-four!"

Yes--"the new proprietor!" The place was sold! The good doctor's
prediction was verified. Sir Laurence was never more to return to
Lexley Hall!

The satisfaction of the villagers almost equalled their surprise on
finding that General Stanley was their new landlord. It suited them
much better that there should be two families settled on the property
than one; and as it was pretty generally reported, that, in the event
of Sparks becoming the purchaser, he intended to demolish the old
house, and reconsolidate the estate around his own more commodious
mansion, they were right glad to find it rescued from such a
sentence--General Stanley, who was the father of a family, would
probably settle the hall on one of his daughters, after placing it in
the state of repair so much needed.

When the chaise-and-four returned, therefore, a few hours afterwards,
through the village, the General was loudly cheered by his subjects.
His partiality for the place was so well known at Lexley, that already
these people seemed to behold in him the guardian of a monument so
long the object of their pride.

For my own part, nothing surprised me so much in the business as that
Sparks should have allowed the purchase to slip through his fingers.
It was worth thrice as much to _him_ as to any body else. It was the
keystone of his property. It was the one thing needful to render
Lexley Park the most perfect seat in the county. But I was not slow in
learning (for every thing transpires in a small country neighbourhood)
that whatever _my_ surprise on finding that the old Hall had changed
its master, that of Sparks was far more overwhelming; that he was
literally frantic on finding himself frustrated in expectations which
formed the leading interest of his declining years. For the progress
of time which had made _me_ a man and a landed proprietor, had
converted the stout active squire into an infirm old man; and it was
his absorbing wish to die sole owner of the whole property to which
the baronets of the Altham family were born.

He even indulged in expressions of irritation, which nearly proved the
means of commencing this new neighbourship by a duel; accusing General
Stanley of having possessed himself by unfair means of Sir Laurence's
confidence, and employed agents, underhand, to effect the purchase. In
consequence of these groundless representations, it transpired in the
country that the decayed baronet had actually volunteered the offer of
the estate to the veteran proprietor of Stanley Manor; that he had
_solicited_ him to become the proprietor, and even accommodated him
with peculiar facilities of payment, on condition of his inserting in
the title-deeds an express undertaking, never to dispose of the old
Hall, or any portion of the property, to Jonas Sparks of Lexley Park,
or his heirs for ever. The solicitor by whom, under Sir Laurence's
direction, the deeds had been prepared, saw fit to divulge this
singular specification, rather than that a hostile encounter should
run the risk of embruing in blood the hands of two grey haired men.

Excepting as regarded the disappointment of our wealthy neighbour, all
was now established on the happiest footing at Lexley. The reparation
instantly commenced by the General, gave employment throughout the
winter to our workmen; and the evils arising from an absentee landlord
began gradually to disappear. It was a great joy to me to perceive
that the new proprietor of the Hall had the good taste to preserve the
antique character of the place in the minutest portion of his
alterations; and though the old gardens were no longer a wilderness,
not a shrub was displaced--not a mutilated statue removed. The
furniture had been sold off at the time of the execution; and that
which came down in cart-loads from town to replace it, was rigidly in
accordance with the semi-Gothic architecture of the lofty chambers.
Poor Sparks must have been doubly mortified; for not only did he find
his old eyesore converted into an irremediable evil by the restoration
of the Hall, but the supremacy hitherto maintained in the
neighbourhood by the modern elegance of his house and establishment,
was thrown into the shade by the rich and tasteful arrangements of the
Hall.

From the contracted look of his forehead, and sudden alteration of his
appearance, I have reason to think he was beginning to undergo all the
moral martyrdom sustained for thirty years past by the unfortunate Sir
Laurence Altham; and were I not by nature the most contented of men,
it would have sufficiently reconciled me to the mediocrity of my
fortunes, to see that these two great people of my neighbourhood--the
nobly-descended baronet and rich _parvenu_--were miserable men; that,
so long as I could remember, one or other of them had been given over
to surliness and discontent.

Before the close of the year the grand old Hall had become one of the
noblest seats in the county. There was talk about it in all the
country round, and even the newspapers took notice of its renovation,
and of General Stanley's removal thither from Stanley Manor. Many
people, of the species who love to detect spots in the sun, were
careful to point out the insufficiency of the estate, as at present
constituted, to maintain so fine a house. But, after all, what
mattered this to General Stanley, who had a fine rent-roll elsewhere?

The first thing he did, on taking possession, was to give a grand ball
to the neighbourhood; nor was it till the whole house was lighted up
for this festive occasion, that people were fully aware of the
grandeur of its proportions. He was good enough to send me an
invitation on so especial an occasion. But already I had imbibed the
distaste which has pursued me through life for what is called society;
and I accordingly contented myself with surveying from a distance the
fine effect produced by the light streaming from the multitude of
windows, and exhibiting to the whole country round the gorgeous nature
of the decorations within. To own the truth, I could scarcely forbear
regretting, as I surveyed them, the gloomy dilapidation of the
venerable mansion. This modernized antiquity was a very different
thing from the massy grandeur of its neglected years; and I am afraid
I loved the old house better with the weeds springing from its
crevices, than with all this carving and gilding, this ebony, and
iron, and light.

The people of Lexley imagined that nothing would induce the Sparks's
family to be seen under General Stanley's roof. But we were mistaken.
So much the contrary, that the squire of Lexley Park made a particular
point of being the first and latest of the guests--not only because
his reconciliation with his new neighbour was so recent, but from not
choosing to authenticate, by his absence, the rumours of his grievous
disappointment.

For all the good he was likely to derive from his visit, the poor man
had better have stayed away; for that unlucky night laid foundations
of evil for him and his, far greater than any he had incurred from the
animosity of Sir Laurence. Nay, when in the sequel these results
became matter of public commentation, superstitious people were not
wanting to hint that the evil spirit, traditionally said to haunt one
of the wings of the old manor, and to have manifested itself on more
than one occasion to members of the Altham family, (and more
especially to the late worthless proprietor of the Hall,) had acquired
a fatal power over the two supplanters of the ruined family the moment
they crossed the threshold.

General Stanley, after marrying late in life, had been some years a
widower--a widower with two daughters, his co-heiresses. The elder of
these young ladies was a hopeless invalid, slightly deformed, and so
little attractive in person, or desirous to attract, that there was
every prospect of the noble fortunes of the General centring in her
sister. Yet this sister, this girl, had little need of such an
accession to her charms; for she was one of those fortunate beings
endowed not only with beauty and excellence, but with a power of
pleasing not always united with even a combination of merit and
loveliness.

Every body agreed that Mary Stanley was charming. Old and young, rich
and poor, all loved her, all delighted in her. It is true, the good
rector's maiden sisters privately hinted to me their horror of the
recklessness with which--sometimes with her sister, oftener without,
but wholly unattended--she drove her little pony-chaise through the
village, laughing like a madcap at pranks of a huge Newfoundland dog
named Sergeant, the favourite of General Stanley, which, while
escorting the young ladies, used to gambol into the cottages, overset
furniture and children, and scamper out again amid a general uproar.
For though Miss Mary was but sixteen, the starched spinsters decided
that she was much too old for such folly; and that, if the General
intended to present her at court, it was high time for her to lay
aside the hoyden manners of childhood.

But, as every one argued against them, why should this joyous, bright,
and beautiful creature lay aside what became her so strangely? Mary
Stanley was not made for the formalities of what is called
high-breeding. Her light, easy, sinuous figure, did not lend itself to
the rigid deportment of a prude; and her gay laughing eyes, and
dimpled mouth, were ill calculated to grace a dignified position. The
long ringlets of her profuse auburn hair were always out of
order--either streaming in the wind, or straying over her white
shoulders--her long lashes and beautifully defined eyebrows of the
same rich tint, alone preserving any thing like uniformity--a
uniformity which, combined with her almost Grecian regularity of
features, gave her, on the rare occasions when her countenance and
figure were at rest, the air of some nymph or dryad of ancient
sculpture. But to compare Mary Stanley to any thing of marble is
strangely out of place; for her real beauty consisted in the
ever-varying play of her features, and a certain impetuosity of
movement, that would have been a little characteristic of the romp,
but that it was restrained by the spell of feminine sensibility. Heart
was evidently the impulse of every look and every gesture.

For a man of my years, methinks I am writing like a lover. And so I
was! From the first moment I saw that girl, at an humble and
unaspiring distance, I could dream of nothing else. Every thing and
every body seemed fascinated by Mary Stanley. When she walked out into
the fields with the General, her two hands clasping, like those of a
child, her father's arm, his favourite colts used to come neighing
playfully towards them; and not the fiercest dog of his extensive
kennel but, even when unmanageable by the keeper, would creep fawning
to her feet.

It was strange enough, but still more fortunate, that all the
adoration lavished upon this lovely creature by gentle and simple,
Christian and brute, provoked no apparent jealousy on the part of her
elder sister. Selina Stanley was afflicted with a cold, reserved,
unhappy countenance, only too completely in unison with her
disastrous position. But her heart was perhaps as genuine as her face
was forbidding; for she loved the merry, laughing, handsome Mary,
more as a mother her child, than as a sister nearly of her own
years--that is, exultingly, but anxiously. Every one else foresaw
nothing but prosperity, and joy, and love, in store for Mary. Selina
prayed that it might prove so;--but she prayed with tears in her
eyes, and trembling in her soul! For where are the destinies of
persons thus exquisitely organized--thus full of love and
loveliness--thus readily swayed to joy or sorrow, by the trivial
incidents of life--characterised by what the world calls
happiness--such happiness, I mean, as is enjoyed by the serene and
the prudent, the unexcitable, the unaspiring! Miss Stanley foresaw
only too truly, that the best days likely to be enjoyed by her
sister, were those she was spending under her father's roof--a
general idol--an object of deference and delight to all around.

At the General's housewarming, though not previously introduced into
society, Mary was the queen of the ball; and all present agreed, that
one of the most pleasing circumstances of the evening was to watch the
animated cordiality with which she flew from one to the other of those
old neighbours of Stanley Manor, (whom she alone had managed to
persuade that a dozen miles was no distance to prevent their accepting
her father's invitation;) and not the most brilliant of her young
friends received a more eager welcome, or more sustained attention
throughout the evening, than the few homely elderly people, (such as
my friends the Whittinghams,) who happened to share the hospitality of
General Stanley. I daresay that even _I_, had I found courage to
accept his invitation, should have received from the young beauty some
gentle word, in addition to the kindly smiles with which she was sure
to return my respectful obeisance whenever we met accidentally in the
village.

Mary was dressed in white, with a few natural flowers in her hair,
which, owing to the impetuosity of her movements, soon fell out,
leaving only a stray leaf or two, that would have looked ridiculous
any where but among her rich, but dishevelled locks; and the pleasant
anxieties of the evening imparted such a glow to her usually somewhat
pale complexion, that her beauty is said to have been, that night,
almost supernatural. She was more like the creature of a dream than
one of those wooden puppets, who move mechanically through the world
under the name of well brought-up young ladies.

It will easily be conceived how much this ball, so rare an event in
our quiet neighbourhood, was discussed, not only the following day,
but for days and weeks to come. Even at the rectory I heard of nothing
else; while by my good old housekeeper, who had a son in service at
General Stanley's, and a daughter waiting-maid to Miss Sparks, I was
let in to secrets concerning it of which even the rectory knew
nothing.

In the first place, though Mr Sparks had peremptorily signified from
the first to his family, his desire that all should accompany him to
Lexley Hall on this trying occasion, (and it was only natural he
should wish to solace his wounded pride, by appearing before his noble
neighbour surrounded by his handsome progeny,) two of his children
had risen up in rebellion against the decree--and for the first
time--for Sparks was happy in a dutiful and well-ordered family. But
the youngest daughter, Kezia, a girl of high spirits and intelligence,
who fancied she had been pointedly slighted by the Misses Stanley,
when, in one of Mary's harum-scarum expeditions on her Shetland pony,
she had passed without recognition the better-mounted young lady of
Lexley Park; and the eldest son, who so positively refused to
accompany his father to the house of a man by whom Mr Sparks had
inconsiderately represented himself as aggrieved, that, for once, the
kind parent was forced to play the tyrant, and insist on his
obedience.

It was, accordingly, with a very ill grace that these two, the
prettiest of the daughters, and by far the handsomest of his three
handsome sons, made their appearance at the _fête_. But no sooner were
they welcomed by General Stanley and his daughters, than the brother
and sister, who had mutually encouraged each other's disputes,
hastened to recant their opinions.

"How could you, dearest father, describe this courteous, high-bred old
gentleman, as insolent and overbearing?"--whispered Kezia.

"How could you possibly suppose that yonder lovely, gracious creature,
intended to treat you with impertinence?"--was the rejoinder of her
brother; and already the Stanleys had two enemies the less among their
neighbours at Lexley Park.

On the other hand, the General had been forced to have recourse to
severe schooling to bring his daughters to a sense of what was due to
_his guests_, as regarded the family of a man who was known to have
spoken disparagingly of them all. Moreover, if the truth must be
owned, Mary was not altogether free from the prejudices of her caste;
and, proud of her father's noble extraction, was apt to pout her
pretty lip on mention of "the people at Lexley Park;" for the General,
who had no secrets from his girls, had foolishly permitted them to see
certain letters addressed to him by the eccentric Sir Laurence Altham,
justifying himself concerning the peculiar clause introduced into his
deeds of conveyance of his Hall estate, on the grounds of the degraded
origin of "the upstart" he was so malignantly intent on discomposing.

"They will spoil our ball, dear papa--I _know_ these vulgar people
will completely spoil our ball!" said she. "I think I hear them
announced:--'Mr Jonas Sparks, Miss Basiliza and Miss Kezia
Sparks!'--What names?"

"The parents of Mr Sparks were dissenters," observed the General,
trying to look severe. "Dissenters are apt to hold to scriptural
names. But _name_ is not _nature_, Mary; and, to judge by appearances,
this man's--this gentleman's--this Mr Sparks's daughters, have every
qualification to be an ornament to society."

"With all my heart, papa, but I wish it were not ours!" cried the
wayward girl. "On the present occasion, especially, I could spare such
an accession to our circle; for I know that Mr Sparks has presumed to
speak of----"

She was interrupted by a sterner reproof on the part of the General
than he had ever before administered to his favourite daughter; and
the consequence of this unusual severity was the distinguished
reception bestowed, both by Selina and her sister, on the family from
Lexley Park.

Next day, however, General Stanley found a totally different cause for
rebuke in the conduct of his dear Mary.

"You talked to nobody last night, but those Sparks's!" said he. "Lord
Dudley informed me he had asked you to dance three times in vain; and
Lord Robert Stanley assured me _he_ could scarcely get a civil answer
from you!--Yet you found time, Mary, to dance twice in the course of
the evening with that son of Sparks's!"

"That son of Sparks's, as you so despisingly call him, dearest papa,
is a most charming partner; while Lord Dudley, and my cousin Robert,
are little better than boors. Everard Sparks can talk and dance, as
well as they ride across a country. Not but what he, too, passes for a
tolerable sportsman; and do you know, papa, Mr Sparks is thinking
seriously of setting up a pack of harriers at Lexley?"

"At Lexley Park!" insisted her father, who chose to enforce the
distinction instituted by Sir Laurence Altham. "I fancy he will have
to ask my permission first. My land lies somewhat inconveniently, in
case I choose to oppose his intentions."

"But you won't oppose them!--No, no, dear papa, you sha'n't oppose
them!"--cried Mary Stanley, throwing her arms coaxingly round her
father's neck, and imprinting a kiss on his venerable forehead. "_Why_
should we go on opposing and opposing, when it would be so much
happier for all of us to live together as friends and neighbours?"

The General surveyed her in silence for some moments as she looked up
lovingly into his face; then gravely, and in silence, unclasped her
arms from his neck. For the first time, he had gazed upon his
favourite child without discerning beauty in her countenance, or
finding favour for her supplications.

"_My_ opinion of Mr Sparks and his family is not altered since
yesterday," said he coldly, perceiving that she was about to renew her
overtures for a pacification. "Your father's prejudices, Mary, are
seldom so slightly grounded, that the adulation of a few gross
compliments, such as were paid you last night by Mr Everard Sparks,
may suffice for their obliteration. For the future, remember the less
I hear of Lexley Park the better. In a few weeks we shall be in
London, where our sphere is sufficiently removed, I am happy to say,
from that of Mr Jonas Sparks, to secure me against the annoyance of
familiarity with him or his."

The partiality of his darling Mary for the handsomest and most
agreeable young man who had ever sought to make himself agreeable to
her, had sufficed to turn the arguments of General Stanley as
decidedly _against_ his _parvenu_ neighbours, as, two days before, his
eloquence had been exercised in their defence.

And now commenced between the young people and their parents, one of
those covert warfares certain to arise from similar interdictions. Mr
Sparks--satisfied that he should have further insults to endure on the
part of General Stanley, in the event of his son pretending to the
hand of the proud old man's daughter--sought a serious explanation
with Everard, on finding that he neglected no opportunity of meeting
Mary Stanley in her drives, and walks, and errands of village
benevolence; and by the remonstrances of one father, and
peremptoriness of the other, the young couple were soon tempted to
seek comforts in mutual confidences. Residing almost within view of
each other, there was no great difficulty in finding occasion for an
interview. They met, moreover, naturally, and without effort, in all
the country houses in the neighbourhood; and so frequently, that I
often wondered they should consider it worth while to hazard the
General's displeasure by partaking a few moments' conversation, every
now and then, among the old thorns by the water-side, just where the
bend of the river secured them from observation; or in the green lane
leading from Lexley Park to my farm, while Miss Stanley took charge of
the pony-chaise during the hasty explanations of the imprudent couple.
Having little to occupy my leisure during the intervals of my
agricultural pursuits, I was constantly running against them, with my
gun on my shoulder or my fishing-rod in my hand. I almost feared young
Sparks might imagine that I was employed by the General as a spy upon
their movements, so fierce a glance did he direct towards me one day
when I was unlucky enough to vault over a hedge within a few yards of
the spot where they were standing together--Miss Mary sobbing like a
child. But, God knows! he was mistaken if he thought I was taking
unfair heed of their proceedings, or likely to gossip indiscreetly
concerning what fell accidentally under my notice.

Not that a single soul in the neighbourhood approved General Stanley's
opposition to the attachment. On the contrary, from the moment of the
liking between the young people becoming apparent, the whole country
decided that there could not be a more propitious mode of reuniting
the dismembered Lexley estates; for though the General was expressly
debarred from selling Lexley Hall to Sparks or his heirs, he could not
be prevented bequeathing it to his daughters--the heirs of Jonas
Sparks being the children of her body. And thus all objections would
have been remedied.

But such was not the proud old man's view of the case. He had set his
heart on perpetuating his own name in his family. He had set his
heart on the union of his dear Mary with her cousin Lord Robert
Stanley; and Everard Sparks might have been twice the handsome, manly
young fellow he was--twice the gentleman, and twice the scholar--it
would have pleaded little in his favour against the predetermined
projects of the positive General. There was certainly some excuse for
his ambition on Miss Mary's account. Beauty, merit, fortune,
connexion, every advantage was hers calculated to do honour to a noble
alliance; and as her father often exclaimed, with a bitter sneer, in
answer to the mild pleadings of Selina--"Such a girl as that--a girl
born to be a duchess--to sacrifice herself to the son of a Congleton
manufacturer!"

Two years did the struggle continue--during the greater part of which
I was a constant eyewitness of the sorrows which so sobered the
impetuous deportment of the light-hearted Mary Stanley. Her father
took her to London, with the project of separation he had haughtily
announced; but only to find, to his amazement, that Eton and Oxford
had placed the son of Mr Sparks of Lexley Park, a member of
Parliament, on as good a footing as himself in nearly all the circles
he frequented. Even when, in the desperation of his fears, he removed
his family to the Continent, the young lover (as became the lover of
so endearing and attractive a creature) followed her, at a distance,
from place to place. At length, one angry day, the General provoked
him to a duel. But Everard would not lift his hand against the father
of his beloved Mary. An insult from General Stanley was not as an
offence from any other man. The only revenge taken by the
high-spirited young man, was to urge the ungenerous conduct of the
father as an argument with the daughter to put an end, by an
elopement, to a state of things too painful to be borne. After much
hesitation, it seems, she most unhappily complied. They were
married--at Naples I think, or Turin, or some other city of Italy,
where we have a diplomatic resident; and after their marriage--poor,
foolish young people!--they went touring it about gaily in the
Archipelago and Levant, waiting a favourable moment to propose a
reconciliation with their respective fathers--as if the wrath and
malediction of parents was so mere a trifle to deal with.

The first step taken by General Stanley, on learning the ungrateful
rebellion of his favourite child, was to return to England. He seemed
to want to be at home again, the better to enjoy and cultivate his
abhorrence of every thing bearing the despised name of Sparks; for now
began the genuine hatred between the families. Nothing would satisfy
the obstinate old soldier, but that the elder Sparks had, from the
first, secretly encouraged the views of his son upon the heiress of
Lexley Hall; while Mr Sparks naturally resented with enraged spirit
the overbearing tone assumed by his aristocratic neighbour towards
those so nearly his equals. Every day produced some new grounds for
offence; and never had Sir Laurence Altham, in the extremity of his
poverty, regarded the thriving mansion in the valley with half the
loathing which the view of Lexley Park produced in the mind of General
Stanley. He was even at the trouble of trenching a plantation on the
brow of the hill, with the intention of shutting out the detested
object. But trees do not grow so hastily as antipathies; and the
General had to endure the certainty, that, for the remainder of _his_
life at least, that beautiful domain must be unrolled, map-like, at
his feet. Nor is it to be supposed that the battlements of the old
hall found greater favour in the sight of the _parvenu_ squire, than
when in Sir Laurence's time the very sight of them was wormwood to his
soul.

Unhappily, while the Congleton manufacturer contented himself with
angry words, the gentleman of thirty descents betook himself to
action. General Stanley swore to be mightily revenged--and he was so.

On the very day following his return to England, before he even
visited his desolate country-house, he sent for Lord Robert Stanley,
and made him the confidant of his indignation--avowed his former good
intentions in his favour--betrayed all Mary's--all _Mr Everard
Sparks's_ disparaging opposition; and ended by enquiring whether,
since whichever of his daughters became Lady Robert Stanley would
become sole heiress to his property, his lordship could make up his
mind to accept Selina as a wife? Proud as he was, the General almost
condescended to plead the cause of his deformed daughter: enlarging
upon her excellences of character, and, still more, upon her aversion
to society, which would secure the self-love of her husband against
any public remarks on her want of personal attractions.

Alas! all these arguments were thoroughly thrown away. Lord Robert
was, as his cousin Mary had truly described him, little better than a
boor. But he was also a spendthrift and a libertine; and had Miss
Stanley been as deformed in mind as she was in person, he would have
joyfully taken to wife the heiress of ten thousand a-year, and two of
the finest seats in the county of Chester.

To herself, meanwhile, no hint of these family negotiations was
vouchsafed; and Selina Stanley had every reason to suppose--when her
cousin became on a sudden an assiduous visitor at the house, and very
shortly a declared lover--that their intimacy from childhood had
accustomed his eye to her want of personal charms--she had become
endeared to him by her mild and submissive temper. So little was she
aware of her father's testamentary dispositions in her favour, that
the interested nature of Lord Robert's views did not occur to her
mind; and, little accustomed to protestations of attachment, Selina's
heart was not _very_ difficult to soften towards the only man who had
ever pretended to love her, and whose apparent attachment promised
some consolation for the loss of her sister's society, as well as the
chance of reunion with one whom her father had sworn should never,
under any possible circumstances, again cross his threshold.

Six months after General Stanley's pride had been wounded to the quick
by the newspaper account of a marriage between his favourite child and
"a man of the name of Sparks," balm was poured into the wound by
another and more pompous paragraph, announcing the union, by special
license, of the Right Hon. Lord Robert Stanley and the eldest daughter
and heiress of Lieut.-Gen. Stanley, of Stanley Manor, only son of the
late Lord Henry Stanley, followed by the usual list of noble relatives
gracing the ceremony with their presence, and a flourishing account of
the departure of the happy couple, in a travelling carriage and four,
for their seat in Cheshire.

This announcement, by the way, probably served to convey the
intelligence to Mr and Mrs Everard Sparks; for the General having
carefully intercepted every letter addressed by Mary to her sister,
Lady Robert had not the slightest idea in what direction to
communicate with one who possessed an undiminished share in her
affections.

On General Stanley's arrival in Cheshire, at the close of the
honeymoon, the most casual observer might have noticed the alteration
which had taken place in his appearance. Instead of the sadness I had
expected to find in his countenance after so severe a stroke as the
disobedience of his darling girl, I never saw him so exulting. Yet his
smiles were not smiles of good-humour. There was bitterness at the
bottom of every word he uttered; and a terrible sound of menace rung
in his unnatural laughter. Consciousness never seemed a moment absent
from his mind, that he had defeated the calculations of the designing
family; that he had distanced them; that he was triumphing over them.
Alas! none at present entertained the smallest suspicion to what
extent!

Preparatory to the settlements made by the General on Lord and Lady
Robert Stanley, it had been found necessary to place in the hands of
his lordship's solicitors the deeds of the Lexley Hall estate; when,
lo! to the consternation of all parties, it appeared that the
General's title was an unsound one; that by the general terms of this
ancient property, rights of heirship could only be evaded by the
payment of a certain fine, after intimation of sale in a certain form
to the nearest-of-kin of the heir in possession, which form had been
overlooked or wantonly neglected by Sir Laurence Altham!

The discovery was indeed embarrassing. Fortunately, however, the sum
of ten thousand pounds only had been paid by the General to satisfy
the immediate funds of the unthrifty baronet; the remainder of the
purchase-money having been left in the form of mortgage on the
property. There was consequently the less difficulty, though
considerable expense, in cancelling the existing deeds, going through
the necessary forms, and, after paying the forfeiture to the heir, (to
whom the very existence of his claims was unknown,) renewing the
contract with Sir Laurence; to whom, so considerable a sum being still
owing, it was as essential as to General Stanley that the covenant
should be completed without delay. But all this occurred at so
critical a moment, that the General had ample cause to be thankful for
the promptitude with which he decided Selina's marriage; for only four
days after the signature of the new deeds, Sir Laurence concluded his
ill-spent life--his death being, it was thought, accelerated by the
excitement consequent on this strange discovery, and the
investigations on the part of the heir to which it was giving rise.

For the clause in the original grant of the Lexley estate (which dated
from the Reformation) affected the property purchased by Jonas Sparks
as fully as that which had been assigned to the General; and the
baronet being now deceased, there was no possibility of co-operation
in rectifying the fatal error. It was more than probable, therefore,
that Lexley Park, with all its improvements, was now the property of
John Julius Altham, Esq.!--the only dilemma still to be decided by the
law, being the extent to which, his kinsman having died insolvent and
intestate, he was liable to the suit of Jonas Sparks for the return of
the purchase money, amounting to L.145,000.

Already the fatal intelligence had been communicated by the attorneys
of John Julius Altham to those of the astonished man, who, though
still convinced of the goodness of his cause, (which, on the strength
of certain various statutes affecting such a case, he was advised to
contest to the utmost,) foresaw a long, vexatious, and expensive
lawsuit, that would certainly last his life, and prevent the
possibility of one moment's enjoyment of the estate, from which he had
received the usual notice of ejection. Fortunately for him, the
present Mr Altham was not only a gentleman, and disposed to exercise
his rights in the most decorous manner; but, of course, unbiassed by
the personal prejudices so strongly felt by Sir Laurence, and so
unfairly communicated by him to the General. Still, the question was
proceeding at the snail's pace rate of Chancery suits at the
commencement of the present century, and the unfortunate Congleton
manufacturer had every reason to curse the day when he had become
enamoured of the grassy glades and rich woodlands of Lexley; seeing
that, at the close of an honourable and well-spent life, he was
uncertain whether the sons and daughters to whom he had laboured to
bequeath a handsome independence, might not be reduced to utter
destitution.

Such was the intelligence that saluted the ill-starred Mary and her
husband on their return to England! Instead of the brilliant prospects
in which she had been nurtured--disinheritance met her on the one
side, and ruin on the other!

Her vindictive father had even made it a condition of his bounties to
Lord and Lady Robert, that all intercourse should cease between them
and their sister; a condition which the former, in revenge for the
early slights of his fairer cousin, took care should be punctually
obeyed by his wife.

Till the event of the trial, Mr Sparks retained, of course, possession
of the Park; but so bitter was the mortification of the family, on
discovering in the village precisely the same ungrateful feeling which
had so embittered the soul of Sir Laurence, that they preferred
remaining in London--where no one has leisure to dwell upon the
mischances of his neighbours, and where sympathy is as little expected
as conceded. But when Mary arrived--_poor_ Mary! who had now the
prospect of becoming a mother--and who, though affectionately beloved
by her husband's family, saw they regarded her as the innocent origin
of their present reverses--she soon persuaded her husband to accompany
her to her old haunts.

"Do not imagine, dearest," said she, "that I have any project of
debasing you and myself, by intruding into my father's presence. Had
we been still prosperous, Everard, I would have gone to him--knelt to
him--prayed to him--wept to him--_so_ earnestly, that his forgiveness
could not have been long withheld from the child he loved so dearly. I
would have described to him all you are to me--all your
indulgences--all your devotion--and _you_, too, my own husband, would
have been forgiven. But as it is, believe me, I have too proud a sense
of what is due to ourselves, to combat the unnatural hostility in
which my sister and her husband appear to take their share. O Everard!
to think of Selina becoming the wife of that coarse and heartless man,
of whom, in former times, she thought even more contemptuously than I;
and who, with his dissolute habits, can only have made my poor
afflicted sister his wife from the most mercenary motives! I dread to
think of what may be her fate hereafter, when, having obtained at my
father's death all the advantages to which he looks forward, he will
show himself in his true colours."

Thus, even with such terrible prospects awaiting herself, the good,
generous Mary trembled only to contemplate those of her regardless
sister; and it was chiefly for the delight of revisiting the spots
where they had played together in childhood--the fondly-remembered
environs of Stanley Manor--that she persuaded her husband to take up
his abode in the deserted mansion at the Park, where, from prudential
motives, Mr Sparks had broken up his establishment, and sold off his
horses.

Attended by a single servant, in addition to the old porter and his
wife who were in charge of the house, Mary trusted that their arrival
at Lexley would be unnoticed in the neighbourhood. Confining herself
strictly within the boundaries of the Park, which neither her father
nor the bride and bridegroom were likely to enter, she conceived that
she might enjoy, on her husband's arm, those solitary rambles of which
every day circumscribed the extent; without affording reason to the
General to suppose, when, discerning every morning from his lofty
terraces the mansion of his falling enemy, that, in place of the man
he loathed, it contained his discarded child.

The dispirited young woman, on the other hand, delighted in
contemplating from the windows of her dressing-room the towers
beneath, whose shelter she had abided in such perfect happiness with
her doating father and apparently attached sister. They loved her no
longer, it is true. Perhaps it was her fault--(she would not allow
herself to conceive it could be a fault of _theirs_)--but at all
events she loved _them_ dearly as ever; and it was comforting to her
poor heart to catch a glimpse of their habitation, and know herself
within reach, should sickness or evil betide.

"If I should not survive my approaching time," thought Mary, often
surveying for hours, through her tears, the heights of Lexley Hall,
and fancying she could discern human figures moving from window to
window, or from terrace to terrace; "if I should be fated never to
behold this child, already loved--this child which is to be so dear a
blessing to us both--in my last hours my father would not surely
refuse to give me his blessing; nor would Selina persist in her
present cruel alienation. It is, indeed, a comfort to be here."

Her husband thought otherwise. To him nothing was more trying than
this compulsory sojourn at Lexley; not that he required other society
than that of his engaging and attached wife. At any other moment it
would have been delightful to him to enjoy the country pleasures
around them, with no officious intrusive world to interpose between
their affection. But in his present uncertainty as to his future
prospects, to be mocked by this empty show of proprietorship, and have
constantly before his eyes the residence of the man who had heaped
such contumely on his head, and inflicted such pain on the gentlest
and sweetest of human hearts, was a state of moral torment.

In the course of my fishing excursions--(for, thanks to Mr Sparks's
neighbourly liberality, I had a card of general access to his
parks)--I frequently met the young couple; and having no clue to their
secret sentiments, noticed, with deep regret, the sadness of Mary's
countenance and sinister looks of her husband. I feared--I greatly
feared--that they were not happy together. The General's daughter
repined, perhaps, after her former fortunes. The young husband sighed,
doubtless, over the liberty he had renounced.

It was spring time, and Lord Robert having satisfied his cravings
after the pleasures of London, by occasional bachelor visits on
pretence of business, the family were to remain at the Hall till after
the Easter holidays, so that Mary had every expectation of the
accomplishment of her hopes previous to their departure. Perhaps, in
the bottom of her heart, she flattered herself that, on hearing of her
safety, her obdurate relations might be moved, by a sudden burst of
pity and kindliness, to make overtures of reconciliation--at all
events to dispatch words of courteous enquiry; for she was ever
dwelling on her good fortune that her father should, on this
particular year, have so retarded the usual period of his departure.
Yet when the report of these exulting exclamations on her part reached
my ear, I was ungenerous enough to attribute them to a very different
origin, fancying that the poor submissive creature was thankful for
being within reach of protection from conjugal misusage.

Meanwhile, she was so far justified in one portion of her premises,
that no tidings of her residence at Lexley Park had as yet reached the
ear of her father. The fact was, that not a soul had courage to do so
much as mention, in his presence, the name of his once idolized child;
and Lord Robert, having been apprized of the circumstance, instantly
exacted a promise from his wife, that nothing should induce her to
hazard her father's displeasure by communication with her sister, or
by acquainting the General of the arrival of the offending pair. The
consequence was, that in the dread of encountering her sister, (whom
she felt ashamed to meet as the wife of the man they had so often
decried together,) Lady Robert rarely quitted the house; and these two
sisters, so long the affectionate inmates of the same chamber--the
sisters who had wept together over their mother's deathbed--abided
within sight of each other's windows, yet estranged as with the
estrangement of strangers.

And then, we pretend to talk with horror of the family feuds of
southern nations; and, priding ourselves on our calm and passionless
nature, feel convinced that all the domestic virtues extant on earth,
have taken refuge in the British empire!

Every day, meanwhile, I noticed that the handsome countenance of
Everard Sparks grew gloomier and gloomier; and how was I to know that
every day he received letters from his father, announcing the
unfavourable aspect of their suit; and that (owing, as was supposed,
to the suggestions of General Stanley's solicitors) even the conduct
of the adverse party was becoming offensive. The elder Sparks wrote
like a man overwhelmed with mortification, and stung by a sense of
undeserved injury; and his appeals to the sympathy and support of his
son, were such as to place the spirited young man in a most painful
predicament as regarded the family of his wife.

Unwilling to utter in her presence an injurious word concerning those
who, persecute her as they might, were still her nearest and dearest
by the indissoluble ties of nature, all he could do, in relief to his
overcharged feelings, was to rush forth into the Park, and curse the
day that he was born to behold all he loved in the world overwhelmed
in one common ruin.

On such occasions, while pretending to fix my attention on my float
upon the river, I often watched him from afar, till I was terrified by
the frantic vehemence of his gestures. There was almost reason to
fancy that the evil influences of the old Hall were extending their
power over the valley; and that this distracted young man was falling
into the eccentricities of Sir Laurence Altham.

After viewing with anxiety the wild deportment of poor Mary's husband,
I happened one day to pass along the lane I have described as skirting
the garden of the manor-house, on my way homewards to my farm; and on
plunging my eyes, as usual, into the verdant depths of the clipped
yew-walks, visible through the iron-palisades, was struck by the
contrast afforded to the scene I had just witnessed, not only by its
aristocratic tranquillity, but by the grave and subdued deportment of
Lady Robert Stanley, who was sauntering in one of the alleys,
accompanied by a favourite dog I had often seen following her sister
in former days, and looking the very picture of contented egotism.

I almost longed to call aloud to her, and confide all I knew and all
that I supposed. But what right had I to create alarms in her sister's
behalf? What right had I to incite her to disobedience against the
father on whom she and her husband were dependent? Better leave things
as they were--the common philosophy of selfish, timid people, afraid
of exposing their own heads to a portion of the storm their
interference may chance to bring down, while assisting the cause of
the weak against the strong.

I used often to go home and think of poor Mary till my heart ached.
That young and beautiful creature--that creature till lately so
beloved--to be thus cruelly abandoned, thus helpless, thus unhappy!
Perhaps not a soul sympathizing with her but myself--an obscure,
low-born, uninfluential man, of no more value as a protector than a
willow-wand shivered from the Lexley plantations! Not so much as the
merest trifle in which I could demonstrate my good-will. I thought and
thought it over, and there was nothing I could do--nothing I could
offer. When I _did_ hit upon some pretext of kindness, I only did
amiss. The fruit season was not begun--nay, the orchards were only in
blossom--and times were over for forcing-houses at Lexley Park!
Thinking, therefore, that the invalid might be pleased with a basket
of Jersey pears, of which a very fine kind grew in my orchard, I
ventured to send some to her address. But the very next time I
encountered Everard in the village, he cast a look at me as if he
would have killed me for my officiousness, or, perhaps, for taking the
liberty to suppose that Lexley Park was less luxuriously provisioned
than in former years. Nor was it till long afterwards I discovered
that my old housekeeper (who had taken upon herself to carry my humble
offering to the park) had not only seen the poor young lady, but been
foolish enough to talk of Lady Robert in a tone which appears to have
exercised a cruel influence over her gentle heart; so that, when her
husband returned home from rabbit-shooting, an hour afterwards, he
found her recovering from a fainting fit, he visited upon _me_ the
folly of my servant; and such was the cause of his angry looks.

A few days afterwards, however, he had far more to reproach his
conscience withal than poor Barbara. Having no concealments from his
wife, to whom he was in the habit of avowing every emotion of his
heart, he was rash enough to mention of having met the travelling
carriage of Lord and Lady Robert on the London road. They had quitted
the Hall ten days previous to the epoch originally fixed for their
departure.

"Gone--exactly gone!--already at two hundred miles' distance from me!"
cried poor Mary, nothing doubting that her father had, as usual,
accompanied them, and feeling herself now, for the first time, alone
in the dreary seclusion to which she had condemned herself, only that
she might breathe the same atmosphere with those she loved. "Yet they
had certainly decided to remain at the Hall till after Easter! Perhaps
they discovered my being here, and the discovery hastened their
journey. Unhappy creature that I am, to have become thus hateful to
those in whose veins my blood is flowing! Everard, Everard! O, what
have I done that God should thus abandon me?"

The soothing and affectionate remonstrances now addressed to her by
her husband, had so far a good effect, that they softened her despair
to tears. Long and unrestrainedly did she weep upon his shoulder;
tried to comfort him by the assurance that _she_ was comforted, or at
least that she would endeavour to _seek_ comfort from the protection
and goodness whence it had been so often derived.

A few minutes afterwards, having been persuaded by Everard to rest
herself on the sofa, to recover the effects of the agitation his
indiscreet communication had excited, she suddenly complained of cold,
and begged him to close the windows. It was a balmy April day, with a
genial sun shining fresh into the room. The air was as the air of
midsummer--one of those days on which you almost see the small green
leaves of spring bursting from their shelly covering, and the resinous
buds of the chestnut-trees expanding into maturity. Poor Everard saw
at once that the chilliness of which his wife complained must be the
effect of illness. More cautious, however, on this occasion than
before, he enquired, as her shivering increased, what preparations she
had made for the events which still left her some weeks for execution.
"None. His sisters had kindly undertaken to supply her with all she
might require; and the services of the nurse accustomed to attend his
married sister, were engaged on her behalf. At the end of the month
this woman was to arrive at Lexley, bringing with her the wardrobe of
the little treasure who was to accord renewed peace and happiness to
its mother."

Though careful to conceal his anxiety from his wife, Everard Sparks,
disappointed and distressed, quitted the room in haste to send for the
medical man who had long been the attendant of his family. But before
he arrived, the shivering fit of the poor sufferer had increased to an
alarming degree. A calming potion was administered, and orders issued
that she was to be kept quiet; but in the consternation created in the
little household by the communication Dr R. thought it necessary to
make of the possibility of a premature confinement, poor Mrs Sparks's
maid, a young inexperienced woman, dispatched a messenger to my house
for her old kinswoman, and it was through Barbara I became acquainted
with the melancholy incidents I am about to relate.

The sedatives administered failed in their effect. A fatal shock had
been already given; and while struggling through that direful night
with the increasing pangs that verified the doctor's prognostications,
the sympathizing women around the sufferer could scarcely restrain
their tears at the courage with which she supported her anguish,
rejoicing in it, as it were, in the prospect of embracing her
child--when all present were aware that the compensation was about to
be denied her, that the child was already dead. Just as the day
dawned, her anxious husband was congratulated on her safety, and then
the truth could no longer be concealed from Mary. She asked to see her
babe. Her husband was employed to persuade her to defer seeing it for
an hour or two, "till it was dressed--till she was more composed." But
the truth rushed into her mind, and she uttered not another word, in
the apprehension of increasing his disappointment and mortification.

So long did her silence continue, that, trusting she had fallen
asleep, old Barbara's granddaughter entreated poor Everard to withdraw
and leave her to her rest. But the moment he quitted the room, she
spoke, spoke resolutely, and in a firmer voice than her previous
sufferings had given them reason to suppose possible.

"Now, then, let me see my boy," said she. "I know that he is dead. But
do not be afraid of shocking or distressing me. I have courage to look
upon the poor little creature for whom I have suffered so much, and
who, I trusted, would reward me for all."

The women remonstrated, as it was their duty to remonstrate. But when
they saw that opposition on this point only excited her, dreading an
accession of fever, they brought the poor babe and laid it on the
pillow beside its mother. That first embrace, to which she had looked
forward with such intensity of delight, folded to her burning bosom
only a clay-cold child!

Even thus it was fair to look on--every promise in its little form,
that its beauty would have equalled that of its handsome parents; and
Mary, as she pressed her lips to its icy forehead, fancied she could
trace on those tiny features a resemblance to its father. Old Barbara,
perceiving how bitterly the tears of the sufferer were falling on the
cheeks of her lost treasure, now interfered. But the mother had still
a last request to make. A few downy curls were perceptible on the
temples--in colour and fineness resembling her own. She wished to
rescue from the grave this slight remembrance of her poor nameless
offspring; and her wish having been complied with, she suffered the
babe to be taken from her relaxed and moveless grasp.

"Leave me the hair," said she, in a faint voice. "Thanks--thanks! I am
happy now--I will try to sleep--I am happy--happy now!"

She slept--and never woke again. At the close of an hour or two, her
anxious husband, finding she had not stirred, gently and silently
approached the bedside, and took into his own the fair hand lying on
the coverlid, to ascertain whether fever had ensued. _Fever?_ It was
already cold with the damps of death!

Imagine, if you can, the agony and self-reproach of that bereaved man!
Again and again did he revile himself as her murderer; accusing
_himself_--her father--her _sister_--the whole world. At one moment,
he fancied that her condition had not been properly treated by her
attendants; at another, that the medical man ought not to have left
the house. Nay, hours and hours after she was gone for ever--after
the undertakers had commenced their hideous preparations--even while
she lay stretched before him, white and cold as marble, he persisted
that life might be still recalled; and, but for the better
discrimination of those around him, would have insisted on attempts at
resuscitation, calculated only to disturb, almost sacrilegiously, the
sound peace of the dead!

I was one of the first to learn the heart-rending news of this beloved
being's untimely end; for my old woman having asked permission to
remain with her through the night, (explaining the exigency of the
case,) I could not forbear hurrying to the house as soon as it was
day, in the hope of hearing she was a happy mother. Somehow or other,
I had never contemplated an unfavourable result. The idea of death
never presented itself to me in common with any thing so young and
fair; and as I walked through the park, and crossed the bridge, with
the white cheerful mansion before me, and the morning sun shining full
upon its windows, I thought how gladsome it looked, but could not
forbear feeling that, even with the prospect of losing it--even with
the certainty of beggary, Everard, as a husband and father, was the
fellow most to be envied upon earth!

I reached the house, and the old man who answered my ring at the
office entrance, was speechless from tears. Though usually hard as
iron, he sobbed as if his heart would break. I asked to speak with
Barbara--with my housekeeper. He told me I could not--that she was
"busy laying out the body." I was answered. That dreadful word told me
all--I had no more questions to ask. I cared not _who_ survived, or
what became of the survivors. And as I turned sickening away, to bend
my steps homewards, I remember wondering how that fair spring morning
could shine so bright and auspiciously, when _she_ was gone from us.
It seemed to triumph in our loss! Alas! it shone to welcome a new
angel to the kingdom of our Father who is in heaven!

Suddenly it struck me, that I, too, had a duty to perform. In that
scanty household there was no one to take thought of the common forms
of life; so I hastened to the rectory, to suggest to our good pastor a
visit of consolation to the house of mourning, and acquaint his
sisters with its forlorn condition. Like myself, they began
exclaiming, "Alas! alas! It was but the other day that"----reverting
to all the acts of charity and girlish graces of that dear departed
Mary Stanley, who had been among us as the shadow of a dream.

Before I left the rectory, Dr Whittingham had issued his orders; and
lo! as I proceeded homewards, with a heavy step and a heavier heart,
the sound of the passing bell from Lexley church pursued me with its
measured toll, till I could scarcely refrain from sitting me down by
the wayside, and weeping my very soul away.

On reaching the lane I have so often described as skirting the gardens
of the old Hall, I noticed, through the palisades, a person, probably
one of the gardeners, sauntering along Lady Robert's favourite
yew-walk. No! on a nearer approach, I saw, and almost shuddered to
see, that it was General Stanley himself (who, I fancied, had
accompanied his son-in-law to town) taking an early walk, to enjoy the
sweetness of that delicious morning.

As I drew nearer, I averted my head. At that moment I had not courage
to look him in the face. I could scarcely suppose him ignorant of what
had occurred; and, if aware of the sad event, his obduracy was unmanly
to a degree that filled me with disgust. But just as I came opposite
the iron gates, he hailed me by name--more familiarly and courteously
than he was wont--to ask whether I came from the village, and for
_whose_ death they were tolling?

If worlds had depended on my answer, I could not have uttered a word!
But I conclude that, catching sight of my troubled face and swollen
eyelids, the General supposed I had lost some near and dear friend;
for, instead of renewing his question, he merely touched his hat, and
passed on, leaving me to proceed in my turn. But the spectacle of my
profound affliction probably excited his curiosity; for I found
afterwards, that, instead of pursuing his walk, he returned straight
to the house, and addressed the enquiry which had so distressed _me_,
to others having more courage to reveal the fatal truth. I believe it
was the old family butler, who abruptly answered--"For my poor young
lady, General--for the sweetest angel that ever trod the earth!"

For my part, I wonder the announcement did not strike him to the
earth! But he heard it without apparent emotion; like a man who,
having already sustained the worst affliction this world can afford,
has no sensibility for further trials. Still the intelligence was not
ineffective. Without pausing an instant for reflection, or the
indulgence of his feelings, he set forth on foot to Lexley Park. With
his hat pulled over his eyes, and a determined air, rather as if about
to execute an act of vengeance than offer a tardy tribute of
tenderness to his victim, he hurried to the house--commanded the
startled old servant to show him the way to _her_ room--entered
it--and knelt down beside the bed on which she lay, with her dead
infant on her arm, asking her forgiveness, and the forgiveness of God,
as humbly as though he were not the General Stanley proverbial for
implacability and pride.

Old Barbara, who had not quitted the room, assured me it was a
heart-breaking sight to behold that white head bowed down in agony
upon the cold feet of his child. For he felt himself unworthy to press
her helpless hand to his lips, or remove the cambric from her face,
but called, in broken accents, upon the name of Mary! his child! his
darling! addressing her rather with the fondling terms bestowed upon
girlhood than as a woman--a wife--a mother!

"But a more affecting story still," said the old woman, "was to see
that Mr Everard took no more heed of the General's sudden entrance
than though it were a thing to be looked for. He seemed neither to
hear his exclamations nor perceive his distress." Poor gentleman! His
haggard eyes were fixed, his mind bewildered, his hopes blasted for
ever, his life a blank. He neither answered when spoken to, nor even
spoke, when the good rector, according to his promise, came to
announce that he had dispatched the fatal intelligence by express to
his family, beseeching his instructions concerning the steps to be
taken for the burial of the dead.

But why afflict you and myself by recurring to these melancholy
details! Suffice it, that this dreadful blow effected what nothing
else on earth could have effected in the mind of General Stanley.
Humbled to the dust, even the arrival of the once despised owner of
Lexley Park did not drive him from the house. He asked his pity--he
asked his pardon. Beside the coffin of his daughter he expressed all
the compunction a generous-hearted and broken-hearted man could
express; and all he asked in return, was leave to lay her poor head in
the grave of her ancestors.

No one opposed his desire. The young widower had not as much
consciousness left as would have enabled him to utter the negative
General Stanley seemed prepared to expect; and as to his father, about
to abandon Lexley for ever, to what purpose erect a family vault in a
church which neither he nor his were ever likely to see again?

To the chapel at Stanley Manor, accordingly, were the mother and child
removed. The General wrote expressly to forbid his son-in-law and
Selina returning to the Hall, on pretence of sustaining him in his
affliction. He _chose_ to give way to it; he _chose_ to be alone with
his despair.

Never shall I forget the day that mournful funeral procession passed
through the village! Young and old came forth weeping to their doors
to bid her a last farewell; even as they used to come and exchange
smiles with her, in those happy days when life lay before her,
bright--hopeful--without a care--without a responsibility. I had
intended to pay him the same respect. I meant, indeed, to have
followed the hearse, at an humble distance, to its final destination.
But when I rose that morning a sudden weakness came upon me, and I was
unable to quit my room. I, so strong, so hardy, who have passed
through life without sickness or doctor, was as powerless that day as
an infant.

It was from the good rector, therefore, I heard how the General (on
whom, in consequence of the precarious condition of the afflicted
husband, devolved the task of chief mourner) sustained his carriage to
perform with dignity and propriety his duty to the dead. As he
followed the coffin through the churchyard, crowded by his old
pensioners--many of them praying on their knees as it passed--his
step was as firm and his brow as erect as though at the head of his
regiment. It was not till all was over--the mournful ceremony done,
the crowd dispersed, the funeral array departed--that having descended
into the vault, ere the stone was rolled to the door of the sepulchre,
in order to point out the exact spot where he wished her remains to be
deposited, so that hereafter his own might rest by her side, he
renounced all self-restraint, and throwing himself upon the ground,
gave himself up to his anguish, and refused to be comforted!

That summer was as dreary a season at Lexley as the dreariest winter!
Both the Park and the Hall were shut up; nor did General Stanley ever
again resume his tenancy of the old manor. When the result of the
Chancery suit left Mr Altham in possession of the former estate, the
General literally preferred forfeiting the moiety of the
purchase-money he had paid, and giving up the place to be re-united
with the property, which the rigour of the law thus singularly
restored to the last heirs of the Althams; and such was the cause of
my neighbour, the present Sir Julius Altham, regaining possession of
the Hall.

It was not for many years, however, that the cause was ultimately
decided. There was an appeal against the Chancellor's decree; and even
after the decree was confirmed, came an endless number of legal forms,
which so procrastinated the settlement, that not only the original
unfortunate purchaser, but poor Everard himself, was in his grave when
the mansion, in which they had so prided themselves, was pulled down,
and all trace of their occupancy effaced.

I sometimes ask myself, indeed, whether the whole of this "strange
eventful history," with which the earliest feelings of my heart were
painfully interwoven, really occurred? whether the manor ever passed
for a time out of the possession of the ancient house of Altham?
whether the domain, now one and indivisible, were literally
partitioned off--a park paling interposing only between the patrician
and plebeian. Often, after spending hour after hour by the river side,
when the fly is on the water and the old thorns in bloom, I recur to
the first day I came back into Lexley Park after the funeral had
passed through, and recollect the soreness of heart with which I
lifted my eyes towards the house, of which every trace has since
disappeared. At that moment there seemed to rise before me, sporting
among the gnarled branches of the old thorn-trees, the graceful form
of Mary Stanley, followed by old Sergeant, bounding and barking
through the fern; and the General looking on from a distance,
pretending to be angry, and desiring her to come out of the covert and
not disturb the game. Exactly thus, and there, I beheld them for the
first time. What would I not give to realize once more, if only for a
day, that happy, happy vision!

Stanley Manor is let to strangers during the minority of Lord Robert's
sickly son; the father being an absentee, the mother in an early
grave. She lived long enough, however, to be a repining wife; and my
neighbour, Sir Julius Altham, has more than once hinted to me, that,
of the whole family, the portion of Selina most deserved compassion.

To me, however, her callous conduct towards that gentle sister, always
rendered her the least interesting of my COUNTRY NEIGHBOURS.


TRAVELS OF KERIM KHAN.[3]

    [3] Travels of Kerim Khan; being a narrative of his
    Journey from Delhi to Calcutta, and thence by Sea to
    England: containing his remarks upon the manners,
    customs, laws, constitutions, literature, arts,
    manufactures, &c., of the people of the British Isles.
    Translated from the original Oordu--(MS.)


Among the various signs of the times which mark the changes of manners
in these latter days of the world, not the least remarkable is the
increasing frequency of the visits paid by the natives of the East to
the regions of Europe. Time was, within the memory of most of the
present generation, when the sight of a genuine Oriental in a London
drawing-room, except in the angel visits, "few and far between," of a
Persian or Moorish ambassador, was a rarity beyond the reach of even
the most determined lion-hunters; and if by any fortunate chance a
stray Persian khan, or a "very magnificent three-tailed bashaw," was
brought within the circle of the quidnuncs of the day, the sayings and
doings of the illustrious stranger were chronicled with as much
minuteness as if he had been the denizen of another planet. Every hair
of his beard, every jewel in the hilt of his khanjar, was enumerated
and criticised; while all oriental etiquette was violated by the
constant enquiries addressed to him relative to the number of his
wives, and the economy of his domestic arrangements. "_Mais à present
on a changé tout cela._" The reforms of Sultan Mahmood, the invention
of steam, and the re-opening of the overland route to India, have
combined to effect a mighty revolution in all these points. Osmanlis,
with shaven chins and tight trousers,[4] have long been as plenty as
blackberries in the saloons of the West, eating the flesh of the
unclean beast, quaffing champagne, and even (if we have been rightly
informed) figuring in quadrilles with the moon-faced daughters of the
Franks; and though the natives of the more distant regions of the East
have not yet appeared among us in such number, yet the lamb-skin cap
of the Persian, the _pugree_, or small Indian turban, and even the
queer head-dress of the Parsee, is far from being a stranger in our
assemblies. We doubt whether the name of Akhbar Khan himself,
proclaimed at the foot of a staircase, would excite the same
_sensation_ in the present day, as the announcement of the most
undistinguished wearer of the turban some ten or twenty years ago; but
of the "Tours" and "Narratives" which are usually the inevitable
result of such an influx of pilgrims, our Oriental visitors have as
yet produced hardly their due proportion. For many years, the travels
of Mirza Abu-Talib Khan, a Hindustani[5] Moslem of rank and education,
who visited Europe in the concluding years of the last century, stood
alone as an example of the effect produced on an Asiatic by his
observation of the manners and customs of the West; and even of late
our stock has not been much increased. The journal of the Persian
princes (a translation of which, by their Syrian mehmandar, Assaad
Yakoob Khayat, has been printed in England for private circulation) is
curious, as giving a picture of European ways and manners when viewed
through a purely Asiatic medium; while the remarkably sensible and
well-written narrative of the two Parsees who lately visited this
country for the purpose of instruction in naval architecture,[6]
differs little from the description of the same objects which would be
given by an intelligent and well-educated European, if they could be
presented to him in the aspect of utter novelty. The latest of these
Oriental wanderers in the ungenial climes of Franguestan, is the one
whose name appears at the head of this article, and who, with a rare
and commendable modesty, has preferred introducing himself to the
public under the protecting guidance of Maga, to venturing, alone and
without a pilot, among the perilous rocks and shoals of the critics of
_the Row_; him therefore we shall now introduce, without further
comment, to the favourable notice of our readers.

    [4] _Shalwarlek_--"tight trousers"--was a phrase used,
    under the old Turkish régime, as equivalent to a
    blackguard.

    [5] The Moslems, and other natives of India descended
    from foreign races, are properly called _Hindustanis_,
    while the aborigines are the _Hindus_--a distinction not
    well understood in Europe. The former take their name
    from the country, as _natives of Hindustan_, which has
    derived its own name from the latter, as being the
    _country of the Hindus_.

    [6] Journal of a Residence of Two Years and a Half in
    Great Britain, by Jehangeer Nowrojee and Hirjeebhoy
    Merwanjee of Bombay, Naval Architects. London: 1841.

Of Kerim Khan himself, the writer of his narrative, and of his motives
for daring the perils of the _kala-pani_, (or black water, the Hindi
name for the ocean,) on a visit to Franguestan, we have little
information beyond what can be gathered from the MS. itself. There can
be no doubt, however, that he was a Mussulman gentleman of rank and
consideration, and of information far superior to that of his
countrymen in general; nor does it appear that he was driven, like
Mirza Abu-Talib, by political misfortune, to seek in strange climes
the security which his native land denied him. His narrative commences
abruptly:--"On the 21st of Ramazan, in the year of the Hejra 1255,"
(Dec. 1, A.D. 1839,) "between four and five in the afternoon, I took
leave of the imperial city of Delhi, and proceeded to our boat, which
was at anchor near the Derya Ganj." The voyage down the Jumna, to its
junction with the Ganges at Allahabad, a distance of not more than 550
miles by land, but which the endless windings of the stream increase
to 2010 by water, presents few incidents worthy of notice: but our
traveller observes _par parenthèse_, that "though it is said that the
sources of this river have not been discovered, I have heard from
those who have crossed the Himalaya from China, that it rises in that
country on the other side of the mountains, and, forcing its way
through them, arrives at Bighamber. They say that gold is found there
in large quantities, and the reason they assign is this--the
philosopher's stone is found in that country, and whatever touches it
becomes gold, but the stone itself can never be found!" Near Muttra he
encountered the splendid cortège of Lord Auckland, then returning to
Calcutta after his famous interview with Runjeet Singh at Lahore, with
such a _suwarree_ as must have recalled the pomp and _sultanut_ for
which the memory of Warren Hastings is even yet celebrated among the
natives of India: "his staff and escort, with the civil and military
officers of government in attendance on him, amounted to about 4000
persons, besides 300 elephants and 800 camels." The noble buildings of
Akbarabad or Agra, the capital and residence of Akbar and Shalijehan,
the mightiest and most magnificent of the Mogul emperors, detained the
traveller for a day; and he notices with deserved eulogium the
splendid mausoleum of Shalijehan and his queen, known as the
Taj-Mahal. There is nothing that can be compared with it, and those
who have visited the farthest parts of the globe, have seen nothing
like it.[7] At Allahabad he launched on the broad stream of the
Ganges; and after passing through part of the territory of _Awadh_ or
Oude, the insecurity of life and property in which is strongly
contrasted with the rigid police in the Company's dominions, arrived
in due time at the holy city of Benares, the centre of Hindoo and
Brahminical sanctity.

    [7] Many of our readers must have seen the beautiful
    ivory model of this far-famed edifice, lately exhibited
    in Regent Street, and now, we believe, in the Cambridge
    University museum. It is fortunate that so faithful a
    miniature transcript of the beauties of the Taj is in
    existence, since the original is doomed, as we are
    informed, to inevitable ruin at no distant period, from
    the ravages of the white ants on the woodwork.

The shrines of Benares, with their swarms of sacred monkeys and
Brahminy bulls, were objects of little interest to our Moslem
wayfarer, who on the contrary recounts with visible satisfaction the
destruction of several of these _But Khanas_, or idol-temples, by the
intolerable bigotry of Aurungzib, and the erection of mosques on their
sites. Among the objects of attraction in the environs of the city, he
particularly notices a famous footprint[8] upon stone, called the
_Kadmsherif_, or holy mark, deposited in a mosque near the serai of
Aurungabad, and said to have been brought from Mekka by Sheik Mohammed
Ali Hazin, whom the translator of his interesting autobiography
(published in 1830 by the Oriental Society) has made known to the
British public, up to the period when the tyranny of Nadir Shah drove
him from Persia. "Here, during his lifetime, he used to go sometimes
on a Thursday, and give alms to the poor in the name of God. He was a
very learned and accomplished man; and his writings, both in prose and
verse, were equal to those of Zahiri and Naziri. When he first came to
India, he resided for some years at Delhi; but having had some dispute
with the poet-laureate of the Emperor Mohammed Shah, he found himself
under the necessity of retiring to Benares, where he lived in great
privacy. As he was a stranger in the country, was engaged in no
calling or profession, and received no allowance from the Emperor, it
was never known whence, or how, he was supplied with the means of
keeping up the establishment he did, which consisted of some hundred
servants, palanquins, horses, &c. It is said that when the Nawab
Shujah-ed-dowlah projected his attack on the English in Bengal, he
consulted the Sheik on the subject, who strongly dissuaded him from
the undertaking. He died shortly after the battle of Buxar in 1180,"
(A.D. 1766.) The battle of Buxar was fought Oct. 23, 1764; but that
Sheik Ali Hazin died somewhere about this time, seems more probable
than that his life was extended (as stated by Sir Gore Ouseley) till
1779; since he describes himself at the conclusion of his memoirs in
1742, when only in his 53d year, as "leading the dullest course of
existence in the dullest of all dull countries, and disabled by his
increasing infirmities from any active exertion of either body or
mind"--a state of things scarcely promising a prolongation of life to
the age of ninety.

    [8] These sacred footmarks are more numerous among the
    Buddhists than the Moslems--the most celebrated is that
    on the summit of Adam's Peak, in Ceylon.

Resuming his voyage from Benares, the Khan notices with wonder the
apparition of the steamers plying between Calcutta and Allahabad,
several of which he met on his course, and regarded with the
astonishment natural in one who had never before seen a ship impelled,
apparently by smoke, against wind and tide:--"I need hardly say how
intensely I watched every movement of this extraordinary, and to me
incomprehensible machine, which in its passage created such a vast
commotion in the waters, that my poor little _budjrow_ (pinnace) felt
its effects for the space of full two _hos_," (nearly four miles.) The
picturesque situation of the city of Azimabad or Patna,[9] extending
for several miles along the right bank of the Ganges, with the villas
and beautiful gardens of the resident English interspersed among the
houses, is described in terms of high admiration; and the mosques,
some of which were as old as the time of the Patan emperors, are not
forgotten by our Moslem traveller in his enumeration of the marvels of
the city. A few days' more boating brought him to Rajmahal; "on one
side of which," says he, "the country is called Bengal, and on the
other _Poorb_, or the East"--a name from which the independent dynasty
of Moslem kings, who once ruled in Bengal, assumed the appellation of
_Poorby-Shaby_. He was now among the rice-fields, the extent and
luxuriance of which surprised him: "There are a great variety of
sorts, and if a man were to take a grain of each sort he might soon
fill a _lota_ (water-pot) with them--so innumerable are the different
kinds. The cultivators who have measured the largest species, have
declared them to exceed the length of fifty cubits; but I have never
seen any of this length, though others may have." He now entered the
Bhagirutti, or branch of the Ganges leading to Calcutta, and which
bears in the lower part of its course the better known name of the
Hoogly--while the main stream to the left is again subdivided into
innumerable ramifications, the greater part of which lose themselves
among the vast marshes of the Sunderbunds; but he complains, that
"though by this branch large vessels and steamers pass up and down to
and from the Presidency, the route is very bad, from the extensive
jungles on both banks, which are haunted by Thugs and _Decoits_,
(river pirates:)--indeed I have heard and read, that the shores of the
Ganges have been infested by freebooters, pirates, and thieves of all
sorts, from time immemorial." He escaped unharmed, however, through
these manifold perils; and passing Murshidabad, the ancient capital of
Bengal, and other places of less note, his remarks upon which we shall
not stay to quote, reached the ghauts of Calcutta in safety.

    [9] Most of the principal cities of India, in addition
    to the ancient name by which they are popularly known,
    have another imposed by the Moslems:--thus Agra is
    Akbarabad, _the residence of Akbar_--Delhi,
    Shahjehanabad; and Patna, Azimabad. In some instances,
    as Dowlutabad in the Dekkan, the Hindu name of which is
    Deogiri, the Mohammedan appellation has superseded the
    ancient name; but, generally speaking, the latter is
    that in common use.

A place so often described as the "City of Palaces," presents little
that is novel in the narrative of the khan; but he does full justice
to the splendour of the architecture, which he says "exceeds that of
_China or Ispahan_--a superiority which arises from the immense sums
which every governor-general has laid out upon public works, and in
improving and adorning the city: the Marquis Wellesley, in particular,
expended lakhs of rupees in this way." The account which he gives,
however, from a Mahommedan writer, of the disputes with the Mogul
government which led to the transference of the British factory and
commerce from its original seat at Hoogly to _Kali-kata_,[10] or
Calcutta, differs considerably from that given by the British
historians, if we are to suppose the events here alluded to (the date
of which the khan does not mention) to be those which occurred in 1686
and 1687, when Charnock defended the factory at Hoogly against the
Imperial deputy, Shaista Khan. Our traveller's version of these
occurrences is, that the factories of the English, which were then
established on the Ghol Ghaut at Hoogly, having been overthrown by an
earthquake, "Mr Charnock, the head officer of the factory, purchasing
a garden called Banarasi, had the trees cut down, and commenced a new
building. But while it was in progress, the principal Mogul merchants
and inhabitants laid a complaint before Meer Nasir, the _foujdar_,
(chief of police,) that their houses and harems would be overlooked,
and great scandal occasioned, if the strangers should be allowed to
erect such lofty buildings in the midst of the city.[11] The complaint
was referred by the foujdar to the nawab, who forthwith issued orders
for the discontinuance of the works, which were accordingly abandoned.
The Company's agent, though highly offended at this arbitrary
proceeding, was unable to resist it, having only one ship and a few
sepoys; and, in spite of the efforts of the foujdar to dissuade him,
he embarked with all his goods, and set sail for the peninsula," (qu.
Indjeli?) "having first set fire to such houses as were near the
river. At this time, however, the Emperor Aurungzib was in the
Carnatic, beleaguered by the Mahrattas, who had cut off all supplies
from his camp; and the Company's agent in that country, hearing of
this, sent a large quantity of grain, which had been recently imported
for their own use, for the relief of the army. Having thus gained the
favour and protection of the Asylum of the World, the English were not
only permitted to build factories in various parts of the country, but
were exempted from the duties formerly laid on their goods. Charnock
returned to Bengal with the emperor's firman; and the nawab, seeing
how matters stood, withdrew his opposition to the erection of the
factory at Hoogly. The English, however, preferred another situation,
and chose Calcutta, where a building was soon erected, the same which
is now called the old fort." This account, which is in fact more
favourable to the English than that given by their own writers, is the
only notice of these transactions we have ever found from a Mahommedan
author; for so small was the importance attached by the Moguls to
these obscure squabbles with a few Frank merchants, that even the
historian Khafi-Khan, who acted as the emperor's representative for
settling the differences which broke out about the same time in
Bombay, makes no allusion to the simultaneous rupture in Bengal.

    [10] "So called from _Kali_, the Hindu goddess, and
    _kata_, laughter; because human victims were formerly
    here sacrificed to her."

    [11] From the sanctity attached by Oriental ideas to the
    privacy of the harem, it is a high crime and
    misdemeanour, punishable by law in all Moslem countries,
    to erect buildings overlooking the residence of a
    neighbour. At Constantinople, there is an officer called
    the Minar Aga, or superintendent of edifices, whose
    especial duty it is to prevent this.

Our author, like Bishop Heber,[12] and other travellers on the same
route, is struck by the contrast between the robust and well-fed
peasantry of Hindustan Proper, and the puny rice-eaters of Bengal;
"who eat fish, boiled rice, bitter oil; and an infinite variety of
vegetables; but of wheaten or barley bread, and of pulse, they know
not the taste, nor of mutton, fowl, or _ghee_, (clarified butter.) The
author of the _Riaz-es-Selatin_, is indeed of opinion that such food
does not suit their constitutions, and would make them ill if they
were to eat it"--an invaluable doctrine to establish in dieting a
pauper population! "As to their dress, they have barely enough to
cover them--only a piece of cloth, called a _dhoti_, wrapped round
their loins, while their head-dress consists of a dirty rag rolled two
or three times round the temples, and leaving the crown bare. But the
natives of Hindustan, and even their descendants to the second and
third generation, always wear the _jamah_, or long muslin robe, out of
doors, though in the house they adopt the Bengali custom. The author
of the _Kholasat-al Tow[=a]rikh_, (an historical work,) says that both
men and women formerly went naked; and no doubt he is right, for they
can hardly be said to do otherwise now." Such are the peasants of
Bengal--a race differing from the natives of Hindustan in language,
manners, food, dress, and personal appearance; but who, from their
vicinity to the seat of the English Supreme Government, have served as
models for the descriptions given by many superficial travellers, as
applying to all the natives of British India, without distinction! The
horrible Hindu custom of immersing the sick, when considered past
recovery, in the Ganges, and holding their lower limbs under water
till they expire,[13] excites, as may be expected, the disgust of the
khan; but the reason which he assigns for it, "the belief of these
people, that if a man die in his own house, he would cause the death
of every member of the family by assuming the form of a _bhut_ or evil
spirit," is new to us, and appears to be analogous to the
superstitious dread entertained by the Greeks and Sclavonians, of a
corpse reanimated into a _Vroucolochas_, or vampire. "But if a man
escapes from their hands, and recovers after this treatment, he is
shunned by every one; and there are many villages in Bengal, called
_villages of the dead_, inhabited by men who have thus escaped death;
they are considered dead to society, and no other persons will dwell
in the same villages."

    [12] "Almost immediately on leaving Allahabad," (on his
    way from Calcutta to the Upper Provinces,) "I was struck
    with the appearance of the men, as tall and muscular as
    the largest stature of Europeans; and with the fields of
    _wheat_, almost the only cultivation."--Heber's Journal,
    vol. iii. "Some of our boatmen passing through a field
    of Indian corn, plucked two or three ears, certainly not
    enough to constitute a theft, or even a trespass. Two of
    the men, however, who were watching, ran after them, not
    as the Bengalis would have done, to complain with joined
    hands, but with stout bamboos, prepared to do themselves
    justice _par voye de faict_. The men saved themselves by
    swimming off to the boat; but my servants called out to
    them--'Ah! dandee folk, beware, you are now in
    Hindustan; the people here know well how to fight, and
    are not afraid.'"

    [13] "I told his (Pertab Chund's) father, that it was
    wrong to keep him where he then was, and he told me to
    take him down to the river. He was lifted up on his
    bedding; his speech was not very distinct at that time,
    but sufficiently so to call on the name of his T'hakoor,
    (spiritual guide,) which he did as desired; he then
    began to shiver, and complained of being very cold. I
    was one of those who went with the rajah to the river
    side. Jago Mohun Dobee pressed his legs under the water,
    and kept them so; and about 10 p.m. his soul quitted the
    body. When he died, his knees were under water, but the
    rest of his body above." Evidence of Radha Sircar and
    Sham Chum Baboo, before the Mofussil Court of Hoogly,
    September 1838, in the enquiry on the impostor
    Kistololl, who personated the deceased Pertab.

The stay of the khan in Calcutta was prolonged for more than a month,
during which time he rented a house from a native proprietor in the
quarter of Kolitolla. While removing his effects from his boat to
this residence, he became involved in a dispute with the police, in
consequence of the violation by his servants, through ignorance, of
the regulation which forbids persons from the Upper Provinces to enter
the city armed; but this unintentional infringement of orders was
easily explained and arranged by the intervention of an European
friend, and the arms, of which the police had taken possession, were
restored. While engaged in preparing for his voyage, the khan made the
best use of his time in visiting the public buildings, and other
objects of interest, among which he particularly notices the _minar_
or column erected in the _maidan_, (square,) near the viceregal palace
of the Nawab Governor-General Bahadur, by a subscription among the
officers of the army, native as well as English, to the memory of the
late Sir David Ochterlony; but rates it, with truth, as greatly
inferior, both in dimensions and beauty, to the famous pillar of the
Kootb-Minar near Delhi. The colossal fortifications of Fort-William
are also duly commemorated; "they resemble an embankment externally,
but when viewed from within are exceedingly high--no foe could
penetrate within them, much less reach the treasures and magazines in
the interior." Our traveller also visited the English courts of
justice, in the proceedings of which he seems to have taken great
interest, and was apparently treated with much hospitality by many of
the European functionaries and other residents, by whom he was
furnished with numerous letters of introduction, as well as receiving
much information respecting the manners and customs of _Ingilistan_,
or England. The choice of a ship, and the selection of sea-stock, were
of course matters of grave consideration, and the more so from the
peculiar unfitness of the habits and religious scruples of an Indian
Moslem for the privations unavoidable at sea; but a passage was at
last taken for the khan and his two servants on board the Edinburgh of
1400 tons, and it being agreed that he should find his own provisions,
to obviate all mistakes on the score of forbidden food, and the
captain promising moreover that his comforts should be carefully
attended to, this weighty negotiation was at length concluded. It is
due to the khan to say, that whether from being better equipped, or
from being endued with more philosophy and forbearance than his
compatriot, Mirza Abu-Talib Khan, (to whom we have above referred,) he
seems to have reconciled himself to the hardships of the _kala-pani_,
or ocean, with an exceedingly good grace; and we find none of the
complaints which fill the pages of the Mirza against the impurity of
his food, the impossibility of performing his ablutions in appointed
time and manner, and sundry other abominations by which he was so
grievously afflicted, that at a time of danger to the vessel, "though
many of the passengers were much alarmed, I, for my own part, was so
weary of life that I was perfectly indifferent to my fate." Abu-Talib,
however, sailed in an ill-regulated Danish ship; and in summing up the
horrors of the sea, he strongly recommends his countrymen, if
compelled to brave its miseries, to embark in none but an English
vessel.

During the last days of the khan's sojourn in Calcutta, he witnessed
the splendid celebration of the rites of the Mohurrum, when the
slaughter of the brother Imams, Hassan and Hussein, the martyred
grandsons of the Prophet, is lamented by all sects of the faithful,
but more especially by the _Rafedhis_ or Sheahs, the followers of Ali,
"of whom there are many in Calcutta, though they are less numerous
than the orthodox sect or Sunnis, from whom they are distinguished, at
this season, by wearing black as mourning. At the _Baitak-Khana_ (a
quarter of Calcutta) we witnessed the splendid procession of the
_Tazîya_,[14] with the banners and flags flying, and the wailers
beating their breasts."... "It is the custom here, at this season, for
all the natch-girls (dancers) to sit in the streets of the
Chandnibazar, under canopies decorated with wreaths and flowers in
the most fantastic manner, and sell sweetmeats, cardamums, betelnuts,
&c., upon stalls, displaying their charms to the passers-by. I took a
turn here one evening with five others, and found crowds of people
collected, both strangers and residents: nor do they ordinarily
disperse till long after midnight." On the second day after his visit
to this scene of gaiety, he received notice that the ship was ready
for sea; and on the 8th of Mohurrum 1256, (March 13, 1840,) he
accordingly embarked with his baggage and servants on board the
Edinburgh, which was towed in seven days, by a steamer, down the river
to Saugor; and the pilot quitting her the next day at the floating
light. "I now found myself," (says the khan,) "for the first time in
my life, in the great ocean, where nothing was to be seen around but
sky and water."

    [14] _Tazîya_, literally _grief_, is an ornamental
    shrine erected in Moslem houses during the Mohurrum, and
    intended to represent the mausoleum of Hassan and
    Hussein, at Kerbelah in Persia. On the 10th and last day
    of the mourning, the tazîyas are carried in procession
    to the outside of the city, and finally deposited with
    funeral rites in the burying-grounds.--See _Mrs Meer
    Hassan Ali's_ Observations on the Mussulmans of India.
    Letter I.

The account of a voyage at sea, as given by an Oriental, is usually
the most deplorable of narratives--filled with exaggerated fears, the
horrors of sea-sickness, and endless lamentations of the evil fate of
the writer, in being exposed to such a complication of miseries. Of
the wailing of Mirza Abu-Talib we have already given a specimen: and
the Persian princes, even in the luxurious comfort of an English
Mediterranean steamer, seem to have fared but little better, in their
own estimation at least, than the Mirza in his dirty and disorderly
Danish merchantman. "Our bones cried, 'Alas! for this evil there is no
remedy.' We were vomiting all the time, and thus afflicted with
incurable evils, in the midst of a sea which appears without end, the
state of my health bad, the sufferings of my brothers very great, and
no hope of being saved, we became most miserable." Such is the naïve
exposition of his woes, by H. R. H. Najaf Kooli Mirza; but Kerim Khan
appears, both physically and morally, to have been made of different
metal. Ere he had been two days on board we find him remarking--"I had
by this time made some acquaintance among the passengers, and began to
find my situation less irksome and lonely;" shortly afterwards
adding--"The annoyances inseparable from this situation were relieved,
in some measure, by the music and dancing going on every day except
Sundays, owing to the numerous party of passengers, both gentlemen and
ladies, whom we had on board--seeing which, a man forgets his griefs
and troubles in the general mirth around him." So popular, indeed,
does the khan appear already to have become, that the captain, finding
that he had hitherto abstained from the use of his pipe, that great
ingredient in Oriental comfort, from an idea that smoking was
prohibited on board, "instantly sent for my hookah, had it properly
prepared for me, and insisted on my not relinquishing this luxury, the
privation of which he knew would occasion me considerable
inconvenience." In other respects, also, he seems to have been not
less happily constituted; for though he says that "the rolling and
rocking of the ship, when it entered the _dark waters_ or open sea,
completely upset my two companions, who became extremely sick"--his
remarks on the incidents of the voyage, and the novel phenomena which
presented themselves to his view, are never interrupted by any of
those pathetic lamentations on the instability of the human stomach,
which form so important and doleful an episode in the relations of
most landsmen, of whatever creed or nation.

The commencement of the voyage was prosperous; and the ship ran to the
south before a fair wind, interrupted only by a few days of partial
calm, till it reached the latitude of Ceylon, where the appearance of
the flying fish excited the special wonder of the khan, who was by
this time beginning, under the tuition of his fellow passengers, to
make some progress in the English language, and had even attempted to
fathom some of the mysteries of the science of navigation; "but though
I took the sextant which the captain handed me, and held it precisely
as he had done, I could make nothing of it." The regular performance
of the Church service on Sundays, and the cessation on that day from
the ordinary amusements, is specially noticed on several occasions,
and probably made a deeper impression on the mind of our Moslem
friend, from the popular belief current in India that the _Feringhis_
are men _of no caste_, without religious faith or ceremonies--a belief
which the conduct and demeanour of the Anglo-Indians in past times
tended, in too many instances, to confirm. Off the southern extremity
of Ceylon, the ship was again becalmed for several days; but the
tedium of this interval was relieved, not only by the ordinary sea
incidents of the capture of a shark and the appearance of a whale,
(the zoological distinctions between which and the true fishes are
stated by the khan with great correctness,) but by the occurrence of a
mutiny on board an English vessel in company, which was fortunately
quelled by the exertions of the captain of the Edinburgh.

"The spicy gales of Ceylon," blowing off the coast to the distance, as
stated, of fifty miles, (an extremely moderate range when compared
with the accounts of some other travellers,) at last brought on their
wings the grateful announcement of the termination of the calm; but
before quitting the vicinity of this famous island, (more celebrated
in eastern story under the name of Serendib,) the khan gives some
notices of the legends connected with its history, which show a more
extended acquaintance with Hindu literature than the Moslems in India
in general take the trouble of acquiring. Among the rest he alludes to
the epic of the Ramayuna, and the bridge built by Rama (or as he calls
him, Rajah Ram Chunder) for the passage of the monkey army and their
redoubled general, Huniman, from the Indian continent into the island,
in order to deliver from captivity Seeta, the wife of the hero. The
wind still continuing favourable, the ship quickly passed the equator,
and the pole-star was no longer visible--"a proof of the earth's
sphericity which I was glad to have had an opportunity of seeing;" and
they left, at a short distance to the right, the islands of Mauritius
and Bourbon, "which are not far from the great island of Madagascar,
where the faithful turn their faces to the north when they pray, as
they turn them to the west in India," the _kiblah_, or point of
direction, being in both cases the kaaba, or temple of Mekka. They
were now approaching the latitude of the Cape; and our voyager was
astonished by the countless multitudes of sea-birds which surrounded
the ship, and particularly by the giant bulk of the albatrosses,
"which I was told remained day and night on the ocean, repairing to
the coast of Africa only at the period of incubation." The Cape of
Storms, however, as it was originally named by Vasco de Gama, did not
fail on this occasion to keep up its established character for bad
weather. A severe gale set in from the east, which speedily increased
to a storm. A sailor fell from "the third stage of the mainmast," (the
main topgallant yard,) and was killed on the deck; and as the
inhospitable shores of Africa were close under their lee, the ship
appears for some time to have been in considerable danger. But in this
(to him) novel scene of peril, the khan manifests a degree of
self-possession, strongly contrasting with the timidity of the royal
grandsons of Futteh Ali Shah, the expression of whose fears during a
gale is absolutely ludicrous. "We were so miserable that we gave up
all hope; we gave up our souls, and began to beseech God for
forgiveness; while the wind continued increasing, and all the waves of
the western sea rose up in mountains, with never-ceasing noise, till
they reached the planets." Even after the violence of the hurricane
had in some measure abated, the sea continued to run so high that the
ports were kept closed for several days. "At last, however, they were
opened for the purpose of ventilating the interior; and the band,
which had been silent for some days, began to play again." The
appearance of a water-spout on the same afternoon is thus
described:--"An object became visible in the distance, in the form of
a minaret, and every one on board crowded on deck to look at it. On
asking what it was, I was told that what appeared to be a minaret was
only water, which was drawn up towards the heavens by the force of the
wind, and when this ceased would fall again into the sea, and was what
we should call a whirlwind. This is sometimes extremely dangerous to
vessels, since, if it reaches them, it is so powerful as to draw them
out of the sea in the same manner as it draws up the water; in
consequence of which many ships have been lost when they have been
overtaken by this wonderful phenomenon."

The storm was succeeded by a calm, which detained the ship for two
days within sight of the lofty mountains near the Cape. "It was
bitterly cold, for the seasons are here reversed, and instead of
summer, as we should have expected, it was now the depth of winter.
At length, however, (on the 69th day after our leaving Calcutta,) a
strong breeze sprung up, which enabled us to set all sail, and carried
us away from this table-land." The run from the Cape to St Helena
seems to have been barren of incident, except an accidental encounter
with a vessel in distress, which proved to be a slaver which had been
captured by an English cruiser, and had sustained serious damage in
the late storm while proceeding to the Cape with a prize crew. On
approaching St Helena, the captain "gave orders for the ship to be
painted, both inside and out, that the people of the island might not
say we came in a dirty ship; and as we neared the land, a white flag
was hoisted to apprise those on shore that there was no one ill on
board. In cases of sickness a yellow flag is displayed, and then no
one is permitted to land from the ship for fear of contagion. The
island is about twenty-six miles in circuit, and is constantly
enveloped in fog and mist. It is said to have been formerly a volcano,
but has now ceased to smoke. The vegetation is luxuriant, but few of
the flowers are fragrant. I recognised some, however, both flowers and
fruits, which seemed similar to those of India. I took the opportunity
of landing with the captain to see the town, which is small, but
extremely well fortified, the cannon being so numerous that one might
suppose the whole island one immense iron-foundery. It is populous,
the inhabitants being chiefly Jews and English; but as it was Sunday,
and all the shops were shut, it had a dull appearance. After surveying
the town, I ascended a hill in the country, leading to the tomb of
Napoleon Bonaparte, which is on an elevated spot, four miles from the
town.

"This celebrated personage was a native of Corsica; and enjoying a
fortunate horoscope, he entered the French army, and speedily rose to
the rank of general; and afterwards, with the consent of the people
and the soldiery, made himself emperor. After this he conquered
several kingdoms, and the fame of his prowess and his victories filled
all the European world. When he invaded Russia, he defeated the
Muscovites in several great battles, and took their capital; but, in
consequence of the intensity of the cold, several thousands of his
army both men and horses, perished miserably. This catastrophe obliged
him to return to France, where he undertook the conquest of another
country. At this time George III. reigned in England; and having
collected all the disposable forces of his kingdom, appointed Lord
Wellington (the same general who was employed in the war against
Tippoo Sultan in Mysore) to command them, and sent him to combat the
French Emperor. He entered Spain, and forced the Emperor's brother,
Yusuf, (Joseph,) who was king of that country, to fly--till after a
variety of battles and incidents, too numerous to particularize, the
two hostile armies met at a place called by the English Waterloo,
where a bloody battle was fought, as famous as that of P[=a]sh[=a]n,
between Sohrab and the hero Rustan: and Napoleon was overthrown and
made prisoner. He was then sent, though in a manner suitable to his
rank, to this island of St Helena, where, after a few years, he
finished his earthly career. His tomb is much visited by all who touch
at the island, and has become a _durgah_ (shrine) for innumerable
visitors from Europe. There are persons appointed to take care of it,
who give to strangers, in consideration of a small present, the leaves
and flowers of the trees which grow round the tomb. No other Emperor
of the Europeans was ever so honoured as to have had his tomb made a
shrine and place of pilgrimage: nor was ever one so great a conqueror,
or so renowned for his valour and victories."

The remainder of the voyage from St Helena to England was apparently
marked by no incident worthy of mention, as the khan notices only the
reappearance of the pole-star on their crossing the line, and
re-entering the northern hemisphere, and their reaching once more the
latitude of Delhi, "which we now passed many thousand miles to our
right; after which nothing of importance occurred till we reached the
British Channel, when we saw the Scilly Isles in the distance, and
about noon caught a glimpse of the Lizard Point, and the south coast
of England, together with the lighthouse: the country of the French
lay on our right at the distance of about eighty miles. I was given
to understand that the whole distance from St Helena to London, by the
ship's reckoning, was 6328 miles, and 16,528 from Calcutta." In the
Downs the pilot came on board, from whom they received the news of the
attempt recently made by Oxford on the life of the Queen; and here the
captain, anxious to lose no time in reaching London, quitted the
vessel as it entered the Thames, "the sources of which famous river, I
was informed, were near a place called Cirencester, eighty-eight miles
from London, in the _zillah_ (county) of Gloucester." The ship was now
taken in tow by a couple of steam-tugs, and passing Woolwich, "where
are the war-ships and _top-khana_ (arsenal) of the English Padishah,
at length reached Blackwall, where we anchored."

"I now (continues the khan) returned thanks to God for having
brought me safe through the wide ocean to this extraordinary
country--bethinking myself of the answer once made by a man who had
undertaken a voyage, on being asked by his friends what he had seen
most wonderful--'The greatest wonder I have seen is seeing myself
alive on land!'" The troubles of the khan, however, were far from
being ended by his arrival on _terra firma_: for apparently from
some mistake or inadvertence, (the cause of which does not very
clearly appear,) on the part of the friends whom he had expected to
meet him, he found himself, on landing at Blackwall and proceeding
by the railway to London, left alone by the person who had thus far
been his guide, in apartments near Cornhill, almost wholly
unacquainted with the English language, separated from his baggage
and servants, who were still on board the Edinburgh, and with no one
in his company but another Hindustani, as little versed as himself
in the ways and speech of Franguestan. In this "considerable
unhandsome fix," as it would be called on the other side of the
Atlantic, the perplexities of the khan are related with such
inimitable naïveté and good-humour, that we cannot do better than
give the account of them in his own words. "As I could neither ask
for any thing, nor answer any question put to me, I passed the whole
night without a morsel of food or a drop of water: till in the
morning, feeling hungry, I requested my companion to go to some
bazar and buy some fruit. He replied that it would be impossible for
him either to find his way to a bazar through the crowds of people,
or to find his way back again--as all the houses were so much alike.
I then told him to go straight on in the street we were in, turning
neither to the right nor the left till he met with some shop where
we might get what we wanted: and, in order to direct him to the
place on his return, I agreed to lean half out of the window, so
that he could not fail to see me. No sooner, however, did he sally
forth, than the people, men, women, and children, began to stare at
him on all sides, as if he had dropped from the moon; some stopped
and gazed, and numbers followed him as if he had been a criminal
about being led to execution. Nor was I in a more enviable position:
the people soon caught sight of me with my head and shoulders out of
the window; and in a few minutes a mob had collected opposite the
door. What was I to do? If I withdrew myself, my friend on returning
would have no mark to find the house, while, if I remained where I
was, the curiosity of the crowd would certainly increase. I kept my
post, however, while every one that passed stopped and gazed like
the rest, till there was actually no room for vehicles to pass; and
in this unpleasant situation I remained fully an hour, when seeing
my friend returning, I went down and opened the door for him. He
told me he had gone straight on, till he came to a fruit-shop, at
the corner of another street, when he went in, and laying two
shillings on the counter, said in Oordu, (the polished dialect of
Hindustani,) 'Give me some fruit.' The shopman, not understanding
him, spoke to him in English; to which he replied again in Oordu, 'I
want some fruit!' pointing at the same time to the money, to signify
that he wanted two shillings' worth of fruit. The man, however,
continued confounded; and my friend at last, not knowing of what
sort the fruits were, whether sour or sweet, bitter or otherwise,
ventured, after much hesitation and fruitless attempts to
communicate with the shopman by signs and gestures, to take up four
apples, and then made his retreat in the best manner he could,
followed, as here, by the rabble. I at last caught a glimpse of him,
as I have mentioned, and let him in; and we sat down together, and
breakfasted on these four apples, my friend taking two of them, and
I the others."

It must be admitted that our khan's first meal in England, and the
concomitant circumstances, were not calculated to impress him with a
very high idea, either of the comforts of the country or the
politeness of the inhabitants; but the unruffled philosophy with which
he submitted to these untoward privations was, ere-long, rewarded by
the arrival of the East India agent to whose care he had been
recommended, and who, after putting him in the way of getting his
servants and luggage on shore from the vessel, took him out in a
carriage to show him the metropolis. "It was, indeed, wonderful in
every point of view, whether I regarded the immense population, the
dresses and faces of the men and women, the multitudes of houses,
churches, &c., and the innumerable carriages running in streets paved
with stone and wood, (the width and openness of which seem to expand
the heart,) and confining themselves to the middle of the road,
without overturning any of the foot-passengers." The cathedral of St
Paul's is described with great minuteness of detail, and the expense
of its erection stated at seventy-three lakhs of rupees, (about
L.750,000;) "but I have heard that if a similar edifice were erected
in the present day, it would cost four times as much, as the cost of
every thing has increased in at least that proportion."

The difficulties of the khan, from his ignorance of the language, and
Moslem scruples at partaking of food not dressed by his own people,
were not yet, however, at an end. For though, on returning to his
lodging in the evening, he found that his friend had succeeded in
procuring from the ship a dish of _kichiri_, (an Indian mess, composed
of rice and _ghee_, or clarified butter,) his inability to communicate
with his landlady still occasioned him considerable perplexity.
"Having ventured to take some pickles, which I saw on the sideboard,
and finding them palatable, I sent for the landlady, and tried to
explain to her by signs, pointing to the bottles, that I wanted
something like what they contained. Alas, for my ignorance! She
thought I wished them taken out of the room, and so walked off with
them, leaving me in the utmost astonishment. How was I to get it back
again? it was the only thing I had to relish my _kichiri_. I had,
therefore, recourse to this expedient--I got an apple and pared it,
putting the parings in a bottle with water; and showing this to the
landlady, intimated, by signs, that I wanted something like it to eat
with my rice. She asked many questions in English, and talked a great
deal, from which I inferred that she had at last discovered my
meaning, but five minutes had hardly elapsed when she re-appeared,
bearing in her hand a bottle of water, filled with apple-parings cut
in the nicest manner imaginable! This she placed on the table in the
most respectful manner, and then retired!"

The good lady, however, conceiving that her guest was in danger of
perishing with hunger, was benevolently importunate with him to
partake of some nourishment, or at least of some tea and toast, "since
it is the custom in this country for every one to eat five times
a-day, and some among the wealthy are not satisfied even with this!"
The arrival of an English acquaintance, who explained to the landlady
the religious prejudices of her lodger, in some measure relieved him
from his embarrassment; but he was again totally disconcerted, by
finding it impossible, after a long search, to procure any _ghee_--an
ingredient indispensable in the composition of every national dish of
India, whether Moslem or Hindu. "How shall I express my astonishment
at this extraordinary ignorance? What! do they not know what _ghee_
is? Wonderful! This was a piece of news I never expected--that what
abounds in every little wretched village in India, could not be
purchased in this great city!" How this unforeseen deficiency was
supplied does not appear; but probably the khan's never-failing
philosophy enabled him to bear even this unparalleled privation with
equanimity, as we hear no further complaints on the subject. He did
not remain, however, many days in those quarters, finding that the
incessant noise of the vehicles passing day and night deprived him of
sleep; and, by the advice of his friends, he took a small house in St
John's Wood, where he was at once at a distance from the intolerable
clamour of the streets, and at liberty to live after the fashion of
his own country.

The first place of public resort to which he directed his steps,
appears to have been the Pantheon bazar in Oxford Street, whither the
familiar name perhaps attracted him--"for the term _bazar_ is in use
also among the people of this country;" but he does not appear to have
been particularly struck by any thing he saw there, except the
richness and variety of the wares. On the contrary, he complains of
the want of fragrance in the flowers in the conservatory, particularly
the roses, as compared with those of his native land--"there was _one_
plantain-tree which seemed to be regarded as a sort of wonder, though
thousands grow in our gardens without any sort of culture." The
presence of the female attendants at the stalls, a sight completely at
variance with Asiatic ideas, is also noticed with marked
disapprobation--"Most of them were young and handsome, and seemed
perfect adepts in the art of selling their various wares; but I could
not help reflecting, on seeing so many fine young women engaged in
this degrading occupation, on the ease and comfort enjoyed by our
females, compared to the drudgery and servile employment to which the
sex are subjected in this country. Notwithstanding all the English say
of the superior condition of their women, it is quite evident, from
all I have seen since my arrival, that their social state is far below
that of our females." This sentiment is often repeated in the course
of the narrative, and any one who has read, in the curious work of Mrs
Meer Hassan Ali, quoted above, an account of the strict domestic
seclusion in which Moslem females having any pretensions to rank, or
even respectability, are constantly retained in India, will not be
surprised at the frequent expression of repugnance, whenever the
writer sees women engaged in any public or out-of-doors occupation--a
custom so abhorrent to Oriental, and, above all, to Indian ideas.

We next find the khan in the Zoological Gardens, his matter-of-fact
description of which affords an amusing contrast with that of those
veracious scions of Persian royalty, who luxuriate in "elephant birds
just like an elephant, but without the proboscis, and with wings
fifteen yards long"--"an elephant twenty-four feet high, with a trunk
forty feet long;" and who assure us that "the monkeys act like human
beings, and play at chess with those who visit the gardens. On this
day a Jew happened to be at this place, and went to play a game with
the monkey. The monkey beat, and began to laugh loudly, all the people
standing round him; and the Jew, exceedingly abashed, was obliged to
leave the place." The khan, in common with ourselves, and the
generality of visitors to the Regent's Park, was not fortunate enough
to witness any of the wondrous feats which gladdened the royal eyes of
the Shahzadehs--though he saw some of the apes, meaning the
orang-outan, "drink tea and coffee, sit on chairs, and eat their food
like human beings." * * *

"There is no island or kingdom," (he continues,) "which has not
contributed its specimens of the animal kingdom to these gardens: from
the elephant and rhinoceros, to the fly and the mosquito, all are to
be seen here"--but not even the giraffes, strange as their appearance
must have been to him, attract any particular notice; though the sight
of the exotics in the garden draws from him a repetition of his old
complaint, relative to the want of fragrance in the flowers as
compared with those produced under the genial sun of India. The
ceremony of the prorogation of Parliament by the Queen in person was
now at hand, and the khan determined to be present at this imposing
scene. But as he takes this opportunity to introduce his observations
and opinions on the laws and customs of this country, we shall
postpone to our next Number the discussion of these weighty subjects.


THE THIRTEENTH.

A TALE OF DOOM.


It was on a sultry July evening that a joyous party of young men were
assembled in the principal room of a wine house, outside the Potsdam
gate of Berlin. One of their number, a Saxon painter, by name Carl
Solling, was about to take his departure for Italy. His place was
taken in the Halle mail, his luggage sent to the office, and the coach
was to call for him at midnight at the tavern, whither a number of his
most intimate friends had accompanied him, to drink a parting glass of
Rhenish wine to his prosperous journey.

Supper was over, and some magnificent melons, and peaches, and plates
of caviare, and other incentives to drinking, placed upon the table; a
row of empty bottles already graced the sideboard, while full ones of
that venerable cobweb-mantle appearance, so dear to the toper, were
forthcoming as rapidly as the thirstiest throats could desire. The
conviviality was at its height, and numerous toasts had been given,
among which the health of the traveller, the prosperity of the art
which he cultivated, and of the land of poetry and song to which he
was proceeding, had not been forgotten. Indeed, it was becoming
difficult to find any thing to toast, but the thirst of the party was
still unquenched, and apparently unquenchable.

Suddenly a young man started up, in dress and appearance the very
model of a German student--in short frock coat and loose sacklike
trousers, long curling hair hanging over his shoulders, pointed beard
and mustache, and the scars of one or two sabre cuts on his handsome
animated countenance.

"You want a toast, my friends!" cried he. "An excuse to drink, as
though drinking needed an excuse when the wine is good. I will give
you one, and a right worthy one too. Our noble selves here assembled;
all, so many as we are!" And he glanced round the table, counting the
number of the guests. "One, two, three, four--thirteen. We are
Thirteen. _Es lebe die Dreizehn!_"

He raised his glass, in which the golden liquor flashed and sparkled,
and set it down, drained to the last drop.

"_Thirteen!_" exclaimed a pale-faced, dark-eyed youth named Raphael,
starting from his seat, and in his turn counting the company. "'Tis
true. My friends, ill luck will attend us. We are Thirteen, seated at
a round table."

There was evidently an unpleasant impression made upon the guests by
this announcement. The toast-giver threw a scornful glance around
him--

"What!" cried he, "are we believers in such nursery tales and old
wives' superstitions? Pshaw! The charm shall soon be broken. Halls!
Franz! Winebutt! Thieving innkeeper! Rascally corkdrawer! where are
you hidden? Come forth! Appear!"

Thus invoked, there toddled into the room the master of the tavern--a
round-bellied, short-legged individual, whose rosy gills and
Bacchus-like appearance proved his devotion to the jolly god whose
high-priest he was.

"Sit down here!" cried the mad student, forcing him into a chair; "and
now, Raphael and gentlemen all, be pleased to shorten your faces
again, and drink your wine as if one with a three after it were an
unknown combination of numerals."

The conversation now took a direction naturally given to it by what
had just occurred, and the origin and causes of the popular prejudice
against the number Thirteen were discussed.

"It cannot be denied that there is something mysterious in the
connection and combination of numbers," observed a student in
philosophy; "and Pythagoras was right enough when he sought the
foundation of all human knowledge in the even and uneven. All over the
world the idea of something complete and perfect is associated with
even numbers, and of something imperfect and defective with uneven
ones. The ancients, too, considered even numbers of good omen, and
uneven ones as unpropitious."

"It is really a pity," cried the mad student, "that you philosophers
should not be allowed to invert and re-arrange history in the manner
you deem fitting. You would soon torture the crooked stream of time
into a straight line. I should like to know from what authors you
derive your very original ideas in favour of even numbers. As far as
my reading goes, I find that number three was considered a sacred and
a fortunate number by nearly all the sects of antiquity, not excepting
the Pythagoreans. And the early Romans had such a respect for the
uneven numbers, that they never allowed a flock of sheep to be of any
number divisible by two."

The philosopher did not seem immediately prepared with a reply to this
attack.

"You are all of you looking too far back for the origin of the curse
that attends the number Thirteen," interposed Raphael. "Think only of
the Lord's Supper, which is rather nearer to our time than Pythagoras
and the Roman shepherds. It is since then that Thirteen has been a
stigmatized and fatal number. Judas Iscariot was the Thirteenth at
that sacred table and believe me it is no childish superstition that
makes men shun so unblest a number."

"Here is Solling, who has not given his opinion yet," cried another of
the party, "and yet I am sure he has something to say on the subject.
How now, Carl, what ails thee, man? Why so sad and silent?"

The painter who, at the commencement of the evening, had entered
frankly and willingly into the joyous humour of his friends, had
become totally changed since the commencement of this discussion on
the number _Thirteen_. He sat silent and thoughtful in his chair, and
left his glass untasted before him, while his thoughts were evidently
occupied by some unpleasant subject. His companions pressed him for
the cause of this change, and after for some time evading their
questions, he at last confessed that the turn the conversation had
taken had brought painful recollections to his mind.

"It is a matter I love not to speak about," said he; "but it is no
secret, and least of all could I have any wish to conceal it from you,
my good and kind friends. We have yet an hour before the arrival of
the mail, and if you are disposed to listen, I will relate to you the
strange incidents, the recollection of which has saddened me."

The painter's offer was eagerly accepted; the young men drew their
chairs round the table, and Solling commenced as follows:--

"I am a native of the small town of Geyer, in Saxony, of the tin mines
of which place my father was inspector. I was the twelfth child of my
parents and half an hour after I saw the light my mother give birth to
a Thirteenth, also a boy. Death, however, was busy in this numerous
family. Several had died while yet infants, and there now survive only
three besides myself, and perhaps my twin brother.

"The latter, who was christened Bernard, gave indications at a very
early age of an eccentric and violent disposition. Precocious in
growth and strength, wild as a young foal, headstrong and passionate,
full of spiteful tricks and breakneck pranks, he was the terror of the
family and the neighbours. In spite of his unamiable qualities, he was
the pet of his father, who pardoned or laughed at all his mischief,
and the consequence was, that he became an object of fear and hatred
to his brothers and sisters. Our hatred, however, was unjust; for
Bernard's heart was good, and he would have gone through fire and
water for any of us. But he was rough and violent in whatever he did,
and we dreaded the fits of affection he sometimes took for us, almost
as much as his less amiable humours.

"As far back as I can remember, Bernard received not only from his
brothers, but also from all our playfellows, the nickname of the
Thirteenth, in allusion, of course, to his being my mother's
thirteenth child. At first this offended him grievously, and many were
the sound thrashings he inflicted in his endeavours to get rid of the
obnoxious title. Finally he succeeded, but scarcely had he done so
when, from some strange perversity of character, he adopted as an
honourable distinction the very name he had taken such pains to
suppress.

"We were playing one Sunday afternoon in the large court of our house;
several of the neighbours' children were there, and it chanced that we
were exactly twelve in number. We had wooden swords, and were having
a sort of tournament, from which, however, we had managed to exclude
Bernard, who, in such games, was accustomed to hit rather too hard.
Suddenly he bounded over a wall, and fell amongst us like a
thunderbolt. He had painted his face in red and black stripes, and
made himself a pair of wings out of an old leathern apron; and thus
equipped and armed with the largest broomstick he had been able to
find, he showered his blows around him, driving us right and left, and
shouting out, 'Room, room for the mad Thirteenth!'

"Soon after this incident my father died. Bernard, who had been his
favourite, was as violent in his grief as he had already shown himself
to be in every thing else. He wept and screamed like a mad creature,
tore his hair, bit his hands till they bled, and struck his head
against the wall; raved and flew at every body who came near him, and
was obliged to be shut up when his father's coffin was carried out of
the house, or he would inevitably have done himself or somebody else a
mischief.

"My mother had an unmarried brother in the town of Marienberg, a
wealthy man, and who was Bernard's godfather. On learning my father's
death he came to Geyer, and invited his sister and her children to go
and take up their abode with him. But the worthy man little knew the
plague he was receiving into his house in the person of his godson.
Himself of a mild, quiet disposition, he was greatly scandalized by
the wild pranks of his nephew, and made vain attempts to restrain him
within some bounds; but by so doing he became the aversion of my
brother, who showed his dislike in every possible way. He gave him
nicknames, broke his china cups and saucers, by which the old
gentleman set great store, splashed his white silk stockings with mud
as he went to church, put the house clock an hour forward or back, and
tormented his kind godfather in every way he could devise.

"Bernard had not forgotten his title of the Thirteenth; but it was
probable he would soon have got tired of it, for it was not his custom
to adhere long to any thing, had not my uncle, who was a little
superstitious, strictly forbidden him to adopt it. This opposition was
all that was wanting to make my brother bring forward the unlucky
number upon every possible occasion. When any body mentioned the
number twelve before him, or called any thing the twelfth, Bernard
would immediately cry out, 'And I am the Thirteenth!'

"No matter when it was, or before whom; time, place, and persons were
to him alike indifferent. For instance, one Sunday in church, when the
clergyman in the course of the service said, 'Let us sing a portion of
such a psalm, beginning at the twelfth verse,' Bernard immediately
screamed out, 'And I am the Thirteenth!'

"This was a grievous scandal to my uncle, and Bernard was called that
evening before a tribunal, composed of his godfather, my mother, and
the old clergyman whom he had so gracelessly interrupted, and who was
also teacher of Latin and theology at the school to which Bernard and
I went. But all their reproaches and remonstrances were lost upon my
brother, who had evidently much difficulty to keep himself from
laughing in their faces. My mother wept, my uncle paced the room in
great perplexity, and the worthy old dominie clasped his hands
together, and exclaimed, 'My child! I fear me, God's chastisement will
be needed to amend you.' The event proved that he was right.

"It was on the Friday before Christmas-day, and we were assembled in
school. The near approach of the holidays had made the boys somewhat
turbulent, and the poor old dominie had had much to suffer during the
whole day from their tricks and unruliness. My brother, of course, had
contributed largely to the disorder, much to the delight of his bosom
friend and companion, the only son of the master. This boy, whose name
was Albert, was a blue-eyed, fair haired lad, gentle as a girl.
Bernard had conceived a violent friendship for him, and had taken him
under his protection. Albert's father, as may be supposed, was little
pleased at this intimacy, but yet, out of consideration for my uncle,
he did not entirely forbid it; and the more so as he perceived that
his son in no respect imitated his wild playmate, but contented
himself with admiring him beyond all created beings, and repaying with
the warmest affection Bernard's watchful and jealous guardianship.

"On the afternoon in question, my brother surpassed himself in wayward
conceits and mischievous tricks, to the infinite delight of Albert,
who rocked with laughter at each new prank. The good dominie, who was
indulgence itself, was instructing us in Bible history, and had to
interrupt himself every moment to repress the unruliness of his
pupils, and especially of Bernard.

"It seemed pre-ordained that the lesson should be an unlucky one.
Every thing concurred to make it so. Our instructor had occasion to
speak of the twelve tribes of Israel, of the twelve patriarchs, of the
twelve gates of the holy city. Each of these served as a cue to my
brother, who immediately shouted out, 'And I am the Thirteenth!' and
each time Albert threw himself back shrieking with laughter, thus
encouraging Bernard to give full scope to his mad humour. The poor
dominie remonstrated, menaced, supplicated, but all in vain. I saw the
blood rising into his pale face, and at last his bald head, in spite
of the powder which sprinkled it, became red all over. He contained
himself, however, and proceeded to the account of the Lord's Supper.
He began, 'And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve
apostles with him.'

"'And I am the Thirteenth!' yelled Bernard.

"Scarcely were the words uttered, when a Bible flew across the school,
the noise of a blow, and a cry of anguish followed, and the old man
fell senseless to the ground. The heavy Bible, the corners of which
were bound with silver, and that he had hurled in a moment of
uncontrollable passion at my brother, had missed its mark, and struck
his own son on the head. Albert lay bleeding on the floor, while
Bernard hung over him like one beside himself, weeping, and kissing
his wounds.

"The boys ran, one and all, out of the school-room, shrieking for
assistance. Our cries soon brought the servants to the spot, who, on
learning what had happened, hastened with us back to the school, and
lifted up the old master, who was still lying on the ground near his
desk. He had been struck with apoplexy, and survived but a few hours.
Albert was wounded in two places, one of the sharp corners of the
Bible having cut open his forehead, while another had injured his left
eye. After much suffering he recovered, but the sight of the eye was
gone.

"Bernard, however, had disappeared. When we re-entered the
school-room, a window which looked into the playground was open, and
there were marks of footsteps on the snow without. A short distance
further were traces of blood, where the fugitive had apparently washed
his face and hands in the snow. We have never seen him since that
day."

The painter paused, and his friends remained some moments silent,
musing on the tragical history they had heard.

"And do you know nothing whatever of your brother's fate?" enquired
Raphael at last.

"Next to nothing. My uncle caused enquiries to be made in every
direction, but without success. Once only a neighbour at Marienberg,
who had been travelling on the Bohemian frontier, told us that he had
met at a village inn a wandering clarinet-player, who bore so strong a
resemblance to my brother that he accosted him by his name. The
musician seemed confused, and muttering some unintelligible reply,
left the house in haste. What renders it probable that this was
Bernard is, that he had a great natural talent for music, and at the
time he left home, had already attained considerable proficiency on
the clarinet."

"How old was your brother when he so strangely disappeared?" asked one
of the party.

"Fifteen, but he looked at least two years older, for he was stout and
manly in person beyond his age."

At this moment the rattling of wheels, and sound of a postilion's
horn, was heard. The Halle mail drove up to the door, the guard
bawling out for his passenger. The young painter took a hasty leave of
his friends, and sprang into the vehicle, which the next instant
disappeared in the darkness.

There was an overplus of travellers by the mail that night, and the
carriage in which Solling had got, was not the mail itself, but a
calèche, holding four persons, which was used as a sort of
supplement, and followed close to the other carriage. Two of the
places were occupied by a Jew horse-dealer and a sergeant of hussars,
who were engaged in an animated, and to them most interesting
conversation, on the subject of horse-flesh, to which the painter paid
little attention; but leaning back in his corner, remained absorbed in
the painful reflections which the incidents he had been narrating had
called up in his mind. In spite of his brother's eccentricities, he
was truly attached to him; and although eight years had elapsed since
his disappearance, he had not yet given up hopes of finding him, if
still alive. The enquiries that he and his uncle had unceasingly made
after their lost relative, had put them, about three years previous to
this time, upon the trace of a clarinet-player who had been seen at
Venice and Trieste, and went by the name of Voltojo. This might have
been a name adopted by Bernard, as being nearly the Italian equivalent
of Geyer, or hawk, the name of his native town; and Solling was not
without a faint hope, that in the course of his journey to Rome he
might obtain some tidings of his brother.

He was roused from his reverie by the postilion shouting out to the
guard of the mail, which was just before them on the road, to know
when they were to take up the passenger who was to occupy the
remaining seat in the calèche.

"Where will the Thirteenth meet us?" asked the man.

"At the inn at Schoneber," replied the guard.

_The Thirteenth!_ The word made the painter's blood run cold. The
horse-dealer and the sergeant, who had begun to doze in their
respective corners, were also disturbed by the ill-omened sound.

"The Thirteenth! The Thirteenth!" muttered the Jew in his beard, still
half asleep. "God forbid! Let's have no thirteenth!"

A company of travelling comedians, who occupied the mail, took up the
word. "The Thirteenth is coming," said one.

"Somebody will die," cried another.

"Or we shall be upset and break our necks," exclaimed a third.

"No Thirteenth!" cried they all in chorus. "Drive on! drive on! he
sha'n't get in!"

This was addressed to the postilion, who just then pulled up at the
door of a village inn, and giving a blast with his horn, shouted
loudly for his remaining passenger to appear.

The door of the public-house opened, and a tall figure, with a small
knap-sack on his shoulder and a knotty stick in his hand, stepped out
and approached the mail. But when he heard the cries of the comedians,
who were still protesting against the admission of a Thirteenth
traveller, he started suddenly back, swinging his cudgel in the air.

"To the devil with you all, vagabonds that ye are!" vociferated he.
"Drive on, postilion, with your cage of monkeys. I shall walk."

At the sound of the stranger's voice, Solling sprang up in the
carriage and seized the handle of the door. But as he did so, a strong
arm grasped him by the collar, and pulled him back into his seat. At
the same moment the carriage drove on.

"The man is drunk," said the sergeant, who had misinterpreted his
fellow-passenger's intentions. "It is not worth while dirtying your
hands, and perhaps getting an ugly blow, in a scuffle with such a
fellow."

"Stop, postilion, stop!" shouted Solling. But the postilion either did
not or would not hear, and some time elapsed before the painter could
persuade his well-meaning companion of his peaceable intentions. At
length he did so, and the carriage, which had meanwhile been going at
full speed, was stopped.

"You will leave my luggage at the first post-house," said Solling,
jumping out and beginning to retrace his steps to the village, which
they had now left some distance behind them.

The night was pitch-dark, so dark that the painter was compelled to
feel his way, and guide himself by the line of trees that bordered the
road. He reached the village without meeting a living creature, and
strode down the narrow street amid the baying of the dogs, disturbed
by his footfall at that silent hour of the night. The inn door was
shut, but there was a light glimmering in one of the casements. He
knocked several times without any body answering. At length a woman's
head was put out of an upper window.

"Go your ways," cried a shrill voice, "and don't come disturbing
honest folk at this time o' night. Do you think we have nought to do
but to open the door for such raff as you? Be off with you, you
vagabond, and blow your clarinet elsewhere."

"You are mistaken, madam," said Solling; "I am no vagabond, but a
passenger by the Halle mail, and"--

"What brings you here, then?" interrupted the virago; "the Halle mail
is far enough off by this."

"My good madam," replied the painter in his softest tone, "for God's
sake tell me who and where is the person who was waiting for the mail
at your hotel."

"Ha! ha!" laughed the hostess, considerably mollified by the _madam_
and the _hotel_. "The mad Italian musician, the clarinet fellow? Why,
I took you for him at first, and wondered what brought him back, for
he started as soon as the mail left the door. He'd have done better to
have got into it, with a dark night and a long road before him. Ha!
ha! He's mad, to be sure."

"His name! His name!" cried Solling, impatiently.

"His name? How can I recollect his outlandish name? Fol--Vol----"

"Voltojo!" cried the painter.

"Voltojo! yes, that's it. Ha! ha! What a name!"

"It is he!" cried Solling, and without another word dashed off full
speed along the road he had just come. He kept in the middle of the
causeway, straining his eyes to see into the darkness on either side
of him, and wondering how it was he had not met the object of his
search as he came to the village. He ran on, occasionally taking trees
and fingerposts for men, and cursing his ill luck when he saw his
mistake. The sweat poured down his face in streams, and his knees
began to knock together with fatigue. Suddenly he struck his foot
against a stone lying in the road, and fell, cutting his forehead
severely upon some pebbles. The sharp pain drew a cry from him, and a
man who had been lying on the grass at the roadside, sprang up and
hastened to his assistance. At that moment a flash of summer lightning
lit up the road.

"Bernard! Bernard!" cried the painter, throwing his arms round the
stranger's neck. It was his brother.

Bernard started back with a cry of horror.

"Albert!" he exclaimed in a hollow voice, "Cannot your spirit rest? Do
you rise from the grave to persecute me?"

"In God's name, my dear brother, what mean you? I am Carl--Carl, your
twin brother."

"Carl? No! Albert! I see that horrid wound on your brow. It still
bleeds!"

The painter grasped his brother's hand.

"I am flesh and blood," said he, "and no spirit. Albert still lives."

"He lives!" exclaimed Bernard, and clasped his brother in his arms.

Explanations followed, and the brothers took the road to Berlin. When
the painter had replied to Bernard's questions concerning their
family, he in his turn begged his brother to relate his adventures
since they parted, and above all to give his reasons for remaining so
long severed from his friends and home.

"Although I fully believed Albert killed by the blow he received,"
replied Bernard, "it was no fear of punishment for my indirect share
in his death, that induced me to fly. But when I saw the father
senseless on the ground, and the son expiring before my eyes, I felt
as if I was accursed, as if the brand of Cain were on my brow, and
that it was my fate to roam through the world an isolated and
wretched being. When you all ran out of the school to fetch
assistance, it seemed to me as though each chair and bench and table
in the room received the power of speech, and yelled and bellowed in
my ears the fatal number which has been the cause of all my
misfortunes--'Thirteen! Thirteen! Thou art the Thirteenth, the
Accursed One!'

"I fled, and since that day no rest or peace has been mine. Like my
shadow has this unholy number clung to me. Wherever I went, in all the
many lands I have wandered through, I carried with me the curse of my
birth. At every turn it met me, aggravating my numerous hardships,
embittering my rare moments of joy. If I entered a room where a
cheerful party was assembled, all rose and shrunk from me as from one
plague-tainted. They were twelve--I was the Thirteenth. If I sat down
at a dinner-table, my neighbour left his chair, and the others would
say, 'He fears to sit by you. You are the Thirteenth.' If I slept at
an inn--there were sure to be twelve persons sleeping there; my bed
was the Thirteenth, or my room would be number Thirteen, and I was
told that the former landlord had shot or hung himself in it.

"At length I left Germany, in the vain hope that the spell would not
extend beyond the land of my birth. I took ship at Trieste for Venice.
Scarcely were we out of port when a violent storm arose, and we were
driven rapidly towards a rocky and dangerous coast. The steersman
counted the seamen and passengers, and crossed himself. We were
_thirteen_.

"Lots were drawn who should be sacrificed for the salvation of the
others. I drew number thirteen, and they put me ashore on a barren
rock, where I passed a day and night half dead with cold and drenched
with sea water. At length an Illyrian fisherman espied me, and took me
off in his boat.

"It is unnecessary to relate to you in detail my wanderings during the
last eight years, or if I do, it shall be at some future time. My
clarinet enables me to live in the humble manner I have always done.
You remember, probably, that I had some skill in it, which I have
since much improved. When travelling, my music was generally taken as
payment for my bed and supper at the petty hostelries at which I put
up; and when I came to a large town, I remained a few days, and
usually gained more than my expenses.

"About a year since, I made some stay at Copenhagen, and at last,
getting wearied of that city, I put myself on board a ship, without
enquiring whither it was bound. It took me to Stralsund.

"The day of my arrival, there was a shooting-match in the suburb
beyond the Knieper, and I hastened thither with my clarinet. It was a
sort of fair, and I wandered from one booth to the other, playing the
joyous mountain melodies which I had not once played since my
departure from Marienberg. God knows what brought them into my head
again; but it did my heart good to play them, and a feeling came over
me, that I should like once more to have a home, and to leave the
weary rambling life I had so long led.

"I had great success that day, and the people thronged to hear the
wandering Italian musician. Many were the jugs of beer and glasses of
wine offered to me, and my plate was soon full of shillings. As I left
off playing, an old greyheaded man pressed through the crowd, and
gazed earnestly at me. His eyes filled with tears, and he was
evidently much moved.

"'What a likeness!' he exclaimed. 'He is the very picture of my
Amadeus. I could fancy he had risen out of the sea. The same features,
the sane voice and manner.'

"He came up to me and took my hand. 'If you do not fear a high
staircase,' said he with a kindly smile, 'come and visit me. I live on
the tower of St Nicholas's Church. Your clarinet will sound well in
the free fresh air, and you will find those there who will gladly
listen.' So saying, he left me.

"The old man's name was Elias Kranhelm, better known in Stralsund as
the old Swede; he was the town musician, and had the care of the bells
of St Nicholas. The next day was Sunday, and I hastened to visit him.
His kind manner had touched me, unaccustomed as I was to kindness or
sympathy from the strangers amongst whom I always lived. When I was
halfway up the stairs leading to the tower, the organ began to play
below me, and I recognised a psalm tune which we used often to sing
for our old schoolmaster at Marienberg. I stopped a moment to listen,
and thoughts of rest and home again came over me.

"I was met at the tower door by old Kranhelm, in his Sunday suit of
black; large silver buckles at his knees and shoes, and a round black
velvet cap over his long white hair. His clear grey eyes smiled so
kindly upon me, his voice was so mild, and his greeting so cordial,
that I thought I had never seen a more pleasing old man. He welcomed
me as though I had been an old friend, and without further preface,
asked me if I should like to become his substitute, and perform the
duties for which his great age had begun to unfit him. His only son,
on whom he had reckoned to take his place, had left him some time
previously, to become a sailor on board a Norwegian ship, and had been
drowned in his very first voyage. It was my extraordinary likeness to
this son that had made him notice me; and the good, simple-hearted old
man seemed to think that resemblance a sufficient guarantee against
any risk in admitting a perfect stranger into his house and intimacy.

"'My post is a profitable one,' said he; 'and, in consideration of my
long services, the worshipful burgomaster has given me leave to seek
an assistant, now that I am getting too old for my office. Consider
then, my son, if the offer suits you. You please me, and I mean you
well. But here comes my Elizabeth, who will soon learn to like you if
you are a good lad.'

"As he spoke, a young girl entered the room, with a psalm-book in her
hand, and attired in an old-fashioned dress, which was not able,
however, to conceal the elegance of her figure, and the charms of her
blooming countenance.

"'How think you, Elizabeth?' said her father. 'Is he not as like our
poor Amadeus as one egg is to another?'

"'I do not see the likeness, my dear father,' replied Elizabeth,
looking timidly at me, and then casting down her eyes, and blushing.

"I accepted the old man's offer with joy, and took up my dwelling in
the other turret of the church tower. My occupation was to keep the
clock wound up, to play the evening hymn on the balcony of the tower,
and to strike the hours upon the great bell with a heavy hammer.

"I soon felt the good effect of repose, and of the happy, tranquil
life I now led; my spirits improved, and I began to forget the curse
which hung over me--to forget, in short, that I was the unlucky
Thirteenth. Old Kranhelm's liking for me increased rapidly, and, in
less than three months, I was Elizabeth's accepted lover. Time flew
on; the wedding-day was fixed, and the bridal-chamber prepared.

"It was on Friday evening, exactly eight days ago, that I went out
with Elizabeth, and walked down to the port to look at a large Swedish
ship that had just arrived. The passengers were landing, and one
amongst them immediately attracted our attention.

"This was a tall, lean, raw-boned woman, apparently about forty years
of age, who held in her hand a long, smooth staff, which she waved
about her, nodding her head, and muttering, as she went, in some
strange, unintelligible dialect. Her dress consisted of a huge black
fur cloak, and a cape of the same colour fringed with red. Her whole
manner and appearance were so strange, that a crowd assembled round
her as soon as she set foot on shore.

"'Hallo! comrade,' cried one of the sailors of the vessel that had
brought her, to a boatman who was passing. 'Hallo! comrade, do you
want a job? Here's a witch to take to Hiddensee.'

"We asked the sailor what he meant; and he told us that this strange
woman was a Lapland witch, who every year, in the dog-days, made a
journey to the island of Hiddensee, to gather an herb which only grew
there, and was essential in her incantations.

"Meantime, the witch was calling for a boat, but no one understood her
language, or else they did not choose to come. My unfortunate
propensity to all that is supernatural or fantastic impelled me, with
irresistible force, towards her. In vain Elizabeth held me back. I
pushed my way through the crowd, until we found ourselves close to the
Lapland woman, who measured us from head to foot with her bright and
glittering eyes. Slipping a florin into her hand, I gave her to
understand, as well as I could, that we wished to have our fortunes
told. She took my hand, and, after examining it, made a sign that she
either could or would tell me nothing. She then took the hand of
Elizabeth, who hung upon my arm, trembling like an aspen leaf, and
gazing intently upon it, muttered a few words in broken Swedish. I did
not understand them, but Elizabeth did, and, starting back, drew me
hastily out of the crowd.

"'What did she say?' enquired I, as soon as we were clear of the
throng.

"Elizabeth seemed much agitated, and had evidently to make a strong
effort before she could reply.

"'Nothing,' answered she, at last; 'nothing, at least, worth
repeating. And yet 'tis strange; it tallies exactly with a prediction
made to my mother when I was an infant, that I should one day be in
peril from the number Thirteen. This strange woman cautioned me
against the same number, and bade me beware of you, for that you were
the Thirteenth!'

"Had the earth opened under my feet, or the lightning from heaven
fallen on my head, I could not have felt a greater shock than was
communicated to me by these words. I know not what I said in reply, or
how I got home. Elizabeth, doubtless, observed my agitation, but she
made no remark on it. I felt her arm tremble upon mine as we walked
along, and by a furtive glance at her face saw that she was pale as
death. Not a word passed between us during our walk back to the tower,
on reaching which she shut herself up in her room. I pleaded a severe
headach and wish to lie down; and, begging the old man to strike the
hours for me, retired to my chamber.

"It would be impossible to give an idea of the agony of mind I
suffered during that evening. I thought at times I was going mad, and
there were moments when I felt disposed to put an end to my existence
by a leap from the tower window. Again, then, this curse that hung
over me was in full force. Again had that fatal number raised itself
before me like an iron wall, interposed between me and all earthly
happiness. Wearied out at length by the storm within me, I fell
asleep.

"As may be supposed, I was followed in my troubled slumbers by the
recollection of my misery. Each hour that struck awoke me out of the
most hideous dreams to a scarce less hideous reality. When midnight
came, and the hammer clanged upon the great bell, a strange fancy took
possession of my mind that it would this night strike Thirteen, and
that at the thirteenth stroke the clock, the tower, the city, and the
whole world, would crumble into atoms. Again I fell asleep and dreamt.
I thought that my head was changed into a mighty bronze bell, and that
I hung in the tower and heard the clock beside me strike Thirteen.
Then came the old schoolmaster, who yet, at the same time, had the
features of Elizabeth's father; and, as he drew near me, I saw that
the hammer he held in his hand was no hammer, but a large silver-bound
Bible. In my despair I made frightful efforts to cry out and to tell
him that I was no bell, but a man, and that he should not strike me;
but my voice refused its service and my tongue clove to my palate. The
greyhaired old man came up to me, and struck thirteen times on my
forehead, till my brains gushed out at my eyes.

"By daybreak the next morning I was two leagues from Stralsund, having
left a few hurried ill-written lines in my room, pleading I know not
what urgent family affairs, and a dislike to leave-taking, as excuses
for my sudden departure. Over field and meadow, through rivers and
forests, on I went, as though hell were at my heels, flying from my
destiny. But the further I got from Stralsund the more did I regret
all I left there--my beautiful and affectionate mistress, her
kind-hearted father, the peaceful happy life I led on the top of the
old tower. The vow I had made to fly from the haunts of men, and seek
in some desert the repose which my evil fate denied me among my
fellows, that vow became daily more difficult to keep. And yet I went
on, dreading to depart from my determination, lest I should encounter
some of those bitter deceptions and cruel disappointments that had
hitherto been my lot in life. Shame, too, at the manner in which I had
left the tower, withheld me, or else I think I should already be on my
road back to Stralsund. But now I have met you, brother, and that my
mind is relieved by the knowledge that I have not, even indirectly,
Albert's death to reproach myself with, I must hasten to my Elizabeth
to relieve her anxiety, and dry the tears which I am well assured each
moment of my absence causes her to shed. Come with me, dearest Carl,
and you shall see her, my beautiful Elizabeth, and her good old
father, and the tower and the bell. Ho! the bell, the jolly old bell!"

The painter looked kindly but anxiously in his brother's face. There
was a mildness in his manner that startled him, accustomed as he had
been to his eccentricities when a boy.

"You are tired, brother," said he. "You need repose after the emotions
and fatigues of the last week. I, too, shall not be sorry to sleep.
Let us to bed for a few hours, and then we will have post-horses and
be off to Stralsund."

"I have no need of rest," replied Bernard, "and each moment seems to
me an eternity till I can again clasp my Elizabeth to my heart. Let us
delay, then, as little as may be."

As he spoke they entered the gates of Berlin. The sun was risen, and
the hotels and taverns were beginning to open their doors. Seeing
Bernard's anxiety to depart, the painter abandoned his intention of
taking some repose, and after hasty breakfast, a post-chaise was
brought to the door, and the brothers stepping in, were whirled off on
their road northwards.

The sun was about to set when the travellers came in sight of the
spires of Stralsund, among which the church of St Nicholas reared its
double-headed tower. Bernard had enlivened the journey by his wild
sallies, and merry but extravagant humour. Now, however, that the goal
was almost reached, he became silent and anxious. The hours appeared
to go too slowly for him, and his restlessness was extreme.

"Faster! postilion," cried Carl, observing his brother's impatience.
"Faster! You shall be paid double."

The man flogged his horses till they flew rather than galloped over
the broad level road. Suddenly, however, a strap broke, and the
postilion got off his seat to tie it up. Through the stillness of the
evening, no longer broken by the rattle of the wheels and clatter of
the horses' feet, a clock was heard striking the hour. Another
repeated it, and a third, of deeper tone than the two preceding ones,
took up the chime. Bernard started to his feet, and leaned so far out
of the carriage that his brother seized hold of him, expecting him to
lose his balance and fall out.

"It is she!" exclaimed Bernard. "'Tis the bell of St Nicholas. Listen,
Carl--my Elizabeth calls me. She strikes the bell. I come, dearest, I
come!"

And with these words he sprang out of the carriage, and set off at
full speed towards the town, leaving his brother thunderstruck at his
mad impatience and vehemence.

Running at the top of his speed, Bernard soon reached the city gate,
and proceeded rapidly through the streets in the direction of St
Nicholas's church. It seemed to him as though he had been absent for
years instead of a few days, and he felt quite surprised at finding no
change in the city since his departure. All was as he had left it; all
conspired to lull him into security. An old fruitwoman, of whom he had
bought cherries the very day of his last walk with Elizabeth, was in
her usual place, and, as he passed, extolled the beauty of her fruit,
and asked him to buy. A large rose-tree, at the door of a
silversmith's shop, which Elizabeth had often admired, was still in
full bloom; through the window of a house in the market-place, he saw
a young girl, Elizabeth's dearest friend, dressing her hair at a
looking-glass, and as he passed the churchyard, the old dumb sexton,
who appeared to be hunting about for a place for a grave, nodded his
head in mute recognition.

Bernard opened the tower door, and darted up the staircase. He was not
far from the top when he heard the voices of two men above him. They
were resting on one of the landing-places of the ladderlike stairs.

"It is a singular case, doctor," said one; "a strange and
incomprehensible case. It is evidently a disease more of the mind than
the body."

"Yes," replied the other, by his voice apparently an old man. "If we
could only get a clue to the cause, any thing to go upon, something
might be done, but at present it is a perfect riddle."

Bernard heard no more, for the men continued their ascent.

"The old father must be ill," said he to himself; but as he said it a
feeling of dread and anxiety, a presentiment of evil, came over him,
and he stood for a few moments unable to proceed. The door at the top
of the stairs was now opened, and shut with evident care to avoid
noise. "The old man must be very ill," said Bernard, as if trying to
persuade himself of it. He reached the door, and his hand shook as he
laid it upon the latch. At length he lifted it, and entered the room.
It was empty; but, just then, the door of Elizabeth's chamber opened,
and old Kranhelm stepped out. On beholding Bernard, he started back as
though he had seen a ghost. He said a word or two in a low voice to
somebody in the inner room, and then shutting the door, bolted it,
and placed his back against it, as if to prevent Bernard from going
in.

"Begone!" cried he in a tremulous voice; "in the name of God, begone!
thou evil spirit of my house;" and he stretched out his arms towards
Bernard as though to prohibit his approach. No longer master of
himself, the young man sprang towards him, and, grasping his arm,
thundered in his ear the question--

"Where is my Elizabeth?"

The words rang through the old tower, and the confused murmuring of
voices in the inner room was heard. Bernard listened, and thought he
distinguished the voice of Elizabeth repeating, in tones of agony, the
fatal number.

One of the physicians knocked, and begged to be let out. The old
tower-keeper opened the door cautiously, and, when the doctor had
passed through, carefully shut and barred it. But during the moment
that it had remained open, Bernard heard too plainly what his ears had
at first been unwilling to believe.

"Is that the man?" demanded the physician hastily. "In God's name, be
silent. You will kill the patient. She recognized your voice, and fell
immediately into the most fearful paroxysm. She has got back again to
the infernal number with which her delirium began, and she shrieks it
out perpetually. It is a frightful relapse. Begone! young man; yet
stay--I will go with you. You can, doubtless, give us a key to this
mystery."

The old physician took Bernard's arm to lead him away; but at that
very moment there was a shrill scream from the next room, and
Elizabeth's voice was heard calling upon Bernard by name. The
unfortunate young man could not restrain himself. Shaking off the
grasp of the physician, he pushed old Kranhelm aside, tore back the
bolts, and flung open the door. There lay Elizabeth on her deathbed,
her arms stretched out towards him, her mild countenance ashy pale and
frightfully distorted, her soft blue eyes straining from their orbits.
She made a violent effort to speak, but death was too near at hand;
the sound died away upon her lips, and her uplifted arms dropped
powerless upon the bed; her head fell back--a convulsive shudder came
over her: she was dead. Her unhappy lover fell senseless to the
ground.

When Bernard awoke out of a long and deathlike swoon, it was night,
and all around him was still and dark. He was lying on the stone floor
outside Kranhelm's dwelling. The physicians had removed him thither;
and, being occupied with the old tower-keeper and his daughter, they
had thought no more about him. On first recovering sensation, he had
but an indistinct idea of where he was, or what had happened. By
degrees his senses returned to a certain extent--he knew that
something horrible had occurred, but without remembering exactly what
it was.

He felt about him, and touched a railing. It was the balustrade round
the open turret where hung the great bell. He was lying under the bell
itself, and, as he gazed up into its brazen throat, the recollection
of the frightful dream which had persecuted him the night before his
flight from Stralsund came vividly to his mind; he appeared to himself
to be still dreaming, and yet his visions were mixed up with the
realities of his everyday occupations.

He had just stepped out, he thought, to strike the hour on the bell,
and rising with some difficulty from the hard couch which had
stiffened his limbs, he sought about for the hammer. He made no effort
to shake off the sort of dreaming semi-consciousness which seemed to
prevent him from feeling the horror and anguish of reality.

"Thirteen strokes," thought he; "thirteen strokes, and at the
Thirteenth the tower will fall, the city crumble to dust, the world be
at an end." Such had been his dream, and the moment of its
accomplishment was come.

He found the hammer, and struck with all his force upon the bell. He
repeated the blow; twelve times he struck, and each stroke rang with
deafening violence through his brain; but at the Thirteenth, as he
raised his arms high above his head, and leaning back against the
railing, threw his whole strength and energy into the blow, the frail
balustrade gave way under his weight, and he fell headlong from the
tower. The last stroke tolled out, sad and hollow as a funereal knell,
and the sound mingled with the death-cry of the luckless Thirteenth!


REMINISCENCES OF SYRIA.[15]

    [15] Reminiscences of Syria. By Colonel E. Napier.


Galloping, gossiping, flirting and fighting, feasting and starving,
but always in high spirits and the best possible humour, Colonel
Napier might answer an advertisement for "A Pleasant Companion in a
Post-chaise," without the slightest chance of rejection. But it is
difficult to imagine so dashing a traveller, boxed up in a civilized
conveyance, rolling quietly along a macadamized road, with a diversity
of milestones and an occasional turnpike gate, the only incidents by
the way--no wild Maronite glimpsing at him over the hedge; no
black-eyed houri peeping over the balustrades of the caravanserai,
(called by vulgar men the Bricklayers' Arms)--no Saïces to help John
Hostler to change horses; but dulness, uniformity, and most tiresome
and unromantic safety. England, we are sorry to confess it, is not the
land of stirring adventures or hair-breadth 'scapes--a railway coach
occasionally blows up; a blind leader occasionally bolts into a ditch;
a wheel comes occasionally into dangerous collision with one of
Pickford's vans; but these are the utmost that can be hoped for in the
way of peril, and other excitement there is positively none. We have
treated life as the mathematician did Paradise Lost--we have struck
out all its similes--obliterated its flights--expunged its glorious
visions--we have made it prose. But fortunately for us--for Colonel
Napier--for the reading public--there is a land where mathematicians
are unknown, and where poetry continues to flourish in the full vigour
of cimeters and turbans--the region of the sun--

    "The first of Eastern lands he shines upon."

It was in this very beautiful, but rather overdone portion of earth's
surface, that the adventures occurred of which we are now to give some
account; and as probably most of our readers have heard the name of
Syria pretty often of late, we need not display much geographical
erudition in pointing out where it lies. It would be pleasant to us if
we could atone for brevity in this respect, by illuminating the reader
on the causes that have brought Syria so prominently forward; but on
this point we confess, with shame and confusion of face, that we know
no more than Lord Ponsonby or M. Thiers. The truth seems to be, that
some time, about two or three years ago, five or six people in
influential stations went mad, and our Secretary for Foreign Affairs
took the infection. He showed his teeth and raised his "birse," and
barked in a most audacious manner, till the French kennel answered the
challenge; an old dog in Egypt cocked his tail at the same time, and
the world began to be afraid that hydrophobia would be universal. All
parties were delighted to let the rival yelpers fight it out on so
distant a field as Syria; and in that country of heat and dryness, of
poverty, anarchy, cruelty, and superstition, there was a skrimmage
that kept all Christendom on the tenter-hooks for half-a-year; and
this we believe to be the policy of the Syrian campaign. Better for
all parties concerned, that a few thousand turbaned and malignant
Turks or Egyptians should bite the dust, than that there should be
another Austerlitz or Waterloo. So the signal was accordingly given,
and the work began.

Wherever there is any fighting it is not to be doubted that the
English hurra will be heard--and an apparition had been seen in the
smoke of battle, which had sorely puzzled the wisest of the
soothsayers of Egypt to explain. It was of a being apparently human,
but dressed as if to represent Mars and Neptune at the same time,
charging along the tops of houses, with the jolly cocked-hat of a
captain of a British man-of-war on the point of his sword, and a
variety of exclamations in his mouth, more complimentary to the
enemy's speed than his courage. The muftis, we have said, were sorely
puzzled, and at last set it down as an infallible truth that he must
be none other than Old Harry, whereas there was not a sailor in the
fleet that did not know that it was none other than Old Charley. And
this identical Old Charley, in a style of communication almost as
rapid as his military evolutions, had indited the following epistle to
the author of the volumes before us:--

    "Headquarters of the Army of Lebanon.--Djouni,
        Sept. 1840.

    "My dear Edward--I have hoisted my broad pendant on
    Mount Lebanon, and mean to advance against the Egyptians
    with a considerable force under my command; you may be
    of use here; therefore go to Sir John M'Donald, and ask
    him to get leave for you to join me without delay.

        "Your affectionate father,
            CHARLES NAPIER."

And the dutiful son, who seems to have no inconsiderable portion of
the paternal penchant for broken heads and other similar
divertisements, in three weeks from the receipt of the letter found
himself on board the Hydra, and rapidly approaching the classic shores
of Sidon, Tyre, Ptolemais; the scenes of scriptural records and deeds
of chivalry--Palestine--the Holy Land. But the broad pendant in the
mean time had been pulled down on Mount Lebanon, and once more
fluttered to the sea breezes on board the Powerful. Sir Charles Smith
had assumed the command of the land forces, and whether from
ill-humour at finding half the work done during his absence by the
amphibious commodore, or from some other cause, his reception of the
author was, at first, far from cordial. Instead of being useful, as he
had hoped, he found the sturdy old general blind to the value of his
accession; and when the Powerful sailed he found himself without
quarters appointed him, or even an invitation to join the officers'
mess. But with the usual good-luck of people who bear disappointments
well, all turned out for the best, as will be seen by the following
extract:

    "I had, on board the Powerful, a few days before, formed
    the acquaintance of a young Syrian of the name of
    Assaade el Khyat, who, brought up at one of our
    universities, was at heart a true Englishman, spoke
    fluently our own and several other European and Eastern
    languages, and whom I found, on the whole, a sensible,
    well-informed young man, and a most agreeable companion.
    As I was sitting alone, after a solitary dinner, (in the
    miserable hotel at Beyrout,) musing in a brown study
    over a bottle of red Cyprus wine, my new acquaintance
    was ushered into the apartment; I made no secret to him
    of my extremely uncomfortable position, when he, with
    great kindness and liberality, overcoming the usual
    prejudices of his country, offered me an asylum in his
    own family, which offer I most gladly accepted, and was
    accordingly the next morning comfortably installed in my
    new quarters, whereof I will endeavour to give the
    reader a slight description.

    "The house of which I had just so unexpectedly become an
    inmate, was situated in one of the most retired and out
    of the way parts of the town, (and it was not before
    considerable time had elapsed, and then with difficulty,
    that I became acquainted with the labyrinth of narrow
    lanes, alleys, and dark passages which it was requisite
    to thread in order to arrive at this desired haven,) the
    property of a young man of the name of Giorgio Habbit
    Jummal--brother-in-law of my friend Assaade, to whom one
    of his sisters was married, and whom, as he spoke
    Italian with fluency and ease, I at once engaged as my
    dragoman or interpreter.

    "By a strange coincidence, I, under the roof of Giorgio,
    for the first time became acquainted with Mr Hunter, the
    author of the _Expedition to Syria_, who, placed in
    similar circumstances with myself, was likewise an
    inmate of the same house, and of whom, as we were
    subsequently much known together during our residence in
    this country, I shall after have occasion to mention: at
    present I will take the liberty of borrowing from his
    amusing narrative the following account of the inmates
    of our new domicile. 'We lived in the house of a
    respectable Syrian family, that of Habbit Jummal, or
    interpreted, the esteemed camel-driver. Our landlord,
    Giorgius, the head of this family, was a young man
    hardly out of his teens; and having some competency, and
    being moreover _un beau garçon_, did not follow either
    his ancestral, or any other avocation. The harem, or
    woman's portion of the house, was composed of his
    mother, a fair widow of forty, and her two daughters,
    both Eastern beauties of their kind, Sarah and Nasarah
    (meaning Victory or Victoria;) the first, a laughing
    black eyed houri, with mischief in every dimple in her
    pretty face; the other, a more portly damsel, of a
    melancholy but not less pleasing expression. There were
    besides these, three younger children with equally
    poetic names, (Nassif, Iskunder, and Furkha,) and
    included in the _coterie_ was a good-humoured negress,
    the general handmaid, whose original cognomen of Saade,
    was lost in the apposite soubriquet of
    Snowball.'--Although the greater part of the
    inhabitants of Beyrout are Christians, generally
    speaking, of the Greek Church, to which persuasion
    likewise belonged the family of our host Giorgio; still
    in this land of bigotry and oppression--to such an
    extent is carried suspicion and jealousy, and so far
    have Mahommedan prejudices in this respect been adopted,
    that all the women (those of the peasantry alone
    excepted) lead nearly as secluded a life as the Osmanli
    ladies of Constantinople or Smyrna. On venturing abroad,
    which they seldom do, unless when the knessi or humaum
    (church or bath) are the limits of their excursions,
    they are so closely shrouded in the izar, or long white
    garment, which, coming over the head and hiding the
    face, falls in numerous folds to the ground, as to be
    scarcely recognizable by their nearest friends or
    relations. To allow, therefore, two unknown and
    friendless strangers to become familiar inmates of an
    Eastern family, exposing wives, daughters, and sisters,
    to their unhallowed gaze, was a favour and mark of
    confidence on the part of Assaade which we duly
    appreciated, nor ever abused; it was, however, a
    privilege to which no other stranger in the place was
    admitted, and affording, as it did, such opportunities
    of acquiring the Arabic language, I eagerly embraced it
    without any feeling of regret at the inhospitality to
    which I was originally indebted for my admission behind
    the scenes of Oriental life.

    "The bare, gloomy, and massive stone walls of the
    exterior of our habitation had not prepared us for the
    comforts we found inside; and as for the first time we
    followed Giorgio and his brother-in-law up the rude and
    narrow stone staircase, which appeared to be scarped out
    of the very thickness of the wall--an open sesame from
    the former causing a strong iron studded door to fly
    back on its hinges, disclosed a handsome patis or court
    paved with black and white marble, along the sides of
    which were luxuriantly growing, and imparting a cooling
    freshness to the scene, the perfumed orange-tree,
    bearing at the same time both fruit and blossoms, and
    flanked by green myrtles and flowering geraniums; whilst
    an apartment opening on this garden terrace, and which
    appeared from the carpets and cushions scattered around
    the still smoking narghilis, (or water-pipe, in which is
    smoked the tumbic or Persian tobacco,) and other sundry
    traces of female industry, to be appropriated as the
    common sitting-room of the family, was on our entrance
    precipitately deserted by all its occupants, save one
    fine-looking matronly lady, whom Giorgio introduced as
    his mother; and while she was welcoming us with many
    'F[=a]dd[=a]lls,' and politely repeating, _Anna mugsond
    shoufuk_, (be seated, I am delighted to see you,) with
    innumerable other euphonious phrases, as we afterwards
    found high-flown Eastern compliments, but which at the
    time were sadly wasted on our Frankish ignorance, he,
    following the fair fugitives, soon brought back in each
    hand the blushing deserters, who have already been
    introduced to the reader as Mesdemoiselles Sarah and
    Nasarah. Pipes, narghilis, sherbet, and coffee followed
    in quick succession; the young negress, Saade, acting as
    Hebe on the occasion; and the ladies, at first timid as
    gazelles of the desert, soon, like those pretty
    creatures when reclaimed from the wilderness, became
    quite domesticated, acquired confidence, and freely
    joined in the conversation, which was with volubility
    carried on through the medium of Giorgio and Assaade;
    and ere an hour had elapsed, we were all on the friendly
    and easy footing of old acquaintances; when, taking
    leave for the time, we hastened to make the necessary
    arrangements for the conveyance of our goods and
    chattels to the capital billets we had had the good
    fortune to stumble on."

The colonel made good use of his opportunity, and, by a diligent
perusal of Miss Sarah's eyes, and an attentive study of Miss Nasarah's
dimple, managed to acquire a smattering of Arabic in a far shorter
time than would have been required in the most assiduous turning over
of dictionaries and grammars. But our school-boy days can't last for
ever--and, ere a fortnight elapsed, an order arrived from England for
the hopeful scholar to be placed on the returns of the Syrian army,
and to draw his field allowance, rations, and forage, as assistant
adjutant-general of the British force. Dictionaries and eyes, grammars
and dimples, were now exchanged for less pleasing pursuits. Fifteen
thousand troops were by this time assembled at Beyrout, and rumour
kept perpetually blowing the charge against Ibrahim Pasha, who was
still encamped at Zachli, with an army much superior to that of the
allies. Booted and spurred--with a long sword, saddle, bridle, and all
the other paraphernalia so captivating to an ancient fair, as recorded
in one of the lays of Old England by some forgotten Macaulay of former
times--the colonel is intent on some doughty deed, and already in
imagination sees captive Egyptians following his triumphal car. When
all of a sudden, the sad news gets spread abroad that the old
commodore has concluded a convention with Mehemet Ali, and that all
the pomp and circumstance of glorious war is at an end. One only
chance remained, and that was, that as all the big-wigs protested with
all their might against the convention; and the fleet, in the midst of
protestation and repudiations of all sorts and kinds, was forced by a
severe gale to up anchor and run for Marmorice Bay, Ibrahim Pasha
might perhaps be tempted to protest also in a still more unpleasant
manner, and pay a visit to Beyrout in the absence of the navy. The
very thoughts of it, however the English auxiliaries may have felt on
the subject, gave an attack of fever to the unfortunate inhabitants,
who devoutly prayed for a speedy fall of _tubbish_, (or snow,) by
which his dreaded approach might be impeded. "Had such a movement on
his part taken place at this critical moment, it is not improbable
that it might have proved successful; as amid the variety of religious
and conflicting interests, by which the people of Beyrout were
influenced, Ibrahim had no doubt many friends in the town; and it is
certain that he was moreover regularly made acquainted with every
occurrence which took place, through the medium, as was supposed, of
French agency and espionage."

Ibrahim, however, had had enough of red coats and blue jackets, and
left the people of Beyrout to themselves--an example which was
followed by the author, who, being foiled in his expectations of
riding down the Egyptians on the noble Arab left to him by the
commodore, determined to put that fiery animal (the Arab) to its paces
in scouring the country in all directions. It is not often that an
assistant adjutant-general sets out on a tour in search of the
picturesque; but in this instance the search was completely
successful. Rock, ravine, precipice, and dell--running waters and
waving woods, come as naturally to his pen as returns of effective
force and other professional details; and, whatever the writing of
them may be, we are prepared to contend that the reading of them is
infinitely pleasanter. But as travellers and poets have of late left
few mountains or molehills unsung in Palestine, we prefer extracting a
picturesque account of a venerable abbess, who threw the light of
Christian goodness over that benighted land about a century ago, and
must have impressed the heathens in the neighbourhood with an exalted
notion of the virtues of a nunnery:--

    "Héndia was a Maronite girl, possessing extraordinary
    personal charms, who, in 1755, first brought herself
    into notice by her pretended piety and attention to her
    religious duties, till at last she was by this simple
    and credulous people considered almost in the light of a
    saint or prophetess. When she had thus established a
    reputation for sanctity, she next thought of becoming
    the head and chief of an extensive establishment of
    monks and nuns, to receive whom, with the aid of large
    contributions raised among her credulous admirers and
    followers, she erected two spacious stone buildings,
    which soon became filled with proselytes of both sexes.
    The patriarch of Lebanon was named the director of this
    establishment, and for twenty years Héndia reigned with
    unbounded sway over the little community--performing
    miracles, uttering prophecies, and giving other tokens
    of being in the performance of a divine mission; and
    though it was remarked that many deaths yearly occurred
    among the nuns, the circumstance was generally
    attributed to disease incident to the insalubrity of the
    situation. At last, chance brought to light the cause of
    this very great mortality, and disclosed all the secret
    horrors which had so long remained covered by the veil
    of mystery in this abode of monastic abominations. A
    traveller, on his way from Damascus to the coast,
    happened to arrive one fine summer night at a late hour
    before the convent gates, which he found closed, and not
    wishing to disturb its inmates, who had apparently
    retired to rest, he spread his travelling rug under some
    neighbouring trees, and laid himself down to sleep. His
    slumbers were, however, shortly disturbed by a number of
    persons, who, issuing from the convent, appeared to be
    clandestinely bearing away what seemed to be a heavy
    bundle. Prompted by curiosity, he cautiously followed
    the party, who, after going a short distance, deposited
    their burden, and commenced digging a deep hole, into
    which having placed and covered with earth what was
    evidently a dead body, they immediately took their
    departure. Astonished, and rather dismayed, at an
    occurrence of so mysterious a nature, the traveller lost
    no time in mounting his mule, and on arriving at Beyrout
    made known the extraordinary occurrence to which he had
    been witness the night before. This account reached the
    ears of a merchant who happened to have two daughters
    undergoing their noviciate at El Kourket, and reports
    had lately reached him of the illness of one of his
    children; this, together with the numerous deaths which
    had lately taken place at the convent, coupled with the
    traveller's narrative, excited in his mind the most
    serious apprehensions. He gave information on the
    subject, and laid a complaint before the Grand Prince at
    Dahr-el-Kamar, and, accompanied by his informant and a
    troop of horsemen furnished by the Emir, hastened to the
    spot of the alleged mysterious burial, when to his
    horror, on opening the newly made grave, he discovered
    it to contain the corpse of his youngest daughter!
    Frantic at this sight, he desired instant admission, in
    order to ascertain the safety of her sister. On this
    being refused, the gates were forced open, and the
    unfortunate girl was found closely confined in a
    dungeon, on the point of death, but retaining still
    strength enough to disclose horrors which led to an
    investigation, implicating the patriarch, the abbess,
    and several priests. This transaction, which happened in
    1776, was submitted for the decision of the Papal See;
    when it appeared that the pretended prophetess had, by
    means of many ingenious mechanical devices, thus long
    imposed on public credulity, whilst in the retirement of
    the cloister the most licentious and profligate
    occurrences nightly took place; and that when any
    unfortunate nun gave offence, either by refusing to be
    sacrificed at the shrine of infamy, or that it became
    desirable to get rid of her, in order to appropriate for
    the convent the amount of her property, she was immured
    in a dungeon, left to perish by a lingering and
    miserable death, and then privately buried in the night.
    In consequence of these shocking discoveries, the
    patriarch was deposed--the priests, his accomplices,
    were severely punished, and the high priestess of this
    temple of cruelty and debauchery was immured in
    confinement, and survived for many years to repent of
    all the atrocities she had previously committed."

We should like to know the colonel's authority for this circumstantial
account. It bears at present a startling resemblance to the confession
of Maria Monk, and the villanies recorded of the nunnery at Montreal;
and we will hope in the mean time, that the devil, even in the shape
of a lady abbess, is not quite so black as he is painted. The present
abbess of El Kourket is already as black as need be, for we are told
she is an Ethiopian negress.

The war carried on in Syria after the decisive battle of Boharsef,
seems to have been on the model of those recorded by Major Sturgeon,
and to have consisted of marching and counter-marching, without any
definite object, except, perhaps, the somewhat Universal-Peace-Society
one of getting out of the enemy's way. General Jochmus, we guess from
his name, was a Scotch schoolmaster, with a Latin termination--there
being no mistaking the Jock--and in his religious tenets we feel sure
he was a Quaker. The English officers attached to the staff had
immense difficulty in bringing the troops (if they deserve to be
called so) to the scratch; and we trust that, in all future
commentaries on the Art of War, the method adopted by Commodore
Napier, of throwing stones at his gallant army to force them forward,
will not be forgotten. The author before us had no sinecure, and after
the news of Ibrahim's retreat, galloped hither and thither, like the
wild huntsman of a German story, to discover by what route the
vanquished lion was growling his way to his den. With a hundred
irregular horse, furnished him by Osman Aga, he set out on a foray
beyond Jordan; and we do not wonder his two friends, Captain Lane, a
Prussian edition of Don Quixote, and Mr Hunter, who has written an
excellent account of his expedition to Syria, besides his old Beyrout
friend Giorgio, volunteered to accompany him.

    "My motley troop, apparently composed of every tribe
    from the Caspian to the Red Sea, displayed no less
    variety in arms and accoutrements than in their personal
    appearance, varying from the sturdy-looking Kourd,
    mounted on his strong powerful steed, to the swarthy,
    spare, and sinewy Arab, with his long reed-like spear,
    his head encircled with the Kéfiah, or thick rope of
    twisted camels' hair; whilst the flowing 'abbage' waved
    gracefully down the shining flanks of the high-mettled
    steed of the desert. In short, such an assemblage of
    cut-throat looking ruffians was probably never before
    seen; and whilst the Prussian military eye of old Lane
    glanced down our wide-spread and irregular line, I could
    see a curl of contempt on his grey mustaches, though his
    weather-beaten countenance maintained all the gravity of
    Frederick the Great. The troop appeared to be divided
    into two distinct parties--one Arab, the other Turkish;
    and, on directing the two chiefs to call the 'roll' of
    their respective forces, I found that many were absent
    without leave, and the party which should have amounted
    to a hundred cavaliers only mustered between seventy and
    eighty. However, on the assurance that the rest would
    speedily follow--as there was no time to spare, after
    making them a short harangue, in which I promised
    abundance of _nehub_ (plunder) whenever we came across
    the enemy, to which they responded by a wild yell of
    approbation--I gave the signal to move off, which was
    instantly obeyed, amidst joyous shouts, the brandishing
    of spears, and promiscuous discharge of fire-arms.
    Having thus got them under weigh, the next difficulty I
    experienced was to keep them together. I tried to form a
    rearguard to bring up the stragglers, but the guard
    would not remain behind, nor the stragglers keep up with
    the main body; and I soon, finding that something more
    persuasive than mere words was requisite to maintain
    them in order, took the first opportunity of getting a
    stout cudgel, with which I soundly belaboured all those
    whom I found guilty of thus disobeying my commands. The
    Eastern does not understand the _suaviter in
    modo_;--behave to him like a human being, he fancies you
    fear him, and he sets you at defiance--kick him and cuff
    him, treat him like a dog, and he crouches at your feet,
    the humble slave of your slightest wishes."

Discipline of so perfect a nature must have inspired the gallant
colonel with the strongest hopes of success in case of an onslaught on
the forces of Ibrahim Pasha, and in all probability his efforts, with
those of Captain Lane, Hunter, and Giorgio, might have produced
something like a skrimmage when they came near the tents of the
Egyptians; but it would seem that the cudgels wielded by the Musree
commanders were either not so strong or not so well applied, for on
the first appearance of the hostile squadron, the heroes of Nezib
evaporated as if by magic, but not before a similar feat of
legerdemain had been performed by the rabble rout of Turks and Arabs;
and on looking round, to inspire his followers with a speech after the
manner of Thucydides, the colonel discovered the last of his escort
disappearing at full speed on the other side of the plain, and the
Europeans were left alone in their glory. As they had nobody to
attack, (the enemy continuing still in a state of evaporation,) every
thing ended well; and, if the trumpeter had not been among the
fugitives, there might have been a triumphal blow performed although
no blow had been struck. We do not believe in the courage of the
Arabs. No amount of kicking and cuffing could cow a nation's spirit
that had once been brave; and we therefore consider it the greatest
marvel in history how the Arabians managed at one time to conquer half
the world. They must have been very different fellows from the
chicken-hearted children of the desert recorded in these volumes. One
thing only is certain, that they have left their anti-fighting
propensities to their mongrel descendants in Spain; for a series of
_actions_--that is, jinking and skulking, and running up and down,
hiding themselves as if they were the personages of a writ--more
distinctly Arabian than the late campaign which ended in the overthrow
of Espartero, could not have been performed under the shadows of Mount
Ebal. All the nobility that we are so fond of picturing to ourselves
in the deeds and thoughts of Saladin, has gone over to the horse. The
wild steed retains its fire, though the miserable horseman would do
for a Madrileno _aide-de-camp_. And yet this is the way they are
treated:--

    "It was a matter of surprise to us, how our horses stood
    without injury all the exposure, severe work, and often
    short commons, to which they were constantly subjected.
    When we came to a place where barley was to be procured,
    the grooms carried away as much as they could; when none
    was to be had, we gave our nags peas and _tibbin_,
    (chopped straw, the only forage used in the East,) or
    any thing we could lay hands on; they had little or no
    grooming, and frequently the saddles were not even
    removed from their backs. But I believe that nothing
    save the high mettle of the desert blood would carry an
    animal through all this toil and privation; and as to
    the much-extolled kindness of the Arab towards his
    horse, although it may be the case in the far deserts of
    the Hedged and Hedjar, I can avow that I never saw these
    noble animals treated with more inhuman neglect than I
    witnessed in the whole of my wanderings through Syria."

The dreariness of a ride through the desolate plains and rugged rocks
of Palestine, was diversified with startling adventures; and the fact
of several of the powers of Europe and many of the tribes of Asia
having chosen that sterile region for their battle-place, gave rise to
some very odd coincidences. People from all the ends of the earth, who
were lounging away their existence some three or four months before,
without any anticipation of treading in the footsteps of the
crusaders--some smoking strong tobacco in the coffeehouses of Berlin,
or leaning gracefully (like the Chinese Admiral Kwang) against the
pillars of the Junior United Service Club in London--or driving a
heavy curricle in the Prado at Vienna--or reading powerfully for
honours at the Great Go at Oxford--or climbing Albanian hills--or
reclining in the silken recesses of a harem at Constantinople--all
were thrown together in such unexpected groups, and found themselves
so curiously banded together, that the tame realities of an ordinary
campaign were thrown completely into the shade. The following
introduces us to another member of the foray, whose character seems to
have been such a combination of the gallant soldier and light-hearted
troubadour, that we read of his after fate, in dying of the plague at
Damascus, with great regret:--

    "My troop had not yet cleared a difficult pass close to
    the khan, running between an abrupt face of the hill and
    the river, when the advanced guard came back at full
    speed with the announcement that a body of the enemy's
    infantry was near at hand. Closely jammed in a narrow
    defile, between inaccessible cliffs and the precipitous
    banks of the Jordan, with nothing but cavalry at my
    disposal, I was placed in rather a disagreeable
    position. There remained, however, no alternative but to
    put spurs to our horses, push forward through the pass,
    deploy on the level ground beyond it, and then trust to
    the chances of war. Having explained these intentions to
    the Sheikh and Aga, we lost no time in carrying them
    into effect; and on taking extended order after clearing
    the pass, saw immediately in front of us what we took to
    be an advanced guard of the enemy, consisting of some
    twenty or thirty soldiers, whom their white
    foustanellis" (the foustanellis is that part of the
    Albanian costume corresponding with the highland kilt)
    "and tall active forms immediately marked as Arnouts, or
    Albanians. Seeing, probably, that we had now the
    advantage of the ground, they hastily retired,
    recrossing a ravine which intersected the path, and
    extending in capital light infantry style, were soon
    sheltered behind the stones and rocks on the opposite
    bank, over the brow of which nought was to be seen but
    the protruding muzzles and long shining barrels of their
    firelocks. All this was the work of a few seconds, and
    passed in a much briefer space of time than it has taken
    to relate. I had now the greatest difficulty in keeping
    Mahommed Aga and his men from charging up to enemies
    who, from their present position, could have picked them
    easily off with perfect safety to themselves; and riding
    rapidly forward with Captain Lane, to see if we could by
    some means turn their flank, a few horsemen at this
    moment suddenly appeared over the swell on the opposite
    side of the ravine, the foremost of whom, whilst making
    many friendly signals, galloped across the intervening
    space, hailing us a friend, and at the same time waving
    his hand, to prevent his own people from opening their
    fire. Lane and myself were not backward in returning
    this greeting; and on approaching we beheld a handsome
    young man, dressed in the showy Austrian uniform, with a
    black Tartar sheepskin cap on his head, who, coming up,
    accosted us in French, and with all the frankness of a
    soldier, introduced himself as Count Szechinge, a
    captain of Austrian dragoons, then on his way from
    Tiberias with a party composed of one or two Turkish
    lancers, about twenty-five Albanian deserters, his
    German servant, dragoman, and suite, to raise troops in
    the Adjelloun hills--a mission very similar to the one I
    was myself employed on at Naplouse."

An acquaintance begun under such circumstances grows into friendship
with amazing rapidity; and many are the joyous hours the foragers
spend together, in spite of intolerable weather and storms of sleet
and snow, which bear a far greater resemblance to the climate of
Lochaber than to that of Syria, "land of roses." Reinforced with the
count and his companions, Colonel Napier pushes on--gets into the
vicinity of Ibrahim--his rabble rout turn tail, in case of being
swallowed alive by the ferocious pasha, whose reputation for cruelty
and all manner of iniquities seems well deserved, and having
ascertained the movements of that formidable ruffian, he returned to
Naplouse to take the command of 1500 half-tamed, undisciplined
savages, with whom to oppose his retreat. Luckily, the ratification of
the convention come in the nick of time; for it is very evident that
the best cudgels that were ever cut in "the classic woods of
Hawthornden," could not have awakened a spark of military ardour in
the wretched riff-raff assemblage appointed for this service--and of
all the abortive efforts at generalship we have ever read of, the
attempt of the Turkish commanders was infinitely the worse--no
foresight in providing for difficulties--no valour in fighting their
way out of them; but, to compensate for these trifling deficiencies, a
plentiful supply of pride and cruelty, with a due admixture of
dishonesty. We heartily join, with Colonel Napier, in wondering where
the deuce the "integrity of the Ottoman empire" is to be found, as,
beyond all doubt, not a particle of it exists in any of its subjects.
The pashas of Egypt, bad as they undoubtedly are, have redeeming
points about them, which the Hassans, and Izzets, and Reschids of the
Turks have no conception of; and, lively and sparkling as the gallant
colonel's narrative is, we confess it leaves a sadder impression on
our minds of the hopelessness and the degeneracy of the Moslems, than
any book we have met with. Turk and Egyptian should equally be whipped
back into the desert, and the fairest portions of the world be won
over to civilization, wealth, and happiness. The present volumes close
at the end of January 1841, and perhaps they are among the best
results of the campaign. We shall be glad to see the proceedings at
Alexandria sketched off in the same pleasant style.


THE FATE OF POLYCRATES.--_Herod._ iii. 124-126.


    "Oh! go not forth, my father dear--oh! I go not forth to-day,
    And trust not thou that Satrap dark, for he fawns but to betray;
    His courteous smiles are treacherous wiles, his foul designs to hide;
    Then go not forth, my father dear--in thy own fair towers abide."

    "Now, say not so, dear daughter mine--I pray thee, say not so!
    Where glory calls, a monarch's feet should never fear to go;
    And safe to-day will be my way through proud Magnesia's halls,
    As if I stood 'mid my bowmen good beneath my Samian walls.

    "The Satrap is my friend, sweet child--my trusty friend is he--
    The ruddy gold his coffers hold he shares it all with me;
    No more amid these clustering isles alone shall be my sway,
    But Hellas wide, from side to side, thy empire shall obey!

