"What is properly called the town of Shumla, is nearly surrounded by a
rampart of Mount Hæmus, or the Balkan, which descends on both sides in
the form of a horse-shoe. The steep slopes of this great fence are
covered with detached rocks and close thorny bushes. The nature of the
ground makes it a most advantageous position for the Turkish soldier,
who when sheltered by these inequalities, rapid steeps and a few
intrenchments, displays all the address of the most skilful marksman.
Like some orators, who cannot express themselves unless when partly
concealed by a table or tribunal, the Turk cannot use his musket unless
he can rest it on a stone or against the trunk of a tree, but then his
aim is infallible.

"The town is about a league in length, with half that breadth, and may
contain from thirty to thirty-five thousand souls. The fortifications
are of barbarian architecture; a ditch, with a simple rampart, partly of
earth, partly of brick, flanked here and there with little towers, which
serve neither for support nor resistance, and which contain not above
seven or eight fusileers. But it is not the town itself which is to be
considered, but the vast intrenched field in the centre of which it is
placed, and which is capable of containing an immense army, with its
magazines, its utensils and equipage, without the enemy having the power
to throw a single shell into the place, or disturb it by any manoeuvre
whatever.

"The air is extremely healthy in the elevated positions of the Balkan
and in the narrow valleys which lie between its ridges.... On the other
hand, there cannot be a more unhealthy country than that which extends
from the Balkan to the borders of the Danube and Pruth. This difference
between the climate of the mountains and the plain is the most
formidable defence which nature has given Shumla. While the enemy is
encamped in wet grounds and pestilential marshes, in want of wood, of
provisions, and sometimes of men in health to take care of the sick; the
Turks breathe a keen, dry air, and have an inexhaustible supply of fuel
in the forests which surround them. In summer, Shumla is an agreeable
abode; the town is surrounded by pleasant gardens, by vineyards, and a
stream running from the mountains maintains the verdure of the fields.
In time of peace it may be entered without hindrance, and the Turks
allow the curious to walk about and survey all the posts. In this there
is perhaps a secret pride, joined with the wish to communicate to others
the conviction which they themselves feel, that the place is
inexpugnable."

       *       *       *       *       *


COURT FLATTERY.


Here is a draught of "delicious essence," proffered by the lord of the
Burmese granaries to the British embassy:--"The most glorious monarch,
the lord of the golden palace, the sunrising king, holds dominion over
that part of the world which lies towards the rising sun; the great and
powerful monarch, the King of England, rules over the whole of that
portion of the world which lies towards the setting sun. The same
glorious sun enlightens the one and the other. Thus may peace continue
between the two countries, and for ever impart mutual blessings to both.
Let no cloud intervene, or mist arise, to obscure its genial rays."

       *       *       *       *       *


A BARGAIN.


The Archbishop of Saltzburg paid, in 1745, 995 scudi for his pallium,
and 31,338 for his confirmation; i.e. (roughly speaking) about 7,000_l_.
The pallium consists of two stripes of white wool, cut from two lambs
offered up, in St. Agnes's Church, on St. Agnes's Day, spun into a sort
of cloth by the nuns of St. Agnes, and consecrated by the Pope on the
altar of St. Peter's.

       *       *       *       *       *


CITY PAGEANTS.


In the reign of James I. the sober liverymen of London decked
themselves, on days of state, with chains of gold, pearl, or diamonds.
The wealthy merchant, Sir Paul Pindar, had a diamond valued at thirty
thousand pounds, which he lent to the king on great occasions, but
refused to sell. It was said by the Prince of Anhalt, in 1610, after
seeing "the pleasant triumphs upon the water, and within the city, which
at this time, were extraordinary, in honour of the lord mayor and
citizens," that "there was no state nor city in the world that did elect
their magistrates with such magnificence, except the city of Venice,
unto which the city of London cometh very near." These exhibitions were
more splendid, and, though quaint and whimsical, savoured more of
intellect and invention than the similar "triumphs" of the present
day.--_Quarterly Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brussels is rapidly advancing in the art of printing; one individual
published no less than 250,000 volumes in the year 1827. Books are
published much cheaper than in Paris, which creates no small jealousy
there. Didot projected to bring his press into Brussels, but found that
he had been forestalled by the labours of more than one printer. Neither
the type nor the paper equal the printing of London or Edinburgh, or
perhaps Paris; but they are daily improving, and an immense number of
books are exported.--_New Mon. Mag_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Huber, a German priest, relates a curious instance, in his own
experience, of the mischief done by hasty proceedings. When he first
went to his parish, he found, to his great disgust, only the common
books of devotion, viz.:--P. Cochem, the Great and Little Garden, the
Spiritual Soul-watcher, &c. The very first occasion which offered, he
attacked these books publicly and vehemently from the pulpit. The people
were shocked and offended; they said that their fathers knew how to pray
as well as fresh teachers, and would not look at his new volumes of
prayer. Taught by his ill success to vary his plan, on a subsequent
occasion he took occasion to speak in proper terms of respect of the
piety of the composers of those early books, but added that many
improvements, as they all knew, were constantly making in agriculture,
masonry, &c., and so they must see that this might be the case with
books. He then proceeded in the pulpit to compare the old and one of his
new books of devotion, and before the evening he had numerous
applications for copies.--_Foreign Quarterly Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MOONLIGHT.


  When sunbeams on the river blaze,
  You on its glory scarce can gaze;
  But when the moon's delirious beam,
  In giddy splendour woos the stream,
  Its mellow'd light is so refined,
  'Tis like a gleam of soul and mind;
  Its gentle ripple glittering by,
  Like twinkle of a maiden's eye;
  While all amazed at Heaven's steepness,
  You gaze into its liquid deepness,
  And see some beauties that excel--
  Visions to dream of, not to tell--
  A downward soul of living hue,
  So mild, so modest, and so blue!

_Ettrick Shepherd_.

       *       *       *       *       *


PERILS OF TRAVEL.


Humboldt and his party, on their memorable ascent of the volcano of
Tunguragna, in the Nevado del Chimborazo, at the elevation of 19,300
feet, the highest spot ever trod by man, suffered severely. The air was
reduced to half its usual density, and felt intensely cold and piercing.
Respiration was laborious; and blood oozed from their eyes, their lips,
and their gums. Another peculiarity of great elevations, noticed by
travellers, is the astonishing clearness of the atmosphere. Captain Head
was struck with it in the case of a condor shot, which appeared to fall
within thirty or forty yards; but on sending one of his miners to bring
it back, to his astonishment he found that the distance was such, as to
take up above half an hour, going and returning. In Norway, a friend of
the present writer stepped out of a boat to visit a spot, as he
conceived, of a few hundred yards distant, when in fact it proved to be
some miles. In the Pyrenees, the celebrated cascade of Gavarni appears
about a short mile from the auberge, where travellers frequently leave
their mules to rest, while they proceed on foot, little aware that they
are thereby exposing themselves to a long and laborious walk of above an
hour's duration. In the Andes, Humboldt remarks this phenomenon; stating
that in the mountains of Quito he could distinguish the white poncho of
a person on horseback, at the distance of seventeen miles. He also
notices the extreme clear and steady light of the stars, which we can
vouch to be true to a most extraordinary degree even in Europe, having
distinctly seen the planet Venus, in a dazzling sunshine, at half past
eleven, from the summit of the port of Venasque, in the Pyrenees.

_London Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


TITLES.


Everybody knows that titles and dignities are not only integral parts of
the person, but its most distinctive attributes. When Earl Grey said he
would stand or fall by his order, it was as if he had said, he would
stand or fall by himself. Take a noble lord, and, if the process be
possible, abstract him mentally from his titles and privileges, and
offer the two lots separately for sale in the market, who would not buy
the latter if they could? who would, in most cases, even bid for the
first? It is the title that is asked everywhere to dinner; it is the
title receives all the bows and prostrations, that gets the nomination
to so many places, that commands the regiments and ships-of-war, and
"robs the Exchequer with unwashed hands." The man who owns it, may be
what he can, an honest man, or a scoundrel, a mushroom or an Howard, a
scholar, or a brute, a wit or a blockhead, _c'est égal_. Proud, haughty,
highdaring, free England, is not this true to the letter?--_New Monthly
Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Thetford, not far from his beloved Newmarket, James I. was threatened
with an action of trespass for following his game over a farmer's
corn.--_Quarterly Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


       *       *       *       *       *


"SIR DAN DANN'LY, THE IRISH HAROE."

_From "Walks in Ireland," in the Monthly Magazine._


In spite of all that yet remains, it must be admitted with a sigh, that
the glory of Donnybrook has departed in the person of the renowned
Daniel Donnelly, better known among his admiring followers, by the
sounding title of "Sir Dan Dann'ly, the Irish haroe." Of course if you
know any thing of the glorious science of self-defence, a necessary
accomplishment which I hope you have not neglected amidst the general
diffusion of knowledge which distinguishes this happy age, of course if
you have cultivated that noble art which teaches us the superiority of
practical demonstration over theoretical induction, the recollection of
that celebrated champion must fill your mind with reverence for his
exploits, mingled with regret that he was snatched so soon from the path
of glory.

I was fortunate enough to possess the friendship of that great man, and
I esteem among the happiest days of my life, that on which I was lucky
enough to attract his attention: it was during a _row_ at Donnybrook
Fair. I was defending myself with whatever energy I possess, against
overwhelming odds, when suddenly, as if Mars himself had listened to my
invocation, and descended to the fray, Dan rushed from his tent to show
fair play, and in an instant my cowardly assailants fled, as if
scattered by a whirlwind. From that hour, gratitude on my part, and a
consciousness of protection on his, cemented an intimacy between us.

During the fair week, Dan Donnelly's tent (he always kept one after he
became a celebrated character) was always crowded to excess by all
classes, high and low; some attracted by admiration of the good things
of this life dispensed by the amiable Lady Dann'ly, others by the
convivial and facetious qualities of her redoubted spouse; in the
evening, especially, you were sure to find him the centre of a circle of
wondering listeners, detailing some of his extraordinary adventures, the
most astonishing of which it was heresy in the eyes of his followers to
doubt for an instant, though my love of truth obliges me to confess,
that one or two I have heard him relate sounded a little apocryphal. But
great and extraordinary characters are not to be judged of by common
rules; for instance, his account of the manner in which he obtained the
honour of knighthood from the hands of our present gracious sovereign,
then Prince Regent, always appeared to me to differ in some material
circumstances from the ordinary routine of court etiquette, and rather
to resemble one of those amusing and instructive narratives denominated
fairy tales. But on this delicate subject perhaps the safest course is
to suffer the reader to judge for himself: so without further
circumlocution, I will submit my lamented friend's account to his
perusal, in the precise words in which I have so often had the pleasure
of hearing it:--

"My jewels, I was lyin' in bed one mornin', restin' myself, in regard ov
bein' dhrunk the night afore, wid Scroggins an' Jack Randall, an' some
more ov the boys; an' as I was lyin' on the broad ov my back, thinkin'
ov nothin', a knock came to my door. 'Come in,' says I, 'iv you're fat.'
So the door opened sure enough, an' in come a great big chap, dhressed
in the most elegantest way ever you see, wid a cockade in his hat, an' a
plume ov feathers out ov id, an' goolden epulets upon his shouldhers,
an' tossels an' bobs of goold all over the coat ov him, jist like any
lord ov the land. 'Are you Dan Dann'ly,' says he;--'Throth an' I am,'
says I; 'an' that's my name sure enough, for want ov a better; an' what
do ye want wid me now you've found me.'--'My masther is waitin' to spake
to ye, an' sint me to tell you to come down to his place in a
hurry.'--'An' who the devil _is_ your masther?' says I; 'an' didn't
think ye had one, only yourself, an' you so fine.'--'Oh,' says he, 'my
masther is the Prence Ragin.'--'Blur an' ouns,' says I; 'tell his honour
I'll be wid him in the twinklin' ov a bedpost, the minit I take my face
from behind my beard, an' get on my clane flax; but stop a bit,' says I;
'where does the masther live?'--'Down at Carltown Palace,' says he; 'so
make yourself dacent, an' be off wid yourself afther me.' Wid that away
he wint.

"Up I gets, an' away I goes, the instant minit I put on my duds, down to
Carltown Palace. An' it's it that's the place; twicet as big as the
castle, or Kilmainham gaol, an' groves ov threes round about it, like
the Phaynix Park. Up I goes to the gate, an' I gives a little asy rap to
show I wasn't proud; who should let me in but the 'dentical chap that
come to ax me up. 'Well, Dan,' says he, 'you didn't let the grass grow
undher your feet; the masther's waitin', so away in wid ye as fast as ye
can.'--'An' which way will I go?' says I.--'Crass the yard,' says he,
'an' folley your nose up through the house, ever 'till you come to the
dhrawin'-room door, an' then jist rap wid your knuckle, an' ye'll get
lave to come in.' So away I wint acrass the yard, an' it's there the fun
was goin' on, soldiers marchin', and fiddlers playin', and monkeys
dancin', an' every kind ov diversion, the same as ourselves here at
Donnybrook Fair, only it lasts all the year round, from mornin' till
night, I'm tould.

"When I come to the house, in I wint, bowin' an' doin' my manners in the
most genteelest way to all the grand lords an' ladies that was there,
folleyin' their own divarsion, the same as thim that was in the yard,
every way they liked--dhrinkin', an' singin', an' playin' ov music, and
dancin' like mad! I wint on, on, on, out ov one room an' into another,
till my head was fairly addled, an' I thought I'd never come to the ind.
And sich grandeur!--why, the playhouse was nothin' to id. At last I come
to a beautiful big stairs, an' up I wint; an' sure enough there was the
drawin'-room door, reachin' up to the ceilin' almost, an' as big as the
gate ov a coach-house, an' wrote on a board over the door, 'No
admittance for strangers, only on business.'--'Sure,' says I, 'I'm come
on the best ov business, whin the Prence is afther sendin' his man to
tell me to come on a visit.'--An' wid that I gave a knock wid my knuckle
the way I was bid. 'Come in,' says a voice; and so I opened the door.

"Oh! then, ov all the sights ever I see, an' it's that was the finest!
There was the Prence Ragin' himself, mounted up upon his elegant throne,
an' his crown, that was half a hundred weight ov goold, I suppose, on
his head, an' his sceptre in his hand, an' his lion sittin' on one side
ov him, an' his unicorn on the other.--'Morrow, Dan,' says he, 'you're
welcome here.'--'Good morning, my Lord,' says I, 'plase your
Reverence.'--'An' what do you think ov my place,' says he, 'Dan, now
you're in it?'--'By Dad! your worship,' says I, 'it bates all the places
ever I see, an' there's not the like ov id for fun in the wide world,
barrin' Donnybrook Fair.'--'I never was at the fair,' says he, 'bud I'm
tould there's plenty ov sport there for them that has money, an' is able
to take their own part in a row.'--'Throth, Majesty,' says I, 'your
honour may say that; an' iv your holiness 'ill come an' see us there,
it's myself that 'ill give you a dhrop ov what's good, an' show ye all
the divarsion ov the place--ay, an' leather the best man in the fair,
that dare say, Black is the white ov your eye!'--'More power to ye,
Dan!' says he, laughin'; 'an' what id you like to dhrink now?'--'Oh, by
Gor!' says I, 'I'm afeard to take any thing, for I was dhrunk last
night, an' I'm not quite study yet.'--'By the piper that played afore
Moses,' says he, 'ye'll not go out ov my house till ye dhrink my
health;' so wid that he mounted down off his throne, an' wint to a
little black cupboard he had snug in the corner, an' tuck out his gardy
vine an' a couple of glasses. 'Hot or cowld, Dan?' says he.--'Cowld,
plase your reverence,' says I. So he filled a glass for me, an' a glass
for himself.--'Here's towards ye, Dan,' says he.--'The same to you,
Majesty!' says I;--an' what do ye think it was? May I never tell a lie
iv id wasn't as good whiskey as ever you see in your born days. 'Well,'
says I, 'that's as fine sperits as ever I dhrunk, for sperits like id;
might I make bould to ax who does your worship dale wid?'--'Kinahan, in
Dublin,' says he.--'An' a good warrant he is,' says I: so we wint on,
dhrinkin' and chattin', till at last, 'Dan,' says he, 'I'd like to spar
a round wid ye.' 'Oh,' says I, 'Majesty, I'd be afeard ov hurtin' ye,
without the gloves.'--'Arrah, do you think it's a brat ov a boy ye're
spakin' to?' says he; 'do ye're worst, Dan, and divil may care!' An' so
wid that we stud up.

"Do you know he has a mighty purty method ov his own, bud thin, though
id might do wid Oliver, it was all nonsense wid me, so afore you could
say Jack Lattin, I caught him wid my left hand undher the ear, an'
tumbled him up on his throne. 'There now,' says I, 'Majesty, I tould ye
how id would be, but you'd never stop until you got yourself
hurt.'--'Give us your fist, Dan,' says he, 'I'm not a bit the worse of
the fall; you're a good man, an' I'm not able for you.'--'That's no
disgrace,' says I, 'for it's few that is; but iv I had you in thrainin'
for six months, I'd make another man ov ye;' an' wid that we fell a
dhrinkin' again, ever till we didn't lave a dhrop in the bottle; an'
then I thought it was time to go, so up I got.--'Dan,' says he, 'before
you lave me I'll make you a knight, to show I have no spite again ye for
the fall.'--'Oh,' says I, 'for the matter ov that, I'm sure ye're too
honourable a gintleman to hould spite for what was done in fair play,
an' you know your reverence wouldn't be easy until you had a thrial ov
me.'--'Say no more about id, Dan,' says he, laughin', 'bud kneel down
upon your bended knees.' So down I kneeled.--'Now,' says he, 'ye wint
down on your marrow bones plain Dan, but I give ye lave to get up Sir
Dan Dann'ly, Esquire.'--'Thank your honour,' says I, 'an' God mark you
to grace wherever you go.' So wid that we shook hands, an' away I wint.
Talk of your kings and prences, the Prence Ragin' is the finest Prence
ever I dhrunk wid."

       *       *       *       *       *


I'D BE A PARODY.

BY THOMAS HAYNES BAYLEY.


  I'd be a Parody, made by a ninny
    On some little song with a popular tune,
  Not worth a halfpenny, sold for a guinea,
    And sung in the Strand by the light of the moon.
  I'd never sigh for the sense of a Pliny,
    (Who cares for sense at St. James's in June?)
  I'd be a Parody, made by a ninny,
    And sung in the Strand by the light of the moon.

  Oh! could I pick tip a thought or a stanza,
    I'd take a flight on another bard's wings,
  Turning his rhymes into extravaganza,
    Laugh at his harp--and then pilfer its strings!
  When a poll-parrot can croak the cadenza
    A nightingale loves, he supposes he sings!
  Oh, never mind, I will pick up a stanza,
    Laugh at his harp--and then pilfer its strings!

  What though you tell me each metrical puppy
    Might make of such parodies _two pair a day_;
  Mocking birds think they obtain for each copy
    Paradise plumes for the parodied lay:--
  Ladder of fame! if man _can't_ reach thy top, he
    Is right to sing just as high up as he may;
  I'd be a Parody, made by a puppy,
    Who makes of such parodies two pair a day!

_Sharpe's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ANECDOTE GALLERY.


       *       *       *       *       *


VISIT TO FERNEY IN 1829.

_Sharpe's London Magazine_, (No, 3.),


Contains a pleasant article under the above title, describing the
present state of Ferney, the residence of Voltaire, an engraving of
which appeared in our No. 384. We would willingly have made the journey,
and written our description in the Poet's _salon_, could we have "stayed
time;" but as the old dials quaintly tell us, time "tarryeth for no
man," and we were then compelled to adopt the most recent description.

Such of this last "Visit to Ferney" as relates to the Château will
therefore be interesting, as a supplement to our previous
illustration:--

"The road leading from Geneva to this celebrated spot is delightful,
bordered on each side with superb villas, and presenting picturesque
points of view only to be found in the environs of that enchanting city.
A handsome avenue conducts the traveller to the château, the
architecture of which is nothing very remarkable. After mounting three
steps, and crossing a narrow vestibule, we entered the _salon_, which in
its day received most of the wits and celebrated personages of Europe:
for as a contemporary of Voltaire observed, 'to have been admitted at
Ferney, is to have taken out a patent for genius.' The appearance of
this salon is far from brilliant: a few indifferent pictures, some old
red tapestry, and antiquated furniture compose the whole of its
ornaments. To the left we entered the chamber of Voltaire.

"On one side of the apartment an humble mausoleum has been reared, the
sanctity of which was not however respected by the sabres of the
Austrians. The inscription on the top (a happy inspiration of the
husband of Mademoiselle Varicourt), contains these simple words: 'Mon
coeur est ici; et mon esprit est partout.' The most elaborate panegyric
could not have conveyed a finer eulogium.

"On entering, the spectator is struck with the view of a bed of simple
materials, and which was pillaged by the Austrians. Hung round the room
are the portraits of Frederick, of Catharine, of Lekain--one of Voltaire
himself, taken at the age of forty, and full of expression, with a
number of _silhouettes_ of the celebrated men of the day.

"The window of this apartment looks upon the gardens, and upon a little
wood, which has undergone many changes since the death of Voltaire. Time
however has hitherto respected a long and thick row of elm trees,
whither he was wont to repair at sunrise, and where he usually meditated
and recited aloud the scenes of his tragedies when finished, to any one
whom he could find. His jealousy of criticism on such occasions is
matter of record.

"The gardener at present belonging to the château was there during the
latter period of Voltaire's life, and related to us with much _naïveté_
several anecdotes, not generally known, of his master.

"Where the thickly-spreading branches of the elm trees present the
slightest opening, the spectator enjoys one of the most beautiful views
that can be imagined. In the distance, that giant of the hills--Mont
Blanc, crowned with its eternal snows, rises majestically. At the base
of the mountain the eye is gratified with the sight of variegated
plains, smiling with verdure, and cultivated with the most industrious
care. The Rhone with its silver stream floats through the beautiful
country that surrounds Geneva, which may be said to describe an
amphitheatre just above the lake.

"A spacious park, not far from the château, usually formed the
termination of Voltaire's rambles: in its cool shades he delighted to
indulge his poetic meditations. To this place he was in the habit of
driving daily in a little open calèche, drawn by a favourite black mare.
The space which separates the park from the château, and which forms a
gentle acclivity, is planted with vines."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GATHERER.


  "A snapper-up of unconsidered trifles."
      SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


A WELSH RABBIT.


Colonel A---- baiting for the first time in his life at a Welsh inn,
thought he would order for his dinner, a dish which _must_ be perfection
in its own country: viz. a _Welsh rabbit_. The dinner hour arrived, and
the colonel lifting up the cover of the dish next him, exclaimed in
angry astonishment to the waiter, upon beholding a large, dry-looking,
fleshy animal before him. "What the d----l d'ye call _this_, a Welsh
rabbit?" "Why, noo, noo, Sir!" replied the man, perfectly cool, and
unconscious of the error, "Noo, it certainly an't exactly a _Welsh_
rabbit, but 'tis a _Monmouthshire_ one!"

J.R.

       *       *       *       *       *


ODD MEAL.


The celebrated David Hartley entertained, at his apartments in Merton
College, of which he was fellow, a party of his friends; they all dined
well, _comme de raison_; and there was every likelihood that the evening
would conclude with the utmost festivity, when a letter was brought to
the naturalist; after due apology, he opened and read it; then starting
up, he rushed out of the room. He soon returned, with horror on his face
and a basketful of feathers in his hand; "Gentlemen, what do you think
we have been eating?" Some of the guests began to fear they had been
poisoned; even the boldest felt qualms. "Oh! that the letter had but
arrived before the bird!" Then holding up some of the feathers, and
letting them fall into the basket to display them to the company, he
relieved their apprehensions, while he revealed the cause of his own
grief, "we have eaten a nondescript." Though no blame could attach to
him, there was something in all appearance so disreputable in the
untoward accident by which, under his auspices, a scientific object had
been treated in so vulgar a manner, that Hartley did not quickly recover
from the mortification.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE COMEDY OF LIFE.


The world is the stage; men are the actors; the events of life form the
piece; fortune distributes the parts; religion governs the performance;
philosophers are the spectators; the opulent occupy the boxes; the
powerful the amphitheatre; and the pit is for the unfortunate; the
disappointed snuff the candles; folly composes the music; and time draws
the curtain.

       *       *       *       *       *


DUKE OF GRAFTON.


The late duke, when hunting, was thrown into a ditch, at the same time a
young curate called out, "_Lie still, my lord_," leaped over him, and
continued the chase. Such apparent want of feeling, might be presumed,
was properly resented. But on being helped out by his attendants, his
grace said, "_that man shall have the first good living that falls to my
disposal, had he stopped to have taken care of me I would never have
given him any thing:_" his grace being delighted with an ardour similar
to his own, or with a spirit that would not stoop to flatter.

C.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

Be ignorance thy choice when knowledge leads to woe.

       *       *       *       *       *

_LIMBIRD'S EDITIONS._

CHEAP and POPULAR WORKS published at the MIRROR OFFICE in the Strand,
near Somerset House.

The ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS, Embellished with nearly 150
Engravings. In 6 Parts, 1s. each.

The TALES of the GENII. Price 2s.

The MICROCOSM. By the Right Hon. G. CANNING. &c. 4 Parts, 6d. each.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES, with Fifty Portraits, 12 Parts, 1s. each.

COWPER'S POEMS, with 12 Engravings, 12 Numbers, 3d. each.

COOK'S VOYAGES, 28 Numbers, 3d. each.

The CABINET of CURIOSITIES: or, WONDERS of the WORLD DISPLAYED. 27 Nos.
2d. each.

BEAUTIES of SCOTT. 2 vols. price 7s. boards.

The ARCANA of SCIENCE for 1828. Price 4s. 6d.