"Well," he conceded, "Europe does take on a new perspective from the
point of view of Susa. I see you are a philosopher, sitting amidst the
ruins of empires and wisely preferring the trickle of your fountain to
the trickle of the telegraph. If Austria falls to pieces, if Serbia
reaches the Adriatic, what is that to us? Nothing but a story that in
Elam has been told too often to have any novelty! Eh?"

"Why," asked Matthews, quickly, "is that on already?"

Magin looked at him again a moment before answering.

"Not yet! But why," he added, "do you say already?"

His voice had a curious rumble in the dim stone room. Matthews wondered
whether it were because the acoustic properties of a _serdab_ in Dizful
differ from those of a galley on the Karun, or whether there really were
something new about him.

"Why, it's bound to come sooner or later, isn't it? If it's true that
all the way from Nish to Ragusa those chaps speak the same language and
belong to the same race, one can hardly blame them for wanting to do
what the Italians and the Germans have already done. And, as a
philosopher sitting amidst the ruins of empires, wouldn't you say
yourself that Austria has bitten off rather more than she can chew?"

"Very likely I should." Magin took a cigar out of his pocket, snipped
off the end with a patent cutter, lighted it, and regarded the smoke
with a growing look of amusement. "But," he went on, "as a philosopher
sitting amidst the ruins of empires, I would hardly confine that
observation to Austria-Hungary. For instance, I have heard"--and his
look of amusement verged on a smile--"of an island in the Atlantic Ocean
not much larger than the land of Elam, an island of rains and fogs whose
people, feeling the need of a little more sunlight perhaps, or of
pin-money and elbow-room, sailed away and conquered for themselves two
entire continents, as well as a good part of a third. I have also heard
that the inhabitants of this island, not content with killing and
enslaving so many defenseless fellow-creatures, or with picking up any
lesser island, cape, or bay that happened to suit their fancy, took it
upon themselves to govern several hundred million unwilling individuals
of all colors and religions in other parts of the world. And, having
thus procured both sunlight and elbow-room, those enterprising islanders
assumed a virtuous air and pushed the high cries--as our friend Gaston
would say--if any of their neighbors ever showed the slightest symptom
of following their very successful example. Have you ever heard of such
an island? And would you not say--as a philosopher sitting amidst the
ruins of empires--that it had also bitten off rather more than it could
chew?"

Matthews, facing the question and the now open smile, felt that he
wanted to be cool, but that he did not altogether succeed.

"I dare say that two or three hundred years ago we did things we
wouldn't do now. Times have changed in all sorts of ways. But we never
set out like a Cæsar or a Napoleon or a Bismarck to invent an empire. It
all came about quite naturally. Anybody else could have done the same.
But nobody else thought of it--at the time. We simply got there first."

"Ah?" Magin smiled more broadly. "It seems to me that I have heard of
another island, not so far from here, which is no more than a pin-point,
to be sure, but which happens to be the key of the Persian Gulf. I have
also heard that the Portuguese got there first, as you put it. But you
crushed Portugal, you crushed Spain, you crushed Holland, you crushed
France--or you meant to. And I must say it looks to me as if you would
not mind crushing Germany. Why do you go on building ships, building
ships, building ships, always two to Germany's one? Simply that you and
your friends can go on eating up Asia and Africa--and perhaps Germany
too!"

Matthews noticed that the elder man ended, at any rate, not quite so
coolly as he began.

"Nonsense! The thing's so simple it isn't worth repeating. We have to
have more ships than anybody else because our empire is bigger than
anybody else's--and more scattered. As for eating, it strikes me that
Germany has done more of that lately than any one. However, if you know
so much about islands, you must also know how we happened to go into
India--or Egypt. In the beginning it was pure accident. And you know
very well that if we left them to-morrow there would be the devil to
pay. Do we get a penny out of them?"

"Oh, no!" laughed Magin. "You administer them purely on altruistic
principles, for their own good and that of the world at large--like the
oil-wells of the Karun!"

"Well, since you put it that way," laughed Matthews in turn, "perhaps we
do!"

Magin shrugged his shoulders.

"Extraordinary people! Do you really think the rest of the world so
stupid? Or it is that the fog of your island has got into your brains?
You always talk about truth as if it were a patented British invention,
yet no one is less willing to call a spade a spade. Look at Cairo, where
you pretend to keep nothing but a consul-general, but where the ruler of
the country can't turn over in bed without his permission. A
consul-general! Look at your novels! Look at what you yourself are
saying to me!"

Matthews lighted a pipe over it.

"In a way, of course, you are right," he said. "But I am not sure that
we are altogether wrong. Spades exist, but there's no inherent virtue in
talking about them. In fact it's often better not to mention them at
all. There's something very funny about words, you know. They so often
turn out to mean more than you expected."

At that Magin regarded his companion with a new interest.

"I would not have thought you knew that, at your age! But after all, if
you will allow me to say so, it is a woman's point of view. A man ought
to say things out--and stick by them. He is less likely to get into
trouble afterward. For example, it would have been not only more honest
but more advantageous for your country if you had openly annexed Egypt
in the beginning. Now where are you? You continually have to explain,
and to watch very sharply lest some other consul-general tell the
Khedive to turn over in bed. And since you and the Russians intend to
eat up Persia, why on earth don't you do it frankly, instead of trying
not to frighten the Persians, and talking vaguely about spheres of
influence, neutral zones, and what not? I'm afraid the truth is that
you're getting old and fat. What?" He glanced over his cigar at
Matthews, who was regarding the trickle of the water beside them. "Those
Russians, they are younger," he went on. "They have still to be reckoned
with. And they aren't so squeamish, either in novels or in life. Look at
what they have done in their 'sphere.' They have roads, they have
Cossacks, they have the Shah under their thumb. And whenever they choose
they shut the Baghdad train against your caravans--yours, with whom they
have an understanding! A famous understanding! You don't even understand
how to make the most of your own sphere. You have had the Karun in your
hands for three hundred years, and what have you done with it? Why, in
heaven's name, didn't you blast out that rock at Ahwaz long ago? Why
haven't you made a proper road to Isfahan? Why don't you build that
railroad to Khorremabad that you are always talking about, and finish it
before the Germans get to Baghdad? Ah! If they had been here in your
place you would have seen!"

"It strikes me," retorted Matthews, with less coolness than he had yet
shown, "that you are here already--from what the Father of the Swords
told me." And he looked straight at the man who had told him that an
Englishman couldn't call a spade a spade. But he saw anew how that man
could ignore an advantage of position.

Magin returned the look--frankly, humorously, quizzically. Then he said:

"You remind me, by the way, of a question I came to ask you. Would you
object to telling me what you are up to here?"

"What am I up to?" queried Matthews, in astonishment. The cheek of the
bounder was really beyond everything! "What do you mean?"

Magin smiled.

"I am not an Englishman. I mean what I say."

"No you're not!" Matthews threw back at him. "No Englishman would try to
pass himself off for a Brazilian."

Magin smiled again.

"Nor would a German jump too hastily at conclusions. If I told you I was
from Brazil, I spoke the truth. I was born there, as were many
Englishmen I know. That makes them very little less English, and it has
perhaps made me more German. Who knows? As a philosopher sitting with
you amidst the ruins of empires I am at least inclined to believe that
we take our mother country more seriously than you do yours! But to
return to our point: what are you doing here?"

"I'm attending to my business. Which seems to me more than you are
doing, Mr. Magin."

Matthews noticed, from the reverberation of the room, that his voice
must have been unnecessarily loud. He busied himself with the bowl of
his pipe. As for Magin, he got up and began walking to and fro, drawing
at his cigar. The red of it showed how much darker the room had been
growing. It increased, too, the curious effect of his eyes. They looked
like two empty holes in a mask.

"Eh, too bad!" sighed the visitor at last. "You disappoint me. Do you
know? You are, of course, much younger than I; but you made me hope that
you were perhaps--how shall I put it?--a spirit of the first class. I
hoped that without padding, without rancor, like true philosophers, we
might exchange our points of view. However--Since it suits you to stand
on your dignity, I must say that I am very distinctly attending to my
business. And I am obliged to add that it does not help my business, Mr.
Matthews, to have you sitting so mysteriously in Dizful--and refusing to
call on me, but occasionally calling on nomad chiefs. I confess that you
don't look to me like a spy. Spies are generally older men than you,
more cooked, as Gaston would say, more fluent in languages. It does not
seem to me, either, that even an English spy would go about his affairs
quite as you have done. Still, I regret to have to repeat that I dislike
your idea of a lark. And not only because you upset nomad chiefs. You
upset other people as well. You might even end up by upsetting
yourself."

"Who the devil are you?" demanded Matthews, hotly. "The Emperor of
Elam?"

"Ha! I see you are acquainted with the excellent Adolf Ganz!" laughed
Magin. "No," he went on in another tone. "His viceroy, perhaps. But as I
was saying, it does not suit me to have you stopping here. I can see,
however, that you have reason to be surprised, possibly annoyed, at my
telling you so. I am willing to be reasonable about it. How much do you
want--for the expenses of your going away?"

Matthews could hardly believe his ears. He got up in turn.

"What in hell do you mean by that?"

"I am sorry, Mr. Matthews," answered the other, slowly, "that my
knowledge of your language does not permit me to make myself clear to
you. Perhaps you will understand me better if I quote from yourself. I
got here first. Did you ever put your foot into this country until two
weeks ago? Did your countrymen ever trouble themselves about it, even
after Layard showed them the way? No! They expressly left it outside of
their famous 'sphere,' in that famous neutral zone. And all these
centuries it has been lying here in the sun, asleep, forgotten,
deserted, lost, given over to nomads and to lions--until I came. I am
the first European since Alexander the Great who has seen what it might
be. It is not so impossible that I might open again those choked-up
canals which once made these burnt plains a paradise. In those mountains
I have found--what I have found. What right have you to interfere with
me, who are only out for a lark? Or what right have your countrymen?
They have already, as you so gracefully express it, bitten off so much
more than they can chew. The Gulf, the Karun, the oil-wells--they are
yours. Take them. But Baghdad is ours: if not today, then tomorrow. And
if you will exercise that logical process of which your British mind
appears to be not altogether destitute, you can hardly help seeing that
this part of your famous neutral zone, if not the whole of it, falls
into the sphere of Baghdad. You know, too, that we do things more
thoroughly than you. Therefore I must very respectfully but very firmly
ask you, at your very earliest convenience, to leave Dizful. I am quite
willing to believe, however, that your interference with my arrangements
was accidental. And I dislike to put you to any unnecessary trouble. So
I shall be happy to compensate you, in marks, _tomans_, or pounds
sterling, for any disappointment you may feel in bringing this
particular lark to an end. Do you now understand me? How much do you
want?"

He perceived, Guy Matthews, that his lark had indeed taken an unexpected
turn. He was destined, far sooner than he dreamed, to be asked of life,
and to answer, questions even more direct than this. But until now life
had chosen to confront him with no problem more pressing than one of
cricket or hunting. He was therefore troubled by an unwonted confusion
of feelings. For he felt that his ordinary vocabulary--made up of such
substantives as lark, cheek, and bounder, and the comprehensive
adjective "rum"--fell short of coping with this extraordinary speech. He
even felt that he might possibly have answered in a different way, but
for that unspeakable offer of money. And the rumble of Magin's bass in
the dark stone room somehow threw a light on the melancholy land
without, somehow gave him a dim sense that he did not answer for himself
alone--that he answered for the tradition of Layard and Rawlinson and
Morier and Sherley, of Clive and Kitchener, of Drake and Raleigh and
Nelson, of all the adventurous young men of that beloved foggy island at
which this pseudo-Brazilian jeered.

"When I first met you in the river, Mr. Magin," he said, quietly, "I
confess I did not realize how much of the spoils of Susa you were
carrying away in your chests. And I didn't take your gold anklet as a
bribe, though I didn't take you for too much of a gentleman in offering
it to me. But all I have to say now is that I shall stay in Dizful as
long as I please--and that you had better clear out of this house unless
you want me to kick you out."

"Heroics, eh? You obstinate little fool! I could choke you with one
hand!"

"You'd better try!" shouted Matthews.

He started in spite of himself when a muffled boom suddenly answered
him, jarring even the sunken walls of the room. Then he remembered that
voice of the drowsing city, bursting out with the pent-up brew of the
day.

"Ah!" exclaimed Magin strangely--"The cannon speaks at last! You will
hear, beside your fountain, what it has to say. That, at any rate, you
will perhaps understand--you and the people of your island." He stopped
a moment. "But," he went on, "if some fasting dervish knocks you on the
head with his mace, or sticks his knife into your back, don't say I
didn't warn you!"

And the echo of his receding stamp in the corridor drowned for a moment
the trickle of the invisible water.


V

The destiny of some men lies coiled within them, invisible as the blood
of their hearts or the stuff of their will, working darkly, day by day
and year after year, for their glory or for their destruction. The
destiny of other men is an accident, a god from the machine or an enemy
in ambush. Such was the destiny of Guy Matthews, as it was of how many
other unsuspecting young men of his time. It would have been
inconceivable to him, as he stood in his dark stone room listening to
Magin's receding stamp, that anything could make him do what Magin
demanded. Yet something did it--the last drop of the strange essence
Dizful had been brewing for him.

The letter that accomplished this miracle came to him by the hand of a
Bakhtiari from Meidan-i-Naft. It said very little. It said so little,
and that little so briefly, that Matthews, still preoccupied with his
own quarrel, at first saw no reason why a stupid war on the Continent,
and the consequent impossibility of telegraphing home except by way of
India, should affect the oil-works, or why his friends should put him in
the position of showing Magin the white feather. But as he turned over
the Bakhtiari's scrap of paper the meaning of it grew, in the light of
the very circumstances that made him hesitate, so portentously that he
sent Abbas for horses. And before the Ramazan gun boomed again he was
well on his way back to Meidan-i-Naft.

There was something unreal to him about that night ride eastward across
the dusty moonlit plain. He never forgot that night. The unexpectedness
of it was only a part of the unreality. What pulled him up short was a
new quality in the general unexpectedness of life. Life had always been,
like the trip from which he was returning, more or less of a lark.
Whereas it suddenly appeared that life might, perhaps, be very little of
a lark. So far as he had ever pictured life to himself he had seen it as
an extension of his ordered English countryside, beset by no hazard more
searching than a hawthorne hedge. But the plain across which he rode
gave him a new picture of it, lighted romantically enough by the moon,
yet offering a rider magnificent chances to break his neck in some
invisible nullah, if not to be waylaid by marauding Lurs or lions. It
even began to come to this not too articulate young man that romance and
reality might be the same thing, romance being what happens to the other
fellow and reality being what happens to you. He looked up at the moon
of war that had been heralded to him by cannon and tried to imagine
what, under that same moon far away in Europe, was happening to the
other fellow. For it was entirely on the cards that it might also happen
to him, Guy Matthews, who had gone up the Ab-i-Diz for a lark! That his
experience had an extraordinary air of having happened to some one else,
as he went back in his mind to his cruise on the river, his meeting with
the barge, his first glimpse of Dizful, the interlude of Bala Bala, the
return to Dizful, the cannon, Magin. Magin! He was extraordinary enough,
in all conscience, as Matthews tried to piece together, under his
romantic-realistic moon, the various unrelated fragments his memory
produced of that individual, connoisseur of Greek kylixes and Lur
nose-jewels, quoter of Scripture and secret agent.

The bounder must have known, as he sat smoking his cigar and ironizing
on the ruins of empires, that the safe and settled little world to which
they both belonged was already in a blaze. Of course he had known
it--and he had said nothing about it! But not least extraordinary was
the way the bounder, whom after all Matthews had only seen twice, seemed
to color the whole adventure. In fact, he had been the first speck in
the blue, the forerunner--if Matthews had only seen it--of the more epic
adventure into which he was so quickly to be caught.

At Shuster he broke his journey. There were still thirty miles to do,
and fresh horses were to be hired--of some fasting _charvadar_ who would
never consent in Ramazan, Matthews very well knew, to start for
Meidan-i-Naft under the terrific August sun. But he was not ungrateful
for a chance to rest. He discovered in himself, too, a sudden interest
in all the trickle of the telegraph. And he was anxious to pick up what
news he could from the few Europeans in the town. Moreover, he needed to
see Ganz about the replenishing of his money-bag; for not the lightest
item of the traveler's pack in Persia is his load of silver _krans_.

At the telegraph office Matthews ran into Ganz himself. The Swiss was a
short, fair, faded man, not too neat about his white clothes, with a
pensive mustache and an ambiguous blue eye that lighted at sight of the
young Englishman. The light, however, was not one to illuminate
Matthews' darkness in the matter of news. What news trickled out of the
local wire was very meager indeed. The Austrians were shelling Belgrade,
the Germans, the Russians, and the French had gone in. That was all. No,
not quite all; for the bank-rate in England had suddenly jumped
sky-high--higher, at any rate, than it had ever jumped before. And even
Shuster felt the distant commotion, in that the bazaar had already seen
fit to put up the price of sugar and petroleum. Not that Shuster showed
any outward sign of commotion as the two threaded their way toward
Ganz's house. The deserted streets reminded Matthews strangely of
Dizful. What was stranger was to find how they reminded him of a chapter
that is closed. He hardly noticed the blank walls, the archways of brick
and tile, the tall _badgirs_, even the filth and smells. But strangest
was it to listen to the hot silence, to look up at the brilliant stripe
of blue between the adobe walls, while over there--!

The portentous uncertainty of what might be over there made his answers
to Ganz's questions about his journey curt and abstracted. He gave no
explanation of his failure to see the celebration at Bala Bala and the
ruins of Susa, which Ganz supposed to be the chief objects of his
excursion. Yet he found himself looking with a new eye at the anomalous
exile whom the Father of Swords called the prince among the merchants of
Shuster, noting the faded untidy air as he had never noted it before,
wondering why a man should bury himself in such a hole as this. Was one
now, he speculated, to look at everybody all over again? He was not the
kind of man, Ganz, to interest the Guy Matthews who had gone to Dizful.
But it was the Guy Matthews who came back from Dizful who didn't like
Ganz's name or Ganz's good enough accent. Nevertheless he yielded to
Ganz's insistence, when they reached the office and the money-bag had
been restored to its normal portliness, that the traveler should step
into the house to rest and cool off.

"Do come!" urged the Swiss. "I so seldom see a civilized being. And I
have a new piano!" he threw in as an added inducement. "Do you play?"

He had no parlor tricks, he told Ganz, and he told himself that he
wanted to get on. But Ganz had been very decent to him, after all. And
he began to perceive that he himself was extremely tired. So he followed
Ganz through the cloister of the pool to the court where the great basin
glittered in the sun, below the pillared portico.

"Who is that?" exclaimed Ganz suddenly. "What a tone, eh? And what a
touch!"

Matthews heard from Ganz's private quarters a welling of music so
different from the pipes and cow-horns of Dizful that it gave him a
sudden stab of homesickness.

"I say," he said, brightening, "could it be any of the fellows from
Meidan-i-Naft?"

The ambiguous blue eye brightened too.

"Perhaps! It is the river music from _Rheingold_. But listen," Ganz
added with a smile. "There are sharks among the Rhine maidens!"

