
Thus there are two books from whence I collect my divinity--besides that
written one of God, another of His servant nature; that universal and
public manuscript, that lies expanded unto the eyes of all--those that
never saw Him in the one, have discovered Him in the other.  This was the
scripture and theology of the heathens; the natural motion of the sun
made them more admire Him, than its supernatural station did the children
of Israel; the ordinary effects of nature wrought more admiration in them
than in the other all His miracles: surely the heathens knew better how
to join and read these mystical letters, than we Christians, who cast a
more careless eye on these common hieroglyphics, and disdain to suck
divinity from the flowers of nature.  Nor do I so forget God as to adore
the name of nature; which I define not with the schools, to be the
principle of motion and rest, but that straight and regular line, that
settled and constant course the wisdom of God hath ordained the actions
of His creatures, according to their several kinds.  To make a revolution
every day, is the nature of the sun, because of that necessary course
which God hath ordained it, from which it cannot swerve, by a faculty
from that voice which first did give it motion.  Now this course of
nature God seldom alters or perverts, but like an excellent artist hath
so contrived His work, that with the selfsame instrument, without a new
creation, He may effect His obscurest designs.  Thus He sweeteneth the
water with a wood, preserveth the creatures in the ark, which the blast
of His mouth might have as easily created; for God is like a skilful
geometrician, who when more easily, and with one stroke of his compass,
he might describe or divide a right line, had yet rather to do this in a
circle or longer way, according to the constituted and fore-laid
principles of his art: yet this rule of His He doth sometimes pervert, to
acquaint the world with His prerogative, lest the arrogancy of our reason
should question His power, and conclude He could not.  And thus I call
the effects of nature the works of God, whose hand and instrument she
only is; and therefore to ascribe His actions unto her, is to devolve the
honour of the principal agent upon the instrument; which, if with reason
we may do, then let our hammers rise up and boast they have built our
houses, and our pens receive the honour of our writing. . . .  Now nature
is not at variance with art, nor art with nature: they being both
servants of His providence.  Art is the perfection of nature: were the
world now as it was the sixth day, there were yet a chaos.  Nature hath
made one world, and art another.  In brief, all things are artificial;
for nature is the art of God.


ON PHILOSOPHY


Beware of philosophy, is a precept not to be received in too large a
sense; for in this mass of nature there is a set of things that carry in
their front, though not in capital letters, yet in stenography, and short
characters, something of divinity, which to wiser reasons serve as
luminaries in the abyss of knowledge, and to judicious beliefs, as scales
and rundles to mount the pinnacles and highest pieces of divinity.  The
severe schools shall never laugh me out of the philosophy of Hermes, that
this visible world is but a picture of the invisible, wherein, as in a
portrait, things are not truly, but in equivocal shapes, and as they
counterfeit some real substance in that invisible fabric.


ON FINAL CAUSE


There is but one first cause, and four second causes of all things; some
are without efficient, as God; others without matter, as angels; some
without form, as the first matter: but every essence, created or
uncreated, hath its final cause, and some positive end both of its
essence and operation; this is the cause I grope after in the works of
nature; on this hangs the providence of God.  To raise so beauteous a
structure, as the world and the creatures thereof, was but His art; but
their sundry and divided operations, with their predestinated ends, are
from the treasure of His wisdom.  In the causes, nature, and affections
of the eclipses of the sun and moon, there is most excellent speculation;
but to profound farther, and to contemplate a reason why His providence
hath so disposed and ordered their motions in that vast circle, as to
conjoin and obscure each other, is a sweeter piece of reason, and a
diviner point of philosophy; therefore sometimes, and in some things,
there appears to me as much divinity in Galen's books _De Usu Partium_,
as in Suarez's Metaphysics: had Aristotle been as curious in the inquiry
of this cause as he was of the other, he had not left behind him an
imperfect piece of philosophy, but an absolute tract of divinity.


ON DEATH


This is that dismal conquest we all deplore, that makes us so often cry,
O Adam, _quid fecisti_?  I thank God I have not those straight ligaments
or narrow obligations to the world as to dote on life, or be convulsed
and tremble at the name of death.  Not that I am insensible of the dread
and horror thereof, or by raking into the bowels of the deceased,
continual sight of anatomies, skeletons, or cadaverous relics, like
vespilloes, or grave-makers, I am become stupid, or have forgot the
apprehension of mortality; but that marshalling all the horrors, and
contemplating the extremities thereof, I find not anything therein able
to daunt the courage of a man, much less a well-resolved Christian.  And
therefore am not angry at the error of our first parents, or unwilling to
bear a part of this common fate, and like the best of them to die, that
is, to cease to breathe, to take a farewell of the elements, to be a kind
of nothing for a moment, to be within one instant of a spirit.  When I
take a full view and circle of myself, without this reasonable moderator
and equal piece of justice, death, I do conceive myself the miserablest
person extant.  Were there not another life that I hope for, all the
vanities of this world should not entreat a moment's breath for me; could
the devil work my belief to imagine I could never die, I would not
outlive that very thought; I have so abject a conceit of this common way
of existence, this retaining to the sun and elements, I cannot think this
is to be a man, or to live according to the dignity of humanity.  In
expectation of a better, I can with patience embrace this life, yet in my
best meditations do often desire death.  I honour any man that contemns
it, nor can I highly love any that is afraid of it: this makes me
naturally love a soldier, and honour those tattered and contemptible
regiments that will die at the command of a sergeant.  For a pagan there
may be some motives to be in love with life; but for a Christian to be
amazed at death, I see not how he can escape this dilemma, that he is too
sensible of this life or hopeless of the life to come.

I am naturally bashful, nor hath conversation, age, or travel, been able
to effront or enharden me; yet I have one part of modesty which I have
seldom discovered in another, that is, (to speak truly), I am not so much
afraid of death, as ashamed thereof.  It is the very disgrace and
ignominy of our natures, that in a moment can so disfigure us, that our
nearest friends, wife and children stand afraid and start at us.  The
birds and beasts of the field, that before in a natural fear obeyed us,
forgetting all allegiance, begin to prey upon us.  This very conceit hath
in a tempest disposed and left me willing to be swallowed up in the abyss
of waters; wherein I had perished unseen, unpitied, without wondering
eyes, tears of pity, lectures of mortality, and none had said, _Quantum
mutatus ab illo_!  Not that I am ashamed of the anatomy of my parts, or
can accuse nature for playing the bungler in any part of me, or my own
vicious life for contracting any shameful disease upon me, whereby I
might not call myself as wholesome a morsel for the worms as any.


ON HEAVEN


Now, the necessary mansions of our restored selves are those two contrary
and incompatible places we call heaven and hell; to define them, or
strictly to determine what and where these are, surpasseth my divinity.
That elegant apostle which seemed to have a glimpse of heaven hath left
but a negative description thereof: 'which neither eye hath seen, nor ear
hath heard, nor can enter into the heart of man': he was translated out
of himself to behold it; but being returned into himself could not
express it.  St. John's description by emeralds, chrysolites, and
precious stones is too weak to express the material heaven we behold.
Briefly, therefore, where the soul hath the full measure and complement
of happiness, where the boundless appetite of that spirit remains
completely satisfied that it can neither desire addition nor alteration,
that I think is truly heaven: and this can only be in the enjoyment of
that essence whose infinite goodness is able to terminate the desires of
itself, and the insatiable wishes of ours; wherever God will thus
manifest Himself, there is heaven, though within the circle of this
sensible world.  Thus the soul of man may be in heaven anywhere, even
within the limits of his own proper body; and when it ceaseth to live in
the body it may remain in its own soul, that is, its Creator.  And thus
we may say that St. Paul, whether in the body, or out of the body, was
yet in heaven. . . .  Moses, that was bred up in all the learning of the
Egyptians, committed a gross absurdity in philosophy when with these eyes
of flesh he desired to see God, and petitioned his Maker, that is truth
itself, to a contradiction.


ON HELL


Men commonly set forth the torments of hell by fire, and the extremity of
corporeal afflictions, and describe hell in the same method that Mahomet
doth heaven.  This indeed makes a noise, and drums in popular ears; but
if this be the terrible piece thereof, it is not worthy to stand in
diameter with heaven, whose happiness consists in that part that is best
able to comprehend it, that immortal essence, that translated divinity
and colony of God, the soul.  Surely, though we place hell under earth,
the devil's walk and purlieu is about it: men speak too popularly who
place it in those flaming mountains, which to grosser apprehensions
represent hell.  The heart of man is the place the devils dwell in.  I
feel sometimes a hell within myself; Lucifer keeps his court in my
breast; Legion is revived in me.  There are as many hells as Anaxagoras
conceited worlds.  There was more than one hell in Magdalene, when there
were seven devils; for every devil is a hell unto himself.  He holds
enough of torture in his own _ubi_, and needs not the misery of
circumference to afflict him.  And thus, a distracted conscience here, is
a shadow or introduction unto hell hereafter.  Who can but pity the
merciful intention of those hands that do destroy themselves?  The devil,
were it in his power, would do the like; which being impossible, his
miseries are endless, and he suffers most in that attribute wherein he is
impassible--his immortality.

I thank God that (with joy I mention it) I was never afraid of hell, nor
never grew pale at the description of that place.  I have so fixed my
contemplations on heaven, that I have almost forgot the idea of hell, and
am afraid rather to lose the joys of the one, than endure the misery of
the other--to be deprived of them is a perfect hell, and needs, methinks,
no addition to complete our afflictions.  That terrible term hath never
detained me from sin, nor do I owe any good action to the name thereof.  I
fear God, yet am not afraid of Him; His mercies make me ashamed of my
sins, before His judgments afraid thereof.  These are the forced and
secondary methods of His wisdom, which He useth but as the last remedy,
and upon provocation; a course rather to deter the wicked, than incite
the virtuous to His worship.  I can hardly think there was ever any
scared into heaven: they go the fairest way to heaven that would serve
God without a hell.  Other mercenaries that crouch unto Him, in fear of
hell, though they term themselves the servants, are indeed but the slaves
of the Almighty.


ON PRAYER


I cannot contentedly frame a prayer for myself in particular, without a
catalogue for my friends; nor request a happiness wherein my sociable
disposition doth not desire the fellowship of my neighbour.  I never
heard the toll of a passing-bell, though in my mirth, without my prayers
and best wishes for the departing spirit.  I cannot go to cure the body
of my patient, but I forget my profession, and call unto God for his
soul.  I cannot see one say his prayers, but instead of imitating him, I
fall into a supplication for him, who, perhaps, is no more to me than a
common nature; and if God hath vouchsafed an ear to my supplications,
there are surely many happy that never saw me, and enjoy the blessing of
my unknown devotions.  To pray for enemies, that is, for their salvation,
is no harsh precept, but the practice of our daily and ordinary
devotions.


ON CHARITY


The vulgarity of those judgments that wrap the Church of God in Strabo's
cloak, and restrain it unto Europe, seem to me as bad geographers as
Alexander, who thought he had conquered all the world, when he had not
subdued the half of any part thereof.  For we cannot deny the Church of
God both in Asia and Africa, if we do not forget the peregrinations of
the apostles, the deaths of the martyrs, the sessions of many, and, even
in our reformed judgment, lawful councils, held in those parts in the
minority and nonage of ours.  Nor must a few differences, more remarkable
in the eyes of man than perhaps in the judgment of God, excommunicate
from heaven one another, much less those Christians who are in a manner
all martyrs, maintaining their faith in the noble way of persecution, and
serving God in the fire, whereas we honour Him in the sunshine.  It is
true we all hold there is a number of elect, and many to be saved; yet
take our opinions together, and from the confusion thereof there will be
no such thing as salvation, nor shall any one be saved.  For first, the
Church of Rome condemneth us, we likewise them; the sub-reformists and
sectaries sentence the doctrine of our Church as damnable; the atomist,
or familist, reprobates all these; and all these them again.  Thus,
whilst the mercies of God do promise us heaven, our conceits and opinions
exclude us from that place.  There must be therefore more than one St.
Peter.  Particular churches and sects usurp the gates of heaven, and turn
the key against each other: and thus we go to heaven against each other's
wills, conceits, and opinions, and, with as much uncharity as ignorance,
do err, I fear, in points not only of our own, but one another's
salvation.

I believe many are saved, who to man seem reprobated; and many are
reprobated who in the opinion and sentence of man stand elected.  There
will appear at the last day strange and unexpected examples, both of His
justice and His mercy; and therefore to define either is folly in man,
and insolency even in the devils.  Those acute and subtle spirits, in all
their sagacity, can hardly divine who shall be saved; which if they could
prognosticate, their labour were at an end; nor need they compass the
earth, seeking whom they may devour.  Those who, upon a rigid application
of the law, sentence Solomon unto damnation, condemn not only him but
themselves, and the whole world; for by the letter, and written word of
God, we are, without exception, in the state of death; but there is a
prerogative of God, and an arbitrary pleasure above the letter of His own
law, by which alone we can pretend unto salvation, and through which
Solomon might be as easily saved as those who condemn him.

The number of those who pretend unto salvation, and those infinite swarms
who think to pass through the eye of this needle, have much amazed me.
That name and compellation of 'little flock' doth not comfort but deject
my devotion, especially when I reflect upon mine own unworthiness,
wherein, according to my humble apprehensions, I am below them all.  I
believe there shall never be an anarchy in heaven; but as there are
hierarchies amongst the angels, so shall there be degrees of priority
amongst the saints.  Yet it is, I protest, beyond my ambition to aspire
unto the first ranks; my desires only are, and I shall be happy therein,
to be but the last man, and bring up the rear in heaven.


ON THE REFORMATION


As there were many reformers, so likewise many reformations; every
country proceeding in a particular way and method, according as their
national interest, together with their constitution and clime inclined
them; some angrily, and with extremity; others calmly, and with
mediocrity, not rending, but easily dividing the community, and leaving
an honest possibility of a reconciliation; which, though peaceable
spirits do desire, and may conceive that revolution of time and the
mercies of God may effect, yet that judgment that shall consider the
present antipathies between the two extremes, their contrarieties in
condition, affection, and opinion, may with the same hopes expect a union
in the poles of heaven.

It is the promise of Christ to make us all one flock; but how, and when
this union shall be, is as obscure to me as the last day.


ON A DYING PATIENT OF HIS


Upon my first visit I was bold to tell them who had not let fall all
hopes of his recovery, that in my sad opinion he was not like to behold a
grasshopper, much less to pluck another fig; and in no long time after
seemed to discover that odd mortal symptom in him not mentioned by
Hippocrates, that is, to lose his own face, and look like some of his
near relations; for he maintained not his proper countenance, but looked
like his uncle, the lines of whose face lay deep and invisible in his
healthful visage before: for as from our beginning we run through variety
of looks, before we come to consistent and settled faces; so before our
end, by sick and languishing alterations, we put on new visages: and in
our retreat to earth, may fall upon such looks which from community of
seminal originals were before latent in us.

Not to fear death, nor desire it, was short of his resolution: to be
dissolved, and be with Christ, was his dying ditty.  He conceived his
thread long, in no long course of years, and when he had scarce outlived
the second life of Lazarus; esteeming it enough to approach the years of
his Saviour, who so ordered His own human state as not to be old upon
earth.

Though age had set no seal upon his face, yet a dim eye might clearly
discover fifty in his actions; and therefore, since wisdom is the grey
hair, and an unspotted life old age; although his years came short, he
might have been said to have held up with longer livers, and to have been
Solomon's old man.  And surely if we deduct all those days of our life
which we might wish unlived, and which abate the comfort of those we now
live; if we reckon up only those days which God hath accepted of our
lives, a life of good years will hardly be a span long: the son in this
sense may outlive the father, and none be climacterically old.  He that
early arriveth unto the parts and prudence of age, is happily old without
the uncomfortable attendants of it; and 'tis superfluous to live unto
grey hairs, when in a precocious temper we anticipate the virtues of
them.  In brief, he cannot be accounted young who outliveth the old man.
He that hath early arrived unto the measure of a perfect stature in
Christ, hath already fulfilled the prime and longest intention of his
being: and one day lived after the perfect rule of piety, is to be
preferred before sinning immortality.


ON A HEAVENLY MIND


Lastly; if length of days be thy portion, make it not thy expectation.
Reckon not upon long life: think every day the last, and live always
beyond thy account.  He that so often surviveth his expectation lives
many lives, and will scarce complain of the shortness of his days.  Time
past is gone like a shadow; make time to come present.  Approximate thy
latter times by present apprehensions of them: be like a neighbour unto
the grave, and think there is but little to come.  And since there is
something of us that will still live on, join both lives together, and
live in one but for the other.  He who thus ordereth the purposes of this
life, will never be far from the next; and is in some manner already in
it, by a happy conformity and close apprehension of it.  And if, as we
have elsewhere declared, any have been so happy, as personally to
understand Christian annihilation, ecstasy, exolution, transformation,
the kiss of the spouse, and ingression into the divine shadow, according
to mystical theology, they have already had an handsome anticipation of
heaven; the world is in a manner over, and the earth in ashes unto them.


ON THE RELIGIO MEDICI


This I confess, about seven years past, with some others of affinity
thereto, for my private exercise and satisfaction I had at leisurable
hours composed; which being communicated unto one, it became common unto
many, and was by transcription successively corrupted, until it arrived
in a most depraved copy at the press.  He that shall peruse that work,
and shall take notice of sundry particulars and personal expressions
therein, will easily discern the intention was not public: and being a
private exercise directed to myself, what is delivered therein, was
rather a memorial unto me, than an example or rule unto any other: and
therefore if there be any singularity therein correspondent unto the
private conceptions of any man, it doth not advantage them: or if
dissentaneous thereunto, it no way overthrows them.  It was penned in
such a place, and with such disadvantage, that (I protest) from the first
setting of pen unto paper, I had not the assistance of any good book,
whereby to promote my invention, or relieve my memory, and therefore
there might be many real lapses therein, which others might take notice
of, and more than I suspected myself.  It was set down many years past,
and was the sense of my conception at that time, not an immutable law
unto my advancing judgment at all times; and therefore there might be
many things therein plausible unto my past apprehension, which are not
agreeable unto my present self.  There are many things delivered
rhetorically, many expressions therein merely tropical, and as they best
illustrate my intention, and therefore also there are many things to be
taken in a soft and flexible sense and not to be called unto the rigid
test of reason.  Lastly, all that is contained therein, is in submission
unto maturer discernments; and as I have declared, shall no further
father them than the best and learned judgments shall authorise them;
under favour of which considerations I have made its secrecy public, and
committed the truth thereof to every ingenuous reader.



LAST LINES OF THE RELIGIO MEDICI

