"--Breachy Mr. BLODGETT!" sighs the lady, to herself.--

"--And three weddings will help us to forget everything but that which
is bright and pleasant," concludes the lawyer.

Next steps to the front Mr. TRACEY CLEWS, with his surprising head of
hair, and archly remarks:

"I believe you take me for a literary man, Mr. BUMSTEAD."

"What is that to me, sir? _I've_ no money to lend," returns the
organist, with marked uneasiness.

"To tell you the truth," proceeds the author of "The Amateur Detective,"
--"to tell you the whole truth, I have been playing the detective with
you by order of Mr. DIBBLE, and hope you will excuse my practice upon
you."

"He is my clerk," explains Mr. DIBBLE.

Whereupon Mr. TRACEY CLEWS dexterously whips off his brush of red hair,
and stands revealed as Mr. BLADAMS.

Merely waiting to granulate one more clove, Mr. BUMSTEAD settles the
rope about his neck anew, squints around under the wet towel in a
curiously ghastly manner, and thus addresses the meeting:--

"Ladies and gen'l'men--I've listened to y'r impudence with patience, and
on any other 'casion would be happy to see y'all safe home. At present,
however, Mr. BENTHAM and I desire to be left alone, if 'ts all th' same
t' you. You can come for the bodies in th' morning."

"BENTHAM! BENTHAM!" calls the Gospeler, "I can't see you acting in that
way, old friend. Come home with me to-night, and we'll talk of starting
a Religious Weekly together. That's your only successful American Comic
Paper."

"By Jove! so it is!" bawls JEREMY BENTHAM, like one possessed. "I never
thought of that before! I'm with you, my boy." And, hastily slipping the
rope from his neck, he hurries to his friend's side.

"And you, Uncle JACK--look at this!" exclaims Mr. E. DROOD, bringing
from behind his back and presenting to the melancholy organist a thing
that looks, at first glance, like an incredibly slim little black girl,
headless, with no waist at all, and balanced on one leg.

Mr. BUMSTEAD reaches for it mechanically; a look of intelligence comes
into his glassy eyes; then they fairly flame.

"ALLIE!" he cries, dancing ecstatically.

It is the Umbrella--old familiar bone-handle, brass ferrule--in a
bran-new dress of alpaca!

All gaze at him with unspeakable emotion, as, with the rope cast from
him, he pats his dear old friend, opens her half way, shuts her again,
and the while smiles with ineffable tenderness.

Suddenly a shriek--the voice of FLORA--breaks the silence:--

"It rains!--oh, my complexion!"

"Rains?" thunders the regenerated BUMSTEAD, in a tone of inconceivable
triumph. "So it does. Now then, ALLIE, do your duty;" and, with a softly
wooing, hospitable air, he opens the umbrella and holds it high over his
head.

By a common instinct they all swarm in upon him, craning their heads far
over each other's shoulders to secure a share of the Providential
shelter. The glare of the great bonfire falls upon the scene; the rain
pours down in torrents: they crowd in upon him on all sides, until what
was once a stately Ritualistic man resembles some tremendous monster
with seventeen wriggling bodies, thirty-four legs, and an alpaca canopy
above all.

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RACE OF THE DAUNTLESS AND CAMBRIA.

Punchinello's Sporting Special went down to Sandy Hook last week to
supervise the race between the _Dauntless_ and the _Cambria_. The affair
was consequently a great success.

Attired in white corduroy breeches, a blue velvet waistcoat, and a light
boating-jacket of yellow flannel, your reporter left the Battery at 6
hrs. 22 m, and 5 secs, on Friday morning, and steamed slowly down the
bay in the editorial row-boat _Punchinelletto_, which was manned by an
individual of remarkable oar-acular powers. So highly was he gifted
indeed in this respect, that your special was enabled to predict the
result of the aquatic gambols with perfect accuracy, as it afterward
appeared. Having got the yachts in position, he gave Messrs. BENNETT and
ASHBURY an audience, in which it was settled by your representative
that, owing to a split in the _Cambria's_ club-topsail, both parties
should carry their block-headed jibs; and the contest was begun.

In his anxiety to see fair play, however, your reporter at first
innocently took the lead, shooting off, at the given signal, far in
advance of the two yachts. His surprise was therefore great when the
latter suddenly hove to on their beam-ends, and declared an armistice,
to permit of Mr. ASHBURY'S publishing the following:

_Card_.

Much as I appreciate the kindness and attention extended to me on all
previous occasions in these waters, I must still politely insist that
the _Punchinelletto_ relinquish her natural and perhaps unavoidable
tendency to take the wind out of everybody's sails, and submit to remain
in the wake of these yachts during the continuance of the race. And I
hereby challenge all fast-sailing yachts of over 100 tons burthen, and
under 50, to a 15-mile race dead to windward and back again alive.

(Signed) ASHBURY.

Upon this your reporter manned the yard-arms, fired a salute of 100
guns, and directed the Oar-acular to back water; thereby giving the
_Dauntless_ the lead, which she retained up to the end of the race. By
the clever management of her Tacks she succeeded in completely Nailing
the _Cambria_. On the home-stretch, however, the latter began "eating
up" on her to such an alarming degree, that it was feared the provisions
of the Dauntless would not hold out. By putting the crew on half-rations
of champagne and sponge-cake this awful calamity was averted.

Excited by the presence of danger, your reporter forgot his habitual
caution, and giving his Oar-ist a hearing, made all sail for the
mark-boat. The tow-line was passed from the bows aft, and there attached
to the boat-hook, held by your representative. Upon this impromptu
clothes-line was crowded all the canvas, velvet, linen, and other
dry-goods appertaining to the gallant captain and his self-sacrificing
crew. The latter gentleman might have been seen under this gay cloud of
drapery working fitfully but energetically to and fro. But 't was all in
vain! The _Dauntless_ passed the mark-boat, and the race was won. Won?
But by whom?

The daily papers, with their usual inaccuracy, have made it appear that
the _Dauntless_ was the winner, but among thinking men there is but one
opinion in regard to the matter, an opinion fully explained and
corroborated in the following, published by Mr. ASHBURY, immediately on
the _Punchinelletto_ passing the mark-boat:

_Card_.

I take this opportunity of saying that whatever misunderstanding may
have arisen in the early part of this race as to the position of the
_Punchinelletto_, it is now but just to admit that she has shown herself
worthy, both in point of speed and management, to take rank among the
first-class yachts of the fleet, and I hereby challenge, &c., &c.

(Signed) ASHBURY.

This was further supplemented by a

_Card_ from Mr. BENNETT.

In token of my concurrence in the brilliant success of the
_Punchinelletto_, and my personal esteem for her commander, I hereby
beg to place at his disposal my yacht _Dauntless_, together with all her
stores, ordnance, by-laws, and small arms.

(Signed) BENNETT.

In reply to both of which your reporter circulated the following:

_Reply_.

It is my express desire that no public mention shall be made of the part
by which the _Dauntless_ was permitted apparently to win the race. It is
the duty of him who might have been victor to display a magnanimous
spirit to those who in that case would have been the vanquished. I must,
however, regret that circumstances of a peculiar nature prevent my
availing myself of Mr. BENNETT's kind offer. Though this will not stand
in the way of my accepting with pleasure--nay, even with alacrity--the $250
silver cup appointed for the winner of to-day's race, as the just meed
of one who, though of a naturally retiring disposition, is forced on the
present occasion to acknowledge himself _facile princeps_.

(Signed) Sporting Spec, _vice_ PUNCHINELLO.

After waiting for Mr. BENNETT'S gig, or water-buggy, to row up and award
the prize, your special nodded majestically to the Oar-acular, who
thereupon steamed slowly up the bay again, arriving at the Battery in
the rosy dawn.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRUSSIA'S POSITION PHILOSOPHICALLY PUT.

German metaphysicians have settled so completely to the satisfaction of
their countrymen that "being" and "not being" are identical, that this
may serve to explain how, while holding possession of her share in the
partition of Poland, Prussia professes to be virtuously indignant at
France for retaining Alsace and Lorraine.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUT OF THE PAN INTO THE FIRE.

What with BISMARCK'S pangerrmanism, the CZAR'S panslavism, NAPOLEON'S
panlatinism, the spread of pantheism, the threatened metamorphosis
of pantalettes into pantaloons, ANDREWS' pantarchy, and
Fox's pantomime, the old régime seems going precipitately to pot.

       *       *       *       *       *

A JUDICIOUS JEW.

Such was the one who wished to contract for the sweepings of Steinway
Hall when he heard that NILSSON showered throughout the room
her precious tones.

       *       *       *       *       *

EXIT "SUN."

The newsboys in the streets no longer cry _The Sun_, with stentorian
voices, but in gentle whispers, fearing to disturb the repose of that
waning luminary.

       *       *       *       *       *

TAPPING THE TILL.

Is there any connection between the quite common offence in New
York of "tapping the till," and the nomination of a Mr. TAPPAN for
Comptroller by the JOHN REAL Democracy?

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS

Pretty _Fräulein_ Margarat asks me to go to church with her. She is not
a New Yorker--or, as Webster would probably say,--a New Yorkeress. She
is rural in her ways and thoughts, a daisy of the fields. Never having
seen the interior of a city church, she asks me to go with her to any
Protestant church that I may select. So we go to the shrine of St.
APOLLOS, which, I am told, is regarded as one of the most fashionable
houses in the city.

It is a matinee service that we elect to attend. A long procession of
carriages is drawn up beside the building as we enter, and I recognize
in the coachmen the familiar faces that wait outside the ACADEMY on
opera nights. The organ overture is already begun, and the audience is
rapidly assembling. We enter the parquette--I should say, the body of
the church--and, standing in picturesque attitudes against the wall,
wait for the coming of the usher. We continue to wait. Evidently the
usher, in common with his kind, despises those who are not holders of
reserved seats. He welcomes with a smile the owners of private
boxes--pews, I mean--and shows them politely up the aisle; but for us,
who have not even an order from the mana--, sexton, I should say--he
has neither smile nor glance.

By and by I pluck up courage and pluck him by the sleeve. So, with a
severe air of suppressed indignation, he shows us to a couple of
ineligible seats, where the draft disarranges MARGARET'S hair, and the
charity children drop books of the op--, that is to say, prayer-books,
and molasses candy in unpleasant proximity to our helpless feet.

Neither MARGARET nor I possess a libret--, a prayer-book I mean.
However, that is a matter of no consequence, as we are both familiar
with the dialog--, or rather the service. The organist having ended his
overture, the service begins. Not even the wretched method of the
tenor--I refer of course to the clerk--and his miserably affected
execution of the recitative passages, can mar the beauty of the words.
The audience evidently feels their solemn import. The young lady and the
young male person who sit immediately in front of me clasp surreptitious
hands as they bow their heads to repeat the confession that they are
miserable sinners, and she whispers by no means softly to him of the
"frightful bonnets the SMITH girls have on." Presently the recitative of
the clerk is succeeded by a contest in chanting--probably for the
championship--by two rival choruses of shrill-voiced boys, who hurl
alternate verses of the Psalms at one another with the fiercest
intensity. MARGARET is betrayed into an inadvertent competition with
them, by reading a verse aloud, as had been her custom elsewhere, but
the charity children smile aloud at her, and the usher frowns, so she
sits down again with reddened cheeks.

I say to her, "that this choir contest is an excellent feature, one that
is sure to draw." But she answers nothing, and busily reads the
libret--, the psalm, to herself.

Then comes the litany. And here again MARGARET betrays her rural habits,
by repeating audibly the first response, thus encroaching on the
province of the choir-boys, who have now united, and form a fine and
powerful chorus, less picturesque perhaps than the Druidical chorus in
the first act of _Norma_, but quite as religious in its effect. After
which comes a hymn, executed by a soprano, who is really a deserving
little girl, and whom I little expected to find doing the leading
business in a first-class church, when I first saw her in the chorus at
the Stadt Theatre, seven years ago. MARGARET, warned by experience, does
not venture to interfere with the singing, to the evident disappointment
of the usher, who is watching her with the intention, plainly expressed
on his face, of peremptorily putting her out, if she sings a single
note. Then comes a recitation of the commandments by the leading male
perfor--, that is to say, by the rector, supported by the double chorus,
and the orches--, the organ, I should say; and then we have the sermon.

I like the sermon. It is delivered with admirable effect, and is, on the
whole, more soothing than the average syrup of the apocryphal Mrs.
WINSLOW. The rector compliments us all on our many virtues, and
contrasts us with the supposititious sinners who are presumed to abound
somewhere in the vicinity of rival houses. The middle-aged men evidently
feel that he will make no mistake worth noticing, and so go to sleep as
calmly as though they were at BOOTH'S THEATRE. The middle-aged ladies
contemplate the dresses of their neighbors, and the young people flirt
with cautious glances. When the curtain--when it is over, I mean--we go
cheerfully away, like an audience that has slept through a Shakesperean
play, and feels that it has done its duty. And when we are once more in
the street, I say to MARGARET: "This has been a delightful performance.
There has been nothing said to make one feel disagreeably discontented
with one's self, nor has there been any impolite suggestions as to the
undesirable future of anybody, except the low wretches who, of course,
don't go to any church. How much better this is than the solemn service,
and, the unpleasantly personal sermons that we used to hear at your
little rural church."

MARGARET.--"I do not like it. Why should boys be hired to pray, and
women to sing for me? Why should I be told by the preacher that I am
perfectly good, when I have just confessed that I am a 'miserable
sinner?' Why do you call this service religious, and Rip Van Winkle
theatrical? Believe me, St. APOLLOS deserves a place among your 'Plays
and Shows' quite as much as does BOOTH'S or WALLACK'S."'

And I to her--"St. APOLLOS shall take its proper place in PUNCHINELLO'S
show. But permit me to say that you are very unreasonable. What do you
go to church for? To be made uncomfortable and dissatisfied with
yourself?"

MARGARET,--"To be made better."

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PASTOR ON POLITICS.

The Reverend Mr. CREAMCHEESE congratulated the hearers of his last
sermon upon the encouraging religious aspects of the time, remarking how
pleasant it was in this fall season to find all the political parties in
the country so interested in making their election sure. We maybe
mistaken, but we think the Rev. gentleman's zeal outruns his discretion.
The preying of politicians is of a kind which we trust the clergy will
never seek to imitate; but now that Congress has undertaken to supervise
this matter of election, there no knowing what it may become in the
future.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN EVASIVE REPLY.

A Correspondent suggests that in No. 30 our artist has given Mr. C. A.
DANA, in representing him as refusing a bribe with virtuous indignation,
a two-cent-imental an expression. In reply, Mr. PUNCHINELLO--although
his own opinion is that the mistake has been in making it rather
dollar-ous than cent-imental--would refer his correspondent to the
artist.

       *       *       *       *       *

A QUERY FOR SOL-UTION.

Is it a fact that, because _Sol_ is the Latin for _Sun_, being on the
_Sun_ is therefore equivalent to being a SOLON?

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE DIPLOMATISTS OF THE HUB.

Whether the Boston dip is a penny one or not, it is nevertheless
scandalous.

       *       *       *       *       *

POEMS OF THE CRADLE.


CANTO IX.

    Rub-a-dub, dub,
    Three men in a tub,
    The Butcher, the Baker, the Candlestick-Maker,
    They all jumped into a rotten potato.

Behold the gentle Poet, now in the midst of the tumult of war. How
calmly he surveys from his elevated position the situation of the hosts
and the signs of the times. He hears the drums beat and the bugle call
to arms, and his soul is filled with martial ardor. Unable to wield the
sword, he seizes his poetical pen, resolved to become the Chronicler and
Historian of the war, and thus add his little mite for the improvement
of future generations. He decided that it must be characteristic, and in
keeping in style with his other productions: short, pithy, and
comprehensive; simple and amusing enough for a child; deep and sarcastic
enough for the most astute mind.

He begins by describing in graphic style the sounds that first struck on
his ear and fired his manly soul--the beat of the rolling drum. Then
comes a description of the terrible conflict that occurred in his native
village, between the three most prominent men of the day. This, not to
be too verbose, he simply likens to being "in a tub."

BILLY the butcher, stout, red-faced, and pugilistic, with his particular
friend MARC the baker, having become jealous of the beautiful shop and
immense patronage of JOHNNY the candlestick-maker, resolve to put an end
to it in some way, even if they have to fight him.

That showy candlestick shop, with its gay trimmings and beautiful
ornaments, open every day before their face and eyes, and attracting
crowds of idlers who stand gazing in at the windows, or lounging around
the doors, is a little too much for the Butcher, who in vain displays
before his door the fresh-cut meat and the tempting sausage. True, he
has plenty of customers; but they come because they need what he has to
sell; they come of necessity, not for pleasure. The Baker experiences
the same vexation, as he sees his loaves passed by and mockingly made
light of.

They bear awhile in silent envy the annoying sight of the rollicking
crowd and the joyful JOHNNY with his troop of apprentices, who have all
they can possibly do to attend to their numerous customers, and who
receive their broad pieces of money with a careless ease that makes the
fingers of the lookers-on tingle.

At last human nature can stand it no longer. The two malicious
storekeepers put their heads together, and resolve to draw their
prosperous enemy into a fight that will ruin him and enable them to
smash his windows. Accordingly, they throw stones and dirt at him, but
he, intently interested in his store, notices them not. His noisy
apprentices and loungers around see and point out the insult, and urge
him to avenge himself. But no; he has no time to pay attention to petty
annoyances; he is too busy getting up a huge candlestick for the Fair,
and so, to smooth matters over, he sends his two enemies an invitation
to view the magnificent candlestick that is to throw so much light on
the world.

"He is either too stupid or too sharp for us," sighs the Baker; "we
can't do anything in that way. Suppose we set up an opposition store,
with one of your sons for Proprietor, and see what effect that will
have."--"Good, it shall be done," says the Butcher.

Soon an empty store adjoining is hired, and being put in order, when the
hitherto blind Proprietor wakes up to the fact that there is a coalition
against him, and that he had better be stirring or he will lose his
trade. Accordingly he writes a remonstrance to his friend the Butcher,
telling him "he wishes no rival in the trade. He has always had a
monopoly, and he intends to keep it." His apprentices back him up in his
assertions, and declare they are ready to die for him and their
candlesticks. The advent of the messenger is noticed with inward
rejoicing by the twain, but, when he presents his remonstrance, he is
immediately kicked out of doors.

That is the last feather, the one straw too much, and the excitable
little Candlestick-maker at once challenges his opponents to deadly
combat.

The Poet, with a sublime contempt for the mysterious and wonderful
intricacies of war, significantly calls this rush to arms a "jumping
into a rotten potato."

Alas! it proves a rotten potato to the poor Candlestick-maker. Out
sallies the Butcher with his cleaver, and his boys with their knives,
and by his side the Baker with his rolling-pin, followed by his crowd of
friends armed with toasting-forks and cutting-irons, presenting a
formidable front to the astonished JOHNNY and his handful of
apprentices.

But there is no back-door to creep out through now; so at it they go,
Valor against Might, but Might is the stronger, and Valor gets knocked
on the head and has to fall back. This exasperates the heroic defenders
of the shop, who exclaim, "If you can't fight any better than that, you
had better leave," and immediately begin an attack in his rear.

The poor man, astonished at this unlooked-for defection from his ranks,
turns his eyes imploringly around for aid, but sees none that can avail
him. He hears on all sides the shout, "Clear out, clear out. If you
can't win the battle for yourself, we will win it for ourselves, and
keep the spoils." Sadly he views the situation; he feels the kicks of
the Candlestick-makers in the rear, and he knows there is no hope for
him. But his beloved store! he will save that if he can; he will offer
himself as a sacrifice.

With compressed lips he walks to the Butcher, and says, "You have got
the best of me; I'll give in. Stop the fighting." BILLY, overjoyed at
the victory, embraces him, and is about to give the order for retreat,
when the wily Baker whispers, "The shop is there yet, and it is that
that troubles us as much as the man. Let us keep at it till we demolish
it, and thus put a stop to all future controversy. After killing the old
fox, don't leave a nest of young ones to grow up and bite us. What is
their loss is our gain, you know. Do you understand?" "Yah, Yah!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Latest from Below.

An unsophisticated young imp, who had not long been in Hades, was
cowering over a small fire in a distant corner, endeavoring to keep from
freezing, when his Impious Majesty himself heard the youth
soliloquizing: "When will LIE BIG, the editor of the _Sun_, keep me
company?" "You blockhead!" exclaimed his Majesty, "LIE BIG, the editor
of the _Sun_, is not coming back for some time; he is of more service to
me on earth, making converts for my jurisdiction, than the public are
probably aware."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ENGAGEMENT IN HIGH LIFE.

Perhaps it is not generally known that Miss SUSAN B. ANTHONY desires to
leave one field only that she may enter another; in other words, that
the lady contemplates marriage. Our authority is uncertain whether the
prospective groom is one of our border aborigines or an ex-Fenian leader
of noted gallantry. We have, however, ventured upon the following sketch
illustrative, in advance, of the reception, and which, in the absence of
more explicit information, we may as well call--

ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRICK.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A CARPET GENERAL.

_Brigadier-General Woodford_. "DEAR ME, WHAT A DISAGREEABLE SMELL!
WONDER WHAT IT CAN BE?"

_Lady_. "OH! THAT'S GUNPOWDER, GENERAL."

_Brigadier-General Woodford_. "GUNPOWDER?--AW! IS IT? NEVER SMELT
ANYTHING OF THE KIND BEFAW."]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIGH-HANDED OUTRAGE.

EDITOR OF PUNCHINELLO: Sir:--I am the young lady, travelling in New
Jersey (perhaps they will next make a crime of _that_!), and mentioned
in a recent paragraph as having been asked by a person (called a _man_)
"if _this_ was ELIZABETH?"

I insist, Sir, that I was right in resenting, as I did, the impudent
familiarity of this person (called a _man_), who, after sitting for an
hour or two in perfect silence (having first intruded himself into the
seat beside me without making any kind of apology), abruptly turns to me
and says, "Is _this_ ELIZABETH?"

I insist, Sir, that I was right in asking the ruffian what he meant.
Consider the abruptness, Sir, of this question--this selfish question,
as it turned out, after a grim and gruff silence of an hour and a
quarter. Could not this unamiable person (called a _man_), have prepared
me for it by a few moments' affable conversation? Why should he dare
intrude his "Is this ELIZABETH?" with such brutal abruptness? Not a
sudden proposal from one of my numerous suitors could have startled me
more.

Look at the question, Sir, as pointing at my supposed Christian name (I
_have_ one, but it is _not_ ELIZABETH, nor yet ELIZA); can you imagine
anything more odiously familiar? "Well known for his mild and gentle
disposition" this "gentleman" of Brooklyn may be; but there was no
mildness, no gentleness this time, I assure you! The language alone
proves _that_!

The rudeness was all the more shocking and discomposing, from the fact
that I was at that moment contemplating the elegant features of a
gentleman at the other end of the car, who seemed not altogether
indifferent to my appearance (which he would have been, perhaps, had I
seemed of "uncertain age," as the low fellow observes who wrote this
paragraph), and there was every appearance of a growing interest in two
susceptible hearts, when this cold-blooded (but "mild and gentle")
person launched his brutal interrogatory, so selfish and unfeeling, with
such violent abruptness.

Look, if you will, Sir, at the question as referring purely to the city
which we were approaching. How did I know that my new found, but already
dear friend was not about to alight (as, indeed, he seemed to be), and
leave me to the disgusting society of this "mild and gentle" barbarian
sitting beside me in such a state of stolid indifference, and thinking
only of a vulgar town, and his still more vulgar affairs in that town!

