In some such way as this we could gather up these strewn and
scattered petals of song into one perfect rose of life, and yet,
perhaps, in so doing, we might be missing the true quality of the
poems; one's real life is so often the life that one does not lead;
and beautiful poems, like threads of beautiful silks, may be woven
into many patterns and to suit many designs, all wonderful and all
different:  and romantic poetry, too, is essentially the poetry of
impressions, being like that latest school of painting, the school
of Whistler and Albert Moore, in its choice of situation as opposed
to subject; in its dealing with the exceptions rather than with the
types of life; in its brief intensity; in what one might call its
fiery-coloured momentariness, it being indeed the momentary
situations of life, the momentary aspects of nature, which poetry
and painting new seek to render for us.  Sincerity and constancy
will the artist, indeed, have always; but sincerity in art is
merely that plastic perfection of execution without which a poem or
a painting, however noble its sentiment or human its origin, is but
wasted and unreal work, and the constancy of the artist cannot be
to any definite rule or system of living, but to that principle of
beauty only through which the inconstant shadows of his life are in
their most fleeting moment arrested and made permanent.  He will
not, for instance, in intellectual matters acquiesce in that facile
orthodoxy of our day which is so reasonable and so artistically
uninteresting, nor yet will he desire that fiery faith of the
antique time which, while it intensified, yet limited the vision;
still less will he allow the calm of his culture to be marred by
the discordant despair of doubt or the sadness of a sterile
scepticism; for the Valley Perilous, where ignorant armies clash by
night, is no resting-place meet for her to whom the gods have
assigned the clear upland, the serene height, and the sunlit air,--
rather will he be always curiously testing new forms of belief,
tinging his nature with the sentiment that still lingers about some
beautiful creeds, and searching for experience itself, and not for
the fruits of experience; when he has got its secret, he will leave
without regret much that was once very precious to him.  "I am
always insincere," says Emerson somewhere, "as knowing that there
are other moods":  "Les emotions," wrote Theophile Gautier once in
a review of Arsene Houssaye, "Les emotions, ne se ressemblent pas,
mais etre emu--voila l'important."

Now, this is the secret of the art of the modern romantic school,
and gives one the right keynote for its apprehension; but the real
quality of all work which, like Mr. Rodd's, aims, as I said, at a
purely artistic effect, cannot be described in terms of
intellectual criticism; it is too intangible for that.  One can
perhaps convey it best in terms of the other arts, and by reference
to them; and, indeed, some of these poems are as iridescent and as
exquisite as a lovely fragment of Venetian glass; others as
delicate in perfect workmanship and as single in natural motive as
an etching by Whistler is, or one of those beautiful little Greek
figures which in the olive woods round Tanagra men can still find,
with the faint gilding and the fading crimson not yet fled from
hair and lips and raiment; and many of them seem like one of
Corot's twilights just passing into music; for not merely in
visible colour, but in sentiment also--which is the colour of
poetry--may there be a kind of tone.

