  _Shylock_                                   Lady fair,
             In this peculiar and imperfect world
             The virtues are divided into parts:
             For instance, mercy. Some do practice it,
             And some do merely preach. A third there are
             Whose only contribution is to be
             The text from which the second sermons preach;
             They neither preach nor practice. Such am I.
             Farewell.

  _Gratiano_      We but insult ourselves to stay. (_Exit Portia and
       Gratiano. Shylock looks after them. Enter Antonio, sees
       Shylock, walks over to him and touches him with his
       stick. Shylock turns._)

  _Antonio_  Hebrew, have I found thee out at last?
             Once more thy promises are broken, eh?

  _Shylock_  Yes, yes. I pray you----

  _Antonio_                          Pray me nothing more.

  _Shylock_  Signor Antonio, wait another day.

  _Antonio_  Another day. For what? Until you hide
             A bag of ducats or a jewel case?
             Your bonds are by a fortnight overdue
             And day by day your fortune dwindles down.
             If I should sell the roof above your head
             And all your land and chattels, they would bring
             Less than enough to pay me what you owe.

  _Shylock_  I prithee not so loud. But you alone
             Are cognizant of my disastrous state.
             My name is good. Perchance I may obtain
             A temporary loan to tide me through.
             But if my losses come to other ears
             Before my kinsmen and my ship arrive
             A bankrupt's ending stares me in the face.
             Wait, wait Antonio, surely he will come,
             My cousin Issachar who sailed away.

  _Antonio_  Thy cousin Issachar will come no more.
             He promised to return three weeks ago.

  _Shylock_  But think, remember, good Antonio,
             The vessel could not founder. 'Twas my best,
             Held in reserve, the last one of my fleet.
             Issachar swore he knew the very spot
             Where dusky natives mined the laughing gold
             And that if I would furnish men and ships
             The moiety of the cargo would be mine.
             Perhaps he is a little while delayed.

  _Antonio_  Perhaps another theory will fit.
             Perhaps your kinsman filled the ship with gold
             And then did point his helm another way.
             Perhaps in England now he lives at ease
             And deems the whole is better than a half.
             Consider, sir, your kinsman is a Jew.

  _Shylock_  He will not fail me, for he is my friend.
             Patience, good sir, patience a day or two.
             Deal with me kindly as so oft before
             You treated many an unfortunate.

  _Antonio_  Let's have no whining. See you pay my bills
             No later than to-day. Expect no further time.
             I have done more than doth in truth become
             A Christian to oblige a Jew withal.
             Think not to share the leniency I give
             To men of Venice of my faith and blood.
             This case is different.

  _Shylock_                         But did thy Lord
             Not preach a creed of brotherhood and love
             And bid thee treat thy neighbor as thyself?

  _Antonio_  He meant our Christian neighbors who reside
             By right of law and ancient heritage
             Within the land, but not the tribe who do
             Usurp the places of their betters. No!

  _Shylock_  I am a Christian, made so by your Church.
             Your own priest said so and it must be true.

  _Antonio_  'Twas but a form to bend thy haughty will.
             In heart and manner thou art still a Jew.
             They should be glad that they can here remain
             To practice sacrilege, and cheat, and fawn.
             I marvel we can be so tolerant.

  _Shylock_  The God who made this land and you and me
             Mocks at your selfish, mean, philosophy.
             When you or yours can build a mountain peak
             Or add a grain unto the universe
             Then talk of this fair ground as your domain.
             The earth is one and rests within His hand;
             The great and small His erring children are,
             But we who from Yisrael claim descent
             Are now the eldest of the family.
             The God of Justice never slumbereth.
             Jehovah is His name; His will be done.

  _Antonio_  Mumble thy prayers if that affords relief,
             But if by sundown I am not repaid
             Another Moses must thou be and bring
             Another set of miracles from heaven
             Or lose the very coat from off thy back.
             By sundown--but a few short minutes hence. (_Exit Antonio_)

  _Shylock_            Finished--almost finished--almost done.
             I see the wave that soon above my hopes,
             My fears, my sorrows, and my broken heart,
             Will roll in cruel triumph. I'm content.
             A long and troubled record I shall leave
             Of struggles in the dark 'gainst many foes.
             I begged for light to see my duty clear
             To see the purpose of my suffering
             To see the end that my Creator served
             In heaping hills of torment on my head.
             The light has never come. But now ere long
             I must be called where all shall be made clear.
             Till then a few weeks more of faith in Him
             A few weeks more with an unfalt'ring tongue
             To praise His wisdom though its end be hid.
             A few weeks more to walk within His law.

       (_Starts to walk off. Enter Jessica in disordered dress
       and manner._)

  _Jessica_  Father!

  _Shylock_               Back! Away! Dare not to touch me.

  _Jessica_  A word, a single word and I will go.

  _Shylock_  (_trying to wrest his arm from her grasp_)
             Let be I say.

  _Jessica_                Nay, but I cannot leave.
             I know not how much time I have to live.
             I marvel that this body thin and frail
             Has so long stood th' innumerable shocks
             Which in my married life it hath endured.
             Death must be near, it stretcheth out its arms,
             And I in answer have extended mine.

  _Shylock_  Come not to me for money. Had I all
             The wealth of Sheba's mines I would not pay
             A mite to save thy fallen soul from hell.
             The potter's field may have thy rotten bones
             And owls and jackals pray for thy repose.

  _Jessica_  'Tis not for gold I beg but for thy love.
             I threw it from me like an orange sucked
             And turned to grasp the shining fruit that he,
             Lorenzo, pictured to mine eyes. Ah me,
             How bitter, hard and worthless to the taste
             Hath been that substitute. The marriage moon
             Had scarce grown full before my body bore
             The marks of coward blows.

  _Shylock_                 Ha! Ha! That's well.

  _Jessica_  I have not known a single kindly word,
             I scarce have heard him call me by my name
             Since less than four weeks after we were wed.

  _Shylock_  (_gloatingly rubbing his hands_) Hm!

  _Jessica_  Oh father, why was I not told before
             That we and all our people are accurst;
             That those to whom we give our love and trust
             Curse us and loathe us with a dreadful hate,
             A hate that neither reason can assuage
             Nor conduct make amends for. Awful fate,
             That makes the very children of the street
             With circle eyes point at us in contempt,
             And people who have never heard our names
             Thirst for our blood and menace us with death!

  _Shylock_  So thou didst think a priestly comedy
             Could make Lorenzo love his Jewish wife?

  _Jessica_  I could have died for him. For him I fled
             And stole your wealth and helped your enemies.
             Why could he not have been a little kind?

  _Shylock_  (_chuckling_) Come tell me how he beat you. Tell me that.

  _Jessica_  Have pity, father.

  _Shylock_                  Tell me how he swore.

  _Jessica_  Oh, torture me no further. Take me back.
             Love me not now, but let me win your love
             A little at a time. No day shall pass
             But in it I shall do some tiny act
             That will in time make up a wealth of deeds,
             And if we both are living long enough
             The balance will be as it was before.

  _Shylock_  Thy pleadings are but wasted, Jessica,
             Thou canst not gain the end that thou dost seek.
             For even if I have the foolish will
             (And I assure thee that I have it not)
             To bring thee back to all the luxury,
             The silken clothes, the soft and perfumed beds,
             The shining jewels of thy girlhood days,
             I could not. I am almost penniless.

  _Jessica_  Poor, and alone, and old! Nay, father dear,
             Thou couldst not drive me from thee after this
             Hadst thou the strength of ten. Let us go forth
             And find a little corner of the earth
             Where I may work and you may live at peace.

  _Shylock_  I need no aid. I want no help from thee.

  _Jessica_  Then give me thine. I starve for sympathy.
             I shall go mad. I saw my baby die
             And all around me were my husband's friends
             Who spoke in terms of polished elegance.
             With formal platitudes and commonplace
             Regarding me as something curious,
             A vulgar, noisy creature, lacking taste
             And proper self-control. While on its bier
             Lay all the joy that life in promise held.
             Dead, and my heart within it. (_Weeps_)
             (_Shylock turns to go, looks back after a step
               or two, and returns_)

  _Shylock_  I did not know the little one was dead.
             Was it a pretty child?

  _Jessica_  A pretty child!
             A cherub could not be more beautiful.
             Blue eyes and golden hair. A tiny mouth
             A dimple in her chin. (_Shylock puts his arm around
             Jessica_)

  _Shylock_  Thy mother's face belike. So did she look.
             And how old when it--died?

  _Jessica_                       A year, a year.

             (_Enter Antonio and Gratiano. Antonio touches
               Shylock on the shoulder_)

  _Antonio_  Well, let us have an end. The time is up.
             I now demand the payment of my bonds.

  _Shylock_  I have not moved since last you spoke to me.

  _Antonio_  All's one for that. You had no move to make.
             Your whole estate is in the bailiff's hands
             And you yourself may come along with me.

  _Shylock_  Where would you take me?

  _Antonio_  Why, before the Duke.

  _Shylock_  What need of trials? Freely I confess
             The debts I owe you. Take what you can find.
             Take ev'ry rag and counter. Take them all.
             Myself and Jessica must go away.

  _Antonio_  Not quite so fast. The law expressly states
             That I may put you in the debtor's gaol
             And so I mean to do.

  _Shylock_                       But good Signor--

  _Antonio_  No protest will avail. I know you Jews.
             You hang together in calamity
             And help each other while the Christians starve.
             Let them redeem you and repay my loss.

  _Shylock_  Good sir, my kin are very far away
             And poor as I.

  _Antonio_                'Twill do no good to lie.
             Write letters. I will see them promptly sent.

  _Shylock_  I swear to you Antonio--

  _Gratiano_                 Wait a while.
             First tell us if the oath thou art to make
             Is sworn as Christian or in Hebrew style;
             Though truly which to give the preference
             Is matter to discuss. A Jewish oath
             Thou canst not take for thou hast been baptised,
             And sooth to say I have a sort of doubt
             About thy reverence for Christian forms.

  _Shylock_  By that great Power who can humble both
             Hebrew and Christian, I do swear to you
             That not in all this universe's span
             Have I a claim on friends or relatives
             As large as this. Much more have I the right
             To claim assistance from Antonio
             Who though he found me keen for my revenge
             And steadfast in assertion of my rights
             Can bring no accusation on my head
             Of underhanded trickery or crime.

  _Gratiano_ Because we watch you pretty carefully.

  _Shylock_  What say you, sir? You will not keep us here?

  _Antonio_  I warned thee once cajoling will not serve.
             Write out the letters. That's the only way.
             I'll see that while you tarry in the gaol
             Your comfort shall not be too much disturbed.
             Your food shall be according to your wish
             And other things in reason you may have.

  _Jessica_  Good sir, I think you know me, do you not?

  _Antonio_  Why, are you not my friend Lorenzo's wife?

  _Jessica_  I am the Jessica who married him,
             But not his wife if wifehood is a state
             That presupposes more than legal rights.
             I and Lorenzo are as strangers now
             And less than strangers, less than enemies.

  _Antonio_  I grieve to hear it.

  _Jessica_                    I would have your grief
             Not for myself but for my father here.
             He speaks the truth. He has no more to give.

  _Antonio_  Then let him call upon his wealthy friends,
             The other Jews will trust him if he asks.

  _Jessica_  You heard him say he knows not where to sue.

  _Antonio_  O, that was but the cunning of his race.

  _Jessica_  Unfeeling man! If his deserts are dumb
             What of your obligation due to me?
             The Court's decree as you no doubt recall
             Was that the half of his estate should go
             To you to hold in trust for me and mine.
             I charge you now upon your Christian faith
             To give my father all the residue
             That will be mine when he shall pass away
             Or take it for yourself and let him go.

  _Antonio_  Three obstacles prevent your sacrifice.
             The first is that though my intent was fair
             By bad investments more than half the fund
             Has disappeared, and all that doth remain
             Would not suffice to satisfy the bonds.
             The second, that the sum is payable
             Upon your father's death, which is not yet.
             But third and most of all the money goes
             To you and to your husband, not to you.
             The gift is joint and neither can alone
             Claim all himself or any several part.
             Indeed, I own it frankly, my desire
             In asking that the Duke should so decree
             Was not to benefit Lorenzo's wife,
             A Jewess, who was never aught to me,
             But solely to befriend Lorenzo's self
             My coreligionist and distant kin.
             To give you anything of Shylock's gold
             Without Lorenzo's will would be a wrong,
             A breach of trust, a patent injury.
             And if your separation from his love,
             As shrewdly I suspect, be fault of yours
             And growing from thy Jewish wilfulness,
             It would be most unfaithful and untrue
             That I should thus reward inconstancy.
             You see, in honor and before the law
             I must refuse to do as you request.

  _Jessica_  I see that Jesus died in vain for you.
             His Jewish heart, with pity for the low
             And meek and humble broke upon the cross
             And for a time the magic of his words
             Restrained the beast in Gentile followers,
             But soon the kindly Stoic lost his sway
             And cruel bigots in his Jewish name,
             By his offenceless, mild authority
             Took fire and sword and hatred for their flag.

  _Antonio_  My girl, there is a law 'gainst blasphemy.

  _Gratiano_ Why stand we here and listen to her spleen?
             Away with Shylock. Take him to the gaol.

  _Antonio_  Come on.

  _Jessica_          No! No!

  _Shylock_                Resist no more, my child.

  _Jessica_  Oh, father, we may never meet again;
             Your age and suffering cannot endure
             The shock of this disgrace.

  _Shylock_                            'Tis better so.
             I pray for death. It cannot come too soon.
             Farewell.

  _Jessica_ Farewell. (_Throws her arms around him_)
             Yet not a long farewell,
             I shall not far survive. It is no sin
             To end a life of misery and shame.

  _Isaac_ (_behind scenes_) Where is my master? Where has Shylock gone?
          (_Enter Isaac._)

  _Gratiano_ Here fellow, here he is. With Jessica
             He poses like a model for the arts.

  _Isaac_    Great news and wonderful. His ship is here
             And laden full of gold. The mine is found
             And Issachar and he are princely rich.
             This cargo is the greatest that has come
             To Venice since the city first began.

  _Antonio_  I do rejoice to hear it. Truly Jew
             I have no wish to do thy body harm
             But thou and thy relations are well known
             To be so deep in craft and villainy
             That to recover what is justly due
             We Christians must resort to rigid means.
             Go freely with thy daughter. Later on
             When ev'rything's in order I'll return
             And you may pay me what the balance is.

       (_Exit Antonio and Gratiano, followed by Isaac. Shylock
       still stands expressionless with Jessica's arms around
       him._)

[Illustration: Signature: Wmln. Blatt]


Jewish Students in European Universities

BY HARRY WOLFSON

(_Concluded_)


_Judaism and Jewish Students in France_

The decadence of native Judaism in France has become proverbial. The
original French Jews never amounted to much; and the Alsatian
immigrants, while still supplying rabbis for the pulpits, have of late
begun to disappear from the pews. You may state it is an axiom that
the synagogue will have to go a-begging for a quorum wherever
church-going is unpopular. But French Judaism has recently been
gaining reinforcement by the influx of newcomers from Eastern Europe.
Paris might be considered next to London the greatest centre of Jewish
immigration in Europe. In fact, Paris as well as some large cities in
the Low Countries, and to some extent even London, have since the
beginning of the Jewish movement towards the United States, become the
refuge of a considerable number who straggled behind the migratory
columns and were unable to reach their final destination. Free from
any official molestations and rather welcomed by the native Jews, the
foreign Jewish community in Paris has flourished in its own way. It
numbers by this time about twenty-five thousand souls, a large
proportion of whom were born and brought up in the French capital.

It is these young French Jews of immigrant parentage, students and
professional men, who organized themselves, about two years ago, in an
"Association des Jeunes Juifs," known by its initials as A. J. J. The
aim of that organization, which is non-partisan in Jewish affairs, is
both cultural and practical. It publishes a monthly by the name of
"Les Pionniers," and occasionally holds debates and lectures on
various Jewish topics. It also carries on a program of social work
among the immigrant Jews. I might perhaps give a clearer idea of the
object of the A. J. J. by reproducing their following declaration:
"Notre But.--Nous voulons nous affirmer 'Juifs' sans forfanterie, mais
avec fermeté; cultiver, développer parmis nous, faire connaître au
dehors, l'âme juive; nous éduquer mutuellement; demander, par les
voies légales, le respect, la justice pour tous,--fussent-ils juifs;
aider nos frères émigrés à l'aquérir la qualité de citoyen; inculquer
à nos membres les principes de solidarité et de mutualité." In the
summer of 1913, Dr. Nahum Slouszch of the Sorbonne submitted to the
society a scheme for more extensive activities, both Jewish and
patriotic in their scope, namely, the participation in educational and
social work among the indigenous Jews of the French possessions in
Africa.


_The Jew of the Roman Ghetto_

It is a pity that so little is known to us about the life of the
Jewish masses in Italy. The fame of the Nathans and Luzzattis has led
us to believe that in Italy Jews form the class of society from which
mayors and statesmen are recruited. But in Italy the majority of Jews
still live in social and economic conditions not far advanced above
those of their ancestors in centuries past. Italy is the only country
in Europe outside those in the Eastern part where the so-called
ghettoes are populated by native Jews. Their political emancipation
has not raised them from the bottom of the social structure over the
heads of their Gentile neighbors. Nowhere is the average Jew so much
like the non-Jew in appearance, language, manners, and vocation than
the inhabitant of the Roman Ghetto on the bank of the Tiber. He is
engaged there in the petty trades of selling his olives, peaches, and
figs, and hires out as a journeyman in and outside his country. He
hawks with "cartiloni" and "ricordi di Roma" in front of the café
terraces, and his street waifs accost the foreigners for a "soldi."
Even at the door of his old-clothes shop you can hardly recognize in
him the Jew. It is this, more than the paucity of the number of Jews
in Italy, that explains the absence of anti-Jewish feeling there. For
the name Sacerdote by which Italian Cohens call themselves does not
suggest affluence, and the cognomen Levi does not necessarily
designate one's business.

In his religious life the Jew of the Roman Ghetto resembles the
Lithuanian rather than the Western European. His religious activity,
to be sure, is restricted to the prayer services of the Temple, but
his Temple is more like a Beth Midrash than a symphony hall and
lyceum. Living within a Catholic environment, his religion has
been preserved as something positive, tangible, and powerful; and
if it is no longer an inspiring influence within him, it exists at
least as a reality outside of him. The religious institutions and
instrumentalities are looked upon by him as something hallowed and
consecrate. The synagogue is spoken of as the "sacro tempio" and the
rabbi, referred to by the Hebrew words "Morenu Harav," is looked up to
in matters religious as if he were the incumbent of the throne of
Moses. The place of worship is opened three times a day for the
traditional number of the daily public prayers, and young men as well
as old, unwashed and in their working garments, repair there directly
from their work to hear the "sacra messa," as the services are
sometimes termed by them. Most of the younger Jews are unable to read
the Hebrew prayers, some read without understanding them; but they all
know a few selected prayers by heart which they recite aloud with many
interesting gesticulations and genuflections, while in the pulpit the
Chasan reads the services from a prayer-book printed in Livorno,
chanting them in a monotonous sing-song not unlike what one often
hears in the chapels of St. Peter.


_Societies of Jewish Youth in Italy_

Racial consciousness is strong among these Jews of the Roman Ghetto.
They are to themselves, in common parlance, "Ibrim" or "Yahudim,"
which they utter not without pride, and the Gentile is looked down
upon as a mere "goi," while the passing priest is pointed out as a
"komer." If you ever happen to be in Rome, I should advise you take
one afternoon off, and ordering a "cafe noro" at some café house on
the Piazza Venezia, sit down quietly at a table on the terrace and try
to look Jewish. You will soon be assailed by a number of postal-card
venders coming one after another, until one importunate youth,
discovering your identity, will of a sudden change his attitude, and,
his obsequiousness gone, will enter with you into an intimate
conversation. He will tell you his name, his pedigree, and of the
"tempio," and of the street where many Jews live. He will no longer
entreat you to buy his goods; and if you do so, he will mumble out his
"grazie" rather perfunctorily. For are not all Israel of the same
descent?--and if they are not all princes, at least none of them is
better than a postal-card vender in Rome.

It is therefore not surprising that among the native Italian Jews
there should arise on the part of the young educated elements a desire
to convert that latent Jewish sentiment into some form of practical
and useful activity. A society of Jewish youth in Italy has already
existed for about three years during which time two conventions were
held. A number of commendable resolutions were passed about the
improvement of Jewish education among the Italian Jews and especially
the advancement of the study of the Hebrew language among them.
Zionism was warmly endorsed, though the society as a whole did not
commit itself officially to the cause. Like the A. J. J. of Paris, the
Italian organization also purports to act as intermediaries between
the Italian government and the native Jewish population of Tripoli. In
Rome there is a local organization of Jewish students, devoted to the
study of Hebrew literature, and is rather of cosmopolitan complexion,
being composed of Italian, Greek, German, and Russian Jews. The moving
spirit of that circle was a brilliant Russian Jew, who had graduated
in law from the University of Rome.


_Conclusion: The Growing National Spirit Among Jewish Students_

A close observation of European Jewish students, both as individuals
and as groups, leads one to the realization of a growing consciousness
among them of national unity, and of an increasing belief on their
part of the imperishability of the Jews as a race. That morbid
feeling of national decay and the imminent disappearance of the race,
which had preyed upon the minds of Jewish men in the past generation,
and which is reflected in the literature of that time, has been
everywhere displaced by one of confidence and hope. Desertion from
Judaism, to be sure, may sporadically make its appearance here and
there as a convenient escape from material disadvantages; indifference
towards it may likewise in some quarters still survive as a relic of
the past,--but these are rather unusual and isolated phenomena,
emphasizing all the more the universal fidelity and attachment to all
things Jewish.

The enthusiasm for Judaism, everywhere in a process of growth,
manifests itself in its early stages in study and self-cultivation; it
assumes a more concrete form, in its later stages, of some communal or
social activity; and if that development keeps on uninterruptedly it
finally consummates in Zionism. This development, it must be admitted,
is not a spontaneous and self-directive movement. In no small measure,
it is everywhere stimulated by the growing tendency on the part of
non-Jews in almost every country to appraise the Jew according to his
racial origin, an appraisal which results in a feeling not necessarily
hostile, but in most cases neutral and sometimes even favoring the
racial and cultural peculiarity, indestructible and impermiscible, of
the Jewish element. It is this external stimulus, rather than any
internal impulse, that is responsible for the unfolding of the
national spirit among Jewish students and the assertion of their
selfhood.

None the less, their self-assertion has nowhere reached the extreme of
spiritual alienation from their environment. There is nothing more
remarkable in the character of Jewish youth of the present day, even
among those who were born and raised in East European ghettos, than
the spiritual and intellectual snugness in which they find themselves,
in what should have been expected to remain to them a foreign
environment. The residual estrangement of the Jewish soul from
everything that is non-Jewish, which our forefathers in the past had
figuratively designated with what Jewish mysticism called the
"Captivity of the Shekinah," has totally disappeared. The individual
Jew of to-day, while sharing in the sublimated consciousness of the
race as a whole, does not in any conscious or subliminal way feel
himself to be personally identified with it; whence the hesitation on
the part of the majority of Jewish students to participate actively in
Zionism even though they would all admit it to be the logical sequel
of Jewish history.

For Zionism to them can never become a personal ideal, something
requisite for the salvation of their souls. It can at its best appeal
to them, in so far as they are consciously Jewish, as the cause of the
nation as a whole; and consequently the mere suspicion that their
affiliation with the movement might be held up against them as an
impugnment of their loyalty to the land of their birth and abode is
sufficient to keep them aloof from it. It was very interesting for me
to notice how everywhere, after a long manoeuvre of Zionist
discussions with good Jewish young men, they would finally halt at
their unshakable position that Zionists might arouse the suspicion of
their Gentile neighbors as to the loyalty and patriotism of the Jews.
Where people are obsessed by the fear of being misunderstood in doing
what they otherwise think to be good and impeccable, no arguments, of
course, can avail. They are in this respect characteristically Jewish.
In their Brand-like racial frame of mind, the Jews could never stop
midway between the two antipodes of roving world-citizenry and
hidebound mono-patriotism. It is probable that their attitude will
change as soon as it is generally realized that personal devotion and
loyalty to two causes are not psychologically a self-deception, and
that the serving of two masters is not a moral anomaly unless, as in
the original adage, one of the masters be Satanic.

[Illustration: Signature: Harry Wolfson]


        Extract from a letter received from William Chadwick,
        President of the Hebrew Congregation and the Adler
        Society, Oxford University, England, commenting on the
        section devoted to England in Mr. Wolfson's article in
        our January number: "The remarks of Mr. Wolfson, whom
        we remember very well, concerning Oxford, were very
        apt for the time; but in Oxford, one particular type
        of Judaism never remains for long; Judaism here is in
        a state of perpetual flux, and to seize upon any one
        moment and represent that view as a type of Oxford's
        Judaism is very erroneous. I am sure that if Mr.
        Wolfson were here now, he would not recognize the
        services or the attitude now prevalent. I doubt if he
        would now hear Liberal Judaism apostrophised 'as the
        safeguard of modern Jews from the attractiveness of
        the superior teachings of Christ.'"


Zionism: A Menorah Prize Essay

BY MARVIN M. LOWENTHAL


[Illustration: _MARVIN M. LOWENTHAL (born in Bradford, Pa., in 1890)
is at present a Senior in the University of Wisconsin. He has won the
Wisconsin Menorah Society Prize twice--in 1912 for an essay on "The
Jew in the American Revolution," and in 1914 for the essay on
"Zionism" here published for the first time. Mr. Lowenthal is now the
President of the Wisconsin Zionist Society._]

At the head of an alley-way hard by the Place of the Temple, the
Haram-esh-Sherif, in Jerusalem, a long wall built in rough-hewn
courses lifts itself above the squalor of the Moghrebin quarter to an
eastern sky from which a sun that seldom sleeps bakes the grey stones,
bares every detail of a crumbling ruin, and intensifies the wistful
odor of decay. This, the remnant of Solomon's glory, is the Wailing
Wall of the Jews. Clad in sackcloth and covered with ashes,
patriarchal figures sway to and fro, press their lips to the hot
granite, beat now their chests and now the wall, and today, as every
day for eighteen hundreds of years, wail in the words of the Psalmist:

        "Oh God, the heathen are come into Thine inheritance;
         Thy holy Temple have they defiled;
         They have laid Jerusalem in heaps."[1]

This picture reveals the typical and traditional attitude of the Jew
toward the land of his forefathers. Taught as children in the Cheder
to turn their thoughts and desires toward Palestine; devoting
themselves as men to the study of the Law and the Prophets and to the
building upon this study of the vast Talmudic structure, until a
spiritual Land of the Book may be said to have been created wherein
they continually dwelt; crystallizing and adopting the Restoration as
a dogma of the faith; commemorating with solemn fasts the Ninth of Ab
as the anniversary of the destruction of the Temple by Titus; and
repeating at each Passover with the pitiful hope of a child, "Next
year in Jerusalem," the Jews have bound the memory of Palestine as a
sign upon their hands and as frontlets between their eyes. They have
indeed written it upon the door-posts of their houses and upon their
gates, to the end--that they have wept and prayed. The vision of the
prophets, which created and sustained this passionate ideal, itself
inhibited the realization by emphasizing the redemption as
miraculous, as a consummation to come in its own time without man's
effort, and indeed in spite of man's will. And so, except for the
sporadic and meteoric fiascos of mock-Messiahs, the Jews--this most
practical of people--continued in hope and prayer to watch the
centuries creep by. Frequently the hope flowered into the songs of a
Judah Halevi or Ibn Gabirol, songs as sweet as have blossomed in the
medieval garden; and the prayer found expression in a poignancy
attributable only to the racial genius which created the Psalms; but
until the nineteenth century the dream preserved all the qualities of
a dream.


_A Crusade for A Birthright_

On August 29, 1897, a congress convened in Basel, Switzerland,
comparable in Jewry to the Council of Clermont; for in this congress
two hundred and four Jews, acting as delegates of their people from
half the countries in the world, assembled at the call of Theodor
Herzl to go crusading for the recovery of Palestine. This difference,
among others, may be apparent--the Christians sought the recovery of a
grave; the Jews, of a cradle. Palestine was to be a cradle in two
senses; this Congress, the first body representative of all Jewry to
be convened in the Diaspora, claimed the land of Israel not by virtue
of a death, but as a birthright, and furthermore hoped to find its
recovery the opportunity for the rejuvenation of a people.

Quoting from his book, "The Jewish State"[2]--a book journalistic in
style, but trumpet-toned in the note it sounded for political
Zionism--Theodor Herzl offered the following definition of Zionism
after the first Zionist Congress (1897): "Zionism has for its object
the creation of a home, secured by public rights, for those Jews who
either cannot or will not be assimilated in the country of their
adoption."[3] Zionism, in a word, is not the last truism in a weary
debate, nor a new verse to an old song; it is, on the contrary, a
definite answer to a perplexing and imperative question. What are
these Jews who cannot or will not be assimilated, and why cannot or
will not they be assimilated? This question constitutes what is known
as _the Jewish problem_, or, for those who deny or dislike the term,
_the Jewish position_; and this question must first be fully stated
before the Zionist or any other answer can be intelligible.


_The Isolation of Medieval Jewry_

The Jews in the Middle Ages were considered by themselves, their few
friends, and their many enemies, as a twice separated nation--a people
separated from those among whom they dwelt and separated from the
land in which they originated. They were governed by their own
law--the Lex Judæorum--which was recognized by the authorities of the
land in which they lived as peculiar and proper to them;[4] they dwelt
in communal groups which were bound together by common interests; they
observed their own customs and nourished their own culture; they were
held to be foreigners, and in a comparison of their own with the
Christian civilization, they readily acknowledged this status. The
force of persecution without and the religious conviction of
superiority, separateness, and nationality within, preserved and
constantly increased this solidarity.[5]

That the existence of a separate, recalcitrant, and even obnoxious
nation within a nation did not constitute a problem for the medievals
may be attributable to two reasons: (1) the medieval theory of life
accentuated a hierarchical order of existence--a theory that found
expression in feudalism, in Church organization, and in guild and
craft life; in pursuance of this theory, the Jews were accorded a
recognized and distinct status; (2) furthermore, the Jews were an
economic necessity in the times when a ban was laid on money-lending,
and they constituted an important economic facility at a little later
period when capital could indeed be worked but when rivalry and
hatreds rendered communication uncertain.[6] To the maintenance of
Jewish solidarity and the preservation of things Jewish _qua_ Jewish,
sacrifices culminating in the surrender of life bequeathed to the race
a comprehensive martyrology.[7]

