One sorrowful day only, my grandfather and I were absent for several
hours from the lighthouse; for we went ashore to follow poor Jem Millar
to the grave. His poor wife was unconscious, and knew nothing of what
was going on.

When, after some weeks, the fever left her, she was still very weak and
unfit for work. But there was much to be done, and she had no time to
sit still, for a new man had been appointed to take her husband's place;
and he was to come into the house at the beginning of the month.

We felt very dull and sad the day that the Millars went away. We went
down to the pier with them, and saw them on board the steamer--Mrs.
Millar, the six little children, and the servant-girl, all dressed in
mourning, and all of them crying. They were going to Mrs. Millar's home,
far away in the north of Scotland, where her old father and mother were
still living.

The island seemed very lonely and desolate when they were gone. If it
had not been for our little sunbeam, as my grandfather called her, I do
not know what we should have done. Every day we loved her more, and what
we dreaded most was, that a letter would arrive some Monday morning to
tell us that she must go away from us.

'Dear me, Alick,' my grandfather would often say, 'how little you and me
thought that stormy night what a little treasure we had got wrapped up
in that funny little bundle!'

The child was growing fast; the fresh sea did her great good, and every
day she became more intelligent and pretty.

We were very curious to know who was appointed in Jem Millar's place;
but we were not able to find out even what his name was. Captain Sayers
said that he did not know anything about it; and the gentlemen who came
over once or twice to see about the house being repaired and put in
order for the new-comer were very silent on the subject, and seemed to
think us very inquisitive if we asked any questions. Of course, our
comfort depended very much upon who our neighbour was, for he and my
grandfather would be constantly together, and we should have no one else
to speak to.

My grandfather was very anxious that we should give the man a welcome
to the island, and make him comfortable on his first arrival. So we set
to work, as soon as the Millars were gone, to dig up the untidy garden
belonging to the next house, and make it as neat and pretty as we could
for the new-comers.

'I wonder how many of them there will be,' I said, as we were at work in
their garden.

'Maybe only just the man,' said my grandfather. 'When I came here first,
I was a young unmarried man, Alick. But we shall soon know all about
him; he'll be here next Monday morning, they say.'

'It's a wonder he hasn't been over before,' I said, 'to see the house
and the island. I wonder what he'll think of it?'

'He'll be strange at first, poor fellow, said my grandfather; 'but we'll
give him a bit of a welcome. Have a nice bit of breakfast ready for
him, Alick, my lad, and for his wife and bairns too, if he has any--hot
coffee and cakes, and a bit of meat, and any thing else you like;
they'll be glad of it after crossing over here.'

So we made our little preparations, and waited very anxiously indeed for
Monday's Steamer.


CHAPTER X.


OUR NEW NEIGHBOUR.

Monday morning came, and found us standing on the pier as usual awaiting
the arrival of the steamer.

We were very anxious indeed to see our new neighbours. A nice little
breakfast for four or five people was set out in our little kitchen, and
I had gathered a large bunch of dahlias from our garden, to make the
table look cheerful and bright. All was ready, and in due time the
steamer came puffing up towards the pier, and we saw a man standing
on the deck, talking to Captain Sayers, who we felt sure must be the new
lighthouse-man.

[Illustration: 'PUFF, PUFF,' SAID LITTLE TIMPEY.]

'I don't see a wife,' said my grandfather.

'Nor any children,' said I, as I held little Timpey up, that she might
see the steamer.

'Puff, puff, puff,' she said, as it came up, and then turned round and
laughed merrily.

The steamer came up to the landing-place, and my grandfather and I went
down the steps to meet Captain Sayers and the stranger.

'Here's your new neighbour, Sandy,' said the captain. 'Will you show him
the way to his house, whilst I see to your goods?'

'Welcome to the island,' said my grandfather, grasping his hand.

He was a tall, strongly-built man, very sun-burnt and weather-beaten.

'Thank you,' said the man, looking at me all the time. 'It _is_
pleasant to have a welcome.'

'That's my grandson Alick,' said my grandfather, putting his hand on my
shoulder.

'Your grandson,' repeated the man, looking earnestly at me; 'your
grandson--indeed!'

'And now come along,' said my grand father, 'and get a bit of something
to eat; we've got a cup of coffee all ready for you at home, and you'll
be right welcome, I assure you.'

'That's very kind of you,' said the stranger.

We were walking up now towards the house, and the man did not seem much
inclined to talk. I fancied once that I saw a tear in his eye, but I
thought I must have been mistaken. What could he have to cry about? I
little knew all that was passing through his mind.

'By the bye,' said my grandfather, turning round suddenly upon him,
'what's your name? We've never heard it yet!'

The man did not answer, and my grandfather looked at him in
astonishment. 'Have you got no name?' he said, 'or have you objections
to folks knowing what your name is?'

'Father!' said the man, taking hold of my grandfather's hand, 'don't you
know your own lad?'

'Why, it's my David! Alick, look Alick, that's your father; it is
indeed!'

And then my grandfather fairly broke down, and sobbed like a child,
whilst my father grasped him tightly with one hand, and put the other on
my shoulder.

'I wouldn't let them tell you,' he said 'I made them promise not to
tell you till I could do it myself. I heard of Jem Millar's death as
soon as I arrived in England, and I wrote off and applied for the place
at once. I told them I was your son, father, and they gave me it at
once, as soon as they heard where I had been all these years.'

'And where have you been, David, never to send us a line all the time?'

'Well, it's a long story,' said my father; 'let's come in, and I'll tell
you all about it.'

So we went in together, and my father still looked at me. 'He's very
like HER, father,' he said, in a husky voice.

I knew he meant my mother!

'Then you heard about poor Alice?' said my grandfather.

'Yes,' he said; 'it was a very curious thing. A man from these parts
happened to be on board the vessel I came home in, and he told me all
about it. I felt as if I had no heart left in me, when I heard she was
gone. I had just been thinking all the time how glad she would be to see
me.'

Then my grandfather told him all he could about my poor mother. How she
had longed to hear from him; and how, as week after week and month after
month went by, and no news came, she had gradually become weaker and
weaker. All this and much more he told him; and whenever he stopped, my
father always wanted to hear more, so that it was not until we were
sitting over the watchroom fire in the evening that my father began to
tell us his story.

He had been shipwrecked on the coast of China. The ship had gone to
pieces not far from shore, and he and three other men had escaped safely
to land. As soon as they stepped on shore, a crowd of Chinese gathered
round them with anything but friendly faces. They were taken prisoners,
and carried before some man who seemed to be the governor of that part
of the country. He asked them a great many questions, but they did not
understand a word of what he said, and, of course, could not answer him.

For some days my father and the other men were very uncertain what their
fate would be; for the Chinese at that time were exceedingly jealous of
any foreigner landing on their shore. However, one day they were brought
out of the wooden house in which they had been imprisoned, and taken a
long journey of some two hundred miles into the interior of the country.
And here it was that my poor father had been all those years, when we
thought him dead. He was not unkindly treated, and he taught the
half-civilized people there many things which they did not know, and
which they were very glad to learn. But both by day and night he was
carefully watched, lest he should make his escape, and he never found a
single opportunity of getting away from them. Of course, there were no
posts and no railways in that remote place, and he was quite shut out
from the world. Of what was going on at home he knew as little as if he
had been living in the moon.

Slowly and drearily eleven long years passed away, and then, one
morning, they were suddenly told that they were to be sent down to the
coast, and put on board a ship bound for England. They told my father
that there had been a war, and that one of the conditions of peace was,
that they should give up all the foreigners in their country whom they
were holding as prisoners.

'Well, David, my lad,' said my grandfather, when he had finished his
strange story, 'it's almost like getting thee back from the dead, to
have thee in the old home again!'


CHAPTER XI.


ON THE ROCK.

About a fortnight after my father arrived, we were surprised one Monday
morning by another visit from old Mr. Davis. His son-in-law had asked
him to come to tell my grandfather that he had received a letter with
regard to the little girl who was saved from the _Victory_. So he told
my father and me as we stood on the pier; and all the way to the house I
was wondering what the letter could be.

Timpey was running by my side, her little hand in mine, and I could not
bear to think how dull we should be when she was gone.

'Why, it's surely Mr. Davis,' said my grandfather, as he rose to meet
the old gentleman.

'Yes,' said he, 'it is Mr. Davis; and I suppose you can guess what I've
come for.'

'Not to take our little sunbeam, sir,' said my grandfather, taking
Timpey in his arms. 'You never mean to say you're going to take her
away?'

'Wait a bit,' said the old gentleman, sitting down and fumbling in his
pocket; 'wait until you've heard this letter, and then see what you
think about her going.'

    And he began to read as follows:
    MY DEAR SIR,--I am almost over
    powered with joy by the news received by
    telegram an hour ago. We had heard of
    the loss of the _Victory_, and were mourning
    for our little darling as being amongst the
    number of those drowned. Her mother has
    been quite crushed by her loss, and has
    been dangerously ill ever since the sad intelligence
    reached us.

    'Need I tell you what our feelings were
    when we suddenly heard that our dear child
    was alive, and well and happy!

    'We shall sail by the next steamer for
    England, to claim our little darling. My
    wife is hardly strong enough to travel this
    week, or we should come at once. A thousand
    thanks to the brave men who saved
    our little girl. I shall hope soon to be
    able to thank them myself. My heart is
    too full to write much to-day.

    'Our child was travelling home under the
    care of a friend, as we wished her to leave
    India before the hot weather set in, and I
    was not able to leave for two months. This
    accounts for the name Villiers not being on
    the list of passengers on board the _Victory_.

    'Thanking you most sincerely for all your
    efforts to let us know of our child's safety,
         'I remain, yours very truly,

                    'EDWARD VILLIERS.