
    "The group of shells which affords the most interesting evidence
    of the origin of new forms through descent with modification is
    that of the genus Vivipara or Paludina, which occurs in
    prodigious abundance throughout the whole series of freshwater
    strata. We shall not, of course, attempt in this place to enter
    into any details concerning the forty distinct _forms_ of this
    genus (Dr. Neumayr very properly hesitates to call them all
    _species_), which are named and described in this monograph,
    and between which, as the authors show, so many connecting
    links, clearly illustrating the derivation of the newer from the
    older types, have been detected. On the minds of those who
    carefully examine the admirably engraved figures given in the
    plates accompanying this valuable memoir, or still better, the
    very large series of specimens from among which the subjects of
    these figures are selected, and which are now in the museum of
    the Reichsanstalt of Vienna, but little doubt will, we suspect,
    remain that the authors have fully made out their case, and have
    demonstrated that, beyond all controversy, the series with
    highly complicated ornamentation were variously derived by
    descent--the lines of which are in most cases perfectly clear
    and obvious--from the simple and unornamented Vivipara
    achatinoides of the Congerien-Schichten (the lower division of
    the series of strata). It is interesting to notice that a large
    portion of these unquestionably derived forms depart so widely
    from the type of the genus Vivipara, that they have been
    separated on so high an authority as that of Sandberger, as a
    new genus, under the name of Tulotoma. And hence we are led to
    the conclusion that a vast number of forms, certainly exhibiting
    specific distinctions, and according to some naturalists,
    differences even entitled to be regarded of generic value, have
    all a common ancestry."


It is, as Professor Judd remarks, owing to the exceptionally favourable
circumstances of a long-continued and unbroken series of deposits being
formed under physical conditions either identical or very slowly
changing, that we owe so complete a record of the process of organic
change. Usually, some disturbing elements, such as a sudden change of
physical conditions, or the immigration of new sets of forms from other
areas and the consequent retreat or partial extinction of the older
fauna, interferes with the continuity of organic development, and
produces those puzzling discordances so generally met with in geological
formations of marine origin. While a case of the kind now described
affords evidence of the origin of species complete and conclusive,
though on a necessarily very limited scale, the very rarity of the
conditions which are essential to such completeness serves to explain
why it is that in most cases the direct evidence of evolution is not to
be obtained.

Another illustration of the filling up of gaps between existing groups
is afforded by Professor Huxley's researches on fossil crocodiles. The
gap between the existing crocodiles and the lizards is very wide, but as
we go back in geological time we meet with fossil forms which are to
some extent intermediate and form a connected series. The three living
genera--Crocodilus, Alligator, and Gavialis--are found in the Eocene
formation, and allied forms of another genus, Holops, in the Chalk. From
the Chalk backward to the Lias another group of genera occurs, having
anatomical characteristics intermediate between the living crocodiles
and the most ancient forms. These, forming two genera Belodon and
Stagonolepis, are found in a still older formation, the Trias. They have
characters resembling some lizards, especially the remarkable Hatteria
of New Zealand, and have also some resemblances to the
Dinosaurians--reptiles which in some respects approach birds.
Considering how comparatively few are the remains of this group of
animals, the evidence which it affords of progressive development is
remarkably clear.[184]

Among the higher animals the rhinoceros, the horse, and the deer afford
good evidence of advance in organisation and of the filling up of the
gaps which separate the living forms from their nearest allies. The
earliest ancestral forms of the rhinoceroses occur in the Middle Eocene
of the United States, and were to some extent intermediate between the
rhinoceros and tapir families, having like the latter four toes to the
front feet, and three to those behind. These are followed in the Upper
Eocene by the genus Amynodon, in which the skull assumes more distinctly
the rhinocerotic type. Following this in the Lower Miocene we have the
Aceratherium, like the last in its feet, but still more decidedly a
rhinoceros in its general structure. From this there are two diverging
lines--one in the Old World, the other in the New. In the former, to
which the Aceratherium is supposed to have migrated in early Miocene
times, when a mild climate and luxuriant vegetation prevailed far within
the arctic circle, it gave rise to the Ceratorhinus and the various
horned rhinoceroses of late Tertiary times and of those now living. In
America a number of large hornless rhinoceroses were developed--they
are found in the Upper Miocene, Pliocene, and Post-Pliocene
formations--and then became extinct. The true rhinoceroses have three
toes on all the feet.[185]


_The Pedigree of the Horse Tribe._

Yet more remarkable is the evidence afforded by the ancestral forms of
the horse tribe which have been discovered in the American tertiaries.
The family Equidae, comprising the living horse, asses, and zebras,
differ widely from all other mammals in the peculiar structure of the
feet, all of which terminate in a single large toe forming the hoof.
They have forty teeth, the molars being formed of hard and soft material
in crescentic folds, so as to be a powerful agent in grinding up hard
grasses and other vegetable food. The former peculiarities depend upon
modifications of the skeleton, which have been thus described by
Professor Huxley:--


    "Let us turn in the first place to the fore-limb. In most
    quadrupeds, as in ourselves, the fore-arm contains distinct
    bones, called the radius and the ulna. The corresponding region
    in the horse seems at first to possess but one bone. Careful
    observation, however, enables us to distinguish in this bone a
    part which clearly answers to the upper end of the ulna. This is
    closely united with the chief mass of the bone which represents
    the radius, and runs out into a slender shaft, which may be
    traced for some distance downwards upon the back of the radius,
    and then in most cases thins out and vanishes. It takes still
    more trouble to make sure of what is nevertheless the fact, that
    a small part of the lower end of the bone of a horse's fore-arm,
    which is only distinct in a very young foal, is really the lower
    extremity of the ulna.

    "What is commonly called the knee of a horse is its wrist. The
    'cannon bone' answers to the middle bone of the five metacarpal
    bones which support the palm of the hand in ourselves. The
    pastern, coronary, and coffin bones of veterinarians answer to
    the joints of our middle fingers, while the hoof is simply a
    greatly enlarged and thickened nail. But if what lies below the
    horse's 'knee' thus corresponds to the middle finger in
    ourselves, what has become of the four other fingers or digits?
    We find in the places of the second and fourth digits only two
    slender splintlike bones, about two-thirds as long as the cannon
    bone, which gradually taper to their lower ends and bear no
    finger joints, or, as they are termed, phalanges. Sometimes,
    small bony or gristly nodules are to be found at the bases of
    these two metacarpal splints, and it is probable that these
    represent rudiments of the first and fifth toes. Thus, the part
    of the horse's skeleton which corresponds with that of the human
    hand, contains one overgrown middle digit, and at least two
    imperfect lateral digits; and these answer, respectively, to the
    third, the second, and the fourth fingers in man.

    "Corresponding modifications are found in the hind limb. In
    ourselves, and in most quadrupeds, the leg contains two distinct
    bones, a large bone, the tibia, and a smaller and more slender
    bone, the fibula. But, in the horse, the fibula seems, at first,
    to be reduced to its upper end; a short slender bone united with
    the tibia, and ending in a point below, occupying its place.
    Examination of the lower end of a young foal's shin-bone,
    however, shows a distinct portion of osseous matter which is the
    lower end of the fibula; so that the, apparently single, lower
    end of the shin-bone is really made up of the coalesced ends of
    the tibia and fibula, just as the, apparently single, lower end
    of the fore-arm bone is composed of the coalesced radius and
    ulna.

    "The heel of the horse is the part commonly known as the hock.
    The hinder cannon bone answers to the middle metatarsal bone of
    the human foot, the pastern, coronary, and coffin bones, to the
    middle toe bones; the hind hoof to the nail; as in the forefoot.
    And, as in the forefoot, there are merely two splints to
    represent the second and the fourth toes. Sometimes a rudiment
    of a fifth toe appears to be traceable.

    "The teeth of a horse are not less peculiar than its limbs. The
    living engine, like all others, must be well stoked if it is to
    do its work; and the horse, if it is to make good its wear and
    tear, and to exert the enormous amount of force required for its
    propulsion, must be well and rapidly fed. To this end, good
    cutting instruments and powerful and lasting crushers are
    needful. Accordingly, the twelve cutting teeth of a horse are
    close-set and concentrated in the forepart of its mouth, like so
    many adzes or chisels. The grinders or molars are large, and
    have an extremely complicated structure, being composed of a
    number of different substances of unequal hardness. The
    consequence of this is that they wear away at different rates;
    and, hence, the surface of each grinder is always as uneven as
    that of a good millstone."[186]


We thus see that the Equidae differ very widely in structure from most
other mammals. Assuming the truth of the theory of evolution, we should
expect to find traces among extinct animals of the steps by which this
great modification has been effected; and we do really find traces of
these steps, imperfectly among European fossils, but far more completely
among those of America.

It is a singular fact that, although no horse inhabited America when
discovered by Europeans, yet abundance of remains of extinct horses have
been found both in North and South America in Post-Tertiary and Upper
Pliocene deposits; and from these an almost continuous series of
modified forms can be traced in the Tertiary formation, till we reach,
at the very base of the series, a primitive form so unlike our perfected
animal, that, had we not the intermediate links, few persons would
believe that the one was the ancestor of the other. The tracing out of
this marvellous history we owe chiefly to Professor Marsh of Yale
College, who has himself discovered no less than thirty species of
fossil Equidae; and we will allow him to tell the story of the
development of the horse from a humble progenitor in his own words.


    "The oldest representative of the horse at present known is the
    diminutive Eohippus from the Lower Eocene. Several species have
    been found, all about the size of a fox. Like most of the early
    mammals, these ungulates had forty-four teeth, the molars with
    short crowns and quite distinct in form from the premolars. The
    ulna and fibula were entire and distinct, and there were four
    well-developed toes and a rudiment of another on the forefeet,
    and three toes behind. In the structure of the feet and teeth,
    the Eohippus unmistakably indicates that the direct ancestral
    line to the modern horse has already separated from the other
    perissodactyles, or odd-toed ungulates.

    "In the next higher division of the Eocene another genus,
    Orohippus, makes its appearance, replacing Eohippus, and showing
    a greater, though still distant, resemblance to the equine type.
    The rudimentary first digit of the forefoot has disappeared, and
    the last premolar has gone over to the molar series. Orohippus
    was but little larger than Eohippus, and in most other respects
    very similar. Several species have been found, but none occur
    later than the Upper Eocene.

    "Near the base of the Miocene, we find a third closely allied
    genus, Mesohippus, which is about as large as a sheep, and one
    stage nearer the horse. There are only three toes and a
    rudimentary splint on the forefeet, and three toes behind. Two
    of the premolar teeth are quite like the molars. The ulna is no
    longer distinct or the fibula entire, and other characters show
    clearly that the transition is advancing.

    "In the Upper Miocene Mesohippus is not found, but in its place
    a fourth form, Miohippus, continues the line. This genus is near
    the Anchitherium of Europe, but presents several important
    differences. The three toes in each foot are more nearly of a
    size, and a rudiment of the fifth metacarpal bone is retained.
    All the known species of this genus are larger than those of
    Mesohippus, and none of them pass above the Miocene formation.

    "The genus Protohippus of the Lower Pliocene is yet more equine,
    and some of its species equalled the ass in size. There are
    still three toes on each foot, but only the middle one,
    corresponding to the single toe of the horse, comes to the
    ground. This genus resembles most nearly the Hipparion of
    Europe.

    "In the Pliocene we have the last stage of the series before
    reaching the horse, in the genus Pliohippus, which has lost the
    small hooflets, and in other respects is very equine. Only in
    the Upper Pliocene does the true Equus appear and complete the
    genealogy of the horse, which in the Post-Tertiary roamed over
    the whole of North and South America, and soon after became
    extinct. This occurred long before the discovery of the
    continent by Europeans, and no satisfactory reason for the
    extinction has yet been given. Besides the characters I have
    mentioned, there are many others in the skeleton, skull, teeth,
    and brain of the forty or more intermediate species, which show
    that the transition from the Eocene Eohippus to the modern Equus
    has taken place in the order indicated"[187] (see Fig. 33).


[Illustration: FIG. 33.--Geological development of the horse tribe
(Eohippus since discovered).]

Well may Professor Huxley say that this is demonstrative evidence of
evolution; the doctrine resting upon exactly as secure a foundation as
did the Copernican theory of the motions of the heavenly bodies at the
time of its promulgation. Both have the same basis--the coincidence of
the observed facts with the theoretical requirements.


_Development of Deer's Horns._

