A lot of cast-off clothes arrive from "A SYMPATHETIC PARISHIONER!" How
degrading! Wish BISHOP OF WORCESTER hadn't said that he knew a Clergyman
who stayed in bed because he had no decent clothes to wear. Congregation
seem to think he meant _me_! Two blankets, and a rig-out of "Cellular
under-clothing," from "CHURCH DEFENCE," addressed to "Our Beloved but
Impoverished Incumbent." Quite insulting! Give blankets to Gardener, and
send the Cellular things to Curate, as his tendencies are distinctly
monastic.

Letter from a Newmarket Bookmaker! Says he hears I'm in want of Easter
Offerings, so he offers to "put me on to a good thing for the Derby." I am,
apparently, to forward him a £5 note, and he returns me £50 "without fail."
Tempting, but haven't got a £5 note to send.

Arrival at my quiet Vicarage of a donkey, a cow, two pigs, and a dozen
barndoor fowls! Perhaps, in honour of the pigs, I might call this a "sow
Easter!" The whole menagerie sent by neighbouring farmers. Wish they'd send
me arrears of rent for glebe instead; yet I daren't ask for them. Evidently
intended as Easter "gifts in kind;" but not the kind I want. Send donkey on
to Curate, and tether cow in back-yard, not having a field. Pigs
temporarily accommodated in back kitchen. Cook threatens to give notice.

Church. Offertory goes to _me_ to-day! Don't half like it. Feel like a
schoolboy expecting to be tipped. Curate rather glum. Finds he thinks my
sending the donkey to him was meant to insult him. When I assure him it
wasn't, he cheers up, and says he'll hold the plate. Does so. Seems very
heavy. Curate distinctly winks at me, which is against the Rubrics, no
doubt, but still seems to be an augury of happy tidings about the sum
collected. On his way to Vestry, Curate whispers to me "Two-fifty!" What
does he mean? Is it two fifty pounds, or shillings? It's neither--it's
_pence_! Really, if this is all the "loyal laity" can do, I may as well
disestablish myself.

Best Easter Offering of all comes by post. Offer of position as
Under-Cashier in a firm of eminent Bone-boilers. Write to accept offer with
thanks. Better to boil bones for other people than to have all the flesh
taken off my own.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEW COINAGE.

  Art will now adorn our purses,
    Hitherto an artless place;
  More than pictures, songs, or verses,
    This should elevate the race.

  Is it safe to be prophetic?
    Will the miser, once abused,
  Be considered quite aesthetic,
    With the connoisseur confused?

  Will the banker, grown artistic,
    Talk a jargon new and strange?
  Will this feeling, subtle, mystic,
    Even reach the Stock Exchange?

  Will it from the City banish
    Dress that artists should eschew?
  Will the hallowed "topper" vanish,
    And the frock-coat fade from view?

  Will the cabman now be willing,
    After driving half a mile,
  To accept a high-art shilling,
    Not with oaths, but with a smile?

  Will the porter at the station
    While his thanks pause on his lip,
  Gaze in silent admiration
    At the beauty of his tip?

  "Music hath," so CONGREVE stated,
    "Charms to soothe the savage breast";
  Numismatic art is fated
    May be to be likewise blest.

       *       *       *       *       *

NAILED!

(_Lord Dufferin and the Gallic Vermin._)

     [At the Annual Dinner of the British Chamber of Commerce in Paris,
     Lord DUFFERIN took occasion to refer trenchantly, but temperately, to
     the long series of calumnies lately directed against him by certain
     sections of the French Press.]

