I have a friend who says that he prefers to select his authors for
himself, not to have them selected for him. But he has money with which
to buy the books he wants, a room in which to put them, and the broad
culture which enables him to make a wise selection. Most of us lack one
at least of these qualifications: the money, the space, or the
knowledge. For most of us a library for the home, selected as this
Pocket Library has been has three great advantages: the cost is not
prohibitive; the space can easily be made in out home for the books;
and the selection is more wisely made than any we could make for
ourselves. For myself I should be very glad to have the editors of this
series come into my library, which is fairly large but sadly needs
weeding out, give me a literary appraisal of my books, and tell me what
volumes in their respective departments they think I could best
dispense with to make room for their betters, and what their betters
would be.

To these considerations in favor of such a home library as this, may be
added the fact that the books are of such a size that one can easily
put a volume in his pocket when he is going on a train or in a trolley
car. For busy men and women often the only time for reading is the time
which too many of us are apt to waste in doing nothing.

Perhaps the highest use of good books is their use as friends. Such a
wisely selected group of friends as this library furnishes is an
invaluable addition to any home which receives it and knows how to make
wise use of it. I am glad to have the privilege of introducing it and
hope that this introduction may add to the number of homes in which it
will find a welcome.


THE PURPOSE OF READING

BY JOHN MACY


Why do we read books is one of those vast questions that need no
answer. As well ask, Why ought we to be good? or, Why do we believe in
a God? The whole universe of wisdom answers. To attempt an answer in a
single article would be like turning a spyglass for a moment toward the
stars. We take the great simple things for granted, like the air we
breathe. In a country that holds popular education to be the foundation
of all its liberties and fortunes, we do not find many people who need
to be argued into the belief that the reading of books is good for us;
even people who do not read much acknowledge vaguely that they ought to
read more.

There are, to be sure, men of rough worldly wisdom, even endowed with
spiritual insight, who distrust "book learning" and fall back on the
obvious truth that experience of life is the great teacher. Such
persons are in a measure justified in their conviction by the number of
unwise human beings who have read much but to no purpose.

The bookful blockhead, ignorantly read,
With loads of learned lumber in his head

is a living argument against mere reading. But we can meet such
argument by pointing out that the blockhead who cannot learn from books
cannot learn much from life, either. That sometimes useful citizen whom
it is fashionable to call a Philistine, and who calls himself a
"practical man," often has under him a beginner fresh from the schools,
who is glib and confident in repeating bookish theories, but is not yet
skillful in applying them. If the practical man is thoughtless, he
sniffs at theory and points to his clumsy assistant as proof of the
uselessness of what is to be got from books. If he is wise, the
practical man realizes how much better off he would be, how much
farther his hard work and experience might have carried him, if he had
had the advantage of bookish training.

Moreover, the hard-headed skeptic, self-made and self-secure, who will
not traffic with the literature that touches his life work, is seldom
so confined to his own little shop that he will not, for recreation,
take holiday tours into the literature of other men's lives and labors.
The man who does not like to read any books is, I am confident, seldom
found, and at the risk of slandering a patriot, I will express the
doubt whether he is a good citizen. Honest he may be, but certainly not
wise. The human race for thousands of years has been writing its
experiences, telling how it has met our everlasting problems, how it
has struggled with darkness and rejoiced in light. What fools we should
be to try to live our lives without the guidance and inspiration of the
generations that have gone before, without the joy, encouragement, and
sympathy that the best imaginations of our generation are distilling
into words. For literature is simply life selected and condensed into
books. In a few hours we can follow all that is recorded of the life of
Jesus--the best that He did in years of teaching and suffering all ours
for a day of reading, and the more deeply ours for a lifetime of
reading and meditation!

If the expression of life in words is strong and beautiful and true it
outlives empires, like the oldest books of the Old Testament. If it is
weak or trivial or untrue, it is forgotten like most of the "stories"
in yesterday's newspaper, like most of the novels of last year. The
expression of truth, the transmission of knowledge and emotions between
man and man from generation to generation, these are the purposes of
literature. Not to read books is like being shut up in a dungeon while
life rushes by outside.

I happen to be writing in Christmas week, and I have read for the tenth
time "A Christmas Carol," by Dickens, that amazing allegory in which
the hard, bitter facts of life are involved in a beautiful myth, that
wizard's caldron in which humor bubbles and from which rise phantom
figures of religion and poetry. Can any one doubt that if this story
were read by every man, woman, and child in the world, Christmas would
be a happier time and the feelings of the race elevated and
strengthened? The story has power enough to defeat armies, to make
revolutions in the faith of men, and turn the cold markets of the world
into festival scenes of charity. If you know any mean person you may be
sure that he has not read "A Christmas Carol," or that he read it long
ago and has forgotten it. I know there are persons who pretend that the
sentimentality of Dickens destroys their interest in him. I once took a
course with an over-refined, imperfectly educated professor of
literature, who advised me that in time I should outgrow my liking for
Dickens. It was only his way of recommending to me a kind of fiction
that I had not learned to like. In time I did learn to like it, but I
did not outgrow Dickens. A person who can read "A Christmas Carol"
aloud to the end and keep his voice steady is, I suspect, not a safe
person to trust with one's purse or one's honor.

It is not necessary to argue about the value of literature or even to
define it. One way of bringing ourselves to realize vividly what
literature can do for us is to enter the libraries of great men and see
what books have done for the acknowledged leaders of our race.

You will recall John Stuart Mill's experience in reading Wordsworth.
Mill was a man of letters as well as a scientific economist and
philosopher, and we expect to find that men of letters have been
nourished on literature; reading must necessarily have been a large
part of their professional preparation. The examples of men of action
who have been molded and inspired by books will perhaps be more helpful
to remember; for most of us are not to be writers or to engage in
purely intellectual work; our ambitions point to a thousand different
careers in the world of action.

Lincoln was not primarily a man of letters, although he wrote noble
prose on occasion, and the art of expression was important, perhaps
indispensable, in his political success. He read deeply in the law and
in books on public questions. For general literature he had little
time, either during his early struggles or after his public life began,
and his autobiographical memorandum contains the significant words:
"Education defective." But these more significant words are found in a
letter which he wrote to Hackett, the player: "Some of Shakespeare's
plays I have never read, while others I have gone over perhaps as
frequently as any unprofessional reader. Among the latter are 'Lear,'
'Richard III,' 'Henry VIII,' 'Hamlet,' and, especially, 'Macbeth.'"

If he had not read these masterpieces, no doubt he would have become
President just the same and guided the country through its terrible
difficulties; but we may be fairly sure that the high philosophy by
which he lifted the political differences of his day above partisan
quarrels, the command of words which gives his letters and speeches
literary permanence apart from their biographical interest, the poetic
exaltation of the Gettysburg Address, these higher qualities of genius,
beyond the endowment of any native wit, came to Lincoln in some part
from the reading of books. It is important to note that he followed
Franklin's advice to read much but not too many books; the list of
books mentioned in the biographical records of Lincoln is not long. But
he went over those half dozen plays "frequently." We should remember,
too, that he based his ideals upon the Bible and his style upon the
King James Version. His writings abound in Biblical phrases.

We are accustomed to regard Lincoln as a thinker. His right arm in the
saddest duty of his life, General Grant, was a man of deeds; as Lincoln
said of him, he was a "copious worker and fighter, but a very meager
writer and telegrapher." In his "Memoirs," Grant makes a modest
confession about his reading:

"There is a fine library connected with the Academy [West Point] from
which cadets can get books to read in their quarters. I devoted more
time to these than to books relating to the course of studies. Much of
the time, I am sorry to say, was devoted to novels, but not those of a
trashy sort. I read all of Bulwer's then published, Cooper's,
Marryat's, Scott's, Washington Irving's works, Lever's, and many others
that I do not now remember."

Grant was not a shining light in his school days, nor indeed in his
life until the Civil War, and at first sight he is not a striking
example of a great man influenced by books. Yet who can deny that the
fruit of that early reading is to be found in his "Memoirs," in which a
man of action, unused to writing, and called upon to narrate great
events, discovers an easy adequate style? There is a dangerous kind of
conjecture in which many biographers indulge when they try to relate
logically the scattered events of a man's life. A conjectured relation
is set down as a proved or unquestioned relation. I have said something
about this in [Footnote: See John Macy's Guide to Reading, Chapter
VIII.]  writing on biography, and I do not wish to violate my own
teachings. But we may, without harm, hazard the suggestion, which is
only a suggestion, that some of the chivalry of Scott's heroes wove
itself into Grant's instincts and inspired this businesslike, modern
general, in the days when politeness has lost some of its flourish, to
be the great gentleman he was at Appomattox when he quietly wrote into
the terms of the surrender that the Confederate officers should keep
their side arms. Stevenson's account of the episode in his essay on
"Gentlemen" is heightened, though not above the dignity of the facts,
certainly not to a degree that is untrue to the facts, as they are to
be read in Grant's simple narrative. Since I have agreed not to say
"ought to read," I will only express the hope that the quotation from
Stevenson will lead you to the essay and to the volume that contains
it.

"On the day of the capitulation, Lee wore his presentation sword; it
was the first thing that Grant observed, and from that moment he had
but one thought: how to avoid taking it. A man, who should perhaps have
had the nature of an angel, but assuredly not the special virtues of a
gentleman, might have received the sword, and no more words about it;
he would have done well in a plain way. One who wished to be a
gentleman, and knew not how, might have received and returned it: he
would have done infamously ill, he would have proved himself a cad;
taking the stage for himself, leaving to his adversary confusion of
countenance and the ungraceful posture of a man condemned to offer
thanks. Grant without a word said, added to the terms this article:
'All officers to retain their side arms'; and the problem was solved
and Lee kept his sword, and Grant went down to posterity, not perhaps a
fine gentleman, but a great one."

Napoleon, who of all men of mighty deeds after Julius Caesar had the
greatest intellect, was a tireless reader, and since he needed only
four or five hours' sleep in twenty-four he found time to read in the
midst of his prodigious activities. Nowadays those of us who are
preparing to conquer the world are taught to strengthen ourselves for
the task by getting plenty of sleep. Napoleon's devouring eyes read far
into the night; when he was in the field his secretaries forwarded a
stream of books to his headquarters; and if he was left without a new
volume to begin, some underling had to bear his imperial displeasure.
No wonder that his brain contained so many ideas that, as the sharp-
tongued poet, Heine, said, one of his lesser thoughts would keep all
the scholars and professors in Germany busy all their lives making
commentaries on it.

In Franklin's "Autobiography" we have an unusually clear statement of
the debt of a man of affairs to literature: "From a child I was fond of
reading, and all the little money that came into my hands was ever laid
out in books. Pleased with the 'Pilgrim's Progress,' my first
collection was of John Bunyan's works in separate little volumes.... My
father's little library consisted chiefly of books on polemic divinity,
most of which I read, and have since often regretted that, at a time
when I had such a thirst for knowledge, more proper books had not
fallen in my way, since it was now resolved that I should not be a
clergyman. 'Plutarch's Lives' there was in which I read abundantly, and
I still think that time spent to great advantage. There was also a book
of De Foe's, called an 'Essay on Projects,' and another of Dr.
Mather's, called 'Essays to do Good,' which perhaps gave me a turn of
thinking that had an influence on some of the principal future events
of my life."

It is not surprising to find that the most versatile of versatile
Americans read De Foe's "Essay on Projects," which contains practical
suggestions on a score of subjects, from banking and insurance to
national academics. In Cotton Mather's "Essays to do Good" is the germ
perhaps of the sensible morality of Franklin's "Poor Richard." The
story of how Franklin pave his nights to the study of Addison and by
imitating the Spectator papers taught himself to write, is the
best of lessons in self-cultivation in English. The "Autobiography" is
proof of how well he learned, not Addison's style, which was suited to
Joseph Addison and not to Benjamin Franklin, but a clear, firm manner
of writing. In Franklin's case we can see not only what he owed to
books, but how one side of his fine, responsive mind was starved
because, as he put it, more proper books did not fall in his way. The
blind side of Franklin's great intellect was his lack of religious
imagination. This defect may be accounted for by the forbidding nature
of the religious books in his father's library. Repelled by the dull
discourses, the young man missed the religious exaltation and poetic
mysticism which the New England divines concealed in their polemic
argument. Franklin's liking for Bunyan and his confession that his
father's discouragement kept him from being a poet--"most probably," he
says, "a very bad one"--show that he would have responded to the right
kind of religious literature, and not have remained all his life such a
complacent rationalist.

If it is clear that the purpose of reading is to put ourselves in
communication with the best minds of our race, we need go no farther
for a definition of "good reading." Whatever human beings hare said
well is literature, whether it be the Declaration of Independence or a
love story. Reading consists in nothing more than in taking one of the
volumes in which somebody has said something well, opening it on one's
knee, and beginning.

We take it for granted, then, that we know why we read. We may ask one
further question: How shall we read? One answer is that we should read
with as much of ourselves as a book warrants, with the part of
ourselves that a book demands. Mrs. Browning says:

                        We get no good
             By being ungenerous, even to a book,
             And calculating profits--so much help
             By so much reading. It is rather when
             We gloriously forget ourselves, and plunge
             Soul-forward, headlong, into a book's profound,
             Impassioned for its beauty, and salt of truth--
             'Tis then we get the right good from a book.

We sometimes know exactly what we wish to get from a book, especially
if it is a volume of information on a definite subject. But the great
book is full of treasures that one does not deliberately seek, and
which indeed one may miss altogether on the first journey through. It
is almost nonsensical to say: Read Macaulay for clearness, Carlyle for
power, Thackeray for ease. Literary excellence is not separated and
bottled up in any such drug-shop array. If Macaulay is a master of
clearness it is because he is much else besides. Unless we read a man
for all there is in him, we get very little; we meet, not a living
human being, not a vital book, but something dead, dismembered,
disorganized. We do not read Thackeray for ease; we read him for
Thackeray and enjoy his ease by the way.

We must read a book for all there is in it or we shall get little or
nothing. To be masters of books we must have learned to let books
master us. This is true of books that we are required to read, such as
text-books, and of those we read voluntarily and at leisure. The law of
reading is to give a book its due and a little more. The art of reading
is to know how to apply this law. For there is an art of reading, for
each of us to learn for himself, a private way of making the
acquaintance of books.

Macaulay, whose mind was never hurried or confused, learned to read
very rapidly, to absorb a page at a glance. A distinguished professor,
who has spent his life in the most minutely technical scholarship,
surprised us one day by commending to his classes the fine art of
"skipping." Many good books, including some most meritorious "three-
decker" novels, have their profitless pages, and it is useful to know
by a kind of practised instinct where to pause and reread and where to
run lightly and rapidly over the page. It is a useful accomplishment
not only in the reading of fiction, but in the business of life, to the
man of affairs who must get the gist of a mass of written matter, and
to the student of any special subject.

Usually, of course, a book that is worth reading at all is worth
reading carefully. Thoroughness of reading is the first thing to preach
and to practise, and it is perhaps dangerous to suggest to a beginner
that any book should be skimmed. The suggestion will serve its purpose
if it indicates that there are ways to read, that practice in reading
is like practice in anything else; the more one does, and the more
intelligently one does it, the farther and more easily one can go. In
the best reading--that is, the most thoughtful reading of the most
thoughtful books--attention is necessary. It is even necessary that we
should read some works, some passages, so often and with such close
application that we commit them to memory. It is said that the habit of
learning pieces by heart is not so prevalent as it used to be. I hope
that this is not so. What! have you no poems by heart, no great songs,
no verses from the Bible, no speeches from Shakespeare? Then you have
not begun to read, you have not learned how to read.

We have said enough, perhaps, of the theories of reading. The one
lesson that seems most obvious is that we must come close to
literature.


HOW TO GET THE BEST OUT
OF BOOKS

By RICHARD LE GALLIENNE


One is sometimes asked by young people panting after the waterbrooks of
knowledge: "How shall I get the best out of books?" Here indeed, is one
of those questions which can be answered only in general terms, with
possible illustrations from one's own personal experience. Misgivings,
too, as to one's fitness to answer it may well arise, as wistfully
looking round one's own bookshelves, one asks oneself: "Have I myself
got the best out of this wonderful world of books?" It is almost like
asking oneself: "Have I got the best out of life?"

As we make the survey, it will surely happen that our eyes fall on many
writers whom the stress of life, or spiritual indolence, has prevented
us from using as all the while they have been eager to be used; friends
we might have made yet never have made, neglected counsellors we would
so often have done well to consult, guides that could have saved us
many a wrong turning in the difficult way. There, in unvisited corners
of our shelves, what neglected fountains of refreshments, gardens in
which we have never walked, hills we have never climbed!

"Well," we say with a sigh, "a man cannot read everything; it is life
that has interrupted our studies, and probably the fact is that we have
accumulated more books than we really need." The young reader's
appetite is largely in his eyes, and it is very natural for one who is
born with a taste for books to gather them about him at first
indiscriminately, on the hearsay recommendation of fame, before he
really knows what his own individual tastes are, or are going to be,
and in that wistful survey I have imagined, our eyes will fall, too,
with some amusement, on not a few volumes to which we never have had
any really personal relation, and which, whatever their distinction or
their value for others, were never meant for us. The way to do with
such books is to hand them over to some one who has a use for them. On
our shelves they are like so much good thrown away, invitations to
entertainments for which we have no taste. In all vital libraries, such
a process of progressive refection is continually going on, and to
realize what we do not want in books, or cannot use, must, obviously,
be a first principle in our getting the best out of them.

Yes, we read too many books, and too many that, as they do not really
interest us, bring us neither benefit nor diversion. Even from the
point of view of reading for pleasure, we manage our reading badly. We
listlessly allow ourselves to be bullied by publishers' advertisements
into reading the latest fatuity in fiction, without, in one case out of
twenty, finding any of that pleasure we are ostensibly seeking.
Instead, indeed, we are bored and enervated, where we might have been
refreshed, either by romance or laughter. Such reading resembles the
idle absorption of innocuous but interesting beverages, which cheer as
little as they inebriate, and yet at the same time make frivolous
demands on the digestive functions. No one but a publisher could call
such reading "light." Actually it is weariness to the flesh and
heaviness to the spirit.

If, therefore, our idea of the best in books is the recreation they can
so well bring; if we go to books as to a playground to forget our cares
and to blow off the cobwebs of business, let us make sure that we find
what we seek. It is there, sure enough. The playgrounds of literature
are indeed wide, and alive with bracing excitement, nor is there any
limit to the variety of the games. But let us be sure, when we set Out
to be amused, that we really are amused, that our humorists do really
make us laugh, and that our story-tellers have stories to tell and know
how to tell them. Beware of imitations, and, when in doubt, try
Shakespeare, and Dumas--even Ouida. As a rule, avoid the "spring
lists," or "summer reading." "Summer reading" is usually very hot work.

Hackneyed as it is, there is no better general advice on reading than
Shakespeare's--

No profit is where is no pleasure taken,

In brief, sir, study what you most affect.

Not only in regard to books whose purpose, frankly, is recreation, but
also in regard to the graver uses of books, this counsel no less holds.
No reading does us any good that is not a pleasure to us. Her paths are
paths of pleasantness. Yet, of course, this does not mean that all
profitable reading is easy reading. Some of the books that give us the
finest pleasure need the closest application for their enjoyment. There
is always a certain spiritual and mental effort necessary to be made
before we tackle the great books. One might compare it to the effort of
getting up to see the sun rise. It is no little tug to leave one's warm
bed--but once we are out in the crystalline morning air, wasn't it
worth it? Perhaps our finest pleasure always demands some such
austerity of preparation. That is the secret of the truest
epicureanism. Books like Dante's "Divine Comedy," or Plato's dialogues,
will not give themselves to a lounging reader. They demand a braced,
attentive spirit. But when the first effort has been made, how
exhilarating are the altitudes in which we find ourselves; what a glow
of pure joy is the reward which we are almost sure to win by our mental
mountaineering.

But such books are not for moments when we are unwilling or unable to
make that necessary effort. We cannot always be in the mood for the
great books, and often we are too tired physically, or too low down on
the depressed levels of daily life, even to lift our eyes toward the
hills. To attempt the great books--or any books at all--in such moods
and moments, is a mistake. We may thus contract a prejudice against
some writer who, approached in more fortunate moments, would prove the
very man we were looking for.

To know when to read is hardly less important than to know what to
read. Of course, every one must decide the matter for himself; but one
general counsel may be ventured: Read only what you want to read, and
only when you want to read it.

