In the adornment of ornamental grounds, some considerable attention has
been given to summer houses, and similar structures; but these have been
mainly _rustic_ in their design and finish, and in this respect well
adapted to their purpose and surroundings. The good taste of these
structures will not be called in question. There are locations, however,
in the more immediate vicinity of our large cities, where a style less
rustic would seem to be more in harmony with the architecture which is
found to prevail. We refer to residences on the outskirts of our large
cities, with inclosures containing a few city lots. Here the
architecture, so far from being rural, is, on the contrary, stiff,
sharp, and sometimes very ornate. A rustic summer house in such a place
would be an incongruity. A rustic house is in itself a beautiful object;
but there is a certain charm in association which can not be widely
departed from without doing violence to our conceptions of the fitness
of things; and hence a purely rustic house without rural surroundings is
destitute of the chief elements which give rise to the beautiful. Most
persons would say it was out of place.

The design herewith presented was prepared to meet the requirements of
such a case; it is consequently somewhat elaborate. It is located on a
small plot of ground within the city limits, and in full view from three
streets. The grounds are laid out with a few rectangular walks, and such
shrubs as the small size of the place would admit of. The house, we
think corresponds with its surroundings. Its faults, if any, are a
little too much ornament, but something of this kind seemed to be
required in the absence of that more beautiful ornamentation produced by
the drapery of Nature. The house is so located that it receives the
morning sun for a few hours, but during the rest of the day is in the
shade; it therefore constitutes a pleasant place of retreat for the
family at all hours, and is used by the children freely as a play house.
The floor is laid in narrow stuff, and is elevated a foot above the
ground for the sake of dryness. Easy seats, a handsome centre table, and
a hanging lamp complete the interior. Venetian blinds afford ample
protection on a misty day or a chilly night, or admit the soft summer
breeze on a hot and sultry eve.--_Horticulturist._


DESIGN No. 12.

STABLE AND CARRIAGE HOUSE.


This stable affords abundant accommodation for three horses, with
carriage house, feed room, and a large harness room on the first floor,
while the loft above may contain a coachman's room, and leave ample
space for hay and straw.

If required, a shed and cow house can be extended on the side opposite
the carriage house, thus adding considerably to the effect of the
external appearance. Under the stable there should be a cellar for the
storage of roots for feed, and, if desirable, the winter stock of
vegetables for household use. This stable may be built of wood, or of
stone or brick.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--_Stable._]

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--_Stable Plan._]


DESIGN No. 13.


This design is intended to cover, at a low cost, as much comfort and
convenience as a moderate-sized family would require, and to distribute
the same as much as possible on one floor.

The cellar or basement kitchen is dispensed with and only enough cellar
room provided to meet the wants of those who occupy suburban places of a
few acres in extent. Where large quantities of vegetables are stored, or
where cellar room is required for farm purposes, we think it better to
build cellars separate from the residence, (an arrangement much more
healthful, as well as convenient and desirable.) For the preservation in
warm weather of meats, milk, and other perishable articles, a
refrigerator, or, better still, an ice closet, can be set up at one end
of the laundry. This can be supplied with ice through an outside door,
and is infinitely better and more convenient than any cellar or spring
house.

The kitchen is without a fire-place, but is provided with a ventilator
in the chimney near the ceiling. The cooking may be done by a stove,
which, if properly contrived, is one of the most effective ventilators,
and preferred by many housekeepers for all kitchen purposes. Or a range
can be placed in the chimney, if desirable, or a fire-place, if it
should be considered indispensable.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--_Elevation._]

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--_Plan._]

A door under the stair-way separates the front and rear halls, and
disconnects the kitchen apartments from the rest of the house. All the
doors opening into the rear hall should be hung with the new spiral
spring butt, the best door spring that has come under our notice. It is
entirely concealed, and works without a fault.

The closets in the dining room are finished to give an interior
appearance of a bay window. The dining room and the two chambers above,
are intended to be heated by a fire-place heater set in the chimney,
thus warming three rooms, at pleasure, with one fire. A small stove in
the library will keep that comfortable. Or, in place of all this, the
whole house may be heated by any of the approved modes, in the use of
hot air, hot water, or steam.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--_First Floor._]

The library, parlor, or general living room in a country house--and we
like these rooms in one--should have the cheerful, healthful luxury of
an open fire-place, and we know of no more elegant, cleanly and
effective contrivance for this purpose than Dixon's low down,
Philadelphia Grate, in which wood, coal, or any other fuel can be used
equally well. The advantages combined in this grate are these:--the
fire flat on the hearth, and radiating the heat from an oval cast iron
backing: cold air supplied from below, and ashes, dirt, &c., shaken down
into an ash-pit in the cellar, beneath the grate. We speak confidently
of this invention, after a trial of two winters, and do not hesitate to
say that, compared with this, the ordinary grate is worthless. Large
rooms can be kept perfectly comfortable in the coldest weather, without
heat from any other source.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--_Second Floor._]

This house is supplied with a cistern, constructed with the utmost care,
ten feet in diameter, and ten feet deep, holding 6,000 gallons of
water. The roof is of slate, and the rain-water is therefore of great
purity, free from color, and the woody taste usually imparted to it by
falling on a shingle roof.

At the laundry sink is one of West's lift and force pumps, which draws
the water from the cistern. This pump is a simple and effective affair,
and works with remarkable ease, is always in order, and may be
considered one of the best pumps known. We have given it a thorough
trial, and speak from personal knowledge.

On one side of the laundry sink there is also one of Kedzie's large size
rain-water filters, which holds several pails full of water, and which
we commend as an admirable contrivance for the purposes intended. It
possesses every merit claimed for it, and after more than a year's use,
the water drawn from it is of such crystal purity and sweetness as to
attract the attention of all to whom it is offered.

No well has been dug or contemplated on the premises connected with this
cottage. About one-half the cost of a well has been expended upon a
slate roof, a large and carefully-constructed cistern, West's pump and
Kedzie's filter--the other half has been safely invested in U. S.
7-30's, and instead of hoisting water fifty feet, for household, garden,
and stable uses, the turn of a croton water tap is not more easy and
convenient, and the finest flow of a silver spring of soft water, is
not more beautiful than that delivered by West's pump and Kedzie's
filter, which supplies for all purposes of the cottage, stable, and
garden, water unsurpassed in its pleasant and wholesome properties.
Those who seek the most convenient and reliable modes of procuring the
purest and sweetest water, will find this to be the least costly and the
most satisfactory.

For a compact, convenient cottage, with every facility for doing the
work of the household, with the least number of steps--in which all the
essential modern conveniences are introduced, without the modern prices
attached--for a low-priced, elegant cottage, we do not know of any plan
more appropriate than this.

In the construction of this house a bay-window was introduced in front,
in the parlor, (Fig. 43.) and the veranda was made half octagon. These
alterations add much to exterior appearance, as well as to the capacity
of the parlor. On the side of the parlor and dining room an addition is
contemplated, which will relieve the apparent want of variety which now
exists, and essentially improve the external appearance.


DESIGN No. 14.


[Illustration: FIG. 45.--_Cottage Stable._]

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--_Plan._]

Fig. 45 shows a design for a cottage stable, giving accommodations for a
horse and cow, two carriages, one or two wagons, and two tons of hay.
The main building is so proportioned, that three more stalls may be
added, and it may then become the wing of a larger building, to be used
for carriage room and other purposes. For those who keep but one horse
and cow, this design affords abundant room.


DESIGN No. 15.

ICE HOUSE.


It is only within a few years that ice, in all seasons, has been classed
among the necessaries of life. In large cities it is indispensable, but
the cool spring-house or cellar in the country impresses many with the
idea that ice, in summer months, can only be regarded as a luxury. Along
with other conveniences in keeping with this progressive age, the
ice-house has its place, and a country-seat of any pretensions is not
complete without it.

It is simple in construction, and can be built very cheaply of rough
materials, or made as elaborate as is desirable. It forms a pretty
feature about the grounds, if treated with some architectural taste.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--_Ice House._]

[Illustration: FIG. 48.--_Ground Plan._]

[Illustration: FIG. 49.--_Perspective._]


DESIGN No. 16.


This design, with the accompanying plans sufficiently explain themselves
without minute description. The arrangement, as will be seen upon
examination, secures a very large amount of accommodation, with good
sized rooms, and ample store and closet conveniences. The building is
compact, and at the same time presents a pleasing variety in its
exterior appearance. By carrying up the library, two dressing rooms, for
the two principal chambers, may be secured.

When one contemplates building, and has put his thoughts and wishes into
a tangible form, the leading question asked is, how much will all this
cost? for what price in dollars and cents, without extras or additional
charges of any kind, can this dwelling be erected in a good and
workmanlike manner, in accordance with plans and specifications, and
satisfactory to the owner? This is precisely the plain English of what a
business man wants to know; for we hold that it is right and proper,
that every one should look right through all the connected links and
complications that require a considerable expenditure of money, and see
that he lands carefully in the place anticipated. To start with the
intention of disbursing $5,000, and wind up with an expenditure of
$12,000, is not only annoying in a money point of view, but an
impeachment of one's judgment and good sense, not pleasant to hear
outsiders reflect on; for however much one might wish to shift the
responsibility on others, it is one of those things that time will
always place where it belongs. As long as men consider the arts of
designing and constructing buildings to be of no special importance, or
that they are qualified, without instruction or experience, to practice
them, expensive blunders will naturally result, and sooner or later it
will be discovered that such wisdom is dearly bought. There are many,
however, who prefer to manage their building affairs thus, and who can
only learn more agreeable and less expensive modes by actual experience;
some do it from ignorance, some from supposed economy, and others from
the supposition that they are best qualified.

The design for a house or other building, and a plan of the interior
arrangement of each floor, prepared by a professional man who makes such
things the business of his life, is now very generally admitted by
intelligent men to be essential; but the management or superintendence
of the work by the party who has studied and designed it, does not seem
quite so apparent. An architect prepares the drawings for a dwelling to
cost $5,000; now whether it actually will cost $5,000, $8,000 or
$10,000, in the hands of another superintendent, is an unanswered
problem. A prevailing folly which we find very general, is to suppose
that all men can build the same house, in all places, for precisely the
same amount of money; and but few are willing to admit that they, of all
others, are not the most competent to carry through the whole business
of building at the lowest figure. Some must find out in the most
expensive manner, that the profession of an architect, or the skill of a
builder, can only be attained by long years of careful application.

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--_Basement Plan._]

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--_First Floor._]

What a house will cost to build is a question always asked with the
utmost simplicity, and a prompt and reliable answer always expected, and
if not forthcoming at once, gives rise to a suspicion that one's
professional ability is not of the most thorough character. There are
so many conditions to govern results in house building, that even an
approximate estimate may fall very wide of the mark. Two houses may be
built from the same plan, and we may also say, from the same
specifications; one by day's work, and the other by contract, and they
shall be so exactly alike in all respects when finished, that an
unprofessional observer would detect no difference, and yet one may
honestly cost just double the amount in money expended on the other;
even the same builder may build two houses precisely alike in all
respects, and yet the cost be quite unequal. On one site stone may be
easily obtained, a sand bank on the premises, a running brook close at
hand, saw mills, brick yards, and lime kilns within moderate distances
and accessible by good roads. The other site may be quite the reverse in
situation, or have some decided disadvantages in obtaining some very
necessary materials. We once built a fine stone house where stone was
abundant and close at hand, but all the lumber and brick had to be
hauled thirteen miles over hilly roads; the cost of that house has
nothing to do with the cost of a similar house in a different locality.

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--_Second Floor._]

A competent business superintendent has a great deal to do with the cost
of a house; one that understands all the tricks of every building trade,
that knows the market well, and the value and quality of all building
materials, and where inferior workmanship and materials can be used to
an equal advantage with those of first class. To slight work and yet do
it justice; to give it all the strength and endurance necessary,
requires one of skillful acquirements. A mechanic may persuade a
proprietor into many a long day's work, as it pays well to nurse good
jobs when other work is slack, but an architect who understands such
things would save the value of useless work.

The cost of a house depends on a well-studied plan; this plan does not
consist alone in the arrangement of rooms, windows, doors, etc., but
involves a careful study of the anatomy of construction. One may save by
a proper distribution of timbers, as well as make a very great saving by
the arrangement of rooms. Good management is of the greatest importance,
not only as a matter of economy, but as securing the best class of
workmanship, and the most judicious use of materials. Good or bad
management produces the same results in building operations as in war or
any other pursuit.

One takes up a capital work on rural architecture, written perhaps ten
or fifteen years ago, before the general introduction of furnaces, steam
pipes, gas, baths, marble basins, etc.; they find a house that suits
them, which the book says will cost $6,000, and that is just the amount,
by close figuring, that can be raised for building. The house is
ordered, put in the hands of the best mechanic to finish all complete,
and he goes ahead; he is unrestricted except by the book, and the author
of it is a man of reputation. In the way of details perhaps nothing has
been said; they are therefore extravagant in the use of materials, and
elaborate in workmanship; as it is not considered good policy for a
workman who has a good order, to make suggestions calculated to decrease
the amount of work. When the bills to the amount of $6,000 have been
settled, the house is found to be half finished, and an additional
$6,000 is necessary to complete it; less that one year's interest of
which would have amply sufficed to secure the services of one who has
spent the best years of his life to learn how to design and to manage
work to cost a specified price.

When an architect says a house can be built for a certain price, it is
to be understood that materials delivered on the ground shall not exceed
an average cost, that the payments made are to be in cash, and that he
manages the work. To hold an architect responsible or blame him for
blunders in the cost of work that he designed and did not superintend,
is manifestly unjust, yet it is a frequent occurrence. The cost of work
is a question easily answered, when one is fully acquainted with all its
bearings and has it under his control, but no one can say at what price
a novice in building operations can execute it.


DESIGN No. 17.


[Illustration: FIG. 53.--_Stable._]

[Illustration: FIG. 54.--_Stable Plan._ (_Reversed._)]

Fig. 53 is a design for a cottage stable, with stalls for two horses,
and the necessary carriage room and other conveniences. This design, in
its exterior, presents as great a degree of variety in the combinations
of form and shadow as the price will admit of. It answers the purposes
of comfortable protection and convenience, as well or even better than
the most costly structures. A horse needs a dry, well-ventilated
apartment, and enjoys fresh air, daylight, and sunlight as well as human
beings. Unless these very inexpensive wants are provided, no
compensation is afforded by elaborate detail and workmanship.


DESIGN No. 18.

SCHOOL HOUSE AT IRVINGTON, ON THE HUDSON.


Our architectural series would be by no means complete if devoted
entirely to dwellings; and as the resources of an extensive professional
practice in the arts which embellish and beautify our country may be
largely made use of, we present here a design for another class of
buildings.

A school-house is not a building which every one contemplates erecting,
and yet a large proportion are, or ought to be, interested in developing
in structures of this class such architectural principles as shall make
their impressions in early life, and influence future tastes.

[Illustration: FIG. 55.--_School House._]

This building is designed to accommodate about fifty scholars, being 25
by 40 feet, with a front projection 10 by 18 feet. In the basement a
large furnace and abundant accommodation for coal. The main floor is
divided into school-room, two recitation rooms, hat and coat room, wash
closet with sink, and water closet, above which is a large tank,
supplied from the roof. An outside cistern supplies cool drinking-water,
the purest and healthiest water known, and renders the use of ice
unnecessary in summer. The height of all these ceilings is nearly
fourteen feet, and each room is thoroughly ventilated; the belfry is
provided with a one hundred pound bell; indeed, nothing has been left
undone that is calculated to promote the health and comfort of the
pupils.

The partition between the doors to the recitation rooms is made in
sections, and can be easily removed, thus making one large room for
exhibition and lecture purposes. The stage, in this case is to be placed
at the left end of the room. The capacity of the building can be nearly
doubled by occupying the entire floor as a school-room, and building an
addition 12 by 24 feet directly in the rear, opposite to the front
projection, for recitation rooms.

The situation of this building at Irvington, on the Hudson, some
twenty-five miles above the city of New York, is in a charming, healthy,
and delightful locality; one made famous by the pen and residence of
Washington Irving, and noted for its magnificent scenery, its views of
river and mountain, and the fine taste displayed in landscape and
architectural embellishments by those who have made their homes in this
vicinity.

We have always thought that those educational institutions possess the
most attractions that are so situated that all surroundings shall have a
favorable influence; and there is nothing like example in early
training. Bring up and educate a boy among those who know nothing of the
refinements of life, away from the progressive examples of art and
taste, in a tumble-down, unplastered, ill-heated and ventilated
apartment, and he never can become, with all the aid of books and
teachers, as thoroughly cultivated and fitted for the duties of life, as
one who has enjoyed associations of a higher order. School architecture
has a meaning in it; there is value in proportion, harmony, beauty,
light and shade, as applied to school buildings, that is not
comprehended by all. A recent writer says better than we can say it,
that "It is the duty of teachers, as well as parents and school
committees, to see that the circumstances under which children study are
such as shall leave a happy impression upon their minds; for whatever is
brought under the frequent observation of the young must have its
influence upon their susceptible natures for good or evil. Shabby
school-houses induce slovenly habits. Ill-constructed benches may not
only distort the body, but, by reflex influence, the mind as well.
Conditions like these seldom fail to disgust the learner with his
school, and neutralize the best efforts of his teachers. On the other
hand, neat, comfortable places for study may help to awaken the
associations enchaining the mind and the heart to learning and virtuous
instruction with links of gold brightening forever."

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--_Principal Floor._]

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--_Perspective View._]


DESIGN No. 19.


This design was prepared for erection in the vicinity of Goshen, Orange
Co., N. Y., and the accommodation limited to a price not exceeding ----.
It presents in hall, verandas, and large parlor, some of the very
necessary attractions of a country house, and is a good example of what
can be done for a limited sum. While the plan is a parallelogram, and
the roof free from hips and valleys, the general arrangement is such as
to show considerable variety in outline, and one, we think, that will
have a pleasing effect.

Such houses, erected in the vicinity of New York, and many of our large
cities, would add a large value to the ground they stand on, and pay a
handsome rate of interest on their cost; better than any other class of
building investments, as the supply is in nowise equal to the demand. It
is so simple a matter, with present prompt and rapid railroad
facilities, to invite a fair proportion of the young business men of our
large cities to make their homes in the adjoining country, that we
wonder capitalists and real estate owners do not more frequently make
money for themselves and others by erecting tasteful, low-priced
suburban homes.

In former times, a house of this class erected in the country, would be
painted exteriorly a pure white, with no relief, except probably in the
violent contrast of bright green venetian blinds to the windows. This
sort of taste unfortunately still remains, although in the progress of
rural taste and art, the country is much improved in this respect.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--_Cellar._]

There is a variety of colors, known as neutral tints, which are suitable
for exteriors, and the effect produced by them is altogether pleasing,
while a house painted white can never be an agreeable object in any
landscape, however admirable its architectural proportions and finish
may be.

The tone of color for a house will depend upon its size, form, and
situation, and it often requires a nice and cultivated eye to determine
what would be most appropriate and effective.

[Illustration: FIG. 59.--_First Floor._]

For such a house as this, we should choose a light fawn color--not
yellow--and paint the cornice, window-frames and other projecting and
ornamental parts two or three shades darker than the body of the
building. This will give a depth of shadow and expression which cannot
be obtained in any other way.

Large houses, with massive features of construction, will bear to be
painted with darker colors, but they should not be too sombre, so as to
give a gloomy appearance to the house. The country, with its bright
sunshine, its rich adornments of flowers, and its numberless forms of
beauty and grace, is eminently cheerful. It often happens that the
painter does all he can to mar this cheerfulness and beauty, by
startling contrasts of colors, and by destroying the harmony which
pervades the landscape.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--_Second Floor._]


DESIGN No. 20.

A COUNTRY CHAPEL.


[Illustration: FIG. 61.--_Perspective._]

We present in this design a plan for a substantial and permanent chapel,
having capacity for seating about four hundred. For the purpose for
which it was designed, no distinct chancel was required. Such a
chancel could be arranged, if desired, in a recess taken off the lecture
or class room in the rear of the chapel. It could be lighted at the
roof, or on the sides.

[Illustration: FIG. 62.--_Ground Plan._]

This chapel, built of stone throughout, with an open timber roof and
stained glass windows, would be an ornament to any country locality, and
a credit to the taste and liberality of those who built it.

