I have both a Note and a Query about Harvey and the circulation of the
blood (Vol. ii., p. 187.). The Note refers to Philostratus (_Life of
Apollorius_, p. 461., ed. 1809), _Nouvelles de la République des
Lettres_, June, 1684, xi.; and Dutens pp. 157-341. 4to. ed. 1796. I
extract the passage from _Les Nouvelles_:--

    "On voit avec plaisir un passage d'André Cæsalpinus qui contient
    fort clairement la doctrine de la circrilation. Il est tiré de
    ses Questions sur la médecine imprimées l'an 1593. Jean
    Leonicenas ajoûte que le père Paul découvrit la circulation du
    sang, et les valvules des veines, mais qu'il n'osa pas en
    parler, de peur d'exciter contre luy quelque tempête. Il n'etois
    déjà que trop suspect, et il n'eut fallu que ce nouveau paradoxe
    pour le transformer en hérétique dans le pais d'inquisition. Si
    bien qu'il ne communiqua son secret qu'au seul Aquapendente, qui
    n'osant s'exposer à l'envie.... Il attendit à l'heure de sa mort
    pour mettre le livre qu'il avoit composé touchant les valvules
    des veines entre les mains de la république de Venise, et comme
    les moindres nouveautez font peur en cc pais-là, le livre fut
    caché dans le billiothèque de Saint Marc. Mais parcequ'
    Aquapendente ne fit pas difficulté de s'ouvrir à un jeune
    Anglois fort curieux nommé Harvée, qui étudioit sous lui a
    Padouë, et qu'en même temps le père Paul fit a même confidence à
    l'Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, ces deux Anglois de retour chez eux,
    et se voyant en pais de liberté, publièrent ce dogme, et l'ayant
    confirmé par plusieurs expériences, s'en attribuèrent toute la
    gloire."

The Query is, what share Harvey had in the discovery attributed to him?

W.W.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

Minor Queries.

_Bernardus Patricius._--Some writers mention _Bernardus_ Patricius as a
follower of Copernicus, about the time of Galileo. Who was he?

M.


_Meaning of Hanger._--Can any one of your readers inform me, what is the
meaning of the word _hanger_, so frequently occurring in the names of
places in Bedfordshire, such as Panshanger?

W. Anderson


_Cat and Bagpipes._--In studying some letters which passed between two
distinguished philosophers of the last century, I have found in one
epistle a request that the writer might be remembered "to his friends at
the Crown and Anchor, and the _Cat and Bagpipes_." The letter was
addressed to a party in London, where doubtless, both those places of
entertainment were. The Crown and Anchor was the house where the Royal
Society Club held its convivial meetings. Can you inform me where the
Cat and Bagpipes was situated, and what literary and scientific club met
there? The name seems to have been a favourite one for taverns, and, if
mistake not, is common in Ireland. Is it a corruption of some foreign
title, as so many such names are, or merely a grotesque and piquant
specimen of sign-board literature?

Quasimodo.


_Andrew Becket._--A.W. Hammond will feel obliged for any information
respecting Andrew Becket, Esq., who died 19th January, 1843, æt. 95, and
to whose memory there is a handsome monument in Kennington Church.
According to that inscription, he was "ardently devoted to the pursuits
of literature," personally acquainted in early life with the most
distinguished authors of his day, long the intimate friend of David
Garrick, "and a profound commentator on the dramatic works of
Shakspeare." Can any of the learned readers of "NOTES AND QUERIES"
satisfy this Query?


_Laurence Minot._--Is any other MS. of Minot known, besides the one from
which Ritson drew his text? Is there any other edition of this poet
besides Ritson's, and the reprints thereof?

E.S. JACKSON.


_Modena Family._--When did Victor Amadeus, King of Sardinia, die? When
did his daughter, Mary Duchess of Modena, die, (the mother of the
present Duke of Modena, and through whom he is the direct heir of the
House of Stuart)?

L.M.M.R.


_Bamboozle._--What is the etymology of _bamboozle_, used as a verb?

L.M.M.R.


_Butcher's Blue Dress._--What is the origin of the custom, which seems
all but universal in England, for butchers to wear a blouse or frock of
_blue_ colour? Though so common in this country as to form a distinctive
mark of the trade, and to be almost a butcher's uniform, it is, I
believe, unknown on the continent. Is it a custom which has originate in
some supposed utility, or in the official dress of a guild or company,
or in some accident of which a historical notice has been preserved?

L.


_Hatchment and Atchievement._--Can any one of the readers of "NOTES AND
QUERIES" tell me how comes the corruption _hatchment_ from
_atchievement_? Ought the English word to be spelt with a _t_, or thus,
_achievement_? Why are hatchments put up in churches and on houses?

W. ANDERSON. {267}


"_Te colui Virtutem_."--Who is the author of the line--

  "Te colui virtutem ut rem ast tu nomen inane es?"

It is a translation of part of a Greek tragic fragment, quoted,
according to Dio Cassius, by Brutus just before his death. As much as is
here translated is also to be found in Plutarch _De Superstitione_.

E.


"_Illa suavissima Vita_."--Where does "Illa suavissima vita indies
sentire se fieri meliorem" come from?

E.


_Christianity, Early Influence of._--"The beneficial influence of the
Christian clergy during the first thousand years of the Christian era."

What works can be recommended on the above subject?

X.Y.Z.


_Wraxen, Meaning of._--What is the origin and meaning of the word
_wraxen_, which was used by a Kentish woman on being applied to by a
friend of mine to send her children to the Sunday-school, in the
following sentence?--"Why, you see, they go to the National School all
the week, and get so _wraxen_, that I cannot send them to the Sunday
School too."

G.W. Skyring.


_Saint, Legend of a._--Can any of your correspondents inform me where I
can find the account of some saint who, when baptizing a heathen,
inadvertently pierced the convert's foot with the point of his crozier.
The man bore the pain without flinching, and when the occurrence was
discovered, he remarked that he thought it was part of the ceremony?

J.Y.C.


_Land Holland--Farewell._--In searching some Court Rolls a few days
since, I found some land described as "Land Holland" or "Hollandland." I
have been unable to discover the meaning of this expression, and should
be glad if any of your correspondents can help me.

In the same manor there is custom for the tenant to pay a sum as a
_farewell_ to the lord on sale or alienation: this payment is in
addition to the ordinary fine, &c. Query the origin and meaning of this?

J.B.C.


_Stepony Ale._--Chamberlayne, in his _Present State of England_ (part.
i. p. 51., ed. 1677), speaking of the "Dyet" of the people, thus
enumerates the prevailing beverages of the day:--

    "Besides all sorts of the best wines from Spain, France, Italy,
    Germany, Grecia, there are sold in London above twenty sorts of
    other drinks: as brandy, coffee, chocolate, tea, aromatick, mum,
    sider, perry, beer, ale; many sorts of ales very different, as
    cock, _stepony_, stickback, Hull, North-Down, Sambidge, Betony,
    scurvy-grass, sage-ale, &c. A piece of wantonness whereof none
    of our ancestors were ever guilty."

It will be observed that the ales are named in some instances from
localities, and in others from the herbs of which they were decoctions.
Can any of your readers tell me anything of Stepony ale? Was it ale
brewed at Stepney?

James T. Hammack


"_Regis ad Exemplar_."--Can you inform me whence the following line is
taken?

  "Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis."

Q.Q.Q.

