The laundress turned quite pale. What could the wretched man want with
her? Coming, too, like that, just in the midst of the preparations for
the feast. She had never had any luck; she could not even be allowed to
enjoy herself quietly. But Virginie replied that she was very foolish to
put herself out about it like that. Why! If Lantier dared to follow her
about, all she had to do was to call a policeman and have him locked up.
In the month since her husband had been appointed a policeman, Virginie
had assumed rather lordly manners and talked of arresting everybody. She
began to raise her voice, saying that she wished some passer-by would
pinch her bottom so that she could take the fresh fellow to the police
station herself and turn him over to her husband. Gervaise signaled her
to be quiet since the workwomen were listening and led the way back into
the shop, reopening the discussion about the dinner.

"Now, don't we need a vegetable?"

"Why not peas with bacon?" said Virginie. "I like nothing better."

"Yes, peas with bacon." The others approved. Augustine was so
enthusiastic that she jabbed the poker into the stove harder than ever.

By three o'clock on the morrow, Sunday, mother Coupeau had lighted their
two stoves and also a third one of earthenware which they had borrowed
from the Boches. At half-past three the pot-au-feu was boiling away in
an enormous earthenware pot lent by the eating-house keeper next door,
the family pot having been found too small. They had decided to cook the
veal and the pig's back the night before, since both of those dishes
are better when reheated. But the cream sauce for the veal would not be
prepared until just before sitting down for the feast.

There was still plenty of work left for Monday: the soup, the peas with
bacon, the roast goose. The inner room was lit by three fires. Butter
was sizzling in the pans and emitting a sharp odor of burnt flour.

Mother Coupeau and Gervaise, with white aprons tied on, were bustling
all around, cleaning parsley, dashing for salt and pepper, turning the
meat. They had sent Coupeau away so as not to have him underfoot, but
they still had plenty of people looking in throughout the afternoon. The
luscious smells from the kitchen had spread through the entire building
so that neighboring ladies came into the shop on various pretexts, very
curious to see what was being cooked.

Virginie put in an appearance towards five o'clock. She had again seen
Lantier; really, it was impossible to go down the street now without
meeting him. Madame Boche also had just caught sight of him standing at
the corner of the pavement with his head thrust forward in an uncommonly
sly manner. Then Gervaise who had at that moment intended going for a
sou's worth of burnt onions for the pot-au-feu, began to tremble from
head to foot and did not dare leave the house; the more so, as the
concierge and the dressmaker put her into a terrible fright by relating
horrible stories of men waiting for women with knives and pistols hidden
beneath their overcoats. Well, yes! one reads of such things every day
in the newspapers. When one of those scoundrels gets his monkey up
on discovering an old love leading a happy life he becomes capable
of everything. Virginie obligingly offered to run and fetch the burnt
onions. Women should always help one another, they could not let that
little thing be murdered. When she returned she said that Lantier was no
longer there; he had probably gone off on finding he was discovered.
In spite of that thought, he was the subject of conversation around
the saucepans until night-time. When Madame Boche advised her to inform
Coupeau, Gervaise became really terrified, and implored her not to say
a word about it. Oh, yes, wouldn't that be a nice situation! Her husband
must have become suspicious already because for the last few days, at
night, he would swear to himself and bang the wall with his fists. The
mere thought that the two men might destroy each other because of her
made her shudder. She knew that Coupeau was jealous enough to attack
Lantier with his shears.

While the four of them had been deep in contemplating this drama, the
saucepans on the banked coals of the stoves had been quietly simmering.
When mother Coupeau lifted the lids, the veal and the pig's back
were discreetly bubbling. The pot-au-feu was steadily steaming with
snore-like sounds. Eventually each of them dipped a piece of bread into
the soup to taste the bouillon.

At length Monday arrived. Now that Gervaise was going to have fourteen
persons at table, she began to fear that she would not be able to find
room for them all. She decided that they should dine in the shop; and
the first thing in the morning she took measurements so as to settle
which way she should place the table. After that they had to remove all
the clothes and take the ironing-table to pieces; the top of this laid
on to some shorter trestles was to be the dining-table. But just in the
midst of all this moving a customer appeared and made a scene because
she had been waiting for her washing ever since the Friday; they were
humbugging her, she would have her things at once. Then Gervaise
tried to excuse herself and lied boldly; it was not her fault, she was
cleaning out her shop, the workmen would not be there till the morrow;
and she pacified her customer and got rid of her by promising to busy
herself with her things at the earliest possible moment. Then, as soon
as the woman had left, she showed her temper. Really, if you listened
to all your customers, you'd never have time to eat. You could work
yourself to death like a dog on a leash! Well! No matter who came in
to-day, even if they offered one hundred thousand francs, she wouldn't
touch an iron on this Monday, because it was her turn to enjoy herself.

The entire morning was spent in completing the purchases. Three times
Gervaise went out and returned laden like a mule. But just as she was
going to order wine she noticed that she had not sufficient money left.
She could easily have got it on credit; only she could not be without
money in the house, on account of the thousand little expenses that one
is liable to forget. And mother Coupeau and she had lamented together
in the back-room as they reckoned that they required at least twenty
francs. How could they obtain them, those four pieces of a hundred sous
each? Mother Coupeau who had at one time done the charring for a little
actress of the Theatre des Batignolles, was the first to suggest the
pawn-shop. Gervaise laughed with relief. How stupid she was not to have
thought of it! She quickly folded her black silk dress upon a towel
which she then pinned together. Then she hid the bundle under mother
Coupeau's apron, telling her to keep it very flat against her stomach,
on account of the neighbors who had no need to know; and she went and
watched at the door to see that the old woman was not followed. But the
latter had only gone as far as the charcoal dealer's when she called her
back.

"Mamma! Mamma!"

She made her return to the shop, and taking her wedding-ring off her
finger said:

"Here, put this with it. We shall get all the more."

When mother Coupeau brought her twenty-five francs, she danced for joy.
She would order an extra six bottles of wine, sealed wine to drink with
the roast. The Lorilleuxs would be crushed.

For a fortnight past it had been the Coupeaus' dream to crush the
Lorilleuxs. Was it not true that those sly ones, the man and his wife, a
truly pretty couple, shut themselves up whenever they had anything nice
to eat as though they had stolen it? Yes, they covered up the window
with a blanket to hide the light and make believe that they were already
asleep in bed. This stopped anyone from coming up, and so the Lorilleuxs
could stuff everything down, just the two of them. They were even
careful the next day not to throw the bones into the garbage so that no
one would know what they had eaten. Madame Lorilleux would walk to
the end of the street to toss them into a sewer opening. One morning
Gervaise surprised her emptying a basket of oyster shells there.
Oh, those penny-pinchers were never open-handed, and all their mean
contrivances came from their desire to appear to be poor. Well, we'd
show them, we'd prove to them what we weren't mean.

Gervaise would have laid her table in the street, had she been able to,
just for the sake of inviting each passer-by. Money was not invented
that it should be allowed to grow moldy, was it? It is pretty when it
shines all new in the sunshine. She resembled them so little now, that
on the days when she had twenty sous she arranged things to let people
think that she had forty.

Mother Coupeau and Gervaise talked of the Lorilleuxs whilst they laid
the cloth about three o'clock. They had hung some big curtains at the
windows; but as it was very warm the door was left open and the whole
street passed in front of the little table. The two women did not place
a decanter, or a bottle, or a salt-cellar, without trying to arrange
them in such a way as to annoy the Lorilleuxs. They had arranged their
seats so as to give them a full view of the superbly laid cloth, and
they had reserved the best crockery for them, well knowing that the
porcelain plates would create a great effect.

"No, no, mamma," cried Gervaise; "don't give them those napkins! I've
two damask ones."

"Ah, good!" murmured the old woman; "that'll break their hearts, that's
certain."

And they smiled to each other as they stood up on either side of that
big white table on which the fourteen knives and forks, placed all
round, caused them to swell with pride. It had the appearance of the
altar of some chapel in the middle of the shop.

"That's because they're so stingy themselves!" resumed Gervaise. "You
know they lied last month when the woman went about everywhere saying
that she had lost a piece of gold chain as she was taking the work home.
The idea! There's no fear of her ever losing anything! It was simply a
way of making themselves out very poor and of not giving you your five
francs."

"As yet I've only seen my five francs twice," said mother Coupeau.

"I'll bet next month they'll concoct some other story. That explains
why they cover their window up when they have a rabbit to eat. Don't
you see? One would have the right to say to them: 'As you can afford a
rabbit you can certainly give five francs to your mother!' Oh! they're
just rotten! What would have become of you if I hadn't taken you to live
with us?"

Mother Coupeau slowly shook her head. That day she was all against the
Lorilleuxs, because of the great feast the Coupeaus were giving. She
loved cooking, the little gossipings round the saucepans, the place
turned topsy-turvy by the revels of saints' days. Besides she generally
got on pretty well with Gervaise. On other days when they plagued one
another as happens in all families, the old woman grumbled saying she
was wretchedly unfortunate in thus being at her daughter-in-law's mercy.
In point of fact she probably had some affection for Madame Lorilleux
who after all was her daughter.

"Ah!" continued Gervaise, "you wouldn't be so fat, would you, if you
were living with them? And no coffee, no snuff, no little luxuries of
any sort! Tell me, would they have given you two mattresses to your
bed?"

"No, that's very certain," replied mother Coupeau. "When they arrive
I shall place myself so as to have a good view of the door to see the
faces they'll make."

Thinking of the faces they would make gave them pleasure ahead of time.
However, they couldn't remain standing there admiring the table. The
Coupeaus had lunched very late on just a bite or two, because the stoves
were already in use, and because they did not want to dirty any dishes
needed for the evening. By four o'clock the two women were working very
hard. The huge goose was being cooked on a spit. Squint-eyed
Augustine was sitting on a low bench solemnly basting the goose with a
long-handled spoon. Gervaise was busy with the peas with bacon. Mother
Coupeau, kept spinning around, a bit confused, waiting for the right
time to begin reheating the pork and the veal.

Towards five o'clock the guests began to arrive. First of all came the
two workwomen, Clemence and Madame Putois, both in their Sunday best,
the former in blue, the latter in black; Clemence carried a geranium,
Madame Putois a heliotrope, and Gervaise, whose hands were just then
smothered with flour, had to kiss each of them on both cheeks with her
arms behind her back. Then following close upon their heels entered
Virginie dressed like a lady in a printed muslin costume with a sash and
a bonnet though she had only a few steps to come. She brought a pot of
red carnations. She took the laundress in her big arms and squeezed her
tight. At length Boche appeared with a pot of pansies and Madame Boche
with a pot of mignonette; then came Madame Lerat with a balm-mint,
the pot of which had dirtied her violet merino dress. All these people
kissed each other and gathered together in the back-room in the midst of
the three stoves and the roasting apparatus, which gave out a stifling
heat. The noise from the saucepans drowned the voices. A dress catching
in the Dutch oven caused quite an emotion. The smell of roast goose
was so strong that it made their mouths water. And Gervaise was very
pleasant, thanking everyone for their flowers without however letting
that interfere with her preparing the thickening for the stewed veal at
the bottom of a soup plate. She had placed the pots in the shop at one
end of the table without removing the white paper that was round them. A
sweet scent of flowers mingled with the odor of cooking.

"Do you want any assistance?" asked Virginie. "Just fancy, you've been
three days preparing all this feast and it will be gobbled up in no
time."

"Well, you know," replied Gervaise, "it wouldn't prepare itself. No,
don't dirty your hands. You see everything's ready. There's only the
soup to warm."

Then they all made themselves comfortable. The ladies laid their shawls
and their caps on the bed and pinned up their skirts so as not to soil
them. Boche sent his wife back to the concierge's lodge until time to
eat and had cornered Clemence in a corner trying to find out if she
was ticklish. She was gasping for breath, as the mere thought of being
tickled sent shivers through her. So as not to bother the cooks, the
other ladies had gone into the shop and were standing against the wall
facing the table. They were talking through the door though, and as they
could not hear very well, they were continually invading the back-room
and crowding around Gervaise, who would forget what she was doing to
answer them.

There were a few stories which brought sly laughter. When Virginie
mentioned that she hadn't eaten for two days in order to have more room
for today's feast, tall Clemence said that she had cleaned herself out
that morning with an enema like the English do. Then Boche suggested
a way of digesting the food quickly by squeezing oneself after each
course, another English custom. After all, when you were invited to
dinner, wasn't it polite to eat as much as you could? Veal and pork and
goose are placed out for the cats to eat. The hostess didn't need to
worry a bit, they were going to clean their plates so thoroughly that
she wouldn't have to wash them.

All of them kept coming to smell the air above the saucepans and the
roaster. The ladies began to act like young girls, scurrying from room
to room and pushing each other.

Just as they were all jumping about and shouting by way of amusement,
Goujet appeared. He was so timid he scarcely dared enter, but stood
still, holding a tall white rose-tree in his arms, a magnificent plant
with a stem that reached to his face and entangled the flowers in his
beard. Gervaise ran to him, her cheeks burning from the heat of the
stoves. But he did not know how to get rid of his pot; and when she had
taken it from his hands he stammered, not daring to kiss her. It was
she who was obliged to stand on tip-toe and place her cheek against his
lips; he was so agitated that even then he kissed her roughly on the eye
almost blinding her. They both stood trembling.

"Oh! Monsieur Goujet, it's too lovely!" said she, placing the rose-tree
beside the other flowers which it overtopped with the whole of its tuft
of foliage.

"Not at all, not at all!" repeated he, unable to say anything else.

Then, after sighing deeply, he slightly recovered himself and stated
that she was not to expect his mother; she was suffering from an attack
of sciatica. Gervaise was greatly grieved; she talked of putting a piece
of the goose on one side as she particularly wished Madame Goujet to
have a taste of the bird. No one else was expected. Coupeau was no doubt
strolling about in the neighborhood with Poisson whom he had called for
directly after his lunch; they would be home directly, they had promised
to be back punctually at six. Then as the soup was almost ready,
Gervaise called to Madame Lerat, saying that she thought it was time to
go and fetch the Lorilleuxs. Madame Lerat became at once very grave; it
was she who had conducted all the negotiations and who had settled how
everything should pass between the two families. She put her cap and
shawl on again and went upstairs very stiffly in her skirts, looking
very stately. Down below the laundress continued to stir her vermicelli
soup without saying a word. The guests suddenly became serious and
solemnly waited.

It was Madame Lerat who appeared first. She had gone round by the street
so as to give more pomp to the reconciliation. She held the shop-door
wide open whilst Madame Lorilleux, wearing a silk dress, stopped at
the threshold. All the guests had risen from their seats; Gervaise went
forward and kissing her sister-in-law as had been agreed, said:

"Come in. It's all over, isn't it? We'll both be nice to each other."

And Madame Lorilleux replied:

"I shall be only too happy if we're so always."

When she had entered Lorilleux also stopped at the threshold and he
likewise waited to be embraced before penetrating into the shop. Neither
the one nor the other had brought a bouquet. They had decided not to do
so as they thought it would look too much like giving way to Clump-Clump
if they carried flowers with them the first time they set foot in her
home. Gervaise called to Augustine to bring two bottles of wine. Then,
filling some glasses on a corner of the table, she called everyone
to her. And each took a glass and drank to the good friendship of the
family. There was a pause whilst the guests were drinking, the ladies
raising their elbows and emptying their glasses to the last drop.

"Nothing is better before soup," declared Boche, smacking his lips.

Mother Coupeau had placed herself opposite the door to see the faces the
Lorilleuxs would make. She pulled Gervaise by the skirt and dragged her
into the back-room. And as they both leant over the soup they conversed
rapidly in a low voice.

"Huh! What a sight!" said the old woman. "You couldn't see them; but I
was watching. When she caught sight of the table her face twisted around
like that, the corners of her mouth almost touched her eyes; and as for
him, it nearly choked him, he coughed and coughed. Now just look at
them over there; they've no saliva left in their mouths, they're chewing
their lips."

"It's quite painful to see people as jealous as that," murmured
Gervaise.

Really the Lorilleuxs had a funny look about them. No one of course
likes to be crushed; in families especially when the one succeeds, the
others do not like it; that is only natural. Only one keeps it in, one
does not make an exhibition of oneself. Well! The Lorilleuxs could not
keep it in. It was more than a match for them. They squinted--their
mouths were all on one side. In short it was so apparent that the other
guests looked at them, and asked them if they were unwell. Never would
they be able to stomach this table with its fourteen place-settings, its
white linen table cloth, its slices of bread cut in advance, all in the
style of a first-class restaurant. Mme. Lorilleux went around the table,
surreptitiously fingering the table cloth, tortured by the thought that
it was a new one.

"Everything's ready!" cried Gervaise as she reappeared with a smile, her
arms bare and her little fair curls blowing over her temples.

"If the boss would only come," resumed the laundress, "we might begin."

"Ah, well!" said Madame Lorilleux, "the soup will be cold by then.
Coupeau always forgets. You shouldn't have let him go off."

It was already half-past six. Everything was burning now; the goose
would be overdone. Then Gervaise, feeling quite dejected, talked
of sending someone to all the wineshops in the neighborhood to find
Coupeau. And as Goujet offered to go, she decided to accompany him.
Virginie, anxious about her husband went also. The three of them,
bareheaded, quite blocked up the pavement. The blacksmith who wore his
frock-coat, had Gervaise on his left arm and Virginie on his right; he
was doing the two-handled basket as he said; and it seemed to them such
a funny thing to say that they stopped, unable to move their legs for
laughing. They looked at themselves in the pork-butcher's glass and
laughed more than ever. Beside Goujet, all in black, the two women
looked like two speckled hens--the dressmaker in her muslin costume,
sprinkled with pink flowers, the laundress in her white cambric dress
with blue spots, her wrists bare, and wearing round her neck a little
grey silk scarf tied in a bow. People turned round to see them pass,
looking so fresh and lively, dressed in their Sunday best on a week day
and jostling the crowd which hung about the Rue des Poissonniers, on
that warm June evening. But it was not a question of amusing themselves.
They went straight to the door of each wineshop, looked in and sought
amongst the people standing before the counter. Had that animal Coupeau
gone to the Arc de Triomphe to get his dram? They had already done the
upper part of the street, looking in at all the likely places; at
the "Little Civet," renowned for its preserved plums; at old mother
Baquet's, who sold Orleans wine at eight sous; at the "Butterfly," the
coachmen's house of call, gentlemen who were not easy to please. But no
Coupeau. Then as they were going down towards the Boulevard, Gervaise
uttered a faint cry on passing the eating-house at the corner kept by
Francois.

"What's the matter?" asked Goujet.

The laundress no longer laughed. She was very pale, and laboring under
so great an emotion that she had almost fallen. Virginie understood it
all as she caught a sight of Lantier seated at one of Francois's tables
quietly dining. The two women dragged the blacksmith along.

"My ankle twisted," said Gervaise as soon as she was able to speak.

At length they discovered Coupeau and Poisson at the bottom of the
street inside Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir. They were standing up in the
midst of a number of men; Coupeau, in a grey blouse, was shouting with
furious gestures and banging his fists down on the counter. Poisson, not
on duty that day and buttoned up in an old brown coat, was listening
to him in a dull sort of way and without uttering a word, bristling his
carroty moustaches and beard the while. Goujet left the women on the
edge of the pavement, and went and laid his hand on the zinc-worker's
shoulder. But when the latter caught sight of Gervaise and Virginie
outside he grew angry. Why was he badgered with such females as those?
Petticoats had taken to tracking him about now! Well! He declined to
stir, they could go and eat their beastly dinner all by themselves. To
quiet him Goujet was obliged to accept a drop of something; and even
then Coupeau took a fiendish delight in dawdling a good five minutes at
the counter. When he at length came out he said to his wife:

"I don't like this. It's my business where I go. Do you understand?"

She did not answer. She was all in a tremble. She must have said
something about Lantier to Virginie, for the latter pushed her husband
and Goujet ahead, telling them to walk in front. The two women got
on each side of Coupeau to keep him occupied and prevent him seeing
Lantier. He wasn't really drunk, being more intoxicated from shouting
than from drinking. Since they seemed to want to stay on the left side,
to tease them, he crossed over to the other side of the street.
Worried, they ran after him and tried to block his view of the door of
Francois's. But Coupeau must have known that Lantier was there. Gervaise
almost went out of her senses on hearing him grunt:

"Yes, my duck, there's a young fellow of our acquaintance inside there!
You mustn't take me for a ninny. Don't let me catch you gallivanting
about again with your side glances!"

And he made use of some very coarse expressions. It was not him that she
had come to look for with her bare elbows and her mealy mouth; it
was her old beau. Then he was suddenly seized with a mad rage against
Lantier. Ah! the brigand! Ah! the filthy hound! One or the other of
them would have to be left on the pavement, emptied of his guts like a
rabbit. Lantier, however, did not appear to notice what was going on
and continued slowly eating some veal and sorrel. A crowd began to form.
Virginie led Coupeau away and he calmed down at once as soon as he had
turned the corner of the street. All the same they returned to the shop
far less lively than when they left it.

The guests were standing round the table with very long faces. The
zinc-worker shook hands with them, showing himself off before the
ladies. Gervaise, feeling rather depressed, spoke in a low voice as she
directed them to their places. But she suddenly noticed that, as Madame
Goujet had not come, a seat would remain empty--the one next to Madame
Lorilleux.

"We are thirteen!" said she, deeply affected, seeing in that a fresh
omen of the misfortune with which she had felt herself threatened for
some time past.

The ladies already seated rose up looking anxious and annoyed. Madame
Putois offered to retire because according to her it was not a matter to
laugh about; besides she would not touch a thing, the food would do
her no good. As to Boche, he chuckled. He would sooner be thirteen than
fourteen; the portions would be larger, that was all.

"Wait!" resumed Gervaise. "I can manage it."

And going out on to the pavement she called Pere Bru who was just then
crossing the roadway. The old workman entered, stooping and stiff and
his face without expression.

"Seat yourself there, my good fellow," said the laundress. "You won't
mind eating with us, will you?"

He simply nodded his head. He was willing; he did not mind.

"As well him as another," continued she, lowering her voice. "He doesn't
often eat his fill. He will at least enjoy himself once more. We shall
feel no remorse in stuffing ourselves now."

This touched Goujet so deeply that his eyes filled with tears. The
others were also moved by compassion and said that it would bring them
all good luck. However, Madame Lorilleux seemed unhappy at having the
old man next to her. She cast glances of disgust at his work-roughened
hands and his faded, patched smock, and drew away from him.

Pere Bru sat with his head bowed, waiting. He was bothered by the napkin
that was on the plate before him. Finally he lifted it off and placed
it gently on the edge of the table, not thinking to spread it over his
knees.

Now at last Gervaise served the vermicelli soup; the guests were taking
up their spoons when Virginie remarked that Coupeau had disappeared. He
had perhaps returned to Pere Colombe's. This time the company got angry.
So much the worse! One would not run after him; he could stay in the
street if he was not hungry; and as the spoons touched the bottom of the
plates, Coupeau reappeared with two pots of flowers, one under each arm,
a stock and a balsam. They all clapped their hands. He gallantly placed
the pots, one on the right, the other on the left of Gervaise's glass;
then bending over and kissing her, he said:

"I had forgotten you, my lamb. But in spite of that, we love each other
all the same, especially on such a day as this."

"Monsieur Coupeau's very nice this evening," murmured Clemence in
Boche's ear. "He's just got what he required, sufficient to make him
amiable."

The good behavior of the master of the house restored the gaiety of the
proceedings, which at one moment had been compromised. Gervaise, once
more at her ease, was all smiles again. The guests finished their soup.
Then the bottles circulated and they drank their first glass of wine,
just a drop pure, to wash down the vermicelli. One could hear the
children quarrelling in the next room. There were Etienne, Pauline, Nana
and little Victor Fauconnier. It had been decided to lay a table for the
four of them, and they had been told to be very good. That squint-eyed
Augustine who had to look after the stoves was to eat off her knees.

"Mamma! Mamma!" suddenly screamed Nana, "Augustine is dipping her bread
in the Dutch oven!"

The laundress hastened there and caught the squint-eyed one in the act
of burning her throat in her attempts to swallow without loss of time a
slice of bread soaked in boiling goose fat. She boxed her ears when the
young monkey called out that it was not true. When, after the boiled
beef, the stewed veal appeared, served in a salad-bowl, as they did not
have a dish large enough, the party greeted it with a laugh.

"It's becoming serious," declared Poisson, who seldom spoke.

It was half-past seven. They had closed the shop door, so as not to be
spied upon by the whole neighborhood; the little clockmaker opposite
especially was opening his eyes to their full size and seemed to take
the pieces from their mouths with such a gluttonous look that it
almost prevented them from eating. The curtains hung before the windows
admitted a great white uniform light which bathed the entire table with
its symmetrical arrangement of knives and forks and its pots of flowers
enveloped in tall collars of white paper; and this pale fading light,
this slowly approaching dusk, gave to the party somewhat of an air of
distinction. Virginie looked round the closed apartment hung with muslin
and with a happy criticism declared it to be very cozy. Whenever a cart
passed in the street the glasses jingled together on the table cloth and
the ladies were obliged to shout out as loud as the men. But there was
not much conversation; they all behaved very respectably and were very
attentive to each other. Coupeau alone wore a blouse, because as he said
one need not stand on ceremony with friends and besides which the blouse
was the workman's garb of honor. The ladies, laced up in their bodices,
wore their hair in plaits greasy with pomatum in which the daylight was
reflected; whilst the gentlemen, sitting at a distance from the table,
swelled out their chests and kept their elbows wide apart for fear of
staining their frock coats.

Ah! thunder! What a hole they were making in the stewed veal! If they
spoke little, they were chewing in earnest. The salad-bowl was becoming
emptier and emptier with a spoon stuck in the midst of the thick
sauce--a good yellow sauce which quivered like a jelly. They fished
pieces of veal out of it and seemed as though they would never come to
the end; the salad-bowl journeyed from hand to hand and faces bent over
it as forks picked out the mushrooms. The long loaves standing against
the wall behind the guests appeared to melt away. Between the mouthfuls
one could hear the sound of glasses being replaced on the table. The
sauce was a trifle too salty. It required four bottles of wine to
drown that blessed stewed veal, which went down like cream, but which
afterwards lit up a regular conflagration in one's stomach. And before
one had time to take a breath, the pig's back, in the middle of a deep
dish surrounded by big round potatoes, arrived in the midst of a cloud
of smoke. There was one general cry. By Jove! It was just the thing!
Everyone liked it. They would do it justice; and they followed the dish
with a side glance as they wiped their knives on their bread so as to be
in readiness. Then as soon as they were helped they nudged one another
and spoke with their mouths full. It was just like butter! Something
sweet and solid which one could feel run through one's guts right down
into one's boots. The potatoes were like sugar. It was not a bit salty;
only, just on account of the potatoes, it required a wetting every few
minutes. Four more bottles were placed on the table. The plates were
wiped so clean that they also served for the green peas and bacon. Oh!
vegetables were of no consequence. They playfully gulped them down in
spoonfuls. The best part of the dish was the small pieces of bacon
just nicely grilled and smelling like horse's hoof. Two bottles were
sufficient for them.

"Mamma! Mamma!" called out Nana suddenly, "Augustine's putting her
fingers in my plate!"

"Don't bother me! give her a slap!" replied Gervaise, in the act of
stuffing herself with green peas.

At the children's table in the back-room, Nana was playing the role
of lady of the house, sitting next to Victor and putting her brother
Etienne beside Pauline so they could play house, pretending they were
two married couples. Nana had served her guests very politely at first,
but now she had given way to her passion for grilled bacon, trying to
keep every piece for herself. While Augustine was prowling around the
children's table, she would grab the bits of bacon under the pretext
of dividing them amongst the children. Nana was so furious that she bit
Augustine on the wrist.

"Ah! you know," murmured Augustine, "I'll tell your mother that after
the veal you asked Victor to kiss you."

But all became quiet again as Gervaise and mother Coupeau came in to get
the goose. The guests at the big table were leaning back in their chairs
taking a breather. The men had unbuttoned their waistcoats, the ladies
were wiping their faces with their napkins. The repast was, so to say,
interrupted; only one or two persons, unable to keep their jaws still,
continued to swallow large mouthfuls of bread, without even knowing that
they were doing so. The others were waiting and allowing their food to
settle while waiting for the main course. Night was slowly coming on; a
dirty ashy grey light was gathering behind the curtains. When Augustine
brought two lamps and placed one at each end of the table, the general
disorder became apparent in the bright glare--the greasy forks and
plates, the table cloth stained with wine and covered with crumbs. A
strong stifling odor pervaded the room. Certain warm fumes, however,
attracted all the noses in the direction of the kitchen.

"Can I help you?" cried Virginie.

She left her chair and passed into the inner room. All the women
followed one by one. They surrounded the Dutch oven, and watched with
profound interest as Gervaise and mother Coupeau tried to pull the bird
out. Then a clamor arose, in the midst of which one could distinguish
the shrill voices and the joyful leaps of the children. And there was
a triumphal entry. Gervaise carried the goose, her arms stiff, and her
perspiring face expanded in one broad silent laugh; the women walked
behind her, laughing in the same way; whilst Nana, right at the end,
raised herself up to see, her eyes open to their full extent. When the
enormous golden goose, streaming with gravy, was on the table, they did
not attack it at once. It was a wonder, a respectful wonderment, which
for a moment left everyone speechless. They drew one another's attention
to it with winks and nods of the head. Golly! What a bird!

"That one didn't get fat by licking the walls, I'll bet!" said Boche.

Then they entered into details respecting the bird. Gervaise gave the
facts. It was the best she could get at the poulterer's in the Faubourg
Poissonniers; it weighed twelve and a half pounds on the scales at the
charcoal-dealer's; they had burnt nearly half a bushel of charcoal in
cooking it, and it had given three bowls full of drippings.

Virginie interrupted her to boast of having seen it before it was
cooked. "You could have eaten it just as it was," she said, "its skin
was so fine, like the skin of a blonde." All the men laughed at
this, smacking their lips. Lorilleux and Madame Lorilleux sniffed
disdainfully, almost choking with rage to see such a goose on
Clump-Clump's table.

"Well! We can't eat it whole," the laundress observed. "Who'll cut it
up? No, no, not me! It's too big; I'm afraid of it."

Coupeau offered his services. _Mon Dieu!_ it was very simple. You caught
hold of the limbs, and pulled them off; the pieces were good all the
same. But the others protested; they forcibly took possession of the
large kitchen knife which the zinc-worker already held in his hand,
saying that whenever he carved he made a regular graveyard of the
platter. Finally, Madame Lerat suggested in a friendly tone:

"Listen, it should be Monsieur Poisson; yes, Monsieur Poisson."

But, as the others did not appear to understand, she added in a more
flattering manner still:

"Why, yes, of course, it should be Monsieur Poisson, who's accustomed to
the use of arms."

And she passed the kitchen knife to the policeman. All round the table
they laughed with pleasure and approval. Poisson bowed his head with
military stiffness, and moved the goose before him. When he thrust
the knife into the goose, which cracked, Lorilleux was seized with an
outburst of patriotism.

"Ah! if it was a Cossack!" he cried.

"Have you ever fought with Cossacks, Monsieur Poisson?" asked Madame
Boche.

"No, but I have with Bedouins," replied the policeman, who was cutting
off a wing. "There are no more Cossacks."

A great silence ensued. Necks were stretched out as every eye followed
the knife. Poisson was preparing a surprise. Suddenly he gave a last
cut; the hind-quarter of the bird came off and stood up on end, rump in
the air, making a bishop's mitre. Then admiration burst forth. None were
so agreeable in company as retired soldiers.

The policeman allowed several minutes for the company to admire the
bishop's mitre and then finished cutting the slices and arranging them
on the platter. The carving of the goose was now complete.

When the ladies complained that they were getting rather warm, Coupeau
opened the door to the street and the gaiety continued against the
background of cabs rattling down the street and pedestrians bustling
along the pavement. The goose was attacked furiously by the rested jaws.
Boche remarked that just having to wait and watch the goose being carved
had been enough to make the veal and pork slide down to his ankles.

Then ensued a famous tuck-in; that is to say, not one of the party
recollected ever having before run the risk of such a stomach-ache.
Gervaise, looking enormous, her elbows on the table, ate great pieces
of breast, without uttering a word, for fear of losing a mouthful, and
merely felt slightly ashamed and annoyed at exhibiting herself thus,
as gluttonous as a cat before Goujet. Goujet, however, was too busy
stuffing himself to notice that she was all red with eating. Besides,
in spite of her greediness, she remained so nice and good! She did not
speak, but she troubled herself every minute to look after Pere Bru,
and place some dainty bit on his plate. It was even touching to see this
glutton take a piece of wing almost from her mouth to give it to the
old fellow, who did not appear to be very particular, and who swallowed
everything with bowed head, almost besotted from having gobbled so much
after he had forgotten the taste of bread. The Lorilleuxs expended their
rage on the roast goose; they ate enough to last them three days; they
would have stowed away the dish, the table, the very shop, if they could
have ruined Clump-Clump by doing so. All the ladies had wanted a piece
of the breast, traditionally the ladies' portion. Madame Lerat, Madame
Boche, Madame Putois, were all picking bones; whilst mother Coupeau,
who adored the neck, was tearing off the flesh with her two last teeth.
Virginie liked the skin when it was nicely browned, and the other guests
gallantly passed their skin to her; so much so, that Poisson looked at
his wife severely, and bade her stop, because she had had enough as it
was. Once already, she had been a fortnight in bed, with her stomach
swollen out, through having eaten too much roast goose. But Coupeau got
angry and helped Virginie to the upper part of a leg, saying that, by
Jove's thunder! if she did not pick it, she wasn't a proper woman. Had
roast goose ever done harm to anybody? On the contrary, it cured all
complaints of the spleen. One could eat it without bread, like dessert.
He could go on swallowing it all night without being the least bit
inconvenienced; and, just to show off, he stuffed a whole drum-stick
into his mouth. Meanwhile, Clemence had got to the end of the rump, and
was sucking it with her lips, whilst she wriggled with laughter on her
chair because Boche was whispering all sorts of smutty things to her.
Ah, by Jove! Yes, there was a dinner! When one's at it, one's at it, you
know; and if one only has the chance now and then, one would be precious
stupid not to stuff oneself up to one's ears. Really, one could see
their sides puff out by degrees. They were cracking in their skins, the
blessed gormandizers! With their mouths open, their chins besmeared with
grease, they had such bloated red faces that one would have said they
were bursting with prosperity.

As for the wine, well, that was flowing as freely around the table
as water flows in the Seine. It was like a brook overflowing after a
rainstorm when the soil is parched. Coupeau raised the bottle high when
pouring to see the red jet foam in the glass. Whenever he emptied a
bottle, he would turn it upside down and shake it. One more dead solder!
In a corner of the laundry the pile of dead soldiers grew larger and
larger, a veritable cemetery of bottles onto which other debris from the
table was tossed.

Coupeau became indignant when Madame Putois asked for water. He took all
the water pitchers from the table. Do respectable citizens ever drink
water? Did she want to grow frogs in her stomach?

Many glasses were emptied at one gulp. You could hear the liquid
gurgling its way down the throats like rainwater in a drainpipe after a
storm. One might say it was raining wine. _Mon Dieu!_ the juice of the
grape was a remarkable invention. Surely the workingman couldn't get
along without his wine. Papa Noah must have planted his grapevine for
the benefit of zinc-workers, tailors and blacksmiths. It brightened you
up and refreshed you after a hard day's work.

Coupeau was in a high mood. He proclaimed that all the ladies present
were very cute, and jingled the three sous in his pocket as if they had
been five-franc pieces.

Even Goujet, who was ordinarily very sober, had taken plenty of wine.
Boche's eyes were narrowing, those of Lorilleux were paling, and Poisson
was developing expressions of stern severity on his soldierly face.
All the men were as drunk as lords and the ladies had reached a certain
point also, feeling so warm that they had to loosen their clothes. Only
Clemence carried this a bit too far.

Suddenly Gervaise recollected the six sealed bottles of wine. She had
forgotten to put them on the table with the goose; she fetched them, and
all the glasses were filled. Then Poisson rose, and holding his glass in
the air, said:

"I drink to the health of the missus."

All of them stood up, making a great noise with their chairs as they
moved. Holding out their arms, they clinked glasses in the midst of an
immense uproar.

"Here's to this day fifty years hence!" cried Virginie.

"No, no," replied Gervaise, deeply moved and smiling; "I shall be too
old. Ah! a day comes when one's glad to go."

Through the door, which was wide open, the neighborhood was looking on
and taking part in the festivities. Passers-by stopped in the broad ray
of light which shone over the pavement, and laughed heartily at seeing
all these people stuffing away so jovially.

The aroma from the roasted goose brought joy to the whole street. The
clerks on the sidewalk opposite thought they could almost taste the
bird. Others came out frequently to stand in front of their shops,
sniffing the air and licking their lips. The little jeweler was unable
to work, dizzy from having counted so many bottles. He seemed to have
lost his head among his merry little cuckoo clocks.

Yes, the neighbors were devoured with envy, as Coupeau said. But why
should there be any secret made about the matter? The party, now fairly
launched, was no longer ashamed of being seen at table; on the contrary,
it felt flattered and excited at seeing the crowd gathered there, gaping
with gluttony; it would have liked to have knocked out the shop-front
and dragged the table into the road-way, and there to have enjoyed the
dessert under the very nose of the public, and amidst the commotion of
the thoroughfare. Nothing disgusting was to be seen in them, was there?
Then there was no need to shut themselves in like selfish people.
Coupeau, noticing the little clockmaker looked very thirsty, held up a
bottle; and as the other nodded his head, he carried him the bottle
and a glass. A fraternity was established in the street. They drank to
anyone who passed. They called in any chaps who looked the right sort.
The feast spread, extending from one to another, to the degree that the
entire neighborhood of the Goutte-d'Or sniffed the grub, and held its
stomach, amidst a rumpus worthy of the devil and all his demons. For
some minutes, Madame Vigouroux, the charcoal-dealer, had been passing to
and fro before the door.

"Hi! Madame Vigouroux! Madame Vigouroux!" yelled the party.

She entered with a broad grin on her face, which was washed for once,
and so fat that the body of her dress was bursting. The men liked
pinching her, because they might pinch her all over without ever
encountering a bone. Boche made room for her beside him and reached
slyly under the table to grab her knee. But she, being accustomed to
that sort of thing, quietly tossed off a glass of wine, and related that
all the neighbors were at their windows, and that some of the people of
the house were beginning to get angry.

"Oh, that's our business," said Madame Boche. "We're the concierges,
aren't we? Well, we're answerable for good order. Let them come and
complain to us, we'll receive them in a way they don't expect."

In the back-room there had just been a furious fight between Nana and
Augustine, on account of the Dutch oven, which both wanted to scrape
out. For a quarter of an hour, the Dutch oven had rebounded over the
tile floor with the noise of an old saucepan. Nana was now nursing
little Victor, who had a goose-bone in his throat. She pushed her
fingers under his chin, and made him swallow big lumps of sugar by way
of a remedy. That did not prevent her keeping an eye on the big table.
At every minute she came and asked for wine, bread, or meat, for Etienne
and Pauline, she said.

"Here! Burst!" her mother would say to her. "Perhaps you'll leave us in
peace now!"

The children were scarcely able to swallow any longer, but they
continued to eat all the same, banging their forks down on the table to
the tune of a canticle, in order to excite themselves.

In the midst of the noise, however, a conversation was going on between
Pere Bru and mother Coupeau. The old fellow, who was ghastly pale in
spite of the wine and the food, was talking of his sons who had died in
the Crimea. Ah! if the lads had only lived, he would have had bread to
eat every day. But mother Coupeau, speaking thickly, leant towards him
and said:

"Ah! one has many worries with children! For instance, I appear to be
happy here, don't I? Well! I cry more often than you think. No, don't
wish you still had your children."

Pere Bru shook his head.

"I can't get work anywhere," murmured he. "I'm too old. When I enter a
workshop the young fellows joke, and ask me if I polished Henri IV.'s
boots. To-day it's all over; they won't have me anywhere. Last year I
could still earn thirty sous a day painting a bridge. I had to lie on
my back with the river flowing under me. I've had a bad cough ever since
then. Now, I'm finished."

He looked at his poor stiff hands and added:

"It's easy to understand, I'm no longer good for anything. They're
right; were I in their place I should do the same. You see, the
misfortune is that I'm not dead. Yes, it's my fault. One should lie down
and croak when one's no longer able to work."

"Really," said Lorilleux, who was listening, "I don't understand why
the Government doesn't come to the aid of the invalids of labor. I was
reading that in a newspaper the other day."

But Poisson thought it his duty to defend the Government.

"Workmen are not soldiers," declared he. "The Invalides is for soldiers.
You must not ask for what is impossible."

Dessert was now served. In the centre of the table was a Savoy cake in
the form of a temple, with a dome fluted with melon slices; and this
dome was surmounted by an artificial rose, close to which was a silver
paper butterfly, fluttering at the end of a wire. Two drops of gum in
the centre of the flower imitated dew. Then, to the left, a piece of
cream cheese floated in a deep dish; whilst in another dish to the
right, were piled up some large crushed strawberries, with the juice
running from them. However, there was still some salad left, some large
coss lettuce leaves soaked with oil.

"Come, Madame Boche," said Gervaise, coaxingly, "a little more salad. I
know how fond you are of it."

"No, no, thank you! I've already had as much as I can manage," replied
the concierge.

The laundress turning towards Virginie, the latter put her finger in her
mouth, as though to touch the food she had taken.

"Really, I'm full," murmured she. "There's no room left. I couldn't
swallow a mouthful."

"Oh! but if you tried a little," resumed Gervaise with a smile. "One can
always find a tiny corner empty. Once doesn't need to be hungry to be
able to eat salad. You're surely not going to let this be wasted?"

"You can eat it to-morrow," said Madame Lerat; "it's nicer when its
wilted."

The ladies sighed as they looked regretfully at the salad-bowl. Clemence
related that she had one day eaten three bunches of watercresses at
her lunch. Madame Putois could do more than that, she would take a coss
lettuce and munch it up with some salt just as it was without separating
the leaves. They could all have lived on salad, would have treated
themselves to tubfuls. And, this conversation aiding, the ladies cleaned
out the salad-bowl.

"I could go on all fours in a meadow," observed the concierge with her
mouth full.

Then they chuckled together as they eyed the dessert. Dessert did not
count. It came rather late but that did not matter; they would nurse
it all the same. When you're that stuffed, you can't let yourself be
stopped by strawberries and cake. There was no hurry. They had
the entire night if they wished. So they piled their plates with
strawberries and cream cheese. Meanwhile the men lit their pipes. They
were drinking the ordinary wine while they smoked since the special wine
had been finished. Now they insisted that Gervaise cut the Savoy cake.
Poisson got up and took the rose from the cake and presented it in
his most gallant manner to the hostess amidst applause from the other
guests. She pinned it over her left breast, near the heart. The silver
butterfly fluttered with her every movement.

"Well, look," exclaimed Lorilleux, who had just made a discovery, "it's
your work-table that we're eating off! Ah, well! I daresay it's never
seen so much work before!"

This malicious joke had a great success. Witty allusions came from all
sides. Clemence could not swallow a spoonful of strawberries without
saying that it was another shirt ironed; Madame Lerat pretended that the
cream cheese smelt of starch; whilst Madame Lorilleux said between her
teeth that it was capital fun to gobble up the money so quickly on the
very boards on which one had had so much trouble to earn it. There was
quite a tempest of shouts and laughter.

But suddenly a loud voice called for silence. It was Boche who, standing
up in an affected and vulgar way, was commencing to sing "The Volcano of
Love, or the Seductive Trooper."

A thunder of applause greeted the first verse. Yes, yes, they would sing
songs! Everyone in turn. It was more amusing than anything else. And
they all put their elbows on the table or leant back in their chairs,
nodding their heads at the best parts and sipping their wine when they
came to the choruses. That rogue Boche had a special gift for comic
songs. He would almost make the water pitchers laugh when he imitated
the raw recruit with his fingers apart and his hat on the back of his
head. Directly after "The Volcano of Love," he burst out into "The
Baroness de Follebiche," one of his greatest successes. When he reached
the third verse he turned towards Clemence and almost murmured it in a
slow and voluptuous tone of voice:

     "The baroness had people there,
          Her sisters four, oh! rare surprise;
     And three were dark, and one was fair;
          Between them, eight bewitching eyes."

Then the whole party, carried away, joined in the chorus. The men beat
time with their heels, whilst the ladies did the same with their knives
against their glasses. All of them singing at the top of their voices:

     "By Jingo! who on earth will pay
          A drink to the pa--to the pa--pa--?
     By Jingo! who on earth will pay
          A drink to the pa--to the pa--tro--o--l?"

The panes of glass of the shop-front resounded, the singers' great
volume of breath agitated the muslin curtains. Whilst all this was going
on, Virginie had already twice disappeared and each time, on returning,
had leant towards Gervaise's ear to whisper a piece of information. When
she returned the third time, in the midst of the uproar, she said to
her:

"My dear, he's still at Francois's; he's pretending to read the
newspaper. He's certainly meditating some evil design."

She was speaking of Lantier. It was him that she had been watching. At
each fresh report Gervaise became more and more grave.

"Is he drunk?" asked she of Virginie.

"No," replied the tall brunette. "He looks as though he had merely had
what he required. It's that especially which makes me anxious. Why does
he remain there if he's had all he wanted? _Mon Dieu!_ I hope nothing is
going to happen!"

The laundress, greatly upset, begged her to leave off. A profound
silence suddenly succeeded the clamor. Madame Putois had just risen and
was about to sing "The Boarding of the Pirate." The guests, silent and
thoughtful, watched her; even Poisson had laid his pipe down on the
edge of the table the better to listen to her. She stood up to the full
height of her little figure, with a fierce expression about her, though
her face looked quite pale beneath her black cap; she thrust out her
left fist with a satisfied pride as she thundered in a voice bigger than
herself:

     "If the pirate audacious
     Should o'er the waves chase us,
     The buccaneer slaughter,
     Accord him no quarter.
     To the guns every man,
     And with rum fill each can!
     While these pests of the seas
     Dangle from the cross-trees."

That was something serious. By Jove! it gave one a fine idea of the real
thing. Poisson, who had been on board ship nodded his head in approval
of the description. One could see too that that song was in accordance
with Madame Putois's own feeling. Coupeau then told how Madame Putois,
one evening on Rue Poulet, had slapped the face of four men who sought
to attack her virtue.

With the assistance of mother Coupeau, Gervaise was now serving the
coffee, though some of the guests had not yet finished their Savoy cake.
They would not let her sit down again, but shouted that it was her turn.
With a pale face, and looking very ill at ease, she tried to excuse
herself; she seemed so queer that someone inquired whether the goose
had disagreed with her. She finally gave them "Oh! let me slumber!" in a
sweet and feeble voice. When she reached the chorus with its wish for
a sleep filled with beautiful dreams, her eyelids partly closed and her
rapt gaze lost itself in the darkness of the street.

Poisson stood next and with an abrupt bow to the ladies, sang a drinking
song: "The Wines of France." But his voice wasn't very musical and only
the final verse, a patriotic one mentioning the tricolor flag, was a
success. Then he raised his glass high, juggled it a moment, and poured
the contents into his open mouth.

Then came a string of ballads; Madame Boche's barcarolle was all about
Venice and the gondoliers; Madame Lorilleux sang of Seville and the
Andalusians in her bolero; whilst Lorilleux went so far as to allude to
the perfumes of Arabia, in reference to the loves of Fatima the dancer.

Golden horizons were opening up all around the heavily laden table. The
men were smoking their pipes and the women unconsciously smiling with
pleasure. All were dreaming they were far away.

Clemence began to sing softly "Let's Make a Nest" with a tremolo in
her voice which pleased them greatly for it made them think of the open
country, of songbirds, of dancing beneath an arbor, and of flowers. In
short, it made them think of the Bois de Vincennes when they went there
for a picnic.

But Virginie revived the joking with "My Little Drop of Brandy." She
imitated a camp follower, with one hand on her hip, the elbow arched to
indicate the little barrel; and with the other hand she poured out the
brandy into space by turning her fist round. She did it so well that
the party then begged mother Coupeau to sing "The Mouse." The old woman
refused, vowing that she did not know that naughty song. Yet she started
off with the remnants of her broken voice; and her wrinkled face
with its lively little eyes underlined the allusions, the terrors of
Mademoiselle Lise drawing her skirts around her at the sight of a mouse.
All the table laughed; the women could not keep their countenances, and
continued casting bright glances at their neighbors; it was not indecent
after all, there were no coarse words in it. All during the song Boche
was playing mouse up and down the legs of the lady coal-dealer. Things
might have gotten a bit out of line if Goujet, in response to a glance
from Gervaise, had not brought back the respectful silence with "The
Farewell of Abdul-Kader," which he sang out loudly in his bass voice.
The song rang out from his golden beard as if from a brass trumpet.
All the hearts skipped a beat when he cried, "Ah, my noble comrade!"
referring to the warrior's black mare. They burst into applause even
before the end.

"Now, Pere Bru, it's your turn!" said mother Coupeau. "Sing your song.
The old ones are the best any day!"

And everybody turned towards the old man, pressing him and encouraging
him. He, in a state of torpor, with his immovable mask of tanned skin,
looked at them without appearing to understand. They asked him if he
knew the "Five Vowels." He held down his head; he could not recollect
it; all the songs of the good old days were mixed up in his head. As
they made up their minds to leave him alone, he seemed to remember, and
began to stutter in a cavernous voice:

     "Trou la la, trou la la,
     Trou la, trou la, trou la la!"

His face assumed an animated expression, this chorus seemed to awake
some far-off gaieties within him, enjoyed by himself alone, as he
listened with a childish delight to his voice which became more and more
hollow.

"Say there, my dear," Virginie came and whispered in Gervaise's ear,
"I've just been there again, you know. It worried me. Well! Lantier has
disappeared from Francois's."

"You didn't meet him outside?" asked the laundress.

"No, I walked quickly, not as if I was looking for him."

But Virginie raised her eyes, interrupted herself and heaved a smothered
sigh.

"Ah! _Mon Dieu!_ He's there, on the pavement opposite; he's looking this
way."

Gervaise, quite beside herself, ventured to glance in the direction
indicated. Some persons had collected in the street to hear the party
sing. And Lantier was indeed there in the front row, listening and
coolly looking on. It was rare cheek, everything considered. Gervaise
felt a chill ascend from her legs to her heart, and she no longer dared
to move, whilst old Bru continued:

     "Trou la la, trou la la,
     Trou la, trou la, trou la la!"

"Very good. Thank you, my ancient one, that's enough!" said Coupeau. "Do
you know the whole of it? You shall sing it for us another day when we
need something sad."

This raised a few laughs. The old fellow stopped short, glanced round
the table with his pale eyes and resumed his look of a meditative
animal. Coupeau called for more wine as the coffee was finished.
Clemence was eating strawberries again. With the pause in singing, they
began to talk about a woman who had been found hanging that morning in
the building next door. It was Madame Lerat's turn, but she required
to prepare herself. She dipped the corner of her napkin into a glass of
water and applied it to her temples because she was too hot. Then, she
asked for a thimbleful of brandy, drank it, and slowly wiped her lips.

"The 'Child of God,' shall it be?" she murmured, "the 'Child of God.'"

And, tall and masculine-looking, with her bony nose and her shoulders as
square as a grenadier's she began:

     "The lost child left by its mother alone
     Is sure of a home in Heaven above,
     God sees and protects it on earth from His throne,
     The child that is lost is the child of God's love."

Her voice trembled at certain words, and dwelt on them in liquid notes;
she looked out of the corner of her eyes to heaven, whilst her right
hand swung before her chest or pressed against her heart with an
impressive gesture. Then Gervaise, tortured by Lantier's presence, could
not restrain her tears; it seemed to her that the song was relating her
own suffering, that she was the lost child, abandoned by its mother, and
whom God was going to take under his protection. Clemence was now very
drunk and she burst into loud sobbing and placed her head down onto the
table in an effort to smother her gasps. There was a hush vibrant with
emotion.

The ladies had pulled out their handkerchiefs, and were drying their
eyes, with their heads erect from pride. The men had bowed their heads
and were staring straight before them, blinking back their tears.
Poisson bit off the end of his pipe twice while gulping and gasping.
Boche, with two large tears trickling down his face, wasn't even
bothering to squeeze the coal-dealer's knee any longer. All these drunk
revelers were as soft-hearted as lambs. Wasn't the wine almost coming
out of their eyes? When the refrain began again, they all let themselves
go, blubbering into their plates.

But Gervaise and Virginie could not, in spite of themselves, take their
eyes off the pavement opposite. Madame Boche, in her turn, caught sight
of Lantier and uttered a faint cry without ceasing to besmear her face
with her tears. Then all three had very anxious faces as they exchanged
involuntary signs. _Mon Dieu!_ if Coupeau were to turn round, if Coupeau
caught sight of the other! What a butchery! What carnage! And they went
on to such an extent that the zinc-worker asked them:

"Whatever are you looking at?"

He leant forward and recognized Lantier.

"Damnation! It's too much," muttered he. "Ah! the dirty scoundrel--ah!
the dirty scoundrel. No, it's too much, it must come to an end."

And as he rose from his seat muttering most atrocious threats, Gervaise,
in a low voice, implored him to keep quiet.

"Listen to me, I implore you. Leave the knife alone. Remain where you
are, don't do anything dreadful."

Virginie had to take the knife which he had picked up off the table
from him. But she could not prevent him leaving the shop and going up to
Lantier.

Those around the table saw nothing of this, so involved were they in
weeping over the song as Madame Lerat sang the last verse. It sounded
like a moaning wail of the wind and Madame Putois was so moved that she
spilled her wine over the table. Gervaise remained frozen with fright,
one hand tight against her lips to stifle her sobs. She expected at any
moment to see one of the two men fall unconscious in the street.

As Coupeau rushed toward Lantier, he was so astonished by the fresh air
that he staggered, and Lantier, with his hands in his pockets, merely
took a step to the side. Now the two men were almost shouting at each
other, Coupeau calling the other a lousy pig and threatening to make
sausage of his guts. They were shouting loudly and angrily and waving
their arms violently. Gervaise felt faint and as it continued for a
while, she closed her eyes. Suddenly, she didn't hear any shouting and
opened her eyes. The two men were chatting amiably together.

Madame Lerat's voice rose higher and higher, warbling another verse.

Gervaise exchanged a glance with Madame Boche and Virginie. Was it going
to end amicably then? Coupeau and Lantier continued to converse on
the edge of the pavement. They were still abusing each other, but in a
friendly way. As people were staring at them, they ended by strolling
leisurely side by side past the houses, turning round again every ten
yards or so. A very animated conversation was now taking place. Suddenly
Coupeau appeared to become angry again, whilst the other was refusing
something and required to be pressed. And it was the zinc-worker who
pushed Lantier along and who forced him to cross the street and enter
the shop.

"I tell you, you're quite welcome!" shouted he. "You'll take a glass of
wine. Men are men, you know. We ought to understand each other."

Madame Lerat was finishing the last chorus. The ladies were singing all
together as they twisted their handkerchiefs.

"The child that is lost is the child of God's love."

The singer was greatly complimented and she resumed her seat affecting
to be quite broken down. She asked for something to drink because she
always put too much feeling into that song and she was constantly afraid
of straining her vocal chords. Everyone at the table now had their eyes
fixed on Lantier who, quietly seated beside Coupeau, was devouring the
last piece of Savoy cake which he dipped in his glass of wine. With the
exception of Virginie and Madame Boche none of the guests knew him. The
Lorilleuxs certainly scented some underhand business, but not knowing
what, they merely assumed their most conceited air. Goujet, who had
noticed Gervaise's emotion, gave the newcomer a sour look. As an awkward
pause ensued Coupeau simply said:

"A friend of mine."

And turning to his wife, added:

"Come, stir yourself! Perhaps there's still some hot coffee left."

Gervaise, feeling meek and stupid, looked at them one after the other.
At first, when her husband pushed her old lover into the shop, she
buried her head between her hands, the same as she instinctively did on
stormy days at each clap of thunder. She could not believe it possible;
the walls would fall in and crush them all. Then, when she saw the two
sitting together peacefully, she suddenly accepted it as quite natural.
A happy feeling of languor benumbed her, retained her all in a heap at
the edge of the table, with the sole desire of not being bothered. _Mon
Dieu!_ what is the use of putting oneself out when others do not, and
when things arrange themselves to the satisfaction of everybody? She got
up to see if there was any coffee left.

In the back-room the children had fallen asleep. That squint-eyed
Augustine had tyrannized over them all during the dessert, pilfering
their strawberries and frightening them with the most abominable
threats. Now she felt very ill, and was bent double upon a stool, not
uttering a word, her face ghastly pale. Fat Pauline had let her head
fall against Etienne's shoulder, and he himself was sleeping on the
edge of the table. Nana was seated with Victor on the rug beside the
bedstead, she had passed her arm round his neck and was drawing him
towards her; and, succumbing to drowsiness and with her eyes shut, she
kept repeating in a feeble voice:

"Oh! Mamma, I'm not well; oh! mamma, I'm not well."

"No wonder!" murmured Augustine, whose head was rolling about on her
shoulders, "they're drunk; they've been singing like grown up persons."

Gervaise received another blow on beholding Etienne. She felt as though
she would choke when she thought of the youngster's father being there
in the other room, eating cake, and that he had not even expressed
a desire to kiss the little fellow. She was on the point of rousing
Etienne and of carrying him there in her arms. Then she again felt that
the quiet way in which matters had been arranged was the best. It would
not have been proper to have disturbed the harmony of the end of the
dinner. She returned with the coffee-pot and poured out a glass of
coffee for Lantier, who, by the way, did not appear to take any notice
of her.

"Now, it's my turn," stuttered Coupeau, in a thick voice. "You've
been keeping the best for the last. Well! I'll sing you 'That Piggish
Child.'"

"Yes, yes, 'That Piggish Child,'" cried everyone.

The uproar was beginning again. Lantier was forgotten. The ladies
prepared their glasses and their knives for accompanying the chorus.
They laughed beforehand, as they looked at the zinc-worker, who steadied
himself on his legs as he put on his most vulgar air. Mimicking the
hoarse voice of an old woman, he sang:

     "When out of bed each morn I hop,
     I'm always precious queer;
     I send him for a little drop
     To the drinking-ken that's near.
     A good half hour or more he'll stay,
     And that makes me so riled,
     He swigs it half upon his way:
     What a piggish child!"

And the ladies, striking their glasses, repeated in chorus in the midst
of a formidable gaiety:

     "What a piggish child!
     What a piggish child!"

Even the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or itself joined in now. The whole
neighborhood was singing "What a piggish child!" The little clockmaker,
the grocery clerks, the tripe woman and the fruit woman all knew the
song and joined in the chorus. The entire street seemed to be getting
drunk on the odors from the Coupeau party. In the reddish haze from the
two lamps, the noise of the party was enough to shut out the rumbling
of the last vehicles in the street. Two policemen rushed over, thinking
there was a riot, but on recognizing Poisson, they saluted him smartly
and went away between the darkened buildings.

Coupeau was now singing this verse:

     "On Sundays at Petite Villette,
     Whene'er the weather's fine,
     We call on uncle, old Tinette,
     Who's in the dustman line.
     To feast upon some cherry stones
     The young un's almost wild,
     And rolls amongst the dust and bones,
     What a piggish child!
     What a piggish child!"

Then the house almost collapsed, such a yell ascended in the calm warm
night air that the shouters applauded themselves, for it was useless
their hoping to be able to bawl any louder.

Not one of the party could ever recollect exactly how the carouse
terminated. It must have been very late, it's quite certain, for not
a cat was to be seen in the street. Possibly too, they had all joined
hands and danced round the table. But all was submerged in a yellow
mist, in which red faces were jumping about, with mouths slit from ear
to ear. They had probably treated themselves to something stronger than
wine towards the end, and there was a vague suspicion that some one had
played them the trick of putting salt into the glasses. The children
must have undressed and put themselves to bed. On the morrow, Madame
Boche boasted of having treated Boche to a couple of clouts in a corner,
where he was conversing a great deal too close to the charcoal-dealer;
but Boche, who recollected nothing, said she must have dreamt it.
Everyone agreed that it wasn't very decent the way Clemence had carried
on. She had ended by showing everything she had and then been so sick
that she had completely ruined one of the muslin curtains. The men
had at least the decency to go into the street; Lorilleux and Poisson,
feeling their stomachs upset, had stumblingly glided as far as the
pork-butcher's shop. It is easy to see when a person has been well
brought up. For instance, the ladies, Madame Putois, Madame Lerat, and
Virginie, indisposed by the heat, had simply gone into the back-room and
taken their stays off; Virginie had even desired to lie on the bed for
a minute, just to obviate any unpleasant effects. Thus the party
had seemed to melt away, some disappearing behind the others, all
accompanying one another, and being lost sight of in the surrounding
darkness, to the accompaniment of a final uproar, a furious quarrel
between the Lorilleuxs, and an obstinate and mournful "trou la la, trou
la la," of old Bru's. Gervaise had an idea that Goujet had burst out
sobbing when bidding her good-bye; Coupeau was still singing; and as
for Lantier, he must have remained till the end. At one moment even, she
could still feel a breath against her hair, but she was unable to say
whether it came from Lantier or if it was the warm night air.

Since Madame Lerat didn't want to return to Les Batignolles at such a
late hour, they took one of the mattresses off the bed and spread it
for her in a corner of the shop, after pushing back the table. She
slept right there amid all the dinner crumbs. All night long, while
the Coupeaus were sleeping, a neighbor's cat took advantage of an open
window and was crunching the bones of the goose with its sharp teeth,
giving the bird its final resting place.


CHAPTER VIII

On the following Saturday Coupeau, who had not come home to dinner,
brought Lantier with him towards ten o'clock. They had had some sheep's
trotters at Chez Thomas at Montmartre.

"You mustn't scold, wife," said the zinc-worker. "We're sober, as you
can see. Oh! there's no fear with him; he keeps one on the straight
road."

And he related how they happened to meet in the Rue Rochechouart. After
dinner Lantier had declined to have a drink at the "Black Ball," saying
that when one was married to a pretty and worthy little woman, one ought
not to go liquoring-up at all the wineshops. Gervaise smiled slightly
as she listened. Oh! she was not thinking of scolding, she felt too much
embarrassed for that. She had been expecting to see her former lover
again some day ever since their dinner party; but at such an hour, when
she was about to go to bed, the unexpected arrival of the two men had
startled her. Her hands were quivering as she pinned back the hair which
had slid down her neck.

"You know," resumed Coupeau, "as he was so polite as to decline a drink
outside, you must treat us to one here. Ah! you certainly owe us that!"

The workwomen had left long ago. Mother Coupeau and Nana had just gone
to bed. Gervaise, who had been just about to put up the shutters when
they appeared, left the shop open and brought some glasses which she
placed on a corner of the work-table with what was left of a bottle of
brandy.

Lantier remained standing and avoided speaking directly to her. However,
when she served him, he exclaimed:

"Only a thimbleful, madame, if you please."

Coupeau looked at them and then spoke his mind very plainly. They were
not going to behave like a couple of geese he hoped! The past was past
was it not? If people nursed grudges for nine and ten years together one
would end by no longer seeing anybody. No, no, he carried his heart
in his hand, he did! First of all, he knew who he had to deal with, a
worthy woman and a worthy man--in short two friends! He felt easy; he
knew he could depend upon them.

"Oh! that's certain, quite certain," repeated Gervaise, looking on the
ground and scarcely understanding what she said.

"She is a sister now--nothing but a sister!" murmured Lantier in his
turn.

"_Mon Dieu!_ shake hands," cried Coupeau, "and let those who don't like
it go to blazes! When one has proper feelings one is better off than
millionaires. For myself I prefer friendship before everything because
friendship is friendship and there's nothing to beat it."

He dealt himself heavy blows on the chest, and seemed so moved that
they had to calm him. They all three silently clinked glasses, and drank
their drop of brandy. Gervaise was then able to look at Lantier at her
ease; for on the night of her saint's day, she had only seen him through
a fog. He had grown more stout, his arms and legs seeming too heavy
because of his small stature. His face was still handsome even though it
was a little puffy now due to his life of idleness. He still took great
pains with his narrow moustache. He looked about his actual age. He was
wearing grey trousers, a heavy blue overcoat, and a round hat. He
even had a watch with a silver chain on which a ring was hanging as a
keepsake. He looked quite like a gentleman.

"I'm off," said he. "I live no end of a distance from here."

He was already on the pavement when the zinc-worker called him back to
make him promise never to pass the door without looking in to wish them
good day. Meanwhile Gervaise, who had quietly disappeared, returned
pushing Etienne before her. The child, who was in his shirt-sleeves and
half asleep, smiled as he rubbed his eyes. But when he beheld Lantier
he stood trembling and embarrassed, and casting anxious glances in the
direction of his mother and Coupeau.

"Don't you remember this gentleman?" asked the latter.

The child held down his head without replying. Then he made a slight
sign which meant that he did remember the gentleman.

"Well! Then, don't stand there like a fool; go and kiss him."

Lantier gravely and quietly waited. When Etienne had made up his mind
to approach him, he stooped down, presented both his cheeks, and then
kissed the youngster on the forehead himself. At this the boy ventured
to look at his father; but all on a sudden he burst out sobbing and
scampered away like a mad creature with his clothes half falling off
him, whilst Coupeau angrily called him a young savage.

"The emotion's too much for him," said Gervaise, pale and agitated
herself.

"Oh! he's generally very gentle and nice," exclaimed Coupeau. "I've
brought him up properly, as you'll see. He'll get used to you. He must
learn to know people. We can't stay mad. We should have made up a long
time ago for his sake. I'd rather have my head cut off than keep a
father from seeing his own son."

Having thus delivered himself, he talked of finishing the bottle of
brandy. All three clinked glasses again. Lantier showed no surprise, but
remained perfectly calm. By way of repaying the zinc-worker's politeness
he persisted in helping him put up the shutters before taking his
departure. Then rubbing his hands together to get rid of the dust on
them, he wished the couple good-night.

"Sleep well. I shall try and catch the last bus. I promise you I'll look
in again soon."

After that evening Lantier frequently called at the Rue de la
Goutte-d'Or. He came when the zinc-worker was there, inquiring after his
health the moment he passed the door and affecting to have solely called
on his account. Then clean-shaven, his hair nicely combed and always
wearing his overcoat, he would take a seat by the window and converse
politely with the manners of an educated man. It was thus that the
Coupeaus learnt little by little the details of his life. During the
last eight years he had for a while managed a hat factory; and when they
asked him why he had retired from it he merely alluded to the rascality
of a partner, a fellow from his native place, a scoundrel who had
squandered all the takings with women. His former position as an
employer continued to affect his entire personality, like a title of
nobility that he could not abandon. He was always talking of concluding
a magnificent deal with some hatmakers who were going to set him up in
business. While waiting for this he did nothing but stroll around all
day like one of the idle rich. If anyone dared to mention a hat factory
looking for workers, he smiled and said he was not interested in
breaking his back working for others.

A smart fellow like Lantier, according to Coupeau, knew how to take care
of himself. He always looked prosperous and it took money to look thus.
He must have some deal going. One morning Coupeau had seen him having
his shoes shined on the Boulevard Montmartre. Lantier was very talkative
about others, but the truth was that he told lies about himself. He
would not even say where he lived, only that he was staying with a
friend and there was no use in coming to see him because he was never
in.

It was now early November. Lantier would gallantly bring bunches of
violets for Gervaise and the workwomen. He was now coming almost every
day. He won the favor of Clemence and Madame Putois with his little
attentions. At the end of the month they adored him. The Boches, whom he
flattered by going to pay his respects in their concierge's lodge, went
into ecstasies over his politeness.

As soon as the Lorilleuxs knew who he was, they howled at the impudence
of Gervaise in bringing her former lover into her home. However, one
day Lantier went to visit them and made such a good impression when he
ordered a necklace for a lady of his acquaintance that they invited
him to sit down. He stayed an hour and they were so charmed by his
conversation that they wondered how a man of such distinction had ever
lived with Clump-Clump. Soon Lantier's visits to the Coupeaus were
accepted as perfectly natural; he was in the good graces of everyone
along the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or. Goujet was the only one who remained
cold. If he happened to be there when Lantier arrived, he would leave at
once as he didn't want to be obliged to be friendly to him.

In the midst, however, of all this extraordinary affection for Lantier,
Gervaise lived in a state of great agitation for the first few weeks.
She felt that burning sensation in the pit of her stomach which affected
her on the day when Virginie first alluded to her past life. Her great
fear was that she might find herself without strength, if he came upon
her all alone one night and took it into his head to kiss her. She
thought of him too much; she was for ever thinking of him. But she
gradually became calmer on seeing him behave so well, never looking her
in the face, never even touching her with the tips of his fingers when
no one was watching. Then Virginie, who seemed to read within her, made
her ashamed of all her wicked thoughts. Why did she tremble? Once could
not hope to come across a nicer man. She certainly had nothing to fear
now. And one day the tall brunette maneuvered in such a way as to get
them both into a corner, and to turn the conversation to the subject of
love. Lantier, choosing his words, declared in a grave voice that his
heart was dead, that for the future he wished to consecrate his life
solely for his son's happiness. Every evening he would kiss Etienne on
the forehead, yet he was apt to forget him in teasing back and forth
with Clemence. And he never mentioned Claude who was still in the south.
Gervaise began to feel at ease. Lantier's actual presence overshadowed
her memories, and seeing him all the time, she no longer dreamed about
him. She even felt a certain repugnance at the thought of their former
relationship. Yes, it was over. If he dared to approach her, she'd
box his ears, or even better, she'd tell her husband. Once again her
thoughts turned to Goujet and his affection for her.

One morning Clemence reported that the previous night, at about eleven
o'clock, she had seen Monsieur Lantier with a woman. She told about it
maliciously and in coarse terms to see how Gervaise would react. Yes,
Monsieur Lantier was on the Rue Notre Dame de Lorette with a blonde
and she followed them. They had gone into a shop where the worn-out and
used-up woman had bought some shrimps. Then they went to the Rue de La
Rochefoucauld. Monsieur Lantier had waited on the pavement in front of
the house while his lady friend went in alone. Then she had beckoned to
him from the window to join her.

No matter how Clemence went on with the story Gervaise went on
peacefully ironing a white dress. Sometimes she smiled faintly. These
southerners, she said, are all crazy about women; they have to have them
no matter what, even if they come from a dung heap. When Lantier came
in that evening, Gervaise was amused when Clemence teased him about the
blonde. He seemed to feel flattered that he had been seen. _Mon Dieu!_
she was just an old friend, he explained. He saw her from time to time.
She was quite stylish. He mentioned some of her former lovers, among
them a count, an important merchant and the son of a lawyer. He added
that a bit of playing around didn't mean a thing, his heart was dead. In
the end Clemence had to pay a price for her meanness. She certainly felt
Lantier pinching her hard two or three times without seeming to do so.
She was also jealous because she didn't reek of musk like that boulevard
work-horse.

When spring came, Lantier, who was now quite one of the family, talked
of living in the neighborhood, so as to be nearer his friends. He wanted
a furnished room in a decent house. Madame Boche, and even Gervaise
herself went searching about to find it for him. They explored the
neighboring streets. But he was always too difficult to please; he
required a big courtyard, a room on the ground floor; in fact, every
luxury imaginable. And then every evening, at the Coupeaus', he seemed
to measure the height of the ceilings, study the arrangement of the
rooms, and covet a similar lodging. Oh, he would never have asked for
anything better, he would willingly have made himself a hole in that
warm, quiet corner. Then each time he wound up his inspection with these
words:

"By Jove! you are comfortably situated here."

One evening, when he had dined there, and was making the same remark
during the dessert, Coupeau, who now treated him most familiarly,
suddenly exclaimed:

"You must stay here, old boy, if it suits you. It's easily arranged."

And he explained that the dirty-clothes room, cleaned out, would make
a nice apartment. Etienne could sleep in the shop, on a mattress on the
floor, that was all.

"No, no," said Lantier, "I cannot accept. It would inconvenience you too
much. I know that it's willingly offered, but we should be too warm all
jumbled up together. Besides, you know, each one likes his liberty.
I should have to go through your room, and that wouldn't be exactly
funny."

"Ah, the rogue!" resumed the zinc-worker, choking with laughter, banging
his fist down on the table, "he's always thinking of something smutty!
But, you joker, we're of an inventive turn of mind! There're two windows
in the room, aren't there? Well, we'll knock one out and turn it into a
door. Then, you understand you come in by way of the courtyard, and
we can even stop up the other door, if we like. Thus you'll be in your
home, and we in ours."

A pause ensued. At length the hatter murmured:

"Ah, yes, in that manner perhaps we might. And yet no, I should be too
much in your way."

He avoided looking at Gervaise. But he was evidently waiting for a word
from her before accepting. She was very much annoyed at her husband's
idea; not that the thought of seeing Lantier living with them wounded
her feelings, or made her particularly uneasy, but she was wondering
where she would be able to keep the dirty clothes. Coupeau was going
on about the advantages of the arrangement. Their rent, five hundred
francs, had always been a bit steep. Their friend could pay twenty
francs a month for a nicely furnished room and it would help them with
the rent. He would be responsible for fixing up a big box under their
bed that would be large enough to hold all the dirty clothes. Gervaise
still hesitated. She looked toward mother Coupeau for guidance. Lantier
had won over mother Coupeau months ago by bringing her gum drops for her
cough.

"You would certainly not be in our way," Gervaise ended by saying. "We
could so arrange things--"

"No, no, thanks," repeated the hatter. "You're too kind; it would be
asking too much."

Coupeau could no longer restrain himself. Was he going to continue
making objections when they told him it was freely offered? He would
be obliging them. There, did he understand? Then in an excited tone of
voice he yelled:

"Etienne! Etienne!"

The youngster had fallen asleep on the table. He raised his head with a
start.

"Listen, tell him that you wish it. Yes, that gentleman there. Tell him
as loud as you can: 'I wish it!'"

"I wish it!" stuttered Etienne, his voice thick with sleep.

Everyone laughed. But Lantier resumed his grave and impressive air. He
squeezed Coupeau's hand across the table as he said:

"I accept. It's in all good fellowship on both sides, is it not? Yes, I
accept for the child's sake."

The next day when the landlord, Monsieur Marescot, came to spend an
hour with the Boches, Gervaise mentioned the matter to him. He refused
angrily at first. Then, after a careful inspection of the premises,
particularly gazing upward to verify that the upper floors would not be
weakened, he finally granted permission on condition there would be
no expense to him. He had the Coupeaus sign a paper saying they would
restore everything to its original state on the expiration of the lease.

Coupeau brought in some friends of his that very evening--a mason, a
carpenter and a painter. They would do this job in the evenings as a
favor to him. Still, installing the door and cleaning up the room cost
over one hundred francs, not counting the wine that kept the work going.
Coupeau told his friends he'd pay them something later, out of the rent
from his tenant.

Then the furniture for the room had to be sorted out. Gervaise left
mother Coupeau's wardrobe where it was, and added a table and two chairs
taken from her own room. She had to buy a washing-stand and a bed with
mattress and bedclothes, costing one hundred and thirty francs, which
she was to pay off at ten francs a month. Although Lantier's twenty
francs would be used to pay off these debts for ten months, there would
be a nice little profit later.

It was during the early days of June that the hatter moved in. The day
before, Coupeau had offered to go with him and fetch his box, to save
him the thirty sous for a cab. But the other became quite embarrassed,
saying that the box was too heavy, as though he wished up to the last
moment to hide the place where he lodged. He arrived in the afternoon
towards three o'clock. Coupeau did not happen to be in. And Gervaise,
standing at the shop door became quite pale on recognizing the box
outside the cab. It was their old box, the one with which they had
journeyed from Plassans, all scratched and broken now and held together
by cords. She saw it return as she had often dreamt it would and it
needed no great stretch of imagination to believe that the same cab,
that cab in which that strumpet of a burnisher had played her such a
foul trick, had brought the box back again. Meanwhile Boche was giving
Lantier a helping hand. The laundress followed them in silence and
feeling rather dazed. When they had deposited their burden in the middle
of the room she said for the sake of saying something:

"Well! That's a good thing finished, isn't it?"

Then pulling herself together, seeing that Lantier, busy in undoing the
cords was not even looking at her, she added:

"Monsieur Boche, you must have a drink."

And she went and fetched a quart of wine and some glasses.

Just then Poisson passed along the pavement in uniform. She signaled to
him, winking her eye and smiling. The policeman understood perfectly.
When he was on duty and anyone winked their eye to him it meant a glass
of wine. He would even walk for hours up and down before the laundry
waiting for a wink. Then so as not to be seen, he would pass through the
courtyard and toss off the liquor in secret.

"Ah! ah!" said Lantier when he saw him enter, "it's you, Badingue."

He called him Badingue for a joke, just to show how little he cared for
the Emperor. Poisson put up with it in his stiff way without one knowing
whether it really annoyed him or not. Besides the two men, though
separated by their political convictions, had become very good friends.

"You know that the Emperor was once a policeman in London," said Boche
in his turn. "Yes, on my word! He used to take the drunken women to the
station-house."

Gervaise had filled three glasses on the table. She would not drink
herself, she felt too sick at heart, but she stood there longing to
see what the box contained and watching Lantier remove the last cords.
Before raising the lid Lantier took his glass and clinked it with the
others.

"Good health."

"Same to you," replied Boche and Poisson.

The laundress filled the glasses again. The three men wiped their lips
on the backs of their hands. And at last the hatter opened the box. It
was full of a jumble of newspapers, books, old clothes and underlinen,
in bundles. He took out successively a saucepan, a pair of boots, a bust
of Ledru-Rollin with the nose broken, an embroidered shirt and a pair of
working trousers. Gervaise could smell the odor of tobacco and that of a
man whose linen wasn't too clean, one who took care only of the outside,
of what people could see.

The old hat was no longer in the left corner. There was a pincushion
she did not recognize, doubtless a present from some woman. She became
calmer, but felt a vague sadness as she continued to watch the objects
that appeared, wondering if they were from her time or from the time of
others.

"I say, Badingue, do you know this?" resumed Lantier.

He thrust under his nose a little book printed at Brussels. "The Amours
of Napoleon III." Illustrated with engravings. It related, among other
anecdotes, how the Emperor had seduced a girl of thirteen, the daughter
of a cook; and the picture represented Napoleon III., bare-legged, and
also wearing the grand ribbon of the Legion of Honor, pursuing a little
girl who was trying to escape his lust.

"Ah! that's it exactly!" exclaimed Boche, whose slyly ridiculous
instincts felt flattered by the sight. "It always happens like that!"

Poisson was seized with consternation, and he could not find a word to
say in the Emperor's defense. It was in a book, so he could not deny
it. Then, Lantier, continuing to push the picture under his nose in a
jeering way, he extended his arms and exclaimed:

"Well, so what?"

Lantier didn't reply, He busied himself arranging his books and
newspapers on a shelf in the wardrobe. He seemed upset not to have a
small bookshelf over his table, so Gervaise promised to get him one.
He had "The History of Ten Years" by Louis Blanc (except for the first
volume), Lamartine's "The Girondins" in installments, "The Mysteries of
Paris" and "The Wandering Jew" by Eugene Sue, and a quantity of booklets
on philosophic and humanitarian subjects picked up from used book
dealers.

His newspapers were his prized possessions, a collection made over a
number of years. Whenever he read an article in a cafe that seemed to
him to agree with his own ideas, he would buy that newspaper and keep
it. He had an enormous bundle of them, papers of every date and every
title, piled up in no discernable order. He patted them and said to the
other two:

"You see that? No one else can boast of having anything to match it.
You can't imagine all that's in there. I mean, if they put into practice
only half the ideas, it would clean up the social order overnight. That
would be good medicine for your Emperor and all his stool pigeons."

The policeman's red mustache and beard began to bristle on his pale face
and he interrupted:

"And the army, tell me, what are you going to do about that?"

Lantier flew into a passion. He banged his fists down on the newspapers
as he yelled:

"I require the suppression of militarism, the fraternity of peoples.
I require the abolition of privileges, of titles, and of monopolies.
I require the equality of salaries, the division of benefits, the
glorification of the protectorate. All liberties, do you hear? All of
them! And divorce!"

"Yes, yes, divorce for morality!" insisted Boche.

Poisson had assumed a majestic air.

"Yet if I won't have your liberties, I'm free to refuse them," he
answered.

Lantier was choking with passion.

"If you don't want them--if you don't want them--" he replied. "No,
you're not free at all! If you don't want them, I'll send you off to
Devil's Island. Yes, Devil's Island with your Emperor and all the rats
of his crew."

They always quarreled thus every time they met. Gervaise, who did not
like arguments, usually interfered. She roused herself from the torpor
into which the sight of the box, full of the stale perfume of her past
love, had plunged her, and she drew the three men's attention to the
glasses.

"Ah! yes," said Lantier, becoming suddenly calm and taking his glass.
"Good health!"

"Good health!" replied Boche and Poisson, clinking glasses with him.

Boche, however, was moving nervously about, troubled by an anxiety as he
looked at the policeman out of the corner of his eye.

"All this between ourselves, eh, Monsieur Poisson?" murmured he at
length. "We say and show you things to show off."

But Poisson did not let him finish. He placed his hand upon his heart,
as though to explain that all remained buried there. He certainly did
not go spying about on his friends. Coupeau arriving, they emptied a
second quart. Then the policeman went off by way of the courtyard and
resumed his stiff and measured tread along the pavement.

At the beginning of the new arrangement, the entire routine of the
establishment was considerably upset. Lantier had his own separate room,
with his own entrance and his own key. However, since they had decided
not to close off the door between the rooms, he usually came and went
through the shop. Besides, the dirty clothes were an inconvenience to
Gervaise because her husband never made the case he had promised and she
had to tuck the dirty laundry into any odd corner she could find. They
usually ended up under the bed and this was not very pleasant on warm
summer nights. She also found it a nuisance having to make up Etienne's
bed every evening in the shop. When her employees worked late, the lad
had to sleep in a chair until they finished.

Goujet had mentioned sending Etienne to Lille where a machinist he knew
was looking for apprentices. As the boy was unhappy at home and eager to
be out on his own, Gervaise seriously considered the proposal. Her only
fear was that Lantier would refuse. Since he had come to live with them
solely to be near his son, surely he wouldn't want to lose him only two
weeks after he moved in. However he approved whole-heartedly when she
timidly broached the matter to him. He said that young men needed to
see a bit of the country. The morning that Etienne left Lantier made a
speech to him, kissed him and ended by saying:

"Never forget that a workingman is not a slave, and that whoever is not
a workingman is a lazy drone."

The household was now able to get into the new routine. Gervaise became
accustomed to having dirty laundry lying all around. Lantier was forever
talking of important business deals. Sometimes he went out, wearing
fresh linen and neatly combed. He would stay out all night and on his
return pretend that he was completely exhausted because he had been
discussing very serious matters. Actually he was merely taking life
easy. He usually slept until ten. In the afternoons he would take a walk
if the weather was nice. If it was raining, he would sit in the shop
reading his newspaper. This atmosphere suited him. He always felt at his
ease with women and enjoyed listening to them.

Lantier first took his meals at Francois's, at the corner of the Rue
des Poissonniers. But of the seven days in the week he dined with the
Coupeaus on three or four; so much so that he ended by offering to board
with them and to pay them fifteen francs every Saturday. From that time
he scarcely ever left the house, but made himself completely at home
there. Morning to night he was in the shop, even giving orders and
attending to customers.

Lantier didn't like the wine from Francois's, so he persuaded Gervaise
to buy her wine from Vigouroux, the coal-dealer. Then he decided
that Coudeloup's bread was not baked to his satisfaction, so he sent
Augustine to the Viennese bakery on the Faubourg Poissonniers for their
bread. He changed from the grocer Lehongre but kept the butcher, fat
Charles, because of his political opinions. After a month he wanted all
the cooking done with olive oil. Clemence joked that with a Provencal
like him you could never wash out the oil stains. He wanted his omelets
fried on both sides, as hard as pancakes. He supervised mother Coupeau's
cooking, wanting his steaks cooked like shoe leather and with garlic on
everything. He got angry if she put herbs in the salad.

"They're just weeds and some of them might be poisonous," he declared.
His favorite soup was made with over-boiled vermicelli. He would pour
in half a bottle of olive oil. Only he and Gervaise could eat this soup,
the others being too used to Parisian cooking.

Little by little Lantier also came to mixing himself up in the affairs
of the family. As the Lorilleuxs always grumbled at having to part with
the five francs for mother Coupeau, he explained that an action could
be brought against them. They must think that they had a set of fools
to deal with! It was ten francs a month which they ought to give! And he
would go up himself for the ten francs so boldly and yet so amiably
that the chainmaker never dared refuse them. Madame Lerat also gave two
five-franc pieces now. Mother Coupeau could have kissed Lantier's hands.
He was, moreover, the grand arbiter in all the quarrels between the old
woman and Gervaise. Whenever the laundress, in a moment of impatience,
behaved roughly to her mother-in-law and the latter went and cried on
her bed, he hustled them about and made them kiss each other, asking
them if they thought themselves amusing with their bad tempers.

And Nana, too; she was being brought up badly, according to his idea. In
that he was right, for whenever the father spanked the child, the mother
took her part, and if the mother, in her turn, boxed her ears, the
father made a disturbance. Nana delighted at seeing her parents abuse
each other, and knowing that she was forgiven beforehand, was up to all
kinds of tricks. Her latest mania was to go and play in the blacksmith
shop opposite; she would pass the entire day swinging on the shafts of
the carts; she would hide with bands of urchins in the remotest corners
of the gray courtyard, lighted up with the red glare of the forge; and
suddenly she would reappear, running and shouting, unkempt and dirty
and followed by the troop of urchins, as though a sudden clash of the
hammers had frightened the ragamuffins away. Lantier alone could scold
her; and yet she knew perfectly well how to get over him. This tricky
little girl of ten would walk before him like a lady, swinging herself
about and casting side glances at him, her eyes already full of vice.
He had ended by undertaking her education: he taught her to dance and to
talk patois.

A year passed thus. In the neighborhood it was thought that Lantier had
a private income, for this was the only way to account for the Coupeaus'
grand style of living. No doubt Gervaise continued to earn money; but
now that she had to support two men in doing nothing, the shop certainly
could not suffice; more especially as the shop no longer had so good a
reputation, customers were leaving and the workwomen were tippling from
morning till night. The truth was that Lantier paid nothing, neither
for rent nor board. During the first months he had paid sums on account,
then he had contented himself with speaking of a large amount he was
going to receive, with which later on he would pay off everything in a
lump sum. Gervaise no longer dared ask him for a centime. She had the
bread, the wine, the meat, all on credit. The bills increased everywhere
at the rate of three and four francs a day. She had not paid a sou to
the furniture dealer nor to the three comrades, the mason, the carpenter
and the painter. All these people commenced to grumble, and she was no
longer greeted with the same politeness at the shops.

She was as though intoxicated by a mania for getting into debt; she
tried to drown her thoughts, ordered the most expensive things, and gave
full freedom to her gluttony now that she no longer paid for anything;
she remained withal very honest at heart, dreaming of earning from
morning to night hundreds of francs, though she did not exactly know
how, to enable her to distribute handfuls of five-franc pieces to her
tradespeople. In short, she was sinking, and as she sank lower and lower
she talked of extending her business. Instead she went deeper into
debt. Clemence left around the middle of the summer because there was
no longer enough work for two women and she had not been paid in several
weeks.

During this impending ruin, Coupeau and Lantier were, in effect,
devouring the shop and growing fat on the ruin of the establishment.
At table they would challenge each other to take more helpings and slap
their rounded stomachs to make more room for dessert.

The great subject of conversation in the neighborhood was as to whether
Lantier had really gone back to his old footing with Gervaise. On this
point opinions were divided. According to the Lorilleuxs, Clump-Clump
was doing everything she could to hook Lantier again, but he would no
longer have anything to do with her because she was getting old and
faded and he had plenty of younger girls that were prettier. On the
other hand, according to the Boches, Gervaise had gone back to her
former mate the very first night, just as soon as poor Coupeau had gone
to sleep. The picture was not pretty, but there were a lot of worse
things in life, so folks ended by accepting the threesome as altogether
natural. In fact, they thought them rather nice since there were never
any fights and the outward decencies remained. Certainly if you stuck
your nose into some of the other neighborhood households you could smell
far worse things. So what if they slept together like a nice little
family. It never kept the neighbors awake. Besides, everyone was still
very much impressed by Lantier's good manners. His charm helped greatly
to keep tongues from wagging. Indeed, when the fruit dealer insisted to
the tripe seller that there had been no intimacies, the latter appeared
to feel that this was really too bad, because it made the Coupeaus less
interesting.

Gervaise was quite at her ease in this matter, and not much troubled
with these thoughts. Things reached the point that she was accused of
being heartless. The family did not understand why she continued to bear
a grudge against the hatter. Madame Lerat now came over every evening.
She considered Lantier as utterly irresistible and said that most ladies
would be happy to fall into his arms. Madame Boche declared that her own
virtue would not be safe if she were ten years younger. There was a sort
of silent conspiracy to push Gervaise into the arms of Lantier, as if
all the women around her felt driven to satisfy their own longings
by giving her a lover. Gervaise didn't understand this because she no
longer found Lantier seductive. Certainly he had changed for the better.
He had gotten a sort of education in the cafes and political meetings
but she knew him well. She could pierce to the depths of his soul and
she found things there that still gave her the shivers. Well, if the
others found him so attractive, why didn't they try it themselves.
In the end she suggested this one day to Virginie who seemed the most
eager. Then, to excite Gervaise, Madame Lerat and Virginie told her of
the love of Lantier and tall Clemence. Yes, she had not noticed anything
herself; but as soon as she went out on an errand, the hatter would
bring the workgirl into his room. Now people met them out together; he
probably went to see her at her own place.

"Well," said the laundress, her voice trembling slightly, "what can it
matter to me?"

She looked straight into Virginie's eyes. Did this woman still have it
in for her?

Virginie replied with an air of innocence:

"It can't matter to you, of course. Only, you ought to advise him to
break off with that girl, who is sure to cause him some unpleasantness."

The worst of it was that Lantier, feeling himself supported by public
opinion, changed altogether in his behavior towards Gervaise. Now,
whenever he shook hands with her, he held her fingers for a minute
between his own. He tried her with his glance, fixing a bold look upon
her, in which she clearly read that he wanted her. If he passed behind
her, he dug his knees into her skirt, or breathed upon her neck. Yet he
waited a while before being rough and openly declaring himself. But
one evening, finding himself alone with her, he pushed her before him
without a word, and viewed her all trembling against the wall at the
back of the shop, and tried to kiss her. It so chanced that Goujet
entered just at that moment. Then she struggled and escaped. And all
three exchanged a few words, as though nothing had happened. Goujet, his
face deadly pale, looked on the ground, fancying that he had disturbed
them, and that she had merely struggled so as not to be kissed before a
third party.

The next day Gervaise moved restlessly about the shop. She was miserable
and unable to iron even a single handkerchief. She only wanted to
see Goujet and explain to him how Lantier happened to have pinned her
against the wall. But since Etienne had gone to Lille, she had hesitated
to visit Goujet's forge where she felt she would be greeted by his
fellow workers with secret laughter. This afternoon, however, she
yielded to the impulse. She took an empty basket and went out under
the pretext of going for the petticoats of her customer on Rue des
Portes-Blanches. Then, when she reached Rue Marcadet, she walked very
slowly in front of the bolt factory, hoping for a lucky meeting. Goujet
must have been hoping to see her, too, for within five minutes he came
out as if by chance.

"You have been on an errand," he said, smiling. "And now you are on your
way home."

Actually Gervaise had her back toward Rue des Poissonniers. He only said
that for something to say. They walked together up toward Montmartre,
but without her taking his arm. They wanted to get a bit away from the
factory so as not to seem to be having a rendezvous in front of it. They
turned into a vacant lot between a sawmill and a button factory. It was
like a small green meadow. There was even a goat tied to a stake.

"It's strange," remarked Gervaise. "You'd think you were in the
country."

The went to sit under a dead tree. Gervaise placed the laundry basket by
her feet.

"Yes," Gervaise said, "I had an errand to do, and so I came out."

She felt deeply ashamed and was afraid to try to explain. Yet
she realized that they had come here to discuss it. It remained a
troublesome burden.

Then, all in a rush, with tears in her eyes, she told him of the
death that morning of Madame Bijard, her washerwoman. She had suffered
horrible agonies.

"Her husband caused it by kicking her in the stomach," she said in a
monotone. "He must have damaged her insides. _Mon Dieu!_ She was
in agony for three days with her stomach all swelled up. Plenty of
scoundrels have been sent to the galleys for less than that, but the
courts won't concern themselves with a wife-beater. Especially since the
woman said she had hurt herself falling. She wanted to save him from the
scaffold, but she screamed all night long before she died."

Goujet clenched his hands and remained silent.

"She weaned her youngest only two weeks ago, little Jules," Gervaise
went on. "That's lucky for the baby, he won't have to suffer. Still,
there's the child Lalie and she has two babies to look after. She isn't
eight yet, but she's already sensible. Her father will beat her now even
more than before."

Goujet gazed at her silently. Then, his lips trembling:

"You hurt me yesterday, yes, you hurt me badly."

Gervaise turned pale and clasped her hands as he continued.

"I thought it would happen. You should have told me, you should have
trusted me enough to confess what was happening, so as not to leave me
thinking that--"

Goujet could not finish the sentence. Gervaise stood up, realizing that
he thought she had gone back with Lantier as the neighbors asserted.
Stretching her arms toward him, she cried:

"No, no, I swear to you. He was pushing against me, trying to kiss me,
but his face never even touched mine. It's true, and that was the first
time he tried. Oh, I swear on my life, on the life of my children, oh,
believe me!"

Goujet was shaking his head. Gervaise said slowly:

"Monsieur Goujet, you know me well. You know that I do not lie. On my
word of honor, it never happened, and it never will, do you understand?
Never! I'd be the lowest of the low if it ever happened, and I wouldn't
deserve the friendship of an honest man like you."

She seemed so sincere that he took her hand and made her sit down again.
He could breathe freely; his heart rejoiced. This was the first time he
had ever held her hand like this. He pressed it in his own and they both
sat quietly for a time.

"I know your mother doesn't like me," Gervaise said in a low voice.
"Don't bother to deny it. We owe you so much money."

He squeezed her hand tightly. He didn't want to talk of money. Finally
he said:

"I've been thinking of something for a long time. You are not happy
where you are. My mother tells me things are getting worse for you.
Well, then, we can go away together."

She didn't understand at first and stared at him, startled by this
sudden declaration of a love that he had never mentioned.

Finally she asked:

"What do you mean?"

"We'll get away from here," he said, looking down at the ground.
"We'll go live somewhere else, in Belgium, if you wish. With both of us
working, we would soon be very comfortable."

Gervaise flushed. She thought she would have felt less shame if he
had taken her in his arms and kissed her. Goujet was an odd fellow,
proposing to elope, just the way it happens in novels. Well, she had
seen plenty of workingmen making up to married women, but they never
took them even as far as Saint-Denis.

"Ah, Monsieur Goujet," she murmured, not knowing what else to say.

"Don't you see?" he said. "There would only be the two of us. It annoys
me having others around."

Having regained her self-possession, however, she refused his proposal.

"It's impossible, Monsieur Goujet. It would be very wrong. I'm a married
woman and I have children. We'd soon regret it. I know you care for me,
and I care for you also, too much to let you do anything foolish. It's
much better to stay just as we are. We have respect for each other and
that's a lot. It's been a comfort to me many times. When people in our
situation stay on the straight, it is better in the end."

He nodded his head as he listened. He agreed with her and was unable
to offer any arguments. Suddenly he pulled her into his arms and kissed
her, crushing her. Then he let her go and said nothing more about their
love. She wasn't angry. She felt they had earned that small moment of
pleasure.

Goujet now didn't know what to do with his hands, so he went around
picking dandelions and tossing them into her basket. This amused him and
gradually soothed him. Gervaise was becoming relaxed and cheerful. When
they finally left the vacant lot they walked side by side and talked
of how much Etienne liked being at Lille. Her basket was full of yellow
dandelions.

Gervaise, at heart, did not feel as courageous when with Lantier as she
said. She was, indeed, perfectly resolved not to hear his flattery, even
with the slightest interest; but she was afraid, if ever he should touch
her, of her old cowardice, of that feebleness and gloominess into which
she allowed herself to glide, just to please people. Lantier, however,
did not avow his affection. He several times found himself alone with
her and kept quiet. He seemed to think of marrying the tripe-seller, a
woman of forty-five and very well preserved. Gervaise would talk of the
tripe-seller in Goujet's presence, so as to set his mind at ease. She
would say to Virginie and Madame Lerat, whenever they were ringing the
hatter's praises, that he could very well do without her admiration,
because all the women of the neighborhood were smitten with him.

Coupeau went braying about everywhere that Lantier was a friend and a
true one. People might jabber about them; he knew what he knew and did
not care a straw for their gossip, for he had respectability on his
side. When they all three went out walking on Sundays, he made his wife
and the hatter walk arm-in-arm before him, just by way of swaggering in
the street; and he watched the people, quite prepared to administer a
drubbing if anyone had ventured on the least joke. It was true that he
regarded Lantier as a bit of a high flyer. He accused him of avoiding
hard liquor and teased him because he could read and spoke like an
educated man. Still, he accepted him as a regular comrade. They
were ideally suited to each other and friendship between men is more
substantial than love for a woman.

Coupeau and Lantier were forever going out junketing together. Lantier
would now borrow money from Gervaise--ten francs, twenty francs at a
time, whenever he smelt there was money in the house. Then on those days
he would keep Coupeau away from his work, talk of some distant errand
and take him with him. Then seated opposite to each other in the corner
of some neighboring eating house, they would guzzle fancy dishes which
one cannot get at home and wash them down with bottles of expensive
wine. The zinc-worker would have preferred to booze in a less
pretentious place, but he was impressed by the aristocratic tastes of
Lantier, who would discover on the bill of fare dishes with the most
extraordinary names.

It was hard to understand a man so hard to please. Maybe it was from
being a southerner. Lantier didn't like anything too rich and argued
about every dish, sending back meat that was too salty or too peppery.
He hated drafts. If a door was left open, he complained loudly. At the
same time, he was very stingy, only giving the waiter a tip of two sous
for a meal of seven or eight francs. He was treated with respect in
spite of that.

The pair were well known along the exterior boulevards, from Batignolles
to Belleville. They would go to the Grand Rue des Batignolles to eat
tripe cooked in the Caen style. At the foot of Montmartre they obtained
the best oysters in the neighborhood at the "Town of Bar-le-Duc." When
they ventured to the top of the height as far as the "Galette Windmill"
they had a stewed rabbit. The "Lilacs," in the Rue des Martyrs, had a
reputation for their calf's head, whilst the restaurant of the "Golden
Lion" and the "Two Chestnut Trees," in the Chaussee Clignancourt, served
them stewed kidneys which made them lick their lips. Usually they went
toward Belleville where they had tables reserved for them at some places
of such excellent repute that you could order anything with your eyes
closed. These eating sprees were always surreptitious and the next day
they would refer to them indirectly while playing with the potatoes
served by Gervaise. Once Lantier brought a woman with him to the
"Galette Windmill" and Coupeau left immediately after dessert.

One naturally cannot both guzzle and work; so that ever since the hatter
was made one of the family, the zinc-worker, who was already pretty
lazy, had got to the point of never touching a tool. When tired of doing
nothing, he sometimes let himself be prevailed upon to take a job. Then
his comrade would look him up and chaff him unmercifully when he found
him hanging to his knotty cord like a smoked ham, and he would call
to him to come down and have a glass of wine. And that settled it. The
zinc-worker would send the job to blazes and commence a booze which
lasted days and weeks. Oh, it was a famous booze--a general review of
all the dram shops of the neighborhood, the intoxication of the morning
slept off by midday and renewed in the evening; the goes of "vitriol"
succeeded one another, becoming lost in the depths of the night,
like the Venetian lanterns of an illumination, until the last candle
disappeared with the last glass! That rogue of a hatter never kept on
to the end. He let the other get elevated, then gave him the slip and
returned home smiling in his pleasant way. He could drink a great deal
without people noticing it. When one got to know him well one could only
tell it by his half-closed eyes and his overbold behavior to women.
The zinc-worker, on the contrary, became quite disgusting, and could no
longer drink without putting himself into a beastly state.

Thus, towards the beginning of November, Coupeau went in for a booze
which ended in a most dirty manner, both for himself and the others. The
day before he had been offered a job. This time Lantier was full of fine
sentiments; he lauded work, because work ennobles a man. In the morning
he even rose before it was light, for he gravely wished to accompany his
friend to the workshop, honoring in him the workman really worthy of the
name. But when they arrived before the "Little Civet," which was just
opening, they entered to have a plum in brandy, only one, merely to
drink together to the firm observance of a good resolution. On a
bench opposite the counter, and with his back against the wall,
Bibi-the-Smoker was sitting smoking with a sulky look on his face.

"Hallo! Here's Bibi having a snooze," said Coupeau. "Are you down in the
dumps, old bloke?"

"No, no," replied the comrade, stretching his arm. "It's the employers
who disgust me. I sent mine to the right about yesterday. They're all
toads and scoundrels."

Bibi-the-Smoker accepted a plum. He was, no doubt, waiting there on that
bench for someone to stand him a drink. Lantier, however, took the part
of the employers; they often had some very hard times, as he who had
been in business himself well knew. The workers were a bad lot, forever
getting drunk! They didn't take their work seriously. Sometimes they
quit in the middle of a job and only returned when they needed something
in their pockets. Then Lantier would switch his attack to the employers.
They were nasty exploiters, regular cannibals. But he could sleep with a
clear conscience as he had always acted as a friend to his employees. He
didn't want to get rich the way others did.

"Let's be off, my boy," he said, speaking to Coupeau. "We must be going
or we shall be late."

Bibi-the-Smoker followed them, swinging his arms. Outside the sun
was scarcely rising, the pale daylight seemed dirtied by the muddy
reflection of the pavement; it had rained the night before and it
was very mild. The gas lamps had just been turned out; the Rue des
Poissonniers, in which shreds of night rent by the houses still floated,
was gradually filling with the dull tramp of the workmen descending
towards Paris. Coupeau, with his zinc-worker's bag slung over his
shoulder, walked along in the imposing manner of a fellow who feels in
good form for a change. He turned round and asked:

"Bibi, do you want a job. The boss told me to bring a pal if I could."

"No thanks," answered Bibi-the-Smoker; "I'm purging myself. You should
ask My-Boots. He was looking for something yesterday. Wait a minute.
My-Boots is most likely in there."

And as they reached the bottom of the street they indeed caught sight of
My-Boots inside Pere Colombe's. In spite of the early hour l'Assommoir
was flaring, the shutters down, the gas lighted. Lantier stood at the
door, telling Coupeau to make haste, because they had only ten minutes
left.

"What! You're going to work for that rascal Bourguignon?" yelled
My-Boots, when the zinc-worker had spoken to him. "You'll never catch
me in his hutch again! No, I'd rather go till next year with my tongue
hanging out of my mouth. But, old fellow, you won't stay three days, and
it's I who tell you so."

"Really now, is it such a dirty hole?" asked Coupeau anxiously.

"Oh, it's about the dirtiest. You can't move there. The ape's for ever
on your back. And such queer ways too--a missus who always says you're
drunk, a shop where you mustn't spit. I sent them to the right about the
first night, you know."

"Good; now I'm warned. I shan't stop there for ever. I'll just go this
morning to see what it's like; but if the boss bothers me, I'll catch
him up and plant him upon his missus, you know, bang together like two
fillets of sole!"

Then Coupeau thanked his friend for the useful information and shook his
hand. As he was about to leave, My-Boots cursed angrily. Was that lousy
Bourguignon going to stop them from having a drink? Weren't they free
any more? He could well wait another five minutes. Lantier came in to
share in the round and they stood together at the counter. My-Boots,
with his smock black with dirt and his cap flattened on his head had
recently been proclaimed king of pigs and drunks after he had eaten a
salad of live beetles and chewed a piece of a dead cat.

"Say there, old Borgia," he called to Pere Colombe, "give us some of
your yellow stuff, first class mule's wine."

And when Pere Colombe, pale and quiet in his blue-knitted waistcoat, had
filled the four glasses, these gentlemen tossed them off, so as not to
let the liquor get flat.

"That does some good when it goes down," murmured Bibi-the-Smoker.

The comic My-Boots had a story to tell. He was so drunk on the Friday
that his comrades had stuck his pipe in his mouth with a handful of
plaster. Anyone else would have died of it; he merely strutted about and
puffed out his chest.

"Do you gentlemen require anything more?" asked Pere Colombe in his oily
voice.

"Yes, fill us up again," said Lantier. "It's my turn."

Now they were talking of women. Bibi-the-Smoker had taken his girl to an
aunt's at Montrouge on the previous Sunday. Coupeau asked for the news
of the "Indian Mail," a washerwoman of Chaillot who was known in the
establishment. They were about to drink, when My-Boots loudly called to
Goujet and Lorilleux who were passing by. They came just to the door,
but would not enter. The blacksmith did not care to take anything. The
chainmaker, pale and shivering, held in his pocket the gold chains
he was going to deliver; and he coughed and asked them to excuse him,
saying that the least drop of brandy would nearly make him split his
sides.

"There are hypocrites for you!" grunted My-Boots. "I bet they have their
drinks on the sly."

And when he had poked his nose in his glass he attacked Pere Colombe.

"Vile druggist, you've changed the bottle! You know it's no good your
trying to palm your cheap stuff off on me."

The day had advanced; a doubtful sort of light lit up l'Assommoir, where
the landlord was turning out the gas. Coupeau found excuses for his
brother-in-law who could not stand drink, which after all was no crime.
He even approved Goujet's behavior for it was a real blessing never to
be thirsty. And as he talked of going off to his work Lantier, with his
grand air of a gentleman, sharply gave him a lesson. One at least stood
one's turn before sneaking off; one should not leave one's friends like
a mean blackguard, even when going to do one's duty.

"Is he going to badger us much longer about his work?" cried My-Boots.

"So this is your turn, sir?" asked Pere Colombe of Coupeau.

The latter paid. But when it came to Bibi-the-Smoker's turn he
whispered to the landlord who refused with a shake of the head. My-Boots
understood, and again set to abusing the old Jew Colombe. What! A rascal
like him dared to behave in that way to a comrade! Everywhere else one
could get drink on tick! It was only in such low boozing-dens that one
was insulted! The landlord remained calm, leaning his big fists on the
edge of the counter. He politely said:

"Lend the gentleman some money--that will be far simpler."

"_Mon Dieu!_ Yes, I'll lend him some," yelled My-Boots. "Here! Bibi,
throw this money in his face, the limb of Satan!"

Then, excited and annoyed at seeing Coupeau with his bag slung over his
shoulder, he continued speaking to the zinc-worker:

"You look like a wet-nurse. Drop your brat. It'll give you a hump-back."

Coupeau hesitated an instant; and then, quietly, as though he had only
made up his mind after considerable reflection, he laid his bag on the
ground saying:

"It's too late now. I'll go to Bourguignon's after lunch. I'll tell him
that the missus was ill. Listen, Pere Colombe, I'll leave my tools under
this seat and I'll call for them at twelve o'clock."

Lantier gave his blessing to this arrangement with an approving nod.
Labor was necessary, yes, but when you're with good friends, courtesy
comes first. Now the four had five hours of idleness before them. They
were full of noisy merriment. Coupeau was especially relieved. They had
another round and then went to a small bar that had a billiard table.

At first Lantier turned up his nose at this establishment because it
was rather shabby. So much liquor had been spilled on the billiard table
that the balls stuck to it. Once the game got started though, Lantier
recovered his good humor and began to flaunt his extraordinary knack
with a cue.

When lunch time came Coupeau had an idea. He stamped his feet and cried:

"We must go and fetch Salted-Mouth. I know where he's working. We'll
take him to Mere Louis' to have some pettitoes."

The idea was greeted with acclamation. Yes, Salted-Mouth, otherwise
Drink-without-Thirst, was no doubt in want of some pettitoes. They
started off. Coupeau took them to the bolt factory in the Rue Marcadet.
As they arrived a good half hour before the time the workmen came out,
the zinc-worker gave a youngster two sous to go in and tell Salted-Mouth
that his wife was ill and wanted him at once. The blacksmith made his
appearance, waddling in his walk, looking very calm, and scenting a
tuck-out.

"Ah! you jokers!" said he, as soon as he caught sight of them hiding in
a doorway. "I guessed it. Well, what are we going to eat?"

At mother Louis', whilst they sucked the little bones of the pettitoes,
they again fell to abusing the employers. Salted-Mouth, otherwise
Drink-without-Thirst, related that they had a most pressing order to
execute at the shop. Oh! the ape was pleasant for the time being. One
could be late, and he would say nothing; he no doubt considered himself
lucky when one turned up at all. At any rate, no boss would dare to
throw Salted-Mouth out the door, because you couldn't find lads of his
capacity any more. After the pettitoes they had an omelet. When each of
them had emptied his bottle, Mere Louis brought out some Auvergne wine,
thick enough to cut with a knife. The party was really warming up.

"What do you think is the ape's latest idea?" cried Salted-Mouth at
dessert. "Why, he's been and put a bell up in his shed! A bell! That's
good for slaves. Ah, well! It can ring to-day! They won't catch me again
at the anvil! For five days past I've been sticking there; I may give
myself a rest now. If he deducts anything, I'll send him to blazes."

"I," said Coupeau, with an air of importance, "I'm obliged to leave you;
I'm off to work. Yes, I promised my wife. Amuse yourselves; my spirit
you know remains with my pals."

The others chuffed him. But he seemed so decided that they all
accompanied him when he talked of going to fetch his tools from Pere
Colombe's. He took his bag from under the seat and laid it on the ground
before him whilst they had a final drink. But at one o'clock the party
was still standing drinks. Then Coupeau, with a bored gesture placed the
tools back again under the seat. They were in his way; he could not get
near the counter without stumbling against them. It was too absurd;
he would go to Bourguignon's on the morrow. The other four, who were
quarrelling about the question of salaries, were not at all surprised
when the zinc-worker, without any explanation, proposed a little stroll
on the Boulevard, just to stretch their legs. They didn't go very far.
They seemed to have nothing to say to each other out in the fresh air.
Without even consulting each other with so much as a nudge, they slowly
and instinctively ascended the Rue des Poissonniers, where they went to
Francois's and had a glass of wine out of the bottle. Lantier pushed his
comrades inside the private room at the back; it was a narrow place with
only one table in it, and was separated from the shop by a dull glazed
partition. He liked to do his drinking in private rooms because it
seemed more respectable. Didn't they like it here? It was as comfortable
as being at home. You could even take a nap here without being
embarrassed. He called for the newspaper, spread it out open before
him, and looked through it, frowning the while. Coupeau and My-Boots had
commenced a game of piquet. Two bottles of wine and five glasses were
scattered about the table.

They emptied their glasses. Then Lantier read out loud:

"A frightful crime has just spread consternation throughout the Commune
of Gaillon, Department of Seine-et-Marne. A son has killed his father
with blows from a spade in order to rob him of thirty sous."

They all uttered a cry of horror. There was a fellow whom they would
have taken great pleasure in seeing guillotined! No, the guillotine was
not enough; he deserved to be cut into little pieces. The story of an
infanticide equally aroused their indignation; but the hatter, highly
moral, found excuses for the woman, putting all the wrong on the back
of her husband; for after all, if some beast of a man had not put the
wretched woman into the way of bleak poverty, she could not have drowned
it in a water closet.

They were most delighted though by the exploit of a Marquis who, coming
out of a dance hall at two in the morning, had defended himself against
an attack by three blackguards on the Boulevard des Invalides. Without
taking off his gloves, he had disposed of the first two villains by
ramming his head into their stomachs, and then had marched the third one
off to the police. What a man! Too bad he was a noble.

"Listen to this now," continued Lantier. "Here's some society news:
'A marriage is arranged between the eldest daughter of the Countess de
Bretigny and the young Baron de Valancay, aide-de-camp to His Majesty.
The wedding trousseau will contain more than three hundred thousand
francs' worth of lace."

"What's that to us?" interrupted Bibi-the-Smoker. "We don't want to know
the color of her mantle. The girl can have no end of lace; nevertheless
she'll see the folly of loving."

As Lantier seemed about to continue his reading, Salted-Mouth, otherwise
Drink-without-Thirst, took the newspaper from him and sat upon it,
saying:

"Ah! no, that's enough! This is all the paper is good for."

Meanwhile, My-Boots, who had been looking at his hand, triumphantly
banged his fist down on the table. He scored ninety-three.

"I've got the Revolution!" he exulted.

"You're out of luck, comrade," the others told Coupeau.

They ordered two fresh bottles. The glasses were filled up again as fast
as they were emptied, the booze increased. Towards five o'clock it began
to get disgusting, so much so that Lantier kept very quiet, thinking of
how to give the others the slip; brawling and throwing the wine
about was no longer his style. Just then Coupeau stood up to make
the drunkard's sign of the cross. Touching his head he pronounced
Montpernasse, then Menilmonte as he brought his hand to his right
shoulder, Bagnolet giving himself a blow in the chest, and wound up by
saying stewed rabbit three times as he hit himself in the pit of the
stomach. Then the hatter took advantage of the clamor which greeted the
performance of this feat and quietly made for the door. His comrades did
not even notice his departure. He had already had a pretty good dose.
But once outside he shook himself and regained his self-possession; and
he quietly made for the shop, where he told Gervaise that Coupeau was
with some friends.

Two days passed by. The zinc-worker had not returned. He was reeling
about the neighborhood, but no one knew exactly where. Several persons,
however, stated that they had seen him at mother Baquet's, at the
"Butterfly," and at the "Little Old Man with a Cough." Only some said
that he was alone, whilst others affirmed that he was in the company of
seven or eight drunkards like himself. Gervaise shrugged her shoulders
in a resigned sort of way. _Mon Dieu!_ She just had to get used to it.
She never ran about after her old man; she even went out of her way if
she caught sight of him inside a wineshop, so as to not anger him; and
she waited at home till he returned, listening at night-time to hear if
he was snoring outside the door. He would sleep on a rubbish heap, or on
a seat, or in a piece of waste land, or across a gutter. On the morrow,
after having only badly slept off his booze of the day before, he would
start off again, knocking at the doors of all the consolation dealers,
plunging afresh into a furious wandering, in the midst of nips of
spirits, glasses of wine, losing his friends and then finding them
again, going regular voyages from which he returned in a state of
stupor, seeing the streets dance, the night fall and the day break,
without any other thought than to drink and sleep off the effects
wherever he happened to be. When in the latter state, the world was
ended so far as he was concerned. On the second day, however, Gervaise
went to Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir to find out something about him; he
had been there another five times, they were unable to tell her anything
more. All she could do was to take away his tools which he had left
under a seat.

In the evening Lantier, seeing that the laundress seemed very worried,
offered to take her to a music-hall, just by way of passing a pleasant
hour or two. She refused at first, she was in no mood for laughing.
Otherwise she would not have said, "no," for the hatter made the
proposal in too straightforward a manner for her to feel any mistrust.
He seemed to feel for her in quite a paternal way. Never before had
Coupeau slept out two nights running. So that in spite of herself, she
would go every ten minutes to the door, with her iron in her hand, and
look up and down the street to see if her old man was coming.

It might be that Coupeau had broken a leg, or fallen under a wagon and
been crushed and that might be good riddance to bad rubbish. She saw no
reason for cherishing in her heart any affection for a filthy character
like him, but it was irritating, all the same, to have to wonder every
night whether he would come in or not. When it got dark, Lantier again
suggested the music-hall, and this time she accepted. She decided it
would be silly to deny herself a little pleasure when her husband had
been out on the town for three days. If he wasn't coming in, then she
might as well go out herself. Let the entire dump burn up if it felt
like it. She might even put a torch to it herself. She was getting tired
of the boring monotony of her present life.

They ate their dinner quickly. Then, when she went off at eight o'clock,
arm-in-arm with the hatter, Gervaise told mother Coupeau and Nana to go
to bed at once. The shop was shut and the shutters up. She left by the
door opening into the courtyard and gave Madame Boche the key, asking
her, if her pig of a husband came home, to have the kindness to put him
to bed. The hatter was waiting for her under the big doorway, arrayed
in his best and whistling a tune. She had on her silk dress. They walked
slowly along the pavement, keeping close to each other, lighted up by
the glare from the shop windows which showed them smiling and talking
together in low voices.

The music-hall was in the Boulevard de Rochechouart. It had originally
been a little cafe and had been enlarged by means of a kind of wooden
shed erected in the courtyard. At the door a string of glass globes
formed a luminous porch. Tall posters pasted on boards stood upon the
ground, close to the gutter.

"Here we are," said Lantier. "To-night, first appearance of Mademoiselle
Amanda, serio-comic."

Then he caught sight of Bibi-the-Smoker, who was also reading the
poster. Bibi had a black eye; some punch he had run up against the day
before.

"Well! Where's Coupeau?" inquired the hatter, looking about. "Have you,
then, lost Coupeau?"

"Oh! long ago, since yesterday," replied the other. "There was a bit of
a free-for-all on leaving mother Baquet's. I don't care for fisticuffs.
We had a row, you know, with mother Baquet's pot-boy, because he wanted
to make us pay for a quart twice over. Then I left. I went and had a bit
of a snooze."

He was still yawning; he had slept eighteen hours at a stretch. He was,
moreover, quite sobered, with a stupid look on his face, and his jacket
smothered with fluff; for he had no doubt tumbled into bed with his
clothes on.

"And you don't know where my husband is, sir?" asked the laundress.

"Well, no, not a bit. It was five o'clock when we left mother Baquet's.
That's all I know about it. Perhaps he went down the street. Yes, I
fancy now that I saw him go to the 'Butterfly' with a coachman. Oh! how
stupid it is! Really, we deserve to be shot."

Lantier and Gervaise spent a very pleasant evening at the music-hall.
At eleven o'clock when the place closed, they strolled home without
hurrying themselves. The cold was quite sharp. People seemed to be in
groups. Some of the girls were giggling in the darkness as their men
pressed close to them. Lantier was humming one of Mademoiselle Amanda's
songs. Gervaise, with her head spinning from too much drink, hummed the
refrain with him. It had been very warm at the music-hall and the two
drinks she had had, along with all the smoke, had upset her stomach a
bit. She had been quite impressed with Mademoiselle Amanda. She wouldn't
dare to appear in public wearing so little, but she had to admit that
the lady had lovely skin.

"Everyone's asleep," said Gervaise, after ringing three times without
the Boches opening the door.

At length the door opened, but inside the porch it was very dark, and
when she knocked at the window of the concierge's room to ask for her
key, the concierge, who was half asleep, pulled out some rigmarole
which she could make nothing of at first. She eventually understood that
Poisson, the policeman, had brought Coupeau home in a frightful state,
and that the key was no doubt in the lock.

"The deuce!" murmured Lantier, when they had entered, "whatever has he
been up to here? The stench is abominable."

There was indeed a most powerful stench. As Gervaise went to look
for matches, she stepped into something messy. After she succeeded in
lighting a candle, a pretty sight met their eyes. Coupeau appeared to
have disgorged his very insides. The bed was splattered all over, so was
the carpet, and even the bureau had splashes on its sides. Besides that,
he had fallen from the bed where Poisson had probably thrown him, and
was snoring on the floor in the midst of the filth like a pig wallowing
in the mire, exhaling his foul breath through his open mouth. His grey
hair was straggling into the puddle around his head.

"Oh! the pig! the pig!" repeated Gervaise, indignant and exasperated.
"He's dirtied everything. No, a dog wouldn't have done that, even a dead
dog is cleaner."

They both hesitated to move, not knowing where to place their feet.
Coupeau had never before come home and put the bedroom into such a
shocking state. This sight was a blow to whatever affection his wife
still had for him. Previously she had been forgiving and not seriously
offended, even when he had been blind drunk. But this made her sick; it
was too much. She wouldn't have touched Coupeau for the world, and just
the thought of this filthy bum touching her caused a repugnance such as
she might have felt had she been required to sleep beside the corpse of
someone who had died from a terrible disease.

"Oh, I must get into that bed," murmured she. "I can't go and sleep in
the street. Oh! I'll crawl into it foot first."

She tried to step over the drunkard, but had to catch hold of a corner
of the chest of drawers to save herself from slipping in the mess.
Coupeau completely blocked the way to the bed. Then, Lantier, who
laughed to himself on seeing that she certainly could not sleep on her
own pillow that night, took hold of her hand, saying, in a low and angry
voice:

"Gervaise, he is a pig."

She understood what he meant and pulled her hand free. She sighed to
herself, and, in her bewilderment, addressed him familiarly, as in the
old days.

"No, leave me alone, Auguste. Go to your own bed. I'll manage somehow to
lie at the foot of the bed."

"Come, Gervaise, don't be foolish," resumed he. "It's too abominable;
you can't remain here. Come with me. He won't hear us. What are you
afraid of?"

"No," she replied firmly, shaking her head vigorously. Then, to show
that she would remain where she was, she began to take off her clothes,
throwing her silk dress over a chair. She was quickly in only her
chemise and petticoat. Well, it was her own bed. She wanted to sleep in
her own bed and made two more attempts to reach a clean corner of the
bed.

Lantier, having no intention of giving up, whispered things to her.

What a predicament she was in, with a louse of a husband that prevented
her from crawling under her own blankets and a low skunk behind her just
waiting to take advantage of the situation to possess her again. She
begged Lantier to be quiet. Turning toward the small room where Nana and
mother Coupeau slept, she listened anxiously. She could hear only steady
breathing.

"Leave me alone, Auguste," she repeated. "You'll wake them. Be
sensible."

Lantier didn't answer, but just smiled at her. Then he began to kiss her
on the ear just as in the old days.

Gervaise felt like sobbing. Her strength deserted her; she felt a great
buzzing in her ears, a violent tremor passed through her. She advanced
another step forward. And she was again obliged to draw back. It was not
possible, the disgust was too great. She felt on the verge of vomiting
herself. Coupeau, overpowered by intoxication, lying as comfortably as
though on a bed of down, was sleeping off his booze, without life in his
limbs, and with his mouth all on one side. The whole street might have
entered and laughed at him, without a hair of his body moving.

"Well, I can't help it," she faltered. "It's his own fault. _Mon Dieu!_
He's forcing me out of my own bed. I've no bed any longer. No, I can't
help it. It's his own fault."

She was trembling so she scarcely knew what she was doing. While Lantier
was urging her into his room, Nana's face appeared at one of the glass
panes in the door of the little room. The young girl, pale from sleep,
had awakened and gotten out of bed quietly. She stared at her
father lying in his vomit. Then, she stood watching until her mother
disappeared into Lantier's room. She watched with the intensity and the
wide-open eyes of a vicious child aflame with curiosity.


CHAPTER IX

That winter mother Coupeau nearly went off in one of her coughing fits.
Each December she could count on her asthma keeping her on her back for
two and three weeks at a time. She was no longer fifteen, she would be
seventy-three on Saint-Anthony's day. With that she was very rickety,
getting a rattling in her throat for nothing at all, though she was
plump and stout. The doctor said she would go off coughing, just time
enough to say: "Good-night, the candle's out!"

When she was in her bed mother Coupeau became positively unbearable. It
is true though that the little room in which she slept with Nana was not
at all gay. There was barely room for two chairs between the beds. The
wallpaper, a faded gray, hung loose in long strips. The small window
near the ceiling let in only a dim light. It was like a cavern. At
night, as she lay awake, she could listen to the breathing of the
sleeping Nana as a sort of distraction; but in the day-time, as there
was no one to keep her company from morning to night, she grumbled and
cried and repeated to herself for hours together, as she rolled her head
on the pillow:

"Good heavens! What a miserable creature I am! Good heavens! What a
miserable creature I am! They'll leave me to die in prison, yes, in
prison!"

As soon as anyone called, Virginie or Madame Boche, to ask after her
health, she would not reply directly, but immediately started on her
list of complaints: "Oh, I pay dearly for the food I eat here. I'd be
much better off with strangers. I asked for a cup of tisane and they
brought me an entire pot of hot water. It was a way of saying that I
drank too much. I brought Nana up myself and she scurries away in her
bare feet every morning and I never see her again all day. Then at night
she sleeps so soundly that she never wakes up to ask me if I'm in pain.
I'm just a nuisance to them. They're waiting for me to die. That will
happen soon enough. I don't even have a son any more; that laundress has
taken him from me. She'd beat me to death if she wasn't afraid of the
law."

Gervaise was indeed rather hasty at times. The place was going to the
dogs, everyone's temper was getting spoilt and they sent each other to
the right about for the least word. Coupeau, one morning that he had a
hangover, exclaimed: "The old thing's always saying she's going to die,
and yet she never does!" The words struck mother Coupeau to the heart.
They frequently complained of how much she cost them, observing that
they would save a lot of money when she was gone.

When at her worst that winter, one afternoon, when Madame Lorilleux and
Madame Lerat had met at her bedside, mother Coupeau winked her eye as
a signal to them to lean over her. She could scarcely speak. She rather
hissed than said in a low voice:

"It's becoming indecent. I heard them last night. Yes, Clump-clump and
the hatter. And they were kicking up such a row together! Coupeau's too
decent for her."

And she related in short sentences, coughing and choking between each,
that her son had come home dead drunk the night before. Then, as she
was not asleep, she was easily able to account for all the noises, of
Clump-clump's bare feet tripping over the tiled floor, the hissing voice
of the hatter calling her, the door between the two rooms gently closed,
and the rest. It must have lasted till daylight. She could not tell the
exact time, because, in spite of her efforts, she had ended by falling
into a dose.

"What's most disgusting is that Nana might have heard everything,"
continued she. "She was indeed restless all the night, she who usually
sleeps so sound. She tossed about and kept turning over as though there
had been some lighted charcoal in her bed."

The other two women did not seem at all surprised.

"Of course!" murmured Madame Lorilleux, "it probably began the very
first night. But as it pleases Coupeau, we've no business to interfere.
All the same, it's not very respectable."

"As for me," declared Madame Lerat through clenched teeth, "if I'd been
there, I'd have thrown a fright into them. I'd have shouted something,
anything. A doctor's maid told me once that the doctor had told her that
a surprise like that, at a certain moment, could strike a woman dead.
If she had died right there, that would have been well, wouldn't it? She
would have been punished right where she had sinned."

It wasn't long until the entire neighborhood knew that Gervaise visited
Lantier's room every night. Madame Lorilleux was loudly indignant,
calling her brother a poor fool whose wife had shamed him. And her poor
mother, forced to live in the midst of such horrors. As a result, the
neighbors blamed Gervaise. Yes, she must have led Lantier astray; you
could see it in her eyes. In spite of the nasty gossip, Lantier was
still liked because he was always so polite. He always had candy or
flowers to give the ladies. _Mon Dieu!_ Men shouldn't be expected to
push away women who threw themselves at them. There was no excuse for
Gervaise. She was a disgrace. The Lorilleuxs used to bring Nana up
to their apartment in order to find out more details from her, their
godchild. But Nana would put on her expression of innocent stupidity
and lower her long silky eyelashes to hide the fire in her eyes as she
replied.

In the midst of this general indignation, Gervaise lived quietly on,
feeling tired out and half asleep. At first she considered herself very
sinful and felt a disgust for herself. When she left Lantier's room she
would wash her hands and scrub herself as if trying to get rid of an
evil stain. If Coupeau then tried to joke with her, she would fly into a
passion, and run and shiveringly dress herself in the farthest corner
of the shop; neither would she allow Lantier near her soon after her
husband had kissed her. She would have liked to have changed her skin as
she changed men. But she gradually became accustomed to it. Soon it was
too much trouble to scrub herself each time. Her thirst for happiness
led her to enjoy as much as she could the difficult situation. She had
always been disposed to make allowances for herself, so why not for
others? She only wanted to avoid causing trouble. As long as the
household went along as usual, there was nothing to complain about.

Then, after all, she could not be doing anything to make Coupeau stop
drinking; matters were arranged so easily to the general satisfaction.
One is generally punished if one does what is not right. His
dissoluteness had gradually become a habit. Now it was as regular an
affair as eating and drinking. Each time Coupeau came home drunk, she
would go to Lantier's room. This was usually on Mondays, Tuesdays
and Wednesdays. Sometimes on other nights, if Coupeau was snoring too
loudly, she would leave in the middle of the night. It was not that she
cared more for Lantier, but just that she slept better in his room.

Mother Coupeau never dared speak openly of it. But after a quarrel,
when the laundress had bullied her, the old woman was not sparing in her
allusions. She would say that she knew men who were precious fools and
women who were precious hussies, and she would mutter words far
more biting, with the sharpness of language pertaining to an old
waistcoat-maker. The first time this had occurred Gervaise looked at her
straight in the face without answering. Then, also avoiding going into
details, she began to defend herself with reasons given in a general
sort of way. When a woman had a drunkard for a husband, a pig who lived
in filth, that woman was to be excused if she sought for cleanliness
elsewhere. Once she pointed out that Lantier was just as much her
husband as Coupeau was. Hadn't she known him since she was fourteen and
didn't she have children by him?

Anyway, she'd like to see anyone make trouble for her. She wasn't
the only one around the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or. Madame Vigouroux, the
coal-dealer had a merry dance from morning to night. Then there was the
grocer's wife, Madame Lehongre with her brother-in-law. _Mon Dieu!_ What
a slob of a fellow. He wasn't worth touching with a shovel. Even
the neat little clockmaker was said to have carried on with his own
daughter, a streetwalker. Ah, the entire neighborhood. Oh, she knew
plenty of dirt.

One day when mother Coupeau was more pointed than usual in her
observations, Gervaise had replied to her, clinching her teeth:

"You're confined to your bed and you take advantage of it. Listen!
You're wrong. You see that I behave nicely to you, for I've never thrown
your past life into your teeth. Oh! I know all about it. No, don't
cough. I've finished what I had to say. It's only to request you to mind
your own business, that's all!"

The old woman almost choked. On the morrow, Goujet having called about
his mother's washing when Gervaise happened to be out, mother Coupeau
called him to her and kept him some time seated beside her bed. She knew
all about the blacksmith's friendship, and had noticed that for some
time past he had looked dismal and wretched, from a suspicion of the
melancholy things that were taking place. So, for the sake of gossiping,
and out of revenge for the quarrel of the day before, she bluntly told
him the truth, weeping and complaining as though Gervaise's wicked
behavior did her some special injury. When Goujet quitted the little
room, he leant against the wall, almost stifling with grief. Then, when
the laundress returned home, mother Coupeau called to her that Madame
Goujet required her to go round with her clothes, ironed or not; and she
was so animated that Gervaise, seeing something was wrong, guessed
what had taken place and had a presentiment of the unpleasantness which
awaited her.

Very pale, her limbs already trembling, she placed the things in a
basket and started off. For years past she had not returned the Goujets
a sou of their money. The debt still amounted to four hundred and
twenty-five francs. She always spoke of her embarrassments and received
the money for the washing. It filled her with shame, because she seemed
to be taking advantage of the blacksmith's friendship to make a fool of
him. Coupeau, who had now become less scrupulous, would chuckle and say
that Goujet no doubt had fooled around with her a bit, and had so paid
himself. But she, in spite of the relations she had fallen into with
Coupeau, would indignantly ask her husband if he already wished to eat
of that sort of bread. She would not allow anyone to say a word against
Goujet in her presence; her affection for the blacksmith remained like
a last shred of her honor. Thus, every time she took the washing home to
those worthy people, she felt a spasm of her heart the moment she put a
foot on their stairs.

"Ah! it's you, at last!" said Madame Goujet sharply, on opening the door
to her. "When I'm in want of death, I'll send you to fetch him."

Gervaise entered, greatly embarrassed, not even daring to mutter an
excuse. She was no longer punctual, never came at the time arranged, and
would keep her customers waiting for days on end. Little by little she
was giving way to a system of thorough disorder.

"For a week past I've been expecting you," continued the lace-mender.
"And you tell falsehoods too; you send your apprentice to me with all
sorts of stories; you are then busy with my things, you will deliver
them the same evening, or else you've had an accident, the bundle's
fallen into a pail of water. Whilst all this is going on, I waste my
time, nothing turns up, and it worries me exceedingly. No, you're most
unreasonable. Come, what have you in your basket? Is everything there
now? Have you brought me the pair of sheets you've been keeping back
for a month past, and the chemise which was missing the last time you
brought home the washing?"

"Yes, yes," murmured Gervaise, "I have the chemise. Here it is."

But Madame Goujet cried out. That chemise was not hers, she would have
nothing to do with it. Her things were changed now; it was too bad! Only
the week before, there were two handkerchiefs which hadn't her mark on
them. It was not to her taste to have clothes coming from no one knew
where. Besides that, she liked to have her own things.

"And the sheets?" she resumed. "They're lost, aren't they? Well!
Woman, you must see about them, for I insist upon having them to-morrow
morning, do you hear?"

There was a silence which particularly bothered Gervaise when she
noticed that the door to Goujet's room was open. If he was in there, it
was most annoying that he should hear these just criticisms. She made
no reply, meekly bowing her head, and placing the laundry on the bed as
quickly as possible.

Matters became worse when Madame Goujet began to look over the things,
one by one. She took hold of them and threw them down again saying:

"Ah! you don't get them up nearly so well as you used to do. One
can't compliment you every day now. Yes, you've taken to mucking your
work--doing it in a most slovenly way. Just look at this shirt-front,
it's scorched, there's the mark of the iron on the plaits; and the
buttons have all been torn off. I don't know how you manage it, but
there's never a button left on anything. Oh! now, here's a petticoat
body which I shall certainly not pay you for. Look there! The dirt's
still on it, you've simply smoothed it over. So now the things are not
even clean!"

She stopped whilst she counted the different articles. Then she
exclaimed:

"What! This is all you've brought? There are two pairs of stockings, six
towels, a table-cloth, and several dish-cloths short. You're regularly
trifling with me, it seems! I sent word that you were to bring me
everything, ironed or not. If your apprentice isn't here on the hour
with the rest of the things, we shall fall out, Madame Coupeau, I warn
you."

At this moment Goujet coughed in his room. Gervaise slightly started.
_Mon Dieu!_ How she was treated before him. And she remained standing
in the middle of the rooms, embarrassed and confused and waiting for the
dirty clothes; but after making up the account Madame Goujet had quietly
returned to her seat near the window, and resumed the mending of a lace
shawl.

"And the dirty things?" timidly inquired the laundress.

"No, thank you," replied the old woman, "there will be no laundry this
week."

Gervaise turned pale. She was no longer to have the washing. Then she
quite lost her head; she was obliged to sit down on a chair, for
her legs were giving way under her. She did not attempt to vindicate
herself. All that she would find to say was:

"Is Monsieur Goujet ill?"

Yes, he was not well. He had been obliged to come home instead of
returning to the forge, and he had gone to lie down on his bed to get a
rest. Madame Goujet talked gravely, wearing her black dress as usual
and her white face framed in her nun-like coif. The pay at the forge had
been cut again. It was now only seven francs a day because the machines
did so much of the work. This forced her to save money every way she
could. She would do her own washing from now on. It would naturally have
been very helpful if the Coupeaus had been able to return her the money
lent them by her son; but she was not going to set the lawyers on them,
as they were unable to pay. As she was talking about the debt, Gervaise
lowered her eyes in embarrassment.

"All the same," continued the lace-maker, "by pinching yourselves a
little you could manage to pay it off. For really now, you live very
well; and spend a great deal, I'm sure. If you were only to pay off ten
francs a month--"

She was interrupted by the sound of Goujet's voice as he called:

"Mamma! Mamma!"

And when she returned to her seat, which was almost immediately, she
changed the conversation. The blacksmith had doubtless begged her not to
ask Gervaise for money; but in spite of herself she again spoke of the
debt at the expiration of five minutes. Oh! She had foreseen long
ago what was now happening. Coupeau was drinking all that the laundry
business brought in and dragging his wife down with him. Her son would
never have loaned the money if he had only listened to her. By now he
would have been married, instead of miserably sad with only unhappiness
to look forward to for the rest of his life. She grew quite stern and
angry, even accusing Gervaise of having schemed with Coupeau to take
advantage of her foolish son. Yes, some women were able to play the
hypocrite for years, but eventually the truth came out.

"Mamma! Mamma!" again called Goujet, but louder this time.

She rose from her seat and when she returned she said, as she resumed
her lace mending:

"Go in, he wishes to see you."

Gervaise, all in a tremble left the door open. This scene filled her
with emotion because it was like an avowal of their affection before
Madame Goujet. She again beheld the quiet little chamber, with its
narrow iron bedstead, and papered all over with pictures, the whole
looking like the room of some girl of fifteen. Goujet's big body was
stretched on the bed. Mother Coupeau's disclosures and the things his
mother had been saying seemed to have knocked all the life out of his
limbs. His eyes were red and swollen, his beautiful yellow beard was
still wet. In the first moment of rage he must have punched away at
his pillow with his terrible fists, for the ticking was split and the
feathers were coming out.

"Listen, mamma's wrong," said he to the laundress in a voice that was
scarcely audible. "You owe me nothing. I won't have it mentioned again."

He had raised himself up and was looking at her. Big tears at once
filled his eyes.

"Do you suffer, Monsieur Goujet?" murmured she. "What is the matter with
you? Tell me!"

"Nothing, thanks. I tired myself with too much work yesterday. I will
rest a bit."

Then, his heart breaking, he could not restrain himself and burst out:

"_Mon Dieu!_ Ah! _Mon Dieu!_ It was never to be--never. You swore it.
And now it is--it is! Ah, it pains me too much, leave me!"

And with his hand he gently and imploringly motioned to her to go. She
did not draw nearer to the bed. She went off as he requested her to,
feeling stupid, unable to say anything to soothe him. When in the other
room she took up her basket; but she did not go home. She stood there
trying to find something to say. Madame Goujet continued her mending
without raising her head. It was she who at length said:

"Well! Good-night; send me back my things and we will settle up
afterwards."

"Yes, it will be best so--good-night," stammered Gervaise.

She took a last look around the neatly arranged room and thought as she
shut the door that she seemed to be leaving some part of her better self
behind. She plodded blindly back to the laundry, scarcely knowing where
she was going.

When Gervaise arrived, she found mother Coupeau out of her bed, sitting
on a chair by the stove. Gervaise was too tired to scold her. Her bones
ached as though she had been beaten and she was thinking that her life
was becoming too hard to bear. Surely a quick death was the only escape
from the pain in her heart.

After this, Gervaise became indifferent to everything. With a vague
gesture of her hand she would send everybody about their business. At
each fresh worry she buried herself deeper in her only pleasure, which
was to have her three meals a day. The shop might have collapsed.
So long as she was not beneath it, she would have gone off willingly
without a chemise to her back. And the little shop was collapsing, not
suddenly, but little by little, morning and evening. One by one
the customers got angry, and sent their washing elsewhere. Monsieur
Madinier, Mademoiselle Remanjou, the Boches themselves had returned to
Madame Fauconnier, where they could count on great punctuality. One
ends by getting tired of asking for a pair of stockings for three weeks
straight, and of putting on shirts with grease stains dating from the
previous Sunday. Gervaise, without losing a bite, wished them a pleasant
journey, and spoke her mind about them, saying that she was precious
glad she would no longer have to poke her nose into their filth. The
entire neighborhood could quit her; that would relieve her of the piles
of stinking junk and give her less work to do.

Now her only customers were those who didn't pay regularly, the
street-walkers, and women like Madame Gaudron, whose laundry smelled so
bad that not one of the laundresses on the Rue Neuve would take it. She
had to let Madame Putois go, leaving only her apprentice, squint-eyed
Augustine, who seemed to grow more stupid as time passed. Frequently
there was not even enough work for the two of them and they sat on
stools all afternoon doing nothing.

Whilst idleness and poverty entered, dirtiness naturally entered also.
One would never have recognised that beautiful blue shop, the color
of heaven, which had once been Gervaise's pride. Its window-frames and
panes, which were never washed, were covered from top to bottom with the
splashes of the passing vehicles. On the brass rods in the windows
were displayed three grey rags left by customers who had died in the
hospital. And inside it was more pitiable still; the dampness of the
clothes hung up at the ceiling to dry had loosed all the wallpaper; the
Pompadour chintz hung in strips like cobwebs covered with dust; the big
stove, broken and in holes from the rough use of the poker, looked
in its corner like the stock in trade of a dealer in old iron; the
work-table appeared as though it had been used by a regiment, covered as
it was with wine and coffee stains, sticky with jam, greasy from spilled
gravy.

Gervaise was so at ease among it all that she never even noticed the
shop was getting filthy. She became used to it all, just as she got
used to wearing torn skirts and no longer washing herself carefully. The
disorder was like a warm nest.

Her own ease was her sole consideration; she did not care a pin for
anything else. The debts, though still increasing, no longer troubled
her. Her honesty gradually deserted her; whether she would be able to
pay or not was altogether uncertain, and she preferred not to think
about it. When her credit was stopped at one shop, she would open
an account at some other shop close by. She was in debt all over the
neighborhood, she owed money every few yards. To take merely the Rue de
la Goutte-d'Or, she no longer dared pass in front of the grocer's, nor
the charcoal-dealer's, nor the greengrocer's; and this obliged her,
whenever she required to be at the wash-house, to go round by the
Rue des Poissonniers, which was quite ten minutes out of her way. The
tradespeople came and treated her as a swindler. One evening the dealer
from whom she had purchased Lantier's furniture made a scene in the
street. Scenes like this upset her at the time, but were soon forgotten
and never spoiled her appetite. What a nerve to bother her like that
when she had no money to pay. They were all robbers anyway and it served
them right to have to wait. Well, she'd have to go bankrupt, but she
didn't intend to fret about it now.

Meanwhile mother Coupeau had recovered. For another year the household
jogged along. During the summer months there was naturally a little more
work--the white petticoats and the cambric dresses of the street-walkers
of the exterior Boulevard. The catastrophe was slowly approaching; the
home sank deeper into the mire every week; there were ups and downs,
however--days when one had to rub one's stomach before the empty
cupboard, and others when one ate veal enough to make one burst. Mother
Coupeau was for ever being seen in the street, hiding bundles under
her apron, and strolling in the direction of the pawn-place in the Rue
Polonceau. She strutted along with the air of a devotee going to mass;
for she did not dislike these errands; haggling about money amused her;
this crying up of her wares like a second-hand dealer tickled the old
woman's fancy for driving hard bargains. The clerks knew her well and
called her "Mamma Four Francs," because she always demanded four francs
when they offered three, on bundles no bigger than two sous' worth of
butter.

At the start, Gervaise took advantage of good weeks to get things back
from the pawn-shops, only to put them back again the next week. Later
she let things go altogether, selling her pawn tickets for cash.

One thing alone gave Gervaise a pang--it was having to pawn her clock to
pay an acceptance for twenty francs to a bailiff who came to seize her
goods. Until then, she had sworn rather to die of hunger than to
part with her clock. When mother Coupeau carried it away in a little
bonnet-box, she sunk on to a chair, without a particle of strength left
in her arms, her eyes full of tears, as though a fortune was being torn
from her. But when mother Coupeau reappeared with twenty-five francs,
the unexpected loan, the five francs profit consoled her; she at once
sent the old woman out again for four sous' worth of brandy in a glass,
just to toast the five-franc piece.

The two of them would often have a drop together, when they were on good
terms with each other. Mother Coupeau was very successful at bringing
back a full glass hidden in her apron pocket without spilling a drop.
Well, the neighbors didn't need to know, did they. But the neighbors
knew perfectly well. This turned the neighborhood even more against
Gervaise. She was devouring everything; a few more mouthfuls and the
place would be swept clean.

In the midst of this general demolishment, Coupeau continued to prosper.
The confounded tippler was as well as well could be. The sour wine and
the "vitriol" positively fattened him. He ate a great deal, and laughed
at that stick Lorilleux, who accused drink of killing people, and
answered him by slapping himself on the stomach, the skin of which was
so stretched by the fat that it resembled the skin of a drum. He would
play him a tune on it, the glutton's vespers, with rolls and beats loud
enough to have made a quack's fortune. Lorilleux, annoyed at not having
any fat himself, said that it was soft and unhealthy. Coupeau ignored
him and went on drinking more and more, saying it was for his health's
sake.

His hair was beginning to turn grey and his face to take on the
drunkard's hue of purplish wine. He continued to act like a mischievous
child. Well, it wasn't his concern if there was nothing about the
place to eat. When he went for weeks without work he became even more
difficult.

Still, he was always giving Lantier friendly slaps on the back. People
swore he had no suspicion at all. Surely something terrible would happen
if he ever found out. Madame Lerat shook her head at this. His sister
said she had known of husbands who didn't mind at all.

Lantier wasn't wasting away either. He took great care of himself,
measuring his stomach by the waist-board of his trousers, with the
constant dread of having to loosen the buckle or draw it tighter; for
he considered himself just right, and out of coquetry neither desired to
grow fatter nor thinner. That made him hard to please in the matter of
food, for he regarded every dish from the point of view of keeping his
waist as it was. Even when there was not a sou in the house, he required
eggs, cutlets, light and nourishing things. Since he was sharing the
lady of the house, he considered himself to have a half interest in
everything and would pocket any franc pieces he saw lying about. He kept
Gervaise running here and there and seemed more at home than Coupeau.
Nana was his favorite because he adored pretty little girls, but he paid
less and less attention to Etienne, since boys, according to him, ought
to know how to take care of themselves. If anyone came to see Coupeau
while he was out, Lantier, in shirt sleeves and slippers, would come
out of the back room with the bored expression of a husband who has been
disturbed, saying he would answer for Coupeau as it was all the same.

Between these two gentlemen, Gervaise had nothing to laugh about. She
had nothing to complain of as regards her health, thank goodness! She
was growing too fat. But two men to coddle was often more than she could
manage. Ah! _Mon Dieu!_ one husband is already too much for a woman! The
worst was that they got on very well together, the rogues. They never
quarreled; they would chuckle in each other's faces, as they sat of
an evening after dinner, their elbows on the table; they would rub up
against one another all the live-long day, like cats which seek and
cultivate their pleasure. The days when they came home in a rage, it was
on her that they vented it. Go it! hammer away at the animal! She had
a good back; it made them all the better friends when they yelled
together. And it never did for her to give them tit-for-tat. In the
beginning, whenever one of them yelled at her, she would appeal to the
other, but this seldom worked. Coupeau had a foul mouth and called her
horrible things. Lantier chose his insults carefully, but they often
hurt her even more.

But one can get used to anything. Soon their nasty remarks and all the
wrongs done her by these two men slid off her smooth skin like water off
a duck's back. It was even easier to have them angry, because when they
were in good moods they bothered her too much, never giving her time to
get a bonnet ironed.

Yes, Coupeau and Lantier were wearing her out. The zinc-worker, sure
enough, lacked education; but the hatter had too much, or at least he
had education in the same way that dirty people have a white shirt, with
uncleanliness underneath it. One night, she dreamt that she was on the
edge of a wall; Coupeau was knocking her into it with a blow of his
fist, whilst Lantier was tickling her in the ribs to make her fall
quicker. Well! That resembled her life. It was no surprise if she was
becoming slipshod. The neighbors weren't fair in blaming her for the
frightful habits she had fallen into. Sometimes a cold shiver ran
through her, but things could have been worse, so she tried to make
the best of it. Once she had seen a play in which the wife detested
her husband and poisoned him for the sake of her lover. Wasn't it more
sensible for the three of them to live together in peace? In spite of
her debts and poverty she thought she was quite happy and could live in
peace if only Coupeau and Lantier would stop yelling at her so much.

Towards the autumn, unfortunately, things became worse. Lantier
pretended he was getting thinner, and pulled a longer face over the
matter every day. He grumbled at everything, sniffed at the dishes of
potatoes--a mess he could not eat, he would say, without having the
colic. The least jangling now turned to quarrels, in which they accused
one another of being the cause of all their troubles, and it was a devil
of a job to restore harmony before they all retired for the night.

Lantier sensed a crisis coming and it exasperated him to realise that
this place was already so thoroughly cleaned out that he could see the
day coming when he'd have to take his hat and seek elsewhere for his bed
and board. He had become accustomed to this little paradise where he was
nicely treated by everybody. He should have blamed himself for eating
himself out of house and home, but instead he blamed the Coupeaus for
letting themselves be ruined in less than two years. He thought Gervaise
was too extravagant. What was going to happen to them now?

One evening in December they had no dinner at all. There was not a
radish left. Lantier, who was very glum, went out early, wandering about
in search of some other den where the smell of the kitchen would bring
a smile to one's face. He would now remain for hours beside the stove
wrapt in thought. Then, suddenly, he began to evince a great friendship
for the Poissons. He no longer teased the policeman and even went so far
as to concede that the Emperor might not be such a bad fellow after all.
He seemed to especially admire Virginie. No doubt he was hoping to board
with them. Virginie having acquainted him with her desire to set up in
some sort of business, he agreed with everything she said, and declared
that her idea was a most brilliant one. She was just the person for
trade--tall, engaging and active. Oh! she would make as much as she
liked. The capital had been available for some time, thanks to an
inheritance from an aunt. Lantier told her of all the shopkeepers who
were making fortunes. The time was right for it; you could sell anything
these days. Virginie, however, hesitated; she was looking for a shop
that was to be let, she did not wish to leave the neighborhood.
Then Lantier would take her into corners and converse with her in an
undertone for ten minutes at a time. He seemed to be urging her to do
something in spite of herself; and she no longer said "no," but appeared
to authorize him to act. It was as a secret between them, with winks and
words rapidly exchanged, some mysterious understanding which betrayed
itself even in their handshakings.

From this moment the hatter would covertly watch the Coupeaus whilst
eating their dry bread, and becoming very talkative again, would deafen
them with his continual jeremiads. All day long Gervaise moved in the
midst of that poverty which he so obligingly spread out. _Mon Dieu!_ he
wasn't thinking of himself; he would go on starving with his friends as
long as they liked. But look at it with common sense. They owed at least
five hundred francs in the neighborhood. Besides which, they were two
quarters rent behind with the rent, which meant another two hundred and
fifty francs; the landlord, Monsieur Marescot, even spoke of having them
evicted if they did not pay him by the first of January. Finally the
pawn-place had absorbed everything, one could not have got together
three francs' worth of odds and ends, the clearance had been so
complete; the nails remained in the walls and that was all and perhaps
there were two pounds of them at three sous the pound. Gervaise,
thoroughly entangled in it all, her nerves quite upset by this
calculation, would fly into a passion and bang her fists down upon the
table or else she would end by bursting into tears like a fool. One
night she exclaimed:

"I'll be off to-morrow! I prefer to put the key under the door and to
sleep on the pavement rather than continue to live in such frights."

"It would be wiser," said Lantier slyly, "to get rid of the lease if you
could find someone to take it. When you are both decided to give up the
shop--"

She interrupted him more violently:

"At once, at once! Ah! it'll be a good riddance!"

Then the hatter became very practical. On giving up the lease one
would no doubt get the new tenant to be responsible for the two overdue
quarters. And he ventured to mention the Poissons, he reminded them
that Virginie was looking for a shop; theirs would perhaps suit her. He
remembered that he had heard her say she longed for one just like it.
But when Virginie's name was mentioned the laundress suddenly regained
her composure. We'll see how things go along. When you're angry you
always talk of quitting, but it isn't so easy when you just stop to
think about it.

During the following days it was in vain that Lantier harped upon the
subject. Gervaise replied that she had seen herself worse off and had
pulled through. How would she be better off when she no longer had her
shop? That would not put bread into their mouths. She would, on the
contrary, engage some fresh workwomen and work up a fresh connection.

Lantier made the mistake of mentioning Virginie again. This stirred
Gervaise into furious obstinacy. No! Never! She had always had her
suspicions of what was in Virginie's heart. Virginie only wanted to
humiliate her. She would rather turn it over to the first woman to come
in from the street than to that hypocrite who had been waiting for
years to see her fail. Yes, Virginie still had in mind that fight in the
wash-house. Well, she'd be wiser to forget about it, unless she wanted
another one now.

In the face of this flow of angry retorts, Lantier began by attacking
Gervaise. He called her stupid and stuck-up. He even went so far as to
abuse Coupeau, accusing him of not knowing how to make his wife respect
his friend. Then, realising that passion would compromise everything, he
swore that he would never again interest himself in the affairs of
other people, for one always got more kicks than thanks; and indeed he
appeared to have given up all idea of talking them into parting with
the lease, but he was really watching for a favorable opportunity of
broaching the subject again and of bringing the laundress round to his
views.

January had now arrived; the weather was wretched, both damp and cold.
Mother Coupeau, who had coughed and choked all through December, was
obliged to take to her bed after Twelfth-night. It was her annuity,
which she expected every winter. This winter though, those around her
said she'd never come out of her bedroom except feet first. Indeed, her
gaspings sounded like a death rattle. She was still fat, but one eye was
blind and one side of her face was twisted. The doctor made one call and
didn't return again. They kept giving her tisanes and going to check on
her every hour. She could no longer speak because her breathing was so
difficult.

One Monday evening, Coupeau came home totally drunk. Ever since his
mother was in danger, he had lived in a continual state of deep emotion.
When he was in bed, snoring soundly, Gervaise walked about the place for
a while. She was in the habit of watching over mother Coupeau during a
part of the night. Nana had showed herself very brave, always sleeping
beside the old woman, and saying that if she heard her dying, she would
wake everyone. Since the invalid seemed to be sleeping peacefully this
night, Gervaise finally yielded to the appeals of Lantier to come into
his room for a little rest. They only kept a candle alight, standing
on the ground behind the wardrobe. But towards three o'clock Gervaise
abruptly jumped out of bed, shivering and oppressed with anguish. She
thought she had felt a cold breath pass over her body. The morsel
of candle had burnt out; she tied on her petticoats in the dark, all
bewildered, and with feverish hands. It was not till she got into the
little room, after knocking up against the furniture, that she was able
to light a small lamp. In the midst of the oppressive silence of
night, the zinc-worker's snores alone sounded as two grave notes. Nana,
stretched on her back, was breathing gently between her pouting lips.
And Gervaise, holding down the lamp which caused big shadows to dance
about the room, cast the light on mother Coupeau's face, and beheld it
all white, the head lying on the shoulder, the eyes wide open. Mother
Coupeau was dead.

Gently, without uttering a cry, icy cold yet prudent, the laundress
returned to Lantier's room. He had gone to sleep again. She bent over
him and murmured:

"Listen, it's all over, she's dead."

Heavy with sleep, only half awake, he grunted at first:

"Leave me alone, get into bed. We can't do her any good if she's dead."

Then he raised himself on his elbow and asked:

"What's the time?"

"Three o'clock."

"Only three o'clock! Get into bed quick. You'll catch cold. When it's
daylight, we'll see what's to be done."

But she did not listen to him, she dressed herself completely. Bundling
himself in the blankets, Lantier muttered about how stubborn women were.
What was the hurry to announce a death in the house? He was irritated at
having his sleep spoiled by such gloomy matters.

Meanwhile, Gervaise had moved her things back into her own room. Then
she felt free to sit down and cry, no longer fearful of being caught
in Lantier's room. She had been fond of mother Coupeau and felt a deep
sorrow at her loss. She sat, crying by herself, her sobs loud in the
silence, but Coupeau never stirred. She had spoken to him and even
shaken him and finally decided to let him sleep. He would be more of a
nuisance if he woke up.

On returning to the body, she found Nana sitting up in bed rubbing her
eyes. The child understood, and with her vicious urchin's curiosity,
stretched out her neck to get a better view of her grandmother; she
said nothing but she trembled slightly, surprised and satisfied in the
presence of this death which she had been promising herself for two days
past, like some nasty thing hidden away and forbidden to children; and
her young cat-like eyes dilated before that white face all emaciated at
the last gasp by the passion of life, she felt that tingling in her back
which she felt behind the glass door when she crept there to spy on what
was no concern of chits like her.

"Come, get up," said her mother in a low voice. "You can't remain here."

She regretfully slid out of bed, turning her head round and not taking
her eyes off the corpse. Gervaise was much worried about her, not
knowing where to put her till day-time. She was about to tell her to
dress herself, when Lantier, in his trousers and slippers, rejoined her.
He could not get to sleep again, and was rather ashamed of his behavior.
Then everything was arranged.

"She can sleep in my bed," murmured he. "She'll have plenty of room."

Nana looked at her mother and Lantier with her big, clear eyes and put
on her stupid air, the same as on New Year's day when anyone made her a
present of a box of chocolate candy. And there was certainly no need
for them to hurry her. She trotted off in her night-gown, her bare feet
scarcely touching the tiled floor; she glided like a snake into the bed,
which was still quite warm, and she lay stretched out and buried in it,
her slim body scarcely raising the counterpane. Each time her mother
entered the room she beheld her with her eyes sparkling in her
motionless face--not sleeping, not moving, very red with excitement, and
appearing to reflect on her own affairs.

Lantier assisted Gervaise in dressing mother Coupeau--and it was not an
easy matter, for the body was heavy. One would never have thought that
that old woman was so fat and so white. They put on her stockings, a
white petticoat, a short linen jacket and a white cap--in short, the
best of her linen. Coupeau continued snoring, a high note and a low one,
the one sharp, the other flat. One could almost have imagined it to be
church music accompanying the Good Friday ceremonies. When the corpse
was dressed and properly laid out on the bed, Lantier poured himself out
a glass of wine, for he felt quite upset. Gervaise searched the chest
of drawers to find a little brass crucifix which she had brought
from Plassans, but she recollected that mother Coupeau had, in all
probability, sold it herself. They had lighted the stove, and they
passed the rest of the night half asleep on chairs, finishing the bottle
of wine that had been opened, worried and sulking, as though it was
their own fault.

Towards seven o'clock, before daylight, Coupeau at length awoke. When
he learnt his loss he at first stood still with dry eyes, stuttering
and vaguely thinking that they were playing him some joke. Then he threw
himself on the ground and went and knelt beside the corpse. His kissed
it and wept like a child, with such a copious flow of tears that he
quite wetted the sheet with wiping his cheeks. Gervaise had recommenced
sobbing, deeply affected by her husband's grief, and the best of friends
with him again. Yes, he was better at heart than she thought he was.
Coupeau's despair mingled with a violent pain in his head. He passed
his fingers through his hair. His mouth was dry, like on the morrow of
a booze, and he was still a little drunk in spite of his ten hours of
sleep. And, clenching his fist, he complained aloud. _Mon Dieu!_ she was
gone now, his poor mother, whom he loved so much! Ah! what a headache he
had; it would settle him! It was like a wig of fire! And now they were
tearing out his heart! No, it was not just of fate thus to set itself
against one man!

"Come, cheer up, old fellow," said Lantier, raising him from the ground;
"you must pull yourself together."

He poured him out a glass of wine, but Coupeau refused to drink.

"What's the matter with me? I've got copper in my throat. It's mamma.
When I saw her I got a taste of copper in my mouth. Mamma! _Mon Dieu!_
mamma, mamma!"

And he recommenced crying like a child. Then he drank the glass of wine,
hoping to put out the flame searing his breast. Lantier soon left, using
the excuse of informing the family and filing the necessary declaration
at the town hall. Really though, he felt the need of fresh air, and so
he took his time, smoking cigarettes and enjoying the morning air.
When he left Madame Lerat's house, he went into a dairy place on Les
Batignolles for a cup of hot coffee and remained there an hour, thinking
things over.

Towards nine o'clock the family were all united in the shop, the
shutters of which were kept up. Lorilleux did not cry. Moreover he had
some pressing work to attend to, and he returned almost directly to his
room, after having stalked about with a face put on for the occasion.
Madame Lorilleux and Madame Lerat embraced the Coupeaus and wiped their
eyes, from which a few tears were falling. But Madame Lorilleux, after
giving a hasty glance round the death chamber, suddenly raised her voice
to say that it was unheard of, that one never left a lighted lamp beside
a corpse; there should be a candle, and Nana was sent to purchase a
packet of tall ones. Ah, well! It made one long to die at Clump-clump's,
she laid one out in such a fine fashion! What a fool, not even to know
what to do with a corpse! Had she then never buried anyone in her life?
Madame Lerat had to go to the neighbors and borrow a crucifix; she
brought one back which was too big, a cross of black wood with a Christ
in painted cardboard fastened to it, which covered the whole of mother
Coupeau's chest, and seemed to crush her under its weight. Then they
tried to obtain some holy water, but no one had any, and it was again
Nana who was sent to the church to bring some back in a bottle. In
practically no time the tiny room presented quite another appearance;
on a little table a candle was burning beside a glass full of holy water
into which a sprig of boxwood was dipped. Now, if anyone came, it would
at least look decent. And they arranged the chairs in a circle in the
shop for receiving people.

Lantier only returned at eleven o'clock. He had been to the undertaker's
for information.

"The coffin is twelve francs," said he. "If you desire a mass, it
will be ten francs more. Then there's the hearse, which is charged for
according to the ornaments."

"Oh! it's quite unnecessary to be fancy," murmured Madame Lorilleux,
raising her head in a surprised and anxious manner. "We can't bring
mamma to life again, can we? One must do according to one's means."

"Of course, that's just what I think," resumed the hatter. "I merely
asked the prices to guide you. Tell me what you desire; and after lunch
I will give the orders."

They were talking in lowered voices. Only a dim light came into the room
through the cracks in the shutters. The door to the little room stood
half open, and from it came the deep silence of death. Children's
laughter echoed in the courtyard. Suddenly they heard the voice of
Nana, who had escaped from the Boches to whom she had been sent. She was
giving commands in her shrill voice and the children were singing a song
about a donkey.

Gervaise waited until it was quiet to say:

"We're not rich certainly; but all the same we wish to act decently. If
mother Coupeau has left us nothing, it's no reason for pitching her into
the ground like a dog. No; we must have a mass, and a hearse with a few
ornaments."

"And who will pay for them?" violently inquired Madame Lorilleux. "Not
we, who lost some money last week; and you either, as you're stumped.
Ah! you ought, however, to see where it has led you, this trying to
impress people!"

Coupeau, when consulted, mumbled something with a gesture of profound
indifference, and then fell asleep again on his chair. Madame Lerat said
that she would pay her share. She was of Gervaise's opinion, they should
do things decently. Then the two of them fell to making calculations
on a piece of paper: in all, it would amount to about ninety francs,
because they decided, after a long discussion, to have a hearse
ornamented with a narrow scallop.

"We're three," concluded the laundress. "We'll give thirty francs each.
It won't ruin us."

But Madame Lorilleux broke out in a fury.

"Well! I refuse, yes, I refuse! It's not for the thirty francs. I'd give
a hundred thousand, if I had them, and if it would bring mamma to life
again. Only, I don't like vain people. You've got a shop, you only dream
of showing off before the neighborhood. We don't fall in with it, we
don't. We don't try to make ourselves out what we are not. Oh! you can
manage it to please yourself. Put plumes on the hearse if it amuses
you."

"No one asks you for anything," Gervaise ended by answering. "Even
though I should have to sell myself, I'll not have anything to reproach
myself with. I've fed mother Coupeau without your help, and I can
certainly bury her without your help also. I already once before gave
you a bit of my mind; I pick up stray cats, I'm not likely to leave your
mother in the mire."

Then Madame Lorilleux burst into tears and Lantier had to prevent her
from leaving. The argument became so noisy that Madame Lerat felt she
had to go quietly into the little room and glance tearfully at her dead
mother, as though fearing to find her awake and listening. Just at this
moment the girls playing in the courtyard, led by Nana, began singing
again.

"_Mon Dieu!_ how those children grate on one's nerves with their
singing!" said Gervaise, all upset and on the point of sobbing with
impatience and sadness. Turning to the hatter, she said:

"Do please make them leave off, and send Nana back to the concierge's
with a kick."

Madame Lerat and Madame Lorilleux went away to eat lunch, promising
to return. The Coupeaus sat down to eat a bite without much appetite,
feeling hesitant about even raising a fork. After lunch Lantier went
to the undertaker's again with the ninety francs. Thirty had come from
Madame Lerat and Gervaise had run, with her hair all loose, to borrow
sixty francs from Goujet.

Several of the neighbors called in the afternoon, mainly out of
curiosity. They went into the little room to make the sign of the cross
and sprinkle some holy water with the boxwood sprig. Then they sat in
the shop and talked endlessly about the departed. Mademoiselle Remanjou
had noticed that her right eye was still open. Madame Gaudron maintained
that she had a fine complexion for her age. Madame Fauconnier kept
repeating that she had seen her having coffee only three days earlier.

Towards evening the Coupeaus were beginning to have had enough of it.
It was too great an affliction for a family to have to keep a corpse so
long a time. The government ought to have made a new law on the subject.
All through another evening, another night, and another morning--no!
it would never come to an end. When one no longer weeps, grief turns to
irritation; is it not so? One would end by misbehaving oneself. Mother
Coupeau, dumb and stiff in the depths of the narrow chamber, was
spreading more and more over the lodging and becoming heavy enough to
crush the people in it. And the family, in spite of itself, gradually
fell into the ordinary mode of life, and lost some portion of its
respect.

"You must have a mouthful with us," said Gervaise to Madame Lerat and
Madame Lorilleux, when they returned. "We're too sad; we must keep
together."

They laid the cloth on the work-table. Each one, on seeing the plates,
thought of the feastings they had had on it. Lantier had returned.
Lorilleux came down. A pastry-cook had just brought a meat pie, for the
laundress was too upset to attend to any cooking. As they were taking
their seats, Boche came to say that Monsieur Marescot asked to be
admitted, and the landlord appeared, looking very grave, and wearing
a broad decoration on his frock-coat. He bowed in silence and went
straight to the little room, where he knelt down. All the family,
leaving the table, stood up, greatly impressed. Monsieur Marescot,
having finished his devotions, passed into the shop and said to the
Coupeaus:

"I have come for the two quarters' rent that's overdue. Are you prepared
to pay?"

"No, sir, not quite," stammered Gervaise, greatly put out at hearing
this mentioned before the Lorilleuxs. "You see, with the misfortune
which has fallen upon us--"

"No doubt, but everyone has their troubles," resumed the landlord,
spreading out his immense fingers, which indicated the former workman.
"I am very sorry, but I cannot wait any longer. If I am not paid by the
morning after to-morrow, I shall be obliged to have you put out."

Gervaise, struck dumb, imploringly clasped her hands, her eyes full
of tears. With an energetic shake of his big bony head, he gave her to
understand that supplications were useless. Besides, the respect due
to the dead forbade all discussion. He discreetly retired, walking
backwards.

"A thousand pardons for having disturbed you," murmured he. "The morning
after to-morrow; do not forget."

And as on withdrawing he again passed before the little room, he saluted
the corpse a last time through the wide open door by devoutly bending
his knee.

They began eating and gobbled the food down very quickly, so as not to
seem to be enjoying it, only slowing down when they reached the dessert.
Occasionally Gervaise or one of the sisters would get up, still holding
her napkin, to look into the small room. They made plenty of strong
coffee to keep them awake through the night. The Poissons arrived about
eight and were invited for coffee.

Then Lantier, who had been watching Gervaise's face, seemed to seize
an opportunity that he had been waiting for ever since the morning. In
speaking of the indecency of landlords who entered houses of mourning to
demand their money, he said:

"He's a Jesuit, the beast, with his air of officiating at a mass! But in
your place, I'd just chuck up the shop altogether."

Gervaise, quite worn out and feeling weak and nervous, gave way and
replied:

"Yes, I shall certainly not wait for the bailiffs. Ah! it's more than I
can bear--more than I can bear."

The Lorilleuxs, delighted at the idea that Clump-clump would no longer
have a shop, approved the plan immensely. One could hardly conceive
the great cost a shop was. If she only earned three francs working for
others she at least had no expenses; she did not risk losing large sums
of money. They repeated this argument to Coupeau, urging him on; he
drank a great deal and remained in a continuous fit of sensibility,
weeping all day by himself in his plate. As the laundress seemed to be
allowing herself to be convinced, Lantier looked at the Poissons and
winked. And tall Virginie intervened, making herself most amiable.

"You know, we might arrange the matter between us. I would relieve you
of the rest of the lease and settle your matter with the landlord. In
short, you would not be worried nearly so much."

"No thanks," declared Gervaise, shaking herself as though she felt a
shudder pass over her. "I'll work; I've got my two arms, thank heaven!
to help me out of my difficulties."

"We can talk about it some other time," the hatter hastened to put in.
"It's scarcely the thing to do so this evening. Some other time--in the
morning for instance."

At this moment, Madame Lerat, who had gone into the little room, uttered
a faint cry. She had had a fright because she had found the candle burnt
out. They all busied themselves in lighting another; they shook their
heads, saying that it was not a good sign when the light went out beside
a corpse.

The wake commenced. Coupeau had gone to lie down, not to sleep, said he,
but to think; and five minutes afterwards he was snoring. When they sent
Nana off to sleep at the Boches' she cried; she had been looking
forward ever since the morning to being nice and warm in her good friend
Lantier's big bed. The Poissons stayed till midnight. Some hot wine had
been made in a salad-bowl because the coffee affected the ladies' nerves
too much. The conversation became tenderly effusive. Virginie talked of
the country: she would like to be buried at the corner of a wood with
wild flowers on her grave. Madame Lerat had already put by in her
wardrobe the sheet for her shroud, and she kept it perfumed with a bunch
of lavender; she wished always to have a nice smell under her nose when
she would be eating the dandelions by the roots. Then, with no sort of
transition, the policeman related that he had arrested a fine girl that
morning who had been stealing from a pork-butcher's shop; on undressing
her at the commissary of police's they had found ten sausages hanging
round her body. And Madame Lorilleux having remarked, with a look of
disgust, that she would not eat any of those sausages, the party burst
into a gentle laugh. The wake became livelier, though not ceasing to
preserve appearances.

But just as they were finishing the hot wine a peculiar noise, a dull
trickling sound, issued from the little room. All raised their heads and
looked at each other.

"It's nothing," said Lantier quietly, lowering his voice. "She's
emptying."

The explanation caused the others to nod their heads in a reassured way,
and they replaced their glasses on the table.

When the Poissons left for home, Lantier left also, saying he would
sleep with a friend and leave his bed for the ladies in case they wanted
to take turns napping. Lorilleux went upstairs to bed. Gervaise and the
two sisters arranged themselves by the stove where they huddled together
close to the warmth, talking quietly. Coupeau was still snoring.

Madame Lorilleux was complaining that she didn't have a black dress and
asked Gervaise about the black skirt they had given mother Coupeau on
her saint's day. Gervaise went to look for it. Madame Lorilleux then
wanted some of the old linen and mentioned the bed, the wardrobe, and
the two chairs as she looked around for other odds and ends. Madame
Lerat had to serve as peace maker when a quarrel nearly broke out.
She pointed out that as the Coupeaus had cared for their mother, they
deserved to keep the few things she had left. Soon they were all dozing
around the stove.

The night seemed terribly long to them. Now and again they shook
themselves, drank some coffee and stretched their necks in the direction
of the little room, where the candle, which was not to be snuffed, was
burning with a dull red flame, flickering the more because of the black
soot on the wick. Towards morning, they shivered, in spite of the great
heat of the stove. Anguish, and the fatigue of having talked too much
was stifling them, whilst their mouths were parched, and their eyes
ached. Madame Lerat threw herself on Lantier's bed, and snored as loud
as a man; whilst the other two, their heads falling forward, and almost
touching their knees, slept before the fire. At daybreak, a shudder
awoke them. Mother Coupeau's candle had again gone out; and as, in the
obscurity, the dull trickling sound recommenced, Madame Lorilleux gave
the explanation of it anew in a loud voice, so as to reassure herself:

"She's emptying," repeated she, lighting another candle.

The funeral was to take place at half-past ten. A nice morning to add to
the night and the day before! Gervaise, though without a sou, said she
would have given a hundred francs to anybody who would have come and
taken mother Coupeau away three hours sooner. No, one may love people,
but they are too great a weight when they are dead; and the more one has
loved them, the sooner one would like to be rid of their bodies.

The morning of a funeral is, fortunately, full of diversions. One has
all sorts of preparations to make. To begin with, they lunched. Then it
happened to be old Bazouge, the undertaker's helper, who lived on the
sixth floor, who brought the coffin and the sack of bran. He was never
sober, the worthy fellow. At eight o'clock that day, he was still lively
from the booze of the day before.

"This is for here, isn't it?" asked he.

And he laid down the coffin, which creaked like a new box. But as he was
throwing the sack of bran on one side, he stood with a look of amazement
in his eyes, his mouth opened wide, on beholding Gervaise before him.

"Beg pardon, excuse me. I've made a mistake," stammered he. "I was told
it was for you."

He had already taken up the sack again, and the laundress was obliged to
call to him:

"Leave it alone, it's for here."

"Ah! _Mon Dieu!_ Now I understand!" resumed he, slapping his thigh.
"It's for the old lady."

Gervaise had turned quite pale. Old Bazouge had brought the coffin for
her. By way of apology, he tried to be gallant, and continued:

"I'm not to blame, am I? It was said yesterday that someone on the
ground floor had passed away. Then I thought--you know, in our business,
these things enter by one ear and go out by the other. All the same, my
compliments to you. As late as possible, eh? That's best, though life
isn't always amusing; ah! no, by no means."

As Gervaise listened to him, she draw back, afraid he would grab her and
take her away in the box. She remembered the time before, when he had
told her he knew of women who would thank him to come and get them.
Well, she wasn't ready yet. _Mon Dieu!_ The thought sent chills down her
spine. Her life may have been bitter, but she wasn't ready to give it up
yet. No, she would starve for years first.

"He's abominably drunk," murmured she, with an air of disgust mingled
with dread. "They at least oughtn't to send us tipplers. We pay dear
enough."

Then he became insolent, and jeered:

"See here, little woman, it's only put off until another time. I'm
entirely at your service, remember! You've only to make me a sign. I'm
the ladies' consoler. And don't spit on old Bazouge, because he's held
in his arms finer ones than you, who let themselves be tucked in without
a murmur, very pleased to continue their by-by in the dark."

"Hold your tongue, old Bazouge!" said Lorilleux severely, having
hastened to the spot on hearing the noise, "such jokes are highly
improper. If we complained about you, you would get the sack. Come, be
off, as you've no respect for principles."

Bazouge moved away, but one could hear him stuttering as he dragged
along the pavement:

"Well! What? Principles! There's no such thing as principles, there's no
such thing as principles--there's only common decency!"

At length ten o'clock struck. The hearse was late. There were already
several people in the shop, friends and neighbors--Monsieur Madinier,
My-Boots, Madame Gaudron, Mademoiselle Remanjou; and every minute, a
man's or a woman's head was thrust out of the gaping opening of the
door between the closed shutters, to see if that creeping hearse was
in sight. The family, all together in the back room, was shaking hands.
Short pauses occurred interrupted by rapid whisperings, a tiresome and
feverish waiting with sudden rushes of skirts--Madame Lorilleux who
had forgotten her handkerchief, or else Madame Lerat who was trying to
borrow a prayer-book. Everyone, on arriving, beheld the open coffin in
the centre of the little room before the bed; and in spite of oneself,
each stood covertly studying it, calculating that plump mother Coupeau
would never fit into it. They all looked at each other with this thought
in their eyes, though without communicating it. But there was a slight
pushing at the front door. Monsieur Madinier, extending his arms, came
and said in a low grave voice:

"Here they are!"

It was not the hearse though. Four helpers entered hastily in single
file, with their red faces, their hands all lumpy like persons in the
habit of moving heavy things, and their rusty black clothes worn and
frayed from constant rubbing against coffins. Old Bazouge walked first,
very drunk and very proper. As soon as he was at work he found his
equilibrium. They did not utter a word, but slightly bowed their heads,
already weighing mother Coupeau with a glance. And they did not dawdle;
the poor old woman was packed in, in the time one takes to sneeze. A
young fellow with a squint, the smallest of the men, poured the bran
into the coffin and spread it out. The tall and thin one spread the
winding sheet over the bran. Then, two at the feet and two at the head,
all four took hold of the body and lifted it. Mother Coupeau was in the
box, but it was a tight fit. She touched on every side.

The undertaker's helpers were now standing up and waiting; the little
one with the squint took the coffin lid, by way of inviting the family
to bid their last farewell, whilst Bazouge had filled his mouth with
nails and was holding the hammer in readiness. Then Coupeau, his two
sisters and Gervaise threw themselves on their knees and kissed the
mamma who was going away, weeping bitterly, the hot tears falling on
and streaming down the stiff face now cold as ice. There was a prolonged
sound of sobbing. The lid was placed on, and old Bazouge knocked the
nails in with the style of a packer, two blows for each; and they none
of them could hear any longer their own weeping in that din, which
resembled the noise of furniture being repaired. It was over. The time
for starting had arrived.

"What a fuss to make at such a time!" said Madame Lorilleux to her
husband as she caught sight of the hearse before the door.

The hearse was creating quite a revolution in the neighborhood. The
tripe-seller called to the grocer's men, the little clockmaker came out
on to the pavement, the neighbors leant out of their windows; and all
these people talked about the scallop with its white cotton fringe. Ah!
the Coupeaus would have done better to have paid their debts. But as
the Lorilleuxs said, when one is proud it shows itself everywhere and in
spite of everything.

"It's shameful!" Gervaise was saying at the same moment, speaking of the
chainmaker and his wife. "To think that those skinflints have not even
brought a bunch of violets for their mother!"

The Lorilleuxs, true enough, had come empty-handed. Madame Lerat had
given a wreath of artificial flowers. And a wreath of immortelles and
a bouquet bought by the Coupeaus were also placed on the coffin. The
undertaker's helpers had to give a mighty heave to lift the coffin
and carry it to the hearse. It was some time before the procession was
formed. Coupeau and Lorilleux, in frock coats and with their hats in
their hands, were chief mourners. The first, in his emotion which two
glasses of white wine early in the morning had helped to sustain, clung
to his brother-in-law's arm, with no strength in his legs, and a violent
headache. Then followed the other men--Monsieur Madinier, very grave
and all in black; My-Boots, wearing a great-coat over his blouse; Boche,
whose yellow trousers produced the effect of a petard; Lantier, Gaudron,
Bibi-the-Smoker, Poisson and others. The ladies came next--in the first
row Madame Lorilleux, dragging the deceased's skirt, which she had
altered; Madame Lerat, hiding under a shawl her hastily got-up mourning,
a gown with lilac trimmings; and following them, Virginie, Madame
Gaudron, Madame Fauconnier, Mademoiselle Remanjou and the rest. When the
hearse started and slowly descended the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, amidst
signs of the cross and heads bared, the four helpers took the lead, two
in front, the two others on the right and left. Gervaise had remained
behind to close the shop. She left Nana with Madame Boche and ran to
rejoin the procession, whilst the child, firmly held by the concierge
under the porch, watched with a deeply interested gaze her grandmother
disappear at the end of the street in that beautiful carriage.

At the moment when Gervaise caught up with the procession, Goujet
arrived from another direction. He nodded to her so sympathetically
that she was reminded of how unhappy she was, and began to cry again as
Goujet took his place with the men.

The ceremony at the church was soon got through. The mass dragged
a little, though, because the priest was very old. My-Boots and
Bibi-the-Smoker preferred to remain outside on account of the
collection. Monsieur Madinier studied the priests all the while, and
communicated his observations to Lantier. Those jokers, though so glib
with their Latin, did not even know a word of what they were saying.
They buried a person just in the same way that they would have baptized
or married him, without the least feeling in their heart.

