If we have been correctly informed, the author of this book is an Irish
woman living in Trenton, N. Y., whose husband is a laboring man, and,
like herself, in humble circumstances. She has quite a large family,
lives in a small tenement, and is obliged to labor daily for a
subsistence for herself and family. When she came to this country from
Ireland, she could scarcely write a grammatical sentence; and all the
information of history and the classics which she has, she has derived
from such books as have accidentally fallen in her hands. She is
extremely modest and retiring, and does not seem to be at all conscious
of the genius with which she is endowed. Mrs. Howarth possesses the
poetical talent of the Irish race. Her rhythm is musical, flowing, and
pure; her thoughts gentle and womanly; her diction refined; her form
good; her powers of imitation great. What she wants now is more
self-reliance, that she may write from the inner life of her own
experience. Her poems lack originality. Let her not fear to dip her pen
in her own heart, and sing to us the joys and sorrows of the poor. Burns
were a better study for her than Moore; the Corn Law rhymer than Poe.
With her talents and the cultivation she has acquired, her familiarity
with the hopes, fears, and realities of a life of labor will give her
great advantages as the poetess of the faithful, suffering poor.


BOOKS RECEIVED TOO LATE FOR REVIEW.

LYRICS OF A DAY; OR, NEWSPAPER POETRY. By a Volunteer of the U. S.
Service. New York: Carleton, publisher, 413 Broadway.

RED-TAPE AND PIGEON-HOLE GENERALS: as Seen from the Ranks during a
Campaign in the Army of the Potomac. By a Citizen Soldier.

     'We must be brief when traitors brave the field.'

New York: Carleton, publisher, 413 Broadway.


EDITOR'S TABLE.

ADELAIDE A. PROCTER AND JEAN INGELOW.


Extremes ever meet, and our age, which is preëminently occupied with
physical science and material comfort and aggrandizement, is also
eminently productive in good poetry. There should be no antithesis
between the words _physical science_ and _poetry_. The secrets of the
Universe, the ways of God's working, are surely the highest poetry; but
the greater number of scientists have willed a divorce between the
material and the spiritual, and decry that very imaginative faculty
which, in the case of Kepler, bore such wonderful fruits for science.
Facts are very well, and induction is also well, but science requires
the aid of the creative and divining imagination to order the details
and draw thence the broader and higher generalizations. Let us hope that
the good common sense of the in-coming half-century will annul the
divorce, and again unite on a solid basis spheres that should never have
been so far sundered.

Meantime, we cannot but remark the number of good poems meeting us on
every hand, not only from writers known to fame, but also from the
living tombs of obscure country newspapers. We know it is the fashion to
deride such productions, and sneer at the 'would-be poets.' Let critics
speak the truth fearlessly, but let them never prefer the glitter of a
self-glorifying search for faults to the more amiable but less piquant
occupation of discovering solid thought, earnest feeling, and poetic
fancy. It is well to discourage insipidity, impudent pretension, and
every species of affectation; but critics are, like authors, fallible,
and not unfrequently present glaring examples of the very faults they
condemn. In any case where the knife is needed, let it be used firmly
but gently, that, while the patient bleeds, he may feel the wound has
been inflicted by no unloving, cynical hand, but was really intended for
his ultimate good. Let the instrument be finely tempered, and neither
coarse nor rough.