THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. 10, No. 287.] SATURDAY, DECEMBER 15, 1827. [PRICE 2d.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: NEW STEAM CARRIAGE.]


Explanation of the References.

1. The Guide and Engineer, to whom the whole management of the machinery
and conduct of the carriage is intrusted. Besides this man, a guard will
be employed.

2. The handle which guides the Pole and Pilot Wheels.

3. The Pilot Wheels.

4. The Pole.

5. The Fore Boot, for luggage.

6. The "Throttle Valve" of the main steam-pipe, which, by means of the
handle, is opened or closed at pleasure, the power of the steam and the
progress of the carriage being thereby regulated from 1 to 10 or 20
miles per hour.

7. The Tank for Water, running from end to end, and the full breadth of
the carriage; it will contain 60 gallons of water.

8. The Carriage, capable of holding six inside-passengers.

9. Outside Passengers, of which the present carriage will carry 15.

10. The Hind Boot, containing the Boiler and Furnace. The Boiler is
incased with sheet-iron, and between the pipes the coke and charcoal are
put, the front being closed in the ordinary way with an iron door. The
pipes extend from the cylindrical reservoir of water at the bottom to
the cylindrical chamber for steam at the top, forming a succession of
lines something like a horse-shoe, turned edgeways. The steam enters the
"separators" through large pipes, which are observable on the Plan, and
is thence conducted to its proper destination.

11. "Separators," in which the steam is separated from the water, the
water descending and returning to the boiler, while the steam ascends,
and is forced into the steam-pipes or main arteries of the machine.

12. The Pump, by which the water is pumped from the tank, by means of
a flexible hose, to the reservoir, communicating with the boiler.

13. The Main Steam Pipe, descending from the "separators," and
proceeding in a direct line under the body of the coach to the "throttle
valve" (No. 6,) and thence, under the tank, to the cylinders from which
the pistons work.

14. Flues of the Furnace, from which there is no smoke, coke and
charcoal being used.

15. The Perches, of which there are three, conjoined, to support the
machinery.

16. The Cylinders. There is one between each perch.

17. Valve Motion, admitting steam alternately to each side of the
pistons.

18. Cranks, operating on the axle: at the ends of the axle are crotches
(No. 21,) which, as the axle turns round, catch projecting pieces of
iron on the boxes of the wheels, and give them the rotatory motion. The
hind wheels only are thus operated upon.

19. Propellers, which, as the carriage ascends a hill, are set in
motion, and move like the hind legs of a horse, catching the ground, and
then forcing the machine forward, increasing the rapidity of its motion,
and assisting the steam power.

20. The Drag, which is applied to increase the friction on the wheel in
going down a hill. This is also assisted by diminishing the pressure of
the steam--or, if necessary, inverting the motion of the wheels.

21. The Clutch, by which the wheel is sent round.

22. The Safety Valve, which regulates the proper pressure of the steam
in the pipe.

23. The Orifice for filling the Tank. This is done by means of a
flexible hose and a funnel, and occupies but a few seconds.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Goldsworthy Gurney, whose name is already familiar to most of our
readers, after a variety of experiments, during the last two years, has
completed a STEAM CARRIAGE on a new principle; or, as a wag said the
other day, he has at length _brought his plan to bear_. We have,
accordingly, procured a drawing of this extraordinary invention, which
we shall proceed to describe generally, since the letters, introduced
in the annexed Engraving, with the accompanying references, will enable
our readers to enter into the details of the machinery:--First, as to
its _safety_, upon which point the public are most sceptical.
In the present invention, it is stated, that, even from the bursting
of the boiler, there is not the most distant chance of mischief to the
passengers. This boiler is tubular, constructed upon philosophical
principles, and upon a plan totally distinct from any thing previously
in use. Instead of being, as in ordinary cases, a large vessel closed on
all sides, with the exception of the valves and steam conductors, which
a high pressure or accidental defect may burst, it is composed of a
succession of welded iron pipes, perhaps forty in number, screwed
together in the manner of the common gas-pipes, at given distances,
extending in a direct line, and in a row, at equal distances from a
small reservoir of water, to the distance of about a yard and a half,
and then curving over in a semi-circle of about half a yard in diameter,
returning in parallel lines to the pipes beneath, to a reservoir above,
thus forming a sort of inverted horse-shoe. This horse-shoe of pipes,
in fact, forms the boiler, and the space between is the furnace; the
whole being enclosed with sheet-iron. The advantage of this arrangement
is obvious; for, while more than a sufficient quantity of steam is
generated for the purposes requited, the only possible accident that
could happen would be, the bursting of one of these barrels, and a
temporary diminution of the steam-power of one-fortieth part. The
effects of the accident could, of course, only be felt within its own
enclosure; and the Engineer could, in ten minutes, repair the injury, by
extracting the wounded barrel, and plugging up the holes at each end;
but the fact is, that such are the proofs to which these barrels are
subjected, before they are used, by the application of a steam-pressure
five hundred times more than can ever be required, that the accident,
trifling as it is, is scarcely possible.

A contemporary journal illustrates Mr. Gurney's invention by the
following analogy:--"It will appear not a little singular that
Mr. Gurney, who was educated a medical man, has actually made the
construction of the human body, and of animals in general, the model
of his invention. His reservoirs of steam and water, or rather
'_separators_,' as they are called, and which are seen at the end
of our plate, are, as it were, the heart of his steam apparatus, the
lower pipes of the boiler are the arteries, and the upper pipes the
veins. The water, which is the substitute for blood, is first sent from
the reservoirs into the pipes--the operation of fire soon produces
steam, which ascends through the pipes to the upper part of the
reservoir, carrying with it a portion of water into the separators,
which of course descends to the lower part, and returns to fill the
pipes which have been exhausted by the evaporation of the steam--the
steam above pressing it down with an elastic force, so as to keep the
arteries or pipes constantly full, and preserve a regular circulation.
In the centre of the _separators_ are perforated steam pipes, which
ascend nearly to the tops, these tops being of course closed, so as to
prevent the escape of the steam. Through these pipes the steam descends
with its customary force, and is conducted by one main pipe all along
under the carriage to the end of the platform, which is, in point of
fact, the _water tank_, where it turns under till it reaches two
large branch pipes which communicate with the cylinders, from which the
pistons move and give motion to the machinery. The cranks of the axle
are thus set in action, and the rotatory movement is given to the
wheels. By the power thus engendered also a pump is worked, and which,
by means of a flexible hose, pumps the water into the boiler, keeping
the supply complete. The tank and furnace, it is calculated will hold
sufficient water and fuel for one hour's consumption, the former being
sixty gallons."

The vehicle resembles the ordinary stage-coaches, but is rather larger
and higher. Coke or charcoal are to form the fuel, by which means smoke
will be avoided; the flues will be above the level of the seated
passenger, and it is calculated that the motion of the carriage will
always disperse the heated rarefied air from the flues.

The present carriage would carry six inside and fifteen outside
passengers, independent of the guide, who is also the engineer. In front
of the coach is a very capacious boot; while behind, that which assumes
the appearance of a boot is the case for the boiler and the furnace.
The length of the vehicle, from end to end, is fifteen feet, and, with
the pole and pilot-wheels, twenty feet. The diameter of the hind wheels
is five feet; of the front wheels three feet nine inches; and of the
pilot-wheels three feet. There is a treble perch, by which the machinery
is supported, and beneath which two propellers, in going up a hill, may
be set in motion, somewhat similar to the action of a horse's legs under
similar circumstances. In descending a hill, there is a break fixed on
the hind wheel to increase the friction; but independent of this, the
guide has the power of lessening the force of the steam to any extent,
by means of the lever to his right hand, which operates upon, what is
called the _throttle valve_, and by which he may stop the action
of the steam altogether, and effect a counter vacuum in the cylinders.
By this means also he regulates the rate of progress on the road, going
at a pace of two miles or ten miles per hour, or even quicker if
necessary. There is another lever also by which he can stop the vehicle
_instanter_, and, in fact, in a moment reverse the motion of the
wheels, so as to prevent accident, as is the practice with the paddles
of steam-vessels. The guide, who sits in front, keeps the vehicle in its
proper course, by means of the pilot-wheels acting upon the pole, like
the handle of a garden-chair.

The weight of the carriage and its apparatus is estimated at 1-1/2 tons,
and its wear and tear of the road, as compared with a carriage drawn by
four horses, is as one to six. When the carriage is in progress the
machinery is not heard, nor is there so much vibration as in an ordinary
vehicle, from the superior solidity of the structure. The engine has a
twelve-horse power, but may be increased to sixteen; while the actual
power in use, except in ascending a hill, is but eight-horse.

The success of the present improved invention is stated to be decided;
but the public will shortly have an opportunity of judging for
themselves, as several experimental journeys are projected. If it should
attain its anticipated perfection, the contrivance will indeed be a
proud triumph of human ingenuity, which, aided by its economy, will
doubtless recommend it to universal patronage. Mr. Gurney has already
secured a patent for his invention; and he has our best wishes for his
permanent success.

       *       *       *       *       *


HISTORICAL FACTS RELATIVE TO THE EARLY CONDITION OF THE ENGLISH.

(_For the Mirror._)


London, in early times (King Ethelred's reign) consisted only of
scattered buildings from Ludgate to Westminster, and none where the
heart of the city now is; it was afterwards extended more westward and
continued increasing---eastward being neglected until a more later
period. Who can view its present well constructed houses, its numerous
elegant squares and terraces, and its general superior appearance,
without almost doubting that the inhabitants of Britain once dwelt in
the most miserable habitations, regardless in every respect of comfort
and cleanliness. Indeed, at an early period we seem to have been in a
very wretched condition. Without carrying ourselves too far back, we
will look at the state of the English about the year 1520, (Henry the
Eighth's reign.) The houses were built entirely regardless of all that
health and comfort could suggest. The situation of the doors and windows
was never thought of, and the former only opened. The floors were made
either of clay, or sand, covered with rushes, which were very seldom
removed.[1] Some few houses were built of stone, but generally they were
composed of wood, coated over with _mud_, or cement, with straw or
reed roofs. Things seem to have been in no very enviable condition
during this reign. The laws were little obeyed; thefts and robbery were
frequent, for "22,000 criminals are said to have been executed by the
rigid justice of Henry VIII."

It is not surprising that crime should have been great in this reign,
for Henry himself was not only guilty of many crimes, but patronised
vice in the regular system of bull and bear-baiting, particularly on
_Sundays_, about four in the afternoon, which exhibitions were
attended by great crowds of persons of all classes. The accommodations
of a royal establishment at this period are thus described:--"The
apartments at Hampton Court had been furnished on a particular occasion,
each with a candlestick, a basin, goblet and ewer of silver; yet the
furniture of Henry's chamber, independent of the bed and cupboard,
consisted only of a joint-stool, a pair of andirons, and a small mirror.
The halls and chambers of the wealthy were replenished with a cupboard,
long tables, or rather loose boards placed upon tressels, forms, a
chair, and a few joint-stools. Carpets were only employed to garnish
cupboards." The food in this reign appears to be in character with
everything else. From a household book of the Earl of Northumberland,
it appears that his family, during the winter, fed mostly on salt meat
and salt fish, with "an appointment of 160 gallons of mustard." On flesh
days through the year, _breakfast_ for my lord and _lady_ was
a loaf of bread, two manchets, a quart of beer, a quart of wine, half a
chine of mutton, or a chine of beef, boiled. The earl had only two cooks
to dress victuals for more than two hundred people. Hens, chickens, and
partridges, were reckoned delicacies, and were forbidden except at my
lord's table.

This excessive love for eating was not, however, confined to Henry's
time, for about two centuries previous to this, (Edward III.) feasting
was endeavoured to be restrained by a law, though Edward himself did not
follow his own law, for when his "son, Lionel, of Clarence, married
Violentes, of Milant there were thirty courses, and the fragments fed
1,500 persons."

The formation of London was but tardy and very irregular until the reign
of Henry VIII. at which time, some extensive buildings and improvements
were made. On the other hand, building seems at length to have gone on
too rapidly, and caused such alarm, that about a century after Henry's
reign, a proclamation was issued by James I. after mature deliberation,
forbidding all new buildings within ten miles of London; and commanding
if any were built after this they should be pulled down, though no
notice was taken of them for seven years.

It is somewhat singular, that though the population in these early
days were but a handful in comparison to the present number, the
_redundancy_ of population was as bitterly complained of as it ever
has been in modern days. About thirty years after Henry's reign
(Elizabeth) we learn from one Harrison, who wrote in 1577, that "a great
number complain of the increase of povertie, laying the cause upon God,
as though he were in fault for sending such increase of people, or want
of wars that should consume them, affirming that the land was never
so full. Some affirming that youth by marrying too soon do nothing to
profit the countrie; but fill it full of beggars, to the hurte and utter
undooing, they say, of the common wealth. The better minded doo forsake
the realme for altogether, complaining of _no room to be left for them
at home_." If there was no room in Elizabeth's time, what must be our
present situation? Indeed the present crowded state of the metropolis,
and the general closeness of the buildings, has frequently been a
subject for regret, as tending to render it unhealthy and impure; but
on referring to its state, when in comparison it was but a village, the
old writers state that in the city, and all round it were a great number
of pits and ditches, and sloughs, which were made the receptacle of all
kind of filth, dead and putrid horses, and cattle, &c. In the time of
Henry VIII. many parts are described as "exceedingly foul and full of
pits and sloughs, and very noisome," and some years after (1625) in a
tract, the author says, "Let not carkasses of horses, dogs, cats, &c.
lye rotting and poisoning the aire, as they have done in _More_ and
_Finsbury_ Fields, and elsewhere round about the cittie. Let the
ditches towards Islington, Olde-street, and towards Shoreditch and
Whitechapel, be well cleansed." In another tract published in 1665, it
states, that "there are all sorts of unsavoury stenches, proceeding
either from carrion, ditches, rotten dung-hills, vaults, sinks, nasty
kennels, and streets, (strewed with all manner of filth) seldom
cleansed." From these statements it is evident that notwithstanding all
the present inconveniences that the inhabitants of London live in more
healthy situations now that they are surrounded by houses, than when
they were exposed to extensive open fields.

A.B.C.


    [1] It was reckoned an extraordinary luxury for Thomas à Becket to
        have his parlour strewed every day with clean rushes.

       *       *       *       *       *


A PORTRAIT.

_Sketched in the year of the world,_ 5831; _and, of my bachelorship_, 24.

(_For the Mirror._)


          Chaste, as the icicle,
  That's curded by the frost from purer snow,
  And hangs on Dian's temple; Dear--_old maid_.

SHAKSPEARE'S _Coriolanus_.

  Sed mihi vel tellus optem prius ima dehiscat,
  Vel Pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad umbras,
  Pallentes umbras Erebi, noctemque profundum,
  Ante, pudor, quam te violem, aut tua jure resolvam.

VIRGIL.

  I have years on my back _forty-eight_,

SHAKSPEARE'S _King Lear_.

  Four-and-twenty lap-dogs, all of a row,
  Four-and-twenty monkeys, kits, and cats, dit-to;
  Four-and-twenty colours in her tawdry dress,
  (A rainbow she in all--but its loveliness!)
  Four-and-twenty tempers, in the four-and-twenty hours;
  Four-and-twenty dreams of _suppos'd_ vanquished pow'rs,
  To wit of four-and-twenty swains--more or less;
  Who have four-and-twenty times, curs'd her ugliness!
  Four-and-twenty trials, ere as many hours are o'er,
  Of four-and-twenty genera of rival Kalydor;
  Four-and-twenty scentings with her dear bergamot,
  Four-and-twenty daubs of her dear paint-pot;
  Four-and-twenty visitings to four-and-twenty friends,
  And four-and-twenty tales of 'em, before the day ends;
  Of these said four-and-twenty tales just four-and-twenty versions,
  And all of them of all the facts most farcica perversions.
  Four-and-twenty false curls, * *

     *       *       *       *       *

  Four-and-twenty false teeth, and quite as false a tongue,
  Which tells how virtuous was the world when--_she and it were young_.
  Or rather for these thirty years has moralizing told,
  How this good deed and that she'll do, _before_ she grows old:
  Four-and-twenty sighs a-day, that our rude English sky
  Is not _precise_ as _she_--and may wash off the dye
  Meretricious of her cheeks, which are then like gold,
  (Though _less tempting_;) _sweet_ and yellow as a marigold![2]
  Four-and-twenty wailings o'er the wedded state,
  Yet twice as many every day 'tis not _her_ fate;
  Pretending to the world 'tis mere _choice_ that has led
  To singleness--yet choosing all the while to be wed,
  If any doting fool could be doting fool enough
  To bid for such a breaking down piece of stuff;
  For any such a winter, that has shed the flowers of spring,
  Whose autumn too is flown; nor left its fruit or any thing!

       *       *       *       *       *

  Yes, _such_ are the marks deep branded on a class
  Of busy blanks, non-entities, creation's very farce;
  In _these_ scales then be every piece of Eve's flesh weighed,
  Find _these_ criteria, and be sure you've found an--Ancient Maid!

W. P----N.

    [2] So much for the "heinous crime of _self-painting_;" as Lord
        Chesterfield says; in speaking of which, "It is even whispered
        about the town, (he observes) of that excellent artist,
        Mr. Liobard, that he lately refused a fine woman to draw her
        picture, alleging that he never copied any body's works but his
        own and God Almighty's!"

       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTES, ROYAL AND NOBLE.

(_For the Mirror._)


_James the First._

Robert Cecil, great grandson to the first Earl of Salisbury, told Lord
Dartmouth that his ancestor, inquiring into the character of king James,
Bruce (his majesty's own ambassador) answered, "Ken ye a John Ape? en
I's have him, he'll bite _you_; en you's have him, he'll bite _me_."


_Sir Edward Seymour._

Speaker of the House of Commons, was one day coming to his duty, when
his coach happening to break down, he ordered the beadle to stop the
first gentleman's coach they met, and bring it to him. The owner felt
much surprised to be turned out of his own coach; but Sir Edward told
him it was much more proper for him to walk in the streets than the
speaker of the House of Commons; and accordingly left him to do so
without farther apology.--This arbitrary exercise of authority is
perhaps without a parallel.


_Henry the Fourth._

Of France used to say that a king should have the heart of a child
towards God, but the heart of a father towards his subjects.


_George the Third._

His late majesty was very partial to Mr. Carbonel, the wine-merchant,
and frequently admitted him to the royal hunts. Returning from the chase
one day, the king entered affably into conversation with his
wine-merchant, and rode with him side by side a considerable distance.
Lord Walsingham was in attendance, and watching an opportunity, called
Mr. C. aside, and whispered something to him. "What's that? what has
Walsingham been saying to you?" inquired the good-humoured monarch.
"I find, sire, I have been unintentionally guilty of disrespect by not
taking off my hat when I address your majesty; but you will please to
observe, that whenever I hunt my hat is fastened to my wig, and my wig
to my head; and as I am mounted on a very spirited horse, if any thing
goes off, we must all go off together." The king laughed heartily at
the whimsical apology.


_The Duke of Wellington._

A certain noble lord, who was the duke's aide-de-camp, visited his
grace early on the morning of the battle of Salamanca, and perceiving
him lying on a very small camp bedstead, observed, "that his grace had
not room to turn himself;" who immediately, in his usual characteristic
manner, rejoined, "When you have lived as long and seen so much as
I have, you will know, that when a general thinks of turning _in_ his
bed, it is full time to turn _out_."


_Rubens._

An artist named Brendel, possessed with the folly of the "philosopher's
stone," proposed to Rubens to join him in the discovery of that
mystery. He replied, "Your application is too late; for these twenty
years past my pencils and pallet have revealed to me the secret about
which you are so anxious."


_Queen Elizabeth._

When the ambassador of Henry IV. of France was in England, the queen
asked him one birth-night, which was attended by a splendid assembly of
the court, how he liked her ladies. Knowing her majesty was not averse
to flattery, he made the following elegant reply: "It is hard, madam,
to judge of _stars_ in the presence of the _sun_."


_Louis XIII._

Was remarkable in his youth for piety; entering a little village,
the better sort of inhabitants wished to attend him with a canopy.
He answered, "I hear you have no church here. I cannot suffer a canopy
of state to be borne over my head in a place where God hath not a
consecrated roof to dwell under."


_Sigismund._

Emperor of Germany, being once asked what was the surest method of
living happy in the world, replied, "By doing in health those good works
you promised to do on the bed of sickness."

JACOBUS.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARCANA OF SCIENCE.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Thunder and Lightning._

Conductors affixed to houses should always be pointed, and the point
should be kept in a state of cleanliness, and the conductors should
terminate in a moist stratum of earth, or in London it might safely be
conveyed into the common sewer. It has been objected to the use of
pointed conductors, that we invite the lightning to the point; and that
is true to a certain extent, and in gunpowder mills the conductor should
be placed at some distance from the building. The conducting rod should
be of copper or iron, and from half to three-fourths of an inch in
diameter, so as not to be readily forced. Its upper end should be
elevated about three or four feet above the highest part of the
building, and all the metallic parts of the roof should be connected
with the rod, which should be continuous throughout. As regards the
question of what is the safest situation in a thunder-storm, we should
be pretty safe in the middle of a large room in bed; we should be pretty
safe among the feathers, which are bad conductors; but as the bell-wires
will conduct the electricity into the room, the bed should be removed
from them. It would be well to stand at a distance from the chimney on
a woollen rug, which is a non-conductor. When out of doors, I scarcely
need to say, that you should never stand under a tree; the tree being
moist, the electric fluid generally passes down between the bark and the
substance of the tree, splitting it in all directions, and the lightning
will pass to the best conductor near it; if any unfortunate animal
should happen to be under the tree, it will be killed. The safest plan
is to go toward the middle of the field, at a distance from any tree,
and to stretch yourself out upon the ground, although this is not a very
pleasant situation, especially in hard rain. During a thunder-storm, the
earth is in a state of electricity as well as the clouds, and the light
and heat which are produced at the explosion indicate the annihilation
of the two electricities. Sometimes the discharge is only from cloud to
cloud, sometimes from the earth to the clouds, and sometimes from the
clouds to the earth, as one or other may be in the positive or negative
state. The clouds are usually more or less electrical when the vapour,
floating about in the atmosphere, is condensed, and the earth being
brought into an opposite state of electricity by induction, a discharge
takes place, when the clouds approach within a certain distance, and
sometimes the electric cloud perches upon a hill, and then discharges
itself. The electricity passes through the clouds in a zig-zag
direction, and the undulation of the air which it produces is the cause
of the noise which we hear, called thunder, which is more or less
intense, and of longer or shorter duration, according to the quantity of
air acted upon, and the distance of the place where the report is heard
from the point of discharge. If the danger be great, we have seldom any
opportunity to count the time which elapses between the appearance of
the lightning and the report: electrical effects take place at no
sensible time; it has been found, that a discharge through a circuit of
four miles is instantaneous, whilst sound moves at the rate of about
twelve miles in a minute. So that, supposing the lightning to pass
through a space of some miles, the explosion will be first heard from
the point of the air agitated nearest to the spectator; it will
gradually come from the more remote parts of the course of the
electricity, and, last of all, will be heard from the very extremity;
and the different degrees of the agitation of the air, and the
difference of the distance, will account for the different intensities
of the sound, and its apparent reverberations and changes. If you can
count from two to three seconds between the appearance of the lightning
and the sound, there is seldom much danger; and when the interval is a
quarter of a minute, you are secure.--_Brande's Lectures.--Lancet._


_New Crane._

A crane for raising weights, on an entirely new principle--that of the
application of the lever, assisted by wedges, instead of the usual
plan of wheel and pinion, for multiplying power--has recently been
constructed at the West India Docks. The power of two men, with the
patent crane, is stated to be capable of lifting from 2-1/2 to 3 times
the weight lifted through the same space in a given time, by the best
constructed cranes on the old principle of wheel machinery.


_Etching on Ivory_.

The usual mode of ornamenting ivory in black, is to engrave the pattern
or design, and to fill up the cavities thus produced with hard black
varnish. Mr. Cathery has much improved and simplified the process, by
covering the ivory with engraver's varnish, and drawing the design with
an etching needle; he then pours on a menstruum, composed of 120 grains
of fine silver, dissolved in an ounce measure of nitric acid, and
diluted with one quart of pure distilled water. After half an hour, more
or less, according to the required depth of tint, the liquor is to be
poured off, and the surface is to be washed with distilled water, and
dried with blotting paper. It is then to be exposed to the light for
an hour, after, which the varnish may be removed by oil of turpentine.
The design will now appear permanently impressed on the ivory, and of
a black or blackish brown colour, which will come to its full tint after
exposure for a day or two to the light. Varieties of colour may be given
by substituting the salt of gold, platina, copper, &c. for the solution
of silver.--_Trans. of the Society of Arts._


_Geology._

Among the fossil bones lately dug from under the lava of the mountain
of Boulade, in the neighbourhood of Issoire, in France, none have been
discovered belonging to the human body. The same is the case in the
other mountains of the vicinity. But, although there are no human bones,
in several places, and especially in the mountain of Boutaresa, (which
is not far from the mountain of Boulade,) pieces of wood have been
discovered, buried under the ancient lava, which observers worthy of
credit declare seem to have been fashioned by the hand of man, and to
have been cut with a hatchet, although rudely, and as might be expected
in the infancy of the arts. Did man exist then, at that remote period
when elephants, lions, and tapirs, lived in Europe, with rein-deer and
bears? This is an exceedingly difficult question, and one which hitherto
does not, by any means, appear to have been satisfactorily
resolved.--_New Monthly Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MONTHS.

[Illustration: THE MONTHS. DECEMBER.]

