Richard Cobden, when in New York, was caught and long detained in a mesh
of drays and carriages in Broadway, and he remarked that the absence of
passionate profanity among the carmen and drivers, and the good-natured
patience they manifested, were in striking contrast with the blasphemous
violence exhibited in London under like circumstances; and he attributed
it to the greater self-respect bred in this class of men here by the
prospect and purpose of a higher vocation. It is curious to observe how
professional are the impressions and observations of Broadway
pedestrians. Walk there with a portrait-painter, and he will infer
character or discover subjects of art in every salient physiognomy. The
disparities of fortune and the signs of depravity will impress the
moralist. The pictorial effects, the adventurous possibilities, the
enterprise, care, or pastime of the scene, elicit comments in accordance
with the idiosyncrasies or aptitudes of the observer. What gradations of
greeting, from the curt recognition to the hilarious salute! What
variety of attraction and repulsion, according as your acquaintance is a
bore or a beauty, a benefactor or a bankrupt! The natural language of
"affairs," however, is the predominant expression. From the days of Rip
Van Dam to those of John Pintard, it is as a commercial city that New
York has drawn both her rural and foreign population. And her chief
thoroughfare retains the distinctive aspect thereof, as the extension of
the city has eliminated therefrom all other social elements,--fashion
being transferred to the Fifth Avenue, indigence to the Five Points, and
equipages to the Central Park. Police reports abound with the ruses and
roughnesses of metropolitan life, as developed in the most frequented
streets, where rogues seek safety in crowds. A rheumatic friend of ours
dropped a guinea in the Strand, and, being unable to stoop, placed his
foot upon the coin, and waited and watched for the right man to ask to
pick it up for him. He was astonished at the difficulty of the choice.
One passer was too elegant, another too abstracted, one looked
dishonest, and another haughty. At last he saw approaching a serious,
kindly-looking, middle-aged loiterer, with a rusty black suit and white
cravat,--apparently a poor curate taking his "constitutional." Our
friend explained his dilemma, and was assured, in the most courteous
terms, that the stranger would accommodate him with pleasure. Very
deliberately the latter picked up the guinea, wiped it carefully on his
coat-sleeve, and transferred it to his vest-pocket,--walking off with a
cheerful nod. Indignant at the trick, the invalid called out "Stop,
thief!" The rascal was chased and caught, and, when taken to the police
office, proved to be Bristol Bill,--one of the most notorious and
evasive burglars in London. Many like instances of false pretences are
traditional in Broadway,--where there are sometimes visible scenic
personages, like a quack doctor whose costume and bearing were borrowed
from Don Pasquale, and Dr. Knickerbocker in the elegant and obselete
breeches, buckles, and cocked hat of the olden time.

A peculiar hardihood and local wit are claimed for what are called the
B'hoys. A cockney, in pursuit of knowledge under difficulties, was
walking up Broadway with the hospitable citizen to whose guidance he
had been specially commended by a London correspondent.

"I want," said the stranger, "to see a b'hoy,--a real b'hoy."

"There's one," replied his companion, pointing to a strapping fellow, in
a red shirt and crush hat, waiting for a job at the corner.

"Ah, how curious!" replied John Bull, examining this new species with
his double eye-glass,--"very curious; I never saw a real b'hoy before. I
should like to hear him speak."

"Then, why don't you talk to him?"

"I don't know what to say."

"Ask him the way to Laight Street."

The inquisitive traveller crossed the street, and, deferentially
approaching the new genus, lisped, "Ha--ah--how d' do, ha? I want to go
to Laight Street."

"Then why in hell don't you go?" loudly and gruffly asks the b'hoy.

Cockney nervously rejoined his friend, saying,--"Very curious, the
Broadway b'hoys!"

To realize the extent and character of the Celtic element in our
population, walk down this thronged avenue on a holiday, when the Irish
crowd the sidewalks, waiting for a pageant; and all you have ever read
or dreamed of savagery will gleam, with latent fire, from those myriads
of sullen or daredevil eyes, and lurk in the wild tones of those
unchastened voices, as the untidy or gaudily dressed and interminable
line of expectants, flushed with alcohol, yield surlily to the backward
wave of the policeman's baton. The materials of riot in the heart of the
vast and populous city then strike one with terror. We see the worst
elements of European life cast upon our shore, and impending, as it
were, like a huge wave, over the peacefulness and prosperity of the
nation. The corruptions of New York local government are explained at a
glance. The reason why even patriotic citizens shrink from the primary
meetings whence spring the practical issues of municipal rule is easily
understood; and the absolute necessity of a reform in the legislative
machinery, whereby property and character may find adequate
representation, is brought home to the most careless observer of
Broadway phenomena. But it is when threading the normal procession
therein that distrust wanes, in view of so much that is hopeful in
enterprise and education, and auspicious in social intelligence and
sympathy. It may be that on one of our bright and balmy days of early
spring, or on a cool and radiant autumnal afternoon, you behold, in your
walk from Union Square to the Battery, an eminent representative of each
function and phase of high civilization;--wealth vested in real estate
in the person of an Astor, peerless nautical architecture in a Webb; the
alert step and venerable head of the poet of nature, as Bryant glides
by, and the still bright eye of the poet of patriotism and wit, as
Halleck greets you with the zest of a rural visitor refreshed by the
sight of "old, familiar faces"; anon comes Bancroft, a chronicler of
America's past, yet moving sympathetically through living history the
while; Verplanck, the Knickerbocker Nestor, and the gentlemen of the old
school represented by Irving's old friend, the companionable and
courteous Governor Kemble; pensive, olive-cheeked, sad-eyed Hamlet, in
the person of Edwin Booth, our native histrionic genius; Vandyke-looking
Charles Elliot, the portrait-painter; Paez, the exiled South American
general; Farragut, the naval hero; Hancock, Hooker, Barlow, or some
other gallant army officer,--volunteer heroes, maimed veterans of the
Union war; merchants, whose names are synonymous with beneficence and
integrity; artists, whose landscapes have revealed the loveliness of
this hemisphere to the Old World; women who lend grace to society and
feed the poor; men of science, who alleviate, and of literature, who
console, the sorrows of humanity; the stanch in friendship, the loyal in
national sentiment, the indomitable in duty, the exemplary in Christian
faith, the tender and true in domestic life,--the redeeming and
recuperative elements of civic society.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY HEATHEN AT HOME.


Kicking my "Dutch wife,"[3] that comfortable Batavian device, to the
foot of the bed, and turning over with a delicious stretch just as day
began to dawn, I opened my eyes with a drowsy sense of refreshing
favor,--a half-dream, mixed of burning and breeze,--and discovered old
Karlee, my pearl of bhearers,[4] waiting in still patience on the
outside of the tent-like mosquito curtain, punka in hand, and tenderly
waving a balmy blessing across the sirocco-plagued sand of my slumber.

"Good morning, Karlee."

"_Salaam, Sahib-bhote-bhote salaam!_[5] Master catch plenty good isleep
this night, Karlee hope."

"So, so,--so, so. But you look happy this morning; your eyes are bright,
and your kummerbund[6] jaunty, and you sport a new turban. What's the
good news, old man?"

"Yes, Sahib. Large joy Karlee have got,--happy _kismut_,[7]--too much
jolly good luck, master, please."

"Aha! I'm glad of it. None too jolly for my patient Karlee, I'll
engage,--not a whit too happy and proud for my faithful, grateful,
humble old man. And what is it?"

"By master's favor, one man-child have got; one fine son he come this
night, please master's graciousness."

"A son--your wife!--what, you, Karlee, _you_?"

"Please master's pardon, no,--Karlee wife, no; Karlee daughter, Karlee
ison-in-law, one man-child have catch this night, by Sahib's merciful
goodness."

"So! your daughter and her husband, the young kitmudgar,[8] they that
were married last year. Good! let us exalt our horn, let us glorify
ourselves; for is it not written, 'By a son a man shall obtain victory
over all people; by a son's son he shall enjoy immortality; and by a
son's son's son he shall reach the solar abodes'? Verily it is pleasant
to have a boy-butcha in the house,--the heir and lord. So we will even
make merry to-day; to-day we will take holiday. Let the buttons wait,
and the beard go awry; send the barber away, and tell the tailor to come
to-morrow; for one day Sahib, the master of earth, abdicates in favor of
_Puttro_, the 'Deliverer from Hell,' the true king for every pious
Hindoo. And here are some rupees to buy him a happy horoscope with, and
to pay the _gooroo_[9] for a good strong charm, warranted to avert the
Evil Eye."

"Ah! Master's bountiful favor too much compassion have,--too much
pitiful munif--"

"That's all right, old man. Salaam now; and good luck to the baby."

Now here, thought I, is a chance to observe my pagan at home, under the
most favorable circumstances. Karlee will devote the occasion to the
domestic felicities; he will spread holiday fare, and there will be
neighborly congratulations, and a hospitable relaxation in the family of
the orthodox heathen rigor. I will make a "surprise party" of myself,
and on the recommendation of a string of corals for the new butcha I'll
catch him in the very dishabille of his Hindooism. And I did.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had often heard that Karlee lived well, and that his household enjoyed
substantial comfort in a degree notably superior to the general
circumstances of his class. With eminent intelligence and devotion he
had served for more than forty years various American gentlemen residing
in Calcutta, by whom, in his neat-handedness, he was esteemed a sort of
he-Phillis; and for his housewifely dusting of books and furniture, his
orderly keeping of drawers and trunks, his sharp eye to punkas and
mosquito-nets, and his exacting discipline of sweepers and messengers,
barbers, tailors, and washermen, he had been rewarded with generous
buksheesh over and above his stipulated, wages, which were liberal; so
that among bhearers he was distinguished for respectability, by income
as well as influence, and represented the best society. Between his own
savings and those of his wife,--who, as an _ayah_, or nurse, in an
English family high in the Civil Service, was extravagantly prized for
her fidelity, skill, and patience,--Karlee had laid up a little fortune
of ten thousand rupees; but that was partly by dint of a clever
speculation now and then in curiosities and choice presents, which he
disposed of among those of his American or English patrons who happened
to be homeward bound. As it is not permitted to a bhearer to engage
directly in trade, these neat little transactions were in all cases
shrewdly managed by a friend of Karlee's, a smart _sircar_,[10] in the
employ of a _banyan_,[11] the bhearer resting strictly in the
background, a silent partner, and limiting his co-operation to the
prompt furnishing of capital, which consisted not of rupees merely, but
of many a cunning hint as well, as to the tastes, ways, and weaknesses
of his customers. It was a mutual understanding: we knew of Karlee's
interest in these sentimental "operations," and we openly patronized
him; he knew which of us had wives, and which sweethearts, across the
black water, and he mysteriously patronized us. On that subject my
heathen was always at home; and so it happened, by a happy dispensation
of cause and effect, that at home he lived like a gentleman.

Through narrow, dingy miles of scrambling bazaar, redolent of all the
unfragrances of that dusty, sweaty, greasy, jabbering quarter, I rolled
in my light buggy, behind a nimble Arab mare, to a suburban retreat on
the eastern skirt of the Black Town, where, just beyond a cluster of
mean huts of the _sooa-logue_, the low laboring rabble, I found Karlee's
genteel abode, and was refreshed by the contrast it presented to the
hovel of his next neighbor, whose single windowless apartment, and walls
of alternate rows of straw and reeds, plastered with mud, proclaimed
most unpicturesquely the hard fate of him who springs from the soles of
Brahma's feet. Karlee's walls were of solid clay of substantial
thickness. His floor was raised a foot or two above the ground, and
there was a neatly thatched roof over all, swelling out in an elongated
dome, and oddly resembling an inverted boat. As in the rural districts,
Karlee had fenced in his privacy with a thick hedge of clipped bamboo
surmounting a quadrangular embankment. Before the grateful porch two
beautiful tamarind-trees and a palm bestowed their kindly shade, and in
the hedge the bamboos, with their golden stems and bright green leaves,
rustled cheerfully.

On the other side of the road, and shyly retired from it in a close
bamboo covert, dwelt Karlee's partner in the curiosity and general fancy
line, the sharp sircar, with whom (both being _soodras_,[12] and of the
same sect) his social relations were intimate and free. The sircar,
having thriven under the patronage of more than one rich and liberal
_baboo_,[13] to whose favor he had recommended himself by his business
alertness and his ever-politic compliance, had attained unto the honor
of a brick house of two stories, plastered and whitewashed without and
within, with a flat roof, having a low parapet, and laid with a
rain-proof composition of clay and lime. Though his stairs are narrow,
his veranda is commodious; and when he shall have made his fortune in
the curiosity and general fancy line, he will have wings, with a
central area open to the sky, and a double veranda with a lattice. Then,
his accommodations being sufficiently enlarged, the proudest wish of his
heart shall be gratified in the reunion of his entire family--children
and grandchildren, even uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces--under the
same roof.

As I drove up to Karlee's hedge, and, tossing the reins to my
_syce_,[14] passed under the tamarind-trees to the little porch, the old
man came out to meet me with unwonted precipitation; and, although he
maintained with admirable presence of mind that imperturbable gravity,
that tranquil, expectant self-possession, which is the study of a
Hindoo's life, and to which he gives all his mind from the time when he
first begins to have any, ever solicitous to be master of himself though
China fall, it was not difficult on this occasion to detect in the
fluttering lights and shades of his countenance an expression mixed of
astonishment, gratification, and confusion, very natural to a poor
bhearer who had never before been taken by a Sahib in the very bosom of
his family. There was something at once pitiful and comical in the
subdued "fidget" with which, applying his joined palms to his forehead,
and lowly louting, he made his most obsequious salaam again and again.

"Master have command for Karlee? Any wrong thing happen, master?
_Dhobee_[15] come? _Mehtur_[16] not sweep room? _Punka-wallah_[17] run
away? Sahibs make visit? _Kitmudgar_ not--"

"No, no; everything all right and proper. I have come to bring good
wishes and a lucky eye to all this house, and a small _salaamee_, a
pretty gift, for the new _Suntoshum_,--the jewel that hangs on its
mother's bosom."

"Ah! master make slave too much happy honor. Master's pitiful
graciousness all same _Barra Lard Sahib_" (the Governor-General). "Poor,
foolish bhearer kiss master's feet."

"Well, another time for that. Lead the way now, and let me make my
salaam to your coolest mat and your largest punka, for I am hot and
tired."

"S'pose Sahib like, _Belatta pawnee_ have got?"

"_Acha; Belatta pawnee lou_."[18]

Here, indeed, was a wide stride in the direction of refinement and
Evangelism! Soda-water in a bhearer's house! Karlee had not served the
Sahibs, and observed "Young Bengal" baboos, in vain. From _Belatta
pawnee_ to Isherryshrob and Simpkin (sherry and champagne) is not far,
and well does Young Bengal know the way.

A quick glance, as I passed in, informed me that Karlee's house
consisted of four rooms; probably two sleeping apartments, one for the
men and another for the women, a kitchen, and a common room for meals,
family chats, and visitors. Like all true Hindoo houses, uncorrupted by
the European innovations which snobbish baboos affect, it contained but
few articles of furniture, and those of the simplest and most
indispensable description,--nothing for luxury, nothing for show. To the
outfit of the poorest laborer's domicile he added little more than a
white cloth spread over checkered Chinese matting, to stand for chair,
table, and bed; a cushion or two to recline upon; a few earthen vessels
of the better quality, to hold rice or water; a brass lamp for cocoa-nut
oil; several more primitive lamps rudely made of the shell of the
cocoa-nut; an iron mortar and pestle--foreign, of course--for pounding
curry; a couple of _charpoys_, or wooden cots; a few brass _lotahs_, or
drinking-cups; and two or three hubble-bubbles. But the crowning glories
were a Chinese extension chair, of bamboo and wicker, and quite a pretty
hookah,--both evidently dedicated to company occasions. These were all
that I could see in the two rooms to which I was admitted, and these
were no doubt the very splendors of Karlee's establishment. If he had
been a rich Anglicized baboo, he would have had a profusion of hot,
tawdry chairs, and a vulgar-gorgeous cramming of gilt-edged tables,
sweaty red sofas, coarse pictures in overdone frames, Bowery mirrors,
and Brummagem chandeliers.

Comfortably installed in the Chinese chair, and refreshed with the
Belatta pawnee, I proceeded to take notes. Karlee had discarded his
working dress for festal attire,--the difference being one of quality
merely. Round his waist he wore a _dhotee_ of coarse muslin, tight
above, so as to form the _kummerbund_, or waistband, but thence falling
in loose and not ungraceful folds down the legs to the ankles. Over his
body another ample mantle, in no respect differing from the _dhotee_ as
to texture or color, was wrapped like a broad scarf, and carelessly
flung over the shoulder in the fashion of a Highland plaid. In the
"cold" season he would draw this over his head for a hood. These sheets
of cloth are worn just as they come from the loom; needle or pin has
never touched them, and they are held in place by tucking the ends under
the folds.

Being a Hindoo gentleman of the old school, Karlee repudiated the
headdress at home; for the _puggree_, at least in its present form, was
adopted from the Mohammedan conquerors, and is, historically, a badge of
subjugation. So when he met me at the door his head was uncovered; but I
had no sooner crossed the threshold than he made haste to don his flat
turban,--reflecting, perhaps, that I had never seen him without it, and
might resent his bare head as an indignity. Of course his feet were
unshod. To have worn his sandals in my presence would have been a
flagrant insult; but on the porch I espied those two queer clogs of
wood, shaped to the sole of the foot, and having no other fastening than
an impracticable-looking knob, to be held between the toes.

This is the orthodox Hindoo dress; but the costume for public occasions
of many Hindoos of rank has been for a quarter of a century in a state
of transition from Mohammedan to British. By way of turbans, loose
trousers, Cashmere shawls, and embroidered slippers, they are marching
on toward pantaloons, waistcoats, shoes and stockings, stove-pipe hats,
and tail-coats. A baboo of superlative fashion, according to the code of
Young Bengal, paid me a visit one day in a state of confirmed "pants"
and "Congress gaiters"; and, on seating himself, he took off his turban
and held it on his knee. I need hardly say that he was a fool and an
infidel. And I have seen an intrepid buffoon of this class in an English
shirt, which he wore over his pantaloons, and hanging down to his knees.
But, after all, these clumsy desecrations are confined to a small
minority of the population, if not strictly to that "set" which is
brought most closely in contact with Europeans; such as a few native
gentlemen in the Presidency capitals, some of the pleaders and principal
_employés_ of the higher courts, not a few of the teachers and pupils in
the Anglo-Indian schools, and many of the native Christians.

Karlee's politeness, superior to that of the more servile bhearers, was
a fair type of the pure Hindoo manners of that well-bred middle class
which clings with orthodox conservatism to its dear traditions, and
spurns as unconstitutional all upstart and dandy amendments of the old
social and religious law. He had invariably one salutation for an
equal,--the right hand gently raised, and the head as gently inclined to
meet it; another, for what I may term a familiar superior (such as
myself),--the hands joined palm to palm, and so applied twice or thrice
to the forehead; and still other, and more and more reverential,
ceremonials for _gooroos_, Brahmins, holy sages, and princes,--the brow
touching the ground, or the whole body prostrated.

If it was an indispensable requirement of respect that he should leave
his slippers at the door on entering any house, it was no less important
that he should resume them on taking his leave. To have appeared in
public with uncovered feet would have been a gross breach of propriety.
Fine old Hindoo gentlemen, all of the olden time, find it difficult to
express their mingled contempt, indignation, and regret for the
innovation which substitutes the Cheapside shoe for the ceremonial
slipper, or permits the wearing of the latter in a Sahib's office or
drawing-room. It shows, they say, that the natives are losing their
respect for the Sahibs. And yet the British authorities stupidly
sanction it, even set the seal of fashion upon it, by allowing natives
of rank, who visit Government House, to appear in the presence of the
Governor-General, and the _élite_ of the European society, in their
slippers. The fact is, these impious disturbings of the established
order of things are most shocking to the well-regulated heathen mind, to
which no spectacle can be more monstrous than that of a Hindoo of good
caste and old family performing with some arf-and-arf Cockney visitor a
duet on the pump-handle, and directly afterward wreathing his apoplectic
neck with flowers, and sprinkling his asthmatic waistcoat with
rose-water. You see they both back "Young Bengal" in the Barrackpore
races.

When Karlee visits his friend the sircar, he is scrupulous not to make
his parting salaam until his host has given the customary signal. He
waits to be dismissed, or rather to receive permission to withdraw. The
etiquette supposes that his inclination is to prolong the enjoyment he
derives from the society of so agreeable a gentleman; it is, therefore,
not until rose-water has been presented to him, or betel-leaf, or
sweetmeats, that he will venture to take his sandals and his leave.

The style of Hindoo politeness is format and imperturbably grave,
utterly devoid of heartiness or impulsiveness; and the cordiality which
distinguishes the intercourse of American friends appears to the native
gentleman boisterous and vulgar. I never saw Karlee laugh; and if I had
happened to snatch him from sudden death by fire or water, I think he
would have acknowledged the obligation with precisely the same
mathematical salaam, or at most the same sententious obsequiousness,
with which he accepted a buksheesh of a half-rupee; and yet in both
good-humor and gratitude he was as cheerful and as worthy as the most
giddy and gushing of damsels. But I must acknowledge there was something
truly corpsy in the solemnity with which he would "lay out" a clean
shirt. Even so, in the midst of all the jolly uproar of a mess dinner,
our Kitmudgars would stand in grim deadliness at our backs, like so many
executioners, only waiting for a sign from the ruthless Kousomar, who
was just then horribly popping the champagne corks, to behead us,--each
his own doomed Sahib.

No wonder Karlee was a gentleman; for the Vishnu Pooran was his
Chesterfield, and he had its precepts by heart. "A wise man," he would
say to the pert young Kitmudgars, as they bragged and wrangled, between
their hubble-bubbles, on the back stairs,--"a wise man will never
address another with the least unkindness; but will always speak gently,
and with truth, and never make public another's faults. He will never
engage in a dispute with either his superiors or his inferiors:
controversy and marriage are permitted only between equals. Nor will he
ever associate with wicked persons: half an instant is the utmost time
he should allow himself to remain in their company. A wise man, when
sitting, will not put one foot over the other, nor stretch forth his
foot in the presence of a superior; but he will sit with modesty, in the
posture styled _virasama_. Above all, he will not expectorate at the
time of eating, offering oblations, or repeating prayers, or in the
presence of any respectable person; nor will he ever cross the shadow of
a venerable man or of an idol."

For those who imagine that polygamy is a popular institution in
Hindostan, the answer of a Hill-man to a Mofussil magistrate should
suffice. "Do you keep more than one wife?" "We can hardly feed one; why
should we keep more?" In fact, the privilege of maintaining a plurality
of wives is restricted to a very few,--those only of the largest means
and smallest scruples,--except in the case of _Kooleen_ Brahmins, that
superlative aristocracy of caste which is supposed to be descended from
certain illustrious families who settled in Bengal several centuries
ago. Wealthy Hindoos of low degree eagerly aspire to the honor of mixing
their puddle blood with the quintessentially clarified fluid that
glorifies the circulatory systems of these demigods, and the result is a
very pretty and profitable branch of the Brahmin business,--_Kooleen_
marrying sometimes as many as fifty of such nut-brown maids of baser
birth, in consideration of a substantial dowry attached to each bride,
and a solemn obligation, accepted and signed by the paternal Puddle,
forever to feed at home her and her improved progeny. So the fifty
continue to roost in the old paternal coops, while Kooleen, like a
pampered Brahmapootra, struts, in pompous patronage, from one to the
other, his sense of duty satisfied when he has left a crow and a cackle
behind him. It is said that many fine fowls of the Brahmin breed, who do
not happen to be Kooleens, complain of the monopoly.

So Karlee had but one wife,--the handy, thrifty ayah already mentioned.
She was nine and he twelve years old when they were betrothed, and they
never saw each other until they were married. A professional
match-maker, or go-between,--female, of course,--was employed by the
parents to negotiate terms and arrange the preliminaries; and when
horoscopes had been compared and the stars found all right, with a
little consequential chaffering, the hymeneal instruments were
"executed." There was no trouble on the score of caste, both families
being soodra; otherwise, the sensitive social balance would have had to
be adjusted by the payment of a sum of money. When the skirts of the
bride and bridegroom had been fastened together with blades of the
sweet-scented cusa grass,--when he had said, "May that heart which is
thine become my heart, and this heart which is mine become thy
heart,"--when, hand in hand, they had stept into the seventh of the
mystic circles,--Mr. and Mrs. Karlee were an accomplished Hindoo fact.

To the parents on both sides, the wedding was a costly performance.
There were the irrepressible and voracious Brahmins to propitiate, the
hungry friends of both families to feast for three days, the musicians
and the nautch-girls and the _tamasha-wallahs_[19] to be bountifully
buksheeshed; and when the bridal palanquin was borne homeward, it was a
high-priced indispensability that the procession should satisfy the best
soodra society,--

    "With the yellow torches gleaming,
    And the scarlet mantles streaming,
    And the canopy above
    Swaying as they slowly move."

Karlee has assured me that neither his father nor his father-in-law,
although both were soodras of fair credit and condition, ever quite
recovered from the financial shock of that "awspidges okashn."

A Hindoo very rarely pronounces the name of his wife, even to his most
intimate friends,--to strangers, and especially foreigners, never; on
the part of a native visitor it is the etiquette to ignore her
altogether, and for the husband to allude to her familiarly is an
unpardonable breach of decorum. When, therefore, Karlee, to gratify my
friendly curiosity, led in the happy grandmother, I felt that I was the
recipient of an extraordinary mark of respect and confidence, involving
a generous sacrifice of prejudice. As she made her modest salaam, and,
in the manner of a shy child, sank to the floor in the habitual posture
of an ayah, I had before me the well-preserved remains of a Hindoo
beauty, according to the standard of the Shasters,--a placid, reposeful
woman, almost fat, with rather delicate features of Rajpoot fairness,
the complexion of high caste, wealth, and ease, such as her
less-favored sisters vainly strive to imitate with a sort of saffron
_rouge_. Her expression was chaste and gentle, her voice dulcet; and to
the practice of carrying light burdens on her head she was indebted for
a carriage erect and graceful. On Broadway or Tremont Street, Mrs.
Karlee would have passed for a very comely colored woman. If she was not
like Rama, fair as the jasmine, or the moon, or the fibres of the lotos,
neither had she, like Krishna, the complexion of a cloud. If she was not
so delicate as that dainty beauty who bewitched the hard heart of
Surajah Dowlah, and weighed but sixty-four pounds, neither did she
reproduce the unwieldy charms of that Venus of one of the Shasters
"whose gait was the gait of a drunken elephant or a goose." A prudent
man, says the Vishnoo Pooran, will not marry a woman who has a beard, or
one who has thick ankles, or one who speaks with a shrill voice, or one
who croaks like a raven, or one whose eyebrows meet, or one whose teeth
resemble tusks. And Karlee was a prudent man.

From the extravagant and clumsy complications, the stupid caprices and
discords, and studious indecencies of our women's fashions, to the
prudent simplicity, the unconscious poetry and picturesqueness and
musically blended modesty and freedom of the good ayah's unchangeable
attire, my thought reverts with a mingled sense of refreshment and
regret. A single web of cloth, eight or nine yards long, having a narrow
blue border, was drawn in self-forming folds around her shoulders and
bosom, and hung down to her feet,--the material muslin, the texture
somewhat coarse, the color white. No dressmaker had ever played
fantastic tricks with it: it was pure and simple in its entireness as it
came from the loom.

Other women, of the laboring class, and very poor, passed to and fro on
the street, half naked, their legs and shoulders bare, and with only a
piece of dirty cloth--blue, red, or yellow--around the loins and hips;
while here and there some superfine baboo's wife floated past in her
close palanquin, or sat with her children on the flat roof of her house,
or peeped through her narrow windows into the street, arrayed in fancy
bodice and petticoat,--Mohammedan fashion.

But the simplicity of Mrs. Karlee's attire began and ended with her
drapery. Her ornaments were cumbersome, clumsy, and grotesque. On her
arms and ankles were many fetter-like bands of silver and copper; rude
rings of gold and silver adorned her fingers and great toes; small
silver coins were twisted in her hair; and the naturally delicate
outline of her lips was deformed by a broad gold ring, which she wore,
like a fractious ox, in her nose. This latter vanity is as precious as
it is ugly; in some of the minor castes its absence is regarded as a
badge of widowhood; and for no inducement would the pious ayah have
removed it from its place, even for an instant. Had it fallen, by any
dreadful chance, the house would have been filled with horror and
lamentation. The half-naked wife of my syce rejoices in a nose-ring of
brass or pewter, and her wrists and ankles are gay with hoops of painted
shell-lac; and even she stains her eyelids with lampblack, and tinges
her nails with henna. Much lovelier was our pretty ayah in her
maidenhood, when her dainty bosom was decked with shells and
sweet-scented flowers, and her raven hair lighted up with sprays of the
Indian jasmine, which first she had offered to Seeta.

But that reminds me that, when I approached her, and presented the
string of corals, my small _salaamee_, and bade Karlee tell her that it
was for the baby,--for she understood not a word of English,--and that I
wished him happy stars and a good name, riches and honors, and a
houseful of sons,--she uttered not a word; but with eyes brimming with
gratitude, flattered to tears, by a sudden graceful movement she touched
my foot with her hand and immediately laid it on her head,--and then,
with many shy and mute, but eloquent salaams, retired. It is difficult
to imagine such a woman scolding and slang-whanging as low Hindoo women
do, accompanying with passionate attitudes and gestures a reckless
torrent of words, and fitting the foulest action to the most scandalous
epithet.

The wives of the native servants are generally industrious. This one,
Karlee boasted, was a notable housewife. Before she went out to service
as an ayah she had cleaned the rice, pounded the curry, cooked all the
meals, brought water from the tank in earthen jars on her head, swept
and scrubbed the floor, cultivated a small kitchen garden, "shopped" at
the bazaar, spun endless supplies of cotton thread on a very primitive
reel, consisting of a piece of wire with a ball of clay at the end of
it, which she twirled with one hand while she fed it with the other; and
every morning she bathed in the Hooghly, and returned home before
daybreak. Sewing and knitting were unknown arts to her,--she had no use
for either; and her washing and ironing were done by a hired dhobee.

True, it was not permitted to her to eat with her husband; when Karlee
dined she sat at the respectful orthodox distance, and waited; and if at
any time they walked out together, ayah must keep her legal place in the
rear. Saith the Shaster, "Is it not the practice of women of immaculate
chastity to eat after their lords have eaten, to sleep only after they
have slept, and to rise from sleep before them?" And again, "Let a wife
who wishes to perform sacred ablution wash the feet of her lord, and
drink the water." Nevertheless, ayah exercised an influence over her
husband as decided as it was wholesome; she did not hesitate to rebuke
him when occasion required; and in all that related to the moral
government of her children she was free to dispute his authority, and
try parental conclusions with him,--kindly but firmly. As for "the
tyrannical immuring of the Oriental female," the cruel caging of the
pretty birds who are supposed to be forever longing and pining for the
gossip of the _ghaut_ and the bustle of the bazaar, the only fault she
had to find with it was that she did not get enough of it. The
well-trained Hindoo woman has been taught to regard such seclusion as
her most charming compliment, and a precious proof of her husband's
affection; to be kept jealously veiled from the staring world, is
associated in her mind with ideas of wealth and rank,--it is the very
aristocracy of fashion.

According to the Code of Menyu, "a believer in Scripture may receive
pure knowledge even from a soodra, a lesson of the highest virtue even
from a chandala, and a woman bright as a gem even from the lowest
family." So if Karlee's wife, instead of being of the same social rank
as himself, had come of basest caste, she would still have been a
treasure. Soon after she had retired, she gently pushed into the room,
to pay his respects to the Sahib, a shy little boy of five years, whom
Karlee presented to me as the child of his only son, a bhearer in the
service of an English officer stationed at Fort William. The mother had
died in blessing her husband with this bright little puttro. In costume
he was the exact miniature of his grandfather, except that he wore no
puggree, and his hair was cut short round the forehead in a quaint
frill, like the small boys one sees running about the streets in Orissa.
His ankles, too, were loaded with massive silver rings, which noticeably
impeded the childish freedom of his steps. When he has begun to
understand what the word "wife" means, these must be laid aside. In his
manners, likewise, little Karlee was the very tautology of his namesake
with the gray moustache,--the same wary self-possession, the same
immovable gravity and nice decorum. Like a little courtier, he made his
small salaam, and through his grandfather replied to some playful
questions I addressed to him, with good emphasis and discretion, without
either awkwardness or boldness, and especially without a smile. When I
gave him a rupee, he construed it as the customary signal, and with
another small salaam immediately dismissed himself.

Little Karlee must have taken lessons in deportment with his primal pap;
and in India all good little boys, who hope to go to heaven when they
die, keep their noses clean, and never romp or whistle. As to girls it
matters less; the midwife gets only half price for consummating that
sort of blunder; for when you are dead only a son can carry you out and
bury you _dacent_,--no daughter, though she pray with the power and
perseverance of the Seven Penitents, can procure you a respectable
metempsychosis.

