Thus far we have been enabled to see, according to the Bible record,
that the posterity of Canaan did not go into bondage; that it was a
powerful people, both in point of numbers and wealth; and, from the
number and character of the cities it built, we infer that it was an
intellectual posterity. We conclude that thus far there is no
evidence, from a biblical standpoint, that Noah's prophecy was
fulfilled. But, notwithstanding the absence of scriptural proof as to
the bondage of the children of Canaan, the venerable Dr. Mede says,
"There never has been a son of Ham who has shaken a sceptre over the
head of Japheth. Shem has subdued Japheth, and Japheth has subdued
Shem; but Ham has never subdued either." The doctor is either
falsifying the facts of history, or is ignorant of history. The
Hebrews were in bondage in Egypt for centuries. Egypt was peopled by
Misraim, the second son of Ham. Who were the Shemites? They were
Hebrews! The Shemites were in slavery to the Hamites. Melchizedek,
whose name was expressive of his character,--_king of righteousness_
(or a righteous king), was a worthy priest of the most high God; and
Abimelech, whose name imports _parental king_, pleaded the integrity
of his heart and the righteousness of his nation before God, and his
plea was admitted. Yet both these personages appear to have been
Canaanites."[22] Melchizedek and Abimelech were Canaanites, and the
most sacred and honorable characters in Old-Testament history. It was
Abraham, a Shemite, who, meeting Melchizedek, a Canaanite, gave him a
tenth of all his spoils. It was Nimrod, a Cushite, who "went to Asher,
and built Nineveh," after subduing the Shemites, So it seems very
plain that Noah's prophecy did not come true in every respect, and
that it was not the word of God. "And God blessed Noah and his
sons."[23] God pronounces his blessing upon this entire family, and
enjoins upon them to "be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the
earth." Afterwards Noah seeks to abrogate the blessing of God by his
"cursed be Canaan." But this was only the bitter expression of a
drunken and humiliated parent lacking divine authority. No doubt he
and his other two sons conformed their conduct to the spirit of the
curse pronounced, and treated the Hamites accordingly. The scholarly
Dr. William Jones[24] says that Ham was the youngest son of Noah; that
he had four sons, Cush, Misraim, Phut, and Canaan; and that they
peopled Africa and part of Asia.[25] The Hamites were the offspring of
Noah, and one of the three great families that have peopled the
earth.[26]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Gen. i. 27.

[2] Gen. ii. 7.

[3] Gen. ii. 15.

[4] Gen. i. 28.

[5] Gen. vi. 5_sq._

[6] Encycl. of Geo., p. 255.

[7] If the Apostle Paul had asserted that all men resembled each other
in the color of their skin and the texture of their hair, or even in
their physiological make-up, he would have been at war with
observation and critical investigation. But, having announced a
wonderful truth in reference to the unity of the human race as based
upon one blood, science comes to his support, and through the
microscope reveals the corpuscles of the blood, and shows that the
globule is the same in all human blood.

[8] Deut. xxxii. 8, 9: "When the Most High divided to the nations
their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the
bounds of the people according to the number of the children of
Israel. For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance."

[9] Rom. v. 12, 14-21.

[10] Luke xxiii, 26: Acts vi. 9, also second chapter, tenth verse.
Matthew records the same fact in the twenty-seventh chapter,
thirty-second verse. "And at they came out, they found a man of
Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to bear his cross."

[11] See Melville's Sermons.

[12] Acts viii. 27.

[13] Pliny says the Ethiopian government subsisted for several
generations in the hands of queens whose name was _Candace_.

[14] See Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon.

[15] Jones's Biblical Cyclopædia, p. 311.

[16] The term Ethiope was anciently given to all those whose color was
darkened by the sun.--_Smyth's Unity of the Human Races_, chap. i. p.
34.

[17] Gen. ix. 24, 25. See also the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh
verses.

[18] Bible Views of Slavery, p. 7.

[19] Gen. ix. 23.

[20] Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride. See also Dr. Morton, and
Ethnological Journal, 4th No p. 172.

[21] Gen. x. 6-20.

[22] Dr. Bush.

[23] Gen. ix. I.

[24] Jones's Biblical Cyclopædia, p. 393. Ps. lxxviii. 51.

[25] Ps. cv. 23.

[26] If Noah's utterance were to be regarded as a prophecy, it applied
only to the Canaanites, the descendants of Canaan, Noah's grandson.
Nothing is said in reference to any person but Canaan in the supposed
prophecy.


CHAPTER II.

THE NEGRO IN THE LIGHT OF PHILOLOGY, ETHNOLOGY, AND EGYPTOLOGY.

     CUSHIM AND ETHIOPIA.--ETHIOPIANS, WHITE AND BLACK.--NEGRO
     CHARACTERISTICS.--THE DARK CONTINENT.--THE ANTIQUITY OF THE
     NEGRO.--INDISPUTABLE EVIDENCE.--THE MILITARY AND SOCIAL
     CONDITION OF NEGROES.--CAUSE OF COLOR.--THE TERM ETHIOPIAN.


There seems to be a great deal of ignorance and confusion in the use
of the word "Negro;"[27] and about as much trouble attends the proper
classification of the inhabitants of Africa. In the preceding chapter
we endeavored to prove, not that Ham and Canaan were the progenitors
of the Negro races,--for that is admitted by the most consistent
enemies of the blacks,--but that the human race is _one_, and that
Noah's curse was not a divine prophecy.

The term "Negro" seems to be applied chiefly to the dark and
woolly-haired people who inhabit Western Africa. But the Negro is to
be found also in Eastern Africa.[28] Zonaras says, "Chus is the person
from whom the Cuseans are derived. They are the same people as the
Ethiopians." This view is corroborated by Josephus.[29] Apuleius, and
Eusebius. The Hebrew term "Cush" is translated Ethiopia by the
Septuagint, Vulgate, and by almost all other versions, ancient and
modern, as well as by the English version. "It is not, therefore, to
be doubted that the term '_Cushim_' has by the interpretation of all
ages been translated by 'Ethiopians,' because they were also known by
their black color, and their transmigrations, which were easy and
frequent."[30] But while it is a fact, supported by both sacred and
profane history, that the terms "Cush" and "Ethiopian" were used
interchangeably, there seems to be no lack of proof that the same
terms were applied frequently to a people who were not Negroes. It
should be remembered, moreover, that there were nations who were
black, and yet were not Negroes. And the only distinction amongst all
these people, who are branches of the Hamitic family, is the texture
of the hair. "But it is _equally_ certain, as we have seen, that the
term 'Cushite' is applied in Scripture to other branches of the same
family; as, for instance, to the Midianites, from whom Moses selected
his wife, and who could not have been Negroes. The term 'Cushite,'
therefore, is used in Scripture as denoting nations who were not
black, or in any respect Negroes, and also countries south of Egypt,
whose inhabitants were Negroes; and yet both races are declared to be
the descendants of Cush, the son of Ham. Even in Ezekiel's day the
interior African nations were not of one race; for he represents Cush,
Phut, Lud, and Chub, as either themselves constituting, or as being
amalgamated with, 'a mingled people' (Ezek. xxx. 5); 'that is to say,'
says Faber, 'it was a nation of Negroes who are represented as very
numerous,--_all_ the mingled people.'"[31]

The term "Ethiopia" was anciently given to all those whose color was
darkened by the sun. Herodotus, therefore, distinguishes the Eastern
Ethiopians who had straight hair, from the Western Ethiopians who had
curly or woolly hair.[32]. They are a twofold people, lying extended
in a long tract from the rising to the setting sun."[33]

The conclusion is patent. The words "Ethiopia" and "Cush" were used
always to describe a black people, or the country where such a people
lived. The term "Negro," from the Latin "_niger_" and the French
"_noir_," means black; and consequently is a modern term, with all the
original meaning of Cush and Ethiopia, with a single exception. We
called attention above to the fact that all Ethiopians were not of the
pure Negro type, but were nevertheless a branch of the original
Hamitic family from whence sprang all the dark races. The term "Negro"
is now used to designate the people, who, in addition to their dark
complexion, have curly or woolly hair. It is in this connection that
we shall use the term in this work.[34]

Africa, the home of the indigenous dark races, in a geographic and
ethnographic sense, is the most wonderful country in the world It is
thoroughly tropical. It has an area in English square miles of
11,556,600, with a population of 192,520,000 souls. It lies between
the latitudes of 38° north and 35° south; and is, strictly speaking,
an enormous peninsula, attached to Asia by the Isthmus of Suez. The
most northern point is the cape, situated a little to the west of Cabo
Blanco, and opposite Sicily, which lies in latitude 37° 20' 40" north,
longitude 9° 41' east. Its southernmost point is Cabo d'Agulhas, in
34° 49' 15" south; the distance between these two points being 4,330
geographical, or about 5,000 English miles. The westernmost point is
Cabo Verde, in longitude 17° 33' west; its easternmost, Cape
Jerdaffun, in longitude 51° 21' east, latitude 10° 25' north, the
distance between the two points being about the same as its length.
The western coasts are washed by the Atlantic, the northern by the
Mediterranean, and the eastern by the Indian Ocean. The shape of this
"dark continent" is likened to a triangle or to an Oval. It is rich in
oils, ivory, gold, and precious timber. It has beautiful lakes and
mighty rivers, that are the insoluble problems of the present times.

Of the antiquity of the Negro there can be no doubt. He is known as
thoroughly to history as any of the other families of men. He appears
at the first dawn of history, and has continued down to the present
time. The scholarly Gliddon says, that "the hieroglyphical designation
of 'KeSH,' exclusively applied to _African_ races as distinct from the
Egyptian, has been found by Lepsius as far back as the monuments of
the sixth dynasty, 3000 B.C. But the great influx of Negro and Mulatto
races into Egypt as captives dated from the twelfth dynasty; when,
about the twenty-second century, B.C., Pharaoh SESOUR-TASEN extended
his conquests up the Nile far into Nigritia. After the eighteenth
dynasty the monuments come down to the third century, A.D., without
one single instance in the Pharaonic or Ptolemaic periods that Negro
labor was ever directed to any agricultural or utilitarian
objects."[35] The Negro was found in great numbers with the Sukim,
Thut, Lubin, and other African nations, who formed the strength of the
army of the king of Egypt, Shishak, when he came against Rehoboam in
the year 971 B.C.; and in his tomb, opened in 1849, there were found
among his depicted army the exact representation of the genuine Negro
race, both in color, hair, and physiognomy. Negroes are also
represented in Egyptian paintings as connected with the military
campaigns of the eighteenth dynasty. They formed a part of the army of
Ibrahim Pacha, and were prized as gallant soldiers at Moncha and in
South Arabia.[36] And Herodotus assures us that Negroes were found in
the armies of Sesostris and Xerxes; and, at the present time, they are
no inconsiderable part of the standing army of Egypt.[37] Herodotus
states that eighteen of the Egyptian kings were Ethiopians.[38]

It is quite remarkable to hear a writer like John P. Jeffries, who
evidently is not very friendly in his criticisms of the Negro, make
such a positive declaration as the following:--

     "Every rational mind must, therefore, readily conclude that
     the African race has been in existence, as a distinct
     people, over four thousand two hundred years; and how long
     before that period is a matter of conjecture only, there
     being no reliable data upon which to predicate any reliable
     opinion."[39]

It is difficult to find a writer on ethnology, ethnography, or
Egyptology, who doubts the antiquity of the Negroes as a distinct
people. Dr. John C. Nott of Mobile, Ala., a Southern man in the widest
meaning, in his "Types of Mankind," while he tries to make his book
acceptable to Southern slaveholders, strongly maintains the antiquity
of the Negro.

     "Ethnological science, then, possesses not only the
     authoritative testimonies of Lepsius and Birch in proof of
     the existence of Negro races during the twenty-fourth
     century, B.C., but, the same fact being conceded by all
     living Egyptologists, we may hence infer that these
     Nigritian types were contemporary with the earliest
     Egyptians."[40]

In 1829 there was a remarkable Theban tomb opened by Mr. Wilkinson,
and in 1840 it was carefully examined by Harris and Gliddon. There is
a most wonderful collection of Negro scenes in it. Of one of these
scenes even Dr. Nott says,--

     "A Negress, apparently a princess, arrives at Thebes, drawn
     in a plaustrum by a pair of humped oxen, the driver and
     groom being red-colored Egyptians, and, one might almost
     infer, eunuchs. Following her are multitudes of Negroes and
     Nubians, bringing tribute from the upper country, as well as
     black slaves of both sexes and all ages, among which are
     some _red_ children, whose _fathers_ were Egyptians. The
     cause of her advent seems to have been to make offerings in
     the tomb of a 'royal son of KeS_h_--Amunoph,' who may have
     been her husband."[41]

It is rather strange that the feelings of Dr. Nott toward the Negro
were so far mollified as to allow him to make a statement that
destroys his heretofore specious reasoning about the political and
social status of the Negro. He admits the antiquity of the Negro; but
makes a special effort to place him in a servile state at all times,
and to present him as a vanquished vassal before Ramses III. and other
Egyptian kings. He sees no change in the Negro's condition, except
that in slavery he is better fed and clothed than in his native home.
But, nevertheless, the Negress of whom he makes mention, and the
entire picture in the Theban tomb, put down the learned doctor's
argument. Here is a Negro princess with Egyptian driver and groom,
with a large army of attendants, going on a long journey to the tomb
of her royal husband!

There is little room here to question the political and social
conditions of the Negroes.[42] They either had enjoyed a long and
peaceful rule, or by their valor in offensive warfare had won
honorable place by conquest. And the fact that black slaves are
mentioned does not in any sense invalidate the historical
trustworthiness of the pictures found in this Theban tomb; for
Wilkinson says, in reference to the condition of society at this
period,--

     "It is evident that both white and black slaves were
     employed as servants; they attended on the guests when
     invited to the house of their master; and, from their being
     in the families of priests as well as of the military
     chiefs, we may infer that they were purchased with money,
     and that the right of possessing slaves was not confined to
     those who had taken them in war. The traffic in slaves was
     tolerated by the Egyptians; and it is reasonable to suppose
     that many persons were engaged ... in bringing them to Egypt
     for public sale, independent of those who were sent as part
     of the tribute, and who were probably, at first, the
     property of the monarch; nor did any difficulty occur to the
     Ishmaelites in the purchase of Joseph from his brethren, nor
     in his subsequent sale to Potiphar on arriving in Egypt."

So we find that slavery was not, at this time, confined to any
particular race of people. This Negro princess was as liable to
purchase white as black slaves; and doubtless some were taken in
successful wars with other nations, while others were purchased as
servants.

But we have further evidence to offer in favor of the antiquity of the
Negro. In Japan, and in many other parts of the East, there are to be
found stupendous and magnificent temples, that are hoary with age. It
is almost impossible to determine the antiquity of some of them, in
which the idols are exact representations of woolly-haired Negroes,
although the inhabitants of those countries to-day have straight hair.
Among the Japanese, black is considered a color of good omen. In the
temples of Siam we find the idols fashioned like unto Negroes.[43]
Osiris, one of the principal deities of the Egyptians, is frequently
represented as black.[44] Bubastis, also, the Diana of Greece, and a
member of the great Egyptian Triad, is now on exhibition in the
British Museum, sculptured in black basalt silting figure.[45] Among
the Hindus, Kali, the consort of Siva, one of their great Triad;
Crishna, the eighth incarnation of Vishnu; and Vishnu also himself,
the second of the Trimerti or Hindu Triad, are represented of a black
color.[46] Dr. Morton says,--

     "The Sphinx may have been the shrine of the Negro population
     of Egypt, who, as a people, were unquestionably under our
     average size. Three million Buddhists in Asia represent
     their chief deity, Buddha, with Negro features and hair.
     There are two other images of Buddha, one at Ceylon and the
     other at Calanee, of which Lieut. Mahoney says, 'Both these
     statues agree in having crisped hair and long, pendent
     ear-rings,'"[47]

And the learned and indefatigable Hamilton Smith says,--

     "In the plains of India are Nagpoor, and a ruined city
     without name at the gates of Benares (perhaps the real Kasi
     of tradition), once adorned with statues of a woolly-haired
     race."[48]

Now, these substantial and indisputable traces of the march of the
Negro races through Japan and Asia lead us to conclude that the Negro
race antedates all profane history. And while the great body of the
Negro races have been located geographically in Africa, they have
been, in no small sense, a cosmopolitan people. Their wanderings may
be traced from the rising to the setting sun.

     "The remains of architecture and sculpture in India seem to
     prove an early connection between that country and
     Africa.... The Pyramids of Egypt, the colossal statues
     described by Pausanias and others, the Sphinx, and the
     Hermes Canis, which last bears a strong resemblance to the
     Varaha Avatar, indicate the style of the same indefatigable
     workmen who formed the vast excavations of Canarah, the
     various temples and images of Buddha, and the idols which
     are continually dug up at Gaya or in its vicinity. These and
     other indubitable facts may induce no ill-grounded opinion,
     that Ethiopia and Hindustan were peopled or colonized by the
     same extraordinary race; in confirmation of which it may be
     added, that the mountaineers of Bengal and Benhar can hardly
     be distinguished in some of their features, particularly in
     their lips and noses, from the modern Abyssinians."[49]

There is little room for speculation here to the candid searcher after
truth. The evidence accumulates as we pursue our investigations.
Monuments and temples, sepulchred stones and pyramids, rise up to
declare the antiquity of the Negro races. Hamilton Smith, after
careful and critical investigation, reaches the conclusion, that the
Negro type of man was the most ancient, and the indigenous race of
Asia, as far north as the lower range of the Himalaya Mountains, and
presents at length many curious facts which cannot, he believes, be
otherwise explained.

     "In this view, the first migrations of the Negro stock,
     coasting westward by catamarans, or in wretched canoes, and
     skirting South-western Asia, may synchronize with the
     earliest appearance of the Negro tribes of Eastern Africa,
     and just precede the more mixed races, which, like the
     Ethiopians of Asia, passed the Red Sea at the Straits of
     Bab-el-Mandeb, ascended the Nile, or crossed that river to
     the west."[50]

Taking the whole southern portion of Asia westward to Arabia, this
conjecture--which likewise was a conclusion drawn, after patient
research, by the late Sir T. Stanford Raffles--accounts, more
satisfactorily than any other, for the Oriental habits, ideas,
traditions, and words which can be traced among several of the present
African tribes and in the South-Sea Islands. Traces of this black race
are still found along the Himalaya range from the Indus to Indo-China,
and the Malay peninsula, and in a mixed form all through the southern
states to Ceylon.[51]

But it is unnecessary to multiply evidence in proof of the antiquity
of the Negro. His presence in this world was coetaneous with the other
families of mankind: here he has toiled with a varied fortune; and
here under God--_his_ God--he will, in the process of time, work out
all the sublime problems connected with his future as a man and a
brother.

There are various opinions rife as to the cause of color and texture
of hair in the Negro. The generally accepted theory years ago was,
that the curse of Cain rested upon this race; while others saw in the
dark skin of the Negro the curse of Noah pronounced against Canaan.
These two explanations were comforting to that class who claimed that
they had a right to buy and sell the Negro; and of whom the Saviour
said, "For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay
them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with
one of their fingers."[52] But science has, of later years, attempted
a solution of this problem. Peter Barrère, in his treatise on the
subject, takes the ground that the bile in the human system has much
to do with the color of the skin.[53] This theory, however, has drawn
the fire of a number of European scholars, who have combated it with
more zeal than skill. It is said that the spinal and brain matter are
of a dark, ashy color; and by careful examination it is proven that
the blood of Ethiopians is black. These facts would seem to clothe
this theory with at least a shadow of plausibility. But the opinion of
Aristotle, Strabo, Alexander, and Blumenbach is, that the climate,
temperature, and mode of life, have more to do with giving color than
any thing else. This is certainly true among animals and plants. There
are many instances on record where dogs and wolves, etc., have turned
white in winter, and then assumed a different color in the spring. If
you start at the north and move south, you will find, at first, that
the flowers are very white and delicate; but, as you move toward the
tropics, they begin to take on deeper and richer hues until they run
into almost endless varieties. Guyot argues on the other side of the
question to account for the intellectual diversity of the races of
mankind.

     "While all the types of animals and of plants go on
     decreasing in perfection, from the equatorial to the polar
     regions, in proportion to the temperatures, man presents to
     our view his purest, his most perfect type, at the very
     centre of the temperate continents,--at the centre of Asia,
     Europe, in the regions of Iran, of Armenia, and of the
     Caucasus; and, departing from this geographical centre in
     the three grand directions of the lands, the types gradually
     lose the beauty of their forms, in proportion to their
     distance, even to the extreme points of the southern
     continents, where we find the most deformed and degenerate
     races, and the lowest in the scale of humanity."[54]

The learned professor seeks to carry out his famous geographical
argument, and, with great skill and labor, weaves his theory of the
influence of climate upon the brain and character of man. But while no
scholar would presume to combat the theory that plants take on the
most gorgeous hues as one nears the equator, and that the races of
mankind take on a darker color in their march toward the equator,
certainly no student of Oriental history will assent to the
unsupported doctrine, that the intensity of the climate of tropical
countries affects the intellectual status of races. If any one be so
prejudiced as to doubt this, let him turn to "Asiatic Researches," and
learn that the dark races have made some of the most invaluable
contributions to science, literature, civil-engineering, art, and
architecture that the world has yet known. Here we find the cradle of
civilization, ancient and remote.

Even changes and differences in color are to be noted in almost every
community.

     "As we go westward we observe the light color predominating
     over the dark; and then, again, when we come within the
     influence of damp from the sea-air, we find the shade
     deepened into the general blackness of the coast
     population."

The artisan and farm-laborer may become exceedingly dark from
exposure, and the sailor is frequently so affected by the weather that
it is next to impossible to tell his nationality.

     "It is well known that the Biscayan women are a shining
     white, the inhabitants of Granada on the contrary dark, to
     such an extent, that, in this region, the pictures of the
     blessed Virgin and other saints are painted of the same
     color."[55]

The same writer calls attention to the fact, that the people on the
Cordilleras, who live under the mountains towards the west, and are,
therefore, exposed to the Pacific Ocean, are quite, or nearly, as fair
in complexion as the Europeans; whereas, on the contrary, the
inhabitants of the opposite side, exposed to the burning sun and
scorching winds, are copper-colored. Of this theory of climateric
influence we shall say more farther on.

It is held by some eminent physicians in Europe and America, that the
color of the skin depends upon substances external to the _cutis
vera_. Outside of the _cutis_ are certain layers of a substance
various in consistence, and scarcely perceptible: here is the home and
seat of color; and these may be regarded as secretions from the
vessels of the _cutis_. The dark color of the Negro principally
depends on the substance interposed between the true skin and the
scarf-skin. This substance presents different appearances: and it is
described sometimes as a sort of organized network or reticular
tissue; at others, as a mere mucous or slimy layer; and it is odd that
these somewhat incompatible ideas are both conveyed by the term
_reticulum mucosum_ given to the intermediate portion of the skin by
its orignal discoverer, Malpighi. There is, no doubt, something
plausible in all the theories advanced as to the color and hair of the
Negro; but it is verily all speculation. One theory is about as
valuable as another.

Nine hundred years before Christ the poet Homer, speaking of the death
of Memnon, killed at the siege of Troy, says, "He was received by his
Ethiopians." This is the first use of the word Ethiopia in the Greek;
and it is derived from the roots [Greek: aithô], "to burn," and
[Greek: ôps], "face." It is safe to assume, that, when God dispersed
the sons of Noah, he fixed the "bounds of their habitation," and,
that, from the earth and sky the various races have secured their
civilization. He sent the different nations into separate parts of the
earth. He gave to each its racial peculiarities, and adaptability for
the climate into which it went. He gave color, language, and
civilization; and, when by wisdom we fail to interpret his inscrutable
ways, it is pleasant to know that "he worketh all things after the
counsel of his own mind."


FOOTNOTES:

[27] Edward W. Blyden, LL.D., of Liberia, says, "Supposing that this
term was originally used as a phrase of contempt, is it not with us to
elevate it? How often has it not happened that names originally given
in reproach have been afterwards adopted as a title of honor by those
against whom it was used?--Methodists, Quakers, etc. But as a proof
that no unfavorable signification attached to the word when first
employed, I may mention, that, long before the slave-trade began,
travellers found the blacks on the coast of Africa preferring to be
called Negroes" (see Purchas' Pilgrimage ...). And in all the
pre-slavetrade literature the word was spelled with a capital _N_. It
was the slavery of the blacks which afterwards degraded the term. To
say that the name was invented to degrade the race, some of whose
members were reduced to slavery, is to be guilty of what in grammar is
called a _hysteron proteron_. The disgrace became attached to the name
in consequence of slavery; and what we propose to do is, now that
slavery is abolished, to restore it to its original place and
legitimate use, and therefore to restore the capital _N_."

[28] Prichard, vol. ii. p. 44.

[29] Josephus, Antiq., lib. 2, chap. 6.

[30] Poole.

[31] Smyth's Unity Human Races, chap. II, p. 41.

[32] Herodotus, vii., 69, 70. Ancient Univ. Hist., vol. xviii. pp.
254, 255.

[33] Strabo, vol. I. p. 60.

[34] It is not wise, to say the least, for intelligent Negroes in
America to seek to drop the word "Negro." It is a good, strong, and
healthy word, and ought to live. It should be covered with glory: let
Negroes do it.

[35] Journal of Ethnology, No. 7, p. 310.

[36] Pickering's Races of Men, pp. 185-89.

[37] Burckhardt's Travels, p. 341.

[38] Euterpe, lib. 6.

[39] Jeffries's Nat. Hist. of Human Race, p. 315.

[40] Types of Mankind, p. 259.

[41] Types of Mankind, p. 262.

[42] Even in Africa it is found that Negroes possess great culture.
Speaking of Sego, the capital of Bambara, Mr. Park says: "The view of
this extensive city, the numerous, canoes upon the river, the crowded
population, and the cultivated state of the surrounding country,
formed altogether a prospect of civilization and magnificence which I
little expected to find in the bosom of Africa." See Park's Travels,
chap. ii.

Mr. Park also adds, that the population of this city, Sego, is about
thirty thousand. It had mosques, and even ferries were busy conveying
men and horses over the Niger.

[43] See Ambassades Mémorables de la Companie des Indes orientales des
Provinces Unies vers les Empereurs du Japan, Amst., 1680; and
Kaempfer.

[44] Wilkinson's Egypt, vol. iii. p. 340.

[45] Coleman's Mythology of the Hindus, p. 91. Dr. William Jones, vol.
iii., p. 377.

[46] Asiatic Researches, vol. vi. pp. 436-448.

[47] Heber's Narrative, vol. i. p. 254.

[48] Nat. Hist. of the Human Species, pp. 209, 214, 217.

[49] Asiatic Researches, vol. i. p 427. Also Sir William Jones, vol.
iii. 3d disc.

[50] Nat. Hist. Human Species, p. 126.

[51] Prichard, pp. 188-219.

[52] Matt. xxiii. 4.

[53] Discours sur la cause physicale de la couleur des nègres.

[54] Earth and Man. Lecture x. pp. 254, 255.

[55] Blumenbach, p. 107.


CHAPTER III.

PRIMITIVE NEGRO CIVILIZATION.

     THE ANCIENT AND HIGH DEGREE OF NEGRO CIVILIZATION.--EGYPT,
     GREECE, AND ROME BORROW FROM THE NEGRO THE CIVILIZATION THAT
     MADE THEM GREAT.--CAUSE OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF NEGRO
     CIVILIZATION.--CONFOUNDING THE TERMS "NEGRO" AND "AFRICAN."


It is fair to presume that God gave all the races of mankind
civilization to start with. We infer this from the known character of
the Creator. Before Romulus founded Rome, before Homer sang, when
Greece was in its infancy, and the world quite young, "hoary Meroe"
was the chief city of the Negroes along the Nile. Its private and
public buildings, its markets and public squares, its colossal walls
and stupendous gates, its gorgeous chariots and alert footmen, its
inventive genius and ripe scholarship, made it the cradle of
civilization, and the mother of art. It was the queenly city of
Ethiopia,--for it was founded by colonies of Negroes. Through its open
gates long and ceaseless caravans, laden with gold, silver, ivory,
frankincense, and palm-oil, poured the riches of Africa into the
capacious lap of the city. The learning of this people, embalmed in
the immortal hieroglyphic, flowed adown the Nile, and, like spray,
spread over the delta of that time-honored stream, on by the beautiful
and venerable city of Thebes,--the city of a hundred gates, another
monument to Negro genius and civilization, and more ancient than the
cities of the Delta,--until Greece and Rome stood transfixed before
the ancient glory of Ethiopia! Homeric mythology borrowed its very
essence from Negro hieroglyphics; Egypt borrowed her light from the
venerable Negroes up the Nile. Greece went to school to the Egyptians,
and Rome turned to Greece for law and the science of warfare. England
dug down into Rome twenty centuries to learn to build and plant, to
establish a government, and maintain it. Thus the flow of civilization
has been from the East--the place of light--to the West; from the
Oriental to the Occidental. (God fixed the mountains east and west in
Europe.)

     "Tradition universally represents the earliest men
     descending, it is true, from the high table-lands of this
     continent; but it is in the low and fertile plains lying at
     their feet, with which we are already acquainted, that they
     unite themselves for the first time in natural bodies, in
     tribes, with fixed habitations, devoting themselves to
     husbandry, building cities, cultivating the arts,--in a
     word, forming well-regulated societies. The traditions of
     the Chinese place the first progenitors of that people on
     the high table-land, whence the great rivers flow: they mike
     them advance, station by station as far as the shores of the
     ocean. The people of the Brahmins come down from the regions
     of the Hindo-Khu, and from Cashmere, into the plains of the
     Indus and the Ganges; Assyria and Bactriana receive their
     inhabitants from the table-lands of Armenia and Persia.

     "These alluvial plains, watered by their twin rivers, were
     better formed than all other countries of the globe to
     render the first steps of man, an infant still, easy in the
     career of civilized life. A rich soil, on which overflowing
     rivers spread every year a fruitful loam, as in Egypt, and
     one where the plough is almost useless, so movable and so
     easily tilled is it, a warm climate, finally, secure to the
     inhabitants of these fortunate regions plentiful harvests in
     return for light labor. Nevertheless, the conflict with the
     river itself and with the desert,--which, on the banks of
     the Euphrates, as on those of the Nile and the Indus, is
     ever threatening to invade the cultivated lands,--the
     necessity of irrigation, the inconstancy of the seasons,
     keep forethought alive, and give birth to the useful arts
     and to the sciences of observation. The abundance of
     resources, the absence of every obstacle, of all separation
     between the different parts of these vast plains, allow the
     aggregation of a great number of men upon one and the same
     space, and facilitate the formation of those mighty
     primitive states which amaze us by the grandeur of their
     proportions.

     "Each of them finds upon its own soil all that is necessary
     for a brilliant exhibition of its resources. We see those
     nations come rapidly forward, and reach in the remotest
     antiquity a degree of culture of which the temples and the
     monuments of Egypt and of India, and the recently discovered
     palaces of Nineveh are living and glorious witnesses.

     "Great nations, then, are separately formed in each of these
     areas, circumscribed by nature within natural limits. Each
     has its religion, its social principles, its civilization
     severally. But nature, as we have seen, has separated them;
     little intercourse is established between them; the social
     principle on which they are founded is exhausted by the very
     formation of the social state they enjoy, and is never
     renewed. A common life is wanting to them: they do not
     reciprocally share with each other their riches. With them
     movement is stopped: every thing becomes stable and tends to
     remain stationary.

     "Meantime, in spite of the peculiar seal impressed on each
     of these Oriental nations by the natural conditions in the
     midst of which they live, they have, nevertheless some grand
     characteristics common to all, some family traits that
     betray the nature of the continent and the period of human
     progress to which they belong, making them known on the one
     side as Asiatic, and on the other side as primitive."[56]

Is it asked what caused the decline of all this glory of the primitive
Negro? why this people lost their position in the world's history?
Idolatry! Sin![57]

Centuries have flown apace, tribes have perished, cities have risen
and fallen, and even empires, whose boast was their duration, have
crumbled, while Thebes and Meroe stood. And it is a remarkable fact,
that the people who built those cities are less mortal than their
handiwork. Notwithstanding their degradation, their woes and wrongs,
the perils of the forest and dangers of the desert, this remarkable
people have not been blotted out. They still live, and are multiplying
in the earth. Certainly they have been preserved for some wise
purpose, in the future to be unfolded.

But, again, what was the cause of the Negro's fall from his high state
of civilization? It was forgetfulness of God, idolatry! "Righteousness
exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people."

The Negro tribes of Africa are as widely separated by mental, moral,
physical, and social qualities as the Irish, Huns, Copts, and Druids
are. Their location on the Dark Continent, their surroundings, and the
amount of light that has come to them from the outside world, are the
thermometer of their civilization. It is as manifestly improper to
call all Africans Negroes as to call, Americans Indians.

     "The Negro nations of Africa differ widely as to their
     manner of life and their characters, both of mind and body,
     in different parts of that continent, according as they have
     existed under different moral and physical conditions.
     Foreign culture, though not of a high degree, has been
     introduced among the population of some regions; while from
     others it has been shut out by almost impenetrable barriers,
     beyond which the aboriginal people remain secluded amid
     their mountains and forests, in a state of instinctive
     existence,--a state from which, history informs us, that
     human races have hardly emerged, until moved by some impulse
     from without. Neither Phoenician nor Roman culture seems to
     have penetrated into Africa beyond the Atlantic region and
     the desert. The activity and enthusiasm of the propagators
     of Islam have reached farther. In the fertile low countries
     beyond the Sahara, watered by rivers which descend northward
     from the central highlands, Africa has contained for
     centuries several Negro empires, originally founded by
     Mohammedans. The Negroes of this part of Africa are people
     of a very different description from the black pagan
     nations farther towards the South. They have adopted many of
     the arts of civilized society, and have subjected themselves
     to governments and political institutions. They practise
     agriculture, and have learned the necessary, and even some
     of the ornamental, arts of life, and dwell in towns of
     considerable extent; many of which are said to contain ten
     thousand, and even thirty thousand inhabitants,--a
     circumstance which implies a considerable advancement in
     industry and the resources of subsistence. All these
     improvements were introduced into the interior of Africa
     three or four centuries ago; and we have historical
     testimony, that in the region where trade and agriculture
     now prevail the population consisted, previous to the
     introduction of Islam, of savages as wild and fierce as the
     natives farther towards the south, whither the missionaries
     of that religion have never penetrated. It hence appears
     that human society has not been in all parts of Africa
     stationary and unprogressive from age to age. The first
     impulse to civilization was late in reaching the interior of
     that continent, owing to local circumstances which are
     easily understood; but, when it had once taken place, an
     improvement has resulted which is, perhaps, proportional to
     the early progress of human culture in other more favored
     regions of the world."[58]

But in our examination of African tribes we shall not confine
ourselves to that class of people known as Negroes, but call attention
to other tribes as well. And while, in this country, all persons with
a visible admixture of Negro blood in them are considered Negroes, it
is technically incorrect. For the real Negro was not the sole subject
sold into slavery: very many of the noblest types of mankind in Africa
have, through the uncertainties of war, found their way to the horrors
of the middle passage, and finally to the rice and cotton fields of
the Carolinas and Virginias. So, in speaking of the race in this
country, in subsequent chapters, I shall refer to them as _colored
people_ or _Negroes_.


FOOTNOTES:

[56] Earth and Man, pp. 300-302.

[57] It is a remarkable fact, that the absence of salt in the food of
the Eastern nations, especially the dark nations or races, has been
very deleterious. An African child will eat salt by the handful, and,
once tasting it, will cry for it. The ocean is the womb of nature; and
the Creator has wisely designed salt as the savor of life, the
preservative element in human food.

[58] Physical History of Mankind, vol. ii. pp. 45, 46.


CHAPTER IV.

NEGRO KINGDOMS OF AFRICA.

     BENIN: ITS LOCATION.--ITS DISCOVERY BY THE
     PORTUGUESE.--INTRODUCTION OF THE CATHOLIC RELIGION.--THE
     KING AS A MISSIONARY,--HIS FIDELITY TO THE CHURCH PURCHASED
     BY WHITE WIFE.--DECLINE OF RELIGION.--INTRODUCTION OF
     SLAVERY.--SUPPRESSION OF THE TRADE BY THE ENGLISH
     GOVERNMENT.--RESTORATION AND PEACE.

     DAHOMEY: ITS LOCATION.--ORIGIN OF THE KINGDOM.--MEANING OF
     THE NAME.--WAR.--CAPTURE OF THE ENGLISH GOVERNOR, AND HIS
     DEATH.--THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT.--WOMEN AS
     SOLDIERS.--WARS AND THEIR OBJECTS.--HUMAN SACRIFICE.--THE
     KING A DESPOT.--HIS POWERS.--HIS WIVES.--POLYGAMY.--KINGLY
     SUCCESSION.--CORONATION.--CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW.--REVENUE
     SYSTEM.--ITS FUTURE.

     YORUBA: ITS LOCATION.--SLAVERY AND ITS ABOLITION.--GROWTH OF
     THE PEOPLE OF ABEOKUTA.--MISSIONARIES AND TEACHERS FROM
     SIERRA LEONE.--PROSPERITY AND PEACE ATTEND THE
     PEOPLE.--CAPACITY OF THE PEOPLE FOR CIVILIZATION.--BISHOP
     CROWTHER.--HIS INFLUENCE.


BENIN.

The vast territory stretching from the Volta River on the west to the
Niger in the Gulf of Benin on the east, the Atlantic Ocean on the
south, and the Kong Mountains on the north, embraces the three
powerful Negro kingdoms of Benin, Dahomey, and Yoruba. From this
country, more than from any other part of Africa, were the people sold
into American slavery. Two or three hundred years ago there were
several very powerful Negro empires in Western Africa. They had social
and political government, and were certainly a very orderly people.
But in 1485 Alfonso de Aviro, a Portuguese, discovered Benin, the most
easterly province; and as an almost immediate result the slave-trade
was begun. It is rather strange, too, in the face of the fact, that,
when De Aviro returned to the court of Portugal, an ambassador from
the Negro king of Benin accompanied him for the purpose of requesting
the presence of Christian missionaries among this people. Portugal
became interested, and despatched Fernando Po to the Gulf of Benin;
who, after discovering the island that bears his name, ascended the
Benin River to Gaton, where he located a Portuguese colony. The Romish
Church lifted her standard here. The brothers of the Society of Jesus,
if they did not convert the king, certainly had him in a humor to
bring all of his regal powers to bear upon his subjects to turn them
into the Catholic Church. He actually took the contract to turn his
subjects over to this Church! But this shrewd savage did not agree to
undertake this herculean task for nothing. He wanted a white wife. He
told the missionaries that he would deliver his subjects to
Christianity for a white wife, and they agreed to furnish her. Some
priests were sent to the Island of St. Thomas to hunt the wife. This
island had, even at that early day, a considerable white population. A
strong appeal was made to the sisters there to consider this matter as
a duty to the holy Church. It was set forth as a missionary
enterprise. After some contemplation, one of the sisters agreed to
accept the hand of the Negro king. It was a noble act, and one for
which she should have been canonized, but we believe never was.

The Portuguese continued to come. Gaton grew. The missionary worked
with a will. Attention was given to agriculture and commerce. But the
climate was wretched. Sickness and death swept the Portuguese as the
fiery breath of tropical lightning. They lost their influence over the
people. They established the slave-trade, but the Church and slave-pen
would not agree. The inhuman treatment they bestowed upon the people
gave rise to the gravest suspicions as to the sincerity of the
missionaries. History gives us the sum total of a religious effort
that was not of God. There isn't a trace of Roman Catholicism in that
country, and the last state of that people is worse than the former.

The slave-trade turned the heads of the natives. Their cruel and
hardened hearts assented to the crime of man-stealing. They turned
aside from agricultural pursuits. They left their fish-nets on the
seashore, their cattle uncared for, their villages neglected, and went
forth to battle against their weaker neighbors. They sold their
prisoners of war to slave-dealers on the coast, who gave them rum and
tobacco as an exceeding great reward. When war failed to give from its
bloody and remorseless jaws the victims for whom a ready market
awaited, they turned to duplicity, treachery, and cruelty. "And men's
worst enemies were those of their own household." The person
suspicioned of witchcraft was speedily found guilty, and adjudged to
slavery. The guilty and the innocent often shared the same fate. The
thief, the adulterer, and the aged were seized by the rapacity that
pervaded the people, and were hurled into the hell of slavery.

Now, as a result of this condition of affairs, the population was
depleted, the people grew indolent and vicious, and finally the empire
was rent with political feuds. Two provinces was the result. One still
bore the name of Benin, the other was called Waree. The capital of the
former contains about 38,000 inhabitants, and the chief town and
island of Waree only contain about 16,000 of a population.

Finally England was moved to a suppression of the slave-trade at this
point. The ocean is very calm along this coast, which enabled her
fleets to run down slave-vessels and make prizes of them. This had a
salutary influence upon the natives. Peace and quietness came as
angels. A spirit of thrift possessed the people. They turned to the
cultivation of the fields and to commercial pursuits. On the river
Bonny, and along other streams, large and flourishing palm-oil marts
sprang up; and a score or more of vessels are needed to export the
single article of palm-oil. The morals of the people are not what they
ought to be; but they have, on the whole, made wonderful improvement
during the last fifty years.


DAHOMEY.

This nation is flanked by Ashantee on the west, and Yoruba on the
east; running from the seacoast on the south to the Kong mountains on
the north. It is one hundred and eighty miles in width, by two hundred
in breadth. Whydah is the principal town on the seacoast. The story
runs, that, about two hundred and seventy-five years ago, Tacudons,
chief of the Foys, carried a siege against the city of Abomey. He made
a solemn vow to the gods, that, if they aided him in pushing the city
to capitulate, he would build a palace in honor of the victory. He
succeeded. He laid the foundations of his palace, and then upon them
ripped open the bowels of Da. He called the building _Da-Omi_, which
meant Da's belly. He took the title of King of Dahomey, which has
remained until the present time. The neighboring tribes, proud and
ambitious, overran the country, and swept Whydah and adjacent places
with the torch and spear. Many whites fell into their hands as
prisoners; all of whom were treated with great consideration, save the
English governor of the above-named town. They put him to death,
because, as they charged, he had incited and excited the people of
Dahomey to resist their king.

This is a remarkable people. They are as cruel as they are cunning.
The entire population is converted into an army: even women are
soldiers. Whole regiments of women are to be found in the army of the
king of Dahomey, and they are the best foot-regiments in the kingdom.
They are drilled at stated periods, are officered, and well
disciplined. The army is so large, and is so constantly employed in
predatory raids upon neighboring tribes, that the consuming element is
greater than the producing. The object of these raids was threefold:
to get slaves for human sacrifices, to pour the blood of the victims
on the graves of their ancestors yearly, and to secure human skulls to
pave the court of the king and to ornament the walls about the palace!
After a successful war, the captives are brought to the capital of the
kingdom. A large platform is erected in the great market space,
encircled by a parapet about three feet high. The platform blazes with
rich clothes, elaborate umbrellas, and all the evidences of kingly
wealth and splendor, as well as the spoils taken in battle. The king
occupies a seat in the centre of the platform, attended by his
imperturbable wives. The captives, rum, tobacco, and cowries are now
ready to be thrown to the surging mob below. They have fought
gallantly, and now clamor for their reward. "Feed us, king!" they cry,
"feed us, king! for we are hungry!" and as the poor captives are
tossed to the mob they are despatched without ceremony!

But let us turn from this bloody and barbarous scene. The king is the
most absolute despot in the world. He is heir-at-law to all his
subjects. He is regarded as a demigod. It is unlawful to indicate that
the king eats, sleeps, or drinks. No one is allowed to approach him,
except his nobles, who at a court levee disrobe themselves of all
their elegant garments, and, prostrate upon the ground, they crawl
into his royal presence. The whole people are the cringing
lickspittles of the nobles in turn. Every private in the army is
ambitious to please the king by valor. The king is literally monarch
of all he surveys. He is proprietor of the land, and has at his
disposal every thing animate or inanimate in his kingdom. He has about
three thousand wives.[59] Every man who would marry must buy his
spouse from the king; and, while the system of polygamy obtains
everywhere throughout the kingdom, the subject must have care not to
secure so many wives that it would appear that he is attempting to
rival the king. The robust women are consigned to the military
service. But the real condition of woman in this kingdom is slavery of
the vilest type. She owns nothing. She is always in the market, and
lives in a state of constant dread of being sold. When the king dies,
a large number of his wives are sacrificed upon his grave. This fact
inspires them to take good care of him! In case of death, the king's
brother, then his nephew, and so on, take the throne. An inauguration
generally lasts six days, during which time hundreds of human lives
are sacrificed in honor of the new monarch.

The code of Dahomey is very severe. Witchcraft is punished with death;
and in this regard stalwart old Massachusetts borrowed from the
barbarian. Adultery is punished by slavery or sudden death. Thieves
are also sold into slavery. Treason and cowardice and murder are
punished by death. The civil code is as complicated as the criminal is
severe. Over every village, is a Caboceer, equivalent to our mayor. He
can convene a court by prostrating himself and kissing the ground. The
court convenes, tries and condemns the criminal. If it be a death
sentence, he is delivered to a man called the Milgan, or equivalent to
our sheriff, who is the ranking officer in the state. If the criminal
is sentenced to slavery, he is delivered to the Mayo, who is second in
rank to the Milgan, or about like our turnkey or jailer. All sentences
must be referred to the king for his approval; and all executions take
place at the capital, where notice is given of the same by a public
crier in the market-places.

The revenue system of this kingdom is oppressive. The majority of
slaves taken in war are the property of the king. A tax is levied on
each person or slave exported from the kingdom. In relation to
domestic commerce, a tax is levied on every article of food and
clothing. A custom-service is organized, and the tax-collectors are
shrewd and exacting.

The religion of the people is idolatry and fetich, or superstition.
They have large houses where they worship snakes; and so great is
their reverence for the reptile, that, if any one kills one that has
escaped, he is punished with death. But, above their wild and
superstitious notions, there is an ever-present consciousness of a
Supreme Being. They seldom mention the name of God, and then with fear
and trembling.

     "The worship of God in the absurd symbol of the lower
     animals I do not wish to defend: but it is all that these
     poor savages can do; and is not that less impious than to
     speak of the Deity with blasphemous familiarity, as our
     illiterate preachers often do?"[60]

But this people are not in a hopeless condition of degradation.

     "The Wesleyan Missionary Society of England have had a
     mission-station at Badagry for some years, and not without
     some important and encouraging tokens of success.... The
     king, it is thought, is more favorable to Christian missions
     now than he formerly was."[61]

And we say Amen!


YORUBA.

This kingdom extends from the seacoast to the river Niger, by which it
is separated from the kingdom of Nufi. It contains more territory than
either Benin or Dahomey. Its principal seaport is Lagos. For many
years it was a great slave-mart, and only gave up the traffic under
the deadly presence of English guns. Its facilities for the trade were
great. Portuguese and Spanish slave-traders took up their abode here,
and, teaching the natives the use of fire-arms, made a stubborn stand
for their lucrative enterprise; but in 1852 the slave-trade was
stopped, and the slavers driven from the seacoast. The place came
under the English flag; and, as a result, social order and business
enterprise have been restored and quickened. The slave-trade wrought
great havoc among this people. It is now about fifty-five years since
a few weak and fainting tribes, decimated by the slave-trade, fled to
Ogun, a stream seventy-five miles from the coast, where they took
refuge in a cavern. In the course of time they were joined by other
tribes that fled before the scourge of slave-hunters. Their common
danger gave them a commonality of interests. They were, at first,
reduced to very great want. They lived for a long time on berries,
herbs, roots, and such articles of food as nature furnished without
money and without price; but, leagued together to defend their common
rights, they grew bold, and began to spread out around their
hiding-place, and engage in agriculture. Homes and villages began to
rise, and the desert to blossom as the rose. They finally chose a
leader,--a wise and judicious man by the name of Shodeke; and one
hundred and thirty towns were united under one government. In 1853,
less than a generation, a feeble people had grown to be nearly one
hundred thousand (100,000); and Abeokuta, named for their cave,
contains at present nearly three hundred thousand souls.

In 1839 some colored men from Sierra Leone, desirous of engaging in
trade, purchased a small vessel, and called at Lagos and Badagry. They
had been slaves in this country, and had been taken to Sierra Leone,
where they had received a Christian education. Their visit, therefore,
was attended with no ordinary interest. They recognized many of their
friends and kindred, and were agreeably surprised at the wonderful
change that had taken place in so short a time. They returned to
Sierra Leone, only to inspire their neighbors with a zeal for
commercial and missionary enterprise. Within three years, five hundred
of the best colored people of Sierra Leone set out for Lagos and
Badagry on the seacoast, and then moved overland to Abeokuta, where
they intended to make their home. In this company of noble men were
merchants, mechanics, physicians, school-teachers, and clergymen.
Their people had fought for deliverance from physical bondage: these
brave missionaries had come to deliver them from intellectual and
spiritual bondage. The people of Abeokuta gave the missionaries a
hearty welcome. The colony received new blood and energy.
School-buildings and churches rose on every hand. Commerce was
revived, and even agriculture received more skilful attention. Peace
and and plenty began to abound. Every thing wore a sunny smile, and
many tribes were bound together by the golden cords of civilization,
and sang their _Te Deum_ together. Far-away England caught their songs
of peace, and sent them agricultural implements, machinery, and
Christian ministers and teachers. So, that, nowhere on the continent
of Africa is there to be found so many renewed households, so many
reclaimed tribes, such substantial results of a vigorous, Christian
civilization.

The forces that quickened the inhabitants of Abeokuta were not all
objective, exoteric: there were subjective and inherent forces
at work in the hearts of the people. They were capable of
civilization,--longed for it; and the first blaze of light from
without aroused their slumbering forces, and showed them the broad and
ascending road that led to the heights of freedom and usefulness. That
they sought this road with surprising alacrity, we have the most
abundant evidence. Nor did all the leaders come from abroad. Adgai, in
the Yoruba language, but Crowther, in English, was a native of this
country. In 1822 he was sold into slavery at the port of Badagry. The
vessel that was to bear him away to the "land of chains and stocks"
was captured by a British man-of-war, and taken to Sierra Leone. Here
he came under the influence of Christian teachers. He proved to be one
of the best pupils in his school. He received a classical education,
fitted for the ministry, and then hastened back to his native country
to carry the gospel of peace. It is rather remarkable, but he found
his mother and several sisters still "in the gall of bitterness and in
the bonds of iniquity." The son and brother became their spiritual
teacher, and, ere long, had the great satisfaction of seeing them
"clothed, in their right mind, and sitting at the feet of Jesus." His
influence has been almost boundless. A man of magnificent physical
proportions,--tall, a straight body mounted by a ponderous head,
shapely, with a kind eye, benevolent face, a rich cadence in his
voice,--the "black Bishop" Crowther is a princely looking man, who
would attract the attention of cultivated people anywhere. He is a man
of eminent piety, broad scholarship, and good works. He has translated
the Bible into the Yoruba language, founded schools, and directed the
energies of his people with a matchless zeal. His beautiful and
beneficent life is an argument in favor of the possibilities of Negro
manhood so long injured by the dehumanizing influences of slavery.
Others have caught the inspiration that has made Bishop Crowther's
life "as terrible as an army with banners" to the enemies of Christ
and humanity, and are working to dissipate the darkness of that land
of night.


FOOTNOTES:

[59] The king of Dahomey is limited to 3,333 wives! It is hardly fair
to suppose that his majesty feels cramped under the ungenerous act
that limits the number of his wives.

[60] Savage Africa, p. 51.

[61] Western Africa, p. 207.


CHAPTER V.

THE ASHANTEE EMPIRE.

     ITS LOCATION AND EXTENT.--ITS FAMOUS KINGS.--THE ORIGIN OF
     THE ASHANTEES OBSCURE.--THE WAR WITH DENKERA.--THE ASHANTEES
     AGAINST THE FIELD CONQUER TWO KINGDOMS AND ANNEX
     THEM.--DEATH OF OSAI TUTU.--THE ENVY OF THE KING OF
     DAHOMEY.--INVASION OF THE ASHANTEE COUNTRY BY THE KING OF
     DAHOMEY.--HIS DEFEAT SHARED BY HIS ALLIES.--AKWASI PURSUES
     THE ARMY OF DAHOMEY INTO ITS OWN COUNTRY.--GETS A MORTAL
     WOUND AND SUFFERS A HUMILIATING DEFEAT.--THE KING OF DAHOMEY
     SENDS THE ROYAL KUDJOH HIS CONGRATULATIONS.--KWAMINA DEPOSED
     FOR ATTEMPTING TO INTRODUCE MOHAMMEDANISM INTO THE
     KINGDOM.--THE ASHANTEES CONQUER THE MOHAMMEDANS.--NUMEROUS
     WARS.--INVASION OF THE FANTI COUNTRY.--DEATH OF SIR CHARLES
     MCCARTHY.--TREATY.--PEACE.


The kingdom of Ashantee lies between the Kong Mountains and the vast
country of the Fantis. The country occupied by the Ashantees was, at
the first, very small; but by a series of brilliant conquests they
finally secured a territory of three hundred square miles. One of
their most renowned kings, Osai Tutu, during the last century, added
to Ashantee by conquest the kingdoms of Sarem, Buntuku, Warsaw,
Denkera, and Axim. Very little is known as to the origin of the
Ashantees. They were discovered in the early part of the eighteenth
century in the great valley between the Kong Mountains and the river
Niger, from whence they were driven by the Moors and Mohammedan
Negroes. They exchanged the bow for fire-arms, and soon became a
warlike people. Osai Tutu led in a desperate engagement against the
king of Denkera, in which the latter was slain, his army was put to
rout, and large quantities of booty fell into the hands of the
victorious Ashantees. The king of Axim unwittingly united his forces
to those of the discomforted Denkera, and, drawing the Ashantees into
battle again, sustained heavy losses, and was put to flight. He was
compelled to accept the most exacting conditions of peace, to pay the
king of the Ashantees four thousand ounces of gold to defray the
expenses of the war, and have his territory made tributary to the
conqueror. In a subsequent battle Osai Tutu was surprised and killed.
His courtiers and wives were made prisoners, with much goods. This
enraged the Ashantees, and they reeked vengeance on the heads of the
inhabitants of Kromanti, who laid the disastrous ambuscade. They
failed, however, to recover the body of their slain king; but many of
his attendants were retaken, and numerous enemies, whom they
sacrificed to the manes of their dead king at Kumasi.

After the death of the noble Osai Tutu, dissensions arose among his
followers. The tribes and kingdoms he had bound to his victorious
chariot-wheels began to assert their independence. His life-work began
to crumble. Disorder ran riot; and, after a few ambitious leaders were
convinced that the throne of Ashantee demanded brains and courage,
they cheerfully made way for the coronation of Osai Opoko, brother to
the late king. He was equal to the existing state of affairs. He
proved himself a statesman, a soldier, and a wise ruler. He organized
his army, and took the field in person against the revolting tribes.
He reconquered all the lost provinces. He defeated his most valorous
foe, the king of Gaman, after driving him into the Kong Mountains.
When his jealous underlings sought his overthrow by conspiracy, he
conquered them by an appeal to arms. His rule was attended by the most
lasting and beneficent results. He died in 1742, and was succeeded by
his brother, Osai Akwasi.

The fame and military prowess of the kings of the Ashantees were borne
on every passing breeze, and told by every fleeing fugitive. The whole
country was astounded by the marvellous achievements of this people,
and not a little envy was felt among adjoining nations. The king of
Dahomey especially felt like humiliating this people in battle. This
spirit finally manifested itself in feuds, charges, complaints, and,
laterally, by actual hostilities. The king of Dahomey felt that he had
but one rival, the king of Ashantee. He felt quite sure of victory on
account of the size, spirit, and discipline of his army. It was idle
at this time, and was ordered to the Ashantee border. The first
engagement took place near the Volta. The king of Dahomey had
succeeded in securing an alliance with the armies of Kawaku and
Bourony, but the valor and skill of the Ashantees were too much for
the invading armies. If King Akwasi had simply maintained his
defensive position, his victory would have been lasting; but,
overjoyed at his success, he unwittingly pursued the enemy beyond the
Volta, and carried war into the kingdom of Dahomey. Troops fight with
great desperation in their own country. The Ashantee army was struck
on its exposed flanks, its splendid companies of Caboceers went down
before the intrepid Amazons. Back to the Volta, the boundary line
between the two empires, fled the routed Ashantees. Akwasi received a
mortal wound, from which he died in 1752, when his nephew, Osai
Kudjoh, succeeded to the throne.

Three brothers had held the sceptre over this empire, but now it
passed to another generation. The new king was worthy of his
illustrious family. After the days of mourning for his royal uncle
were ended, before he ascended the throne, several provinces revolted.
He at once took the field, subdued his recalcitrant subjects, and made
them pay a heavy tribute. He won other provinces by conquest, and awed
the neighboring tribes until an unobstructed way was open to his
invincible army across the country to Cape Palmas. His fame grew with
each military manoeuvre, and each passing year witnessed new triumphs.
Fawning followed envy in the heart of the king of Dahomey; and a large
embassy was despatched to the powerful Kudjoh, congratulating him upon
his military achievements, and seeking a friendly alliance between the
two governments. Peace was now restored; and the armies of Ashantee
very largely melted into agricultural communities, and great
prosperity came. But King Kudjoh was growing old in the service of his
people; and, as he could no longer give his personal attention to
public affairs, dissensions arose in some of the remote provinces.
With impaired vision and feeble health he, nevertheless, put an army
into the field to punish the insubordinate tribes; but before
operations began he died. His grandson, Osai Kwamina, was designated
as legal successor to the throne in 1781. He took a solemn vow that he
would not enter the palace until he secured the heads of Akombroh and
Afosee, whom he knew had excited and incited the people to rebellion
against his grandfather. His vengeance was swift and complete. The
heads of the rebel leaders were long kept at Juntas as highly prized
relics of the reign of King Kwamina. His reign was brief, however. He
was deposed for attempting to introduce the Mohammedan religion into
the kingdom. Osai Apoko was crowned as his successor in 1797. The
Gaman and Kongo armies attached themselves to the declining fortunes
of the deposed king, and gave battle for his lost crown. It was a lost
cause. The new king could wield his sword as well as wear a crown. He
died of a painful sickness, and was succeeded by his son, Osai Tutu
Kwamina, in 1800.

The new king was quite youthful,--only seventeen; but he inherited
splendid qualities from a race of excellent rulers. He re-organized
his armies, and early won a reputation for courage, sagacity, and
excellent ability, extraordinary in one so young. He inherited a
bitter feeling against the Mohammedans, and made up his mind to
chastise two of their chiefs, Ghofan and Ghobago, and make the
territory of Banna tributary to Ashantee. He invaded their country,
and burned their capital. In an engagement fought at Kaha, the entire
Moslem army was defeated and captured. The king of Ghofan was wounded
and made prisoner, and died in the camp of the Ashantee army. Two more
provinces were bound to the throne of Kwamina; and we submit that this
is an historical anomaly, in that a pagan people subdued an army that
emblazoned its banner with the faith of _the one God_!

The Ashantee empire had reached the zenith of its glory. Its flag
waved in triumph from the Volta to Bossumpea, and the Kong Mountains
had echoed the exploits of the veterans that formed the strength of
its army. The repose that even this uncivilized people longed for was
denied them by a most unfortunate incident.

Asim was a province tributary to the Ashantee empire. Two of the
chiefs of Asim became insubordinate, gave offence to the king, and
then fled into the country of the Fantis, one of the most numerous and
powerful tribes on the Gold Coast. The Fantis promised the fugitives
armed protection. There was no extradition treaty in those days. The
king despatched friendly messengers, who were instructed to set forth
the faults of the offending subjects, and to request their return. The
request was contemptuously denied, and the messengers subjected to a
painful death. The king of Ashantee invaded the country of the enemy,
and defeated the united forces of Fanti and Asim. He again made them
an offer of peace, and was led to believe it would be accepted. But
the routed army was gathering strength for another battle, although
Chibbu and Apontee had indicated to the king that the conditions of
peace were agreeable. The king sent an embassy to learn when a formal
submission would take place; and they, also, were put to death. King
Osai Tutu Kwamina took "_the great oath_," and vowed that he would
never return from the seat of war or enter his capital without the
heads of the rebellious chiefs. The Ashantee army shared the desperate
feelings of their leader; and a war was begun, which for cruelty and
carnage has no equal in the annals of the world's history. Pastoral
communities, hamlets, villages, and towns were swept by the red waves
of remorseless warfare. There was no mercy in battle: there were no
prisoners taken by day, save to be spared for a painful death at
nightfall. Their groans, mingling with the shouts of the victors, made
the darkness doubly hideous; and the blood of the vanquished army, but
a short distance removed, ran cold at the thoughts of the probable
fate that waited them on the morrow. Old men and old women, young men
and young women, the rollicking children whose light hearts knew no
touch of sorrow, as well as the innocent babes clinging to the
agitated bosoms of their mothers,--unable to distinguish between
friend or foe,--felt the cruel stroke of war. All were driven to an
inhospitable grave in the place where the fateful hand of war made
them its victims, or perished in the sullen waters of the Volta. For
nearly a hundred miles "the smoke of their torment" mounted the skies.
Nothing was left in the rear of the Ashantee army, not even cattle or
buildings. Pursued by a fleet-footed and impartial disaster, the
fainting Fantis and their terrified allies turned their faces toward
the seacoast. And why? Perhaps this fleeing army had a sort of
superstitious belief that the sea might help them. Then, again, they
knew that there were many English on the Gold Coast; that they had
forts and troops. They trusted, also, that the young king of the
Ashantees would not follow his enemy under the British flag and guns.
They were mistaken. The two revolting chiefs took refuge in the fort
at Anamabo. On came the intrepid king, thundering at the very gates of
the English fort. The village was swept with the hot breath of battle.
Thousands perished before this invincible army. The English soldiers
poured hot shot and musketry into the columns of the advancing army;
but on they marched to victory with an impurturbable air, worthy of
"_the old guard_" under Ney at Waterloo. Preparations were completed
for blowing up the walls of the fort; and it would have been but a few
hours until the king of Ashantee would have taken the governor's
chair, had not the English capitulated. During the negotiations one of
the offending chiefs made good his escape to a little village called
Cape Coast; but the other was delivered up, and, having been taken
back to Kumasi, was tortured to death. Twelve thousand persons fell in
the engagement at Anamabo, and thousands of lives were lost in other
engagements. This took place in 1807.

In 1811 the king of Ashantee sent an array to Elmina to protect his
subjects against predatory bands of Fantis. Three or four battles were
fought, and were invariably won by the Ashantee troops.

Barbarians have about as long memories as civilized races. They are a
kind-hearted people, but very dangerous and ugly when they are led to
feel that they have been injured. "_The great oath_" means a great
deal; and the king was not happy in the thought that one of the
insolent chiefs had found refuge in the town of Cape Coast, which was
in the Fanti country. So in 1817 he invaded this country, and called
at Cape Coast, and reduced the place to the condition of a siege. The
English authorities saw the Fantis dying under their eyes, and paid
the fine imposed by the King of Ashantee, rather than bury the dead
inhabitants of the beleaguered town. The Ashantees retired.

England began to notice the Ashantees. They had proven themselves to
be a most heroic, intelligent, and aggressive people. The Fantis lay
stretched between them and the seacoast. The frequent invasion of this
country, for corrective purposes as the Ashantees believed, very
seriously interrupted the trade of the coast; and England began to
feel it. The English had been defeated once in an attempt to assist
the Fantis, and now thought it wise to turn attention to a pacific
policy, looking toward the establishment of amicable relations between
the Ashantees and themselves. There had never been any unpleasant
relations between the two governments, except in the instance named.
The Ashantees rather felt very kindly toward England, and for
prudential and commercial reasons desired to treat the authorities at
the coast with great consideration. They knew that the English gave
them a market for their gold, and an opportunity to purchase
manufactured articles that they needed. But the Fantis, right under
the English flag, receiving a rent for the ground on which the English
had their fort and government buildings, grew so intolerably abusive
towards their neighbors, the Ashantees, that the British saw nothing
before them but interminable war. It was their desire to avoid it if
possible. Accordingly, they sent an embassy to the king of the
Ashantees, consisting of Gov. James, of the fort at Akra, a Mr.
Bowdich, nephew to the governor-in-chief at Cape Coast, a Mr.
Hutchinson, and the surgeon of the English settlement, Dr. Teddlie.
Mr. Bowdich headed the embassy to the royal court, where they were
kindly received. A treaty was made. The rent that the Fantis had been
receiving for ground occupied by the English--four ounces of gold per
month--was to be paid to the king of Ashantee, as his by right of
conquest. Diplomatic relations were to be established between the two
governments, and Mr. Hutchinson was to remain at Kumasi as the British
resident minister. He was charged with the carrying out of so much of
the treaty as related to his government. The treaty was at once
forwarded to the home government, and Mr. Dupuis was appointed consul
of his Majesty's government to the court of Ashantee. A policy was
outlined that meant the opening up of commerce with the distant
provinces of the Ashantee empire along the Kong Mountains. In those
days it took a long time to sail from England to the Gold Coast in
Western Africa; and before Consul Dupuis reached the coast, the king
of Ashantee was engaged in a war with the king of Gaman. The Ashantee
army was routed. The news of the disaster was hailed by the Fantis on
the coast with the most boisterous and public demonstrations. This
gave the king of Ashantee offence. The British authorities were quite
passive about the conduct of the Fantis, although by solemn treaty
they had become responsible for their deportment. The Fantis grew very
insulting and offensive towards the Ashantees. The king of the latter
called the attention of the authorities at the Cape to the conduct of
the Fantis, but no official action was taken. In the mean while Mr.
Dupuis was not allowed to proceed on his mission to the capital of the
Ashantees. Affairs began to assume a very threatening attitude; and
only after the most earnest request was he permitted to proceed to the
palace of the king of Ashantee. He received a hearty welcome at the
court, and was entertained with the most lavish kindness. After long
and painstaking consideration, a treaty was decided upon that was
mutually agreeable; but the self-conceited and swaggering insolence of
the British authorities on the coast put it into the waste-basket. The
commander of the British squadron put himself in harmony with the
local authorities, and refused to give Consul Dupuis transportation to
England for the commissioners of the Ashantee government, whom he had
brought to the coast with the intention of taking to London with him.

A war-cloud was gathering. Dupuis saw it. He sent word to the king of
Ashantee to remember his oath, and refrain from hostilities until he
could communicate with the British government. The treaty stipulated
for the recognition, by the British authorities, of the authority of
the Ashantee king over the Fantis. Only those immediately around the
fort were subject to English law, and then not to an extent to exempt
them from tax imposed by the Ashantee authorities.

In the midst of these complications, Parliament, by a special act,
abolished the charter of the African Company. This put all its forts,
arsenals, and stations under the direct control of the crown. Sir
Charles McCarthy was made governor-general of the British possessions
on the Gold Coast, and took up his head-quarters at Cape Coast in
March, 1822. Two months had passed now since Dupuis had sailed for
England; and not a syllable had reached the king's messenger, who, all
this time, had waited to hear from England. The country was in an
unsettled state. Gov, McCarthy was not equal to the situation. He fell
an easy prey to the fawning and lying Fantis. They received him as the
champion of their declining fortunes, and did every thing in their
power to give him an unfriendly opinion of the Ashantees. The king of
the Ashantees began to lose faith in the British. His faithful
messenger returned from the coast bearing no friendly tidings. The
king withdrew his troops from the seacoast, and began to put his army
upon a good war-footing. When all was in readiness a Negro sergeant in
the British service was seized, and put to a torturous death. This was
a signal for the grand opening. Of course the British were bound to
demand redress. Sir Charles McCarthy was informed by some Fantis
scouts that the king of Ashantee, at the head of his army, was
marching for Cape Coast. Sir Charles rallied his forces, and went
forth to give him battle. His object was to fight the king at a
distance from the cape, and thus prevent him from devastating the
entire country as in former wars. Sir Charles McCarthy was a brave
man, and worthy of old England; but in this instance his courage was
foolhardy. He crossed the Prah River to meet a wily and desperate foe.
His troops were the worthless natives, hastily gathered, and were
intoxicated with the hope of deliverance from Ashantee rule. He should
have waited for the trained troops of Major Chisholm. This was his
fatal mistake. His pickets felt the enemy early in the morning of the
21st of January, 1824. A lively skirmish followed. In a short time the
clamorous war-horns of the advancing Ashantees were heard, and a
general engagement came on. The first fighting began along a shallow
stream. The Ashantees came up with the courage and measured tread of
a well-disciplined army. They made a well-directed charge to gain the
opposite bank of the stream, but were repulsed by an admirable bayonet
charge from Sir Charles's troops. The Ashantees then crossed the
stream above and below the British army, and fell with such
desperation upon its exposed and naked flanks, that it was bent into
the shape of a letter A, and hurled back toward Cape Coast in dismay.
Wounded and exhausted, toward evening Sir Charles fled from his
exposed position to the troops of his allies under the command of the
king of Denkera. He concentrated his artillery upon the heaviest
columns of the enemy; but still they came undaunted, bearing down upon
the centre like an avalanche. Sir Charles made an attempt to retreat
with his staff, but met instant death at the hands of the Ashantees.
His head was removed from the body and sent to Kumasi. His heart was
eaten by the chiefs of the army that they might imbibe his courage,
while his flesh was dried and issued in small rations among the
line-officers for the same purpose. His bones were kept at the capital
of the Ashantee kingdom as national fetiches.[62]

Major Chisholm and Capt. Laing, learning of the disaster that had
well-nigh swallowed up Sir Charles's army, retreated to Cape Coast.
There were about thirty thousand troops remaining, but they were so
terrified at the disaster of the day that they could not be induced to
make a stand against the gallant Ashantees. The king of Ashantee,
instead of following the routed army to the gates of Cape Coast, where
he could have dealt it a death-blow, offered the English conditions of
peace. Capt. Ricketts met the Ashantee messengers at Elmina, and heard
from them the friendly messages of the king. The Ashantees only wanted
the British to surrender Kudjoh Chibbu of the province of Denkera; but
this fugitive from the Ashantee king, while negotiations were pending,
resolved to rally the allied armies and make a bold stroke. He crossed
the Prah at the head of a considerable force, and fell upon the
Ashantee army in its camp. The English were charmed by this bold
stroke, and sent a reserve force; but the whole army was again
defeated by the Ashantees, and came back to Cape Coast in complete
confusion.

The Ashantee army were at the gates of the town. Col. Southerland
arrived with re-enforcements, but was beaten into the fort by the
unyielding courage of the attacking force. A new king, Osai Ockote,
arrived with fresh troops, and won the confidence of the army by
marching right under the British guns, and hissing defiance into the
face of the foe. The conflict that followed was severe, and
destructive to both life and property. All the native and British
forces were compelled to retire to the fort; while the Ashantee
troops, inspired by the dashing bearing of their new king, closed in
around them like tongues of steel. The invading army was not daunted
by the belching cannon that cut away battalion after battalion. On
they pressed for revenge and victory. The screams of fainting women
and terrified children, the groans of the dying, and the bitter
imprecations of desperate combatants,--a mingling medley,--swelled the
great diapason of noisy battle. The eyes of the beleaguered were
turned toward the setting sun, whose enormous disk was leaning against
the far-away mountains, and casting his red and vermilion over the
dusky faces of dead Ashantees and Fantis; and, imparting a momentary
beauty to the features of the dead white men who fell so far away from
home and friends, he sank to rest. There was a sad, far-off look in
the eye of the impatient sailor who kept his lonely watch on the
vessel that lay at rest on the sea. Night was wished for, prayed for,
yearned for. It came at last, and threw its broad sable pinions over
the dead, the dying, and the living. Hostilities were to be renewed in
the morning; but the small-pox broke out among the soldiers, and the
king of Ashantee retired.

Sir Neill Campbell was appointed governor-general at Cape Coast. One
of his first acts was to call for all the chiefs of the Fantis, and
give them to understand that hostilities between themselves and the
king of Ashantee must stop. He then required Osai Ockoto to deposit
four thousand ounces of gold ($72,000), as a bond to keep the peace.
In case he provoked hostilities, the seventy-two thousand dollars were
to be used to purchase ammunition with which to chastise him. In 1831
the king was obliged to send two of his royal family, Kwanta Missah,
his own son, and Ansah, the son of the late king, to be held as
hostages. These boys were sent to England, where they were educated,
but are now residents of Ashantee.

Warsaw and Denkera, interior provinces, were lost to the Ashantee
empire; but, nevertheless, it still remains one of the most powerful
Negro empires of Western Africa.

The king of Ashantee has a fair government. His power is well-nigh
absolute. He has a House of Lords, who have a check-power. Coomassi is
the famous city of gold, situated in the centre of the empire. The
communication through to the seacoast is unobstructed; and it is
rather remarkable that the Ashantees are the only nation in Africa,
who, living in the interior, have direct communication with the
Caucasian. They have felt the somewhat elevating influence of
Mohammedanism, and are not unconscious of the benefits derived by the
literature and contact of the outside world. They are a remarkable
people: brave, generous, industrious, and mentally capable. The day is
not distant when the Ashantee kingdom will be won to the Saviour, and
its inhabitants brought under the beneficent influences of Christian
civilization.


FOOTNOTES:

[62] The following telegram shocks the civilized world. It serves
notice on the Christians of the civilized world, that, in a large
missionary sense, they have come far short of their duty to the
"nations beyond," who sit in darkness and the shadow of death.

     "MASSACRE OF MAIDENS. LONDON, NOV. 10, 1881.--Advices from
     Cape Coast Castle report that the king of Ashantee killed
     two hundred young girls for the purpose of using their blood
     for mixing mortar for repair of one of the state buildings.
     The report of the massacre was received from a refugee
     chosen for one of the victims. Such wholesale massacres are
     known to be a custom with the king."--_Cinn. Commercial._


CHAPTER VI.

THE NEGRO TYPE.

     CLIMATE THE CAUSE.--HIS GEOGRAPHICAL THEATRE.--HE IS
     SUSCEPTIBLE TO CHRISTIANITY AND CIVILIZATION.


If the reader will turn to a map of Africa, the Mountains of the
Moon[63] will be found to run right through the centre of that
continent. They divide Africa into two almost equal parts. In a
dialectic sense, also, Africa is divided. The Mountains of the Moon,
running east and west, seem to be nature's dividing line between two
distinct peoples. North of these wonderful mountains the languages are
numerous and quite distinct, and lacking affinity. For centuries these
tribes have lived in the same latitude, under the same climatic
influences, and yet, without a written standard, have preserved the
idiomatic coloring of their tribal language without corruption. Thus
they have eluded the fate that has overtaken all other races who
without a written language, living together by the laws of affinity,
sooner or later have found one medium of speech as inevitable as
necessary.

But coming south of the Mountains of the Moon, until we reach the Cape
of Good Hope, there is to be found one great family. Nor is the
difference between the northern and southern tribes only linguistic.
The physiological difference between these people is great. They range
in color from the dead black up to pure white, and from the dwarfs on
the banks of the Casemanche to the tall and giant-like Vei tribe of
Cape Mount.

     "The Fans which inhabit the mountain terraces are altogether
     of a different complexion from the seacoast tribes. Their
     hair is longer: that of the women hangs down in long braids
     to their shoulders, while the men have tolerably long
     two-pointed beards. It would be impossible to find such long
     hair among the coast tribes, even in a single instance.

     "In the low, swampy land at the mouth of the Congo, one
     meets with typical Negroes; and there again, as one reaches
     a higher soil, one finds a different class of people.

     "The Angolese resemble the Fula. They are scarcely ever
     black. Their hands and feet are exquisitely small; and in
     every way they form a contrast with the slaves of the
     Portuguese, who, brought for the most part from the Congo,
     are brutal and debased.

     "I have divided Africa into three grand types,--the
     Ethiopian, the intermediate, and the Negro. In the same
     manner the Negro may be divided into three sub-classes:--

     "The bronze-colored class: gracefully formed, with
     effeminate features, small hands and feet, long fingers,
     intelligent minds, courteous and polished manners. Such are
     the Mpongwe of the Gaboon, the Angolese, the Fanti of the
     Gold Coast, and most probably the Haoussa of the Niger, a
     tribe with which I am not acquainted.

     "The black-skinned class: athletic shapes, rude manners,
     less intelligence, but always with some good faculties,
     thicker lips, broader noses, but seldom prognathous to any
     great degree. Such are the Wollof, the Kru-men, the Benga of
     Corisco, and the Cabinda of Lower Guinea, who hire
     themselves out as sailors in the Congo and in Angola
     precisely as do the Kru-men of North Guinea.

     "Lastly, the typical Negroes: an exceptional race even among
     the Negroes, whose disgusting type it is not necessary to
     re-describe. They are found chiefly along the coast between
     the Casemanche and Sierra Leone, between Lagos and the
     Cameroons, in the Congo swamps, and in certain swampy plains
     and mountain-hollows of the interior."[64]

That climate has much to do with physical and mental character, we
will not have to prove to any great extent. It is a fact as well
established as any principle in pathology. Dr. Joseph Brown says,--

     "It is observed that the natives of marshy districts who
     permanently reside in them lose their whole bodily and
     mental constitution, contaminated by the poison they inhale.
     Their aspect is sallow and prematurely senile, so that
     children are often wrinkled, their muscles flaccid, their
     hair lank, and frequently pale, the abdomen tumid, the
     stature stunted, and the intellectual and moral character
     low and degraded. They rarely attain what in more wholesome
     regions would be considered old age. In the marshy districts
     of certain countries,--for example, Egypt, Georgia, and
     Virginia,--the extreme term of life is stated to be forty in
     the latter place.... In portions of Brittany which adjoin
     the Loire, the extreme duration of life is fifty, at which
     age the inhabitant wears the aspect of eighty in a healthier
     district. It is remarked that the inferior animals, and even
     vegetables, partake of the general deprivation; they are
     stunted and short-lived."

In his "Ashango Land," Paul B. du Chaillu devotes a large part of his
fifteenth chapter to the Obongos, or Dwarfs. Nearly all African
explorers and travellers have been much amazed at the diversity of
color and stature among the tribes they met. This diversity in
physical and mental character owes its existence to the diversity and
perversity of African climate.

The Negro, who is but a fraction of the countless indigenous races of
Africa, has been carried down to his low estate by the invincible
forces of nature. Along the ancient volcanic tracts are to be found
the Libyan race, with a tawny complexion, features quite Caucasian,
and long black hair. On the sandstones are to be found an intermediate
type, darker somewhat than their progenitors, lips thick, and nostrils
wide at the base. Then comes the Negro down in the alluvia, with dark
skin, woolly hair, and prognathous development.

     "The Negro forms an exceptional race in Africa. He inhabits
     that immense tract of marshy land which lies between the
     mountains and the sea, from Senegal to Benguela, and the low
     lands of the eastern side in the same manner. He is found in
     the parts about Lake Tchad, in Sennaar, along the marshy
     banks of rivers, and in several isolated spots besides."[65]

The true Negro inhabits Northern Africa. When his country, of which we
know absolutely nothing, has been crowded, the nomadic portion of the
population has poured itself over the mountain terraces, and,
descending into the swamps, has become degraded in body and mind.

Technically speaking, we do not believe the Negro is a distinct
species.

     "It is certain that the woolly hair, the prognathous
     development, and the deep black skin of the typical Negro,
     are not peculiar to the African continent."[66]

The Negro is found in the low, marshy, and malarious districts. We
think the Negro is produced in a descending scale. The African who
moves from the mountain regions down into the miasmatic districts may
be observed to lose his stature, his complexion, his hair, and his
intellectual vigor: he finally becomes the Negro. Pathologically
considered, he is weak, sickly, and short-lived. His legs are slender
and almost calf-less: the head is developed in the direction of the
passions, while the whole form is destitute of symmetry.

     "It will be understood that the typical Negroes, with whom
     the slavers are supplied, represent the dangerous, the
     destitute, and diseased classes of African society. They may
     be compared to those which in England fill our jails, our
     workhouses, and our hospitals. So far from being equal to
     us, the polished inhabitants of Europe, as some ignorant
     people suppose, they are immeasurably below the Africans
     themselves,

     "The typical Negro is the true savage of Africa; and I must
     paint the deformed anatomy of his mind, as I have already
     done that of his body.

     "The typical Negroes dwell in petty tribes, where all are
     equal except the women, who are slaves; where property is
     common, and where, consequently, there is no property at
     all; where one may recognize the Utopia of philosophers, and
     observe the saddest and basest spectacles which humanity can
     afford.

     "The typical Negro, unrestrained by moral laws, spends his
     days in sloth, his nights in debauchery. He smokes hashish
     till he stupefies his senses or falls into convulsions; he
     drinks palm-wine till he brings on a loathsome disease; he
     abuses children, stabs the poor brute of a woman whose hands
     keep him from starvation, and makes a trade of his own
     offspring. He swallows up his youth in premature vice; he
     lingers through a manhood of disease, and his tardy death is
     hastened by those who no longer care to find him food.... If
     you wish to know what they have been, and to what we may
     restore them, look at the portraits which have been
     preserved of the ancient Egyptians: and in those delicate
     and voluptuous forms; in those round, soft features; in
     those long, almond-shaped, half-closed, languishing eyes; in
     those full pouting lips, large smiling mouths, and
     complexions of a warm and copper-colored tint,--you will
     recognize the true African type, the women-men of the Old
     World, of which the Negroes are the base, the depraved
     caricatures."[67]

But the Negro is not beyond the influences of civilization and
Christianization. Hundreds of thousands have perished in the cruel
swamps of Africa; hundreds of thousands have been devoured by wild
beasts of the forests; hundreds of thousands have perished before the
steady and murderous columns of stronger tribes; hundreds of thousands
have perished from fever, small-pox, and cutaneous diseases; hundreds
of thousands have been sold into slavery; hundreds of thousands have
perished in the "middle-passage;" hundreds of thousands have been
landed in this New World in the West: and yet hundreds of thousands
are still swarming in the low and marshy lands of Western Africa. Poor
as this material is, out of it we have made, here in the United
States, six million citizens; and out of this cast-away material of
Africa, God has raised up many children.

To the candid student of ethnography, it must be conclusive that the
Negro is but the most degraded and disfigured type of the primeval
African. And still, with all his interminable woes and wrongs, the
Negro on the west coast of Africa, in Liberia and Sierra Leone, as
well as in the southern part of the United States, shows that
centuries of savagehood and slavery have not drained him of all the
elements of his manhood. History furnishes us with abundant and
specific evidence of his capacity to civilize and Christianize. We
shall speak of this at length in a subsequent chapter.


FOOTNOTES:

[63] See Keith Johnson's Map of Africa, 1863.

[64] Savage Africa, pp. 403, 404.

[65] Savage Africa, p. 400.

[66] Savage Africa, p. 412.

[67] Savage Africa, p. 430.


CHAPTER VII.

AFRICAN IDIOSYNCRASIES.

     PATRIARCHAL GOVERNMENT.--CONSTRUCTION OF VILLAGES.--NEGRO
     ARCHITECTURE.--ELECTION OF KINGS.--CORONATION
     CEREMONY.--SUCCESSION.--AFRICAN QUEENS.--LAW, CIVIL AND
     CRIMINAL.--PRIESTS.--THEIR
     FUNCTIONS.--MARRIAGE.--WARFARE.--AGRICULTURE.--MECHANIC
     ARTS.--BLACKSMITHS.


All the tribes on the continent of Africa are under, to a greater or
less degree, the patriarchal form of government. It is usual for
writers on Africa to speak of "kingdoms" and "empires;" but these
kingdoms are called so more by compliment than with any desire to
convey the real meaning that we get when the empire of Germany or
kingdom of Spain is spoken of. The patriarchal government is the most
ancient in Africa. It is true that great kingdoms have risen in
Africa; but they were the result of devastating wars rather than the
creation of political genius or governmental wisdom.

     "Pangola is the child or vassal of Mpende. Sandia and Mpende
     are the only independent chiefs from Kebrabasa to Zumbo, and
     belong to the tribe Manganja. The country north of the
     mountains, here in sight from the Zambesi, is called Senga,
     and its inhabitants Asenga or Basenga; but all appear to be
     of the same family as the rest of the Manganja and Maravi.
     Formerly all the Manganja were united under the government
     of their great chief, Undi, whose empire extended from Lake
     Shirwa to the River Loangwa; but after Undi's death it fell
     to pieces, and a large portion of it on the Zambesi was
     absorbed by their powerful Southern neighbors, the Bamjai.
     This has been the inevitable fate of every African empire
     from time immemorial. A chief of more than ordinary ability
     arises, and, subduing all his less powerful neighbors,
     founds a kingdom, which he governs more or less wisely till
     he dies. His successor, not having the talents of the
     conqueror, cannot retain the dominion, and some of the abler
     under-chiefs set up for themselves; and, in a few years, the
     remembrance only of the empire remains. This, which may be
     considered as the normal state of African society, gives
     rise to frequent and desolating wars, and the people long in
     vain for a power able to make all dwell in peace. In this
     light a European colony would be considered by the natives
     as an inestimable boon to inter-tropical Africa. Thousands
     of industrious natives would gladly settle around it, and
     engage in that peaceful pursuit of agriculture and trade of
     which they are so fond; and, undistracted by wars or rumors
     of wars, might listen to the purifying and ennobling truths
     of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Manganja on the Zambesi,
     like their countrymen on the Shire, are fond of agriculture;
     and, in addition to the usual varieties of food, cultivate
     tobacco and cotton in quantities more than equal to their
     wants. To the question, 'Would they work for Europeans?' an
     affirmative answer may be given; if the Europeans belong to
     the class which can pay a reasonable price for labor, and
     not to that of adventurers who want employment for
     themselves. All were particularly well clothed from Sandia's
     to Pangola's; and it was noticed that all the cloth was of
     native manufacture, the product of their own looms. In Senga
     a great deal of iron is obtained from the ore, and
     manufactured very cleverly."[68]

The above is a fair description of the internecine wars that have been
carried on between the tribes in Africa, back "to a time whereof the
memory of man runneth not to the contrary." In a preceding chapter we
gave quite an extended account of four Negro empires. We call
attention here to the villages of these people, and shall allow
writers who have paid much attention to this subject to give their
impressions. Speaking of a village of the Aviia tribe called Mandji,
Du Chaillu says,--

     "It was the dirtiest village I had yet seen in Africa, and
     the inhabitants appeared to me of a degraded class of
     Negroes. The shape and arrangement of the village were quite
     different from any thing I had seen before. The place was in
     the form of a quadrangle, with an open space in the middle
     not more than ten yards square; and the huts, arranged in a
     continuous row on two sides, were not more than eight feet
     high from the ground to the roof. The doors were only four
     feet high, and of about the same width, with sticks placed
     across on the inside, one above the other, to bar the
     entrance. The place for the fire was in the middle of the
     principal room, on each side of which was a little dark
     chamber; and on the floor was an _orala_, or stage, to smoke
     meat upon. In the middle of the yard was a hole dug in the
     ground for the reception of offal, from which a disgusting
     smell arose, the wretched inhabitants being too lazy or
     obtuse to guard against this by covering it with earth.

     "The houses were built of a framework of poles, covered with
     the bark of trees, and roofed with leaves. In the middle of
     the village stood the public shed, or palaver-house,--a kind
     of town-hall found in almost all West-African villages. A
     large fire was burning in it, on the ground; and at one end
     of the shed stood a huge wooden idol, painted red and white,
     and rudely fashioned in the shape of a woman. The shed was
     the largest building in the village, for it was ten feet
     high, and measured fifteen feet by ten. It is the habit of
     the lazy negroes of these interior villages--at least, the
     men--to spend almost the whole day lying down under the
     palaver-shed, feeding their morbid imaginations with tales
     of witchcraft, and smoking their _condoquais_."

But all the villages of these poor children of the desert are not so
untidy as the one described above. There is a wide difference in the
sanitary laws governing these villages.

     "The Ishogo villages are large. Indeed, what most strikes
     the traveller in coming from the seacoast to this inland
     country, is the large size, neatness, and beauty of the
     villages. They generally have about one hundred and fifty or
     one hundred and sixty huts, arranged in streets, which are
     very broad and kept remarkably clean. Each house has a door
     of wood which is painted in fanciful designs with red,
     white, and black. One pattern struck me as simple and
     effective; it was a number of black spots margined with
     white, painted in regular rows on a red ground. But my
     readers must not run away with the idea that the doors are
     like those of the houses of civilized people; they are
     seldom more than two feet and a half high. The door of my
     house was just twenty-seven inches high. It is fortunate
     that I am a short man, otherwise it would have been hard
     exercise to go in and out of my lodgings. The planks of
     which the doors are made are cut with great labor by native
     axes out of trunks of trees, one trunk seldom yielding more
     than one good plank. My hut, an average-sized dwelling, was
     twenty feet long and eight feet broad. It was divided into
     three rooms or compartments, the middle one, into which the
     door opened, being a little larger than the other two....
     Mokenga is a beautiful village, containing about one hundred
     and sixty houses; they were the largest dwellings I had yet
     seen on the journey. The village was surrounded by a dense
     grove of plantain-trees, many of which had to be supported
     by poles, on account of the weight of the enormous bunches
     of plantains they bore. Little groves of lime-trees were
     scattered everywhere, and the limes, like so much golden
     fruit, looked beautiful amidst the dark foliage that
     surrounded them. Tall, towering palm-trees were scattered
     here and there. Above and behind the village was the dark
     green forest. The street was the broadest I ever saw in
     Africa; one part of it was about one hundred yards broad,
     and not a blade of grass could be seen in it. The _Sycobii_
     were building their nests everywhere, and made a deafening
     noise, for there were thousands and thousands of these
     little sociable birds."[69]

The construction of houses in villages in Africa is almost uniform, as
far as our studies have led us.[70] Or, rather, we ought to modify
this statement by saying there are but two plans of construction. One
is where the houses are erected on the rectilinear, the other is where
they are built on the circular plan. In the more warlike tribes the
latter plan prevails. The hillsides and elevated places near the
timber are sought as desirable locations for villages. The plan of
architecture is simple. The diameter is first considered, and
generally varies from ten to fifteen feet. A circle is drawn in the
ground, and then long flexible sticks are driven into the earth. The
builder, standing inside of the circle, binds the sticks together at
the top; where they are secured together by the use of the
"monkey-rope," a thick vine that stretches itself in great profusion
from tree to tree in that country. Now, the reader can imagine a large
umbrella with the handle broken off even with the ribs when closed up,
and without any cloth,--nothing but the ribs left. Now open it, and
place it on the ground before you, and you have a fair idea of the hut
up to the present time. A reed thatching is laid over the frame, and
secured firmly by parallel lashings about fifteen inches apart. The
door is made last by cutting a hole in the side of the hut facing
toward the centre of the contemplated circle of huts.[71] The door is
about eighteen inches in height, and just wide enough to admit the
body of the owner. The sharp points, after the cutting, are guarded by
plaited twigs. The door is made of quite a number of stout sticks
driven into the ground at equal distances apart, through which, in and
out, are woven pliant sticks. When this is accomplished, the maker
cuts off the irregular ends to make it fit the door, and removes it to
its place. Screens are often used inside to keep out the wind: they
are made so as to be placed in whatever position the wind is blowing.
Some of these houses are built with great care, and those with domed
roofs are elaborately decorated inside with beads of various sizes and
colors.

The furniture consists of a few mats, several baskets, a milk-pail, a
number of earthen pots, a bundle of assagais, and a few other weapons
of war. Next, to guard against the perils of the rainy season, a ditch
about two feet in width and of equal depth is made about the new
dwelling. Now multiply this hut by five hundred, preserving the
circle, and you have the village. The _palaver-house_, or place for
public debates, is situated in the centre of the circle of huts. Among
the northern and southern tribes, a fence is built around their
villages, when they are called "kraals." The space immediately outside
of the fence is cleared, so as to put an enemy at a disadvantage in an
attack upon the village. Among the agricultural tribes, as, for
example, the Kaffirs, they drive their cattle into the kraal, and for
the young build pens.

The other method of building villages is to have one long street, with
a row of houses on each side, rectangular in shape. They are about
twenty-five or thirty feet in length, and about twelve to fifteen feet
in width. Six or eight posts are used to join the material of the
sides to. The roofs are flat. Three rooms are allowed to each house.
The two end rooms are larger than the centre one, where the door opens
out into the street. Sometimes these rooms are plastered, but it is
seldom; and then it is in the case of the well-to-do class.[72]

We said, at the beginning of this chapter, that the government in
Africa was largely patriarchal; and yet we have called attention to
four great kingdoms. There is no contradiction here, although there
may seem to be; for even kings are chosen by ballot, and a sort of a
house of lords has a veto power over royal edicts.

     "Among the tribes which I visited in my explorations I found
     but one form of government, which may be called the
     patriarchal. There is not sufficient national unity in any
     of the tribes to give occasion for such a despotism as
     prevails in Dahomey, and in other of the African
     nationalities. I found the tribes of equatorial Africa
     greatly dispersed, and, in general, no bond of union between
     parts of the same tribe. A tribe is divided up into numerous
     _clans_, and these again into numberless little villages,
     each of which last possesses an independent chief. The
     villages are scattered; are often moved for death or
     witchcraft, as I have already explained in the narrative;
     and not infrequently are engaged in war with each other.

     "The chieftainship is, to a certain extent, hereditary, the
     right of succession vesting in the brother of the reigning
     chief or king. The people, however, and particularly the
     elders of the village, have a veto power, and can, for
     sufficient cause, deprive the lineal heir of his succession,
     and put in over him some one thought of more worth. In such
     cases the question is put to the vote of the village; and,
     where parties are equally divided as to strength, there
     ensue sometimes long and serious palavers before all can
     unite in a choice. The chief is mostly a man of great
     influence prior to his accession, and generally an old man
     when he gains power.

     "His authority, though greater than one would think, judging
     from the little personal deference paid to him, is final
     only in matters of every-day use. In cases of importance,
     such as war, or any important removal, the elders of the
     village meet together and deliberate in the presence of the
     whole population, which last finally decide the question.

     "The elders, who possess other authority, and are always in
     the counsels of the chief, are the oldest members of
     important families in the village. Respect is paid to them
     on account of their years, but more from a certain regard
     for 'family,' which the African has very strongly wherever I
     have known him. These families form the aristocracy."[73]

Here are democracy and aristocracy blended somewhat. The king's power
seems to be in deciding everyday affairs, while the weighty matters
which affect the whole tribe are decided by the elders and the people.
Mr. Reade says of such government,--

     "Among these equatorial tribes the government is
     patriarchal, which is almost equivalent to saying that there
     is no government at all. The tribes are divided into clans.
     Each clan inhabits a separate village, or group of villages;
     and at the head of each is a patriarch, the parody of a
     king. They are distinguished from the others by the
     grass-woven cap which they wear on their heads, and by the
     staff which they carry in their hands. They are always rich
     and aged: therefore they are venerated; but, though they can
     exert influence, they cannot wield power; they can advise,
     but they cannot command. In some instances, as in that of
     Quenqueza, King of the Rembo, the title and empty honors of
     royalty are bestowed upon the most influential patriarch in
     a district. This is a vestige of higher civilization and of
     ancient empire which disappears as one descends among the
     lower tribes."[74]

     "The African form of government is patriarchal, and,
     according to the temperament of the chief, despotic, or
     guided by the counsel of the elders of the tribe. Reverence
     for loyalty sometimes leads the mass of the people to submit
     to great cruelty, and even murder, at the hands of a despot
     or madman; but, on the whole, the rule is mild; and the same
     remark applies in a degree to their religion."[75]

When a new king is elected, he has first to repair to the pontiff's
house, who--apropos of priests--is more important than the king
himself. The king prostrates himself, and, with loud cries, entreats
the favor of this high priest. At first the old man inside, with a
gruff voice, orders him away, says he cannot be annoyed; but the king
enumerates the presents he has brought him, and finally the door
opens, and the priest appears, clad in white, a looking-glass on his
breast, and long white feathers in his head. The king is sprinkled,
covered with dust, walked over, and then, finally, the priest lies
upon him. He has to swear that he will obey, etc.; and then he is
allowed to go to the coronation. Then follow days and nights of
feasting, and, among some tribes, human sacrifices.

The right of succession is generally kept on the male side of the
family. The crown passes from brother to brother, from uncle to
nephew, from cousin to cousin. Where there are no brothers, the son
takes the sceptre. In all our studies on Africa, we have found only
two women reigning. A woman by the name of Shinga ascended the throne
of the Congo empire in 1640. She rebelled against the ceremonies,
sought to be introduced by Portuguese Catholic priests, who incited
her nephew to treason. Defeated in several pitched battles, she fled
into the Jaga country, where she was crowned with much success. In
1646 she won her throne again, and concluded an honorable peace with
the Portuguese. The other queen was the bloodthirsty Tembandumba of
the Jagas. She was of Arab blood, and a cannibal by practice. She
fought many battles, achieved great victories, flirted with beautiful
young savages, and finally was poisoned.

The African is not altogether without law.

     "Justice appears, upon the whole, to be pretty fairly
     administered among the Makololo. A headman took some beads
     and a blanket from one of his men who had been with us; the
     matter was brought before the chief; and he immediately
     ordered the goods to be restored, and decreed, moreover,
     that no headman should take the property of the men who had
     returned. In theory all the goods brought back belonged to
     the chief; the men laid them at his feet, and made a formal
     offer of them all: he looked at the articles, and told the
     men to keep them. This is almost invariably the case. Tuba
     Mokoro, however, fearing lest Sekeletu might take a fancy to
     some of his best goods, exhibited only a few of his old and
     least valuable acquisitions. Masakasa had little to show: he
     had committed some breach of native law in one of the
     villages on the way, and paid a heavy fine rather than have
     the matter brought to the doctor's ears. Each carrier is
     entitled to a portion of the goods in his bundle, though
     purchased by the chief's ivory; and they never hesitate to
     claim their rights; but no wages can be demanded from the
     chief if he fails to respond to the first application."[76]

We have found considerable civil and criminal law among the different
tribes. We gave an account of the civil and criminal code of Dahomey
in the chapter on that empire. In the Congo country all civil suits
are brought before a judge. He sits on a mat under a large tree, and
patiently hears the arguments _pro_ and _con_. His decisions are
final. There is no higher court, and hence no appeal. The criminal
cases are brought before the _Chitomé_, or priest. He keeps a sacred
fire burning in his house that is never suffered to go out. He is
supported by the lavish and delicate gifts of the people, and is held
to be sacred. No one is allowed to approach his house except on the
most urgent business. He never dies, so say the people. When he is
seriously sick his legal successor steals quietly into his house, and
beats his brains out, or strangles him to death. It is his duty to
hear all criminal cases, and to this end he makes a periodical circuit
among the tribe. Murder, treason, adultery, killing the escaped
snakes from the fetich-house,--and often stealing,--are punished by
death, or by being sold into slavery. A girl who loses her standing,
disgraces her family by an immoral act, is banished from the tribe.
And in case of seduction the man is tied up and flogged. In case of
adultery a large sum of money must be paid. If the guilty one is
unable to pay the fine, then death or slavery is the penalty.

     "Adultery is regarded by the Africans as a kind of theft. It
     is a vice, therefore, and so common that one might write a
     Decameron of native tales like those of Boccaccio. And what
     in Boccaccio is more poignant and more vicious than this
     song of the Benga, which I have often heard them sing, young
     men and women together, when no old men were present?--

       'The old men young girls married.
       The young girls made the old men fools;
       For they love to kiss the young men in the dark,
       Or beneath the green leaves of the plantain-tree.
       The old men then threatened the young men,
       And said, "You make us look like fools;
       But we will stab you with our knives till your blood runs forth!"
       "Oh, stab us, stab us!" cried the young men gladly,
       "_For then your wives will fasten up our wounds_."'"[77]


The laws of marriage among many tribes are very wholesome and
elevating. When the age of puberty arrives, it is the custom in many
tribes for the elderly women, who style themselves _Negemba_, to go
into the forest, and prepare for the initiation of the _igonji_, or
novice. They clear a large space, build a fire, which is kept burning
for three days. They take the young woman into the fetich-house,--a
new one for this ceremony,--where they go through some ordeal, that,
thus far, has never been understood by men. When a young man wants a
wife, there are two things necessary; viz., he must secure her
consent, and then buy her. The apparent necessary element in African
courtship is not a thing to be deprecated by the contracting parties.
On the other hand, it is the _sine qua non_ of matrimony. It is proof
positive when a suitor gives cattle for his sweetheart, first, that he
is wealthy; and, second, that he greatly values the lady he fain would
make his bride. He first seeks the favor of the girl's parents. If she
have none, then her next of kin, as in Israel in the days of Boaz. For
it is a law among many tribes, that a young girl shall never be
without a guardian. When the relatives are favorably impressed with
the suitor, they are at great pains to sound his praise in the
presence of the girl; who, after a while, consents to see him. The
news is conveyed to him by a friend or relative of the girl. The
suitor takes a bath, rubs his body with palm-oil, dons his best armor,
and with beating heart and proud stride hastens to the presence of the
fastidious charmer. She does not speak. He sits down, rises, turns
around, runs, and goes through many exercises to show her that he is
sound and healthy. The girl retires, and the anxious suitor receives
the warm congratulations of the spectators on his noble bearing. The
fair lady conveys her assent to the waiting lover, and the village
rings with shouts of gladness. Next come the preliminary matters
before the wedding. Marriage among most African tribes is a coetaneous
contract. The bride is delivered when the price is paid by the
bridegroom. No goods, no wife. Then follow the wedding and feasting,
firing of guns, blowing of horns, music, and dancing.[78]

Polygamy is almost universal in Africa, and poor woman is the greater
sufferer from the accursed system. It is not enough that she is
drained of her beauty and strength by the savage passions of man: she
is the merest abject slave everywhere. The young women are beautiful,
but it is only for a brief season: it soon passes like the fragile
rose into the ashes of premature old age. In Dahomey she is a soldier;
in Kaffir-land she tends the herds, and builds houses; and in Congo
without her industry man would starve. Everywhere man's cruel hand is
against her. Everywhere she is the slave of his unholy passions.[79]

It is a mistaken notion that has obtained for many years, that the
Negro in Africa is physically the most loathsome of all mankind. True,
the Negro has been deformed by degradation and abuse; but this is not
his normal condition. We have seen native Africans who were jet black,
woolly-haired, and yet possessing fine teeth, beautiful features,
tall, graceful, and athletic.

     "In reference to the status of the Africans among the
     nations of the earth, we have seen nothing to justify the
     notion that they are of a different 'breed' or 'species'
     from the most civilized. The African is a man with every
     attribute of human kind. Centuries of barbarism have had
     the same deteriorating effects on Africans as Prichard
     describes them to have had on certain of the Irish who were
     driven, some generations back, to the hills in Ulster and
     Connaught; and these depressing influences have had such
     moral and physical effects on some tribes, that ages
     probably will be required to undo what ages have done. This
     degradation, however, would hardly be given as a reason for
     holding any race in bondage, unless the advocate had sunk
     morally to the same low state. Apart from the frightful loss
     of life in the process by which, it is pretended, the
     Negroes are better provided for than in a state of liberty
     in their own country, it is this very system that
     perpetuates, if not causes, the unhappy condition with which
     the comparative comfort of some of them in slavery is
     contrasted.

     "Ethnologists reckon the African as by no means the lowest
     of the human family. He is nearly as strong physically as
     the European; and, as a race, is wonderfully persistent
     among the nations of the earth. Neither the diseases nor the
     ardent spirits which proved so fatal to North-American
     Indians, South-Sea Islanders, and Australians, seem capable
     of annihilating the Negroes. Even when subjected to that
     system so destructive to human life, by which they are torn
     from their native soil, they spring up irrepressibly, and
     darken half the new continent. They are gifted by nature
     with physical strength capable of withstanding the sorest
     privations, and a lightheartedness which, as a sort of
     compensation, enables them to make the best of the worst
     situations. It is like that power which the human frame
     possesses of withstanding heat, and to an extent which we
     should never have known, had not an adventurous surgeon gone
     into an oven, and burnt his fingers with his own watch. The
     Africans have wonderfully borne up under unnatural
     conditions that would have proved fatal to most races.

     "It is remarkable that the power of resistance under
     calamity, or, as some would say, adaptation for a life of
     servitude, is peculiar only to certain tribes on the
     continent of Africa. Climate cannot be made to account for
     the fact that many would pine in a state of slavery, or
     voluntarily perish. No Krooman can be converted into a
     slave, and yet he is an inhabitant of the low, unhealthy
     west coast; nor can any of the Zulu or Kaffir tribes be
     reduced to bondage, though all these live on comparatively
     elevated regions. We have heard it stated by men familiar
     with some of the Kaffirs, that a blow, given even in play by
     a European, must be returned. A love of liberty is
     observable in all who have the Zulu blood, as the Makololo,
     the Watuta, and probably the Masai. But blood does not
     explain the fact. A beautiful Barotse woman at NHLe, on
     refusing to marry a man whom she did not like, was in a pet
     given by the headman to some Mambari slave-traders from
     Benguela. Seeing her fate, she seized one of their spears,
     and, stabbing herself, fell down dead."[80]

Dr. David Livingstone is certainly entitled to our utmost confidence
in all matters that he writes about. Mr. Archibald Forbes says he has
seen Africans dead upon the field of battle that would measure nine
feet, and it was only a few months ago that we had the privilege of
seeing a Zulu who was eight feet and eleven inches in height. As to
the beauty of the Negro, nearly all African travellers agree.

     "But if the women of Africa are brutal, the men of Africa
     are feminine. Their faces are smooth; their breasts are
     frequently as full as those of European women; their voices
     are never gruff or deep; their fingers are long; and they
     can be very proud of their rosy nails. While the women are
     nearly always ill-shaped after their girlhood, the men have
     gracefully moulded limbs, and always after a feminine
     type,--the arms rounded, the legs elegantly formed, without
     too much muscular development, and the feet delicate and
     small.

     "When I first went ashore on Africa, viz., at Bathurst, I
     thought all the men who passed me, covered in their long
     robes, were women, till I saw one of the latter sex, and was
     thereby disenchanted.

     "While no African's face ever yet reminded me of a man whom
     I had known in England, I saw again and again faces which
     reminded me of women; and on one occasion, in Angola, being
     about to chastise a _carregadore_, he sank on his knees as I
     raised my stick, clasped his hands, and looked up
     imploringly toward me,--was so like a young lady I had once
     felt an affection for, that, in spite of myself, I flung the
     stick away, fearing to commit a sacrilege.

     "Ladies on reading this will open their eyes, and suppose
     that either I have very bad taste, or that I am writing
     fiction. But I can assure them that among the Angolas, and
     the Mpongwe, and the Mandingoes, and the Fula, I have seen
     men whose form and features would disgrace no
     petticoats,--not even satin ones at a drawing-room.

     "While the women are stupid, sulky, and phlegmatic, the men
     are vivacious, timid, inquisitive, and garrulous beyond
     belief. They make excellent domestic servants, are cleanly,
     and even tedious in the nicety with which they arrange
     dishes on a table or clothes on a bed. They have also their
     friendships after the manner of woman, embracing one
     another, sleeping on the same mat, telling one another their
     secrets, betraying them, and getting terribly jealous of one
     another (from pecuniary motives) when they happen to serve
     the same master.

     "They have none of that austerity, that reserve, that
     pertinacity, that perseverance, that strong-headed stubborn
     determination, or that ferocious courage, which are the
     common attributes of our sex. They have, on the other hand,
     that delicate tact, that intuition, that nervous
     imagination, that quick perception of character, which have
     become the proverbial characteristics of cultivated women.
     They know how to render themselves impenetrable; and if they
     desire to be perfidious, they wear a mask which few eyes can
     see through, while at the same time a certain sameness of
     purpose models their character in similar moulds. Their
     nature is an enigma: but solve it, and you have solved the
     race. They are inordinately vain: they buy looking-glasses;
     they will pass hours at their toilet, in which their wives
     must act as _femmes de chambre_; they will spend all their
     money on ornaments and dress, in which they can display a
     charming taste. They are fond of music, of dancing, and are
     not insensible to the beauties of nature. They are indolent,
     and have little ambition except to be admired and well
     spoken of. They are so sensitive that a harsh word will
     rankle in then hearts, and make them unhappy for a length of
     time; and they will strip themselves to pay the _grills_ for
     their flattery, and to escape their satire. Though naturally
     timid, and loath to shed blood, they witness without horror
     the most revolting spectacles which their religion
     sanctions; and, though awed by us their superiors, a real
     injury will transform their natures, and they will take a
     speedy and merciless revenge.

     "According to popular belief, the Africans are treacherous
     and hostile. The fact is, that all Africans are supposed to
     be Negroes, and that which is criminal is ever associated
     with that which is hideous. But, with the exception of some
     Mohammedan tribes toward the north, one may travel all over
     Africa without risking one's life. They may detain you, they
     may rob you, if you are rich; they may insult you, and
     refuse to let you enter their country, if you are poor: but
     your life is always safe till you sacrifice it by some
     imprudence.

     "In ancient times the blacks were known to be so gentle to
     strangers that many believed that the gods sprang from them.
     Homer sings of the Ocean, father of the gods; and says that,
     when Jupiter wishes to take a holiday, he visits the sea,
     and goes to the banquets of the blacks,--a people humble,
     courteous, and devout."[81]

We have quoted thus extensively from Mr. Reade because he has given a
fair account of the peoples he met. He is a good writer, but sometimes
gets real funny!

It is a fact that all uncivilized races are warlike. The tribes of
Africa are a vast standing army. Fighting seems to be their
employment. We went into this matter of armies so thoroughly in the
fourth chapter that we shall not have much to say here. The bow and
arrow, the spear and assagai were the primitive weapons of African
warriors; but they have learned the use of fire-arms within the last
quarter of a century. The shield and assagai are not, however, done
away with. The young Prince Napoleon, whose dreadful death the reader
may recall, was slain by an assagai. These armies are officered,
disciplined, and drilled to great perfection, as the French and
English troops have abundant reason to know.

     "The Zulu tribes are remarkable for being the only people in
     that part of Africa who have practised war in an European
     sense of the word. The other tribes are very good at bush
     fighting, and are exceedingly crafty at taking an enemy
     unawares, and coming on him before he is prepared for them.
     Guerilla warfare is, in fact, their only mode of waging
     battle; and, as is necessarily the case in such warfare,
     more depends on the exertion of individual combatants than
     on the scientific combinations of masses. But the Zulu tribe
     have, since the time of Dhaka, the great inventor of
     military tactics, carried on war in a manner approaching the
     notions of civilization.

     "Their men are organized into regiments, each subdivided
     into companies, and each commanded by its own chief, or
     colonel; while the king, as commanding general, leads his
     forces to war, disposes them in battle-array, and personally
     directs their movements. They give an enemy notice that they
     are about to match against him, and boldly meet him in the
     open field. There is a military etiquette about them which
     some of our own people have been slow to understand. They
     once sent a message to the English commander that they would
     'come and breakfast with him.' He thought it was only a
     joke, and was very much surprised when the Kaffirs, true to
     their promise, came pouring like a torrent over the hills,
     leaving him barely time to get his men under arms before the
     dark enemies arrived."[82]

And there are some legends told about African wars that would put the
"Arabian Nights" to the blush.[83]

In Africa, as in districts of Germany and Holland, woman is burdened
with agricultural duties. The soil of Africa is very rich,[84] and
consequently Nature furnishes her untutored children with much
spontaneous vegetation. It is a rather remarkable fact, that the
average African warrior thinks it a degradation for him to engage in
agriculture. He will fell trees, and help move a village, but _will
not_ go into the field to work. The women--generally the married
ones--do the gardening. They carry the seed on their heads in a large
basket, a hoe on their shoulder, and a baby slung on the back. They
scatter the seed over the ground, and then break up the earth to the
depth of three or four inches.

     "Four or five gardens are often to be seen round a kraal,
     each situated so as to suit some particular plant. Various
     kinds of crops are cultivated by the Kaffirs, the principal
     being maize, millet, pumpkins, and a kind of spurious
     sugar-cane in great use throughout Southern Africa, and
     popularly known by the name of 'sweet-reed.' The two former
     constitute, however, the necessaries of life, the latter
     belonging rather to the class of luxuries. The maize, or, as
     it is popularly called when the pods are severed from the
     stem, 'mealies,' is the very staff of life to a Kaffir; as
     it is from the mealies that is made the thick porridge on
     which the Kaffir chiefly lives. If a European hires a
     Kaffir, whether as guide, servant, or hunter, he is obliged
     to supply him with a stipulated quantity of food, of which
     the maize forms the chief ingredient. Indeed, so long as the
     native of Southern Africa can get plenty of porridge and
     sour milk, he is perfectly satisfied with his lot. When
     ripe, the ears of maize are removed from the stem, the leafy
     envelope is stripped off, and they are hung in pairs over
     sticks until they are dry enough to be taken to the
     storehouse."[85]

The cattle are cared for by the men, and women are not allowed to
engage in the hunt for wild animals. The cattle among the mountain and
sandstone tribes are of a fine stock, but those of the tribes in the
alluvia, like their owners, are small and sickly.

The African pays more attention to his weapons of offensive warfare
than he does to his wives; but in many instances he is quite skilful
in the handicrafts.

     "The Ishogo people are noted throughout the neighboring
     tribes for the superior quality and fineness of the
     _bongos_, or pieces of grass-cloth, which they manufacture.
     They are industrious and skilful weavers. In walking down
     the main street of Mokenga, a number of _ouandjas_, or
     houses without walls are seen, each containing four or five
     looms, with the weavers seated before them weaving the
     cloth. In the middle of the floor of the _ouandjay_ a
     wood-fire is seen burning; and the weavers, as you pass by,
     are sure to be seen smoking their pipes, and chatting to one
     another whilst going on with their work. The weavers are all
     men, and it is men also who stitch the _bongos_ together to
     make _denguis_ or robes of them; the stitches are not very
     close together, nor is the thread very fine, but the work is
     very neat and regular, and the needles are of their own
     manufacture. The _bongos_ are very often striped, and
     sometimes made even in check patterns; this is done by their
     dyeing some of the threads of the warp, or of both warp and
     woof, with various simple colors; the dyes are all made of
     decoctions of different kinds of wood, except for black,
     when a kind of iron ore is used. The _bongos_ are employed
     as money in this put of Africa. Although called grass-cloth
     by me, the material is not made of grass, but of the
     delicate and firm cuticle of palm leaflets, stripped off in
     a dexterous manner with the fingers."[86]

Nearly all his mechanical genius seems to be exhausted in the
perfection of his implements of war, and Dr. Livingstone is of the
opinion, that when a certain perfection in the arts is reached, the
natives pause. This, we think, is owing to their far remove from other
nations. Livingstone says,--

     "The races of this continent seem to have advanced to a
     certain point and no farther; their progress in the arts of
     working iron and copper, in pottery, basket-making,
     spinning, weaving, making nets, fish-hooks, spears, axes,
     knives, needles, and other things, whether originally
     invented by this people or communicated by another
     instructor, appears to have remained in the same rude state
     for a great number of centuries. This apparent stagnation of
     mind in certain nations we cannot understand, but, since we
     have in the latter ages of the world made what we consider
     great progress in the arts, we have unconsciously got into
     the way of speaking of some other races in much the same
     tone as that used by the Celestials in the Flowery Land.
     These same Chinese anticipated us in several most important
     discoveries, by as many centuries as we may have preceded
     others. In the knowledge of the properties of the magnet,
     the composition of gunpowder, the invention of printing, the
     manufacture of porcelain, of silk, and in the progress of
     literature, they were before us. But then the power of
     making further discoveries was arrested, and a stagnation of
     the intellect prevented their advancing in the path of
     improvement or invention."

Mr. Wood says,--

     "The natives of Southern Africa are wonderful proficients in
     forging iron; and, indeed, a decided capability for the
     blacksmith's art seems to be inherent in the natives of
     Africa, from north to south, and from east to west. None of
     the tribes can do very much with the iron, but the little
     which they require is worked in perfection. As in the case
     with all uncivilized beings, the whole treasures of the art
     are lavished on their weapons; and so, if we wish to see
     what an African savage can do with iron, we must look at his
     spears, knives, and arrows--the latter, indeed, being but
     spears in miniature."

The blacksmith, then, is a person of some consequence in his village.
He gives shape and point to the weapons by which game is to be secured
and battles won. All seek his favor.

     "Among the Kaffirs, a blacksmith is a man of considerable
     importance, and is much respected by the tribe. He will not
     profane the mystery of his craft by allowing uninitiated
     eyes to inspect his various processes, and therefore carries
     on his operations at some distance from the kraal. His first
     care is to prepare the bellows. The form which he uses
     prevails over a very large portion of Africa, and is seen,
     with some few modifications, even among the many islands of
     Polynesia. It consists of two leathern sacks, at the upper
     end of which is a handle. To the lower end of each sack is
     attached the hollow horns of some animal, that of the cow or
     eland being most commonly used; and when the bags are
     alternately inflated and compressed, the air passes out
     through the two horns.

     "Of course the heat of the fire would destroy the horns if
     they were allowed to come in contact with it; and they are
     therefore inserted, not into the fire, but into an
     earthenware tube which communicates with the fire. The use
     of valves is unknown; but as the two horns do not open into
     the fire, but into the tube, the fire is not drawn into the
     bellows as would otherwise be the case. This arrangement,
     however, causes considerable waste of air, so that the
     bellows-blower is obliged to work much harder than would be
     the case if he were provided with an instrument that could
     conduct the blast directly to its destination. The ancient
     Egyptians used a bellows of precisely similar construction,
     except that they did not work them entirely by hand. They
     stood with one foot on each sack, and blew the fire by
     alternately pressing on them with the feet, and raising them
     by means of a cord fastened to their upper ends.

     "When the blacksmith is about to set to work, he digs a hole
     in the ground, in which the fire is placed; and then sinks
     the earthenware tube in a sloping direction, so that the
     lower end opens at the bottom of the hole, while the upper
     end projects above the level of the ground. The two horns
     are next inserted into the upper end of the earthenware
     tube; and the bellows are then fastened in their places, so
     that the sacks are conveniently disposed for the hands of
     the operator, who sits between them. A charcoal-fire is then
     laid in the hole, and is soon brought to a powerful heat by
     means of the bellows. A larger stone serves the purpose of
     an anvil, and a smaller stone does duty for a hammer.
     Sometimes the hammer is made of a conical piece of iron, but
     in most cases a stone is considered sufficient. The rough
     work of hammering the iron into shape is generally done by
     the chief blacksmith's assistants, of whom he has several,
     all of whom will pound away at the iron in regular
     succession. The shaping and finishing the article is
     reserved by the smith for himself. The other tools are few
     and simple, and consist of punches and rude pinchers made of
     two rods of iron.

     "With these instruments the Kaffir smith can cast brass into
     various ornaments, Sometimes he pours it into a cylindrical
     mould, so as to make a bar from which bracelets and similar
     ornaments can be hammered, and sometimes he makes studs and
     knobs by forming their shape in clay moulds."[87]

Verily, the day will come when these warlike tribes shall beat their
spears into pruning-hooks, and their assagais into ploughshares, and
shall learn war no more! The skill and cunning of their artificers
shall be consecrated to the higher and nobler ends of civilization,
and the noise of battle shall die amid the music of a varied
industry!


FOOTNOTES:

[68] Livingstone's Expedition to the Zambesi, pp. 216, 217.

[69] Ashango Land, pp. 288, 289, 291, 292.

[70] Western Africa, p. 257 _sq._

[71] Through the Dark Continent, vol. i. p. 489.

[72] Uncivilized Races of Men, vol. i. chap, vii.

[73] Equatorial Africa, pp. 377, 378.

[74] Savage Africa, p. 216.

[75] Expedition to Zambesi, pp. 626, 627.

[76] Livingstone's Expedition to the Zambesi, pp. 307, 308.

[77] Savage Africa, p. 219.

[78] See Savage Africa, p. 207. Livingstone's Life-Work, pp. 47, 48.
Uncivilized Races of Men, vol. 1. pp. 71-86; also Du Chaillu and
Denham and Clappterton.

[79] Savage Africa, pp. 424, 425.

[80] Livingstone's Expedition to the Zambesi, pp 625, 626.

[81] Savage Africa, pp 426, 427.

[82] Uncivilized Races of Men, vol. i. p. 94.

[83] Through the Dark Continent, vol. i. p. 344 _sq._; also vol. ii.
pp. 87, 88.

[84] Livingstone's Zambesi, pp. 613-617.

[85] Uncivilized Races of Men, vol. i. p. 146.

[86] Ashango Land, pp 290, 291.

[87] Uncivilized Races of Men, vol. i. pp. 97, 98.


CHAPTER VIII.

LANGUAGES, LITERATURE, AND RELIGION.

     STRUCTURE OF AFRICAN LANGUAGES.--THE MPONGWE, MANDINGO, AND
     GREBO.--POETRY: EPIC, IDYLLIC, AND MISCELLANEOUS.--RELIGIONS
     AND SUPERSTITIONS.


Philologically the inhabitants of Africa are divided into two distinct
families. The dividing line that Nature drew across the continent is
about two degrees north of the equator. Thus far science has not
pushed her investigations into Northern Africa; and, therefore, little
is known of the dialects of that section. But from what travellers
have learned of portions of different tribes that have crossed the
line, and made their way as far as the Cape of Good Hope, we infer,
that, while there are many dialects in that region, they all belong to
one common family. During the Saracen movement, in the second century
of the Christian era, the Arab turned his face toward Central Africa.
Everywhere traces of his language and religion are to be found. He
transformed whole tribes of savages. He built cities, and planted
fields; he tended flocks, and became trader. He poured new blood into
crumbling principalities, and taught the fingers of the untutored
savage to war. His religion, in many places, put out the ineffectual
fires of the fetich-house, and lifted the grovelling thoughts of
idolaters heavenward. His language, like the new juice of the vine,
made its way to the very roots of Negro dialects, and gave them method
and tone. In the song and narrative, in the prayer and precept, of the
heathen, the Arabic comes careering across each sentence, giving
cadence and beauty to all.

On the heels of the Mohammedan followed the Portuguese, the tried and
true servants of Rome, bearing the double swords and keys. Not so
extensive as the Arab, the influence of the Portuguese, nevertheless,
has been quite considerable.

[Transcriber's Note: A breve diacritical mark, a u-shaped symbol above
a letter used to indicate special pronunciation, is found on several
words in the original text. These letters are indicated here by the
coding [)x] for a breve above any letter x. For example, the word
"tonda" with a breve above the letter "o" will appear as "t[)o]nda" in
the following text.]

All along the coast of Northern Guinea, a distance of nearly fifteen
hundred miles,--from Cape Mesurado to the mouth of the Niger,--the
Kree, Grebo, and Basa form one general family, and speak the Mandu
language. On the Ivory Coast another language is spoken between Frisco
and Dick's Cove. It is designated as the Av[)e]kw[)o]m language, and
in its verbal and inflective character is not closely related to the
Mandu. The dialects of Popo, Dahomey, Ashantee, and Akra are
resolvable into a family or language called the _Fantyipin_. All these
dialects, to a greater or less extent, have incorporated many foreign
words,--Dutch, French, Spanish, English, Portuguese, and even many
words from Madagascar. The language of the Gold and Ivory Coasts we
find much fuller than those on the Grain Coast. Wherever commerce or
mechanical enterprise imparts a quickening touch, we find the
vocabulary of the African amplified. Susceptible, apt, and cunning,
the coast tribes, on account of their intercourse with the outside
world, have been greatly changed. We are sorry that the change has not
always been for the better. Uncivilized sailors, and brainless and
heartless speculators, have sown the rankest seeds of an effete
Caucasian civilization in the hearts of the unsuspecting Africans.
These poor people have learned to cheat, lie, steal; are capable of
remarkable diplomacy and treachery; have learned well the art of
flattery and extreme cruelty. Mr. Wilson says,--

     "The Sooahelee, or Swahere language, spoken by the
     aboriginal inhabitants of Zanzibar, is very nearly allied to
     the Mpongwe, which is spoken on the western coast in very
     nearly the same parallel of latitude. _One-fifth of the
     words of these two dialects are either the same, or so
     nearly so that they may easily be traced to the same root_."

The Italics are our own. The above was written just a quarter of a
century ago.

     "The language of Uyanzi seemed to us to be a mixture of
     almost all Central African dialects. Our great stock of
     native words, in all dialects, proved of immense use to me;
     and in three days I discovered, after classifying and
     comparing the words heard from the Wy-anzi with other
     African words, that I was tolerably proficient, at least for
     all practical purposes, in the Kiyanzi dialect."[88]

Mr. Stanley wrote the above in Africa in March, 1877. It was but a
repetition of the experiences of Drs. Livingstone and Kirk, that,
while the dialects west and south-west of the Mountains of the Moon
are numerous, and apparently distinct, they are referable to one
common parent. The Swahere language has held its place from the
beginning. Closely allied to the Mpongwe, it is certainly one of great
strength and beauty.

     "This great family of languages--if the Mpongwe dialect may
     be taken as a specimen--is remarkable for its beauty,
     elegance, and perfectly philosophical arrangements, as well
     as for its almost indefinite expansibility. In these
     respects it not only differs essentially and radically from
     all the dialects north of the Mountains of the Moon, but
     they are such as may well challenge a comparison with any
     known language in the world."[89]

The dialects of Northern Africa are rough, irregular in structure, and
unpleasant to the ear. The Mpongwe we are inclined to regard as the
best of all the dialects we have examined. It is spoken, with but
slight variations, among the Mpongwe, Ayomba, Oroungou, Rembo, Camma,
Ogobay, Anenga, and Ngaloi tribes. A careful examination of several
other dialects leads us to suspect that they, too, sustain a distant
relationship to the Mpongwe.

Next to this remarkable language comes the Bakalai, with its numerous
dialectic offspring, scattered amongst the following tribes: the
Balengue, Mebenga, Bapoukow, Kombe, Mbiki, Mbousha, Mbondemo, Mbisho,
Shekiani, Apingi, Evili, with other tribes of the interior.

The two families of languages we have just mentioned--the Mpongwe and
the Bakalai--are distinguished for their system and grammatical
structure. It is surprising that these unwritten languages should hold
their place among roving, barbarous tribes through so many years. In
the Mpongwe language and its dialects, the liquid and semi-vowel _r_
is rolled with a fulness and richness harmonious to the ear. The
Bakalai and its branches have no _r_; and it is no less true that all
tribes that exclude this letter from their dialects are warlike,
nomadic, and much inferior to the tribes that use it freely.

The Mpongwe language is spoken on each side of the Gabun, at Cape
Lopez, and at Cape St. Catharin in Southern Guinea; the Mandingo,
between Senegal and the Gambia; and the Grebo language, in and about
Cape Palmas. It is about twelve hundred miles from Gabun to Cape
Palmas, about two thousand miles from Gabun to Senegambia, and about
six hundred miles from Cape Palmas to Gambia. It is fair to presume
that these tribes are sufficiently distant from each other to be
called strangers. An examination of their languages may not fail to
interest.

It has been remarked somewhere, that a people's homes are the surest
indications of the degree of civilization they have attained. It is
certainly true, that deportment has much to do with the polish of
language. The disposition, temperament, and morals of a people who
have no written language go far toward giving their language its
leading characteristics. The Grebo people are a well-made, quick, and
commanding-looking people. In their intercourse with one another,
however, they are unpolished, of sudden temper, and revengeful
disposition.[90] Their language is consequently _monosyllabic_. A
great proportion of Grebo words are of the character indicated. A few
verbs will illustrate. _Kba_, carry; _la_, kill; _ya_, bring; _mu_,
go; _wa_, walk; _ni_, do; and so on. This is true of objects, or
nouns. _Ge_, farm; _bro_, earth; _w[)e]nh_, sun; _tu_, tree; _gi_,
leopard; _na_, fire; _yi_, eye; _bo_, leg; _lu_, head; _nu_, rain;
_kai_, house. The Grebo people seem to have no idea of syllabication.
They do not punctuate; but, speaking with the rapidity with which they
move, run their words together until a whole sentence might be taken
for one word. If any thing has angered a Grebo he will say, "_E ya mu
kra wudi_;" being interpreted, "It has raised a great bone in my
throat." But he says it so quickly that he pronounces it in this
manner, _yamukroure_. There are phrases in this language that are
beyond the ability of a foreigner to pronounce. It has no
contractions, and often changes the first and second person of the
personal pronoun, and the first and second person plural, by lowering
or pitching the voice. The orthography remains the same, though the
significations of those words are radically different.

The Mpongwe language is largely polysyllabic. It is burdened with
personal pronouns, and its adjectives have numerous changes in
addition to their degrees of comparison. We find no inflections to
suggest case or gender. The adjective _mpolo_, which means "large,"
carries seven or eight forms. While it is impossible to tell whether a
noun is masculine, feminine, or neuter, they use one adjective for all
four declensions, changing its form to suit each.

The following form of declensions will serve to impart a clearer idea
of the arbitrary changes in the use of the adjective:

  First Declension.  (Singular, _nyare mpolu_, a large cow.
                     (Plural, _inyare impolu_, large cows.

  Second Declension. (Singular, _egara evolu_, a large chest.
                     (Plural, _gara volu_, large chests.

  Third Declension.  (Singular, _idâmbe ivolu_, a large sheep.
                     (Plural, _idâmbe ampolu_, large sheep.

  Fourth Declension. (Singular, _omamba ompolu_, a large snake.
                     (Plural, _imamba impolu_, large snakes.[91]

We presume it would be a difficult task for a Mpongwe to explain the
arbitrary law by which such changes are made. And yet he is as uniform
and strict in his obedience to this law as if it were written out in
an Mpongwe grammar, and taught in every village.

His verb has four moods; viz., indicative, imperative, conditional,
and subjunctive. The auxiliary particle gives the indicative mood its
grammatical being. The imperative is formed from the present of the
indicative by changing its initial consonant into its reciprocal
consonant as follows:--

  _tonda_, to love.
  _ronda_, love thou.
  _denda_, to do.
  _lenda_, do thou.

The conditional mood has a form of its own; but the conjunctive
particles are used as auxiliaries at the same time, and different
conjunctive particles are used with different tenses. The subjunctive,
having but one form, in a sentence where there are two verbs is used
as the second verb.[92] So by the use of the auxiliary particles the
verb can form the infinitive and potential mood. The Mpongwe verb
carries four tenses,--present, past or historical, perfect past, and
future. Upon the principle of alliteration the perfect past tense,
representing an action as completed, is formed from the present tense
by prefixing _a_, and by changing _a_-final into _i_: for example,
_t[)o]nda_, "to love;" _at[)o]ndi_, "did love." The past or historical
tense is derived from the imperative by prefixing _a_, and by changing
_a_-final into _i_. Thus _r[)o]nda_, "love;" _ar[)o]ndi_, "have
loved." The future tense is constructed by the aid of the auxiliary
particle _be_, as follows: _mi be t[)o]nda_," I am going to love."

We have not been able to find a Mandingo grammar, except Mr.
MacBrair's, which is, as far as we know, the only one in existence.
We have had but little opportunity to study the structure of that
language. But what scanty material we have at hand leads us to the
conclusion that it is quite loosely put together. The saving element
in its verb is the minuteness with which it defines the time of an
action. The causative form is made by the use of a suffix. It does not
use the verb "to go" or "come" in order to express a future tense.
Numerous particles are used in the substantive verb sense. The
Mandingo language is rather smooth. The letters _v_ and _z_ are not in
it. About one-fifth of the verbs and nouns commence with vowels, and
the noun always terminates in the letter _o_.

Here is a wide and interesting field for philologists: it should be
cultivated.

The African's nature is as sunny as the climate he lives in. He is not
brutal, as many advocates of slavery have asserted. It is the
unanimous testimony of all explorers of, and travellers through, the
Dark Continent, that the element of gentleness predominates among the
more considerable tribes; that they have a keen sense of the
beautiful, and are susceptible of whatever culture is brought within
their reach. The Negro nature is not sluggish, but joyous and
vivacious. In his songs he celebrates victories, and laughs at death
with the complacency of the Greek Stoics.

  "Rich man and poor fellow, all men must die:
  Bodies are only shadows. Why should I be sad?"[93]

He can be deeply wrought upon by acts of kindness; and bears a
friendship to those who show him favor, worthy of a better state of
society. When Henry M. Stanley (God bless him! noble, brave soul!) was
about emerging from the Dark Continent, he made a halt at Kabinda
before he ended his miraculous journey at Zanzibar on the Pacific
Ocean. He had been accompanied in his perilous journey by
stout-hearted, brave, and faithful natives. Their mission almost
completed, they began to sink into that listlessness which is often
the precursor of death. They had been true to their master, and were
now ready to die as bravely as they had lived. Read Mr. Stanley's
account without emotion if you can:--

     "'Do you wish to see Zanzibar, boys?' I asked.

     "'Ah, it is far. Nay, speak not, master. We shall never see
     it,' they replied.

     "'But you will die if you go on in this way. Wake up--shake
     yourselves--show yourselves to be men.'

     "'Can a man contend with God? Who fears death? Let us die
     undisturbed, and be at rest forever,' they answered.

     "Brave, faithful, loyal souls! They were, poor fellows,
     surrendering themselves to the benumbing influences of a
     listlessness and fatal indifference to life! Four of them
     died in consequence of this strange malady at Loanda, three
     more on board her Majesty's ship Industry, and one woman
     breathed her last the day after we arrived at Zanzibar. But
     in their sad death they had one consolation, in the words
     which they kept constantly repeating to themselves--

     "'We have brought our master to the great sea, and he has
     seen his white brothers. La il Allah, il Allah! There is no
     God but God!' they said--and died.

     "It is not without an overwhelming sense of grief, a choking
     in the throat, and swimming eyes, that I write of those
     days; for my memory is still busy with the worth and virtues
     of the dead. In a thousand fields of incident, adventure,
     and bitter trials, they had proved their stanch heroism and
     their fortitude; they had lived and endured nobly. I
     remember the enthusiasm with which they responded to my
     appeals; I remember their bold bearing during the darkest
     days; I remember the Spartan pluck, the indomitable courage,
     with which they suffered in the days of our adversity. Their
     voices again loyally answer me, and again I hear them
     address each other upon the necessity of standing by the
     'master.' Their boat-song, which contained sentiments
     similar to the following:--

       'The pale-faced stranger, lonely here,
       In cities afar, where his name is dear,
       Your Arab truth and strength shall show;
       He trusts in us, row, Arabs, row'--

     despite all the sounds which now surround me, still charms
     my listening ear.[94] ...

     "They were sweet and sad moments, those of parting. What a
     long, long, and true friendship was here sundered! Through
     what strange vicissitudes of life had they not followed me!
     What wild and varied scenes had we not seen together! What a
     noble fidelity these untutored souls had exhibited! The
     chiefs were those who had followed me to Ujiji in 1871; they
     had been witnesses of the joy of Livingstone at the sight of
     me; they were the men to whom I intrusted the safe-guard of
     Livingstone on his last and fatal journey, who had mourned
     by his corpse at Muilala, and borne the illustrious dead to
     the Indian Ocean.

     "And in a flood of sudden recollection, all the stormy
     period here ended rushed in upon my mind; the whole panorama
     of danger and tempest through which these gallant fellows
     had so stanchly stood by me--these gallant fellows now
     parting from me. Rapidly, as in some apocalyptic vision,
     every scene of strife with Man and Nature, through which
     these poor men and women had borne me company, and solaced
     me by the simple sympathy of common suffering, came
     hurrying across my memory; for each face before me was
     associated with some adventure or some peril, reminded me of
     some triumph or of some loss. What a wild, weird retrospect
     it was,--that mind's flash over the troubled past! so like a
     troublous dream!

     "And for years and years to come, in many homes in Zanzibar,
     there will be told the great story of our journey, and the
     actors in it will be heroes among their kilt and kin. For me
     too they are heroes, these poor, ignorant children of
     Africa, for, from the first deadly struggle in savage Ituru
     to the last staggering rush into Embomma, they had rallied
     to my voice like veterans, and in the hour of need they had
     never failed me. And thus, aided by their willing hands and
     by their loyal hearts, the expedition had been successful,
     and the three great problems of the Dark Continent's
     geography had been fairly settled."[95]

How many times we have read this marvellous narrative of Stanley's
march through the Dark Continent, we do not know; but we do know that
every time we have read it with tears and emotion, have blessed the
noble Stanley, and thanked God for the grand character of his black
followers! There is no romance equal to these two volumes. The trip
was one awful tragedy from beginning to end, and the immortal deeds of
his untutored guards are worthy of the famous _Light Brigade_.

On the fourth day of August, 1877, Henry M. Stanley arrived at the
village of Nsanda on his way to the ocean. He had in his command one
hundred and fifteen souls. Foot-sore, travel-soiled, and hungry, his
people sank down exhausted. He tried to buy food from the natives; but
they, with an indifference that was painful, told them to wait until
market-day. A foraging party scoured the district for food, but found
none. Starvation was imminent. The feeble travellers lay upon the
ground in the camp, with death pictured on their dusky features.
Stanley called his boat-captains to his tent, and explained the
situation. He knew that he was within a few days march of Embomma, and
that here were located one Englishman, one Frenchman, one Spaniard,
and one Portuguese. He told the captains that he had addressed a
letter to these persons for aid; and that resolute, swift, and
courageous volunteers were needed to go for the relief,--without which
the whole camp would be transformed into a common graveyard. We will
now quote from Mr. Stanley again in proof of the noble nature of the
Negro:--

     "The response was not long coming; for Uledi sprang up and
     said, 'O master, don't talk more! I am ready now. See, I
     will only buckle on my belt, and I shall start at once, and
     nothing will stop me. I will follow on the track like a
     leopard.'

     "'And I am one,' said Kachéché. 'Leave us alone, master. If
     there are white men at Embomma, we will find them out. We
     will walk and walk, and when we cannot walk we will crawl.'

     "'Leave off talking men,' said Muini Pembé, 'and allow
     others to speak, won't you? Hear me, my master. I am your
     servant. I will outwalk the two. I will carry the letter,
     and plant it before the eyes of the white men.'

     "'I will go too, sir,' said Robert.

     "'Good! It is just as I should wish it; but, Robert, you
     cannot follow these three men. You will break down, my boy.'

     "'Oh, we will carry him if he breaks down,' said Uledi.
     'Won't we, Kachéché?"

     "'_Inshallah_!' responded Kachéché decisively. 'We must have
     Robert along with us, otherwise the white men won't
     understand us.'"

What wonderful devotion! What sublime self-forgetfulness! The world
has wept over such stories as Bianca and Héloise, and has built
monuments that will stand,--

    "_While Fame her record keeps,
    Or Homer paints the hallowed spot
    Where Valor proudly sleeps_,"--

and yet these black heroes are unremembered. "I will follow the track
like a leopard," gives but a faint idea of the strong will of Uledi;
and Kachéché's brave words are endowed with all the attributes of that
heroic _abandon_ with which a devoted general hurls the last fragment
of wasting strength against a stubborn enemy. And besides, there is
something so tender in these words that they seem to melt the heart.
"We will walk and walk, and when we cannot walk we will crawl!" We
have never read but one story that approaches this narrative of Mr.
Stanley, and that was the tender devotion of Ruth to her
mother-in-law. We read it in the Hebrew to Dr. O.S. Stearns of Newton,
Mass.; and confess that, though it has been many years since, the
blessed impression still remains, and our confidence in humanity is
strengthened thereby.

Here are a few white men in the wilds of Africa, surrounded by the
uncivilized children of the desert. They have money and valuable
instruments, a large variety of gewgaws that possessed the power of
charming the fancy of the average savage; and therefore the whites
would have been a tempting prey to the blacks. But not a hair of their
head was harmed. The white men had geographical fame to encourage them
in the struggle,--friends and loved ones far away beyond the
beautiful blue sea. These poor savages had nothing to steady their
purposes save a paltry sum of money as day-wages,--no home, no
friends; and yet they were as loyal as if a throne were awaiting them.
No, no! nothing waited on their heroic devotion to a magnificent cause
but a lonely death when they had brought the "master" to the sea. When
their stomachs, pinched by hunger; when their limbs, stiff from
travel; when their eyes, dim with the mists of death; when every vital
force was slain by an heroic ambition to serve the great Stanley; when
the fires of endeavor were burnt to feeble embers,--then, and only
then, would these faithful Negroes fail in the fulfilment of their
mission, so full of peril, and yet so grateful to them, because it was
in the line of _duty_.

Cicero urged virtue as necessary to effective oratory. The great
majority of Negroes in Africa are both orators and logicians. A people
who have such noble qualities as this race seems to possess has, as a
logical necessity, the poetic element in a large degree.

In speaking of Negro poetry, we shall do so under three different
heads; viz., the _Epic_, _Idyllic_, _Religious_, or miscellaneous.

_The epic poetry_ of Africa, so far as known, is certainly worthy of
careful study. The child must babble before it can talk, and all
barbarians have a sense of the sublime in speech. Mr. Taine, in his
"History of English Literature," speaking of early Saxon poetry,
says,--

     "One poem nearly whole, and two or three fragments, are all
     that remain of this lay-poetry of England. The rest of the
     pagan current, German and barbarian, was arrested or
     overwhelmed, first by the influx of the Christian religion,
     then by the conquest of the Norman-French. But what remains
     more than suffices to show the strange and powerful poetic
     genius of the race, and to exhibit beforehand the flower in
     the bud.

     "If there has ever been anywhere a deep and serious poetic
     sentiment, it is here. They do not speak: they sing, or
     rather they shout. Each little verse is an acclamation,
     which breaks forth like a growl; their strong breasts heave
     with a groan of anger or enthusiasm, and a vehement or
     indistinct phrase or expression rises suddenly, almost in
     spite of them, to their lips. There is no art, no natural
     talent, for describing, singly and in order, the different
     parts of an object or an event. The fifty rays of light
     which every phenomenon emits in succession to a regular and
     well-directed intellect, come to them at once in a glowing
     and confused mass, disabling them by their force and
     convergence. Listen to their genuine war-chants, unchecked
     and violent, as became their terrible voices! To this day,
     at this distance of time, separated as they are by manners,
     speech, ten centuries, we seem to hear them still."[96]

This glowing description of the poetry of the primitive and hardy
Saxon gives the reader an excellent idea of the vigorous, earnest, and
gorgeous effusions of the African. Panda was king of the Kaffirs. He
was considered quite a great warrior. It took a great many
_isi-bongas_ to describe his virtues. His chief _isi-bongas_ was
"O-Elephant." This was chosen to describe his strength and greatness.
Mr. Wood gives an account of the song in honor of Panda:--


       "1. Thou brother of the Tchaks, _considerate forder_,
       2. A _swallow which fled in the sky_;
       3. A swallow with a whiskered breast;
       4. Whose cattle was ever in so huddled a crowd,
       5. They stumble for room when they ran.
       6. Thou false adorer of the valor of another,
       7. That valor thou tookest at the battle of Makonko.
       8. Of the stock of N'dabazita, _ramrod of brass_,
       9. _Survivor alone of all other rods_;
       10. Others they broke and left this in the soot,
       11. Thinking to burn at some rainy cold day.
       12. _Thigh of the bullock of Inkakavini_,
       13. Always delicious if only 'tis roasted,
       14. It will always be tasteless if boiled.
       15. The woman from Mankeba is delighted;
       16. She has seen the leopards of Jama,
       17. Fighting together between the Makonko.
       18. He passed between the Jutuma and Ihliza,
       19. The Celestial who thundered between the Makonko.
       20. I praisethee, O King! son of Jokwane, the son of Undaba,
       21. The merciless opponent of every conspiracy.
       22. Thou art an _elephant_, an _elephant_, an _elephant_.
       23. All glory to thee, thou _monarch who art black_."

     "The first _isi-bonga_, in line 1, alludes to the ingenuity
     with which Panda succeeded in crossing the river so as to
     escape out of the district where Dingan exercised authority.
     In the second line, 'swallow which fled in the sky' is
     another allusion to the secrecy with which he managed his
     flight, which left no more track than the passage of a
     swallow through the air. Lines 4 and 5 allude to the wealth,
     i.e., the abundance of cattle, possessed by Panda. Line 6
     asserts that Panda was too humble minded, and thought more
     of the power of Dingan than it deserved; while line 7 offers
     as proof of this assertion, that, when they came to fight,
     Panda conquered Dingan. Lines 8 to 11 all relate to the
     custom of seasoning sticks by hanging them over the
     fireplaces in Kaffir huts. Line 14 alludes to the fact that
     meat is very seldom roasted by the Kaffirs, but is almost
     invariably boiled, or rather stewed, in closed vessels. In
     line 15 the 'woman from Mankebe' is Panda's favorite wife.
     In line 19 'The Celestial' alludes to the name of the great
     Zulu tribe over which Panda reigned; the word 'Zulu' meaning
     celestial, and having much the same import as the same word
     when employed by the Chinese to denote their origin. Line 21
     refers to the attempts of Panda's rivals to dethrone him,
     and the ingenious manner in which he contrived to defeat
     their plans by forming judicious alliances."

There is a daring insolence, morbid vanity, and huge description in
this song of Panda, that make one feel like admitting that the sable
bard did his work of flattery quite cleverly. It should not be
forgotten by the reader, that, in the translation of these songs, much
is lost of their original beauty and perspicuity. The following song
was composed to celebrate the war triumphs of Dinga, and is, withal,
exciting, and possessed of good movement. It is, in some instances,
much like the one quoted above:--

    "Thou needy offspring of Umpikazi,
    Eyer of the cattle of men;
    Bird of Maube, fleet as a bullet,
    Sleek, erect, of beautiful parts;
    Thy cattle like the comb of the bees;
    O head too large, too huddled to move;
    Devourer of Moselekatze, son of Machobana;
    Devourer of 'Swazi, son of Sobuza;
    Breaker of the gates of Machobana;
    Devourer of Gundave of Machobana;
    A monster in size, of mighty power;
    Devourer of Ungwati of ancient race;
    Devourer of the kingly Uomape;
    Like heaven above, raining and shining."

The poet has seen fit to refer to the early life of his hero, to call
attention to his boundless riches, and, finally, to celebrate his war
achievements. It is highly descriptive, and in the Kaffir language is
quite beautiful.

Tchaka sings a song himself, the ambitious sentiments of which would
have been worthy of Alexander the Great or Napoleon Bonaparte. He had
carried victory on his spear throughout all Kaffir-land. Everywhere
the tribes had bowed their submissive necks to his yoke; everywhere he
was hailed as king. But out of employment he was not happy. He sighed
for more tribes to conquer, and thus delivered himself:--

    "Thou hast finished, finished the nations!
    Where will you go out to battle now?
    Hey! where will you go out to battle now?
    Thou hast conquered kings!
    Where are you going to battle now?
    Thou hast finished, finished the nations!
    Where are you going to battle now?
    Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah!
    Where are you going to battle now?"

There is really something modern in this deep lament of the noble
savage!

The following war song of the Wollof, though it lacks the sonorous and
metrical elements of real poetry, contains true military
aggressiveness, mixed with the theology of the fatalist.

A WAR SONG.

     "I go in front. I fear not death. I am not afraid. If I die,
     I will take my blood to bathe my head.

     "The man who fears nothing marches always in front, and is
     never hit by the murderous ball. The coward hides himself
     behind a bush, and is killed.

     "Go to the battle. It is not lead that kills. It is Fate
     which strikes us, and which makes us die."

Mr. Reade says of the musicians he met up the Senegal,--

     "There are three classes of these public minstrels,--1,
     those who play such vulgar instruments as the flute and
     drum; 2, those who play on the ballafond, which is the
     marimba of Angola and South America, and on the harp; 3,
     those who sing the legends and battle-songs of their
     country, or who improvise satires or panegyrics. This last
     class are dreaded, though despised. They are richly rewarded
     in their lifetime, but after death they are not even given a
     decent burial. If they were buried in the ground, it would
     become barren; if in the river, the water would be poisoned,
     and the fish would die: so they are buried in hollow trees.

_The idyllic poetry_ of Africa is very beautiful in its gorgeous
native dress. It requires some knowledge of their mythology in order
to thoroughly understand all their figures of speech. The following
song is descriptive of the white man, and is the production of a
Bushman.

    "_In the blue palace of the deep sea
    Dwells a strange creature:
    His skin as white as salt;
    His hair long and tangled as the sea-weed.
    He is more great than the princes of the earth;
    He is clothed with the skins of fishes,--
    Fishes more beautiful than birds.
    His house is built of brass rods;
    His garden is a forest of tobacco.
    On his soil white beads are scattered
    Like sand-grains on the seashore._"

The following idyl, extemporized by one of Stanley's black soldiers,
on the occasion of reaching Lake Nyanza, possesses more energy of
movement, perspicuity of style, and warm, glowing imagery, than any
song of its character we have yet met with from the lips of unlettered
Negroes. It is certainly a noble song of triumph. It swells as it
rises in its mission of praise. It breathes the same victorious air of
the song of Miriam: "_Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed
gloriously; the horse and the rider hath he thrown into the sea_." And
in the last verse the child-nature of the singer riots like "The May
Queen" of Tennyson.

THE SONG OF TRIUMPH.

    "Sing, O friends, sing; the journey is ended:
    Sing aloud, O friends; sing to the great Nyanza.
    Sing all, sing loud, O friends, sing to the great sea;
    Give your last look to the lands behind, and then turn to the sea.

    Long time ago you left your lands,
    Your wives and children, your brothers and your friends;
    Tell me, have you seen a sea like this
    Since you left the great salt sea?

    CHORUS.

    Then sing, O friends! sing; the journey is ended:
    Sing aloud, O friend! sing to this great sea.

    This sea is fresh, is good and sweet;
    Your sea is salt, and bad, unfit to drink.
    This sea is like wine to drink for thirsty men;
    The salt sea--bah! it makes men sick.

    Lift up your heads, O men, and gaze around;
    Try if you can see its end.
    See, it stretches moons away,
    This great, sweet, fresh-water sea.

    We come from Usukuma land,
    The land of pastures, cattle, sheep and goats,
    The land of braves, warriors, and strong men,
    And, lo! this is the far-known Usukuma sea.

    Ye friends, ye scorned at us in other days.
    Ah, ha! Wangwana. What say ye now?
    Ye have seen the land, its pastures and its herds,
    Ye now see the far-known Usukuma sea.
    Kaduma's land is just below;
    He is rich in cattle, sheep, and goats.
    The Msungu is rich in cloth and beads;
    His hand is open, and his heart is free.

    To-morrow the Msungu must make us strong
    With meat and beer, wine and grain.
    We shall dance and play the livelong day,
    And eat and drink, and sing and play."

_The religious and miscellaneous poetry_ is not of the highest order.
One of the most remarkable men of the Kaffir tribe was Sicana, a
powerful chief and a Christian. He was a poet, and composed hymns,
which he repeated to his people till they could retain them upon their
memories. The following is a specimen of his poetical abilities, and
which the people are still accustomed to sing to a low monotonous
air:--

    "Ulin guba inkulu siambata tina
    Ulodali bom' unadali pezula,
    Umdala undala idala izula,
    Yebinza inquinquis zixeliela.
    UTIKA umkula gozizuline,
    Yebinza inquinquis nozilimele.
    Umze uakonana subiziele,
    Umkokeli ua sikokeli tina,
    Uenza infama zenza go bomi;
    Imali inkula subiziele,
    Wena wena q'aba inyaniza,
    Wena wena kaka linyaniza,
    Wena wena klati linyaniza;
    Invena inh'inani subiziele,
    Ugaze laku ziman' heba wena,
    Usanhla zaku ziman' heba wena,
    Umkokili ua, sikokeli tina:
    Ulodali bom' uadali pezula,
    Umdala uadala idala izula."

TRANSLATION.

    "Mantle of comfort! God of love!
      The Ancient One on high!
    Who guides the firmament above,
      The heavens, and starry sky;

    Creator, Ruler, Mighty One;
      The only Good, All-wise,--
    To him, the great eternal God,
      Our fervent prayers arise.

    Giver of life, we call on him,
      On his high throne above,
    Our Rock of refuge still to be,
      Of safety and of love;

    Our trusty shield, our sure defence,
      Our leader, still to be:
    We call upon our pitying God,
      Who makes the blind to see.

    We supplicate the Holy Lamb
      Whose blood for us was shed,
    Whose feet were pierced for guilty man,
      Whose hands for us have bled;

    Even our God who gave us life,
      From heaven, his throne above,
    The great Creator of the world,
      Father, and God of love."

When any person is sick, the priests and devout people consult their
favorite spirits. At Goumbi, in Equatorial Africa, this ceremony is
quite frequent. Once upon a time the king fell sick. Quengueza was the
name of the afflicted monarch. Ilogo was a favorite spirit who
inhabited the moon. The time to invoke the favor of this spirit is
during the full moon. The moon, in the language of Equatorial Africa,
is Ogouayli. Well, the people gathered in front of the king's house,
and began the ceremony, which consisted chiefly in singing the
following song:--

    "_Ilogo, we ask thee!
    Tell who has bewitched the king!

    Ilogo, we ask thee,
    What shall we do to cure the king?

    The forests are thine, Ilogo!
    The rivers are thine, Ilogo!

    The moon is thine!
    O moon! O moon! O moon!
    Thou art the house of Ilogo!
    Shall the king die? Ilogo!
    O Ilogo! O moon! O moon!_"[97]

In African caravans or processions, there is a man chosen to go in
front and sing, brandishing a stick somewhat after the manner of our
band-masters. The song is rather an indifferent howl, with little or
no relevancy. It is a position much sought after, and affords abundant
opportunity for the display of the voice. Such a person feels the
dignity of the position. The following is a sample:--

    "_Shove him on!
    But is he a good man?
    No, I think he's a stingy fellow;
    Shove him on!
    Let him drop in the road, then.
    No, he has a big stick:
    Shove him on!
    Oh, matta-bicho! matta-bicho!
    Who will give me matta-bicho_?"

Of this song Mr. Reade says,--

     "_Matta-bicho_ is a bunda compound meaning _kill-worm_; the
     natives supposing that their entrails are tormented by a
     small worm, which it is necessary to kill with raw spirits.
     From the frequency of their demand, it would seem to be the
     worm that ever gnaws, and that their thirst is the fire
     which is never quenched."

The Griot, as we have already mentioned, sings for money. He is a most
accomplished parasite and flatterer. He makes a study of the art. Here
is one of his songs gotten up for the occasion.

     I.

     "The man who had not feared to pass the seas through a love
     of study and of science heard of the poor Griot. He had him
     summoned. He made him sing songs which made the echoes of
     the Bornou mountains, covered with palm-trees, ring louder
     and louder as the sounds flew over the summits of the trees.

     II.

     "The songs touched the heart of the great white man, and the
     dew of his magnificence fell upon the Griot's head. Oh! how
     can he sing the wonderful deeds of the Toubab? His voice and
     his breath would not be strong enough to sing that theme. He
     must be silent, and let the lion of the forest sing his
     battles and his victories.

     III.

     "Fatimata heard the songs of the Griot. She heard, too, the
     deeds which the Toubab had accomplished. She sighed, and
     covered her head with her robe. Then she turned to her young
     lover, and she said, 'Go to the wars; let the flying ball
     kill thee: for Fatimata loves thee no longer. The white man
     fills her thoughts.'"

The most beautiful nursery song ever sung by any mother, in any
language, may be heard in the Balengi county, in Central Africa. There
is wonderful tenderness in it,--tenderness that would melt the
coldest heart. It reveals a bright spot in the heart-life of this
people.[98]

    "_Why dost than weep, my child?
    The sky is bright; the sun is shining: why dost than weep?
    Go to thy father: he loves thee; go, tell him why thou weepest.
    What! thou weepest still! Thy father loves thee; I caress thee:
        yet still thou art sad.
    Tell me then, my child, why dost thou weep?_"

It is not so very remarkable, when we give the matter thought, that
the African mother should be so affectionate and devoted in her
relations to her children. The diabolical system of polygamy has but
this one feeble apology to offer in Africa. The wives of one man may
quarrel, but the children always find loving maternal arms ready to
shelter their heads against the wrath of an indifferent and cruel
father. The mother settles all the disputes of the children, and cares
for them with a zeal and tenderness that would be real beautiful in
many American mothers; and, in return, the children are very noble in
their relations to their mothers. "Curse me, but do not speak ill of
my mother," is a saying in vogue throughout nearly all Africa. The old
are venerated, and when they become sick they are abandoned to die
alone.

It is not our purpose to describe the religions and superstitions of
Africa.[99] To do this would occupy a book. The world knows that this
poor people are idolatrous,--"_bow down to wood and stone_." They do
not worship the true God, nor conform their lives unto the teachings
of the Saviour. They worship snakes, the sun, moon, and stars, trees,
and water-courses. But the bloody human sacrifice which they make is
the most revolting feature of their spiritual degradation. Dr.
Prichard has gone into this subject more thoroughly than our time or
space will allow.


     "Nowhere can the ancient African religion be studied better
     than in the kingdom of Congo. Christianity in Abyssinia, and
     Mohammedanism in Northern Guinea, have become so mingled
     with pagan rites as to render it extremely difficult to
     distinguish between them.

     "The inhabitants of Congo, whom I take as a true type of the
     tribes of Southern Guinea generally, and of Southern Central
     Africa, believe in a supreme Creator, and in a host of
     lesser divinities. These last they represent by images; each
     has its temple, its priests, and its days of sacrifice, as
     among the Greeks and Romans."[100]

The false religions of Africa are but the lonely and feeble reaching
out of the human soul after the true God.


FOOTNOTES:

[88] Stanley's Through the Dark Continent, vol. ii. pp. 320, 321; see,
also, pp. 3, 78, 123, 245, 414.

[89] Western Africa, p. 455.

[90] Western Africa, p. 456.

[91] Western Africa, p. 470.

[92] Equatorial Africa, p. 531.

[93] Savage Africa, p. 212.

[94] Through the Dark Continent, vol. ii. pp, 470, 471.

[95] Through the Dark Continent, vol. ii. pp. 482, 483.

[96] History of English Literature, vol i. pp. 48. 49.

[97] Equatorial Africa, pp. 448, 449.

[98] On the intellectual faculties of the Negro, see Prichard, third
ed., 1837, vol. ii. p. 346, sect. iii. Peschel's Races of Men, p. 462,
_sq._, especially Blumenbach's Life and Works, p. 305, _sq_ Western
Africa, p. 379,--all of chap. xi.

[99] See Prichard, fourth ed., 1841, vol. 1. p. 197, sect. v. Moffat's
Southern Africa; Uncivilized Races of Men, vol 1. pp. 183-219.

[100] Savage Africa, p. 287, _sq._


CHAPTER IX.

SIERRA LEONE.

     ITS DISCOVERY AND SITUATION.--NATURAL BEAUTY.--FOUNDING OF A
     NEGRO COLONY.--THE SIERRA LEONE COMPANY.--FEVER AND
     INSUBORDINATION.--IT BECOMES AN ENGLISH PROVINCE--CHARACTER
     OF ITS INHABITANTS.--CHRISTIAN MISSIONS, ETC.


Sierra Leone was discovered and named by Piedro de Cintra. It is a
peninsula, about thirty miles in length by about twenty-five in
breadth, and is situated 8° and 30' north latitude, and is about
13-1/2° west longitude. Its topography is rather queer. On the south
and west its mountains bathe their feet in the Atlantic Ocean, and on
the east and north its boundaries are washed by the river and bay of
Sierra Leone. A range of mountains, co-extensive with the
peninsula,--forming its backbone,--rises between the bay of Sierra
Leone and the Atlantic Ocean, from two to three thousand feet in
altitude. Its outlines are as severe as Egyptian architecture, and the
landscape view from east or west is charming beyond the power of
description. Freetown is the capital, with about twenty thousand
inhabitants, situated on the south side of Sierra Leone River, and
hugged in by an amphitheatre of beautiful hills and majestic
mountains.

     "On the side of the hill [says Mr. Reed] which rises behind
     the town is a charming scene, which I will attempt to
     describe. You have seen a rural hamlet, where each cottage
     is half concealed by its own garden. Now convert your linden
     into graceful palm, your apples into oranges, your
     gooseberry-bushes into bananas, your thrush which sings in
     its wicker cage into a gray parrot whistling on a rail; ...
     sprinkle this with strange and powerful perfumes; place in
     the west a sun flaming among golden clouds in a
     prussian-blue sea, dotted with white sails; imagine those
     mysterious and unknown sounds, those breathings of the
     earth-soul, with which the warm night of Africa rises into
     life,--and then you will realize one of those moments of
     poetry which reward poor travellers for long days and nights
     of naked solitude."[101]

In 1772 Lord Mansfield delivered his celebrated opinion on the case of
the Negro man Sommersett, whose master, having abandoned him in a
sick condition, afterwards sought to reclaim him. The decision was to
the effect that no man, white or black, could set foot on British soil
and remain a slave. The case was brought at the instance of Mr.
Granville Sharp. The decision created universal comment. Many Negroes
in New England, who had found shelter under the British flag on
account of the proclamation of Sir Henry Clinton, went to England.
Free Negroes from other parts--Jamaica, St. Thomas, and San
Domingo--hastened to breathe the free air of the British metropolis.
Many came to want, and wandered about the streets of London, strangers
in a strange land. Granville Sharp, a man of great humanity, was
deeply affected by the sad condition of these people. He consulted
with Dr. Smeathman, who had spent considerable time in Africa; and
they conceived the plan of transporting them to the west coast of
Africa, to form a colony.[102] The matter was agitated in London by
the friends of the blacks, and finally the government began to be
interested. A district of about twenty square miles was purchased by
the government of Naimbanna, king of Sierra Leone, on which to locate
the proposed colony. About four hundred Negroes and sixty white
persons, the greater portion of the latter being "women of the
town,"[103] were embarked on "The Nautilus," Capt. Thompson, and
landed at Sierra Leone on the 9th of May, 1787. The climate was
severe, the sanitary condition of the place vile, and the habits of
the people immoral. The African fever, with its black death-stroke,
reaped a harvest; while the irregularities and indolence of the
majority of the colonists, added to the deeds of plunder perpetrated
by predatory bands of savages, reduced the number of the colonists to
about sixty-four souls in 1791.

The dreadful news of the fate of the colony was borne to the
philanthropists in England. But their faith in colonization stood as
unblanched before the revelation as the Iron Duke at Waterloo. An
association was formed under the name of "St. George's Bay," but
afterwards took the name of the "Sierra Leone Company," with a capital
stock of one million two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, with such
humanitarians as Granville Sharp, Thornton, Wilberforce, and Clarkson
among its directors. The object of the company was to push forward the
work of colonization. One hundred Europeans landed at Sierra Leone in
the month of February, 1792, and were followed in March by eleven
hundred and thirty-one Negroes. A large number of them had served in
the British army during the Revolutionary War in America, and,
accepting the offer of the British Government, took land in this
colony as a reward for services performed in the army. Another fever
did its hateful work; and fifty or sixty Europeans, and many blacks,
fell under its parching and consuming touch.[104] Jealous feuds rent
the survivors, and idleness palsied every nerve of industry in the
colony. In 1794 a French squadron besieged the place, and the people
sustained a loss of about two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. Once
more an effort was made to revive the place, and get its drowsy
energies aroused in the discharge of necessary duties. Some little
good began to show itself; but it was only the tender bud of promise,
and was soon trampled under the remorseless heel of five hundred and
fifty insurrectionary maroons from Jamaica and Nova Scotia.

The indifferent character of the colonists, and the hurtful touch of
the climate, had almost discouraged the friends of the movement in
England. It was now the year 1800. This vineyard planted by good men
yielded "nothing but leaves." No industry had been developed, no
substantial improvement had been made, and the future was veiled in
harassing doubts and fears. The money of the company had almost all
been expended. The company barely had the signs of organic life in it,
but the light of a beautiful Christian faith had not gone out across
the sea in stalwart old England. The founders of the colony believed
that good management would make the enterprise succeed: so they looked
about for a master hand to guide the affair. On the 8th of August,
1807, the colony was surrendered into the hands of the Crown, and was
made an English colony. During the same year in which this transfer
was made, Parliament declared the slave-trade piracy; and a naval
squadron was stationed along the coast for the purpose of suppressing
it. At the first, many colored people of good circumstances, feeling
that they would be safe under the English flag, moved from the United
States to Sierra Leone. But the chief source of supply of population
was the captured slaves, who were always unloaded at this place. When
the English Government took charge of Sierra Leone, the population was
2,000, the majority of whom were from the West Indies or Nova Scotia.
In 1811 it was nearly 5,000; in 1820 it was 12,000; it 1833 it was
30,000; in 1835 it was 35,000; in 1844 it was 40,000; in 1869 it was
55,374, with but 129 white men. On the 31st of March, 1827, the slaves
that had been captured and liberated by the English squadron numbered
11,878; of which there were 4,701 males above, and 1,875 under,
fourteen years of age. There were 2,717 females above, and 1,517
under, the age of fourteen, besides 1,068 persons who settled in
Freetown, working in the timber-trade.

With the dreadful scourge of slavery driven from the sea, the sanitary
condition of the place greatly improved; and with a vigorous policy of
order and education enforced, Sierra Leone began to bloom and blossom
as a rose. When the slaver disappeared, the merchant-vessel came on
her peaceful mission of commerce.

The annual trade-returns presented to Parliament show that the
declared value of British and Irish produce and manufactures exported
to the West Coast of Africa, arranged in periods of five years each,
has been as follows:--

                  EXPORTS FROM GREAT BRITAIN.

  1846-50 .  .  . £2,773,408; or a yearly average of £554,681
  1851-55 .  .  .  4,314,752;  "     "        "       862,950
  1856-60 .  .  .  5,582,941;  "     "        "     1,116,588
  1861-63 .  .  .  4,216,045;  "     "        "     1,405,348


IMPORTS

The same trade-returns show that the imports of African produce from
the West Coast into Great Britain have been as follows. The "official
value" is given before 1856, after that date the "computed real value"
is given.

  Official value, 1851-55  .   .   .  £4,154,725; average, £830,945
  Computed real value, 1856-60 .   .   9,376,251;    "    1,875,250
     "      "     "    1861-63 .   .   5,284,611;    "    1,761,537

The value of African produce has decreased during the last few years
in consequence of the discovery of the petroleum or rock-oil in
America. In 1864 between four and five thousand bales of cotton were
shipped to England.

It is to be borne in mind, that under the system which existed when
Sierra Leone, the Gambia, and Gold Coast settlements were maintained
for the promotion of the slave-trade, the lawful commerce was only
£20,000 annually, and that now the amount of tonnage employed in
carrying legal merchandise is greater than was ever engaged in
carrying slaves.[105] W. Winwood Reade visited Sierra Leone during the
Rebellion in America; but, being somewhat prejudiced against the
Negro, we do not expect any thing remarkably friendly. But we quote
from him the view he took of the people he met there:--

     "The inhabitants of the colony may be divided into four
     classes:--

     "First, The street-venders, who cry cassada-cakes, palm-oil,
     pepper, pieces of beef, under such names, as _agedee_,
     _aballa_, _akalaray_, and which are therefore as
     unintelligible as the street-cries of London. This is the
     costermonger type.

     "Second, The small market-people, who live in frame houses,
     sell nails, fish-hooks, tape, thread, ribbons, etc., and who
     work at handicrafts in a small way.

     "Third, The shopkeepers, who inhabit frame houses on stone
     foundations, and within which one may see a sprinkling of
     mahogany, a small library of religious books, and an almost
     English atmosphere of comfort.

     "Lastly, The liberated Africans of the highest grade, who
     occupy two-story stone houses enclosed all around by
     spacious piazzas, the rooms furnished with gaudy richness;
     and the whole their own property, being built from the
     proceeds of their ... thrift."

When England abolished the slave-trade on the West Coast of Africa,
Christianity arose with healing in her wings. Until slavery was
abolished in this colony, missionary enterprises were abortive; but
when the curse was put under the iron heel of British prohibition, the
Lord did greatly bless the efforts of the missionary. The Episcopal
Church--"the Church of England"--was the first on the ground in 1808;
but it was some years before any great results were obtained. In 1832
this Church had 638 communicants, 294 candidates for baptism, 684
sabbath-school pupils, and 1,388 children in day-schools. This Church
carried its missionary work beyond its borders to the tribes that were
"sitting in darkness;" and in 1850 had built 54 seminaries and
schools, had 6,600 pupils, 2,183 communicants, and 7,500 attendants on
public worship. It is pleasant to record that out of 61 teachers, 56
_were native Africans!_ In 1865 there were sixteen missionary
societies along the West Coast of Africa. Seven were American, six
English, two German, and one West-Indian. These societies maintained
104 European or American missionaries, had 110 mission-stations,
13,000 scholars, 236 schools, 19,000 registered communicants;
representing a Christian population of 60,000 souls.

The Wesleyan Methodists began their work in 1811; and in 1831 they had
two missionaries, 294 members in their churches, and 160 pupils in
school. They extended their missions westward to the Gambia, and
eastward toward Cape Coast Castle, Badagry, Abbeokuta, and Kumasi; and
in this connection, in 1850, had 44 houses of worship, 13
out-stations, 42 day-schools, 97 teachers, 4,500 pupils in day and
sabbath schools, 6,000 communicants, 560 on probation, and 14,600 in
attendance on public worship. In 1850 the population of Sierra Leone
was 45,000; of which 36,000 were Christians, against 1,734
Mohammedans.

Sierra Leone represents the most extensive composite population in the
world for its size. About one hundred different tribe are represented,
with as many different languages or dialects. Bishop Vida, under
direction of the British Parliament, gave special attention to this
matter, and found not less than one hundred and fifty-one distinct
languages, besides several dialects spoken in Sierra Leone. They were
arranged under twenty-six groups, and yet fifty-four are unclassified
that are distinct as German and French. "God makes the wrath of man to
praise him, and the remainder thereof he will restrain." Through these
numerous languages, poor benighted Africa will yet hear the gospel.

Some years ago Dr. Ferguson, who was once governor of the Sierra Leone
colony, and himself a colored man, wrote and an extended account of
the situation there, which was widely circulated in England and
America at the time. It is so manifestly just and temperate in tone,
so graphic and minute in description, that we reproduce it _in
extenso_:--

     "1. Those most recently arrived are to be found occupying
     mud houses and small patches of ground in the neighborhood
     of one or other of the villages (the villages are about
     twenty in number, placed in different parts of the colony,
     grouped in three classes or districts; names, mountain,
     river, and sea districts.) The majority remain in their
     locations as agriculturists; but several go to reside in the
     neighborhood of Freetown, looking out for work as laborers,
     farm-servants, servant to carry wood and water, grooms,
     house-servants, etc.; others cultivate vegetables, rear
     poultry and pigs, and supply eggs, for the Sierra Leone
     market. Great numbers are found offering for sale in the
     public market and elsewhere a vast quantity of cooked edible
     substances--rice, corn and cassava cakes; heterogeneous
     compounds of rice and corn-flower, yams, cassava, palm-oil,
     pepper, pieces of beef, mucilaginous vegetables, etc.,
     etc., under names quite unintelligible to a stranger, such
     as _aagedee_, _aballa_, _akalaray_, _cabona_, etc., etc.,
     cries which are shouted along the streets of Freetown from
     morn till night. These, the lowest grade of liberated
     Africans, are a harmless and well-disposed people; there is
     no poverty among them, nor begging; their habits are frugal
     and industrious; their anxiety to possess money is
     remarkable: but their energies are allowed to run riot and
     be wasted from the want of knowledge requisite to direct
     them in proper channels.

     "2. Persons of grade higher than those last described are to
     be found occupying frame houses: they drive a petty trade in
     the market, where they expose for sale nails, fish-hooks,
     door-hinges, tape, thread, ribbons, needles, pins, etc. Many
     of this grade also look out for the arrival of canoes from
     the country laden with oranges, _kolas_, sheep, bullocks,
     fowls, rice, etc., purchase the whole cargo at once at the
     water-side, and derive considerable profit from selling such
     articles by retail in the market and over the town. Many of
     this grade are also occupied in curing and drying fish, an
     article which always sells well in the market, and is in
     great request by people at a distance from the water-side,
     and in the interior of the country. A vast number of this
     grade are tailors, straw-hat makers, shoemakers, cobblers,
     blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, etc. Respectable men of
     this grade meet with ready mercantile credits amounting from
     twenty pounds to sixty pounds; and the class is very
     numerous.

     "3. Persons of grade higher than that last mentioned are
     found occupying frame houses reared on a stone foundation of
     from six to ten feet in height. These houses are very
     comfortable; they are painted outside and in; have piazzas
     in front and rear, and many of them all round; a
     considerable sprinkling of mahogany furniture of European
     workmanship is to be found in them; several books are to be
     seen lying about, chiefly of a religious character; and a
     general air of domestic comfort pervades the whole, which,
     perhaps more than any thing else, bears evidence of the
     advanced state of intelligence at which they have arrived.
     This grade is nearly altogether occupied in shopkeeping,
     hawking, and other mercantile pursuits. At sales of prize
     goods, public auctions, and every other place affording a
     probability of cheap bargains, they are to be seen in great
     numbers, where they club together in numbers of from three
     to six, seven, or more, to purchase large lots or unbroken
     bales. And the scrupulous honesty with which the subdivision
     of the goods is afterwards made cannot be evidenced more
     thoroughly than this: that, common as such transactions are,
     they have never yet been known to become the subject of
     controversy or litigation. The principal streets of
     Freetown, as well as the approaches to the town, are lined
     on each side by an almost continuous range of booths and
     stalls, among which almost every article of merchandise is
     offered for sale, and very commonly at a cheaper rate than
     similar articles are sold in the shops of the merchants.

     "Two rates of profit are recognized in the mercantile
     transactions of the European merchants; namely, a wholesale
     and retail profit, the former varying from thirty to fifty
     per cent, the latter from fifty to one hundred per cent. The
     working of the retail trade in the hands of Europeans
     requires a considerable outlay in the shape of shop-rent,
     shopkeepers' and clerks' wages, etc. The liberated Africans
     were not slow in observing nor in seizing on the advantages
     which their peculiar position held out for the successful
     prosecution of the retail trade.

     "Clubbing together, as before observed, and holding ready
     money in their hands the merchants are naturally anxious to
     execute for them considerable orders on such unexceptionable
     terms of payment while, on the other hand, the liberated
     Africans, seeing clearly their advantage, insist most
     pertinaciously on the lowest possible percentage of
     wholesale profit.

     "Having thus become possessed of the goods at the lowest
     possible ready-money rate, then subsequent transactions are
     not closed with the expense of shop-rents, shopkeepers' and
     clerks' wages and subsistence, etc., etc., expenses
     unavoidable to Europeans. They are therefore enabled at once
     to undersell the European retail merchants, and to secure a
     handsome profit to themselves; a consummation the more
     easily attained, aided as it is by the extreme simplicity
     and abstemiousness of their mode of living, which contrast
     so favorably for them with the expensive and almost
     necessary luxuries of European life. Many of this grade
     possess huge canoes, with which they trade in the upper part
     of the river, along shore, and in the neighbouring rivers,
     bringing down rice, palm-oil, cam-wood, ivory, hides, etc.,
     etc., in exchange for British manufactures. They are all in
     easy circumstances, readily obtaining mercantile credits
     from sixty pounds to two hundred pounds. Persons of this and
     the grade next to be mentioned evince great anxiety to
     become possessed of houses and lots in old Freetown. These
     lots are desirable because of their proximity to the
     market-place and the great thoroughfares, and also for the
     superior advantages which they allow for the establishment
     of their darling object,--'a retail store.' Property of this
     description has of late years become much enhanced in value,
     and its value is still increasing solely from the annually
     increasing numbers and prosperity of this and the next
     grade. The town-lots originally granted to the Nova-Scotian
     settlers and the Maroons are, year after year, being offered
     for sale by public auction, and in every case liberated
     Africans are the purchasers. A striking instance of their
     desire to possess property of this description, and of its
     increasing value, came under my immediate notice a few
     months ago.

     "The gentlemen of the Church Missionary Society having been
     for some time looking about in quest of a lot on which to
     erect a new chapel, a lot suitable for the purpose was at
     length offered for sale by public auction, and at a meeting
     of the society's local committee, it was resolved, in order
     to secure the purchase of the property in question, to offer
     as high as sixty pounds. The clergyman delegated for this
     purpose, at my recommendation, resolved, on his own
     responsibility, to offer, if necessary, as high as seventy
     pounds; but to the surprise and mortification of us all, the
     lot was knocked down at upward of ninety pounds, and a
     liberated African was the purchaser. He stated very kindly
     that if he had known the society were desirous of purchasing
     the lot he would not have opposed them; he nevertheless
     manifested no desire of transferring to them the purchase,
     and even refused an advance of ten pounds on his bargain.

     "4. Persons of the highest grade of liberated Africans
     occupy comfortable two story stone houses, enclosed all
     round with spacious piazzas. These houses are their own
     property and are built from the proceeds of their own
     industry. In several of them are to be seen mahogany chairs,
     tables, sofas, and four-post bedsteads, pier-glasses,
     floor-cloths, and other articles indicative of domestic
     comfort and accumulating wealth.

     "Persons of this grade, like those last described, are
     almost wholly engaged in mercantile pursuits. Their
     transactions, however, are of greater magnitude and value,
     and their business is carried on with an external appearance
     of respectability commensurate with then superior pecuniary
     means: thus, instead of exposing their wares for sale in
     booths or stalls by the wayside, they are to be found in
     neatly fitted-up shops on the ground-floors of their stone
     dwelling houses.

     "Many individual members of this grade have realized very
     considerable sums of money,--sums which, to a person not
     cognizant of the fact, would appear to be incredible. From
     the studied manner in which individuals conceal their
     pecuniary circumstances from the world, it is difficult to
     obtain a correct knowledge of the wealth of the class
     generally. The devices to which they have recourse in
     conducting a bargain are often exceedingly ingenious; and to
     be reputed rich might materially interfere with their
     success on such occasions. There is nothing more common than
     to hear a plea of poverty set up and most pertinaciously
     urged, in extenuation of the terms of a purchase, by persons
     whose outward condition, comfortable well-furnished houses,
     and large mercantile credits, indicate any thing but
     poverty.

     "There are circumstances, however, the knowledge of which
     they cannot conceal, and which go far to exhibit pretty
     clearly the actual state of matters: such as, _First_, the
     facility with which they raise large sums of cash prompt' at
     public auctions. _Second_, the winding up of the estates of
     deceased persons. (Peter Newland, a liberated African, died
     a short time before I left the colony: and his estate
     realized, in houses, merchandise, and cash, upward of
     fifteen hundred pounds.) _Third_, the extent of their
     mercantile credits. I am well acquainted with an individual
     of this grade who is much courted and caressed by every
     European merchant in the colony, who has transactions in
     trade with all of them, and whose name, shortly before my
     departure from the colony, stood on the debtor side of the
     books of one of the principal merchants to the amount of
     nineteen hundred pounds, to which sum it had been reduced
     from three thousand pounds during the preceding two months.
     A highly respectable female has now, and has had for several
     years, the government contract for the supplying of fresh
     beef to the troops and the naval squadron; and I have not
     heard that on a single occasion there has been cause of
     complaint for negligence or non-fulfilment of the terms of
     the contract. _Fourth_, many of them at the present moment
     have their children being educated in England at their own
     expense. There is at Sierra Leone a very fine regiment of
     colonial militia, more than eight-tenths of which are
     liberated Africans. The amount of property which they have
     acquired is ample guaranty for their loyalty, should that
     ever be called in question. They turn out with great
     alacrity and cheerfulness on all occasions for periodical
     drill. But perhaps the most interesting point of view in
     which the liberated Africans are to be seen, and that which
     will render their moral condition most intelligible to those
     at a distance, is where they sit at the Quarter Sessions as
     petty, grand, and special jurors. They constitute a
     considerable part of the jury at every session, and I have
     repeatedly heard the highest legal authority in the colony
     express his satisfaction with their decisions."

But this account was written at the early sunrise of civilization in
Sierra Leone. Now civilization is at its noonday tide, and the hopes
of the most sanguine friends of the liberated Negro have been more
than realized. How grateful this renewed spot on the edge of the Dark
Continent would be to the weary and battle-dimmed vision of
Wilberforce, Sharp, and other friends of the colony! And if they still
lived, beholding the wonderful results, would they not gladly say,
"Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou hast prepared
before the face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel"?


FOOTNOTES:

[101] Savage Africa, p. 25.

[102] Précis sur l'Établissement des Colonies de Sierra Léona et de
Boulama, etc. Par C.B. Wadström, pp. 3-28.

[103] Wadström Essay on Colonization, p. 220.

[104] This led to the sending of 119 whites, along with a governor, as
counsellors, physicians, soldiers, clerks, overseers, artificers,
settlers, and servants. Of this company 57 died within the year, 22
returned, and 40 remained. See Wadström, pp. 121, _sq._

[105] See Livingstone's Zambesi, pp. 633, 634.


CHAPTER X.

THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA.

     LIBERIA.--ITS LOCATION.--EXTENT.--RIVERS AND
     MOUNTAINS.--HISTORY OF THE FIRST COLONY.--THE NOBLE MEN WHO
     LAID THE FOUNDATION OF THE LIBERIAN REPUBLIC.--NATIVE
     TRIBES.--TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT INTO THE VEI
     LANGUAGE.--THE BEGINNING AND TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS
     TO LIBERIA.--HISTORY OF THE DIFFERENT DENOMINATIONS ON THE
     FIELD.--A MISSIONARY REPUBLIC OF NEGROES.--TESTIMONY OF
     OFFICERS OF THE ROYAL NAVY AS TO THE EFFICIENCY OF THE
     REPUBLIC IN SUPPRESSING THE SLAVE-TRADE.--THE WORK OF THE
     FUTURE.


That section of country on the West Coast of Africa known as Liberia,
extending from Cape Palmas to Cape Mount, is about three hundred miles
coastwise. Along this line there are six colonies of Colored people,
the majority of the original settlers being from the United States.
The settlements are Cape Palmas, Cape Mesurado, Cape Mount, River
Junk, Basa, and Sinon. The distance between them varies from
thirty-five to one hundred miles, and the only means of communication
is the coast-vessels. Cape Palmas, though we include it under the
general title of Liberia, was founded by a company of intelligent
Colored people from Maryland. This movement was started by the
indefatigable J.H.B. Latrobe and Mr. Harper of the Maryland
Colonization Society. This society purchased at Cape Palmas a
territory of about twenty square miles, in which there was at that
time--more than a half-century ago--a population of about four
thousand souls. Within two years from the time of the first purchase,
this enterprising society held deeds from friendly proprietors for
eight hundred square miles, embracing the dominions of nine kings, who
bound themselves to the colonists in friendly alliance. This territory
spread over both banks of the Cavally River, and from the ocean to the
town of Netea, which is thirty miles from the mouth of the river. In
the immediate vicinity of Cape Palmas,--say within an area of twenty
miles,--there was a native population of twenty-five thousand. Were we
to go toward the interior from the Cape about forty-five or fifty
miles, we should find a population of at least seventy thousand
natives, the majority of whom we are sure are anxious to enjoy the
blessings of education, trade, civilization, and Christianity. The
country about Cape Palmas is very beautiful and fertile. The cape
extends out into the sea nearly a mile, the highest place being about
one hundred and twenty-five feet. Looking from the beach, the ground
rises gradually until its distant heights are crowned with heavy,
luxuriant foliage and dense forest timber. And to plant this colony
the Maryland Legislature appropriated the sum of two hundred thousand
dollars! And the colony has done worthily, has grown rapidly, and at
present enjoys all the blessings of a Christian community. Not many
years ago it declared its independence.

But Liberia, in the proper use of the term, is applied to all the
settlements along the West Coast of Africa that were founded by
Colored people from the United States. It is the most beautiful spot
on the entire coast. The view is charming in approaching this country,
Rev. Charles Rockwell says,--

     "One is struck with the dark green hue which the rank and
     luxuriant growth of forest and of field everywhere presents.
     In this it respect it strongly resembles in appearance the
     dark forests of evergreens which line a portion of the coast
     of Eastern Virginia ... At different points there are capes
     or promontories rising from thirty to forty to one or two
     hundred feet above the level of the sea; while at other
     places the land, though somewhatuneven, has not, near the
     sea, any considerable hills. In some places near the mouths
     of the rivers are thickly wooded marshes; but on entering
     the interior of the country the ground gradually rises, the
     streams become rapid, and at the distance of twenty miles or
     more from the sea, hills, and beyond them mountains, are
     often met with."

The physical, social, and political bondage of the Colored people in
America before the war was most discouraging. They were mobbed in the
North, and sold in the South. It was not enough that they were
isolated and neglected in the Northern States: they were proscribed by
the organic law of legislatures, and afflicted by the most burning
personal indignities. They had a few friends; but even their
benevolent acts were often hampered by law, and strangled by
caste-prejudice. Following the plans of Granville Sharp and William
Wilberforce, Liberia was founded as a refuge to all Colored men who
would avail themselves of its blessings.

Colonization societies sprang into being in many States, and large
sums of money were contributed to carry out the objects of these
organizations. Quite a controversy arose inside of anti-slavery
societies, and much feeling was evinced; but the men who believed
colonization to be the solution of the slavery question went forward
without wavering or doubting. In March, 1820, the first emigrants
sailed for Africa, being eighty-six in number; and in January, 1822,
founded the town of Monrovia, named for President Monroe. Rev. Samuel
J. Mills, while in college in 1806, was moved by the Holy Spirit to
turn his face toward Africa as a missionary. His zeal for missionary
labor touched the hearts of Judson, Newell, Nott, Hall, and Rice, who
went to mission-fields in the East as early as 1812.[106] The American
Colonization Society secured the services of the Rev. Samuel J. Mills
and Rev. Ebenezer Burgess to locate the colony at Monrovia. Mr. Mills
found an early, watery grave; but the report of Mr. Burgess gave the
society great hope, and the work was carried forward.

The first ten years witnessed the struggles of a noble band of Colored
people, who were seeking a new home on the edge of a continent given
over to the idolatry of the heathen. The funds of the society were not
as large as the nature and scope of the work demanded. Emigrants went
slowly, not averaging more than 170 per annum,--only 1,232 in ten
years: but the average from the first of January, 1848, to the last of
December, 1852, was 540 yearly; and, in the single year of 1853, 782
emigrants arrived at Monrovia. In 1855 the population of Monrovia and
Cape Palmas had reached about 8,000.

Going south from Monrovia for about one hundred miles, and inland
about twenty, the country was inhabited by the Bassa tribe and its
branches; numbering about 130,000 souls, and speaking a common
language. "They were peaceful, domestic, and industrious; and, after
fully supplying their own wants, furnish a large surplus of rice, oil,
cattle, and other articles of common use, for exportation."[107] This
tribe, like the Veis, of whom we shall make mention subsequently, have
reduced their language to a written system. The New Testament has been
translated into their language by a missionary, and they have had the
gospel these many years in their own tongue.

The "Greybo language," spoken in and about Cape Palmas, has been
reduced to a written form; and twenty thousand copies of eleven
different works have been printed and distributed. There are about
seventy-five thousand natives within fifty miles of Cape Palmas; and,
as a rule, they desire to avail themselves of the blessings of
civilization. The Veis occupy about fifty miles of seacoast; extending
from Gallinas River, one hundred miles north of Monrovia, and
extending south to Grand Mount. Their territory runs back from the
seacoast about thirty miles, and they are about sixteen thousand
strong.

This was a grand place to found a Negro state,--a _missionary
republic_, as Dr. Christy terms it. When the republic rose, the
better, wealthier class of free Colored people from the United States
embarked for Liberia. Clergymen, physicians, merchants, mechanics, and
school-teachers turned their faces toward the new republic, with an
earnest desire to do something for themselves and race; and history
justifies the hopes and players of all sincere friends of Liberia.
Unfortunately, at the first, many white men were more anxious to get
the Negro out of the country than to have him do well when out; and,
in many instances, some unworthy Colored people got transportation to
Liberia, of whom Americans were rid, but of whom Liberians could not
boast. But the law of the survival of the fittest carried the rubbish
to the bottom. The republic grew and expanded in every direction. From
year to year new blood and fresh energy were poured into the social
and business life of the people; and England, America, and other
powers acknowledged the republic by sending resident ministers there.

The servants of Christ saw, at the earliest moment of the conception
to build a black government in Africa, that the banner of the cross
must wave over the new colony, if good were to be expected. The
Methodist Church, with characteristic zeal and aggressiveness, sent
with the first colonists several members of their denomination and two
"local preachers;" and in March, 1833, the Rev. Melville B. Cox, an
ordained minister of this church, landed at Monrovia. The mission
experienced many severe trials; but the good people who had it in
charge held on with great tenacity until the darkness began to give
away before the light of the gospel. Nor did the Board of the
Methodist Missionary Society in America lose faith. They appropriated
for this mission, in 1851, $22,000; in 1852, $26,000; in 1853,
$32,957; and in 1854, $32,957. In the report of the board of managers
for 1851, the following encouraging statement occurs:--

     "All eyes are now turned toward this new republic on the
     western coast of Africa as the star of hope to the colored
     people both bond and free, in the United States. The
     republic is establishing and extending itself; and its
     Christian population is in direct contact with the natives,
     both Pagans and Mohammedans. Thus the republic has,
     indirectly, a powerful missionary influence, and its moral
     and religious condition is a matter of grave concern to the
     Church. Hence the Protestant Christian missions in Liberia
     are essential to the stability and prosperity of the
     republic, and the stability and prosperity of the republic
     are necessary to the protection and action of the missions.
     It will thus appear that the Christian education of the
     people is the legitimate work of the missions."

At this time (1851) they had an annual Conference, with three
districts, with as many presiding elders, whose duty it was to visit
all the churches and schools in their circuit. The Conference had 21
members, all of whom were colored men. The churches contained 1,301
members, of whom 115 were on probation, and 116 were natives. There
were 20 week-day schools, with 839 pupils, 50 of whom were natives.
Then there Were seven schools among the natives, with 127 faithful
attendants.

Bishop Scott, of the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, was, by order of his Conference, sent on an official visit to
Liberia. He spent more than two months among the missions, and
returned in 1853 much gratified with the results garnered in that
distant field.

