    "The music of Borodin, the composer of 'Prince Igor,' is
    little known in England, apart from the Polovtsienne Dances
    which, owing to their wind and barbaric character, have
    been so popular a feature of the performances of the Russian
    Ballet."--_Musical Opinion._

Why drag in the wind? The strings were just as good as the wind when
we were there.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GIRL OF THE PERIOD.

_New Maid._ "VOILÀ, MA'M'SELLE."

_Débutante._ "HEAVENS, MY GOOD GIRL, THAT WON'T DO. HERE, GIVE ME THE
THINGS. WHY, HALF-WAY ACROSS THE ROOM NO ONE WOULD SEE I WAS MADE UP
AT ALL!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

FACT AND FABLE.

  For miles I'd tramped by down and hill;
    With eve I found the happy ending;
  All in the sunset, golden chill,
    The collie met me, grave, befriending.
  I saw the roof-tree down the vale,
    Brave fields of harvest spread thereunder;
  The collie waved a feathery tail
    And led me to the House of Wonder.

  Houses, like people, so I've thought,
    Bear character upon their faces,
  Born of their company and wrought
    Upon by inward gifts and graces:
  Here, through the harvest's gold array
    And evening's mellow _far niente_,
  Looked kindliness and work-a-day,
    And happy hours and peace and plenty.

  And, lo, it seemed the Downs amid
    I'd found a folded bit of Britain,
  Laid by in lavender and hid
    The year--let's say--_Tom Jones_ was written;
  An old farm manor-house it is
    With fantails fluttering on the gables,
  A place of men and memories
    And solid facts and homespun fables.

  For Fact: a fortnight passed me by
    Mid ancient oak and secret panel
  And strawberries of late July
    And distant glimpses of the Channel;
  Fair morns to wake on--were they not?--
    Full of the pigeons' coo and cadence,
  Each day a page of CALDECOTT,
    All cream and flowers and pretty maidens.

  For Fable: as I smoked a pipe
    And havered with a black-haired cowman,
  Grey-eyed, in that fine Celtic type,
    As much the poet as the ploughman--
  "Seems kind of lucky here," said I;
    "The very ducklings look more downy
  Than others do." He grinned: "An' why?
  May happen, Sir, we feeds a brownie!

  "'There isn't many left,' says you;
    As hearts grow hard the breed gets rarer;
  Yet, when he goes, the luck goes too,
    And prices fall and boards be barer;
  But if so be you does your part
    An' feeds him fair and treats folk proper,
  Keepin' for all the kindly heart--
    The lucky Lad's a certain stopper!"

       ***

  Well, should you go by Butser way
    And hit the god-sent path, and follow,
  You'll find, at closing of the day,
    The old house in the valley-hollow,
  Laid by in lavender, forgot,
    The home of peace and ancient plenty;
  A brownie may be there or not--
    The hearts are kind enough for twenty!

       *       *       *       *       *

Cause and Effect?

    "Of the five catalpa trees in the Embankment-gardens the
    finest has been blighted. The tree is close to the National
    Liberal Club."--_Leicester Daily Mercury._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WHAT OF THE DAWN?]

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

(EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.)

[Illustration: Snapshots of certain Members who were _not_ on
their way to or from the Conference. Their expressions reflect the
pessimistic view which they entertained from the first as to its
chance of success in their absence.

(Sir WILLIAM BYLES, Mr. HOGGE, Mr. KEIR HARDIE, Mr. JOHN WARD, Mr.
WILLIAM O'BRIEN, Mr. WINSTON CHURCHILL.)]

_House of Commons, Monday, July 20._--The T. R. Westminster is at
least equal to the old T. R. Drury Lane in capacity for producing
dramatic turns. When Members went off on Saturday for week-end holiday
the Ulster attitude was pretty generally understood. Ulster demanded
"a clean cut," with the alternative, phrased by CARSON, of "Come over
and fight us." The Cabinet after prolonged deliberation had resolved
to meet demand with firm _non possumus_: PREMIER was expected on
resumption of Sittings this afternoon to announce conclusion of
matter, adding such offer of concession on matter of detail as, whilst
providing golden bridge for Opposition, would avert revolt in his own
camp, where "conversations" with leaders of Opposition are regarded
with growing jealousy and suspicion.

New stage in long-drawn-out controversy sufficient to create
profoundest interest in to-day's proceedings. It would surely be the
beginning of the end. What exactly the PREMIER would say about further
concession to Ulster, and how the overtures would be received on Front
Opposition Bench, were questions on which might hang the issue of
peace or war.

PREMIER had a more startling message to deliver. From point of view
of dramatic effect it was a thousand pities his secret had been
prematurely disclosed. When he rose amid profound stillness of
crowded House everyone knew what he was going to say. In ordinary
circumstances his interposition at so critical a juncture would have
been hailed by resounding applause from the multiform sections that
contribute to making up of Ministerial majority. As matters turned
out, a frigid cheer greeted his appearance at the Table. To the
announcement that "in view of the grave situation the KING has thought
it right to summon representatives of Parties, both British and Irish,
to a Conference in Buckingham Palace, with the object of discussing
outstanding issues in relation to the problem of Irish government," he
had only one new thing to add. It was that the SPEAKER would preside
over the Conference.

This was the only passage in the brief formal conversation, to which
LEADER OF OPPOSITION and LEADER OF IRISH NATIONALISTS contributed,
that elicited general cheer. A high tribute to occupant of the Chair.

GINNELL saw his opportunity and seized it by the hair. He is one of
three leaders of the Irish Nationalists. Understood that his Party
consists of a single member, so shadowy that there are varied reports
as to his identity. Member for N.W. Meath leaped on to pinnacle of
enduring fame when the present Parliament met to elect a Speaker.
Before Mr. LOWTHER was qualified to take the Chair, and whilst as yet
no recognised authority existed, GINNELL, master of the situation,
delivered a long harangue. Proposed now to offer a few remarks "as an
independent Irish Nationalist."

SPEAKER on point of order restricting him to putting a question,
he "begged to ask the PRIME MINISTER what precedent he had and
what authority to advise the KING to place himself at the head of a
conspiracy to defeat the decision of this House?"

"Members desiring to take their seats will please come to the Table,"
said the SPEAKER.

The observation did not appear relevant. It met the occasion. It
brought up LEVERTON HARRIS, newly elected for East Worcestershire, who
found his welcome the warmer by reason of the fact that he had been a
passive instrument in avoiding what might under less adroit management
have developed into a disorderly scene.

_Business done._--PREMIER announces Conference upon Ulster question to
meet at Buckingham Palace on the invitation of HIS MAJESTY.

_Tuesday._--Dull sitting closed in lively conversation arising on
motion for adjournment. RUPERT GWYNNE, jealous for due observance of
traditions of House, has noticed with concern the departure for Canada
for indefinite period of Member for East St. Pancras. At Question
time asked CHANCELLOR OF EXCHEQUER whether Mr. MARTIN had applied for
Chiltern Hundreds. Answered in the negative, he put a further question
to PREMIER, directing his attention to Act of 6 HENRY VIII. c. 16,
ordering that no Member of Parliament shall absent himself from
attendance except he have licence of Mr. SPEAKER. This upon pain of
having his wages docked. PREMIER brushed him aside with one of his
brief answers.

GWYNNE not the man to be shouldered off the path of duty when it
lies straight before him. Here was a Member in receipt of £400 a year
leaving the place of business where it was assumed to be earned, not
even taking the trouble to follow example of the clerk who, left
in sole charge of his master's office, wrote in legible hand, "Back
D'reckly," affixed notice to front door and went forth to enjoyment of
prolonged meal.

Since he could get no satisfaction at Question time he kept Members
in, after hour of adjournment, in order to debate subject.

Unfortunately it turned out that he was not exactly the man to
have undertaken the job. Amid laughter and hilarious cheering HOME
SECRETARY pointed out that here was a case of Satan reproving sin.
Reference to the records showed that during the time payment of
Members has been in vogue, of 687 divisions GWYNNE was absent from
424. (GWYNNE later corrected these figures.) During that time he had
drawn from the Exchequer salary amounting to £1,000.

"On his own principle, that payment should be in proportion to
attendance, the hon. Member," said the HOME SECRETARY, "is entitled
to only £400. Being so conscientious no doubt he will repay to the
CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER the balance of £600."

HELMSLEY, gallantly coming to assistance of friend in dire straits,
himself fell into the bog. It appeared that of 1056 divisions taken in
two Sessions he had been absent from 602. Here was another unexpected
little windfall for the Exchequer.

At this stage it was found expedient to drop the subject; adjournment
not further resisted.

_Business done._--Budget Bill dealt with on Report stage.

_Thursday._--With that austerity that since Stuart times has marked
relations of House of Commons with royalty Mr. HOGGE is known at
Westminster simply as the Member for East Edinburgh, a position he
with characteristic modesty accepts. But blood, especially royal
blood, like murder, will out. Lineal descendant of one of the oldest
dynasties in the world's history, Mr. HOGGE cannot be expected always
and altogether to be free from ancestral influence. Something of the
hauteur of 'OGGE, King of Bashan (or, as some records have it, OG)
is discerned in his attitude and manner when, throned on corner seat
below Gangway, he occasionally deigns to direct the PRIME MINISTER in
the way he should go.

Such opportunity presented itself in connection with meeting of
Conference which through the Parliamentary week has centred upon
Buckingham Palace the attention of mankind. With respect to palaces
Mr. HOGGE is by family association an expert.

"Why Rookery?" _Miss Betsey Trotwood_ sharply asked _David
Copperfield_ when he casually mentioned his mother's postal address.

"Why Buckingham Palace?" asked Mr. HOGGE, bending severe glance on
Treasury Bench whence the PREMIER had judiciously fled.

St. Stephen's, which houses the Member for East Edinburgh, is also a
royal palace. Why then was not the Conference held within its walls,
instead of under the roof of what he loftily alluded to as "the
domestic Palace"?

This and much more, with covert references to machinations of the two
Front Benches, Mr. HOGGE wanted to know.

The PRIME MINISTER, uneasily conscious of the coming storm, had,
as mentioned, discreetly disappeared. As an offering to righteous
indignation he left behind him on the Treasury Bench the body of
ATTORNEY-GENERAL. That astute statesman avoided difficulty and
personal disaster by meekly undertaking to lay before the PRIME
MINISTER the views so eloquently and pointedly set forth by the hon.
Member.

Mr. HOGGE graciously assented to this course, and what at the outset
looked like threatening incident terminated.

_Business done._--Budget Bill passed Third Reading without a division.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Waiter._ "WHAT SAUCE WILL YOU TAKE WIZ YOUR FISH,
SAIR?"

_Polite Customer._ "WELL, WHAT DISINFECTANTS HAVE YOU?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Mr. Hogge: Can the Prime Minister say whether any of those
    taking part in the Conference attached any conditions to their
    entering the Conference?

    'I cannot sty,' replied the Premier."--_Evening News._

Was this quite worthy of the PRIME MINISTER? We ourselves do not care
for these personal jokes on people's names.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Mr. Asquith's statement was thus of sensational interest,
    because it represented the last effort at the eleventh minute
    of the eleventh hour to avert Civil War."--_Dublin Evening
    Mail._

No need to hurry. There are still forty-nine minutes left.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Finances of Cricket.

    "Cumberland batted first and reached the total of £272, C. A.
    Hardcastle (87), R. B. Brown (41), and R. C. Saint (27) being
    the chief contributors."--_Daily News and Leader._

       *       *       *       *       *

Suggested mottoes for the L.C.C.:--

    "PROGRESS MODERATELY."

      "TRAM UP A CHILD."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SUGGESTION FOR DEVELOPING A "WHITE HOPE" AMONGST OUR
'BUS- AND TAXI-DRIVERS.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MISSIONARY.

  Where Oriental calm derides
    Our Occidental stress
  And Ninety-seven E. collides
    With Five-and-twenty S.,

  You'll find a product of the West,
    A Bachelor of Arts,
  Who blends a mind of youthful zest
    With patriarchal parts.

  Each morning mid his rubber trees
    He rides an ancient hack,
  A cassock girt above his knees,
    A topee tilted back.

  Now reining in his steed to preach
    A parable on sap,
  Now vaulting from his seat to teach
    The proper way to tap.

  His swart disciples knit their brows
    O'er algebraic signs;
  They build their byres, they milk their cows
    On scientific lines.

  They use his microscope and gaze
    On strange bacterial risks;
  They tuns their daily hymns of praise
    To gramophonic discs.

  And every evening after grace,
    When converts clear the cloth,
  He pins an orchid to its place
    Or camphorates a moth.

  Out of the world his path may run,
    Yet still in worldly wise
  He'll talk of feats with rod or gun,
    A twinkle in his eyes,

  And tell of tiger-stalking nights,
    Of mornings with the snipe,
  With never a pause save when he lights
    An antiquated pipe.

  We others earn our pensioned ease,
    The furlough of our kind;
  We book our berths, we cross the seas,
    But he shall stay behind,

  Plodding his round of feast and fast,
    Dreaming the dreams of yore,
  Of England as he saw her last
    In 1884.

                                J. M. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

More Impending Apologies.

I.

    "GREAT GALA NIGHT
           WHEN
     JOSEPHINE DAVIS
    WILL BID 'AU REVOIR' TO BOMBAY
    BY SPECIAL REQUEST."

    _Bombay Chronicle._

II.

    "At the hour of six the Rev. S. F. Collier gave out the only
    possible hymn--

        'And are we yet alive
         And see each other's face!'"

    _Yorkshire Post._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GESTICULATORS.

The supper-room was so full that I quite expected to find that, since
I was so late, the harassed head-waiter had taken the liberty of
presuming my death and letting someone else have my table; but there
it was, empty and ready for me. I sank into a chair with a feeling
of relief and, having ordered something to eat, began to examine the
room. There was not a spare place; everyone was eating and talking and
unusual excitement was in the air. From my remote corner I could not
catch any words, but the odd thing was that at every table one at
least of the men, who were all in evening-dress, was waving his arms.
Now and then a man would stand up to do this better. It was as though
they were all deaf and dumb, or cinema actors.

The next day at lunch I had a similar experience. I patronized another
restaurant, which seemed to be equally popular, and again every man
was gesticulating in a style totally foreign to the staid apathetic
Londoner. What could it mean? What was the reason?

I asked the waiter. He laughed. "Ah," he said, "I have notice it too.
It is funny, is it not? Zey all show each other how CARPENTIER won on
ze foul."

       *       *       *       *       *

AN ERROR IN ARCADY.

People who know us both have often expressed a doubt as to whether
Charles or myself is the more absent-minded and unobservant. I wish to
set the matter at rest once and for all.

We were discussing William's wedding, which had just taken place,
romantically enough, in the very heart of Herts--one of those quaint
little villages where no sound seems to disturb the silence of the
long summer day but the gentle bleating of horn to horn and the murmur
of innumerable tyres. Both of us had been there, and Charles came
round to talk to me about it a few evenings afterwards.

"I do hope the poor dear fellow will be happy," he said, lighting his
fifth match and pulling away vigorously at an ugly-looking briar.

"It really goes much better with tobacco in it," I said, passing him
my pouch. "Why on earth shouldn't William be happy? It seemed a very
pretty wedding. Did you notice how the rays of the sun coming through
the window lit up the best man's boots?"

"I daresay, I daresay," he replied. "As a matter of fact I couldn't
see the church part of it very well: I came late and was behind a
pillar at the back."

"Well, it all went beautifully," I told him. "Everybody stood up and
sat down in the wrong places as usual, and the friends of the bride
looked with extreme _hauteur_ at the friends of the bridegroom, and
_vice versâ_. I suppose you went to the reception afterwards. I never
saw you at all except for a moment on the platform going back. You
must have shaken hands with the happy pair and examined the presents?"

"I went to the house," said Charles. "I went in a motor-car on a seat
that took two men to hold down, and that hit me hard when I tried to
stand up. I caught a glimpse of William, but I couldn't find the room
where the presents were set out, so I went through almost at once
into the garden, where the feasting was going on. Do tell me about the
gifts. Was my little pepper-castor hung on the line?"

"I didn't notice that," I said, "but my butter-dish was doing itself
proud. It had sneaked up to a magnificent toast-rack with stabling
accommodation for about eight pieces, given by somebody with a title.
And you ought to have seen the fish-slices. The fish-slices wore
gorgeous. I expect William will spend a great part of his married
life in slicing fish. It will be a great change from golf-balls. But I
think you really ought to have said a few hearty and well-chosen words
to the young people."

"That's just it," replied Charles in a mournful voice. "I did. I
talked to the bride."

"Hang it, so did I!" I exclaimed rather indignantly. "Directly I got
in I went up to William and her and said to her, 'How glad you must be
it's all over!' and then quite suddenly it struck me that that wasn't
really the best thing to say in the circumstances, so I blushed and
trod on William's toe and passed on. What did you do in the garden?"

"Well, I wandered about on the lawn where there were lots and lots of
people," said Charles. "I didn't seem to meet anyone I knew, but the
flower-beds were most beautifully kept. I have seldom seen such a
display of cress sandwiches and champagne. After a bit I strolled down
through the shrubberies, went through a little wooden gate and found
myself amongst the raspberry canes. About a quarter of an hour later,
after a little fruity refreshment, whom should I meet walking along a
quiet shady path but the bride herself, all alone."

"Stealing away to get one last raspberry at the dear old home," I
said. "How romantic! What did you do? Hide?"

"No," answered Charles bitterly. "I only wish I had. I felt that now
or never was the time. I went straight up to her, and, feeling that
to talk about the weather or the theatres on such an occasion would be
rather footling, in spite of the fact that we'd never been introduced,
I plunged straight into it. 'You've never seen me before in your
life,' I said earnestly, 'because you haven't got eyes in the back of
your head, and I've never seen you because I can't look through stone.
What's more, I'm only a little silver pepper-castor, an insignificant
item in your cruet. But I must tell you how delighted I am to have a
chance of speaking to you.'"

"What did she say to that?" I asked.

"Well, you'd never believe it, but the girl looked quite nervous and
frightened, and positively began to walk away from me. I supposed I'd
begun on the wrong tack, so I hurried after her and started again.
'Marriage is a state full of the most serious responsibilities,' I
said, 'but one glance at you shows me that you are fully competent to
shoulder them all.'"

"That sounds as if you thought she looked a trifle statuesque," I
said. "Did she seem annoyed?"

"Worse," replied Charles. "She hurried on again without speaking a
word. 'Stop,' I cried, 'stop! I am a friend of the fairy prince;' and
just then we came out on to a piece of lawn, and she gave a little
shriek and actually ran away, leaving me standing where I was. I was
so ashamed and exhausted that I slunk back through the little gate and
had some more raspberries. When I had partially recovered I returned
to the upper part of the garden again, had two cups of tea in the big
tent, and made my way back to the station, where I saw you. If you
hadn't got into another carriage I should have told you about it at
the time."

"Then you never saw them going away at all?" I said.

"No," replied Charles; "did you?"

"Did I not?" said I. "You wouldn't believe the amount of rice I
started their married life with. About two milk puddings' worth, I
should say. And so you are not quite satisfied with William's choice?"

"Well, she seems to me to be rather an unresponsive and timid sort
of person," said Charles. "Not tactful, nor likely to make what the
newspapers call a charming hostess. I should have liked dear William
to marry someone who would be a social success."

I smoked for some time in silence, and then I had an idea.

"How was the bride dressed when you saw her, Charles?" I asked.

"Do I know how women are dressed? She was in white, of course, and
hadn't a hat on."

"But she had a train and a veil, I suppose. She hadn't a short skirt
by any chance?"

"Goodness, how do I know?" he replied. "I didn't notice all that. Why
do you ask?"

"Well, you only saw her once, you see," I said, "and you went through
that little gate at the bottom of the garden, didn't you?"

"I did," said Charles. "What's that got to do with it?"

"Nothing, nothing. Only I know that there were some people playing
tennis at the next house, and very likely the two gardens are
connected, and I'm wondering whether that girl----"

"Good heavens," said Charles.... "You haven't got such a thing as a
hairpin about you, have you? This pipe's stopped up."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The Nambudiri school is progressing with the French motto of
    'Festina lente!'"--_The Malabar Herald._

More progress might be made with the old Latin tag, "_Trop de zèle._"

       *       *       *       *       *

    "'As long as I can play as good a game of golf as I did to-day
    I will never get any cider,' was Mr. Rockefeller's reply to
    one of the friends who called to congratulate him."--_New York
    Sun._

He may, however, get older, even then.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SOCIETY NOTES.

WE ARE SORRY TO HEAR THAT, THROUGH THE INCONSIDERATE ACTION OF THE
ANTIQUATED PEOPLE WHO STILL TAKE DOGS TO THE PARK, THE PET RAT OF
LADY PIPER HAD A NARROW ESCAPE FROM WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN A SERIOUS
ACCIDENT.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FOILING OF "THE BLARE."

(_Suggested to a slightly Hibernian brain by the recent ebullition of
generosity on the part of the popular press, which insures its readers
against holiday accidents whilst boating and bathing._)

  When I bolt from this city of vapour
    To bite the salubrious breeze,
  Do you know why I gambol and caper
    And plunge with a shout in the seas
      Twice the lad that I was
      For a lark? It's because
  I subscribe to that bountiful paper,
    _The Blare_, if you please.

  For I know that if currents are shifty,
    If cramp should arrive unaware,
  I shall die, but my end will be thrifty,
    And my host (being also my heir)
      Will be amply consoled
      By the thought of the gold
  (Which amounts to two hundred and fifty)
    He'll get from _The Blare_.

  "Pray take from your forehead those creases,"
    I cry to my friend on the yacht,
  "I admit that the mainsail's in pieces
    And most of the sheets in a knot;
      But remember that if
      We go _ponk_ on that cliff
  It's _The Blare_ will be paying your nieces
    A nice little pot."

  But whatever may crash into cruisers
    Or wherries when I am afloat,
  When the waves have destroyed me like bruisers,
    I call on my country to note,
      If _The Blare_ should pretend,
      When I've passed to my end,
  I was one of its constant perusers,
    It lies in its throat.

  To my tenantless rooms in the City
    The rags have been sent, and it's there
  That I'll burn them unopened and gritty
    Or, if (and it's little I care)
      I am whelmed in the wave,
      I shall laugh from my grave
  At the blow that I've dealt the banditti
    Who publish _The Blare_.

                                      EVOE.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "With one accord they all say, 'Welcome to Ireland!' 'No
    more delightful place,' says Mr. Birrell; 'A kindly welcome
    everywhere,' says Mr. Devlin; 'The most peaceful place in the
    world,' says Mr. Redmond."--_Daily Graphic._

Mr. REDMOND has overlooked the Balkans.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALL LIARS' DAY.

"So it's ----'s birthday to-day," said Fortescue (naming a very
well-known politician) as he looked up from his newspaper. "You'll
call and wish him many happy returns, of course, Ferguson?"

We who travel up together each morning by this train are pretty well
agreed about ----.

"Don't mention that man to me!" cried Ferguson. "He's absolutely the
biggest liar on earth. I can't imagine how he faces the world as he
does after having been exposed so many times. You'd think he would
want to crawl away into a hole somewhere. He can't have the least
sense of shame."

"Pardon me," interrupted the burly stranger seated in the corner.
"Pardon me; there is reason why he should. It is not _his_ fault if
he is addicted to inexactitude. He was predestined to it. It is the
irresistible influence of the day on which he was born. Every man born
on this day must inevitably grow up to be a liar; it is his fate, from
which there can be no escape."

"Oh, come!" protested Ferguson. "That sounds rather far-fetched, you
know, for these days."

"My dear Sir," retorted the other, brushing up his moustache
aggressively and glaring at Ferguson, "I happen to be President of the
Society for the Investigation of Natal Day Influences upon Character,
so I presume I may claim to know what I am talking about."

So truculent was his demeanour that nobody ventured to speak.

"My Society," he continued after a pause, "has conducted its
researches over a period of many years. I am going to give you just
a few examples out of thousands we have collected. Let us take a
significant date, February 29th. A man born on that day is a coward.
It is inevitable. Pusillanimity is born in him and can never be
eradicated.

"We had before us a month or two ago the case of a gentleman living
in a country town--a quiet, shy, studious recluse--born on this fatal
day. By some mischance he happened to pick up a journal in which was
an article on the Government by Mr. ARNOLD WHITE. He read it. He was
so terrified that he expired from heart failure. That sounds to you
incredible, but real life is often incredible. That is one of the
discoveries of our Society.

"I will give you a more remarkable instance still. A well-to-do
gentleman with the same birthday, whose case we have recorded in
our journals, is now, though perfectly healthy, bed-ridden under the
following amazing circumstances. He accidentally discovered that his
tailor, who had clothed him since boyhood, was an anarchist. After
this he was afraid to have any further dealings with the man, while,
on the other hand, he lacked sufficient courage to face the ordeal
of being fitted by a fresh tailor. For some time he used to sit up at
night and secretly sew patches into his trousers. Naturally this could
not go on for ever, and at last, when his garments were dropping to
pieces, he had to take to his bed.... You smile, Sir. Perhaps you
think I am exaggerating?"

His eyes flashed and his voice vibrated with such anger that I jumped
six inches out of my seat.

"Not at all--not at all," I stammered. "Only it occurred to
me--er--that he might have--er--b-bought them ready-made."

"Your knowledge of human nature must be singularly slight," replied
the other icily, "if you imagine that a man without sufficient courage
to be fitted by a tailor would be brave enough to wear ready-made
clothes."

"It seems to me, Sir," said Dean, coming to the rescue, "that your two
instances prove little, if anything. They may be mere coincidence."

The stranger leaned forward, frowned heavily and wagged his forefinger
at Dean, who wilted visibly.

"The Society for the Investigation of Natal Day Influences upon
Character," he said, "does not seek to build up a theory upon
isolated and arbitrarily selected examples. We deal with the subject
scientifically. To continue with this date, February 29th. After
several cases similar to those I have recounted had come to our
notice, we made out a list of two hundred and fifty men born on
this day. To each of them we sent a representative to ask for a
subscription to the Society. Though they had never heard of it before,
_every one of those two hundred and fifty was easily intimidated into
subscribing._

"Now let us consider another date--March 3rd. Several striking
instances had led us to suspect that a person born on March 3rd comes
into the world with an ineradicable passion for gambling. I will give
you just one of these. A gentleman one day imagined he was seriously
ill and called in a doctor. The latter laughed at his fears and
offered to bet him that he would live to be seventy. The temptation
was too great. The gambler closed with the offer, and on the eve of
his seventieth birthday drowned himself."

At this point Empson sniggered audibly. The speaker turned his head
and fixed his terrifying glance upon the delinquent. Poor Empson grew
very red, and endeavoured to cover his lapse by coughing noisily. The
other waited patiently till he had finished.

"Perhaps you wish to say something, Sir," he remarked coldly.

"N-no," said Empson. "Most interesting."

The President made a gesture which indicated that Empson was beneath
contempt and renewed his discourse.

"Continuing the same method of research," he said, "we compiled a list
of nearly four hundred persons born on March 3rd. To each of these we
sent particulars of a Derby Sweepstake. _Every one of them, gentlemen,
applied for a ticket by return of post._"

There was an impressive pause. The President looked round the carriage
defiantly as if challenging suspicion.

"One of our tests with regard to to-day's date--liars' day," he
continued presently, "was rather amusing. We hired a room in the City
for a week and sent out over three hundred letters to persons born
on that day. Our notepaper was headed, 'Short, Stay and Hoppett,
Solicitors,' and the letters were in identical terms. They said that
we had been endeavouring for some time to trace the relatives of one
Davy Jones, who, after acquiring a large fortune in Australia, had
died intestate, and we had that morning been given to understand that
the gentleman with whom we wore corresponding was a nephew of the
deceased, etc., etc. You guess what happened. _Every one of them
without exception claimed as his uncle this millionaire who never
existed._"

The train began to slow down, and the President rose to his feet.

"I get out here," he said. "I'm sorry. I should like to have
discussed the subject further. You, Sir"--he pointed threateningly at
Ferguson--"will doubtless in future refrain from blaming Mr. ---- for
a failing for which, as you see, he is in no way responsible."

Ferguson quaked and said nothing.

The President brushed up his moustache still higher and looked round
in triumph. All of us were completely cowed--all of us, except little
Windsor.

"Just a moment, Sir," said the latter gently. "Before you leave us
will you kindly accept this?"

He took out his tie-pin and laid it in the other's hand.

For the first time the burly one's confidence deserted him. He
reddened slightly and looked embarrassed.

"It's very kind of you," he said, "but really I--I don't quite
understand."

"It's a birthday present for you," said Windsor sweetly.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Humorous Artist._ "I'VE BROUGHT YOU AN ORIGINAL FUNNY
JOKE THIS TIME. A FRIEND OF MINE THOUGHT OF IT."

_Editor_ (after reading it). "YES, IT _IS_ FUNNY; BUT I PREFER THE
DRAWING THAT WAS PUBLISHED WITH IT IN THE 'SEVENTIES!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

(_By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks._)

Three numbers of _The South Polar Times_ were brought out at Cape
Evans, the winter quarters of Captain SCOTT, during 1911. Mr. APSLEY
CHERRY-GARRARD, the editor, has now presented them to a wider circle
under the auspices of SMITH, ELDER, hoping that they will prove "a
source of interest and pleasure to the friends of the expedition." He
need have no fears. Of course a paper produced under such conditions
is in its nature esoteric, and many of its jokes are lost if you
"don't know Jimson." But if you have previously read _Scott's Last
Expedition_ then you _will_ "know Jimson"; you will feel that every
man at Cape Evans in 1911 was a personal friend of yours, and you
will be delighted with this facsimile reproduction of the paper which
delighted them. Personally I cannot read or see too much of the men
who are my heroes; and in a world where an ordinary school-girl is
allowed twenty-seven photographs of Mr. LEWIS WALLER I shall not
consider myself surfeited with two caricatures and a humorous
character-sketch of Lieutenant BOWERS. But there are contributions to
_The South Polar Times_ which have an interest other than the merely
personal. Mr. GRIFFITH TAYLOR, a tower of strength on the literary
side, is really funny in _The Bipes_--a paper (on the wingless bipeds
of Cape Evans) supposed to have been read by OATES' escaped rabbit to
the Royal Society of Rabbits. Mr. TAYLOR, as a recorder of history in
_Scott's Last Expedition_, was, I thought, a little too familiar; in
these and other articles he is much more at home. But it is upon
Dr. WILSON's pictures (both serious and comic) that _The South Polar
Times_ can most justly pride itself. I envy Mr. CHERRY-GARRARD so
prolific and brilliant a contributor. Still more I envy him (and all
his colleagues at Cape Evans) the knowledge of such a man. The more I
get to know of "BILL" WILSON, the more I understand that he was of
the very salt of the earth--a man to love whom was indeed a liberal
education, and to be loved by whom was a passport to the little
company of the elect.

       ***

When _John Barleycorn_ (MILLS AND BOON) came my way, I noticed that
the publishers had shown a reticence, unusual in these days, on the
outside paper cover; they didn't say a word as to the quality or
character of the contents. They had three good reasons: first, given
the name of JACK LONDON, there was no need of further advertisement or
lure; second, if they had started describing the book they would have
been unable to say with strict truth that it was or was not a novel,
for it isn't and it is; third, and best, they couldn't, as honest men,
have avoided mentioning that it is in a way a sermon on alcoholism,
and that, being said, might have acted as a deterrent, unless they
had explained (as they wouldn't have had room to do) how and why, when
they said "sermon," they didn't really mean "sermon." So they lay low
and said nothing, and I almost wish I had done the same, for no one
who has the lightest interest, practical or theoretical, in John
Barleycorn ought to be put off these alcoholic memoirs. The diarist
purports to have been first drunk at the age of five, again at the
age of seven, almost perpetually for a spell of years from the age of
fifteen, and yet to have taken over a quarter of a century to acquire
a liking for alcohol. That sounds odd, but is not unique. Not only
in California and not only in the lower grades of society, is
Youth, vigorous and unspoilt, bound to acquire the taste if it would
foregather on lively and intimate terms with its fellows; and not only
in the saloons of the Oakland water-front are fine youngsters drinking
themselves permanently silly because it is their only way of being men
among men, jolly good fellows among jolly good fellows. A sound enough
text for any sermon; and, I may honestly add, a sound enough sermon
for any text, with a strong smell of the sea and of adventure about
it. But I ask myself for what purpose the photograph of Mr. and Mrs.
JACK LONDON is inserted as a frontispiece? As well, I think, have had
a portrait of Mr. MILLS, with Mr. BOON inset.

       ***

