"This here is sho the trufe, and if you don't believe it, go out ter
Southview Cemetery and see Sid Heard, my oldest son; he been out there
over 20 years as sexton and bookkeeper. Yessir, he tole it ter me and I
believe it. This happen long ago, 10 or 15 years. There wuz a couple
that lived in Macon, Ga., but their home wuz in Atlanta and they had a
lot out ter Southview. Well, they had a young baby that tuck sick and
died so they had the baby's funeral there in Macon; then they put the
coffin in the box, placed the label on the box, then brought it ter
Atlanta. Folkes are always buried so that they head faces the east. They
say when Judgment Day come and Gabriel blow that trumpet everybody will
rise up facing the east. Well, as I wuz saying, they came here. Sid
Heard met 'em out yonder and instructed his men fer arrangements fer the
grave and everything. A few weeks later the 'oman called Sid Heard up
long distance. She said, 'Mr. Heard.' Yesmam, he said. 'I call you ter
tell you me and my husband can't rest at all.' 'Why?' he asked. 'Because
we can hear our baby crying every night and it is worrying us ter death.
Our neighbors next door say our baby must be buried wrong.' Sid Heard
said, Well, I buried the baby according ter the way you got the box
labeled. 'I am not blaming you, Mr. Heard, but if I pay you will you
take my baby up?' Yesmam, I will if you want me to; jest let me know the
day you will be here and I'll have everything ready. Alright, said she.

'Well,' said Sid Heard, 'the day she wuz ter come she wuz sick and
instead sent a car load of her friends. The men got busy and started
digging till they got ter the box; when they took it up sho nuff after
they opened it, they found the baby had been buried wrong; the head was
facing the west instead of the east. They turned the box around and
covered it up. The folks then went on back to Macon. A week later the
'omen called up again. 'Mr. Heard,' she says. Yesmam, says he. 'Well, I
haven't heard my baby cry at all in the past week. I wuzn't there but I
know the exact date you took my baby up, cause I never heard it cry no
more.'


[MRS. ROSA MILLEGAN AND MR. JASPER MILLEGAN]

On December 10, 1936 Mr. and Mrs. Millegan who reside at 231 Chestnut
Ave. NE. were interviewed on the subject of superstitions, signs,
conjure, etc. Mrs. Rosa Millegan studied awhile after the facts of the
interview were made clear to her. Finally she said; "I kin tell you more
bout conjure; that's all I know bout cause I done been hurted myself and
every word of it is the trufe.

"Well, it happen lak this. I wuz suffering with rheumatism in my arm and
a old man in the neighborhood came ter me and gave me some medicine that
he said would help me. Well, I done suffered so I thought mebbe it might
help me a little. Chile honey, 'after I done tuck some of that stuff I
nearly went crazy. I couldn't talk; couldn't hardly move and my head
look lak it bust open. I didn't know what ter do. I called medical
doctors and they jest didn't do me no good. Let me tell you right here,
when you done been conjured, medical doctors can't do you no good; you
got ter get a nudder conjur doctor ter get it off you. Well, one day I
says to my daughter, "I'm through wid medical doctors. I'm gwine ter Sam
Durham. They say he is good and I go find out. Chile, folks done give me
up ter die. I use ter lay in bed and hear 'em say, she won't never get
up. Well, I went ter Sam Durham and he looked at me and said: 'You is
hurt in the mouth.' He carried me in a small room, put some medicine
around my face, and told me ter sit down a while. After while my mouth
and face begin ter feel lak it wuz paralyzed, and he begin ter talk.
'That man that give you that medicine is mad wid you about his wife and
he fixed you. Now do what I tell you and you will overcome it. He is
coming ter your door and is gwine want ter shake your hand. Don't let
him touch you, but speak ter him in the name of the Lord and throw your
hands over your head; by doing this you will overcome him and the
devil.' Anudder thing he says; 'This man is coming from around the back
of your house.' Then he give me 5 vials of different lengths and a half
cup of pills, and told me ter take all that medicine. He told me too ter
get a rooster and let him stay on my porch all the time and he couldn't
get ter me no more. Sho nuff, that nigger come jest lak he said he wuz
going ter do, but I fixed him. Later on this same man tried ter fix his
wife cause he thought she had anudder man. Do you know that oman
couldn't drink water in her house? and when he died he wuz nearly crazy;
they had ter strap him in the bed; all the while he wuz cussin God and
raving."

The next stories were told to the writer by Mr. Jasper Millegan:

"My uncle wuz poisoned. Yes, sir, somebody fixed him in coffee. He
lingered and lingered and finally got so he wuz confined ter bed fer
good. Somebody put scorpions in him and whenever they would crawl under
his skin he would nearly go crazy, and it looked lak his eyes would jest
pop out. He waited so long ter go ter the conjure doctors they couldn't
do him any good. And the medical doctors ain't no good fer nothing lak
that. Yes, sir, them snakes would start in his feet and run up his leg.
He nebber did get any better and he died.

"A long time ago I saw a lady that wuz conjured in her feet; somebody
put something down fer her ter walk over. Well, anyway she got down with
her feet and couldn't travel from her bed ter a chair. Well, she got a
old conjure doctor ter come treat her and he rubbed her feet with
medicine and after he done that a while he told her that something wuz
coming out of her feet. Sho nuff, I see'd them maggots with my own eyes
when they come out of her feet; but she got well."

The following are preventatives to use against conjure; also a few home
treatments for different sickness.

"Ter keep from being conjured, always use plenty salt and pepper. Always
get up soon in the morning so nobody can see you and sprinkle salt and
pepper around your door and they sho can't git at you.

"If you think you done been poisoned or conjured, take a bitter gourd
and remove the seeds, then beat 'em up and make a tea. You sho will
heave all of it up.

"Ef you think you will have a stroke, go to running water and get four
flint rocks; heat 'em and lay on all of them, and believe me, it will
start your blood circulating and prevent the stroke. Another way to
start your blood circulating; heat a brick and (lay) lie on it.

"To get rid of corns, bathe your feet in salt water and take a little
salt and put it 'tween your toes."

Mrs. Millegan closed her interview by telling the writer that every
morning found her sprinkling her salt and pepper, cause she knows what
it means ter be fixed. As the writer started out the door she noticed a
horse shoe hanging over the door.


FOLKLORE
(Negro)
Minnie B. Ross

[MRS. CAMILLA JACKSON]


On November 24, 1936 Mrs. Camilla Jackson was interviewed concerning
superstitions, signs, etc. Mrs. Jackson, an ex-slave, is about 80 years
of age and although advanced in years she is unusually intelligent in
her speech and thoughts. The writer was well acquainted with her having
previously interviewed her concerning life as a slave.

Mrs. Jackson related to the writer the following signs and incidents:

If a tree is standing in your yard or near your house and an owl lights
in it and begins to hoot, some one in the family will die.

If, during the illness of a person, a cat comes in the room, or the
house, and whines, the person will die.

Another sure sign of death and one that has been experienced by Mrs.
Jackson is as follows: Listen child if a bird flies in your house some
one is going to die. My daughter and I were ironing one day and a bird
flew in the window right over her head. She looked up and said, "mama
that bird came after me or you, but I believe it came for me." One month
later my daughter took sick with pneumonia and died.

My mother said before the Civil War ended her mistress owned an old
slave woman 100 years old. This old woman was very wicked and the old
miss used to visit her cabin and read the Bible to her. Well sir, she
died and do you know the horses balked and would go every way but the
right way to the grave. They rared and kicked and would turn straight
around in the road 'cause the evil spirits were frightening them. It was
a long time before they could get the body to the grave.

Mrs. Jackson before relating the following experiences emphatically
stated her belief in seeing the dead but only believes that you can see
them in a dream.

"Many a night my sister has come to me all dressed in white. I have
heard her call me too; but I have never answered. No longer than one
night last week old Mr. and Mrs. Tanner came to me in a dream. The old
lady came in my room and stood over my bed. Her hair was done up on the
top of her head just like she always wore it. She was distressed and
spoke about some one being after her. Old Mr. Tanner came and led her
away. They really were in my room, you see both of them died in this
house years ago."

Mrs. Jackson could not relate any stories of conjuring; but did mention
the fact that she had often heard of people wearing money around their
legs to keep from being conjured. She also spoke of people keeping a
horseshoe over the door for good luck.

During slavery and since that time, if you should go out doors on a
drizzling night for any thing, before you could get back Jack O'lantern
would grab you and carry you to the swamps. If you hollowed and some one
bring a torch to the door the Jack O'lantern would turn you aloose.
Another way to get rid of them is to turn your pockets wrong side out.

One day a man came here selling roots called "John the Conqueror" and
sister Blakely there, paid him 10¢ for one of the plants, but she never
did plant it. He said the plant would bring good luck.


[MRS. ANNA GRANT]

On the same day Mrs. Jackson was interviewed, Mrs. Anna Grant told the
writer that if she didn't mind she would relate to her a ghost story
that was supposed to be true. In her own words the writer gives the
following story:

Onst a 'oman, her husband and two chillun wuz travelin'. This 'oman wuz
a preacher and only wanted to stop over night. Now this 'oman's husban'
wuz a sinner, but she wuz a christian. Well she saw an old empty house
setting in a field but when she went ter inquire 'bout it she wuz told
that it wuz hanted and no one had ebber been able ter stay there over
night. De lady dat owned de house offered her pillows, bed clothes,
sheets, etc., if she intended to stay, and even told her that she would
give her de house if she could stay there. The woman that owned the
house told her butler to go and make a fire for the family and carry the
pillows, sheets, etc. Well, they all got there the 'oman built a fire,
cooked supper and fed 'em all. Her husband and children went ter bed.
The husband wanted to know why his wife wanted him to go to bed and she
wanted ter stay up. The wife didn't say nothin', just told him ter go to
bed, then she laid the Bible on the table bottom side up and kept
looking behind her. The house wuz two story and after while something
came ter the top steps and said, "Can I throw down," she said "throw
down in the name of the father, son and Holy Ghost." Two thighs and a
foot came down. Later the same voice sed, "Can I throw down," and she
said, "throw down in the name of the father, son and the Holy Ghost,"
and then a whole body came down. The husband woke up when he heard the
noise and ran away from the house. The ghost told the 'oman ter follow
her, and she picked up her Bible and kept on reading and went on behind
the ghost. The ghost showed her where some money was buried near a big
oak tree and then vanished. The next morning the 'oman dug and found der
money, but the 'oman of the house wouldn't take a penny, said she didn't
want it, sides that she gave her the house. They said this wuz a true
story and der reason dat house wus hanted wuz 'cause der family dat used
to live there got killed about money. Mrs. Grant ended by saying "Deres
a horseshoe over my door right now for luck."


[MRS. EMMALINE HEARD]

Mrs. Emmaline Heard lives on Cain St. between Fort and Butler Sts. She
is an ex-slave and on a previous occasion had given the writer an
interesting account of slavery as she knew it. When the writer
approached her concerning superstitious signs, ghost tales, conjure
etc., Mrs. Heard's face became lit with interest and quickly assured the
writer that she believed in conjuring, ghosts, and signs. It was not
long before our interview began. Mrs. Heard, although seventy or
seventy-five years old, is very intelligent in her expression of her
different thoughts. This interview, as nearly as possible, was taken in
the exact words of the person interviewed.

"If you are eating with a mouthful of food and sneeze, that sho is a
true sign of death. I know that 'cause years ago I wuz havin' breakfast
with my son Wylie and one other boy and Wylie sneezed and said "Mama I'm
so sorry I jist coundn't help it the sneeze came on me so quick." I jist
sat there and looked at him and began ter wonder. Two weeks later my
brother rode up and announced my mother's death. That is one sign thats
true, yes sir.

If a picture falls off the wall some one in the family will die.

If you dream about teeth, if one falls out thats another sign of death.

Another sign of death jest as sho as you live is ter dream of a person
naked. I dreamed my son was naked but his body was covered with hair.
Three months later he died. Yes sir, that sho is a true sign.

Jest as sho as your left hand itches you will receive money. If fire
pops on you from the stove, or fire place, you will get a letter.

If the left side of your nose itches a man is coming to the house. If it
itches on the tip, he will come riding.

If the right side of your nose itches a woman is coming to the house.

Following are stories told to Mrs. Heard by her parents, which took
place during the period of slavery. They are supposed to be true as they
were experienced by the persons who told them.

"My mother told me a story that happened when she was a slave. When her
mistress whipped her she would run away ter the woods; but at night she
would sneak back to nurse her babies. The plantation was on old
McDonough road, so ter get ter the plantation she had ter come by a
cemetery and you could see the white stones shining in the moonlight.
This cemetery was near a cut in the road that people said was hanted and
they still say old McDonough road is hanted. One night, mama said she
was on her way to the plantation walking on the middle of the road and
the moon was shining very bright. When she reached this cut she heard a
noise, Clack! Clack! Clack!, and this noise reminded a person of a lot
of machines moving. All at once a big thing as large as a house came
down the side of the road. She said it looked like a lot of chains,
wheels, posts all mangled together, and it seemed that there were more
wheels and chains than anything else. It kept on by making that noise,
clack! clack! clack!. She stood right still till it passed and came on
ter the farm. On her way back she say she didn't see it any more, but
right till ter day that spot is hanted. I have knowed horses to run away
right there with people and hurt them. Then sometimes they have rared
and kicked and turned to go in the other direction. You see, horses can
see hants sometimes when folks can't. Now the reason fer this cut being
hanted was because old Dave Copeland used to whip his slaves to death
and bury them along there."

The next story was told to Mrs. Heard by her father, who experienced it,
as a slave boy.

"My father sed when he wuz a boy him and two more boys run away from the
master 'cause the master whipped 'em. They set out and walked till it
got dark, and they saw a big old empty house settin' back from der road.
Now this house was 3 or 4 miles from any other house. So they went in
and made a fire, and laid down 'cause they wuz tired from running from
the Pader rollers. Soon they heard something say tap! tap! tap!, down
the stairs it came, a loud noise and then "Oh Lordy Master, I aint goin'
do it no more; let me off this time." After a while they heard this same
noise like a house falling in and the same words "Oh Lordy Master, I ant
goin' do it no more. Let me off this time." By this time they had got
good and scared, so my pa sed he and his friends looked at each other
and got up and ran away from that house jest as fast as they could go.
Nobody knowed why this old house wuz hanted; but they believed that some
slaves had been killed in it."

The next is a story of the Jack O'lantern as told by Mrs. Heard.

"Old South River on' the Jonesboro road is jest full of swampy land and
on a rainy drizzly night Jack O'lanterns will lead you. One night my
uncle started out ter see his girl end he had ter go through the woods
and the swamps. When he got in der swamp land he had ter cross a branch
and the night wuz dark and drizzly, so dark you could hardly see your
hand before your face. Way up the creek he saw a little bright light, so
he followed it thinking he wuz on his way. All night long he sed he
followed this light up and down the swamp, but never got near ter it.
When day came he was still in the creek and had not gone any distance at
all. He went home and told the folks and they went back ter the swamps
and saw his tracks up and down in the mud. Later a group of 'em set out
to find the Jack O'lantern and way down the creek they found it on a
bush. It looked like soot hanging down from a bush, burnt out. My uncle
went ter bed 'cause he wuz sleepy and tired down from walking all
night."

The following three stories related by Mrs. Heard deals with practices
of conjure. She definitely states that they are true stories; and backs
up this statement by saying she is a firm believer in conjure.

"As I told you before, my daddy came from Virginia. He wuz bought there
by Old Harper and brought ter McDonough as a slave boy. Well as the
speculator drove along south, he learned who the different slaves were.
When he got here he wuz told by the master to live with old uncle Ned
'cause he wuz the only bachelor on the plantation. The master said ter
old Ned, "Well Ned, I have bought me a fine young plow boy. I want him
ter stay with you and you treat him right." Every night uncle Ned would
make a pallet on the floor for daddy and make him go to bed. When he got
in bed he (uncle Ned) would watch him out of the corner of his eye, but
daddy would pretend he wuz asleep and watch old uncle Ned to see what he
wuz going ter do. After a while uncle Ned would take a broom and sweep
the fireplace clean, then he would get a basket and take out of it a
whole lot of little bundles wrapped in white cloth. As he lay out a
package he would say "grass hoppers," "spiders", "scorpian," "snake
heads", etc., then he, would take the tongs and turn 'em around before
the blaze so that they would parch. Night after night he would do this
same thing until they had parched enough, then he would beat all of it
together and make a powder; then put it up in little bags. My daddy wuz
afraid ter ask old uncle Ned what he did with these bags, but heard he
conjured folks with 'em. In fact he did conjure a gal 'cause she
wouldn't pay him any attention. This gal wuz very young and preferred
talking to the younger men, but uncle Ned always tried ter hang around
her and help hoe, but she would always tell him to go do his own work
'cause she could do hers. One day he said ter her "All right madam, I'll
see you later, you wont notice me now but you'll wish you had. When the
dinner came, and they left the field they left their hoes standing so
they would know jest where ter start when they got back. When that gal
went back ter the field the minute she touched that hoe she fell dead.
Some folks say they saw uncle Ned dressing that hoe with conjure.

"My sister Lizzie sho did get fixed, honey, and it took a old conjurer
ter get the spell off of her. It wuz like this: Sister Lizzie had a
pretty peachtree and one limb spreaded out over the walk and jest as
soon as she would walk under this limb, she would stay sick all the
time. The funny part 'bout it wuz that while she wuz at other folks
house she would feel all right, but the minute she passed under this
limb, she would begin ter feel bad. One day she sent fer a conjurer, and
he looked under the house, and sho nuff, he found it stuck in the sill.
It looked like a bundle of rags, red flannel all stuck up with needles
and every thing else. This old conjurer told her that the tree had been
dressed for her an t'would be best fer her ter cut it down. It wuz a
pretty tree and she sho did hate to cut it down, but she did like he
told her. Yes child, I don't know whither I've ever been conjured or
not, but sometimes my head hurts and I wonder."

Mrs. Heard asked the writer to return at a later date and she would
probably be able to relate more interesting incidents.


FOLKLORE
(Negro)
Edwin Driscoll

[MRS. JULIA RUSH, MR. GEORGE LEONARD, MR. HENRY HOLMES, MR. ELLIS
STRICKLAND, MR. SAM STEVENS, JOE (a boy)]


The Negro folklore as recounted below was secured from the following
persons: Mrs. Julia Rush (an ex-slave) who lives at 878 Coleman Street,
S.W.; Mr. George Leonard (a very intelligent elderly person) whose
address is 148 Chestnut Avenue N.E.; and Mr. Henry Holmes (an ex-slave);
Mr. Ellis Strickland; Mr. Sam Stevens and a young boy known only as Joe.
The latter named people can be found at the address of 257 Old Wheat
Street, N.E. According to these people this lore represents the sort of
thing that their parents and grandparents believed in and at various
times they have been heard to tell about these beliefs.


VOODOO AND CONJURE

Mr. Leonard says: "In dem days de old folks b'lieved in witch-craft and
conjure and sicha stuff like dat. Dey b'lieved dat an old person could
punish anybody by taking a piece of chip and spitting on it and den dey
would throw it on 'em. Dey said dat in two weeks time maggots would be
in 'em."

"I have seen 'em take a black cat an' put 'im in a sack an' den dey took
'im an' put 'im in a pot of boiling hot water alive. Man de cat would
almos' tear dat pot up tryin' to git out. After dey had cooked all de
meat off de cat dey took one of his bones (I don't know which one of
'em) and put it crossways in their front teeth while dey mumbled
somethin' under their breath an' den dey took dis bone an' throwed it
'cross de right shoulder an' when dey went an' picked it up an' put it
in their pocket it was supposed to give 'em de bes' kind of luck. Dey
could say or do anything dey wanted to an' ole marster couldn't hit
'em."

Regarding the Black cat's bone Mr. Strickland told the following story
which he says he once heard an old man tell his father:

"You goes out in de valley in de woods an' you takes a live black cat
an' throws 'im in a pot of boiling water. You boils 'im 'till he gits
done all to pieces an' den you takes all de bones an' throws 'em in de
creek an' de one dat floats up de creek is de one to use. You takes dis
bone an' draws it through your teech an' gits all de meat off an' den
you can take dat bone an' do all kinds of majic. You can talk to folks
an' dey can't see you. You can even disappear an' come right back. It
takes a good 'un to do dat (get a black cat's bone). While you's boilin'
de cat dat thunder an' lightnin' look like it goin' tear up de face of
de earth--you can even see de wind which is like a red blaze of fire."

Continuing Mr. Strickland says: "Some of de roots dat dey used to bring
'im luck an' to trick folks wid wuz Rattle-Snake Marster, and John de
Conquerer. John de Conquerer is supposed to conquer any kind of trouble
you gits intuh. Some folks says dat you can tote it in your pocket an'
have good luck.

"I once knowed a woman who had some lodestone dat she uster work. She
could take men an' dere wives apart an' den put 'em back together again.
She say dat she had killed so many folks (by the use of conjure and
majic etc.) dat she did'nt know whether she would ever git fit fer
forgiveness. She sold She sold herself to de devil fer twenty years."

"Aint nuthin wrong wid folks all de time when dey thinks dey is
tricked," says Mr. Strickland. "I had a friend named Joe once an' he
uster fool 'roun wid roots an' stuff like dat. One day he heard about a
man who had promised to pay five-hundred dollars to anybody dat could
cure him of de misery in his stomach. He thought somebody had "tricked"
him by puttin' a snake in 'im. Joe stayed wid 'im fer two days an' he
did'nt git no better an' so he went out de nex' day an' bought a rubber
snake an den he come back an' give de man some medecine to make 'im
vomit. When he comited Joe throwed de snake in de can an' den he said to
de man: "Dere it is, I knowed somebody had fixed you." De man said: "Dey
tol' me somebody had put a snake in me." Joe took de snake an' done away
wid it an' de nex' day de man wuz up walkin' 'roun. He never did know
how he had been fooled an' Joe made de five-hundred dollars."

According to Mrs. Rush the wife of the colored foreman on her master's
plantation was always working with roots. She says "One day I come in
fum de field to nurse my baby an' when I got to my house dere was dis
woman standing at my door." I said to her: "Name o' God Aunt Candis (dat
wus her name) whut is you doin'?" She wus makin' all kings of funny
motions when I come up on her. If you aint scared of 'em dey can't do
nuthin to you. When I hollored at her de sweat broke out on her face. By
dis time I had stayed away fum de field too long an' I knowed I wus
goin' to git a whippin' but Candis gimme some of de roots she had in her
mouth an'in her pockets. She tol' me to put piece of it in my mouth an'
chew it. When I got near de overseer I was to spit some of de juice
towars him an' I would'nt git a whippin'. I tied a piece of it 'roun my
waist an' put some in my trunk too. I did'nt git a whippin' when I got
to de field but when I went to look fer de root 'roun my waist it wus
gone. When I went back to de house dat night de other piece was gone
too. I aint seed it fum dat day to dis. De rest of de women on de
plantation honored Candis but I did'nt. Dey say dat folks like dem can
put stuff down fer you to walk in er set in or drink an' dat dey can fix
you lie dat. But dey can't do nuthin' wid you if you aint scared of
'em."

"Not so long ago a woman whut uster live back of me tried to do sumpin'
to me after we had a fuss. I woke up one mornin' an' looked out by my
back fence an' dere wus a lotsa salt an' sulphur an' stuff all 'roun de
yard. De other women wus scared fer me but I wus'nt."

Several of my informants say that salt can be used as a weapon of
conjure. According to Joe salt may be used to make a gambler lose all of
his money. To do this all that is necessary is to stand behind the
person to be conjured and then sprinkle a small amount of salt on his
back. From that instant on he will lose money. Joe has also seen a woman
use the following method to make her male friend remain at home: "She
taken some salt an' pepper an' sprinkled it up an' down de steps," says
Joe, "an' den she taken a plain eatin' fork an' stuck it under de door
steps an' de man stayed right in de house until she moved de fork."

Mr. Stevens says: "If you want to fix somebody all you got to do is to
sprinkle some salt an' petter 'roun 'em an' it'll make 'em bus' dere
brains out. If you wants to make 'em move you go out to de grave yard
an' stick your hand down in de middle of a grave an' git a handful of
dat red graveyard dirt an' den you comes back an' sprinkles it 'roun
dere door an' dey's gone, dey can't stay dere. Another conjuration is
fer a woman to make three waves over a man's head. I saw one do dat
once."

Another method used to fix or conjure people, according to Mrs. Rush, is
to take a lizard and parch it. The remains must be put in something that
the person is to eat and when the food is eaten the individual will be
conjured. Mr. Holmes says if a black cat's tail is tied on someone's
doorknob it will "cut dey luck off."

Silver money tied around the leg will ward off the effects of conjure.
Mrs. Rush says if you are feeling ill and you wish to determine whether
or not someone has been trying to conjure you or not just take a silver
coin and place it in your mouth. If it turns black somebody is working
conjure on you. "I knowed a man who went to Newnan to see his mother who
wus sick," stated Mrs. Rush. "She wus so sick dat she could'nt tell whut
wus de matter wid her an' so her son took a silver quarter an' put it in
her mouth an' it turned as black as a kettle."

Says Mr. Holmes: "If anybody comes to your house an' you don't want 'em
dere, when dey leaves you take some salt an' throw it at 'em when dey
gits out of hearin' you cuss at 'em an' dey won't never come back
again."

Following are some songs that used to be sung about conjure, etc.:

  SON:

  "Mother, make my bed down
   I will freely lie down,
   Mother, make my bed down
   I will freely lie down"

  MOTHER:

  "Ransom, my son, what did she give you to eat?
   Ransom, my son, what did she give you to eat?

  SON:

  "Red head (parched lizard) and speckle back
   Oh, make my bed down I will freely lie down."

  "I'm goin' to pizen (poison) you, I'm goin' to pizen you,
   I'm jus' sick an' tired of de way you do,
   I'm goin' to sprinkle spider legs 'roun yo' bed
   an' you gonna wake up in de mornin' an find yourself dead"

  "You beat me an' you kick me an' you black my eyes,
   I'm gonna take dis butcher knife an' hew you down to my size,
   You mark my words, my name is Lou,
   You mind out what I say, I'm goin' to pizen you."


POSITIVE CURES AND CONTROLS

  Mrs. Rush says that backache can be cured by rubbing a hot iron up and
  down the afflicted person's back.

  Asafetida tied around the neck will prevent smallpox.

  Risings can be cured by rubbing them with a poultice made from
  House-Leak root.

  To prevent a fall while walking from one side of a creek to the other on
  a log, place a small stick crosswise in the front-teeth and no mishap
  will result.

  Hold the mouth full of water while peeling onions and the onion juice
  will not get in the eyes.

  If a man wishes to make a woman fall in love with him all that he has to
  do is to take some of her hair, tie it up, and then throw it in running
  water. In a short while she will fall deeply in love with him.

  A man may also cause a woman to fall in love with him by letting her
  drink whiskey in which he has allowed "Gin-Root" to soak.

  If a woman wishes to make a man fall in love with her she has only to
  take the small bow usually found in the back of a man's cap on the
  sweatband, or the bow usually found on the band of the man's hat. After
  this has been secured it must be taken and worn under her clothes next
  to her body.


WITCH RIDING

Mrs. Betty Brown of 74 Butler Street, N.E. says that when people die
angry with someone they usually come back after death in the form of a
witch and then they ride the person that they were angry with at the
time of their death.

According to Mr. Favors who lives at 78 Raymond Street, when a witch
rides anyone it is a sign that a man, a woman, or a dog, is after that
person.

Mrs. Julia Rush says: "De old folks uster call witches hags. Dey wus
some kind of sperrits (spirits) an' dey would ride anybody. My
grandmother uster sleep wid de sissors under her pillow to keep 'em
away."

"I once heerd a woman dat a witch come to a house one night an' took her
skin off an' went through de key hole. Somebody foun' de skin an'
sprinkled salt on it an' when de witch come out she could'nt git in de
skin an' she started saying: 'Skinny, Skinny, don't you know me?'"

Regarding witches Mr. Leonard made the following statement: "The old
folks b'lieved dat any house a person died in was "hainted" and dat de
dead person's spirit was a witch dat would come back at night. They used
to put a pan of salt on de corpse to keep it fum purgin' an' to keep de
witches away. They burned lamps all night long fer about three weeks
after de person was dead an' they sprinkled salt an' pepper 'roun too to
keep de witches away."

Another informant claims that if a person sleeps with his or her shoes
under the bed the witches are liable to ride him.

Mr. Strickland says that when the witches are riding anyone if that
person can say any three words of the Bible such as: "Lord have mercy,"
or "Jesus save me" the witch will stop riding.


APPARITIONS AND GHOSTS

Mr. Henry Holmes claims that he has seen the Jack O'Lantern and that at
one time he even followed it. He says: "One night me an' two more
fellows followed de Jack O'Lantern. It looked like a light in a house or
sumpin. We did'nt know where we wus until de nex' mornin' an' when we
did find ourselfs we wus at home. All de while we followed it it jus'
kep' goin' further an' further until it jus' vanished."

According to Mr. Leonard the Jack O'Lantern is a light that comes out of
the swamps at night and after getting in front of a person it will lead
him on and on. The old folks also used to think that the vapor seen
rising out of the swamps at night were ghosts. One night he and his
grandfather were walking down the railroad tracks when suddenly his
grandfather said: "Stand back dere George don't you see dat man walkin'
'long dere wid no head?" He says, however, that he himself failed to see
any such thing.

According to both Mrs. Brown and Mrs. [Rush?] people who are born with
cauls (a kind of a veil) over their eyes are able to see ghosts.


CUSTOMS CONCERNING COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE

Mr. Leonard says that a young man wishing to accompany a young woman to
her home always spoke in the following manner: "Dear kind Miss, if you
have no objection of my being your protection, I'm going in your
direction." It was in this manner that he asked her to allow him to
escort her home.

For several years after freedom was declared it was the custom for the
bride and the groom to jump over the broom together before they were
pronounced man and wife.


HUNTING LORE

The best time to hunt 'possums is on a cloudy night just before the
break of day. All of the big ones are out then Mr. Favors claims.


COMPILATION FOLKLORE INTERVIEWS--RICHMOND COUNTY

CONJURATION

Written by:
Louise Oliphant
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia

Edited by:
John N. Booth,
District Supervisor,
Residencies 6 & 7,
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia


CONJURATION

Richmond County's older colored citizens, particularly the few surviving
ex-slaves, are outspoken in their firm belief concerning powers of
conjurers and root workers.

"When it comes to conjuration, don't nobody know more 'bout that, and
there ain't nobody had as much of it done to 'em as I have," said a
wizened old woman. "I know nobody could stand what I have stood. The
first I knowed 'bout conjuration was when a woman named Lucinda hurt my
sister. She was always a 'big me,' and her chillun was better than
anybody elses. Well her oldest child got pregnant and that worried
Lucinda nearly to death. She thought everybody she seed was talkin'
'bout her child. One day she passed my sister and another 'oman standin'
on the street laughin' and talkin'. Lucinda was so worried 'bout her
daughter she thought they was laughin' at her. She got so mad she cussed
'em out right there and told 'em their 'turn was in the mill.' My sister
called the other 'oman in the house and shut the door to keep from
listenin' at her. That made it wuss.

"'Bout three weeks later my sister started complainin'. Us had two or
three doctors with her, but none of 'em done her any good. The more
doctors us got the wuss she got. Finally all of the doctors give her up
and told us there warn't nothin' they could do. After she had been sick
'bout two months she told us 'bout a strange man comin' to her house a
few days 'fore she took sick. She said he had been there three or four
times. She 'membered it when he come back after she took sick and
offered to do somethin' for her. The doctors hadn't done her no good and
she was just 'bout to let him doctor on her when this 'oman that was
with her the day Lucinda cussed 'em out told her he was Lucinda's great
uncle. She said that everybody called him the greatest root worker in
South Carolina. Then my sister thought 'bout how this man had come to
her house and asked for water every time. He wouldn't ever let her get
the water for him, he always went to the pump and got it hisself. After
he had pumped it off real cool he would always offer to get a bucket
full for her. She didn't think nothin' 'bout it and she would let him
fill her bucket. That's how he got her.

"She stayed sick a long time and Mamie stayed by her bed 'til she died.
I noticed Mamie wipin' her mouth every few minutes, so one day I asked
her what did she keep wipin' from my sister's mouth. She told me it
wasn't nothin' but spit. But I had got very anxious to know so I stood
by her head myself. Finally I seed what it was. Small spiders came
crawlin' out of her mouth and nose. Mamie thought it would skeer me,
that's why she didn't want me to know.

"That happened on Tuesday and that Friday when she died a small snake
come out of her forehead and stood straight up and stuck his tongue out
at us. A old man who was sittin' there with us caught the snake, put him
in a bottle, and kept him 'bout two weeks before he died.

"Don't think Lucinda didn't have pore Mamie conjured too. Mamie took
sick just one month after my sister died. After she found out the
doctors couldn't do her no good, she got a real good root worker to
doctor on her. He got her up and she stayed up for nearly a year before
Lucinda doubled the dose. That time pore Mamie couldn't git up. She
suffered and suffered before she died. But Lucinda got her pay for all
of it. When Mamie died Lucinda come to see her and said 'some folks was
better off dead anyhow'. Mamie's daughter started to jump on her but
some of the old folks wouldn't let her.

"Lucinda went a long time, but when she fell she sho' fell hard. She
almost went crazy. She stayed sick as long as my sister and Mamie put
together. She got so bad off 'til nobody couldn't even go in her house.
Everybody said she was reapin' what she sowed. She wouldn't even let her
own chillun come in the house. After she got so sick she couldn't get
off the bed she would cuss 'em and yell to the top of her voice 'til
they left. Nobody didn't feel sorry for her 'cause they knowed she had
done too much devilment.

"Just 'fore she died, Lucinda was so sick and everybody was talkin'
'bout it was such a shame for her to have to stay there by herself that
her youngest daughter and her husband went to live with her. Her
daughter was 'fraid to go by herself. When she died you could stand in
the street and hear her cussin' and yellin'. She kept sayin' 'take 'em
off of me, I ain't done nothin' to 'em. Tell 'em I didn't hurt 'em,
don't let 'em kill me.' And all of a sudden she would start cussin' God
and anybody she could think of. When she died it took four men to hold
her down in the bed."

"I've been sick so much 'til I can look at other folks when they're sick
and tell if its natural sickness or not. Once I seed my face always
looked like dirty dish water grease was on it every mornin' 'fore I
washed it. Then after I washed it in the places where the grease was
would be places that looked like fish scales. Then these places would
turn into sores. I went to three doctors and every one of 'em said it
was poison grease on my face. I knowed I hadn't put no kind of grease on
it, so I couldn't see where it was comin' from. Every time I told my
husband 'bout it he got mad, but I never paid too much 'tention to that.
Then one day I was tellin' a friend of mine 'bout it, and she told me my
husband must be doin' it. I wondered why he would do such a thing and
she said he was just 'bout jealous of me.

"The last doctor I went to give me somethin' to put on my face and it
really cleared the sores up. But I noticed my husband when my face got
clear and he really looked mad. He started grumblin' 'bout every little
thing, right or wrong. Then one day he brought me a black hen for
dinner. My mind told me not to eat the chicken so I told him I wanted to
keep the hen and he got mad 'bout that. 'Bout two or three days later I
noticed a big knot on the side of the chicken's head and it bursted
inside of that same week. The chicken started drooping 'round and in a
week's time that chicken was dead. You see that chicken was poison.

"After that my husband got so fussy I had to start sleepin' in another
room. I was still sick, so one day he brought me some medicine he said
he got from Dr. Traylor. I tried to take a dose 'cause I knowed if it
was from Dr. Traylor it was all right, but that medicine burnt me just
like lye. I didn't even try to take no more of it. I got some medicine
from the doctor myself and put it in the bottom of the sideboard. I took
'bout three doses out of it and it was doing me good, but when I started
to take the fourth dose it had lye in it and I had to throw it away. I
went and had the doctor to give me another bottle and I called myself
hidin' it, but after I took 'bout six doses, lye was put in it. Then one
day a friend of mine, who come from my husband's home, told me he was a
root worker and she thought I already knowed it. Well I knowed then how
he could find my medicine everytime I hid it. You see he didn't have to
do nothin' but run his cards. From then on I carried my medicine 'round
in my apron pocket.

"I started sleepin' in the kitchen on a cot 'cause his mother was usin'
the other room and I didn't want to sleep with her. Late at night he
would come to the window and blow somethin' in there to make me feel
real bad. Things can be blowed through the key hole too. I know 'cause I
have had it done to me. This kept up for 'bout a year and five or six
months. Then 'cause he seed he couldn't do just what he wanted to, he
told me to get out. I went 'cause I thought that might help me to git
out of my misery. But it didn't 'cause he come where I was every night.
He never did try to come in, but us would hear somebody stumblin' in the
yard and whenever us looked out to see who it was us always found it was
him. Us told him that us seed him out there, but he always denied it. He
does it right now or sometimes he gets other root workers to do it for
him. Whenever I go out in the yard my feet always feel like they are
twistin' over and I can't stop 'em; my legs and knees feel like
somethin' is drawin' 'em, and my head starts swimmin'. I know what's
wrong, it just what he had put down for me.

"When I get up in the mornin' I always have to put sulphur and salt and
pepper in my shoes to keep down the devilment he puts out for me. A man
who can do that kind of work give me somethin' to help me, but I was
s'posed to go back in six months and I ain't been back. That's why it's
started worryin' me again.

"My sister was conjured by openin' the door and eatin' afterwards
without washin' her hands," an 80-year old ex-slave remarked. "She had
just come home and opened her front door and went in the house to eat
before goin' to church. She et her supper and started to church with
another of my sisters. After she had gone 'bout two or three blocks she
started feelin' sick and walkin' as if she was drunk. My sister tried to
make her go back home but she wouldn't. When they got to church she
couldn't hardly get up the steps and they warn't in church over fifteen
minutes 'fore she had a stroke. Somebody took a car and carried her
home. She couldn't even speak for more than a week. The doctor come and
'xamined her, but he said he didn't see nothin' that would cause her to
have a stroke. He treated her for 'bout two weeks but she didn't get no
better. A friend told us to try a root worker. She said she knowed one
that was good on such things. Us was afraid at first, but after the
three doctors us had tried didn't seem to do her no good, us decided to
get the root worker.

"The root worker come that Wednesday mornin' and looked at her, but he
never touched her. He told us she had been hurt, but he could have her
on her feet in 'bout a week or ten days. He didn't give her no medicine,
and he never come back 'til after she was up and walkin' 'round. She got
up in 'bout seven days, and started talkin' earlier than that. The root
worker told her she had got conjured by puttin' her hands on somethin'
and eatin' without washin' 'em.

"She got along fine for 'bout three years, 'til one day she got home
from work and found her house open. She thought her son had gone out and
forgot to lock the door. When he come home he told her he had not been
back since he left that mornin'. She knowed she didn't forget to lock
it, so she guessed somebody had jus 'bout gone in through the window and
come out the door. But it was too late then 'cause she had et what was
left in the house and had drunk some water.

"That night she had her second stroke. Us sent for the same man who had
got her up before, but he said he doubted gettin' her up this time
'cause the person had made a good job of it by puttin' somethin' in her
water and t'eat. He treated her, and she got strong enough to sit up in
the house, but she soon had the third stroke and then he give her up.
She died 'bout two months later.

"I know you don't know how folks can really conjure you. I didn't at one
time, but I sho' learnt. Everytime somebody gets sick it ain't natchel
sickness. I have seed folks die with what the doctors called
consumption, and yet they didn't have it. I have seed people die with
heart trouble, and they didn't have it. Folks is havin' more strokes now
than ever but they ain't natchel. I have seed folks fixed so they would
bellow like a cow when they die, and I have seed 'em fixed so you have
to tie them down in bed to die. I've got so I hardly trust anybody."

Estella Jones thinks conjurers and root workers are much more skillful
now than formerly. "Folks don't kill you like they used to kill you.
They used to put most anythin' in you, but now they got so wise or
afraid that somebody will know zactly what killed you, 'til they do it
slick as a eel.

"Once a man named John tried to go with a girl but her step-pa, Willie,
run him away from the house just like he mought be a dog, so John made
it up in his mind to conjure Willie. He went to the spring and planted
somethin' in the mouth of it, and when Willie went there the next day to
get a drink he got the stuff in the water. A little while after he drunk
the water he started gettin' sick. He tried to stay up but every day he
got wuss and wuss 'til he got flat down in bed.

"In a few days somethin' started growin' in his throat. Every time they
tried to give him soup or anythin' to eat, somethin' would come crawlin'
up in his throat and choke him. That was what he had drunk in the
spring, and he couldn't eat nothin' or drink nothin'. Finally he got so
bad off he claimed somethin' was chokin' him to death, and so his wife
sont off and got a fortune teller. This fortune teller said it was a
turtle in his throat. He 'scribed the man that had conjured Willie but
everybody knowed John had done it 'fore the fortune teller told us. It
warn't long after that 'fore Willie was dead. That turtle come up in his
throat and choked him to death.

"Some folk don't believe me, but I ain't tellin' no tale 'bout it. I
have asked root workers to tell me how they does these things, and one
told me that it was easy for folks to put snakes, frogs, turtles,
spiders, or most anythin' that you couldn't live with crawlin' and
eatin' on the inside of you. He said these things was killed and put up
to dry and then beat up into dust like. If any of this dust is put in
somethin' you have to eat or drink, these things will come alive like
they was eggs hatchin' in you. Then the more they grow, the worse off
you get.

"My aun't son had took a girl away from another man who was going with
her too. As soon as this man heard they was going to marry, he started
studyin' some way to stop it. So he went to a root worker and got
somethin' and then went to this girl's house one night when he knew my
cousin was there. Finally when he got ready to leave, he was smart
enough to get my cousin to take a drink with him.

"That next mornin' the boy was feelin' a little bad, but he never paid
too much 'tention to it. Next day he felt a little wuss, and everyday
from then on he felt wuss and wuss 'til he got too sick to stay up. One
day a old lady who lived next door told us to try a root worker who
lived on Jones Street. This man came and told us what was wrong, but
said us had waited too long to send for him. He give us some thin' to
'lieve the boy of his misery. Us kept givin' this to him 'til he finally
got up. Course he warn't well by no means and this medicine didn't help
his stomach. His stomach got so big everybody would ask what was wrong.
He told everybody that asked him and some who didn't ask him 'bout the
frogs in his stomach. The bigger these frogs got, the weaker he got.

"After he had been sick 'bout four months and the frogs had got to be a
pretty good size, you could hear 'em holler everytime he opened his
mouth. He got to the place where he wouldn't talk much on account of
this. His stomach stuck out so far, he looked like he weighed 250
pounds.

"After these frogs started hollerin' in him, he lived 'bout three weeks,
and 'fore he died you could see the frogs jumpin' 'bout in him and you
could even feel 'em.

"T'ain't no need talkin'; folks can do anythin' to you they wants to.
They can run you crazy or they can kill you. Don't you one time believe
that every pore pusson they has in the 'sylum is just natchelly crazy.
Some was run crazy on account of people not likin' 'em, some 'cause they
was gettin' 'long a little too good. Every time a pusson jumps in the
river don't think he was just tryin' to kill hisself; most times he just
didn't know what he was doin'.

"My daughter was fixed right here under our noses. She was married and
had five little chillun and she was the picture of health. But she had a
friend that she trusted too much and this friend was single and in love
with my daughter's husband. Diff'unt people told Liza 'bout this girl,
but she just didn't believe 'em. Every day this girl was at Liza's house
'til time for Lewis to git off from work. She helped Liza wash, clean
up, iron and cook, but she always left at the time for Lewis to git off
from work.

"This went on for more'n a year, but I kept tellin' Liza to ween off
from this girl 'cause I seed she didn't mean her no good. But Liza was
grown and nobody couldn't tell her nothin'. I think she had Liza fixed
so she would be crazy 'bout her. People can make you love 'em, even
marry 'em when if you was in your right mind you wouldn't give 'em a
thought. Anyhow Liza went on with the girl 'til one afternoon while she
was comin' from the store she seed Lewis and Edna goin' in a house
together. He come home 'bout three hours later, and when Liza asked him
why he was so late he told her they had to work late. He didn't know she
had seed him and she never told him.

"After this she started watchin' him and Edna, and she soon found out
what folks had been tellin' her was true. Still she never told Lewis
nothin' 'bout it. She told Edna 'bout seein' 'em and asked her to please
let Lewis alone. Edna made up some kind of s'cuse but she never let him
alone, and she kept goin' to Liza's house. When things finally went too
far, Liza spoke to Lewis 'bout it and asked him to leave Edna alone. He
did, but that made Edna mad and that's when she 'cided to kill Liza.
Lewis really loved Liza and would do anythin' she asked him to.

"One day Edna come to see Liza, after she had stayed away for 'bout
three weeks, and she was more lovin' than ever. She hung around 'til she
got a chance to put somethin' in the water bucket, then she left. People
can put somethin' in things for you and everybody else can eat or drink
it, but it won't hurt nobody but the one it's put there for. When Liza
drunk water, she said it tasted like it had salt-peter in it. When she
went to bed that night, she never got out 'til she was toted out. She
suffered and suffered and we never knowed what was wrong 'til Edna told
it herself. She took very sick and 'fore she died she told one of her
friends 'bout it and this friend told us, but it was too late then, Liza
was dead."


COMPILATION RICHMOND COUNTY--EX-SLAVE INTERVIEWS

FOLK REMEDIES AND SUPERSTITION

Written by:
Louise Oliphant
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia

Edited by:
John N. Booth
District Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia


Belief in charms and conjurs is still prevalent among many of Augusta's
older Negroes. Signs and omens also play an important part in their
lives, as do remedies and cures handed down by word of mouth from
generation to generation.

  If a wrestler can get dirt from the head of a fresh grave, sew it up
  in a sack, and tie it around his waist, no one can throw him.

  To make a person leave town, get some dirt out of one of his tracks,
  sew it up in a sack, and throw it in running water. The person will
  keep going as long as the water runs.

  To take a hair out of a person's head and put it in a live fishes
  mouth will make the person keep traveling as long as the fish
  swims.

  If someone dies and comes back to worry you, nail some new lumber into
  your house and you won't be bothered any more.

  When the hands of a dead person remain limp, some other member of the
  family will soon follow him in death.

  When a spider builds a web in your house, you may expect a visitor the
  same color as the spider.

  A singing fire is a sign of snow.

  If a cat takes up at your house it's a sign of good luck; a dog--bad
  luck.

  If a spark of fire pops on you, it is a sign that you will receive
  some money or a letter.

  To dream of muddy water, maggots, or fresh meat is a sign of death.
  To dream of caskets is also a sign of death. You may expect to hear
  of as many deaths as there are caskets in the dream.

  To dream of blood is a sign of trouble.

  To dream of fish is a sign of motherhood.

  To dream of eggs is a sign of trouble unless the eggs are broken. If
  the eggs are broken, your trouble is ended.

  To dream of snakes is a sign of enemies. If you kill the snakes, you
  have conquered your enemies.

  To dream of fire is a sign of danger.

  To dream of a funeral is a sign of a wedding.

  To dream of a wedding is a sign of a funeral.

  To dream of silver money is a sign of bad luck; bills--good luck.

  To dream of dead folk is a sign of rain.

  Wear a raw cotton string tied in nine knots around your waist to cure
  cramps.

  To stop nosebleed or hiccoughs cross two straws on top of your head.

  Lick the back of your hand and swallow nine times without stopping to
  cure hiccoughs.

  Tea made from rue is good for stomach worms.

  Corn shuck tea is good for measles; fodder tea for asthma.

  Goldenrod tea is good for chills and fever.

  Richet weed tea is good for a laxative.

  Tea made from parched egg shells or green coffee is good for
  leucorrhoea.

  Black snuff, alum, a piece of camphor, and red vaseline mixed together
  is a sure cure for piles.

  To rid yourself of a corn, grease it with a mixture of castor oil and
  kerosine and then soak the foot in warm water.

  Sulphur mixed with lard is good for bad blood.

  A cloth heated in melted tallow will give relief when applied to a
  pain in any part of the body.

  Take a pinch of sulphur in the mouth and drink water behind it to
  cleanse the blood.

  Dog fern is good for colds and fever; boneset tea will serve the same
  purpose.

  Catnip tea is good for measles or hives.

  If your right shoe comes unlaced, someone is saying good things about
  you; left shoe--bad things.

  If a chunk of fire falls from the fireplace a visitor is coming. If
  the chunk is short and large the person will be short and fat, etc.

  Don't buy new things for a sick person; if you do he will not live to
  wear it out.

  If a person who has money dies without telling where it is, a friend
  or relative can find it by going to his grave three nights in
  succession and throwing stones on it. On the fourth night he must go
  alone, and the person will tell him where the money is hidden.

  If a witch rides you, put a sifter under the bed and he will have to
  count the holes in the sifter before he goes out, thus giving you time
  to catch him.

  Starch your sweetheart's handkerchief and he will love you more.

  Don't give your sweetheart a knife. It will cut your love in two.

  If it rains while the sun is shining the devil is beating his wife.

  To bite your tongue while talking is a sign that you have told a lie.

  Persons with gaps between their front teeth are big liars.

  Cut your finger nails on Monday, you cut them for news;
  Cut them on Tuesday, get a new pair of shoes;
  Cut them on Wednesday, you cut them for wealth;
  Cut them on Thursday, you cut them for health;
  Cut them on Friday, you cut them for sorrow;
  Cut them on Saturday, see your sweetheart tomorrow;
  Cut them on Sunday, its safety to seek;
  But the devil will have you the rest of the week.

  If you start some place and forget something don't turn around without
  making a cross mark and spitting in it, if you do you will have bad
  luck.

  To stump your right foot is good luck, but to stump your left foot is
  bad luck. To prevent the bad luck you must turn around three times.

  It is bad luck for a black cat to cross you to the left, but good luck
  if he crosses you to the right.

  If a picture of a person falls off the wall it is a sign of death.

  To dream of crying is a sign of trouble.

  To dream of dancing is a sign of happiness.

  If you meet a gray horse pulling a load of hay, a red haired person
  will soon follow.

  If you are eating and drop something when you are about to put it in
  your mouth someone wishes it.

  If a child never sees his father he will make a good doctor.

  To dream that your teeth fall out is a sign of death in the family.

  To dream of a woman's death is a sign of some man's death.

  To dream of a man's death is the sign of some woman's death.

  If a chicken sings early in the morning a hawk will catch him before
  night.

  Always plant corn on the waste of the moon in order for it to yield
  a good crop. If planted on the growing of the moon there will be more
  stalk than corn.

  When there is a new moon, hold up anything you want and make a wish
  for it and you will get it.

  If you hear a voice call you and you are not sure it is really
  someone, don't answer because it may be your spirit, and if you answer
  it will be a sure sign of death.

  Cross eyed women are bad luck to other women, but cross eyed men are
  good luck to women and vice-versa for men.

  To wear a dime around your ankle will ward off witch craft.

  To put a silver dime in your mouth will determine whether or not you
  have been bewitched. If the dime turns black, someone has bewitched
  you, but if it keeps its color, no one has bewitched you.

  To take a strand of a person's hair and nail it in a tree will run
  that person crazy.

  If a rooster crows on your back steps you may look for a stranger.

  Chinaberries are good for wormy children.

  The top of a pine tree and the top of a cedar tree placed over a
  large coal of fire, just enough to make a good smoke, will cure
  chillblain feet.


COMPILATION RICHMOND COUNTY EX-SLAVE INTERVIEWS

MISTREATMENT OF SLAVES

Written by:
Louise Oliphant,
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia

Edited by:
John N. Booth,
District Supervisor,
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia


There are many ex-slaves living in Richmond County and Augusta who have
vivid recollections of the days when their lives were inseparably bound
to those of their masters. These people have a past rich in tradition
and sentiment, and their memories of customs, habits of work and play,
and the superstitious beliefs, which still govern their actions to a
large extent weave a colorful pattern in local history.

Mistreatment at the hands of their masters and the watchdog overseers is
outstanding in the memory of most of them. "When I was in slavery, us
had what you call good white folk. They warn't rich by no means, but
they was good. Us had rather have 'em poor and good than rich and mean.
Plenty of white folk mistreated they slaves, but ours never mistreated
us. They was a man lived in callin' distance, on the next plantation,
who worked his slaves day and night and on Sunday for a rarety. You
could hear 'em coming from the field about 12 o'clock at night, and they
had to be back in the fields by daylight. They couldn't get off on
Saturday nights like everbody else. Whenever he bought their clothes, it
was on Sunday when they warn't workin'. He was mean, but he was good
about buyin' for 'em, new shoes or a suit or anything of the like they
said they needed.

"Marster had overseers, but he wouldn't let 'em whip his slaves
unmerciful. They always whipped us just as your mamas whips you now.

"Bob Lampkin was the meanest slave owner I ever knowed. He would beat
his slaves and everybody else's he caught in the road. He was so mean
'til God let him freeze to death. He come to town and got drunk and when
he was going back home in his buggy, he froze stiff going up Race Creek
Hill. White and colored was glad when he died.

"His slaves used to run away whenever they got a chance. I 'member he
had a real pretty gal on his place. She was light brown and was built up
better than anybody I ever saw. One of the overseers was crazy about
her, but her mother had told her not to let any of 'em go with her. So
this old overseer would stick close 'round her when they was workin',
just so he could get a chance to say somethin' to her. He kept followin'
this child and followin' this child until she almost went crazy. Way
afterwhile she run away and come to our house and stayed 'bout three
days. When my marster found out she was there, he told her she would
have to go back, or at least she would have to leave his place. He
didn't want no trouble with nobody. When that child left us she stayed
in the woods until she got so hungry she just had to go back. This old
man was mad with her for leavin', and one day while she was in the field
he started at her again and when she told him flat footed she warn't
goin' with him he took the big end of his cow hide and struck her in the
back so hard it knocked her plumb crazy. It was a big lake of water
about ten yards in front of 'em, and if her mother hadn't run and caught
her she would have walked right in it and drowned.

"In them times white men went with colored gals and women bold. Any time
they saw one and wanted her, she had to go with him, and his wife didn't
say nothin' 'bout it. Not only the men, but the women went with colored
men too. That's why so many women slave owners wouldn't marry, 'cause
they was goin' with one of their slaves. These things that's goin' on
now ain't new, they been happenin'. That's why I say you just as well
leave 'em alone 'cause they gwine to do what they want to anyhow.

"My marster never did whip any grown folk. He whipped chillun when they
did anything wrong. He didn't 'low us to eat plums before breakfus, but
all the chillun, his too, would die or do it, so every time he caught us
he would whip us."

Another ex-slave recalled that "you had to call all your marster's
chillun marster or mistis, even the babies. You never wore enough
clothes and you always suffered for comfort. Us warn't even 'lowed to
have fire. If you had a fireplace in your house, it was took out and the
place closed up. If you was ever caught with fire you was beat 'most to
death. Many mothers died in confinement on account of takin' cold 'cause
us couldn't have fire.

"My young marster tried to go with me, and 'cause I wouldn't go with him
he pretended I had done somethin' and beat me. I fought him back because
he had no right to beat me for not goin' with him. His mother got mad
with me for fightin' him back and I told her why he had beat me. Well
then she sent me to the courthouse to be whipped for fightin' him. They
had stocks there where most people would send their slaves to be
whipped. These stocks was in the shape of a cross, and they would strap
your clothes up around your waist and have nothin' but your naked part
out to whip. They didn't care about who saw your nakedness. Anyway they
beat me that day until I couldn't sit down. When I went to bed I had to
lie on my stomach to sleep. After they finished whippin' me, I told them
they needn't think they had done somethin' by strippin' me in front of
all them folk 'cause they had also stripped their mamas and sisters. God
had made us all, and he made us just alike.

"They never carried me back home after that; they put me in the Nigger
Trader's Office to be sold. About two days later I was sold to a man at
McBean. When I went to his place everbody told me as soon as I got there
how mean he was and they said his wife was still meaner. She was jealous
of me because I was light; said she didn't know what her husband wanted
to bring that half white nigger there for, and if he didn't get rid of
me pretty quick she was goin' to leave. Well he didn't get rid of me and
she left about a month after I got there. When he saw she warn't comin'
back 'til he got rid of me, he brought me back to the Nigger Trader's
Office.

"As long as you warn't sold, your marster was 'sponsible for you, so
whenever they put you on the market you had to praise yourself in order
to be sold right away. If you didn't praise yourself you got a beatin'.
I didn't stay in the market long. A dissipated woman bought me and I
done laundry work for her and other dissipated women to pay my board
'til freedom come. They was all very nice to me.

"Whenever you was sold your folk never knowed about it 'til afterwards,
and sometimes they never saw you again. They didn't even know who you
was sold to or where they was carryin' you, unless you could write back
and tell 'em.

"The market was in the middle of Broad and Center Streets. They made a
scaffold whenever they was goin' to sell anybody, and would put the
person up on this so everybody could see him good. Then they would sell
him to the highest bidder. Everybody wanted women who would have
children fast. They would always ask you if you was a good breeder, and
if so they would buy you at your word, but if you had already had too
many chillun, they would say you warn't much good. If you hadn't ever
had any chillun, your marster would tell 'em you was strong, healthy,
and a fast worker. You had to have somethin' about you to be sold. Now
sometimes, if you was a real pretty young gal, somebody would buy you
without knowin' anythin' 'bout you, just for yourself. Before my old
marster died, he had a pretty gal he was goin' with and he wouldn't let
her work nowhere but in the house, and his wife nor nobody else didn't
say nothin' 'bout it; they knowed better. She had three chillun for him
and when he died his brother come and got the gal and the chillun.

"One white lady that lived near us at McBean slipped in a colored gal's
room and cut her baby's head clean off 'cause it belonged to her
husband. He beat her 'bout it and started to kill her, but she begged so
I reckon he got to feelin' sorry for her. But he kept goin' with the
colored gal and they had more chillun.

"I never will forget how my marster beat a pore old woman so she
couldn't even get up. And 'cause she couldn't get up when he told her
to, he hit her on the head with a long piece of iron and broke her
skull. Then he made one of the other slaves take her to the jail. She
suffered in jail all night, and the jailer heard her moanin' and
groanin', so the next mornin' he made marster come and get her. He was
so mad 'cause he had to take her out of jail that he had water pumped
into her skull just as soon as he got back home. Then he dropped her
down in a field and she died 'fore night. That was a sad time. You saw
your own folk killed and couldn't say a word 'bout it; if you did you
would be beat and sometimes killed too.

"A man in callin' distance from our place had a whippin' pole. This man
was just as mean as he could be. I know he is in hell now, and he ought
to be. A woman on his place had twins and she warn't strong from the
beginnin'. The day after the chillun was borned, he told her to go over
to his house and scrub it from front to back. She went over to the house
and scrubbed two rooms and was so sick she had to lay down on the floor
and rest awhile. His wife told her to go on back to her house and get in
bed but she was afraid. Finally she got up and scrubbed another room and
while she was carryin' the water out she fainted. The mistress had some
of the men carry her home and got another slave to finish the scrubbin'
so the marster wouldn't beat the pore nigger. She was a good woman but
her husband was mean as the devil. He would even beat her. When he got
home that night he didn't say nothin' 'cause the house had been
scrubbed, but the next mornin' one of the chillun told him about the
woman faintin' and the other girl finishin' the scrubbin'. He got mad
and said his wife was cloakin' for the slaves, that there was nothin'
wrong with the woman, she was just lazy. He beat his wife, then went out
and tied the pore colored woman to a whippin' pole and beat her
unmerciful. He left her hangin' on the pole and went to church. When he
got back she was dead. He had the slaves take her down and bury her in a
box. He said that laziness had killed her and that she warn't worth the
box she was buried in. The babies died the next day and he said he was
glad of it 'cause they would grow up lazy just like their mother.

"My marster had a barrel with nails drove in it that he would put you in
when he couldn't think of nothin' else mean enough to do. He would put
you in this barrel and roll it down a hill. When you got out you would
be in a bad fix, but he didn't care. Sometimes he rolled the barrel in
the river and drowned his slaves.

"I had a brother who worked at the acadamy and every night when the
teacher had his class he would let my brother come in. He taught him to
read and write too. He learned to read and write real well and the
teacher said he was the smartest one in the class. Marster passed our
window one night and heard him readin'. The next mornin' he called him
over to the house and fooled him into readin' and writin', told him he
had somethin' he wanted him to do if he could read and write good
enough. My brother read everythin' marster give him and wrote with a
pencil and ink pen. Marster was so mad that he could read and write
better than his own boy that he beat him, took him away from the
academy, and put him to work in the blacksmith shop. Marster wouldn't
let him wear no shoes in the shop 'cause he wanted the hot cinders to
fall on his feet to punish him. When the man in charge of the shop told
marster he wouldn't work my brother unless he had on shoes, he bought
some brogans that he knowed he couldn't wear, and from then on he made
him do the hardest kind of work he could think of.

"My marster never whipped us himself. He had a coachman do all the
whippin' and he stood by to see that it was done right. He whipped us
until we was blistered and then took a cat-o-nine-tails and busted the
blisters. After that he would throw salty water on the raw places. I
mean it almost gave you spasms. Whenever they sent you to the courthouse
to be whipped the jail keeper's daughter give you a kick after they put
you in the stocks. She kicked me once and when they took me out I sho
did beat her. I scratched her everwhere I could and I knowed they would
beat me again, but I didn't care so long as I had fixed her."

One ex-slave "belonged to an old lady who was a widow. This lady was
very good to me. Of course most people said it was 'cause her son was my
father. But she was just good to all of us. She did keep me in the house
with her. She knowed I was her son's child all right. When I married, I
still stayed with my mistress 'til she died. My husband stayed with his
marster in the day time and would come and stay with me at night.

"When my mistress died I had to be sold. My husband told me to ask his
marster to buy me. He didn't want me to belong to him because I would
have to work real hard and I hadn't been use to no hard work, but he was
so afraid somebody would buy me and carry me somewhere way off, 'til he
decided it was best for his marster to buy me. So his marster bought me
and give me and my husband to his son. I kept house and washed for his
son as long as he was single. When he married his wife changed me from
the house and put me in the field and she put one of the slaves her
mother give her when she married, in the kitchen. My marster's wife was
very mean to all of us. She didn't like me at all. She sold my oldest
child to somebody where I couldn't ever see him any more and kept me.
She just did that to hurt me. She took my baby child and put her in the
house with her to nurse her baby and make fire. And all while she was in
the house with her she had to sleep on the floor.

"Whenever she got mad with us she would take the cow hide, that's what
she whipped us with, and whip us 'til the blood ran down. Her house
was high off the ground and one night the calf went under the house
and made water. The next morning she saw it, so she took two of my
sister-in-law's chillun and carried 'em in the kitchen and tied 'em. She
did this while her husband was gone. You see if he had been there he
wouldn't have let her done that. She took herself a chair and sit down
and made one of the slaves she brought there with her whip those chillun
so 'til all of the slaves on the place was cryin'. One of the slaves run
all the way where our marster was and got him. He come back as quick as
he could and tried to make her open the door, but she wouldn't do it so
he had to break the door in to make her stop whippin' them chillun. The
chillun couldn't even cry when he got there. And when he asked her what
she was whippin' them for she told him that they had went under the
house and made that water. My master had two of the men to take 'em over
to our house, but they was small and neither one ever got over that
whippin'. One died two days later and the other one died about a month
afterwards. Everybody hated her after that.

"Just before freedom declared, my husband took very sick and she took
her husband and come to my house to make him get up. I told her that he
was not able to work, but my husband was so scared they would beat me to
death 'til he begged me to hush. I expect marster would have if he
hadn't been scared of his father. You see his father give me to him. He
told me if the legislature set in his behalf he would make me know a
nigger's place. You know it was near freedom. I told him if he made my
husband get out of bed as sick as he was and go to work, I would tell
his father if he killed me afterwards. And that's one time I was goin'
to fight with 'em. I never was scared of none of 'em, so I told 'em if
they touched my husband they wouldn't touch nothin' else. They wouldn't
give us nothin' to eat that whole day.

"Course we never did have much to eat. At night they would give us a
teacup of meal and a slice of bacon a piece for breakfus' the next
mornin'. If you had chillun they would give you a teacup of meal for two
chillun. By day light the next mornin' the overseer was at your house to
see if you was out, and if you hadn't cooked and eat and got out of that
house he would take that bull whip, and whip you nearly to death. He
carried that bull whip with him everywhere he went.

"Those folks killed one of my husband's brothers. He was kind of
crack-brained, and 'cause he was half crazy, they beat him all the time.
The last time they beat him we was in the field and this overseer beat
him with that bull hide all across the head and everywhere. He beat him
until he fell down on his knees and couldn't even say a word. And do you
know he wouldn't even let a one of us go to see about him. He stayed
stretched out in the the field 'til us went home. The next mornin' he
was found dead right where he had beat him that evenin'.

"'Bout two or three weeks later than that they told one of the slaves
they was goin' to beat him after we quit work that evenin'. His name was
Josh.

"When the overseer went to the other end of the field Josh dropped his
hoe and walked off. Nobody saw him anymore for about three weeks. He was
the best hand us had and us sho' did need him. Our master went
everywhere he could think of, lookin' for Josh, but he couldn't find him
and we was glad of it. After he looked and looked and couldn't find him
he told all of us to tell Josh to come back if we knowed where he was.
He said if Josh would come back he wouldn't whip him, wouldn't let the
overseer whip him. My husband knowed where he was but he warn't goin' to
tell nobody. Josh would come to our house every night and us would give
him some of what us had for dinner and supper. Us always saved it for
him. Us would eat breakfus' at our house, but all of us et dinner and
supper at the mess house together. Everyday when I et dinner and supper
I would take a part of mine and my husband would take a part of his and
us would carry it to our house for pore Josh. 'Bout 'leven o'clock at
night, when everybody was sleep, Josh would come to the side window and
get what us had for him. It's really a shame the way that pore man had
to hide about just to keep from bein' beat to death 'bout nothin'. Josh
said the first day he left he went in the woods and looked and looked
for a place to hide. Later he saw a tree that the wind had blowed the
top off and left 'bout ten feet standin'. This was rather a big tree and
all of the insides had rotted out. I reckon you have seen trees like
that. Well that's the way this one was. So Josh climbed up this tree and
got down inside of it. He didn't know there was nothin' down in that
tree, but there was some little baby bears in there. Then there he was
down there with no way to come out, and knowin' all the time that the
mama bear was comin' back. So he thought and thought and thought. After
while he thought 'bout a knife he had in his pocket. You see he couldn't
climb out of the tree, it was too tall. When he heard the bear climbin'
up the tree he opened his knife. Have you ever seen a bear comin' down a
tree? Well he comes down backwards. So when this bear started down
inside of the tree he went down backwards, and Josh had his knife open
and just caught him by the tail and begin stickin' him with the knife.
That's the way Josh got out of that tree. When he stuck the bear with
the knife the bear went back up the tree, and that pulled Josh up. And
when the bear got to the top of the tree Josh caught a hold of the tree
and pulled himself on out, but the bear fell and broke his neck. Well
Josh had to find him somewhere else to hide. In them times there was big
caves in the woods, not only the woods but all over the country, and
that's where pore Josh hid all while he was away. Josh stayed there in
that cave a long time then he come on back home. He didn't get a
whippin' either."

Childhood memories were recalled by an old woman who said: "When I was
about nine years old, for about six months, I slept on a crocus bag
sheet in order to get up and nurse the babies when they cried. Do you
see this finger? You wonder why its broke? Well one night the babies
cried and I didn't wake up right away to 'tend to 'em and my mistess
jumped out of bed, grabbed the piece of iron that was used to push up
the fire and began beatin' me with it. That's the night this finger got
broke, she hit me on it. I have two more fingers she broke beatin' me at
diff'unt times. She made me break this leg too. You see they would put
the women in stocks and beat 'em whenever they done somethin' wrong.
That's the way my leg was broke. You see us had to call all of our
marster's chillun 'mistess' or 'marster.' One day I forgot to call one
of my young mistesses, 'miss.' She was about eight or nine months old.
My mistess heard me and put me in a stock and beat me. While she was
beatin' me, I turned my leg by some means and broke it. Don't you think
she quit beatin' me 'cause I had broke my leg. No, that made no
diff'unce to her. That's been years ago, but it still worries me now.
Now other times when you called your marster's chillun by their names,
they would strip you and let the child beat you. It didn't matter
whether the child was large or small, and they always beat you 'til the
blood ran down.

"Have you ever slept in the grave yard? I know you haven't but I have.
Many a time when I was told that I was goin' to get a beatin', I would
hide away in the cemetery where I stayed all night layin' in gullies
between graves prayin'. All night long I could see little lights runnin'
all over the grave yard, and I could see ha'nts, and hear 'em sayin'
'Uh, Uh, Uh, Uh, Uh,' which meant they were pityin' my case.

"When they whipped the men, all their clothes was took off, their hands
was fastened together and then they wound 'em up in the air to a post
and tied their feet to the bottom of the post. They would begin whippin'
'em at sundown, and sometimes they would be whippin' 'em as late as
'leven o'clock at night. You could hear 'em cryin' and prayin' a long
ways off. When they prayed for the Lord to have mercy, their marster
would cuss the Lord and tell 'em they better not call his name again."

The whipping pole, as described by Lizzie, was a long post several feet
in diameter to which was attached a long rope through a pulley. On one
end was a device, similiar to the modern handcuff--the other end was
used to draw the hand to an upward position, thereby, rendering the
individual helpless. At the base of the pole was a clamp like instrument
which held the feet in a motionless position.

Roy Redfield recalls going to the courthouse and seeing the older slaves
whipped. "When I would go there with my young marster I would see 'em
whippin' the slaves. You see they had stocks there then, and they
wouldn't put you in jail like they do now. Your marster or mistess would
send you to the courthouse with a note and they would put you in them
stocks and beat you, then they would give you a note and send you back.
They never did beat me, if they had my old mistess would have raised
sand with 'em. Whenever I was whipped my mother did it. I warn't no
slave and my ma neither, but my pa was.

"When they whipped you they would strap you down in them stocks, then a
man would wind the whippin' machine and beat you 'til they had given you
the number of lashes your boss had on the note. I didn't see them
whippin' any women there, so I can't say they did and I can't say they
didn't.

"My master wouldn't let us go to school, but his chillun would slip
'round and teach us what they could out of their books. They would also
give us books to read. Whenever their pa or ma caught them tryin' to
teach us they always whipped them. I learned to read and write from 'em
and I'll never forget how hard it was for 'em to get a chance to teach
me. But if they caught you tryin' to write they would cut your finger
off and if they caught you again they would cut your head off.

"When I was a young man, a old man stole the head and pluck (pluck is
the liver and lites) out of the hog (some people call it the haslet) and
hid it up in the loft of his house. When his marster missed it he went
to this man's house lookin' for it. The man told him that he didn't have
it. He had already told his wife if his marster come not to own it
either. Well his master kept askin' him over and over 'bout the head and
pluck, but they denied having it. The marster told 'em if they didn't
give it to him and that quick he was goin' to give 'em a thousand lashes
each, if less didn't kill 'em. This woman's husband told her not to own
it. He told her to take three thousand lashes and don't own it. So their
marster whipped her and whipped her, but she wouldn't own it. Finally he
quit whippin' her and started whippin' the old man. Just as soon as he
started whippin' the man he told his wife to go up in the loft of the
house and throw the head and pluck down 'cause he didn't want it.

"You always had to get a pass when goin' out. Sometimes, when you
wouldn't be thinking, a patter roller would step up to the door and ask
who was there. If any visitor was there they would ask 'em to show their
pass. If you didn't have a pass they would take you out and beat you,
then make you go home and when you got home, your marster would take you
to the barn, strip you buck naked, tie you to a post and beat you. Us
didn't have to get passes whenever us wanted to go visitin'. All us had
to do was tell 'em who us belonged to, and they always let us by. They
knowed our marster would let us go 'thout passes.

"Us used to go to barn dances all the time. I never will forget the
fellow who played the fiddle for them dances. He had run away from his
marster seven years before. He lived in a cave he had dug in the ground.
He stayed in this cave all day and would come out at night. This cave
was in the swamp. He stole just 'bout everythin' he et. His marster had
been tryin' to catch him for a long time. Well they found out he was
playin' for these dances and one night us saw some strange lookin' men
come in but us didn't pay it much 'tention. Us always made a big oak
fire and thats where us got mos' of our light from. Well these men
danced with the girls a good while and after a while they started goin'
out one by one. Way after while they all came back in together, they had
washed the blackenin' off their faces, and us seen they was white. This
man had a song he would always sing. 'Fooled my marster seven
years--expect to fool him seven more.' So when these men came in they
went to him and told him maybe he had fooled 'em for seven years, but he
wouldn't fool 'em seven more. When they started to grab him he just
reached in the fire and got a piece of wood that was burnin' good on one
end and waved it all around (in a circle) until he set three of 'em on
fire. While they was puttin' this fire out he run out in the swamp and
back in his cave. They tried to catch him again. They painted their
faces and done just like they did the first time, but this time they
carried pistols. When they pulled their pistols on him he did just like
he did the first time, and they never did catch him. He stopped comin'
to play for the dances after they was straight after him. Dogs couldn't
trail him 'cause he kept his feet rubbed with onions.

"I have seen some marsters make their slaves walk in snow knee deep,
barefooted. Their heels would be cracked open jus' like corn bread.

"The only real mean thing they did to us when I was young was to sell my
father when our marster died. They sold him to somebody way off, and
they promised to bring him back to see us, but they never did. We always
wished he would come, but until this day us hasn't laid eyes on him
again. My mother worried 'bout him 'til she died.

"Chillun didn't know what shoes was 'til they was 'bout fifteen years
old. They would go a mile or a mile and a half in the snow for water
anytime, and the only thin' they ever had on their feet would be
somethin' made out of home-spun. You don't hardly hear of chilblain feet
now, but then most every child you saw had cracked heels. The first pair
of shoes I ever wore, I was sixteen years old, was too small for me and
I pulled 'em off and throwed 'em in the fire."


[HW: Dist. #2
Ex. Slave #99]

SLAVERY
by
RUBY LORRAINE RADFORD

COMPILATION MADE FROM
INTERVIEWS WITH 30 SLAVES
AND INFORMATION FROM SLAVERY
LAWS AND OLD NEWSPAPER FILES
[Date Stamp: MAY 8 1937]


SLAVERY

The ex-slaves interviewed ranged in ages from 75 to 100 years old. Out
of about thirty-five negroes contacted only two seemed to feel bitter
over memories of slave days. All the others spoke with much feeling and
gratitude of the good old days when they were so well cared for by their
masters. Without exception the manners of these old men and women were
gentle and courteous. The younger ones could pass on to us only
traditional memories of slavery times, as given them by their parents;
on some points a few were vague, while others could give clear-cut and
vivid pictures.

Practically all the Negroes interviewed seemed to be of pure African
blood, with black or dark brown skin, Negroid features, and kinky,
tightly wrapped wool. Most of the women were small and thin. We found
one who had a strain of Indian blood, a woman named Mary, who belonged
to John Roof. Her grandfather was an Indian, and her grandmother was
part Indian, having migrated into South Carolina from Virginia.

Sarah Ray, who was born on the Curtis Lowe place in McDuffie County was
one of the few ex-slaves contacted, who was admittedly half-white.
Although now wrinkled and weazened with age she has no definite Negroid
features. Her eyes are light hazel and her hair fluffs about her face in
soft ringlets instead of the tight kinks of the pure Negro.

"My father was a white man, de overseer," said Sarah. "Leastways, dey
laid me to him."

Sarah was brought up like the Negro children on the plantation. She had
no hard work to do. Her mother was a field hand, and they lived in a
little house in the quarters. "De ve'y fust thing I kin remember is
ridin' down de road in de ox cart wid my mammy," she said. "Ole man Eli
wus drivin'. We wus goin' to Miss Meg's on de odder side o' Hart's
Branch. Marster had give us to Miss Meg when she married Mr. Obediah
Cloud."


HOUSING CONDITIONS

The slave houses were called "quarters," which consisted generally of a
double row of houses facing each other in a grove of trees behind the
"big house." On prosperous plantations each of these cabins had a garden
plot and a chicken yard. Some of them were built of logs, but many were
of planks. Most of them were large, one-room, unceiled, with open
fireplaces at one end for cooking. When families grew too large a shed
room would be "drap down on de back." Another type of slave cabin was
called the "Double-pen" house. This was a large two-room cabin, with a
chimney between the two rooms, and accommodating two families. On the
more prosperous plantations the slave quarters were white-washed at
intervals.

On plantations housing arrangements were left entirely to the discretion
of the owner, but in the cities strict rules were made. Among the
ordinances of the City Council of Augusta, dated from August 10th,
1820-July 8, 1829, Section 14, is the following law concerning the
housing of slaves:

"No person of color shall occupy any house but that of some white person
by whom he or she is owned or hired without a license from the City
Council. If this license is required application must first be made for
permission to take it out. If granted the applicant shall give bond with
approved security, not exceeding the sum of $100.00 for his or her good
behavior. On execution of charge the Clerk shall issue the license. Any
person renting a house, or tenament contrary to this section or
permitting the occupancy of one, may be fined in a sum not exceeding
$50.00."

Descriptions were given of housing conditions by quite a number of
slaves interviewed. Fannie Fulcher, who was a slave on Dr. Balding
Miller's plantation in Burke County described the slave quarters thus:
"Houses wus built in rows, one on dat side, one on dis side--open space
in de middle, and de overseer's house at de end, wid a wide hall right
through it. (Fannie was evidently referring to the breezeway or dogtrot,
down the middle of many small plantation houses). We cook on de
fireplace in de house. We used to have pots hanging right up in de
chimbley. When dere wus lots of chillun it wus crowded. But sometimes
dey took some of 'em to de house for house girls. Some slep' on de flo'
and some on de bed. Two-three houses had shed rooms at de back. Dey had
a patch sometime. My father, he used to have a patch. He clean it up
hisself at night in de swamp."

Susie Brown, of the Evans Plantation on Little River in Columbia County
said, in describing the Quarters, "Dey look like dis street." She
indicated the unpaved street with its rows of unpainted shacks. "Some of
dem wus plank houses and some wus log houses, two rooms and a shed room.
And we had good beds, too--high tester beds wid good corn shuck and hay
mattresses."

On the plantation of John Roof the slave cabins were of logs. Large
families had two or three rooms; smaller ones one or two rooms.

Susannah Wyman, who was a slave on the Starling Freeman place near Troy,
S.C. said, "Our houses wus made outer logs. We didn't have nothin' much
nohow, but my mammy she had plenty o' room fer her chillun. We didn't
sleep on de flo', we had bed. De people in de plantachun all had bed."

Others described mattresses made of straw and corn shucks. Another said,
"Yas'm, we had good cotton mattresses. Marster let us go to de gin house
and git all de cotton we need."

Another described the sleeping conditions thus, "Chillun pretty much
slep' on de flo' and old folks had beds. Dey wus made out o' boards
nailed togedder wid a rope strung across it instead o' springs, and a
cotton mattress across it."


FOOD

Many of the Negroes with whom we talked looked back on those days of
plenty with longing. Rations of meal, bacon and syrup were given out
once a week by the overseer. Vegetables, eggs and chickens raised in the
little plots back of the cabins were added to these staples.

Ellen Campbell, who was owned by Mr. William Eve of Richmond County
said, "My boss would feed 'em good. He was killin' hogs stidy fum
Jinuary to March. He had two smokehouses. Dere wus four cows. At night
de folks on one side de row o' cabins go wid de piggins fer milk, and in
de mawnin's, dose on de odder side go fer de piggins o' milk."

"And did you have plenty of other good things to eat?" we asked.

"Law, yas'm. Rations wus give out to de slaves; meal, meat, and jugs o'
syrup. Dey give us white flour at Christmas. Every slave family had de
gyarden patch and chickens. Marster buy eggs and chickens fum us at
market prices."

Another slave told us that when the slaves got hungry before dinner time
they would ask the nursing mothers to bring them back hoe-cake when they
went to nurse the babies. Those hot hoe-cakes were eaten in mid-morning,
"to hold us till dinner-time."

On one plantation where the mother was the cook for the owner, her
children were fed from the big kitchen.

A piece of iron crossed the fireplace, and the pots hung down on hooks.
"Us cooked corn dodgers," one ex-slave recalled, "the hearth would be
swept clean, the ash cakes wrapped up into corn shucks and cooked brown.
They sure was good!"


TYPES OF WORK

The large plantations were really industrial centers in which almost
everything necessary to the life of the white family and the large
retinue of slaves was grown or manufactured. On estates where there were
many slaves there were always trained blacksmiths, coopers, carpenters,
tanners, shoemakers, seamstresses, laundresses, weavers, spinners, cooks
and house servants; all employed in the interest of the community life
of the plantation. Those who could not learn to do any of this skilled
work were turned into the fields and called, "hands". Both men and women
were employed in the fields where cotton, corn, rice and tobacco were
cultivated. House servants ware always considered superior to field
hands.

Melinda Mitchell, who was born a slave in Edgefield, S.C., said, "My
family wasn't fiel' hands. We wus all house servants. My father wus de
butler, and he weighed out de rations fer de slaves. My mammy wus de
house 'oman and her mother and sister wus de cooks. Marster wouldn't
sell none of his slaves, and when he wanted to buy one he'd buy de whole
fambly to keep fum havin' 'em separated."

At an early age Melinda and her younger sister were given to the two
young ladies of the house as their personal maids. "I wus given to Miss
Nettie," Melinda said, "Our young Mistresses visited, too, and wherever
dey went my sister and me went erlong. My own mammy took long trips with
ole Mistis to de Blue Ridge Mountains and sometimes over de big water."

Susannah Wyman of the Starling Freeman plantation in South Carolina
said, "The house servants wuz trained to cook, clean up, de man wuz
trained to make shoes. I don't think us had carpenters. I toted water in
de field, hoed some. I wuz quite young. I spun but I didn't weave. Dere
wuz a lady dey had on de place did de weavin'. I had many a striped
dress woven on dat big loom and dey wuz pretty, too."

Susie Brown, who used to live on the Evans plantation on Little River in
Columbia County was too little to do any hard work during slavery times.
"I jus' stayed at home and 'tend de baby," she said. "But my mother was
a cook and my father a blacksmith."

Mary's mother was a plantation weaver. "Mistis would cut out dresses out
of homespun. We had purple dyed checks. They was pretty. I had to sew
seams. Marster had to buy shoes for us, he give us good-soled ones."

Easter Jones, who had only bitter memories of the slavery period said,
"Sometimes we eben had to pull fodder on Sunday. But what I used to hate
worse'n anything was wipin' dishes. Dey'd make me take de dish out de
scaldin' water, den if I drap it dey whip me. Dey whip you so hard your
back bleed, den dey pour salt and water on it. And your shirt stick to
your back, and you hadder get somebody to grease it 'fore you kin take
it off."

Ellen Campbell, who used to belong to Mr. William Eve said she did only
simple jobs about the plantation in childhood, "When I was 'bout ten
years old dey started me totin' water--you know ca'yin' water to de
hands in de field. 'Bout two years later I got my first field job
'tending sheep. When I wus fifteen year old Missus gib me to Miss Eva,
you know she de one marry Colonel Jones. My young Mistus was fixin' to
git married, but she couldn't on account de war, so she brought me to
town and rented me out to a lady runnin' a boarding house. De rent wus
paid to my Mistus. One day I was takin' a tray from de out-door kitchen
to de house when I stumbled and dropped it. De food spill all over de
ground. Da lady got so mad she picked up de butcher knife and chop me in
de haid. I went runnin' till I come to da place where mah white folks
live. Miss Eva took me and wash de blood out mah head and put medicine
on it, and she wrote a note to de lady and she say, 'Ellen is my slave,
give to me by my mother. I wouldn't had dis happen to her no more dan to
me. She won't come back dere no more.'"

Willis Bennefield, who was a slave on Dr. Balding Miller's plantation in
Burke County, said, "I wuk in de fiel' and I drove him 30 years. He was
a doctor. He had a ca'iage and a buggy, too. My father driv de ca'iage.
I driv de doctor. Sometimes I was fixin' to go to bed and had to hitch
up my horse and go five or six miles. He had regular saddle horses, two
pair o' horses fer de ca'iage. He was a rich man--riches' man in Burke
County--had three hundred slaves. He made his money on de plantachuns,
not doctorin'."

Fannie Fulcher, who was also one of Dr. Miller's slaves, and Willis
Bennefield's sister gives this account of the slaves' work in earning
extra money. "De marster give 'em ev'y day work clothes, but dey bought
de res' deyselves. Some raise pumpkins, squashes, potatoes, all sich
things like dat in dey patches; sell 'em to different stores. Jus' like
somebody want ground clear up, dey git big torches fer light, clean up
de new groun' at night, dat money b'long to dem. I year my mother and
father say de slaves made baskets and quilts and things and sell 'em for
they-selves."


EDUCATION

The following appears in the Statue Laws of Georgia for 1845 concerning
educating negroes, under Section II, Minor Offences.

     "Punishment for teaching slaves or free persons of color to
     read. If any slave, negro, or free person of color, or any
     white person, shall teach any other slave, negro or free
     person of color, to read or write either written or printed
     characters, the said free person of color or slave shall be
     punished by fine and whipping, or fine or whipping, at the
     direction of the court."

Among the ordinances passed by the City of Augusta, effective between
August 10th, 1820 and July 8th, 1829, was the following concerning the
teaching of negroes:

     "No person shall teach a negro or person of color to read or
     cause any one to be taught within the limits of the City, nor
     shall any person suffer a school for the instruction of
     negroes, or persons of color to be kept on his or her lot."

None of the ex-slaves whom we interviewed could either read or write.
Old Willis Bennefield, who used to accompany his young master to school,
said he "larned something then. I got way up in my A B Cs, but atter I
got to thinkin' 'bout gals I fergit all 'bout dat."

Another slave said, "We had a school on our plantation and a Negro
teacher named, Mathis, but they couldn't make me learn nothin'. I sure
is sorry now."

Easter Jones, who was once a slave of Lawyer Bennet, on a plantation
about ten miles from Waynesboro, said, when we asked if she had been to
school, "Chillun didn't know whut a book wus in dem days--dey didn't
teach 'em nothin' but wuk. Dey didn' learn me nothin' but to churn and
clean up house, and 'tend to dat boy and spin and cyard de roll."


RELIGION

Most of the ex-slaves interviewed received their early religious
training in the churches of their masters. Many churches which have
slave sections in this district are still standing. Sometimes the slaves
sat in pews partitioned off at the back of the church, and sometimes
there was a gallery with a side entrance.

The old Bath Presbyterian Church had a gallery and private entrance of
this kind. Sunday Schools were often conducted for the slaves on the
plantation.

Among the ordinances passed by the City of Augusta, February 7, 1862,
was section forty-seven, which concerned negro preaching and teaching:

     "No slave or free person of color shall be allowed to preach,
     exhort or teach, in any meeting of slaves or free persons of
     color, for public worship or religious instruction in this
     city, but except at funerals or sitting up with the dead,
     without a license in writing from the Inferior Court of
     Richmond County, and Mayor of the City, regularly granted
     under the Act of the General Assembly of this State, passed
     on the 23rd day of December, 1843.

     "No colored preacher residing out of the County of Richmond,
     shall preach, exhort, or teach, until he has produced his
     license granted under the Act aforesaid, and had the same
     countersigned by the Mayor of this City, or in his absence
     by two members of Council.

     "Persons qualified as aforesaid, may hold meetings in this city
     for the purpose aforesaid, at any time during the Sabbath day,
     and on Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday nights. No other meetings
     of slaves or free persons of color for religious purposes shall
     be held, except by permission of Council.

     "No meeting of slaves or free persons of color for the purpose
     aforesaid, shall continue at any time later than 10:30 at
     night, and all such meetings shall be superintended by one or
     more citizens, appointed by the ministers in charge of their
     respective denominations, and approved by the Mayor. All slaves
     or free persons of color attending such meetings, after that
     hour, shall be arrested, and punished, under the Section,
     whether with or without tickets from their owners; and all such
     persons returning from such meetings after the ringing of the
     Market Bell, without tickets, shall be arrested and punished
     as in other cases.

     "Every offense against this section shall be punished by
     whipping, not exceeding 39 lashes, or fined not exceeding
     $50.00."

Harriet White, who told us some of her father's slavery experiences
said, "Yas'm, dey let'em go to chu'ch, but de colored folks hadder sit
behind a boarded up place, so dey hadder stretch dey neck to see de
preacher, and den day hadder jine de Master's chu'ch--de Methodis'
Chu'ch. De spirit done tole my father to jine da Baptis' Chu'ch--dat de
right t'ing, but he hadder jine de Methodis', 'cause his Master was
Methodis'. But when he come to Augusta he wus baptise in de river. He
say he gwine ca'y God's point."

We asked Ellen Campbell of the Eve Plantation in Richmond County about
church going. She replied, "Yas'm, we used to go to town. But de
Padderolas wus ridin' in dem days, and you couldn' go off de plantachun
widout a pass. So my boss he built a brick chu'ch on de plantachun, and
de D'Laigles built a chu'ch on dere's."

Susie Brown, who was a slave on the Evans Plantation in Columbia County,
said, in speaking of her mother getting religion, "My Maw and Paw wasn't
married till after freedom. When my Maw got 'ligion dey wouldn' let her
be baptise till she was married." She stated that her mother had seven
children then. Aunt Susie had had eight children herself, but her
husband was now dead. When asked why she didn't get married again, she
replied, "Whut I wanner git married fer? I ain' able to wuk fer myself
let alone a man!"

Augustus Burden, who was born a slave on General Walker's plantation at
Windsor Springs, Ga., said, "We had no churches on our place. We went to
the white people's church at Hale's Gate. Then after they stopped the
colored people going there to church, they had their little meetings
right at home. We had one preacher, a real fine preacher, named Ned
Walker, who was my uncle by marriage."

Fannie Fulcher, a former slave on Dr. Miller's plantation in Burke
County, gave this unique account of the slave children's early religious
trainings: "Dey had a ole lady stay in de quarters who tuk care o' de
chillun whilst de mother wus in de fiel'. Den dey met at her house at
dark, and a man name, Hickman, had prayers. Dey all kneel down. Den de
chillun couln' talk till dey got home--if you talk you git a whippin'
frum de ole lady nex' night. Ole granny whip 'em."

Fannie said the slaves went to the "white folks church," and that "white
folks baptise 'em at Farmer's Bridge or Rock Creek." A white preacher
also married the slaves.


DISCIPLINE

In 1757 the Patrol System was organized. This was done as a result of
continual threats of uprisings among the slaves. All white male citizens
living in each district, between the ages of 16 and 45 were eligible for
this service. The better class of people paid fines to avoid this duty.
Members of the patrol group could commit no violence, but had power to
search Negro houses and premises, and break up illegal gatherings. They
were on duty from nine at night until dawn.

By 1845 there were many laws on the Statute books of Georgia concerning
the duties of patrols. The justice of the peace in each captain's
district of the state was empowered to decide who was eligible to patrol
duty and to appoint the patrol. Every member of the patrol was required
to carry a pistol while on duty. They were required to arrest all slaves
found outside their master's domain without a pass, or who was not in
company with some white person. He was empowered to whip such slave with
twenty lashes. He also had power to search for offensive weapons and
fugitive slaves. Every time a person evaded patrol duty he was required
to pay the sum of five dollars fine.

The entire life of the slave was hedged about with rules and
regulations. Beside those passed by individual masters for their own
plantations there were many city and state laws. Severe punishment, such
as whipping on the bare skin, was the exception rather than the rule,
though some slaves have told of treatment that was actually inhuman.

In 1845 the following laws had been passed in Georgia, the violation of
which brought the death penalty:

     "Capital crimes when punished with death: The following shall
     be considered as capital offenses, when committed by a slave or
     free person of color: insurrection or an attempt to excite it;
     committing a rape, or attempting it on a free white female;
     murder of a free white person, or murder of a slave or free
     person of color, or poisoning a human being; every and each of
     these offenses shall, on conviction, be punished with death."

There were severe punishments for a slave striking a white person,
burning or attempting to burn a house, for circulating documents to
incite insurrection, conspiracy or resistance of slaves. It was against
the law for slaves to harbor other fugitive slaves, to preach without a
license, or to kill or brand cattle without instructions.

In Section Forty-Five of the Ordinances of the City of Augusta, passed
on Feb. 7, 1862, were the following restrictions:

     "Any slave or free person of color found riding or driving
     about the city, not having a written pass from his or her
     owner, hirer, or guardian, expressing the date of such pass,
     the name of the negro to whom it is given, the place or places
     to which he or she is going, how long he or she is to be
     absent, and in the case of a slave, that such slave is in the
     services of the person before the Recorder's Court by which he
     or she shall be tried, and on conviction shall be punished by
     whipping not to exceed 39 lashes.

     "No slave or free person of color, other than Ministers of the
     Gospel, having charge of churches, in the discharge of their
     duties, and funeral processions, shall be allowed to ride or
     drive within the limits of the city, on the Sabbath, without
     written permission from his or her owner, or employer, stating
     that such slave or free parson of color is on business of such
     owners or employer.

     "Every slave or free person of color not excepted as aforesaid,
     who shall be found riding or driving in the city on the
     Sabbath, without such permission from his or her owner or
     employer shall be arrested and taken to Recorder's Court; and
     if such slave or free person of color was actually engaged in
     the business of said owner or employer, the said slave or free
     person of color shall be convicted and punished by whipping,
     not to exceed 39 lashes, which punishment in no case be
     commuted by a fine.

     "It shall be the duty of the officer making the arrest of such
     slave or free person of color as aforesaid, to take into his
     possession the horse or horse and vehicle, or horses and
     vehicles, so used by such slave or free person of color, which
     property may be redeemed by the owner, if white, upon the
     payment of $10.00, and if the owner of such property is a slave
     or free person of color, he or she shall be punished by
     whipping not less than 15 lashes."

     "No slave or free person of color shall be allowed to attend
     military parades, or any procession of citizens, or at the
     markethouse on public sale days under the penalty of receiving
     not exceeding 15 lashes, for each and every offense, to be
     inflicted by the Chief of Police, Captain or any lieutenant;
     provided no person shall be prevented from having the
     attendance of his own servant on such occasions."

     "No slave or free person of color shall walk with a cane, club,
     or stick, except such slave or free person of color be blind or
     infirm; nor smoke a pipe or cigar in any street, lane, alley or
     other public place, under a penalty of not exceeding 25 lashes,
     to be inflicted by any officer of the City, by order of the
     Recorder's Court."


SECTION FORTY-THIRD

     "No slave or free person of color shall play upon any
     instrument of music after sunset, without permission from the
     mayor or two members of Council, unless employed in the house
     of some citizen. No slave or free person of color shall be
     absent from his or her house 15 minutes after the bell shall
     have been rung, without a sufficient pass, under the penalty
     of 25 lashes, to be inflicted by the Chief of Police, or any
     officer of the City, and be confined in the Guard-Room for
     further examination, if found under suspicious circumstances.
     No slave or person of color shall keep lights in the house
     which they occupy after 10:00 at night, unless in case of
     necessity."


SECTION FORTY-FOUR

     "No slave or free person of color shall in the streets or
     alleys, fight, quarrel, riot, or otherwise, act in a disorderly
     manner, under the penalty of chastisement by any officer of the
     city, not exceeding 25 lashes, and in all cases of conviction
     before the Recorder's Court, he or she shall be punished by
     whipping, not exceeding 75 lashes.

     "No slave or free person of color, shall be allowed to keep a
     shop or shops for the sale of beer, cake, fruit, soda water, or
     any similar articles on their own account or for the benefit
     of any other person whomsoever. Any slave or slaves, or free
     person of color, found keeping a shop and selling, bartering,
     or trading in any way, shall be taken up and punished by
     whipping, with not more than 30 lashes for each and every
     offense, and shall stand committed until the officer's fees
     are paid."

Most of the slaves interviewed were too young during the slavery period
to have experienced any of the more cruel punishments, though some
remembered hearing tales of brutal beatings. Most of the punishments
inflicted were mild chastisements or restrictions.

Susie Brown, who was a slave on the Evans' plantation on Little River in
Columbia, said, "My Marster wus good to me, good as he could be--only
thing he whup me fer wus usin' snuff. And when he go to whup me, Mistis
beg him to stop, and he only gib me a lick or two. And if Mistis try to
whup me, he make her stop. No, dey didn't had to do much whuppin'. Dey
wus good to de hand." When asked about her overseer she replied, "Dere
wus a overseer, but I disremember his name."

Most of these old ex-slaves' recollections had to do with the
"Patterolas", as the Patrol was called. One of them said about the
Patrol, "Oh yes, ma'm, I seed da Patterolas, but I never heard no song
about 'em. Dey wus all white mens. Jus' like now you want to go off your
Marster's place to another man's place, you had to get a pass from your
boss man. If you didn't have dat pass, de Patterolas would whip you."

A woman who lived on the Roof plantation said, "I worked under four
overseers, one of 'em was mean, and he had a big deep voice. When the
niggers was at the feed lot, the place where they carried the dinner
they brought to the fields, he would hardly give 'em time to eat before
he hollered out, 'Git up and go back to work!'"

She also said that Mars. Thomas, the red-haired young master, was mean
about slaves over-staying pass time. "If they want off and stayed too
long, when they came back, he'd strip them stark, mother nekked, tie 'em
to a tree, and whip 'em good. But old Marster, he didn't believe in
whipping. It was different when the boys took possession after he died."

Very few slaves ran away, but when they did the master hunted them with
dogs.

When Carrie Lewis, who belonged to Captain Ward, was asked if the slaves
were ever whipped on their plantation, she replied, "No ma'm, de Marster
say to de overseer, 'If you whup dem, I whup you.' No ma'm, he wouldn't
keep a overseer dat wus mean to us--Cap'n Ward wus good to us. He
wouldn't let de little ones call him 'Marster', dey had to call him and
de Missus, 'Grampa' and 'Gramma'. My folks didn't mistreat de slaves.
I'd be better off now if it wus dem times now."

We asked Ellen Campbell, a Richmond County slave if her master was good
to her and she replied, "I'll say fer Mr. William Eve--he de bes' white
man anywhere round here on any dese plantachuns. Dey all own slaves.
Sometimes de overseer whup 'em--make 'em strip off dey shirt and whup
'em on de bare skin. My boss had a white overseer and two colored men
dey call drivers. If dey didn't done right dey dus whup 'em and turn 'em
loose."

It was said that those who refused to take whippings were generally
negroes of African royal blood, or their descendants.

Edward Glenn of the Clinton Brown plantation in Forsythe County, Ga.,
said, "My father would not take a whipping. He would die before he would
take a whipping. The Marster thought so much of him, he made young
Marster Clinton promise he would never sell him or put a stripe on him.
Once, when he wanted to punish him, he give him a horse and bridle and
fifty dollars. 'Go on off somewhere and get somebody to buy you.' My
father stayed away a month. One day he come home, he had been off about
100 miles. He brought with him a man who wanted to buy him. Marster put
the man up for the night, fed his horse, and father went on out to
mother. Next day when the man made him a price on father, Marster said,
'I was just foolin'. I wouldn't sell him for nothing. I was trying to
punish him. He is true and honest, but he won't take a whipping.'

"Sometimes a slave was treated so bad by his owners he was glad if they
put him up to be sold. If he was a bad man, they handcuffed him, put him
on a stand, like for preachings and auctioned him off to the highest
bidder.

"When runaway slave was brought back they was punished. Once in Alabama
I saw a woman stripped naked, laid over a stump in a field with her head
hangin' down on one side, her feet on the other, and tied to the stump.
Then they whipped her hard, and you could hear her hollering far off,
'Oh, Lawd a'musay! Lawd a-musay!'."

Another punishment Edward said, was called the "Gameron Stick",
(sometimes called the Gamlin stick, or Spanish Buck). The slave's arms
were bound around the bent knees and fastened to a stick run beneath
them. This was called the "Spanish Buck" punishment. They stripped the
slave, who was unable to stand up, and rolled him on one side and
whipped him till the blood came. They called the whip the "cowhide".
Slaves were whipped for small things, such as forgetting orders or
spilling food.


OVERSEERS

The most important person in the disciplining of negro slaves was the
overseer. However, he occupied an unfortunate position socially. He was
not regarded as the equal of the owner's family, and was not allowed to
mix socially with the slaves. His was a hard lot, and consequently this
position was generally filled by men of inferior grade. However, he was
supposed to have an education so that he could handle the finances of
the plantation accurately, and to be possessed of a good moral character
in order to enforce the regulations. On most Georgia plantations
overseers were given a house near the slave quarters. In some instances
he lived in the house with the plantation owner. The average pay for
overseers was from three to five hundred dollars a year.

Next in authority to the overseer was the driver, who directed the work
in the fields. Every morning the driver blew the horn or rang the
plantation bell to summon slaves to their work. Next to him was some
trusted slave, who carried the keys to the smokehouse and commissary,
and helped to give out rations once a week.

Many of the overseers were naturally cruel and inclined to treat the
slaves harshly. Often strict rules and regulations had to be made to
hold them in check. Overseers were generally made to sign these
regulations on receiving their appointments.

In 1840 the Southern Cultivator and Monthly Journal published the
following rules of the plantation:


RULES OF THE PLANTATION

     Rule 1st. The overseer will not be expected to work in the
     crop, but he must constantly with the hands, when not
     otherwise engaged in the employer's business, and will be
     required to attend on occasions to any pecuniary transactions
     connected with the plantation.

     Rule 2nd. The overseer is not expected to be absent from the
     plantation unless actual necessity compels him, Sundays
     excepted, and then it is expected that he will, on all
     occasions, be at home by night.

     Rule 3rd. He will attend, morning, noon and night, at the
     stable, and see that the mules and horses are ordered, curried,
     and fed.

     Rule 4th. He will see that every negro is out by daylight in
     the morning--a signal being given by a blast of the horn, the
     first horn will be blown half an hour before day. He will also
     visit the negro cabins at least once or twice a week, at night,
     to see that all are in. No negro must be out of his house after
     ten oclock in summer and eleven in winter.

     Rule 5th. The overseer is not to give passes to the negroes
     without the employer's consent. The families the negroes are
     allowed to visit will be specified by the employer; also those
     allowed to visit the premises. Nor is any negro allowed to
     visit the place without showing himself to the employer or
     overseer.

     Rule 6th. The overseer is required not to chat with the
     negroes, except on business, nor to encourage tale bearing, nor
     is any tale to be told to him or employer, by any negro, unless
     he has a witness to his statements, nor are they allowed, in
     any instance, to quarrel and fight. But the employer will
     question any negro, if confidence can be placed in him, without
     giving him cause of suspicion, about all matters connected with
     the plantation, if he has any reason to believe that all things
     are not going on right.

     Rule 7th. As the employer pays the overseer for his time and
     attention, it is not to be expected he will receive much
     company.

     Rule 8th. As the employer employs an overseer, not to please
     himself, but the employer, it will be expected that he will
     attend strictly to all his instructions. His opinion will be
     frequently asked relative to plantation matters, and
     respectfully listened to, but it is required they be given in
     a polite and respectful manner, and not urged, or insisted
     upon; and if not adopted, he must carry into effect the views
     of the employer, and with a sincere desire to produce a
     successful result. He is expected to carry on all experiments
     faithfully and carefully note the results, and he must, when
     required by the employer, give a fair trial to all new methods
     of culture, and new implements of agriculture.

     Rule 9th. As the whole stock will be under immediate charge
     of the overseer, it is expected he will give his personal
     attention to it, and will accompany the hog feeder once a week
     and feed them, and count and keep a correct number of the same.
     The hog feeder is required to attend to feeding them every
     morning.

     Rule 10th. The negroes must be made to obey, and to work,
     which may be done by an overseer who attends regularly to his
     business, with very little whipping; for much whipping indicates
     a bad tempered or an inattentive manager. He must _never_, on
     any occasion, unless in self-defense, kick a negro, or strike
     him with his fist, or butt end of his whip. No unusual
     punishment must be resorted to without the employer's consent.
     He is not expected to punish the foreman, except on some
     extraordinary emergency that will not allow of delay, until
     the employer is consulted. Of this rule the foreman is to be
     kept in entire ignorance.

     Rule 11th. The sick must be attended to. When sick they are to
     make known the fact to him; if in the field, he is requested
     to send them to the employer, if at home; and if not, the
     overseer is expected to attend to them in person, or send for
     a physician if necessary. Suckling and pregnant women must be
     indulged more than others. Sucklers are to be allowed time to
     visit their children, morning, noon and evening, until they are
     eight months old, and twice a day from thence until they are
     twelve months old--they are to be kept working near their
     children. No lifting, pulling fodder, or hard work is expected
     of pregnant women.

     Rule 12th. The negroes are to appear in the field on Monday
     mornings cleanly clad. To carry out said rule they are to be
     allowed time (say one hour by sun) every Saturday evening for
     the purpose of washing their clothes.

     Rule 13th. The overseer is particularly required to keep the
     negroes as much as possible out of the rain, and from all kind
     of exposure.

     Rule 14th. It will be expected of a good manager, that he will
     constantly arrange the daily work of the negroes, so that no
     negro may wait to know what to go to doing. Small jobs that
     will not reasonably admit of delay must be forthwith attended
     to.

     Rule 15th. It is required of him, to keep the tools, ploughs,
     hoes &c. out of the weather and have all collected after they
     are done using them. The wagon and cart must be kept under a
     shed. He is expected to keep good gates, bars and fences.

     Rule 16th. The employer will give him a list of all the tools
     and farming utensils and place the same in his care, and he is
     to return them at the years' end to the employer; if any are
     broke, the pieces are expected to be returned.

     Rule 17th. He is not to keep a horse or dog against the
     employer's approbation--and dogs kept for the purpose of
     catching negroes will not be allowed under any consideration.

     Rule 18th. He is required to come to his meals at the blowing
     of the horn. It is not expected he will leave the field at
     night before the hands quit their work.

     Rule 19th. It will be expected he will not speak of the
     employer's pecuniary business, his domestic affairs, or his
     arrangements to any one. He will be expected to inform the
     employer of anything going on that may concern his interest.

     Rule 20th. He is to have no control whatever over the
     employer's domestic affairs; nor to take any privileges in
     the way of using himself, or loaning the employers property to
     others.

     Rule 21st. He is expected to be guilty of no disrespectful
     language in the employer's presence--such as vulgarity,
     swearing &c; nor is he expected to be guilty of any
     indecencies, such as spitting on the floor, wearing his hat in
     the house, sitting at the table with his coat off, or whistling
     or singing in the house (Such habits are frequently indulged
     in, in Bachelor establishments in the South). His room will be
     appropriated to him, and he will not be expected to obtrude
     upon the employer's private chamber, except on business.

     Rule 22nd. It will be expected of him that he will not get
     drunk, and if he returns home in that state he will be
     immediately discharged. He will also be immediately discharged,
     if it is ascertained he is too intimate with any of the negro
     women.

     Rule 23rd. It is distinctly understood, in the agreement with
     every overseer, should they separate, from death or other
     cause--and either is at liberty to separate from the other
     whenever dissatisfied--without giving his reasons for so doing;
     in said event the employer, upon settlement, is not expected to
     pay the cash nor settle for the year, but for the time only he
     remained in the employer's service, by note, due January next
     (with interest) pro rata, he was to pay for the year.


AMUSEMENTS

In spite of the many restrictions that hedged the slaves about there
were many good times on the plantation. Old Mary of the Roof plantation
described their frolics thus:

"We would sing and there was always a fiddle. I never could put up to
dance much but nobody could beat me runnin' 'Peep Squirrel'. That was a
game we made up on the plantation. The girls peeped out, then ran by the
men, and they'd be caught and twirled around. They said I was like a
kildee bird, I was so little and could run so fast. When we growed up we
walked the boys to death! They used to say we walked the heels off their
boots. We would have dances every Christmas, on different plantations. I
tell my grandchildren sometimes that my brother-in-law would carry us to
dances and wouldn' allow us to sleep, we'd dance all night long. We had
a good time, us girls!"

When the negroes got married long tables were set under the trees in the
back yard and the people from the big house came down to see how the
slaves were dressed and to wish them well.

Concerning her own marriage Mary said, "They say I was married when I
was 17 years old. I know it was after freedom. I married a boy who
belonged to the Childs plantation. I had the finest kind of marrying
dress, my father bought it for me. It had great big grapes hanging down
from the sleeves and around the skirt." She sighed and a shadow passed
over her placid old face, as she added, "I wish't I had a kep' it for my
children to saw."

A slave from the Starling Freeman plantation in South Carolina said,
"When cullud people wus married, white people give a supper. A cullud
man whut lives on de place marries 'em."

"I used to sing good myself," continued Susannah, "you could hear the
echo of my voice way out yonder, but I can't sing no more." Here
Susannah stuck out her legs, covered with long-ribbed pink stockings.
"My legs got de misery in 'em now, and my voice gone. In my mother's
house dey never trained us to sing things like the mos' o' people. We
sung the good old hymns, like, 'A Charge to Keep I have, a God to
Glorify.'"

Old Tim, who used to live on a plantation in Virginia, said in speaking
of good times before the war, "Sho', we had plenty o' banjo pickers!
They was 'lowed to play banjos and guitars at night, if de Patterolas
didn' interfere. At home de owners wouldn' 'low de Patterolas to tech
their folks. We used to run mighty fast to git home after de frolics!
Patterolas wus a club of men who'd go around and catch slaves on strange
plantations and break up frolics, and whip 'em sometimes."

We asked Aunt Ellen Campbell, who was a slave on the Eve plantation in
Richmond County, about good times in slavery days. She laughed
delightedly and said, "When anybody gwine be married dey tell de boss
and he have a cake fix. Den when Sunday come, after dey be married she
put on de white dress she be married in and dey go up to town so de boss
can see de young couple."

She was thoughtful a moment, then continued, "Den sometimes on Sadday
night we have a big frolic. De nigger fum Hammond's place and Phinizy
place, Eve place, Clayton place, D'Laigle place, all git together fer a
big dance and frolic. A lot o' de young sports used to come dere and
push de young nigger bucks aside and dance wid de wenches."

"We used to have big parties sometime," said Fannie Fulcher, a former
slave on Dr. Miller's plantation in Burke County. "No white folks--jus'
de overseer come round to see how dey git erlong. I 'member dey have a
fiddle. I had a cousin who played fer frolics, and fer de white folks,
too."

According to Melinda Mitchell, who lived on the plantation of Rev. Allen
Dozier in Edgefield County, South Carolina, the field hands and house
servants forgot cares in merriment and dancing after the day's work was
over. When asked about her master, a Baptist preacher, condoning dancing
Melinda replied with the simple statement, "He wasn't only a preacher,
he was a religious man. De slaves danced at de house of a man who
'tended de stack, way off in de fiel' away fum de big house." They
danced to the tunes of banjos and a homemade instrument termed, "Quill",
evidently some kind of reed. It was fairly certain that the noise of
merriment must have been heard at the big house, but the slaves were not
interrupted in their frolic.

"My mammy wus de bes' dancer on de plantachun," Melinda said proudly.
"She could dance so sturdy she could balance a glass o' water on her
head an never spill a drop." She recalls watching the dancers late into
the night until she fell asleep.

She could tell of dances and good times in the big house as well as in
the quarters. The young ladies were belles. They were constantly
entertaining. One day a wandering fortune-teller came on the piazza
where a crowd of young people were gathered, and asked to tell the young
ladies' fortunes. Everything was satisfactory until he told Miss Nettie
she would marry a one-armed man. At this the young belle was so
indignant that the man was driven off and the dogs set on him. "But de
fortune teller told true-true," Melinda said. A faint ominous note crept
into her voice and her eyes seemed to be seeing events that had
transpired almost three-quarters of a century ago. "After de war Miss
Nettie did marry a one-arm man, like de fortune-teller said, a
Confederate officer, Captain Shelton, who had come back wid his sleeve
empty."


SLAVE SALES

There were two legal places for selling slaves in Augusta; the Lower
Market, at the corner of Fifth and Broad Street, and the Upper Market at
the corner of Broad and Marbury Streets. The old slave quarters are
still standing in Hamburg, S.C., directly across the Savannah River from
the Lower Market in Augusta. Slaves who were to be put up for sale were
kept there until the legal days of sales.

Advertisements in the newspapers of that day seem to point to the fact
that most slave sales were the results of the death of the master, and
the consequent settlement of estates, or a result of the foreclosure of
mortgages.

In the Thirty-Seventh Section of the Ordinances of the City of Augusta,
August 10, 1820-July 8, 1829, is the following concerning Vendue
Masters:

     "If any person acts as a Vendue Master within the limits of
     this City without a license from the City Council, he shall be
     fined in a sum not exceeding $1,000.00. There shall not be more
     than four Vendue Masters for this city. They shall be appointed
     by ballot, and their license shall expire on the day proceeding
     the 1st Saturday in October of every year. No license shall
     be issued to a Vendue Master until he has given bond, with
     securities according to the laws of this State, and also a bond
     with approved security to the Council for the faithful discharge
     of his duties in the sum of $5,000.00."

The newspapers of the time regularly carried advertisements concerning
the sale of slaves. The following is a fair sample:

     "Would sell slaves: With this farm will be sold about Thirty
     Likely Negroes mostly country born, among them a very good
     bricklayer, and driver, and two sawyers, 17 of them are fit for
     field or boat work, and the rest fine, thriving children."

The following advertisement appeared in _The Georgia Constitutionalist_
on January 17, 1769: "To be sold in Savannah on Thursday the 15th. inst.
a cargo of 140 Prime Slaves, chiefly men. Just arrived in the Scow
Gambia Captain Nicholas Doyle after a passage of six weeks directly from
the River Gambia." by Inglis and Hall.

Most of the advertisements gave descriptions of each slave, with his age
and the type of work he could do. They were generally advertised along
with other property belonging to the slave owner.

The following appeared in the Chronicle and Sentinel of Augusta on
December 23rd, 1864: "Negro Sales. At an auction in Columbus the annexed
prices were obtained: a boy 16 years old, $3,625.

"At a late sale in Wilmington the annexed prices were obtained: a girl
14 years old $5,400; a girl 22 years old, $4,850; a girl 13 years
$3,500; a negro boy, 22 years old $4,900."

Very few of the slaves interviewed had passed through the bitter
experience of being sold. Janie Satterwhite, who was born on a Carolina
plantation, and was about thirteen years old when she was freed,
remembered very distinctly when she was sold away from her parents.

"Yes'm, my Mama died in slavery, and I was sold when I was a little
tot," she said. "I 'member when dey put me on de block."

"Were you separated from your family?" we asked.

"Yes'm. We wus scattered eberywhere. Some went to Florida and some to
odder places. De Missus she die and we wus all sold at one time. Atter
dat nobody could do nothin' on de ole plantachun fer a year--till all
wus settled up. My brudder he wasn't happy den. He run away fer five
years."

"Where was he all that time?"

"Lawd knows, honey. Hidin', I reckon, hidin in de swamp."

"Did you like your new master?"

"Honey, I wus too little to have any sense. When dat man bought me--dat
Dr. Henry, he put me in a buggy to take me off. I kin see it all right
now, and I say to Mama and Papa, 'Good-bye, I'll be back in de mawnin'.'
And dey all feel sorry fer me and say, 'She don' know whut happenin'."

"Did you ever see your family again?"

"Yes'm. Dey wusn't so far away. When Christmas come de Marster say I can
stay wid Mama de whole week."

Easter Jones, who had many bitter memories of slavery days back on the
Bennet plantation near Waynesboro, said, when asked if she was ever sold
into slavery, "Dey had me up fer sale once, but de horse run away and
broke de neck o' de man whut gwine buy me."

Harriet White, whose father was a slave, gives this account of his sale,
"Yas'm, he tell me many times 'bout when he wus put up for sale on
Warren Block (in Augusta). Father say dey put him on de block down here.
De gemmen whut bought him name Mr. Tom Crew. But when dey tryin' to sell
him--dat right durin' de war, one man say, 'No, I don' want him--he know
too much.' He'd done been down to Savannah wid de Yankees. Den my father
say, 'If you buy me you can't take me oudder de state of Georgia, 'cause
de Yankees all around."

Carrie Lewis, who was owned by Captain Phillip Ward and lived on a
plantation down in Richmond County said, "No'm, I wasn't never sold, but
my Mama was sold fum me. See, I belonged to de young girl and old
Marster fool Missus away fum de house so he git to sell my Mama."

"Did you ever see your mother afterwards?" we asked.

"No, ma'm. I wouldn' know my Mammy no more den you would."

"But were you happy on the plantation?"

A smile brightened her wrinkled old face as she replied, "I'd be a heap
better off if it was dem times now."

When we asked Ellen Campbell if she was ever sold during slavery times
she replied, "No'm. I wa'n't sold, but I know dem whut wus. Jedge
Robinson he kept a nigger trade office over in Hamburg."

"Oh yes, we remember--the old brick building."

"Yas'm, dat it. Well, all de colored people whut gonner be sold was kept
dere. Den dey brung 'em over to de market and put 'em up fer sale.
Anybody fixin' to buy 'em, 'zamines 'em to see if day all right. Looks
at de teef to tell 'bout de age."

Laura Steward, who was a slave in a Baptist preacher's family in Augusta
told some interesting things about slave sales here: "Slaves were sold
at the Augusta market, in spite of what white ladies say." She stated
that there was a long house with porches on Ellis between 7th and 8th,
where a garage now stands. In this building slaves were herded for
market. "Dey would line 'em up like horses or cows," said Laura, "and
look in de mouf at dey teef; den dey march 'em down togedder to market
in crowds, first Tuesday sale day."

Old Mary used to live on the Roof plantation with her mother, while her
father lived on a nearby plantation. She said her father tried for a
long time to have his owner buy his wife and children, until finally,
"One day Mr. Tom Perry sont his son-in-law to buy us in. You had to get
up on what they called the block, but we just stood on some steps. The
bidder stood on the ground and called out the prices. There was always a
speculator at the sales. We wus bought all right and moved over to the
Perry place. I had another young marster there. He had his own hands and
didn't sell them at all. Wouldn't none of us been sold from the Roof
place, except for my father beggin' Mr. Perry to buy us, so we wouldn't
be separated."

Susannah Wyman of the Freeman plantation in South Carolina said, "Once
de Marster tried to sell my brudder and anodder youngster fer a pair o'
mules, and our Mistis said, 'No! You don' sell my chillun for no mules!'
And he didn't sell us neider. They never sold anybody off our
plantation. But people did sell women, old like I am now--or if they
didn't have no chillun. The fus' spec-lator come along and wants to buy
'em, he kin have 'em. De Marster say, 'Bring me han's in. I want
han's!'"

Eugene Smith, who used to belong to Mr. Steadman Clark of Augusta said,
"I read in the papers where a lady said slaves were never sold here in
Augusta at the old market, but I saw 'em selling slaves myself. They put
'em up on something like a table, bid 'em off just like you would do
horses or cows. Dere wus two men. I kin recollect. I know one was call
Mr. Tom Heckle. He used to buy slaves, speculatin'. The other was name
Wilson. They would sell a mother from her children. That's why so many
colored people married their sisters and brothers, not knowin' till they
got to talking 'bout it. One would say: 'I remember my grandmother,' and
another would say, 'that's _my_ grandmother!' Then they'd find out they
were sister and brother."


WAR MEMORIES

Most of the ex-slaves interviewed were too young to have taken any part
in war activities, though many of them remembered that the best slaves
were picked and sent from each plantation to help build breastworks for
the defense of Waynesboro. On some places the Yankees were encamped and
on others the southern soldiers were entertained.

"De Yankees come through de plantation on Sunday," said Hannah Murphy, a
former slave on a Georgia plantation. "I'll never forgit dat! Dey wus
singin' Dixie, 'I wisht I wus in Dixie, look away!' Dey wus all dress in
blue. Dey sot de gin house afire, and den dey went in de lot and got all
de mules and de horses and ca'y 'em wid 'em. Dey didn't bother de smoke
house where de food wuz, and dey didn't tek no hogs. But dey did go to
de long dairy and thowed out all de milk and cream and butter and stuff.
Dey didn' bother us none. Some o' de cullard folks went wid de Yankees.
De white folks had yeared dey wuz comin' and dey had lef'--after de
Yankees all gone away, de white folks come back. De cullud folks stayed
dere a while, but de owners of de place declaimed dey wuz free, and sont
de people off. I know dat my mother and father and a lot o' people come
heah to Augusta."

Old Tim, from a plantation in Virginia, remembers when Lee was fighting
near Danville, and how frightened the negroes were at the sound of the
cannon. "They cay'd the wounded by the 'bacco factory," he said, "on de
way to de horspittle."

The northern troops came to the William Morris plantation in Burke
County. Eliza Morris, a slave, who was her master's, "right hand bough"
was entrusted with burying the family silver. "There was a battle over
by Waynesboro," Eliza's daughter explained to us. "I hear my mother
speak many times about how the Yankees come to our place." It seems that
some of the other slaves were jealous of Eliza because of her being so
favored by her master. "Some of the niggers told the soldiers that my
mother had hidden the silver, but she wouldn' tell the hidin' place. The
others were always jealous of my mother, and now they tried to made the
Yankees shoot her because she wouldn' tell where the silver was hidden.
My mother was a good cook and she fixed food for the Yankees camped on
the place, and this softened the soldiers' hearts. They burned both the
plantation houses, but they give my mother a horse and plenty of food to
last for some time after they left."

"What did your mother do after the war?" we asked.

"She spent the rest of her life cookin' for her young Mistis, Mrs. Dr.
Madden in Jacksonville. She was Cap'n Bill's daughter. That was her home
till shortly after the World War when she died."

"Did your Master live through the war?"

"Yas'm. He come home. Some of the old slaves had stayed on at the
plantation; others followed the Yankees off. Long time afterward some of
'em drifted back--half starved and in bad shape."

"'Let'em come home'", Marster said. "And them that he couldn' hire he
give patches of land to farm."

"'Member de war? Course I do!" said Easter Jones, "My Marster went to
Savannah, and dey put him in prison somewhere. He died atter he come
back, it done him so bad. I 'member my brudder was born dat Sunday when
Lee surrender. Dey name him Richmond. But I was sick de day dey came and
'nounced freedom."

Augustus Burden, a former slave on General Walker's plantation at
Windsor Springs, Ga., served as valet for his master, said, "Master was
killed at Chickamauga. When the war ceased they brought us home--our old
master's home. My old Mistis was living and we came back to the old
lady."

When the Yankees came through Georgia the Walkers and Schleys asked for
protection from gunfire. Because of school associations with Northern
officers nothing on the plantation was disturbed.

"Mrs. Jefferson Davis came there to visit the Schleys," said Augustus,
and his face lit up with enthusiasm, "She was a mighty pretty woman--a
big lady, very beautiful. She seemed to be real merry amongst the white
folks, and Miss Winnie was a pretty little baby. She was talking then."


Louis Jones was seven years old when he was freed. He said, "I kin
'member de Yankees comin'. I wasn't skeered. I wanted to see 'em. I hung
on de fence corners, and nearabouts some sich place. After freedom my Ma
didn't go 'way. She stayed on de plantation till she could make more
money cookin' some udder place. I don't think dey did anything to de
plantation whar I wus. I yeared dey cay'd out de silver and mebbe hid it
in places whar de Yankees couldn't find it."

When Ellen Campbell of the Eve plantation in Richmond County, was asked
if she remembered anything about the Yankees coming through this part of
the country, she replied:

"Yas'm, I seen 'em comin' down de street. Every one had er canteen on de
side, a blanket on de shoulder, caps cocked on one side de haid. De
Cavalry had boots on, and spurros on de boots. First dey sot de niggers
free on Dead River, den dey come on here and sot us free. Dey march
straight up Broad Street to de Planters Hotel, den dey camped on de
river. Dey stayed here six months till dey sot dis place free. When dey
campin' on de river bank we go down dere and wash dey clo'se fer a good
price. Day had hard tack to eat. Dey gib us hard tack and tell us to
soak it in water, and fry it in meat gravy. I ain't taste nothin' so
good since. Dey say, 'Dis hard tack whut we hadder lib on while we
fightin' to sot you free.'"


FREEDOM

Although the Emancipation Proclamation was delivered on January 1st,
1863 it was not until Lee's final surrender that most of the negroes
knew they were free. The Freedman's Bureau in Augusta gave out the news
officially to the negroes, but in most cases the plantation owners
themselves summoned their slaves and told them they were free. Many
negroes stayed right with their masters.

Carrie Lewis, a slave on Captain Ward's plantation in Richmond County,
said, when asked where she went when freedom came, "Me? I didn't went
nowhere. Da niggers come 'long wid de babies and dey backs, and say I
wus free, and I tell 'em I was free already. Didn't make no diffunce to
me--freedom."

Old Susannah from the Freeman plantation said, "When freedom come I got
mad at Marster. He cut off my hair. I was free so I come from Ca'lina to
Augusta to sue him. I walk myself to death! Den I found I couldn't sue
him over here in Georgia! I had to go back. He was jus' nachally mad
'cause we was free. Soon as I got here, dere was a lady on de street,
she tole me to come in, tek a seat. I stayed dere. Nex' mornin' I
couldn't stand up. My limbs was hurtin' all over."

Tim from the plantation in Virginia remembers distinctly when freedom
came to his people. "When we wus about to have freedom," he said, "they
thought the Yankees was a-goin' to take all the slaves so they put us on
trains and run us down south. I went to a place whut they call 'Butler'
in Georgia, then they sent me on down to the Chattahoochee, where they
were cuttin' a piece of railroad, then to Quincy, then to Tallahassee.
When the war ended I weren't 'xactly in 'Gusta, I was in Irwinville,
where they caught Mars. Jeff Davis. Folks said he had de money train,
but I never seed no gold, nor nobody whut had any. I come on up to
'Gusta and jined de Bush Arbor Springfield Church.


"When freedom came they called all the white people to the court house
first, and told them the darkies ware free. Then on a certain day they
called all the colored people down to the parade ground. They had a big
stand," explained Eugene Wesley Smith, whose father was a slave in
Augusta. "All the Yankees and some of our leading colored men got up
there and spoke, and told the negroes: "You are free. Don't steal! Now
work and make a living. Do honest work, make an honest living and
support yourself and children. There are no more masters. You are free!"

"When the colored troops came in, they came in playing:

  'Don't you see the lightning?
   Don't you hear the thunder?
   It isn't the lightning,
   It isn't the thunder
   But the buttons on the Negro uniform!'

"The negroes shouted and carried on when they heard they were free."

This story of freedom was told by Edward Glenn of Forsythe County: "A
local preacher, Walter Raleigh, used to wait by the road for me every
day, and read the paper before I give it to Mistis. One day he was
waiting for me, and instead of handing it back to me he tho'wed it down
and hollered, 'I'm free as a frog!' He ran away. I tuk the paper to
Mistis. She read it and went to cryin'. I didn't say no more. That was
during the week. On Sunday morning I was talking to my brother's wife,
who was the cook. We were talking about the Yankees. Mistis come in and
say, 'Come out in the garden with me.' When we got outside Mistis said:
'Ed, you suppose them Yankees would spill their blood to come down here
to free you niggers?'

"I said, 'I dunno, but I'se free anyhow, Miss Mary.'"

"'Shut up, sir, I'll mash your mouth!"

"That day Marster was eating, and he said, 'Doc' (they called me Doc,
'cause I was the seventh son). 'You have been a good boy. What did you
tell your Mistis?'"

"I said, 'I told her the truth, that I knowed I was free.'

"He said, 'Well, Doc, you aren't really free. You are free from me, but
you aren't of age yet, and you still belong to your father and mother.'

"One morning I saw a blue cloud of Yankees coming down the road. The
leader was waving his arms and singing:

  'Ha, ha, ha! Trabble all the day!
   I'm in the Rebel's Happy Land of Caanan.
   Needn't mind the weather,
   Jump over double trouble,
   I'm in the Rebel's Happy Land of Caanan.'

"The Yankee captain, Captain Brown, gathered all us negroes in the fair
ground, July or August after freedom, and he made a speech. Lawsy! I can
see that crowd yet, a-yelling and a-stomping! And the captain waving his
arms and shouting!

"'We have achieved the victory over the South. Today you are all free
men and free women!'

"We had everybody shouting and jumping, and my father and mother shouted
along with the others. Everybody was happy."


Janie Satterwhite's memories were very vivid about freedom. "Oh yas'm,"
she said, "my brudder comed fer me. He say, 'Jane, you free now. You
wanna go home and see Papa?' But old Mars say, 'Son, I don' know you and
you don' know me. You better let Jane stay here a while.' So he went
off, but pretty soon I slip off. I had my little black bonnet in my
hand, and de shoes Papa give me, and I started off 'Ticht, ticht; crost
dat bridge.

"I kept on till I got to my sister's. But when I got to de bridge de
river wus risin'. And I hadder go down de swamp road. When I got dere,
wus I dirty? And my sister say, 'How come you here all by yourself?' Den
she took off my clo'es and put me to bed. And I remember de next mornin'
when I got up it wus Sunday and she had my clo'es all wash and iron. De
fus' Sunday atter freedom."


FOLK LORE

As most of the ex-slaves interviewed were mere children during the
slavery period they remembered only tales that were told them by their
parents. Two bits of folk lore were outstanding as they were repeated
with many variations by several old women. One of these stories may be a
relic of race memory, dating back to the dawn of the race in Africa.
Several negroes of the locality gave different versions of this story of
the woman who got out of her skin every night. Hannah Murphy, who was
once a slave and now lives in Augusta gives this version:

"Dere was a big pon' on de plantation, and I yeared de ole folks tell a
story 'bout dat pon', how one time dere was a white Mistis what would go
out ev'y evenin' in her cay'age and mek de driver tak her to de pon'.
She would stay out a long time. De driver kep' a wonderin' whut she do
here. One night he saw her go thu' de bushes, and he crep' behin' her.
He saw her step out o' her skin. Da skin jus' roll up and lay down on de
groun', and den de Mistis disappear. De driver wus too skeered to move.
In a little while he yeared her voice sayin', 'Skinny, Skinny, don't you
know me? Den de skin jump up and dere she wus again, ez big as life. He
watch her like dat for a lot o' nights, and den he went and tole de
Marster. De Marster wus so skeered o' her he run away frum de plantation
and quit her."

Laura Stewart, who was born a slave in Virginia, gives this verson of
the same story:

"Dey always tole me de story 'bout de ole witch who git out her skin. I
ain't know it all. In dem days I guess dose kinder things went on. Dey
said while she was out ridin' wid de ole witch she lef' her skin behind
her, and when she come back, de other woman had put salt and pepper on
it; and whan she say, 'Skinny, Skinny, don't you know me?' de ole skin
wouldn't jump up, so she ain't had no skin a-tall."

"Granny," Laura's granddaughter called to her, "tell the ladies about
the Mistis what got bury."

"Oh yes," Laura recalled, "dey didn' bury her so far. A bad man went
dere to git her gold ring off her finger. She make a sound like 'Shs'
like her bref comin' out, and de man got skeered. He run off. She got up
direckly and come to de house. Dey was skeered o' dat Mistis de res' o'
her life and say she were a hant."


INTERESTING CUSTOMS

On one southern plantation soap was made at a certain time of the year
and left in the hollowed-out trough of a big log.

Indigo was planted for blueing. Starch was made out of wheat bran put in
soak. The bran was squeezed out and used to feed the hogs, and the
starch was saved for clothes.

A hollow stump was filled with apples when cider was to be made. A hole
was bored in the middle, and a lever put inside, which would crush the
apples. As Mary put it, "you put the apples in the top, pressed the
lever, the cider come out the spout, and my, it was good!"


DRESS

Most of the old ex-slave women interviewed wore long full skirts, and
flat loose shoes. In spite of what tradition and story claim, few of the
older negroes of this district wear head clothes. Most of them wear
their wooly hair "wropped" with string. The women often wear men's
discarded slouch hats. Though many of the old woman were interviewed in
mid-summer, they wore several waists and seemed absolutely unaware of
the heat.

One man, wearing the typical dress of the poverty-stricken old person of
this district, is Tim Thornton, who used to live on the Virginia
plantation of Mrs. Lavinia Tinsley. His ragged pants are sewed up with
cord, and on his coat nails are used where buttons used to be. In the
edges of his "salt and pepper" hair are stuck matches, convenient for
lighting his pipe. His beard is bushy and his lower lip pendulous and
long, showing strong yellow teeth. His manner is kindly, and he is known
as "Old Singing Tim" because he hums spirituals all day long as he
stumps around town leaning on a stick.


NUMBER OF SLAVES

Plantations owned by Dr. Balding Miller in Burke County had about eight
hundred slaves. Governor Pickens of South Carolina was said to have had
about four hundred on his various plantations. The William Morris
plantations in Burke County had about five hundred slaves.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Flanders, Ralph Betts
Plantation Slavery in Georgia.
Chapel Hill: The University Press of N.C., 326 pages,
p. 1933, c. 1933, pp. 254-279.

Hotchkiss, William A.
Statute Laws of Georgia and State Papers;
Savannah, Ga.; John M. Cooper, pub., 990 pages, p. 1845, c. 1845,
pp. 810, 817, 838, 839, 840.

Rutherford, John
Acts of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia
Savannah, Ga.: Samuel T. Chapman, State Printer,
620 pages, p. 1854, c. 1854, p. 103.

Jones, J.W., Editor,
Southern Cultivator
Augusta, Ga.: J.W. and W.S. Jones, pubs., Vol. 1, 1843.

Ordinances of the City Council of Augusta.
August 10, 1820; July 8, 1829; Feb. 7, 1862.

The Daily Chronicle & Sentinel
Vol. XXVIII. No. 306.
Augusta, Ga., Dec. 23, 1864.
Clipping.


COMPILATION RICHMOND COUNTY EX-SLAVE INTERVIEWS

WORK, PLAY, FOOD, CLOTHING, MARRIAGE, etc.

Written by:
Louise Oliphant
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Ga.

Edited by:
John N. Booth
District Supervisor,
Federal Writers' Project
Augusta, Ga.


In recalling habits of work and play, marriage customs, and like
memories of Southern life before the Civil War, Richmond County's
ex-slaves tell varied stories. One said: "I didn't start workin' 'til I
was 'bout nine years old. Before that I had watched chickens, carried in
wood, gathered eggs and such light work as that. But when I was nine I
started workin' in the field. I didn't plow then because I was too
small, but I hoed and did other light jobs.

"Our marster made our shoes for us out of raw cow hide. Us got two pairs
of shoes a year, one for every day and one for Sunday. Us made
everythin' us needed. The old women, who couldn't work in the field,
would make cloth on the looms and the spinnin' wheels. Us didn't have
chairs; us made benches and stools to sit on. Us didn't know what swings
was. Us used to tie ropes in trees and swing in 'em.

"Everybody had his own tin plate and tin cup to eat out of. On Saturday
they would give everybody three pounds of meat, twelve pounds of flour,
twelve pounds of meal, and one quart of syrup. This was to last a week.
Us always had plenty to eat 'til the war started, then us went hungry
many a day because they took the food and carried it to the soldiers. Us
stole stuff from everybody durin' that time.

"They always blowed a horn for you to go to work by and get off for
dinner by and stop work in the evening by. When that horn blowed, you
couldn't get them mules to plow another foot. They just wouldn't do it.
Us always et dinner out in the yard, in the summer time, at a long
bench. In cold weather us always went inside to eat. Whenever us didn't
have enough to eat us would tell the overseer and he seed to it that us
got plenty. Our overseers was colored."

Another old woman said she "started working at the age of seven as a
nurse. I nursed, made fire in the house and around the wash pots 'til I
was old enough to go to work in the fields. When I got big enough I hoed
and later plowed. Us didn't wait 'til sun up to start workin', us
started as soon as it was light enough. When it come to field work, you
couldn't tell the women from the men. Of course my marster had two old
women on the place and he never made them work hard, and he never did
whip' em. They always took care of the cookin' and the little chillun.

"I'll tell you one thing, they had better doctors then than they do now.
When folks had high blood pressure the doctors would cut you in your
head or your arm and folks would get over it then. They took better care
of themselves. Whenever anybody was caught in the rain they had to go to
the marster's house and take some medicine. They had somethin' that
looks like black draught looks now, and they would put it in a gallon
jug, fill it a little over half full of boiling water, and finish
fillin' it with whiskey. It was real bitter, but it was good for colds.
Young folk didn't die then like they do now. Whenever anybody died it
was a old person.

"I know more about conjuration than I'll ever be able to tell. I didn't
believe in it at one time, but I've seen so much of it that I can almost
look at a sick person and tell whether he is conjured or not. I wouldn't
believe it now if I hadn't looked at snakes come out of my own sister's
daughter. She married a man that had been goin' 'round with a old woman
who wasn't nothin'. Well one day this woman and my niece got in a fight
'bout him, and my niece whipped her. She was already mad with my niece
'bout him, and after she found she couldn't whip her she decided to get
her some way and she just conjured her.

"My niece was sick a long time and we had 'bout seven or eight diff'unt
doctors with her, but none of 'em done her any good. One day us was
sittin' on the porch and a man walked up. Us hadn't never seen him
before, and he said he wanted to talk with the lady of the house. I
'vited him in and he asked to speak to me alone. So I went in the front
room and told him to come on in there. When he got there he said just
like this: 'You have sickness don't you?' I said, 'yes.' Then he said:
'I know it, and I come by here to tell you I could cure her. All I want
is a chance, and you don't have to pay me a cent 'til I get her back on
her feet, and if I don't put her back on her feet you won't be out one
cent. Just promise you'll pay me when the work is done.' I told him to
come back the next day 'cause I would have to talk with her husband and
her mother 'fore I could tell him anythin'.

"Us all agreed to let him doctor on her since nobody else had did her
any good. Two days later he brought her some medicine to take and told
us to have her say: 'relieve me of this misery and send it back where it
come from.' Seven days from the day she started takin' this medicine she
was up and walkin' 'round the room. 'Fore that time she had been in bed
for more than five weeks without puttin' her feet on the floor. Well
three days after she took the first medicine, she told us she felt like
she wanted to heave. So we gave her the bucket and that's what come out
of her. I know they was snakes because I know snakes when I see 'em. One
was about six inches long, but the others was smaller. He had told us
not to be scared 'bout nothin' us saw, so I wasn't, but my sister was.
After that day my niece started to get better fast. I put the snakes in
a bottle and kept 'em 'til the man come back and showed 'em to him. He
took 'em with him. It was 'bout three weeks after this that the other
woman took sick and didn't live but 'bout a month."

Roy Redfield recalls that "when a person died several people would come
in and bathe the body and dress it. Then somebody would knock up some
kind of box for 'em to be buried in. They would have the funeral and
then put the body on a wagon and all the family and friends would walk
to the cemetery behind the wagon. They didn't have graves like they does
now; they would dig some kind of hole and put you in it, then cover you
up.

"In olden times there was only a few undertakers, and of course there
warn't any in the country; so when a person died he was bathed and
dressed by friends of the family. Then he was laid on a ironing board
and covered with a sheet.

"For a long while us knowed that for some cause a part of the person's
nose or lips had been et off, but nobody could find out why. Finally
somebody caught a cat in the very act. Most people didn't believe a cat
would do this, but everybody started watchin' and later found out it was
so. So from then on, 'til the caskets come into use, a crowd of folks
stayed awake all night sittin' up with the dead."

One old woman lived on a plantation where "every Saturday they would
give you your week's 'lowance. They would give you a plenty to eat so
you could keep strong and work. They weighed your meat, flour, meal and
things like that, but you got all the potatoes, lard and other things
you wanted. You got your groceries and washed and ironed on Saturday
evenin' and on Saturday night everybody used that for frolicin'. Us
would have quiltin's, candy pullin's, play, or dance. Us done whatever
us wanted to. On these nights our mist'ess would give us chickens or
somethin' else so us could have somethin' extra. Well, us would dance,
quilt, or do whatever us had made up to do for 'bout three hours then us
would all stop and eat. When us finished eatin' us would tell tales or
somethin' for a while, then everybody would go home. Course us have
stayed there 'til almost day when us was havin' a good time.

"My marster wanted his slaves to have plenty of chillun. He never would
make you do much work when you had a lot of chillun, and had them fast.
My ma had nineteen chillun, and it looked like she had one every ten
months. My marster said he didn't care if she never worked if she kept
havin' chillun like that for him. He put ma in the kitchen to cook for
the slaves who didn't have families.

"People who didn't have families would live in a house together, but
whenever you married you lived in a house to yourself. You could fix up
your house to suit yourself. The house where everybody lived that warn't
married, had 'bout a dozen and a half beds in it. Sometimes as many as
three and four slept in a bed together when it was cold. The others had
to sleep on the floor, but they had plenty of cover. Us didn't have
anythin' in this house but what was made by some of us. There warn't but
one room to this house with one fire place in it. Us never et in this
room, us had another house where everybody from this house and from the
house for the men who warn't married, et. Our beds was diff'unt from
these you see now. They was made by the slaves out of rough lumber. Our
marster seed to it that all the chillun had beds to sleep in. They was
taken good care of. Us had no such things as dressers or the like. Us
didn't have but a very few chairs 'cause the men didn't have time to
waste makin' chairs, but us had plenty of benches. Our trunks was made
by the men.

"People who had families lived by theyselves, but they didn't have but
one room to their houses. They had to cook and sleep in this one room,
and as their chillun got old enough they was sent over to the big house.
Everybody called it that. The house you lived in with your family was
small. It had a fire place and was only big enough to hold two beds and
a bench and maybe a chair. Sometimes, if you had chillun fast enough,
five and six had to sleep in that other bed together. Mothers didn't
stay in after their chillun was born then like they do now. Whenever a
child was born the mother come out in three days afterwards if she was
healthy, but nobody stayed in over a week. They never stayed in bed but
one day.

"When they called you to breakfast it would be dark as night. They did
this so you could begin workin' at daybreak. At twelve o'clock they
blowed the horn for dinner, but they didn't have to 'cause everybody
knowed when it was dinner time. Us could tell time by the sun. Whenever
the sun was over us so us could almost step in our shadow it was time to
eat. When us went in to eat all the victuals was on the table and the
plates was stacked on the table. You got your plate and fork, then got
your dinner. Some would sit on the floor, some in chairs, and some would
sit on the steps, but mos' everybody held their plates in their laps.
Whenever any of the slaves had company for dinner, us was allowed to set
the table and you and your company would eat at the table. In our
dinin'-room, we called it mess house, us only had one long table, one
small table, a stove, some benches, a few chairs, and stools. Whenever
us got out of forks the men would make some out of wood to be used 'til
some more could be bought. The food we got on Saturday would be turned
over to the cook.

"When you married, your husband didn't stay with you like they do now.
You had to stay with your marster and he had to stay with his. He was
'lowed to come every Saturday night and stay with you and the chillun
'til Monday mornin'. If he was smart enough to have a little garden or
to make little things like little chairs for his chillun to sit in or
tables for 'em to eat on and wanted you to have 'em 'fore he could get
back to see you, they would be sent by the runner. They had one boy they
always used just to go from one place to the other, and they called him
a runner. The runner wouldn't do anythin' else but that.

"Us made everythin' us wore. Us knitted our socks and stockin's. Things
was much better then than they are now. Shoes lasted two and three
years, and clothes didn't tear or wear out as easy as they do now. Us
made all our cloth at night or mos' times durin' the winter time when us
didn't have so much other work to do.

"When a person died he was buried the same day, and the funeral would be
preached one year later. The slaves made your coffin and painted it with
any kind of paint they could find, but they usually painted the outside
box black.

"The slaves 'tended church with their marsters and after their service
was over they would let the slaves hold service. They always left their
pastor to preach for us and sometimes they would leave one of their
deacons. When they left a deacon with us one of our preachers would
preach. They only had two kinds of song books: Baptist Cluster, and
Methodist Cluster. I kept one of these 'til a few years ago. Our
preachers could read some, but only a very few other slaves could read
and write. If you found one that could you might know some of his
marster's chillun had slipped and learned it to him 'cause one thing
they didn't 'low was no colored folk to learn to read and write. Us had
singin' classes on Sunday, and at that time everybody could really sing.
People can't sing now."