


TROUBLE EN ROUTE

After leaving Fort Carney our troubles began. Many of the drivers were
as treacherous as the Indians and would bear watching. One of them in
our mess was a former bushwhacker, who bore many scars of his former
unsavory life, one of which was the loss of an eye, which did not make
him a very desirable acquaintance, much less a companion. He was of an
ugly disposition, very seldom speaking to anyone and very few taking
the trouble to speak to him. At times he acted as if he had been
taking something stronger than coffee, but as we had not camped near
any ranch where the poison could be procured, I came to the conclusion
that he was a dope fiend. In some mysterious manner we had lost one of
our cups, and at each meal for a week it fell to the lot of this
particular bushwhacker to get left. He at last broke his long silence,
and in anger with oaths, vowed he would not eat another meal without a
cup, and would certainly take one from somebody, if obliged to. As
soon as the call for grub was heard the next morning, all rushed
simultaneously for a cup, and Mr. Bushwhacker got left again. Without
ceremony he proceeded to make good his threat, the second cook being
his victim.


TROUBLE EN ROUTE

For his trouble he received a stinging blow over his good eye, and was
sent sprawling in the alkali dust. Not being in the least dismayed, he
rushed for another and received a similar salute on the jaw, doubling
him up and bringing him to the earth. By this time both messes joined
in forming a ring and called for fair play. Mr. Perry tried hard to
stop it, but was finally convinced that it was better, policy to let
them have it out. How many times the fellow was knocked down, I do not
remember, but the last round finished him. We carried him to the shady
side of his wagon, covered him with a blanket and resumed our meal. On
going into corral, we always took our revolvers off and placed them
where they could easily be reached. We had been eating but a short
time, when the report of a gun rang out and each man fairly flew for
his weapons. Indians seldom made an attack except at early morning,
when the oxen were being yoked or when we were going into corral at
night. To the surprise of everyone Mr. Bushwhacker had taken another
lease of life and with a revolver in each hand was firing at anyone
his disturbed brain suggested. He was quick of action, firing and
reloading with rapidity, and soon had the entire camp playing hide and
seek between, around and under the wagons to keep out of the range of
his guns, which we succeeded in doing, for not a man was hit. Finally,
two of the drivers succeeded in getting behind him and overpowered
him. His brother bushwhackers were in for lynching him on the spot,
but wiser council prevailed, and his disposal was left to Mr. Perry
who sentenced him to be escorted back three miles from the corral and
left to walk the remaining two miles to Fort Carney alone. He covered
less than a mile when he was captured by the Indians. I was obliged
then to drive his team. A few evenings later my chum and friend were
lounging by the side of my wagon smoking, and otherwise passing the
time away, when finally the conversation turned to the departed driver
who by that time had undoubtedly been disposed of by the Indians--not
a very pleasant thought--but we consoled ourselves with the fact that
no one was to blame but himself. My chum inquired the contents of my
prairie schooner, and I replied that I did not know, but would
investigate. Suiting the action to the word I crawled in, struck a
match, and found a case labeled Hostetters' Bitters. Its ingredients
were one drop of Bitters and the remainder, poor liquor. I soon found
a case that had been opened, pulled out a bottle and sampled it. The
old story came to me about the Irish saloonkeeper and his bartender. I
called my chum and asked him if Murphy was good for a drink, he
replied, "Has he got it?" "He has?" "He is then!" and we all were. I
thought it would be impossible for the secret to be kept, but it was
until we were on the last leg to Denver. The entire load consisted of
cases of the Bitters. Fights were of frequent occurrence during the
remainder of the trip, Mr. Perry being powerless to prevent them.

Arriving at Central City where the Bitters were consigned, the
consignee reported to the freighter that the load just received
consisted of one-half Bitters, the remainder Platte river water. Each
man had twenty dollars deducted from his pay, and a large number of
the drivers, in addition, bore earmarks of its effect.

The country from Fort Carney for four hundred miles up the Platte
river valley and back from the high bluffs, that skirted the river on
either side, was one vast rolling plain with no vegetation except a
coarse luxuriant growth of grass in the valley near the river and
beyond the bluffs; in spots that were not bare grew the prickly pear,
and a short crisp grass of lightish color and of two varieties--the
bunch and buffalo grasses--which were very nutritious, as the cattle
thrived and grew fat on them. There was the clear sky and sun by day,
with an occasional sandstorm; the moon (when out) and stars by night,
but no rain--a vast thirsty desert. On the small islands of the river
a few scattered cottonwood trees were to be seen. Their high branches
embraced a huge bunch of something that resembled the nest of an
American Eagle, but on close inspection was found to be the corpse of
a lone Indian a long time dead. This was the mode of burial of some of
the tribes in the early days, using fur robes or blankets for a
casket. There was nothing to relieve the monotony in this desert land,
except desperate Indians, immense herds of animal life, daily
coaches--when not held back or captured by the Indians or mountain
highwaymen--returning freight trains, and the following points where
there were adobe ranches: Dog Town, Plum Creek, Beaver Creek,
Godfrey's, Moore's, Brever's at Old California Crossing and Jack
Morrow's at the junction of the north and south Platte, Fort
Julesburg, Cotton Wood and the Junction, each one hundred miles apart,
and John Corlew's and William Kirby near O'Fallow's Bluffs. It was
said of these ranchmen that some were honest and some were not; others
were in league with the Indians, and cattle and mule thieves, and, as
a rule, a bad lot. They traded supplies to the Indians for furs of
every kind. The winter passed in hunting, trapping, drinking, and
gambling.


O'FALLOW'S BLUFFS

