By agreement, Mr Bang and I met Mr Stornaway this morning, in order to
visit some other estates together, and during our ride I was
particularly gratified by his company.  He was a man of solid and very
extensive acquirements, and far above what his situation in life at that
time led one to expect.  When I revisited the island some years
afterwards, I was rejoiced to find that his intrinsic worth and ability
had floated him up into a very extensive business, and I believe he is
now a man of property. I rather think he is engaged in some statistical
work connected with Jamaica, which, I am certain, will do him credit
whenever it appears.  Odd enough, the very first time I saw him, I said
I was sure he would succeed in the world; and I am glad to find I was a
true prophet.  To return: Our chief object at present was to visit a
neighbouring estate, the overseer of which was, we were led to believe
from a message sent to Mr Bang, very ill with fever.  He was a most
respectable young man, Mr Stomaway told me, a Swede by birth, who had
came over to England with his parents at the early age of eight years,
where both he and his cousin Agatha had continued, until he embarked for
the West Indies.  This was an orphan girl whom his father had adopted,
and both of them, as he had often told Mr Stornaway, had utterly
forgotten their Swedish,--in fact, they understood no language but
English at the time he embarked.  I have been thus particular, from a
very extraordinary phenomenon that occurred immediately, preceding his
dissolution, of which I was a witness.

We rode up in front of the door, close to the fixed manger, where the
horses and mules belonging to the busha are usually fed, and encountered
a negro servant on a mule, with an umbrella--case slung across his back,
and a portmanteau behind him, covered with the usual sheep's fleece, and
holding a saddle horse.

"Where is your master?" said Mr Bang.

"De dactor is in de hose," replied quashie.  "Busha dere upon dving."

We ascended the rocky unhewn steps, and entered the cool, dark hall,
smelling strong of camphor, and slid over the polished floors towards an
open door, that led into the back piazza, where we were received by the
head book--keeper and carpenter.  They told us that the overseer had
been seized three days before with fever, and was now desperately ill;
and presently the doctor came forth out of the sick--room.

"Poor Wedderfelt is fast going, sir--cold at the extremities already
very bad fever--the bilious remittent of the country, of the worst type."

All this while the servants, male and female, were whispering to each
other; while a poor little black fellow sat at the door of the room,
crying bitterly--this was the overseer's servant.  We entered the room.
which was darkened from the jealousies being, all shut, except one of
the uppermost, which happening to be broken, there was a strong pencil
of light cast across the head of the bed where the sick man lay while
the rest of the room was involved in gloom.

The sufferer seemed in the last stage of yellow fever; his skin was a
bright vellow, his nose sharp, and his general features very much
pinched.  His head had been shaven, and there was a handkerchief bound
round it over a plantain leaf, the mark of the blister coming low down
on his forehead, where the skin was shrivelled like dry parchment
apparently it had not risen.  There was also a blister on his chest.  He
was very restless, clutching the bedclothes, and tossing his limbs
about; his mouth was ulcerated, and blood oozed from the corners; his
eyes were a deep yellow, with the pupil much dilated, and very,
lustrous; he was breathing with a heavy moaning noise when we entered,
and looked wildly round, mistaking Mr Bang and me for some other
persons.  Presently he began to speak very quickly, and to lift one of
his hands repeatedly close to his face, as if there was something in it
he wished to look at. I presently saw that it held a miniature of a fair
haired, blue--eyed Scandinavian girl; but apparently he could not see
it, from the increasing dimness of his eyes, which seemed to distress
him greatly.  After a still minute, during which no sound was heard but
his own heavy breathing, he again began to speak very rapidly, but no
one in the room could make out what he said. I listened attentively--it
struck me is being like--I was certain of it--it was Swedish, which in
health he had entirely forgotten, but now in his dying moments vividly
remembered.  Alas, it was a melancholy and a moving sight, to perceive
all the hitherto engrossing thoughts and incidents of his youth and
manhood, all save the love of one dear object, suddenly vanish from the
tablet of his memory, ground away and abrased, as it were, by his great
agony--or like worthless rubbish, removed from above some beautiful
ancient inscription, which for ages it had hid, disclosing in all their
primeval freshness, sharp cut into his dieing heart, the long
smothered, but never to be obliterated impressions of his early,
childhood. I could plainly distinguish the name Agatha, whenever he
peered with fast glazing eyes on the miniature.  All this while a nice
little brown child was lying playing with his watch and seals on the bed
beside him, while a handsome coloured girl, a slight young creature,
apparently its mother, sat on the other side of the dying man,
supporting his head on her lap, and wetting his mouth every now and then
with a cloth dipped in brandy.

As he raised the miniature to his face, she would gently endeavour to
turn away his hand, that he might not look at one whom she, poor thing,
no doubt considered was usurping the place in his fluttering heart, that
she long fancied had been filled by herself solely; and at other times
she would vainly try to coax it out of his cold hand, but the dieing
grasp was now one of iron, and her attempts evidently discomposed the
departing sinner; but all was done kindly and quietly, and a flood of
tears would every now and then stream down her cheeks, as she failed in
her endeavours, or as the murmured, gasped name, Agatha, reached her
ear.

"Ah!" said she, "him heart riot wid me now--it far away in him own
country, him never will make me yeerie what him say again no more."

Oh, woman, woman! who can fathom that heart of thine!  By this time the
hiccup grew stronger, and all at once he sat up strong in his bed
without assistance, "light as if he felt no wound;" but immediately
thereafter gave a strong shudder, ejecting from his mouth a jet of dark
matter like the grounds of chocolate, and fell back dead whereupon the
negroes began to howl and shriek in such a horrible fashion, that we
were glad to leave the scene.

Next day, when we returned to attend the poor fellow's funeral, we found
a complete bivouac of horses and black servants below the trees in front
of the house, which was full of neighbouring planters and overseers, all
walking about, and talking, and laughing, as if it had been a public
meeting on parish business.  Some of them occasionally went into the
room to look at the body as it lay in the open coffin, the lid of which
was at length screwed down, and the corpse carried on four negroes
shoulders to its long home, followed by the brown girl and all the
servants, the latter weeping and howling,--but she, poor thing, said not
a word, although her heart seemed, from the convulsive heaving of her
bosom, like to burst.  He was buried under a neighbouring orange--tree,
the service being read by the Irish carpenter of the estate, who got
half a page into the marriage service by mistake before either he or any
one else noticed he was wrong.

Three days after this the admiral extended my leave for a fortnight,
which I spent in a tour round this most glorious island with friend
Aaron, whose smiling face, like the sun, (more like the nor'west moon in
a fog, by the by,) seemed to diffuse warmth, and comfort, and happiness,
wherever he went, while Sir Samuel and his charming family, and the
general, and my dearie, and her aunt, returned home; and after a three
weeks philandering, I was married, and all that sort of thing, and a
week afterwards embarked with my treasure for I had half a million of
dollars on freight, as well as my own particular jewel; and don't grin
at the former, for they gave me a handsome sum, and helped to rig us
when we got to Ould England, where Lotus--Leaf was paid off, and I
settled for a time on shore, the happiest, &c. &c. &c., until some years
afterwards, when the wee Cringles began to tumble home so deucedly fast,
that I had to cut and run, and once more betake myself to the salt sea.
My aunt and her family returned at the same time to England, in a
merchant ship under my convoy, and became our neighbours.  Bang also got
married soon after to Miss Lucretia Wagtail, by whom he got the Slap
estate.  But old Gelid and my other allies remain, I believe, in single
blessedness until this hour.

MY TALE is told--my yarn is ended,--and were I to spin it longer, I fear
it would be only bending it "end for end;" yet still I linger, "like the
sough of an auld sang" on the ear, loath to pronounce that stern heart
crushing word, that yet "has been, and must be," and which, during my
boisterous and unsettled morning, has been, alas! a too familiar one
with me.  I hope I shall always bless Heaven for my fair Blinks,
although, as the day has wore on, I have had my own share of lee
currents, hard gales, and foul weather; and many an old and dear friend
has lately swamped alongside of me, while few new ones have shoved out
to replace them.  But suffering, that scathes the heart, does not always
make it callous; and I feel much of the woman hanging about mine still,
even now, when the tide is on the turn with me, and the iron voice of
the inexorable First--Lieutenant, Time, has sung out, "Strike the bell
eight,"--every chime smiting on my soul as if an angel spoke, to warn
me, that my stormy forenoon watch is at length over--that the sun, now
passing the meridian, must soon decline towards the western horizon, and
who shall assure himself of a cloudless setting.

I have, in very truth, now reached the summit of the bald spray washed
promontory, and stand on the slippery ledge of the cliff, that trembles
to the thundering of the surge beneath; but the plunge must be made--so
at once, Farewell all hands, and God bless ye.  If, while chucking the
cap about at a venture--but I hope and trust there has been no such
thing--it has alighted on the head of some ancient ally, and pinched in
any the remotest degree, I hereby express my most sincere and heartfelt
regret; and to such a one I would say, as he said, who wrote for all
time,

"I have shot Mine arrow o'er the house, and hurt my brother."

Thus I cut my stick while the play is good, and before the public gets
wearied of me; and, as for the Log, it is now launched, swim, or
founder; if those things be good, it will float from its own buoyancy;
if they be naught, let it sink at once and for ever--all that Tom
Cringle expects at the hands of his countrymen is--A CLEAR STAGE, AND NO
FAVOUR.

                  THE END.