Distributed Proofreaders from material generously made available by Cornell
University


PUNCHINELLO, Vol. I, Issue 10

SATURDAY, JUNE 4, 1870.

PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW-YORK.


[Illustration: Vol. I. No. 10.]


CONANT'S

_PATENT BINDERS_

FOR

"PUNCHINELLO,"

to preserve the paper for binding, will be sent, post-paid, on receipt
of One Dollar, by

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

83 Nassau Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO NEWS-DEALERS.

PUNCHINELLO'S MONTHLY.

THE FIVE NUMBERS FOR APRIL,

Bound in a Handsome Cover,

IS NOW READY. Price, Fifty Cents.

THE TRADE

SUPPLIED BY THE

AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,

Who are now prepared to receive Orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

HARRISON BRADFORD & CO.'S

STEEL PENS.

These pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and cheaper
than any other Pen in the market. Special attention is called
to the following grades, as being better suited for business purposes
than any Pen manufactured. The

"505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"

We recommend for bank and office use.

D. APPLETON & CO.,

_Sole Agents for United States_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: See 15th page for Extra Premiums.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Will Shortly appear: Our New Serial, written expressly for
Punchinello,
by ORPHEUS C. KERR, Entitled, "The Mystery of Mr. E. Drood." To be
continued weekly during this year._


APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN

"PUNCHINELLO"

Should be addressed to

J. NICKINSON,

Room No. 4,

83 NASSAU STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notice to Ladies.

DIBBLEE,

Of 854 Broadway,

Has just received a large assortment of all the latest styles of

Chignons, Chatelaines, etc.

FROM PARIS.

Comprising the following beautiful varieties:

La Coquette, La Plenitude, Le Bouquet,

La Sirene, L'Imperatrice etc.,

At prices varying from $2 upward.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHELAN & COLLENDER,

MANUFACTURERS OF

Standard American Billiard Tables.

WAREROOMS AND OFFICE,

738 BROADWAY, NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW-YORK CITIZEN

AND

ROUND TABLE,

A Literary, Political, and Sporting paper, with

the best writers in each department. Published every Saturday.

PRICE--Ten Cents.

32 Beckman Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: [Hercules with club and Apple of the Hesperides]
COPYRIGHT SECURED.]

HERCULES MUTUAL
LIFE ASSURANCE
SOCIETY
OF THE UNITED STATES.

No. 240 Broadway, New-York.

POLICIES NON-FORFEITABLE.

All Policies

Entitled to Participation in Profits.

Dividends Declared Annually.


JAMES D. REYMERT, President.

ASHER S. MILLS,
Secretary.

THOMAS H. WHITE, M.D.,
Medical Examiner.

ACTIVE AGENTS WANTED.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE
MERCHANTS
Life Insurance Company
OF NEW-YORK.

OFFICE, 257 BROADWAY,

ORGANIZED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW-YORK.

Issues all kinds of Life and Endowment Policies on the Mutual System, free
from restriction on travel and occupation, which permit residence
anywhere without extra charge.

Premiums may be paid annually, semi-annually, or quarterly in cash.

All Policies are non-forfeitable, and participate in the profits of the
Company.

Dividends are made annually, on the Contribution plan.

Pamphlets containing Rates of Premium, and information on the subject of
Life Insurance, may be obtained at the office of the Company, or any of
its Agents.

Parties desiring to represent this Company in the capacity of Agents
will please address the New-York Office.


WILLIAM T. PHIPPS

_President_.

A.D. HOLLY, _Secretary_.

HENRY HILTON, _Counsel_.

O.S. PAINE, M. D. _Medical Examiner_

C.H. KING, M.D. _Asst. Med Ex._


_Each Agent in direct communication with the New-York Office._

       *       *       *       *       *

Mercantile Library

Clinton Hall, Astor Place,

NEW-YORK.


This is now the largest circulating Library in America, the number of
volumes on its shelves being 114,000. About 1000 volumes are added each
month; and very large purchases are made of all new and popular works.

Books are delivered at members' residences for five cents each delivery.


TERMS OF MEMBERSHIP:

TO CLERKS,

$1 Initiation, $3 Annual Dues.

TO OTHERS, $5 a year.

SUBSCRIPTIONS TAKEN FOR

SIX MONTHS.


BRANCH OFFICES

AT

NO. 76 CEDAR STREET, NEW-YORK,

AND AT

Yonkers, Norwalk, Stamford, and Elizabeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMERICAN

BUTTONHOLE, OVERSEAMING,

AND

SEWING-MACHINE CO.,

572 and 574 Broadway, New-York.


This great combination machine is the last and greatest improvement on
all the former machines, making, in addition to all work done on best
Lock-Stitch machines, beautiful

BUTTON AND EYELET HOLES,

in all fabrics.

Machine, with finely finished

OILED WALNUT TABLE AND COVER

complete, $75. Same machine, without the buttonhole parts, $50. This last
is beyond all question the simplest, easiest to manage and to keep in
order, of any machine in the market. Machines warranted, and full
instruction given to purchasers.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HENRY SPEAR. PRINTER-LITHOGRAPHER STATIONER
BLANK BOOK MANUFACTURER.  82 WALL ST. NEW YORK.]

       *       *       *       *       *

J. NICKINSON

begs to announce to the friends of

"PUNCHINELLO"

residing in the country, that, for their convenience, he has
Made arrangements by which, on receipt of the price of

ANY STANDARD BOOK PUBLISHED.

the same will be forwarded, postage paid.

Parties desiring Catalogues of any of our Publishing Houses
can have the same forwarded by inclosing two stamps.

OFFICE OF

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.

83 Nassau Street,

[P.O. Box 2783.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[ILLUSTRATION: WHAT WE MAY CONFIDENTLY LOOK FOR.

_Jurywoman_. "I BEG TO INTERRUPT THE COURT WITH THE REQUEST THAT, BEFORE
THE CASE PROCEEDS ANY FURTHER, THE SHERIFF BE DIRECTED TO PROVIDE THE
JURYMAN ON MY RIGHT WITH A BOTTLE OF LURIN'S EXTRACT, OTHERWISE THE
FEMALE MEMBERS OF THE JURY WILL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
CONSEQUENCES," etc., etc.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A CONSISTENT LEAGUE.

Immediately upon McFarland's acquittal, the Union League of Philadelphia
determined to give a grand ball. And they did it. And, what is more,
they intend to do it every time the majesty of any kind of Union is
vindicated. Except, of course, the union of the "Iron interest" and the
public good.

One of the most valuable and instructive features of this ball was, the
grand opportunity it offered to the members of the League to show their
respect and affection for the spirit of the Fifteenth Amendment,
Accordingly, they invited a large number of colored ladies and
gentlemen, and the accursed spirit of caste was completely exorcised by
the exercises of the evening. The halls were grandly decorated with
blackberry and gooseberry bushes, and other rare plants; sumptuous
fountains squirted high great streams of XX ale and gin-and-milk;
enormous piles of panned oysters, lobster salad, Charlotte Russe, and
rice-pudding blocked up half the doorways, while within the dancing hall
the merriment was kept up grandly. The ball was opened by a grand
Cross-match waltz in which Hon. MORTON MCMICHAEL and Mrs. DINAH J--N;
GEORGE H. BOKER and Miss CHLOE P--T--N; WILLIAM D. KELLEY and Aunty Di.
LU-V-I-A-N; A. BORIE and Miss E. G--N; Gen. TYNDALE and Miss MAY OR--TY,
and several other distinguished couples twirled their fantastic toes in
the most reckless _abandon_. Virginia reels, Ole Kentucky break-downs,
and other characteristic dances diversified the ordinary Terpsichorean
programme, and the dancing was kept up to a late hour. It was truly
gratifying to every consistent supporter of the enfranchisement of the
African race, to see such gentlemen as _Senator_ REVELS, FREDERICK
DOUGLASS, Mr. PURVIS, and other prominent colored citizens, in the halls
of this patriotic and thoroughly American Society. The members of the
League were evidently of the opinion that it would be a most flagrant
shame, on an occasion of this kind, for them to deny to their colored
fellow citizens the rights and privileges that they are so anxious shall
be accorded them by every one else; and, while they do not believe that
they are bound to invite any one--black or white--to their private
reunions on account of political considerations, they do not attempt to
deny that, on an occasion of this kind--a celebration in fact of the
success of a political party--it would be most shameful to ostracize the
very citizens for whom that party labored and conquered. Therefore it
was that they so warmly welcomed, within their gorgeous halls, their
colored fellow-citizens, and by so doing won for themselves the
approbation of every consistent American. It was one of the most
affecting sights of the evening to see these gentlemen of the League,
nobly trampling under their feet all base considerations of color and
caste, and walking arm and arm with their colored sisters; smelling the
exotics; admiring the groups of statuary; sipping the coffee and the
punch; pricing the crimson curtains; inhaling the perfumes from the
cologne-water fountains; ascending and descending the grand walnut
staircase (arranged for this occasion only); listening to the birds in
the conservatories; and fixing their hair in the magnificent
dressing-rooms. When, in the midst of the festivities the band struck up
the beautiful air, "Ask me no more!" the honored guests of color looked
at each other with pleasant smiles which seemed to denote a perfect
satisfaction. And so, whatever may be said of the friends of the colored
race in other parts of the country, it must be universally admitted that
the Union League of Philadelphia has done its duty!

       *       *       *       *       *

Good Reading for Topers.

MR. GREELEY's "Recollections of a Boozy Life."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sporting Intelligence.

A NEWSPAPER item says that "a Mexican offers to shoot JUAREZ for $200."

That's nothing. TAYLOR, of Jersey City, offers to shoot any man in the
world for $2000.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Favorite Drink of the Canadian Government.

CABINET Whiskey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by the
PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District
Court of the United States, for the Southern District of New-York.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PUNCHINELLO CORRESPONDENCE.]

The public still labor under misapprehensions of our character and
calling. We are in daily receipt of letters of the most heterogeneous
description, the task of answering which we are compelled to utterly
forego.

We subjoin a few specimens:

"MR. PUNCHINELLO. _Dear Sir_: My wife died yesterday, and would you be
so kind as to come and make her will? I would not give you the trouble
of coming, but the young woman I intend to marry next is going away
to-morrow, and I don't want to leave home. My wife had five hundred
dollars which I want left to me, and a feather bed, which you may divide
amongst the children.

"Yours in affliction,

"SOLOMON SNIPP."


"SIR: I calculate to give a funeral down at my place shortly, that is,
if things go right; but we have no preacher to do the work. Would you
please to send us one? Not particular what kind, so long as the work is
_sure_. Party is not dead yet, but I make arrangements beforehand as I
expect to be insane. Good pay for good work.

"Sincerely,

"P. MCFINIGAN.

"P. S. Do preachers warrant their burials?"


"DEAR MR. PUNCHINELLO:--You were so good as to prescribe a hot pitch
plaster for the baby's mouth. Next day I took the prescription to your
office, but failed to get it made up, as the devil, they told me, was
busy. Will you please inform me when you will be at leisure? Meanwhile
baby yells.

"Yours truly,

"C. PUGSBY.

"P.S. _Later_. Mrs. PUGSBY says if I apply that plaster she will go
insane. True, she does not understand fire-arms, but then I should be
afraid to drink any coffee for a month. In the meantime, if the baby
keeps on, I shall go crazy myself; so there is likely to be a casualty
somewhere. What's to be done? Shall I bring the child to you?

"C. P."


_Answer_. At your peril. Go crazy and shoot it; then we will go crazy
and turn counsel for the defence. The result will probably be that you
are handed over to the ladies to be kissed into reason; but if you would
rather be hung, you must do the shooting over in New-Jersey.

       *       *       *       *       *

"BEAUTIFUL SNOW."

Circumstances having rendered it probable that the dispute respecting
the authorship of the poem "Beautiful Snow" may shortly be revived,
PUNCHINELLO takes this opportunity of setting the public right on the
subject, and silencing further controversy regarding it for ever.

It is the production of Mr. PUNCHINELLO, himself; was composed by him so
long ago as July, 1780, and copyrighted in August of the same year. It
may be asked how the idea of snow-flakes happened to occur to him in
July. That question is easily settled. The day was sultry; thermometer
98° in the arbor. Drowsed by the sultry air--not to mention the iced
claret--Mr. PUNCHINELLO posed himself gracefully upon a rustic bench,
and slept. Presently the lovely lady who was fanning him, fascinated by
the trumpet tones that preceded from his nose, exclaimed: "Beautiful
Snore!" This was repeated to him when he awoke, and hence the origin of
the poem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fish Culture.

The Grand Duke ALEXIS, of Russia, proposes to come to these shores and
inspect the American system of fish culture. With this end in view, he
will, of course, be the particular guest of Gen. GRANT, and will, no
doubt, be surprised to find that our principal FISH is a cultivated man.
But he will better understand our FISH system by witnessing its
operations in Spanish and Canadian waters, as also in those of Sault St.
Marie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Linsey-Woolsey.

The regular troops for the Canadian Red River Expedition have been
supplied by Gen. LINDSEY, and are commanded by Col. WOLSLEY--a fact
oddly co-incidental with the reported flimsy character of the
expedition, so far as it has gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TOO TRUE! Scene-Academy. Time-Spring of 70. Miss Smith.
"WHAT DOES 'N.A.' MEAN AFTER SOME OF THESE ARTISTS' NAMES?" Miss Brown.
"N.A. WHY IT MUST MEAN 'NEEDY ARTISTS.' POOR FELLOWS!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

Bivalvulor Intelligence.

It is stated that the clams along the Stratford shore are dying by
thousands of a malignant disease, which a correspondent of the
Bridgeport _Standard_ calls "clam cholera." This is a sad c'lamity for
the people of the Stratford shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Fifteenth Amendment.

The appointment of colored postmasters in Maryland may be all very well;
but PUNCHINELLO would like to know whether the Post-office authorities
intend to revive the custom of Blackmailing.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

[Illustration: C]

Comedy personified, in Mr. CLARKE, has now reigned at BOOTH'S for nearly
six weeks. During that time there has been a perceptible change in the
metaphorical atmosphere of the house. The audience no longer wears the
look of subdued melancholy which was once involuntarily assumed by each
mourner for the memory of SHAKSPEARE, who passed the solemn threshold.
The ushers no longer find it necessary to sustain their depressed
spirits by the surreptitious chewing of the quid of consolation, and are
now the most pleasant, as they were always the most courteous, of their
kind. Persons have even been heard, within the past week, to allude to
BOOTH'S as a "theatre," instead of a "temple of art;" and though the
convulsions of nature which attend the shifting of the scenery, and
cause castles to be violently thrown up by volcanic eruptions and
forests to be suddenly swallowed by gaping earthquakes, impart a certain
solemnity to the brightest of comedies, still there is a general
impression among the audience that BOOTH'S has become a place of
amusement. And in noting this change PUNCHINELLO does not mean to jeer
at the former and normal character of BOOTH'S. BEETHOVEN'S Seventh
Symphony, DANTE'S Inferno, JEFFERSON'S Rip Van Winkle, and EDWIN BOOTH'S
Hamlet are not amusing, but it does not follow that they are therefore
unworthy of the attention of the public, which is pleased with the
rattle of De Boots, and tickled with the straw of Toodles.

FOX vs. GOOSE is a three act comedy in which Mr. CLARKE last week made
his audience laugh as freely as though the tomb-stones of all the
Capulets were not gleaming white and awful in the lamplight of the
property-room; or, at all events, would be gleaming if any body were to
hunt them up with a practicable lantern. The opening scene is the
tap-room of an inn, where Mr. FOX FOWLER, an adventurer, is taking his
ease and his unpaid-for gin-and-milk.

_Enter Landlord, presenting his bill_. "Here, sir, you've been drinking
my beer for several years, and now I want you to pay for it."

_Fox_. "My friend! why ask me to pay bills? Do you not perceive that I
wear a velvet coat? And, besides, even if I wanted to pay I could not
until my baggage, which I gave to an expressman ten years ago, shall
reach me. It will probably arrive in a month or two more."

_Landlord_. "Here comes Sir GANDER GOSLING. I'll complain to him of your
conduct."

(_Enter Sir Gander_.)

_Fox_. "My dear Sir GANDER. Allow me to embrace you."

_Sir Gander_. "I don't know you. I'm not my son JACK."

_Fox_. "But I am Jack's dearest friend. I have saved him from drowning,
from matrimony, from reading the _Nation,_ from mothers-in-law, and all
other calamities mentioned in the litany."

_Sir Gander_. "Describe him to me, if you know him so well."

_Fox_. "He is tall, dark, slender, and quiet in manner."

_Sir Gander_. "My dear fellow he is short, fat, light, and noisy. I am
convinced that you know him. Permit me to pay your bill, lend you money,
and tell you all about our dear JACK'S intended marriage." (_He pays,
lends, and narrates accordingly. A terrific rattling of dishpans
simulates the arrival of a train. Sir_ GANDER _departs and_ JACK GOSLING
_enters._)

_Fox_. "My dear JACK, allow me to embrace you."

_Jack_. "I don't know you. I'm not my father."

_Fox_. "But I am your father's dearest friend. Sit down and have a
bottle of wine, and tell me all about ROSE MANDRAKE, your intends bride.
'Rose! Rose! the coal black Rose!' as MILTON finely remarks." (_They sit
down and_ JACK _immediately gets very drunk, thereby affording another
proof of the horribly adulterated condition of the liquor used on the
stage, which infallibly intoxicates an actor within two minutes after it
is imbibed. [Let the Excise authorities see to this matter.] Finally_
JACK _falls, and the curtain immediately follows his example.)

Critical Young Man, who reads all the theatrical "notices" in the Herald
in the leisure moments when he is not selling yards of tape and ribbon_.
"I don't think much of CLARKE. He ain't half the man that NED FORREST
is. There ain't a bit of spontanatious humor in him. Them San Francisco
Minstrels can beat him out of sight."

_Accompanying Young Female Person_. "Yes, I think so, too. I hate to see
a man act drunk. It's so low and vulgar. I like pretty plays, like they
have at WALLACK'S."

_Respectable Old Gentleman_. "PLACIDE--BLAKE--BURTON--"

_Every Body Else_. "Well, this is real humor; I haven't laughed so much
since I heard BEECHER preach a funeral sermon."

The second act takes place in the house of Major MANDRAKE. Fox has
successfully assumed the character of JACK GOSLING, and is having a
pleasant chat with the family, when the gardener enters to inform the
Major that a flock of crows is in sight.

_Major Mandrake_. "I love the pleasures of the chase. Bring my gun, and
I will shoot the crows." (_He goes out, and shoots_ JACK, _who is
climbing over the gate. Re-enter Major and men carrying_ JACK.)

_Major_. "Alas! I have missed the crow over the cornfield, and lost the
crow over my shooting which I would otherwise have had. Also I have shot
a man out of season, and the sportsmen's club will prosecute me."

_Jack_. "I am not dead, though my appearance and conversation might
induce you to think so. My name is JACK GOSLING. The chap in the velvet
coat is an impostor."

_Major, Fox, and other dramatis persons_. "Away with the wretch! He
himself is the impostor. Call a policeman who will club him if he makes
no resistance."

JACK is dragged away, but perpetually returns and denounces his rival.
He is bitten by suppositious dogs cunningly simulated by stage
carpenters, who remark "bow wow" from behind the scenes. He is cut by
ROSE MANDRAKE, and also by rows of broken bottles, which line the top of
the wall on which he makes a perilous perch, not having a pole or rod
with which to defend himself against the dogs. He is challenged by Fox
and seconded by Miss BLANCHE BE BAR in naval uniform. Finally he takes
refuge in the china closet, and hurls cheap plates and saucers at his
foes. With the exhaustion of the supply of crockery, the act naturally
comes to an end, and, as frequently occurs in similar cases, the curtain
falls.

_Comic Man_. "Why does CLARKE, when he slings china at the company,
remind you of the Paraguayan war? Of course you give it up. Because he
carries on a war on the Plate. Do you see it? Crockery plates and the
river Plate, you know. Ha! ha!"

And two ushers, reinforced by a special policeman, drag the miserable
man away, and lead him to MAGONIGLE'S private room, there to be dealt
with for the hideous crime of making infamous jokes in BOOTH'S theatre.
He is never seen again, and so the Philadelphia _Day_ loses its
brightest ornament.

The third act consists of a duel between JACK and FOX, each of whom is
too cowardly to fight. They therefore follow the safer example of rival
editors, and swear and scold at each other. At last a small millennium
of universal reconciliation takes place, and the usual old comedy "tag"
ends the play.

(Parenthetically, why "tag?" Does it receive this name because its
invariable stupidity suggests those other worthless commodities "rag"
and "bob-tail," which, outside of theatres, are generally associated
with the name.)

And every body goes away murmuring of the genial humor of CLARKE, the
magical violin of MOLLENHAUER, the elegance, convenience and comfort of
the theatre, the matchless memory of BOOTH'S Hamlet and Iago, and the
golden certainty of the coming of Rip Van Winkle. And every body is
supremely satisfied, and says to every body else, "This theatre needs
only a company, to be the foremost theatre of either continent."

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

Remarks by Our Stammering Contributor.

The up-town theatrical sensation is, we hear, produced "regardless of
expense." We had reason to think that its managers would show more
Frou-frou-frugality.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PISCATORY DISCUSSION.

_Uncle Walton_. "THAR! DIDN'T I TOLE YER? KNOW'D HE COULDN'T KETCH NO
FISH WID DAT 'AR BUGGY-WHIP OF A THING!"

_Isaac_. "YAH! DON'T TALK!--WAIT TILL HE TURNS DAT 'AR CRANK, AND SEE IF
DE PEERCH DON'T COME A-WINDIN' IN!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

COMIC ZOOLOGY.

THE MONKEY TRIBE.

Of this genus there are countless varieties, differing widely in the cut
of their monkey jackets, as the untravelled American naturalist will
doubtless have observed on traversing his native sidewalk. The educated
specimens met with in our cities are upon the whole well Organized, and
appear to have music in their soles. For its feats _à pied_, the tame
monkey is indebted to a Piedmontese who accompanies him.

To behold the monkey race in their glory, however, they must be seen in
their native woods, where they dwell in genteel independence, enjoying
their entailed estates and living on their own cocoa nuts. There will be
found the Gibbon, whose Decline and Fall when yielding the Palm to some
aspiring rival is swifter than that of the Roman Empire; the Barberry
Ape, so called from feeding exclusively on Barberries; the
Chimpanzee--an African corruption of Jump-and-see, the name given to the
animal by his first European discoverers in compliment to his alertness;
the Baboon, a melancholy brute that, as you may observe from his visage,
always has the blues; to say nothing of a legion of Red Monkeys, which
are particularly Rum Customers.

Some men of science have advanced the theory that man is the climactic
consequence of innumerable improvements of the monkey; the negro as he
now exists being the result of the Fifteenth Amendment. These
philosophers erect a sort of pyramid of progress, placing an Ape at the
base and a Caucasian at the Apex. This wild hypothesis of a monkey
apotheosis can of coarse only be regarded Jockolarly, in other words,
with a grin. Nevertheless the Marmozet is sufficiently like a little
Frenchwoman to be called a Ma'amoiselle, and there are (in New-Zealand
for instance) human heathen with a craving for the Divine, to whom the
Gorilla, though not a man, is certainly a brother. Possibly the Orang
Outang, if able to express his thoughts in an harangue, might say with
Mr. DICKENS, "I am very human." He certainly looks it.

There is a strong facial resemblance among the simious races--_Simia
Similibus_. This likeness does not, however, extend in all cases to the
opposite extremity. Some monkeys have no tails. Of the tailless Apes it
is said that they originally erased their rear appendages by too much
sitting--perhaps as members of the "Rump" in some Anthropoid Congress.
Be that as it may, the varieties that have retained their tails seem
disposed to hang on to them, and will doubtless continue to do so by
hook or by crook.

The natives of Africa believe that the monkeys would converse with them
if they were not afraid of being set to work; but it is quite apparent
that they are not averse either to labor or conversation, inasmuch as
among themselves they frequently Mow and Chatter.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT AFRICAN TEA COMPANY.

MR. PUNCHINELLO: If I can induce you to take a few shares in the
above-named Co. (at a merely nominal price, I assure you,) I think I
shall do you a very great favor, and at the same time secure to the Co.
the benefit of your enormous influence.

The Grand Points, in this unequalled Scheme, may be explained as
follows:

The Tea is from the new African Tea Fields, (that is the holds of ships
in which it has spoiled, or become musty, or lost its bouquet, and the
old chests of the usual dealers,) and is delivered in our ware-rooms for
a mere song, so to speak: say the Song of Sixpence (a pound.)

At a small additional outlay, we dye and scour this Tea, or otherwise
Renovate it to such an extent that Nature herself would be deceived, at
least till she began to sip the decoction from it, when, perhaps, she
would conclude not to try any further issues with this Co.

These African Tea Fields (cultivated by Ourselves) are "situated near
the Cape of Good Hope." From the recent appreciation of African
Interests (and, of course, technology,) you will perceive that in our
Name and Scheme is Good Hope indeed, for the Stockholders, if not the
tea-drinkers.

Our system of business embraces, in part, the following ingenious and
strictly novel features: By means of circulars and extensive advertising
we convince the public (an easy task) that, in consequence of Raising
the Tea Ourselves, from "Our Own Tea Fields," (and thus saving a great
many profits to different absorbents of the people's money,) we can
afford it at ruinously low prices, yet the Tea is always A. 1. (which,
in familiar language, might be construed as A Wonder especially to the
Chinese.) We make a great variety out of the same stock! One may always
know the Great A. Co.'s Tea from the circumstance of it's never having
either odor or flavor. We find, after ample experience, that the
presence of either of these qualities directly injures the sale. Give it
plenty of Astringency (an easy knack) and it will be sure to go down in
this country. It is our experience (and that of many other Operators of
our kind--or _upon_ our kind, if you prefer the phrase,) that people
_like to be imposed upon,_ and can always be taken with the Economical
hook. If an article (of Tea, for instance) is only "cheap" enough, it
may be ever so nasty and unwholesome, and yet it will Sell! Sell? Bless
you! you can't produce it fast enough--even from your Own Tea Fields!

We make an article of Coffee (which we have almost decided to call
Cuffee) that has as much Color in one pound as the real (an inferior)
article has in six! Boarding-house keepers praise it! It goes far, and
is actually preferred to Mocha! We sell it for less than the latter
could be bought for at wholesale, in Arabia, and yet you will readily
believe we make money by it.

A few shares will be sold to you for a mere fraction of their nominal
value. Call and see us, at the sign of the GREAT AFRICAN (TEA CO.)

T. T. T. (for the Co.)

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR CUBAN TELEGRAMS.

We are happy to inform our readers that we have made a special
arrangement with the telegraph companies, by which we shall receive the
only reliable news from Cuba. The following telegrams from Havana, which
were received at this office at a late hour last night, will show how
full and accurate our Cuban news will henceforth be:

FIRST DISPATCH.

HAVANA, May 26th, 9 P.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--A great battle was
fought yesterday between the National army and the Spanish Cut-throats.
General CESPEDES, with five hundred men, attacked VALMESEDA, who had
eleven thousand men in a strong position, and completely routed him. The
Invaders lost ten thousand in killed and wounded, and nine hundred
prisoners. Twenty pieces of artillery were captured. This blow will
crush the Spanish brigands, and make certain the independence of the
island. Our loss was trifling--only a drummer-boy or two.

SECOND DISPATCH.

9:30 P.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--A great battle was fought
yesterday between the loyal army and the rebel hordes. General
VALMESADA, with five hundred men, attacked CESPEDES, who had eleven
thousand men in a strong position, and completely routed him. The
brigands lost ten thousand in killed and wounded, and nine hundred
prisoners. Twenty pieces of artillery were captured. This blow will
crush the rebels, and make certain the establishment of order in the
island. Our loss was trifling--only a sutler or two.

THIRD DISPATCH.

10 P.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--Our victory was more complete than
at first believed. Only two Spaniards escaped. Our only loss was one
drummer-boy slightly wounded.

FOURTH DISPATCH.

10:30 P.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--Our victory was more
complete than was at first believed. Only two rebels escaped. Our only
loss was one sutler somewhat demoralized.

FIFTH DISPATCH.

11 P.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--CESPEDES had only two hundred men,
and VALMESADA eight thousand. The latter is reported killed. The victory
was complete.

SIXTH DISPATCH.

11:30 P.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--VALMESEDA had only two
hundred men, and CESPEDES eight thousand. The latter is reported killed.
The victory was complete.

SEVENTH DISPATCH.

12 M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--The battle was not so bloody as was at
first reported. The Patriots had fifty men, and were greatly
outnumbered. Several dead Spaniards were left on the field. No artillery
was captured, but a great quantity of supplies was taken.

EIGHTH DISPATCH.

12:30 A.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--The battle was not so
bloody as was at first reported. The loyal force consisted of only fifty
men, and many dead rebels were left on the field. No artillery was
captured, but a great quantity of bananas was taken.

NINTH DISPATCH.

1 A.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--It is now known that the battle was
only a skirmish. The Spaniards attacked our men in order to seize upon
their extra linen. They were repulsed however.

TENTH DISPATCH.

1:30 A.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--It is now known that the
battle was only skirmish. The rebels attacked a hen-roost in search of
eggs, but were repulsed.

ELEVENTH DISPATCH.

3 A.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--The rumor of a battle seems to have
originated in a fight between a Patriot and a mob of blood-thirsty
Spaniards in an alley in this city. The latter managed to escape.

TWELFTH DISPATCH.

2:30 A.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--The rumor of a battle
evidently grew out of a fight in an alley of this city, between a
Volunteer and a mob of rebel sympathizers. The latter were all arrested.

THIRTEENTH DISPATCH.

3 A.M.--(_From the American, Consul_.)--Yesterday a Cuban boy threw a
stone at a dog belonging to one of the volunteers. The dog ran away. All
is quiet in the city, and elsewhere on the island.

At this point we were compelled to go to press. The above dispatches,
however, furnish the latest and only reliable intelligence from Cuba.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ONE VIEW OF THE QUESTION.

_Nervous Man_. "UP FOUR FLIGHTS OF STAIRS, AND THROUGH NO END OF CROOKED
PASSAGES. HOW AM I TO GET OUT IN CASE OF FIRE?"

_Polite Waiter_. "NO OCCASION WHATEVER FOR ANXIETY, SIR; THE HOUSE IS
FULLY INSURED."]

       *       *       *       *       *

A Good Turn Meant.

THERE is some talk of reviving the Tournament in this region, and the
young men are expected to show their skill in "riding at the ring." If
our young men were to put any number of good sharp lances through a few
of our City Rings, they would be noble and chivalrous fellows, surely.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Dumb Beasts' Friend.

Mr. BERGH, the philodoggist, is an honest oracle in his way, and when he
opes his mouth we hope no cur will be ungrateful enough to bark. He says
in his last lecture that dumb animals are creatures like unto himself.
That accounts for Mr. BERGH being Deer to the quadrupeds, and such a
Terrier to their enemies.

       *       *       *       *       *

Land and Water.

An Ocean Cable Company has just asked Congress for a grant of lands. The
request is natural, as the Company, of course, wants to see its cable
well Landed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Kellogg Testimonial.

