--

_10th round_. 1 plain, 2 beads, 2 plain, 1 bead, 1 plain, 3 beads, 2
plain, 4 beads; repeat.--

_11th round_. 2 plain, 1 bead, 1 plain, 2 beads, 4 plain, 6 beads;
repeat.--

_12th round_. 5 plain, 3 beads, 4 plain, 4 beads; repeat.--

_13th round_. 12 plain, 4 beads; repeat,--_14th round_. 8 plain, 8
beads; repeat.--

_15th round_. 10 plain, 2 beads, 1 plain, 3 beads; repeat.--

_17th round_. Plain, decreasing by missing every 16th stitch. Work 1
round with gold, then divide the purse, and work one-half with cerise;
work 8 rows, passing down a bead at every stitch, and decreasing a
stitch at the beginning and end of each row; work the other half to
correspond; sew on to the top, and finish with tassel in the centre of
star.

       *       *       *       *       *


CROCHET.

63. ROUND COLLAR.

_Materials--White, and three shades of scarlet and shaded green Berlin
wool;_ _Penelope crochet No. 2_.


With white make a chain of 84 stitches; work a row of single open
crochet.--

_2d row (lightest scarlet)_. 3 chain, 3 long, miss 2; repeat to the
end.--

_3d row (second shade of scarlet)_. 1 long worked in the centre long
stitch of previous row, 5 chain; repeat.--

_4th row (dark scarlet)_. 3 long worked above the long, and the last and
first stitches of the chain, 4 chain; repeat.--

_5th row (green)_. Commence in the edge stitch of third row. 5 chain,
miss 3 *, 5 long, 3 chain, miss 1; repeat from *, and work to the end,
which must be finished with 5 chain, 1 plain, worked in the third row.--

_6th row (white)_. Commence at the edge-stitch of the third row. 6
chain, * 5 plain worked above the 5 long of previous row, 4 chain:
repeat from * to the end, and finish with 6 chain. Fasten the white wool
to the second stitch of fourth row, 6 chain, 3 plain worked above the 3
long of fourth row; repeat. Pass through every second stitch of white
row, and place a rosette of ribbon at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *


EMBROIDERY

64. PRINCE OF WALES'S PLUME.

_Materials--Crimson satin and gold twist_.


Draw the design, and work in embroidery-stitch. This elegant design is
suitable for the centre of a book-cover, a watch-pocket, and many other
purposes, which the taste of the worker may suggest.

       *       *       *       *       *

NETTING

65. PATTERN FOR WINDOW-CURTAINS.

_Materials--Raworths crochet-thread No. 30, or fine knitting-cotton_.


Use cotton No. 10 for embroidering the pattern. Meshes No. 4, No. 6, and
a flat mesh three-fourths of an inch in width, will be required for the
edge.


Commence with a foundation of 300 loops on mesh No. 4, and net till the
length required is worked; then net the following edge at the sides and
end; net two loops in every loop on the large mesh, making four loops in
the corner loops.--

_2d row_. Take two loops together, netting two in these.--

_3d row_. Take every loop on mesh No. 6.--

_4th row_. Like 3d row.--

_5th row_. Net two loops in every loop on the large mesh.--

_6th and 7th rows_. Like 3d and 4th. Work the pattern in darning-stitch,
as in illustration.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No. 63. ROUND COLLAR.]

[Illustration: No. 64. PRINCE OF WALES'S PLUME.]

[Illustration: No. 65. PATTERN FOR WINDOW-CURTAINS.]

[Illustration: No. 66. GENTLEMAN'S BRACES.]

       *       *       *       *       *


EMBROIDERY

66. GENTLEMAN'S BRACES.

_Materials--Black velvet or white satin ribbon of a very good quality,
and five shades of crimson and three of green embroidery silk_.


Line the ribbon with linen; draw the design, and work in
embroidery-stitch, shading, as taste may direct,--the leaves with the
greens, and the roses with crimson, using three shades for each rose,
and working first only with the lightest shades, then with the darkest
only.

       *       *       *       *       *


EMBROIDERY

67. TOILET-CUSHION.

_Materials--White or black satin; three shades of crimson, three shades
of yellow, three shades of green, and two shades of olive green
embroidery silk; one yard of crimson and one yard of green chenille will
also be required_.


Draw the pattern on the material, and work in embroidery-stitch one rose
with the shades of crimson, and the second with the shades of yellow;
the leaves with the shades of green, and the stems with olive; work a
few stitches with the shades of the roses in the centre of the
rose-buds, and work the corner designs with green and olive. In the
arrangement of the colours, the taste and judgment of the worker must be
exercised, as much depends upon the harmoniously blending of the various
shades.

       *       *       *       *       *


NETTING

68. THE HELEN CAP.

_Materials--Scarlet floss silk, or five shades of scarlet Berlin wool;
meshes Nos. 3 and 6; cornucopia gauge, and a flat mesh, an inch in
width_.


The cap is worked in honeycomb netting, and the borders and rosette in
plain netting. With the darkest shade make a foundation of 56 stitches
on mesh No. 3, net 2 rows with each shade, increasing a stitch at the
end of each row; leave one-half of the cap plain, and net a border in
the following manner on the remaining loops and at the ends:--With the
darkest shade net 4 loops in every loop on the flat mesh, increasing by
making 6 loops in each of the three corner stitches; then on mesh No. 3,
net 1 loop in each, and finish by netting a row with the next shade on
the smallest mesh: this must be repeated at each side of the cap. For
the second border, net 100 loops on the flat mesh on a foundation of
wool, and finish to correspond with the first border. Two pieces netted
in this manner are required, and they are arranged in festoons at the
sides of the cap. Pass a cord the size required through the
foundation-stitches, join it, and sew on a rosette made in the following
manner:--With the darkest shade net 100 loops on mesh No. 3; then with
the next shade net 2 rows at each side and at the ends; make this into a
rosette with long ends, as in illustration.

This elegant and becoming head-dress derives its name from the beautiful
sister-in-law of the Emperor of Russia, the Grand Duchess Helen, who
introduced this style of coiffure at St. Petersburg.

       *       *       *       *       *


INDIAN ORNAMENTAL WORK

69. SCREEN.

Beautiful cabinets, work-boxes, work-tables, fire-screens, &c., may be
painted in imitation of ebony inlaid with ivory by the following
means:--Let your screen be made of an elegant form, but merely of common
white wood or deal, prepared as below.


_Composition for the Surface of Wood_.--Steep one ounce of glue in a
pint of cold water all night; throw off the water in the morning. Take
six ounces of finest white lead in powder, mix it by degrees in a
mortar, with about half a pint of cold water, till it is perfectly
smooth, then place it, along with the glue, in a clean pan. Add half a
pint more water; set it on the fire, stirring constantly till it boils.
Let it boil three minutes; take it off, and pour it into a stone jar,
and continue to stir it occasionally till cold. When cold, but before it
congeals, take a clean paint-brush, and paint your screen with the
composition. When it is quite dry, rub it over with sand-paper, to make
it quite smooth; then give it another coat of the white composition,
repeating the rubbing with sand-paper as before. Repeat this same
process five or six times, until you obtain a smooth, equal, white
surface. When that is accomplished, dissolve the fourth of an ounce of
isinglass in a quarter of a pint of water; when cold, but liquid, give
the screen a coat of it with a clean brush, and do not use the
sand-paper after it.

_To Ornament the Screen_.--Lay a sheet of black tracing-paper on the
screen, with the black side downwards; then place a pattern above it,
with the right side uppermost; place a weight here and there, to prevent
it slipping; then trace over the outline with a rather blunt stiletto.
On removing the paper, you will find the outline of the pattern
transferred to the surface of the screen. Trace over the outline,
and shade, in lines, with a fine camel's-hair pencil dipped in Newman's
lamp-black; fill in with the same.

_Varnish_.--Place four ounces of rectified spirit of wine in a
wide-mouthed bottle; add one ounce of gum sandarac, a quarter of an
ounce of gum mastic, and a drachm of camphor, all in powder. Put a
stopper in the bottle, set it near a fire, and shake it occasionally.
When all the gums are quite dissolved, add one ounce of oil of
turpentine; then strain through muslin into another clean, dry
wide-mouthed bottle. Let it stand a day or two before using.

_Mode of Varnishing_.--Take a large clean new varnish-brush, dip it into
the bottle, and then cover over all your screen with it. When perfectly
dry, give it another coat, and so on till it has had six coats; let it
remain untouched for two days; rub it smooth with sand-paper; then give
it two more coats of varnish, and repeat the rubbing, being careful to
wait between each coat till the last is dry, and not to rub with
sand-paper sooner than two days after varnishing, and never give more
than two coats of varnish in a day--one in the morning, another at
night. When you think it looks clear and sufficiently thick, give it
another coat without using the sand-paper after it; let it stand four
days; then rub it all over with pounded rottenstone, and wipe it off
with a wet cloth; after which take a little Florence oil and
hair-powder, and polish with your hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No 67. TOILET CUSHION.]

[Illustration: No. 68. THE HELEN CAP.]

[Illustration: No. 69. SCREEN]

[Illustration: No. 70. HEARTSEASE]

       *       *       *       *       *


KNITTING

70. HEARTSEASE.

_Materials--Split Berlin wool, and knitting-needles No. 20; cornucopia
gauge_.


_Violet Petals_.--Cast on three stitches with a bright shade of violet;
knit and pearl in alternate rows, making a stitch at the beginning of
every row, until you have fourteen or sixteen stitches; then knit and
pearl six rows alternately, without increase, and continue in knitted
and pearled rows, decreasing one stitch at the beginning of each row,
till six or eight stitches alone remain; these cast off in the plain
row, taking the two last as one before you turn the last stitch over.
Two petals like these are required.

_Large Yellow Petal_.--Take a bright, though rather deep, shade of
yellow wool, split; cast on three stitches, knit and pearl in alternate
rows, increasing one stitch before and one after the middle stitch in
the plain row, till you have fifteen or seventeen stitches; take a
higher shade of yellow, and work six more alternate plain and pearled
rows, still increasing in the middle, but decreasing one stitch at the
beginning of every row; change your wool for a deep violet, and continue
to knit in alternate plain and pearled rows, decreasing one stitch at
the beginning of each row, till seven stitches only remain; these cast
off, taking the two last as one.

_Two smaller Petals_.--Exactly like the large one, but increased only to
thirteen stitches. Sew a fine wire round each petal with split wool, tie
the five petals together with a bit of green.

_Buds_.--Take eight or ten lengths of split wool, yellow and violet,
place across a piece of wire, fold the wire, twist the ends, turn down
the ends of wool, tie them round the wire, leaving out the length
required for the bud (about a quarter of an inch); cover the stem with
green wool, split; also the stem of the heartsease.

_Leaves_.--Begin with a shade of green wool, split as for one of the
yellow petals, but you have thirteen stitches; cast off three at the
beginning of the two following rows, go on increasing again to thirteen;
cast off three at each end, and make thus as many scallops as will look
well--in general three or four on each side make a very good-sized leaf;
after the last scallops, decrease one stitch at the beginning of every
row, till the leaf comes to a point.

       *       *       *       *       *


CROCHET.

71. SERVIETTE FOR LIQUEUR-STAND.

_Materials--Raworth's thread No. 30, and three shades of Manlove's pink
crochet thread of corresponding size_.


With the lightest shade make a chain of 9 stitches; join to form a
round.

_1st round_. Double crochet, increasing in every stitch.--

_2d round_. 5 chain. 1 plain, miss 2; repeat.--

_3d round_. 5 chain, 1 plain, taking the centre stitch of chain of
previous round; repeat.--

_4th round_. Double crochet, increasing in every fifth stitch.--

_5th round_. 7 chain, 1 plain, miss 3; repeat.--

_6th round_. Double crochet.--

_7th round_. 1 chain, 1 plain above the centre stitch of chain in 5th
round; repeat.--

_8th round (second shade of pink)_. 9 chain, 1 plain, worked in the
plain of last round; repeat.--

_9th round_. Double crochet.--

_10th round_. 5 chain, 1 plain, miss 3; repeat.--

_11th round_. 4 chain, 1 plain, worked in the centre stitch of chain of
last round; repeat.--

_12th round_. Double crochet, increasing in every ninth stitch. Now
divide the work into three parts, commence with the darkest shade, and
work as follows:--Fasten on the thread three stitches from the centre of
one of these divisions; make a chain of 9 stitches, 1 plain, miss 6.--

_2d row_. Commence one stitch from the first stitch in last row, 1
chain, 1 long in every stitch; repeat, finishing by working a stitch in
advance.--

_3d row_. Commence as in last row, 2 chain, 1 long, miss 1, and
finish as before.--

_4th row_. Commence and finish as before, 1 long, 2 chain, miss 1;
repeat.--

_5th row_. 3 chain, 1 long, miss 2; repeat, beginning and finishing as
before.--

_6th row_. 1 long, 3 chain, miss 1; repeat, commencing and finishing as
before. Now work the other two divisions in the same manner; after which
work 1 long, 2 chain, miss 1, all round; then work a round in double
crochet. This completes the centre.

_For the Edge_.--With white work 1 long, 2 chain, miss 1, all round.--

_2d round_. 7 chain, 1 plain, miss 3; repeat.--

_3d round_. 7 chain, 1 plain worked in the centre stitch of chain;
repeat.--

_4th round_. 1 plain worked in the centre stitch of chain, 5 long worked
in the following stitches: 1 plain, 7 chain, 1 plain in the centre
stitch of chain, 7 chain; repeat.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No. 71. SERVIETTE FOR LIQUEUR STAND]

[Illustration: No. 72. RIBBON-WORK.]

[Illustration: No. 73. LADY'S SILK MITTENS.]

[Illustration: No. 74. COUVRETTE FOR DEVOTIONAL CHAIR.]

       *       *       *       *       *

RIBBON WORK

72. A NEW AND ELEGANT WORK FOR SOFA PILLOWS, ANTI-MACASSARS,
CARD-BASKETS, &c.

We will describe how to make an anti-macassar:--

_Take Penelope canvass, three quarters of a yard long, half a yard wide;
a piece of crimson china ribbon; one piece of gold-colour, one of shaded
lilac, and a rug-needle_.


Prepare the canvass by cutting away every 2 alternate threads, and draw
them out the whole length of the canvass; next cut away and draw them
out with tweezers, every 2 alternate threads, the whole of the width of
the canvass. Next thread the rug-needle with crimson ribbon, and sew
over the first 2 threads of canvass the lengthway of the canvass; when
at the end, pass the needle to the next 2 threads and sew them over,
taking care to keep the ribbon flat as possible; when at the top, return
and cover the next two threads with the same coloured ribbon. This will
make 3 stripes. Proceed the same with the gold-colour, 3 stripes; then
the lilac, 3 stripes; then recommence with the crimson, and continue the
same until you have the whole length finished. Next commence to sew over
the same from side to side, which will form a chequered pattern, and has
a rich effect. Finish round with a ruche of satin ribbon or fringe,
crimson colour. If desired, can be worked with slight silk.

       *       *       *       *       *


CROCHET.

73. LADY'S SILK MITTEN.

_Materials_--10 _pieces of fine black crochet silk_; 2 _bundles of No_.
6 _steel beads; Penelope crochet No_. 3.


Make a chain of 84 stitches; work 1 row in plain-stitch crochet.--

_2d row_. 2 edge-stitches, 1 bead-stitch, 1 plain to the end of row.--

_3d row_. Plain.--

_4th row_. Same as 2d row.--

_5th, 6th, and 7th rows_. Plain.--

_8th row_. 4 plain, 4 bead to the end of row.--

_9th, 10th, and 11th rows_. As 8th row.--

_13th, 14th, and 15th rows_. Plain.--

_16th row_. 1 plain-stitch, 1 bead-stitch to the end of row.--

_17th row_. Plain.

This completes the band for the arm, which must be worked on one side,
detaching the silk at the end of each row. Work 4 rows in chain-stitch
open crochet, making 7 loops in each chain, and missing 4 stitches in
working the first row, join and work in rounds; work _2_ rounds, then
divide the mit in half, and leave a space for the thumb; the silk must
be detached at the end of the row. Work to the centre of the back of
hand, make 3 chain-stitches, pass down a bead in making the next 3
chain-stitches, crochet to the centre stitch of chain of last row; then
work 3 stitches, passing down a bead at each stitch, then _3_
chain-stitches; work to the end of row. Work 6 rows, increasing the
number of bead-stitches by commencing at the preceding chain-stitch;
then work 6 rows, decreasing as seen in illustration; the last 3 of
these must be worked in rounds instead of rows; work _3_ rounds in
chain-stitches of 7 as before, then a round of chain-loops in each
chain. Work one-half plain for the inner part of the hand, then 1 bead,
1 plain. Next round plain. Work 3 rows thus on the back of the hand; 3
bead-stitches, 3 plain stitches. Next round plain; then 1 bead-stitch, 1
plain as before, and finish with a plain round. Now work the thumb as
follows:--Work a chain of 7, missing every third stitch; repeat three
times, then work 5 rounds, decreasing in each round by passing the loop
through the centre stitches of two of the chains; work 3 rounds without
decreasing, and finish with 3 rounds of close double crochet, making
every alternate stitch of the centre round a bead-stitch. Work a loop on
the band, and fasten with a button.

       *       *       *       *       *


NETTING

74. COUVRETTE FOR DEVOTIONAL CHAIR.

_Materials--Raworth's thread No_. 30, _knitting-cotton No_. 10, _shaded
amber Berlin wool, mesh No_. 6.


Commence with a foundation of 100 loops, and net till the proper length
is completed. Work the pattern in darning-stitch with cotton. Net a
fringe with shaded wool, making two loops in every loop, using a flat
mesh two inches broad.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No. 75 SACHET]

[Illustration: No. 76. PEN-WIPER.]

[Illustration: No. 77. PATTERN FOR FOOTSTOOL.]

       *       *       *       *       *




EMBROIDERY

75. SACHET.

_Materials--A quarter of a yard of pale-blue satin, one yard and
one-eighth of blue silk fringe, three shades of green, and two shades of
olive-green embroidery silk, and a small bundle of pearl beads_.


Draw the design upon the satin, and work in embroidery-stitch, the
leaves with the shades of green, the stems with the shades of olive, and
the grapes with the beads. Use such perfume as may be preferred, and
trim round the edge with the fringe.

       *       *       *       *       *




_EMBROIDERY IN BRAID_.

76. PEN-WIPER.

_Materials--Blue cachmere and gold-coloured braid_.


Draw the pattern, and sew on the braid; edge with button-hole stitch.

       *       *       *       *       *




_BERLIN WORK_.

77. PATTERN FOR FOOTSTOOL OR CUSHION.

_Materials--Canvass No. 40; scarlet, black, and white Berlin wool;
fourth shade of blue, fourth ditto of green, fourth ditto of peach
Berlin wool; amber floss silk, six skeins of each of the wools, and a
similar quantity of silk will be required; also a piece of fine
piping-cord, and emerald-green velvet ribbon_.


Cut the canvass into strips 3 inches in width, and the length required;
sew 14 lengths of cord upon the canvass, leaving 2 threads between each
cord; the cord will cover a space of 2 threads. Leave a margin 18
threads from this, and with black work 6 stitches over the 7th and 8th
cords opposite each other; with blue work 6 stitches on the same cords
on the right side, and with green 6 on the left; with peach work 6
stitches on the 9th and 10th cords, above the stitches of black; and
with scarlet 6 stitches on the 6th and 7th cords, underneath the black.
There will now be 60 stitches worked. With white work 6 stitches on a
line with each of the preceding stitches, and on the 2 cords above the
stitches of peach and below the scarlet; with amber silk work 6 stitches
in the same manner. This completes the first diamond. The pattern is
repeated to the end of row. The spaces between the diamonds are worked
as follows: With black work 6 stitches on a line with each stitch of
amber; with peach work the stitches between the black on the 3d and 4th
cords; on the right hand work 6 stitches with blue on the 1st and 2d
cords, and on the left with green; work the centre stitches with silk.
The opposite space is worked in a similar manner, substituting scarlet
for peach. For a cushion it will be necessary to work 4 strips of this
pattern; and, in making it up, a length of velvet ribbon of a similar
width is placed between each division of work. Finish with green cord
and tassels.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No 78. A MAT FOR A FLOWER-VASE.]

[Illustration: Nos. 79, 80. LADY'S SLIPPER.]

       *       *       *       *       *




CROCHET.

78. A MAT FOR A FLOWER-VASE.

_Material--Raworth's crochet thread No_. 40.


_Centre Flower_.--12 c s, unite, work into this ring 5 c s, 1 l s, * 2 c
s, 1 l s; repeat from * eleven times, finish with 2 c s, s c into third
stitch of first, 5 c s.--

_2d round_. D c into first space, * 5 c s, d c into next space; repeat
from * into every space, finish with 5 c s, s c into first d c of the
round.--

_3d round_. 5 d c round every loop of 5 c s in last round.

