We all anticipated a hard time of it, from the severe storm which raged
all the morning, and I, in common with all the passengers, was delighted
to find it any thing but rough water outside the Hook. We kept steaming
away till we lost sight of land with the loss of daylight, and yet the
sea was in less commotion than it frequently exhibits in Newport Harbor.
The next morning, at breakfast, we had quite a fair representation at
table, and I think more than two thirds presented themselves for duty.
We boys were all on hand, and passed for "able-bodied men." The routine
of life on board was as follows: We breakfasted at eight, lunched at
twelve, dined at four, took tea at half past six, and from nine till
eleven gentlemen had any article for supper they saw fit to order. This
is quite enough of time for taking care of the outer man, and any one
careful of his health will be sure to intermit one or two of these
seasons. All the meals were excellent, and the supplies liberal. The
tables present a similar appearance to those of a first-class hotel. In
regard to our passengers, I think I can say, with confidence, that a
more agreeable set of persons could not well have been gathered
together. It really was a nicely-assorted cargo. We numbered one
hundred and thirty, and the various parts of our country were all
represented. Philadelphia sent the largest delegation; from that city we
had more than twenty. I liked the looks of the passengers at the first
glance, and every day's intercourse heightened my estimate of their
worth and pleasantness. Amongst the company we had Professor Haddock, of
Dartmouth College, going out to Portugal as _chargé d'affaires_. He was
accompanied by his lady and son. Then, too, we had the world-renowned
Peter Parley, with his accomplished family circle. Mr. Goodrich, after a
long life of labor for the youth of his country, for whose reading and
instruction he has done so much, has been honored by the government of
the United States with an appointment as consul at Paris. Mr. Goodrich
resided there for two or three years, and was in Paris during the
revolution of 1848. He seems fond of the company of young people, and we
spent a great deal of time on board with him, listening to his stories,
some made up for the occasion, and narrations of the events in February
at Paris, and some capital anecdotes about the last war with England,
during which he served his country in the army. The Hon. George Wright,
of California, and her first representative in Congress, was also one of
our party; and his glowing descriptions of the auriferous regions kept
groups of audience for many an hour. The Rev. Arthur Cleveland Cox, of
Hartford, favorably known as the author of some pleasant rhymes and
sonnets, Mr. Cunningham, a southern editor, and several retired sea
captains, all contributed to enhance the agreeableness of the voyage. I
am sorry to tell you that, three days out, we had a sad occurrence in
our little world. Just as we were sitting down to lunch at eight bells,
the machinery stopped for a moment, and we were informed that William
Irwin, one of the assistant engineers, was crushed to death. He
accidentally slipped from his position, and was killed instantaneously.
In less than half an hour he was sewed up in canvas, and all hands
called to attend his funeral services! The poor fellow was laid upon a
plank covered with the American flag, and placed at the wheel-house. The
service was performed by Mr. Cox, in full canonicals; and I can assure
you that the white-robed priest, as he issued from the cabin and
ascended the wheel-house, really looked impressively. At the close, he
was committed to the deep. What food for thought was here! A man in
health and at life's daily task,--alive,--dead,--and buried,--all these
conditions of his state crowded into thirty minutes! The poor man had a
mother who was dependent upon him. Dr. Choules drew up a subscription
paper for her benefit, and nearly five hundred dollars were at once
raised for her relief. This unhappy event, of course, gave a sad
damper to the joyous feelings which existed on board, and which were
excited by our fine weather and rapid headway. On Sunday we had two
sermons in the cabin to large congregations, all the passengers
attending, with the officers and many of the crew. The morning service
was by Dr. Choules, and the evening one by Mr. Cox.

[Illustration: Four Positions of an Iceberg, seen 6th of April.
Estimated Height, 300 feet. Lat. 43.04; long. 53.11; at Noon.]

[Illustration: Icebergs seen from the Steamship "Arctic," on the Voyage
from New York to Liverpool, April 6, 1851.]

In the afternoon, April 6, we had the gratification to see a magnificent
iceberg. We were in lat. 43° 4', lon. 53° 11' at twelve o'clock, and at
three the ice appeared at about ten miles' distance. The estimated
height was about three hundred feet. One if the passengers took a
sketch. I also made one, and have laid it aside for your inspection.

The berg had much the appearance of the gable end of a large house, and
at some little distance there was another, of tower-like aspect, and
much resembling a light-house. The effect of the sun upon it, as we saw
it in various positions, was exceedingly fine. On Monday, the 7th, we
saw a much larger one, with several small ones as neighbors. This was
probably one mile in length, and about two hundred feet high.

We saw several whales frolicking at the distance of a mile, and
distinctly saw them spout at short intervals.

After having had all reason to hope for a ten-day passage, we were
annoyed for four or five days with head winds, materially retarding our
headway. The evenings of the voyage were generally spent on deck, where
we had charming concerts. Seldom have I heard better singing than we
were favored with by eight or ten ladies and gentlemen. One universal
favorite was the beautiful piece, "Far, far at sea." On Sunday, the
13th, just after morning service, conducted by Mr. Cox, we made Mizzen
Head, and obtained a magnificent view of the north coast of Ireland,
which was far more beautiful than we had expected. The coast is very
bold, and the cliffs precipitous, in many places strongly reminding us
of the high lands of the Hudson. A more exquisite treat than that which
we enjoyed all the afternoon in looking on the Irish coast I can hardly
imagine. At night we had a closing service, and Dr. Choules preached.
Every one seemed to feel that we had cause for thankfulness that we had
been brought in safety across the ocean, and under so many circumstances
of enjoyment We have made acquaintances that are truly valuable, and
some of them I hope to cultivate in future life. One of the great
advantages of travel, Charles, seems to be, that it enables us to
compare men of other places than those we live in with our former
acquaintances. It brings us into intercourse with those who have had a
different training and education than our own; and I think a man or boy
must be pretty thoroughly conceited who does not often find out his own
inferiority to many with whom he chances to meet. On board our ship are
several young men of fine attainments, who, engaged in mechanical
business, are going out to obtain improvement and instruction by a
careful study of the great exhibition. A number of gentlemen with us are
young merchants, who represent houses in our great cities, and go to
England and France twice and three times every year. Some of these are
thoroughly accomplished men, and, wherever they go, will reflect credit
upon their country. In no country, perhaps, do young men assume
important trusts in commercial life at so early a period as in America.
I have heard one or two Englishmen on board express their surprise at
finding large business operations intrusted to young men of twenty and
twenty-one; and yet there are some such with us who are making their
second and third trips to Manchester, Leeds, Paisley, and Paris, for the
selection of goods.

I ought to tell you that, on the last day of the voyage, we had a great
meeting in the cabin, Mr. Goodrich in the chair, for the purpose of
expressing the satisfaction of the passengers with the Arctic, her
captain, officers, and engineer. Several good speeches were made, and
some resolutions passed. This has become so ordinary an affair at the
termination of a passage, as to have lost much of its original value;
but as this ship had an unusual number of passengers, many of them well
known to their fellow-countrymen, and as great opposition had been
displayed, on both sides of the ocean, to this line of steamers, it was
thought suitable to express our views in relation to this particular
ship and the great undertaking with which she is identified. Every man
on board was satisfied that, in safety, these ships are equal to the
Cunard line; while in comfort, accommodation, size, and splendor they
far surpass their rivals. It really seems strange to us that Americans
should think of making the ocean trip in an English steamship, when
their own country has a noble experiment in trial, the success of which
alone depends upon the patriotism and spirit of her citizens. The
English on board are forced to confess that our ship and the line are
all that can be asked, and I think that pretty strong prejudices have
been conquered by this voyage. Every one left the ship with sentiments
of respect to Captain Luce, who, I assure you, we found to be a very
kind friend, and we shall all of us be glad to meet him again on ship or
shore.

On Monday, the 14th, at three o'clock, we took our pilot, and at eight
o'clock we anchored off Liverpool, and a dark-looking steamtug came off
to us for the mails, foreign ministers, and bearers of despatches. As
we came under the wing of one of the last-named class of favored
individuals, we took our luggage, and proceeded straight to the Adelphi
Hotel. I ought to say that James was the first to quit the ship and
plant his foot on Old England. It was quite strange to see it so light
at half past eight o'clock, although it was a rainy evening. I shall not
soon forget the cheerful appearance of the Adelphi, which, in all its
provisions for comfort, both in the coffee-room and our chambers, struck
me more favorably than any hotel I had ever seen. Although our
state-room on board the Arctic was one of the extra size and every thing
that was nice, yet I long for the conveniences of a bed-chamber and a
warm bath. I am quite disposed to join with the poor Irish woman who had
made a steerage passage from New York to Liverpool in a packet ship; and
when landed at St. George's pier, and seated on her trunk, a lady who
had also landed, when getting into her carriage, said, "Well, my good
woman, I suppose you are very glad to get out of the ship?" Her reply
was, "And indeed, my lady, every bone in my body cries out _feathers!_"


Yours truly,

WELD.


Letter 3.


LIVERPOOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Well, we have fairly commenced our travel, and yet I can scarcely
realize the fact that I am here in Old England, and that, for some
months at least, I shall be away from home and the occupations of the
school-room. The next day after landing we went to the custom-house to
see our fellow-passengers pass their effects, and really felt glad to
think of our good fortune in landing every thing at night and direct
from the ship. It was an exciting scene, and I was not a little amused
to observe the anxiety of the gentlemen to save their cigars from the
duty imposed, and which amounts to nine shillings sterling per pound.
All sorts of contrivances were in vogue, and the experiences of men were
various, the man with one hundred, perhaps, being brought up, while his
neighbor with five hundred passed off successfully, and, as he cleared
the building, seemed disposed to place his finger on the prominent
feature of his face.

I quite like the appearance of Liverpool. After walking through the
principal streets and making a general survey of the shops,--no one
speaks of _store_,--I think I can testify to the extraordinary cleanness
of the city, and the massiveness and grandeur of the public buildings.

Our attention was first directed to the cemetery which had been
described, you remember, to us one evening in the study. It is on the
confines of the city, and is made but of an old quarry. I liked it
better than any cemetery I ever saw; it is unlike all I had seen, and,
though comparatively small, is very picturesque, I may almost say
romantic. The walls are lofty, and are devoted to spacious tombs, and
the groundwork abounds in garden shrubbery and labyrinth. Some of the
monuments are striking. The access to this resting-place is by a steep
cut through the rock, and you pass under an archway of the most imposing
character. At the entrance of the cemetery is a neat chapel, and the
officiating minister has a dwelling-house near the gate.

I wish you could see a building now in progress, and which has taken
twelve or fourteen years to erect, and from its appearance will not, I
suppose, be finished in four or five more. It is called St. George's
Hall. The intent is to furnish suitable accommodations for the various
law courts, and also to contain the finest ball-room in Europe. It is in
a commanding position. I know little of architecture, but this building
strikes me as one of exquisite beauty. We obtained an order from the
mayor to be shown over it and examine the works, and we enjoyed it very
much. The great hall will be without a rival in England. The town hall
is a noble edifice, and the people are quite proud of it. The interior
is finely laid out, and has some spacious rooms for the civic revelries
of the fathers of the town. The good woman who showed us round feels
complacently enough as she explains the uses of the rooms. The ball-room
is ninety feet by forty-six, and forty feet high. The dining and
drawing-rooms are spacious apartments. On the grand staircase is a noble
statue of George Canning, by Chantrey, whose beautiful one of Washington
we have so often admired in the Boston State House. In the building are
some good paintings of the late kings; one or two by Sir Thomas
Lawrence. The Exchange is directly behind the hall, and contains in the
centre a glorious bronze monument to Lord Nelson, the joint production
of Wyat and Westmacott. Death is laying his hand upon the hero's heart,
and Victory is placing a fourth crown on his sword. Ever since I read
Southey's Life of Nelson, I have felt an interest in every thing
relating to this great; yet imperfect man. You know that illustrated
work on Nelson that we have so often looked at it contains a large
engraving of this monument. As Yankee boys, we found our way to the top
of the Exchange, to look at the cotton sales-room. This same room has
more to do with our good friends at the south than any other in the
world. The atmosphere would have been chilly to a Georgian planter, as
cotton was down--down.

The Necropolis is a very spacious burying-place, open to all classes,
and where persons can be interred with the use of any form desired. The
gateway is of stone, and not unlike the granite one at Mount Auburn; and
on one side is a chapel, and on the other a house for the register. Not
far from this we came to the Zoölogical Gardens, kept in excellent
order, and where is a good collection of animals, birds, &c. The
Collegiate Institution is an imposing structure in the Tudor style.

St. George's Church, which stands at the head of Lord Street, occupies
the position of the old castle, destroyed, I believe, more than one
hundred and fifty years ago, and is a very graceful termination to one
of the best business avenues of the city. Several of the churches and
chapels are in good style. But one of the best buildings is--as it
should be, in a city like this--the Sailor's Home, not far from the
Custom House. This is a highly-ornamented house, and would adorn any
city of the world.

The Custom House is thought to be one of the finest buildings in the
kingdom. It occupied ten years in its erection. It is composed of three
_façades_, from a rusticated pavement, each having a splendid portico of
eight Ionic columns. The whole is surmounted by a dome, one hundred and
thirty feet high, and the effect of the building is excellent. The glory
of Liverpool is her docks, and a stranger is sure to be pointed to the
great landing stage, an immense floating pier, which was moored into its
present position on the 1st of June, 1847. This stage is five hundred
and seven feet long, and over eighty feet wide. This mass of timber
floats upon pontoons, which have to support more than two thousand tons.
At each end is a light barge.

In the Clarence dock are to be found the Irish and coasting steamers,
and to the north are the Trafalgar, Victoria, and Waterloo docks; the
Prince's dock, and the Great Prince's dock basin. On the outside of all
these is a fine parade, of about one half a mile, and which affords one
of the most beautiful marine promenades in the world, and gives an
interesting view of the Cheshire shore, opposite the city. The Prince's
dock is five hundred yards long, and one hundred broad. Vessels, on
arriving, discharge on the east side, and take in cargo on the west.
Besides all these there is the Brunswick dock, Queen's dock, Duke's
dock, Salthouse dock, &c.

The Royal Liverpool Institution is a great benefit to the inhabitants.
It has a good library, fine collections of paintings, and a good museum
of natural history. Many of these paintings belong to the early masters,
and date even before the fifteenth century. We were interested to find
here a complete set of casts of the Elgin marbles. The originals were
the decorations of the Parthenon at Athens, and are now in the British
Museum. As we shall spend some time in that collection, I say no more at
present about these wonderful monuments of genius. The Athenæum and the
Lyceum are both fine buildings, and each has a good library, lecture,
and news rooms.

We were disappointed at finding the Rev. Dr. Raffles, the most eloquent
preacher of the city, out of town. He was the successor of Spencer, who
was drowned bathing in the Mersey, and his Life by Raffles is one of
deep interest. The great historical name of Liverpool is William Roscoe,
the author of the Lives of Leo X. and the Medici. I must not omit to
tell you that, during our stay, the town was all alive with a regiment
of lancers, just arrived from Ireland, on their way to London. They are
indeed fine-looking fellows, and are mounted on capital horses. I have
watched their evolutions in front of the Adelphi with much pleasure, and
have been amused to notice a collection of the most wretched-looking
boys I ever saw, brought together by the troops. There seems to me more
pauperism this week, in Liverpool, than I ever saw in New York in my
life.


Truly yours,

JAMES.


Letter 4.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Does it not seem strange that I am here in London? I can hardly tell
what to write about first. I stand at the door of our hotel and look at
the crowds in the streets, and then at old King Charles, at Charing
Cross, directly across the road, and when I think that this is the old
city where Wat Tyler figured, and Whittington was lord mayor, and Lady
Jane Grey was beheaded, and where the Tower is still to be seen, I am
half beside myself, and want to do nothing but roam about for a good
month to come. I have read so much concerning London, that I am pretty
sure I know more about it than many of the boys who have heard Bow
Church bells all their lives. We left Liverpool for Birmingham, where we
passed an afternoon and evening in the family of a manufacturer very
pleasantly, and at ten o'clock took the express mail train for London.
We are staying at a hotel called the Golden Cross, Charing Cross. We
have our breakfast in the coffee-room, and then dine as it suits our
convenience as to place and hour. We spent one day in riding about the
city, and I think we got quite an idea of the great streets.

The Strand is a very fine business street, perhaps a mile long. It
widens in one part, and has two churches in the middle of it, and a
narrow street seems built inside it at one place, as nasty, dirty a lane
as I ever saw, called Hollowell Street. I was very much delighted at the
end of the Strand to see old Temple Bar, which is the entrance to the
city proper, and which divides Fleet Street from the Strand. It is a
noble archway, with small side arches for foot passengers. The head of
many a poor fellow, and the quarters of men called traitors, have been
fastened over this gateway in former times.

Dr. Johnson was once walking in Westminster Abbey with Goldsmith, and as
they were looking at the Poet's Corner, Johnson said to his friend,--

     "Forsitan et nostrum nomen miscebitur istis."

When they had walked on to Temple Bar, Goldsmith stopped Johnson, and
pointed to the heads of Fletcher and Townley, hanging above, and slyly
remarked,--

     "Forsitan et nostrum nomen miscebitur _istis_."

I suppose you remember that the great dictionary man was a Jacobite in
his heart.

The present bar was put up in 1670, and was designed by Sir Christopher
Wren. The statues on the sides, which are towards the city, are those of
Queen Elizabeth and James I.; and towards the Strand, those of Charles
I. and Charles II. They stand in niches.

Whenever the monarch passes into the city, there is much ceremony takes
place at the bar. The gates are closed, a herald sounds a trumpet and
knocks for entrance, the gates are opened, and the lord mayor of London
presents the sword of the city to the sovereign, who returns it to his
lordship. The upper part of the bar is used by Messrs. Childs, the
bankers, as a store room for their past account books.

Fleet Street is thronged with passengers and carriages of all sorts.
Just a few doors from the bar, on the right-hand side, is a
gayly-painted front, which claims to have been a palace of Henry VIII.
and the residence of Cardinal Wolsey. It is now used as a hair-cutting
shop, up stairs. We went up and examined the panelled ceiling, said to
be just as it used to be. It is certainly very fine, and looks as if it
were as old as the times of bluff Harry. Of course we had our hair cut
in the old palace.

We followed through Fleet Street, noticing the offices of Punch and the
London Illustrated News, till we came to Ludgate Hill,--rather an
ascent,--which is the direct way to the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's.
It stands directly in front of Ludgate Hill, and the churchyard occupies
a large space, and the streets open on each side, making a sort of
square called Paul's Churchyard, and then at the rear you go into
Cheapside. We looked with interest, I can tell you, at Bow Church, and,
as the old bells were ringing, I tried to listen if I could hear what
Whittington heard once from their tingling--"Turn again, Whittington,
lord mayor, of London." At the end of this street, on the right hand, is
the lord mayor's house, called the Mansion House, and directly in front
of the street, closing it up, and making it break off, is the Royal
Exchange; whilst at the left is the Bank of England. All these are very
noble-looking buildings, and you will hear about them from us as we
examine them in our future walks. We went to the counting-house of
Messrs. Baring & Co., the great merchants and bankers for so many
Americans, and there we found our letters and got some money. Mr.
Sturgis, one of the partners, told us to take the check to the bank, No.
68 Lombard Street, and informed us that was the very house where the
great merchant of Queen Elizabeth's time--Sir Thomas Gresham--used to
live. He built the first London Exchange, and his sign, a large
grasshopper, is still preserved at the bank. On Good Friday we had bunns
for breakfast, with a cross upon them, and they were sold through the
streets by children, crying "One a penny, two a penny, hot cross bunns."
We took a carriage and rode to Camden town to visit a friend; thence we
took the cars, to Hackney, and called on the Rev. Dr. Cox, who some
fifteen years ago made the tour of the United States, and wrote a
volume on our country. We then returned to London, and took our dinner
at the London Coffee House, Ludgate Hill. This has been a very
celebrated house for one hundred years, and figures largely in the books
of travellers fifty years ago. It has a high reputation still, and every
thing was excellent, and the waiting good. You cannot walk about London
without observing how few boys of our age are to be seen in the streets,
and when we asked the reason, we were told that nearly all the lads of
respectable families were sent to boarding schools, and the vacations
only occur at June and December; then the boys return home, and the city
swarms with them at all the places of amusement. We seemed to be objects
of attention, because we wore caps; (here boys all wear hats;) and then
our gilt buttons on blue jackets led many to suppose that we were
midshipmen. The omnibuses are very numerous, and each one has a
conductor, who stands on a high step on the left side of the door,
watching the sidewalks and crying out the destination of the "bus," as
the vehicle is called. There is a continual cry, "Bank, bank," "Cross,
cross," "City, city," &c. I must not forget to tell you one thing; and
that is, London is the place to make a sight-seeing boy very tired, and
I am quite sure that, in ten minutes, I shall be unable to do what I can
now very heartily, viz., assure you that

I am yours, affectionately,

GEORGE.


Letter 5.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

After passing a day or two in a general view of the city, and making
some preliminary arrangements for our future movements, we all called
upon Mr. Lawrence, the minister of our country at the court of St.
James, which expression refers to the appellation of the old palace of
George III. Mr. Lawrence resides in Piccadilly, opposite the St. James's
Park, in a very splendid mansion, which he rents from an English
nobleman, all furnished. We were very kindly received by his excellency,
who expressed much pleasure at seeing his young countrymen coming
abroad, and said he was fond of boys, and liked them as travelling
companions. I handed him a letter of introduction from his brother. Mr.
Lawrence offered us all the facilities in his power to see the sights,
and these are great, for he is furnished by the government of England
with orders which will admit parties to almost every thing in and about
London. Amongst other tickets he gave us the following admissions: to
the Queen's stables, Windsor Castle, Dulwich Gallery, Woolwich Arsenal,
Navy Yard, Sion House, Northumberland House, Houses of Parliament, and,
what we highly valued, an admission to enter the exhibition, which is
yet unfinished, and not open to inspection.

After leaving the minister, we paid our respects to Mr. Davis, the
secretary of legation, and were kindly received. We walked on from
Piccadilly to the Crystal Palace, passing Apsley House, the residence of
the Duke of Wellington, and soon reached Hyde Park, with its famous
gateway and the far-famed statue of "the duke." As we shall go into some
detailed account of the palace after the exhibition opens, I would only
say, that we were exceedingly surprised and delighted with the building
itself, and were so taken up with that as hardly to look at its
contents, which were now rapidly getting into order. The effect of the
noble elms which are covered up in the palace is very striking and
pleasing, and very naturally suggests the idea that the house would, by
and by, make a glorious green-house for the city, where winter's
discontents might be almost made into a "glorious summer." A poor fellow
was killed here, just before we entered, by falling through the skylight
roof. He was at work on a plank laid across the iron frame, and that
tipping up, threw him on to the glass, and his death was instantaneous.
We are more and more pleased at having so central a domicile as the
Golden Cross, for time is every thing when you have to see sights; and
here we can get to any point we desire by a bus, and obtain a fly at any
moment. Very much that we desire to see, too, is east of Temple Bar, and
our Mentor seems determined that we shall become acquainted with the
London of other times, and we rarely walk out without learning who lived
in "that house," and what event had happened in "that street." I fancy
that we are going to gather up much curious matter for future use and
recollection by our street wanderings. A book called "The Streets of
London" is our frequent study, and is daily consulted with advantage.
To-day we dined at the famous Williams's, in Old Bailey, where boiled
beef is said to be better than at any other place in London. It was
certainly as fine as could be desired. The customers were numerous, and
looked like business men. The proprietor was a busy man, and his eyes
seemed every where. A vision of cockroaches, however, dispelled the
appetite for a dessert, and we perambulated our way to the Monument.
This has a noble appearance, and stands on Fish Street Hill. The pillar
is two hundred and two feet high, and is surmounted by a gilt flame. The
object of the Monument is to commemorate the great fire of London in
Charles II.'s reign.

It had an inscription which ascribed the origin of the fire to the
Catholics; but recently this has been obliterated. It was to this
inscription and allegation that Pope referred in his lines,--

     "Where London's column, pointing to the skies, Like a tall bully,
     lifts its head, and _lies_."

There are few things in London that have impressed us more than the
fine, massive bridges which span the Thames, and are so crowded with
foot passengers and carriages. Every boy who has read much has had his
head full of notions about London Bridge; that is, old London Bridge,
which was taken down about thirty years ago. The old bridge was
originally a wooden structure, and on the sides of the bridge were
houses, and the pathway in front had all sorts of goods exposed for
sale, and the Southwark gate of the bridge was disfigured with the heads
and quarters of the poor creatures who were executed for treason.

The new bridge was commenced in 1825, and it was opened in 1831 by
William IV. and Queen Adelaide. The bridge has five arches; the central
one is one hundred and fifty feet in the clear, the two next one hundred
and forty feet, and the extreme arches one hundred and thirty feet. The
length, including the abutments, is about one thousand feet, its width
eighty-three feet, and the road for carriages fifty-five feet.

The great roads leading to London Bridge have been most costly affairs;
and I was told that a _parish and its church_ had been destroyed to make
these approaches. The men of different generations, who, for almost one
thousand years, looked at the old bridge, would stare at the present one
and its present vicinity, if they were to come back again. Southwark
Bridge was commenced in 1814, and finished in 1819. It has three arches,
and the central arch is two hundred and forty feet, which is the
greatest span in the world. In this bridge are five thousand three
hundred and eight tons of iron. Blackfriars Bridge was commenced in
1760, and opened in 1770. It has nine elliptical arches, of which the
middle one is one hundred feet in width. Recently this bridge has been
thoroughly repaired. I think this is my favorite stand-point for the
river and city. Nowhere else have I obtained such a view up and down the
river. Here I have a full prospect of the Tower, St. Paul's Cathedral,
Somerset House, the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Abbey, and perhaps
twenty-five other churches! But the great bridge of all is the Waterloo
one, commenced in 1811, and opened in 1817, on the 18th of June, the
anniversary of the battle of Waterloo. Of course, the Duke of Wellington
figured upon the occasion. At this point the river is one thousand three
hundred and twenty-six feet wide; and the bridge is of nine elliptical
arches, each of one hundred and twenty feet space, and thirty-five feet
high above high water, and its entire length two thousand four hundred
and fifty-six feet. It is painful to hear the sad stories which have a
connection with this magnificent structure. It seems the chosen resort
of London suicides, and very frequent are the events which almost
justify its appellation--"the Bridge of Sighs." I love to walk this and
the other bridges, and look at the mighty city, and think of its
wonderful history and its existing place in the affairs of the world;
and I cannot help thinking of the reflection of the wise man--"One
generation passeth away, but the earth remaineth." I have never felt my
own insignificance so much, Charley, as when walking in one of these
crowded streets. I know no one; I am unknown; I am in solitude, and feel
it more, perhaps, than I should if alone upon a mountain top or in a
wilderness. I am sure I have told you enough for once, and perhaps you
are as tired of my letter as I was in going over the places I have
written to you about; so I will relieve your patience.

I am yours always,

WELD.


Letter 6.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

All round London there are the most exquisite villages or towns, full of
charming retreats, boxes of wealthy tradesmen, and some very fine rows
of brick and stone residences, with gardens in front. I am amused to see
almost every house having a name. Thus you find one house called, on
the gateway, Hamilton Villa, the next Hawthorne Lodge, whilst opposite
their fellows rejoice in the names, Pelham House, Cranborne Cottage; and
so it is with hundreds of neat little domiciles. I think the road up to
St. John's Wood is one of the prettiest I have seen; and there are in it
perhaps two hundred habitations, each having its _sobriquet._ Since
writing to you last we have been to Camberwell, a very pretty place, two
or three miles from the city. We called on a gentleman who had a party
that night, and we were politely invited, and spent an agreeable
evening. The supper was elegant, and the ladies were quite inquisitive
as to our social manners. One gentleman present had a son in Wisconsin,
and he seemed to fancy that, as that state was in the United States, it
was pretty much like the rest of the country. We told him that Wisconsin
was about as much like New York and Massachusetts as Brighton, in 1851,
was like what it was one hundred years ago. When we talk with
well-educated persons here, we are much amused at their entire
unacquaintedness with American geography and history. I think an
importation of Morse's School Geography would be of great service. We
very often lose our patience when we hear about the great danger of life
in America. I find very intelligent and respectable persons who fancy
that life is held by a slight tenure in the Union, and that law and
order are almost unknown. Now, the first week we were in London the
papers teemed with accounts of murders in various parts of England. One
newspaper detailed no less than eleven oases of murder, or executions on
account of murders. Poison, however, seems just at present the
prevailing method by which men and women are removed.

As to accidents in travel, we, no doubt, have our full share; but since
our arrival in England the railroad trains have had some pretty rough
shakings, and the results in loss of life and limb would have passed for
quite ugly enough, even had they happened in the west. I very much wish
you could have been with us on Easter Monday, when we passed the day at
Greenwich, and were at the renowned Greenwich Fair, which lasts for
three days. The scene of revelry takes place in the Park, a royal one,
and really a noble one. Here all the riff-raff and bobtail of London
repair in their finery, and have a time. You can form no notion of the
affair; it cannot be described. The upper part of the Park, towards the
Royal Observatory, is very steep, and down this boys and girls, men and
women, have a roll. Such scenes as are here to be witnessed we cannot
match. Nothing can exceed the doings that occur. All the public houses
swarm, and in no spot have I ever seen so many places for drinking as
are here. The working-men of London, and apprentices, with wires and
sweethearts, all turn out Easter Monday. It seems as though all the
horses, carts, chaises, and hackney coaches of the city were on the
road. We saw several enormous coal wagons crammed tightly with boys and
girls. On the fine heath, or down, that skirts the Park, are hundreds of
donkeys, and you are invited to take a halfpenny, penny, or twopenny
ride. All sorts of gambling are to be seen. One favorite game with the
youngsters was to have a tobacco box, full of coppers, stuck on a stick
standing in a hole, and then, for a halfpenny paid to the proprietor,
you are entitled to take a shy at the mark. If it falls into the hole,
you lose; if you knock it off, and away from the hole, you take it. It
_requires,_ I fancy, much adroitness and experience to make any thing at
"shying" at the "bacca box." At night, Greenwich is all alive--life is
out of London and in the fair. But let the traveller who has to return
to town beware. The road is full of horses and vehicles, driven by
drunken men and boys; and, for four or five miles, you can imagine that
a city is besieged, and that the inhabitants are flying from the sword.
O, such weary-looking children as we saw that day! One favorite
amusement was to draw a little wooden instrument quick over the coat of
another person, when it produces a noise precisely like that of a torn
garment. Hundreds of these machines were in the hands of the urchins who
crowded the Park. Here, for the first time, I saw the veritable gypsy of
whose race we have read so much in Bòrrow's Zincali. The women are very
fine looking, and some of the girls were exquisitely beautiful. They are
a swarthy-looking set, and seem to be a cross of Indian and Jew. Those
we saw were proper wiry-looking fellows. One or two of the men were
nattily dressed, with fancy silk handkerchiefs. They live in tents, and
migrate through the midland counties, but I believe are not as numerous
as they were thirty years ago. You will not soon forget how we were
pleased with the memoirs of Bamfield Moore Carew, who was once known as
their king in Great Britain. I wonder that book has never been reprinted
in America. I am pretty sure that Greenwich Park would please your
taste. I think the view from the Royal Observatory, and from whence
longitude is reckoned, is one of the grandest I have ever seen. You get
a fine view of the noble palace once the royal residence, but now the
Sailor's Home. You see the Thames, with its immense burden, and, through
the mist, the great city. As to the Hospital, we shall leave that for
another excursion: we came to Greenwich at present merely to witness
Easter Fair, and it will not soon be forgotten by any of us.

Yours, &c.,

JAMES.


Letter 7.


BRISTOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

As we had a few days to spare before the exhibition opened, we proposed
to run down to Bristol and Bath, and pass a week. We took the Great
Western train first-class ears, and made the journey of one hundred and
twenty miles in two hours and forty minutes. This is the perfection of
travelling. The cars are very commodious, holding eight persons, each
having a nicely-cushioned chair. The rail is the broad gage; and we
hardly felt the motion, so excellent is the road. The country through
which we passed was very beautiful, and perhaps it never appears to more
advantage than in the gay garniture of spring. We left Windsor Castle to
our left, and Eton College, and passed by Beading, a fine, flourishing
town; and at Swindon we made a stay of ten minutes. The station at this
place is very spacious and elegant. Here the passengers have the only
opportunity to obtain refreshments on the route; and never did people
seem more intent upon laying in provender. The table was finely laid
out, and a great variety tempted the appetite. The railroad company,
when they leased this station, stipulated that every train should pass
ten minutes at it. But the express train claimed exemption, and refused
to afford the time. The landlord prosecuted the company, obtained
satisfactory damages, and now even the express train affords its
passengers time to recruit at Swindon. This place has grown up under the
auspices of the railroad, and one can hardly fancy a prettier place than
environs the station. The cottages are of stone, of the Elizabethan and
Tudor style, and are very numerous; while the church, which is just
finished, is one of the neatest affairs I have yet seen in England. The
town of Swindon is about two miles from the station, and I expect to
visit it in the course of my journey. You know, my dear Charley, how
long and fondly I have anticipated my visit to my native city, and can
imagine my feelings on this route homewards. We passed through Bath, a
most beautiful city, (and I think as beautiful as any I ever saw,) and
then in half an hour we entered Bristol. The splendid station-house of
the railroad was new to me, but the old streets and houses were all
familiar as if they had been left but yesterday. The next morning I
called on my friends, and you may think how sad my disappointment was to
find that a dangerous accident had just placed my nearest relative in
the chamber of painful confinement for probably three months. It was a
pleasant thing to come home to scenes of childhood and youth, and I was
prepared to enjoy every hour; but I soon realized that here all our
roses have thorns. Of course, in Bristol I need no guide; and the boys
are, I assure you, pretty thoroughly fagged out, when night comes, with
our perambulations through the old city and neighborhood.

Bristol has claims upon the attention of the stranger, not only as one
of the oldest cities in England, but on account of its romantic scenery.
The banks of the Avon are not to be surpassed by the scenes afforded by
any other river of its size in the world. This city was founded by
Brennus, the chieftain of the Gauls and the conqueror of Rome, 388 B.C.,
and tradition states that his brother Belinus aided him in the work. The
statues of these worthies are quaintly carved on the gateway of John's
Church, in Broad Street, and are of very great antiquity. In the
earliest writings that bear upon the west of England--the Welsh
Chronicles--this city is called _Caër oder_, which means the city of the
_Chasm_. This the Saxons called _Clifton_. The Avon runs through a
tremendous fissure in the rocks called Vincent's Rocks; and hence the
name given to the suburbs of the city, on its banks--Clifton. Of this
place we shall have much to tell you. Another Welsh name for the city
was _Caër Brito_, or the painted city, or the famous city. Bristol, like
Rome, stands on seven hills, and on every side is surrounded by the most
attractive scenery. It has made quite a figure in history, and its
castle was an object of great importance during the civil wars between
Charles I. and his Parliament. This city stands in two counties, and has
the privileges of one itself. It is partly in Gloucestershire and partly
in Somersetshire. The population of Bristol, with Clifton and the Hot
Wells, is about two hundred thousand. My first excursion with the boys
was to Redcliffe Church, which is thought to be the finest parish church
in England. This is the church where poor Chatterton said that he found
the Rowley MSS. No one of taste visits the city without repairing to
this venerable pile. Its antiquity, beauty of architecture, and the many
interesting events connected with its history, claim particular notice.
This church was probably commenced about the beginning of the thirteenth
century; but it was completed by William Cannynge, Sen., mayor of the
city, in 1396. In 1456, the lofty spire was struck by lightning, and one
hundred feet fell upon the south aisle. The approach from Redcliffe
Street is very impressive. The highly-ornamented tower, the west front
of the church, its unrivalled north porch, and the transept, with flying
buttresses, pinnacles, and parapet, cannot fail to gratify every
beholder. The building stands on a hill, and is approached by a
magnificent flight of steps, guarded by a heavy balustrade. In length,
the church and the Lady Chapel is two hundred and thirty-nine feet;
from north to south of the cross aisles is one hundred and seventeen
feet; the height of the middle aisle is fifty-four, and of the north and
south aisles, twenty-five feet.

The impression produced on the spectator by the interior is that of awe
and reverence, as he gazes on the clustered pillars, the mullioned
windows, the panelled walls, the groined ceilings, decorated with ribs,
tracery, and bosses, all evincing the skill of its architects and the
wonderful capabilities of the Gothic style.

The east window and screen have long been hidden by some large paintings
of Hogarth. The subjects of these are the Ascension, the Three Marys at
the Sepulchre, and the High Priest sealing Christ's Tomb.

On a column in the south transept is a flat slab, with a long
inscription, in memory of Sir William Penn, father of William Penn, the
great founder of Pennsylvania. The column is adorned with his banner and
armor.

The boys, who had so often read of Guy, Earl of Warwick, and of his
valorous exploits, were greatly pleased to find in this church, placed
against a pillar, a rib of the Dun cow which he is said to have slain.

You may be very sure that we inquired for the room in which Chatterton
said he found old Monk Rowley's poems. It is an hexagonal room over the
north porch, in which the archives were kept Chatterton's uncle was
sexton of the church; and the boy had access to the building, and
carried off parchments at his pleasure. The idea of making a literary
forgery filled his mind; and if you read Southey and Cottle's edition of
the works of Chatterton, or, what is far better, an admirable Life of
the young poet by John Dix, a gifted son of Bristol, now living in
America, you will have an interesting view of the character of this
remarkable youth.

[Illustration: Thomas Chatterton.]

At the east end of the church is the Chapel of the Virgin Mary. A noble
room it is. A large statue of Queen Elizabeth, in wood, stands against
one of the windows, just where it did thirty-seven years ago, when I was
a youngster, and went to her majesty's grammar school, which is taught
in the chapel. I showed the boys the names of my old school-fellows cut
upon the desks. How various their fates! One fine fellow, whose name yet
lives on the wood, found his grave in the West Indies, on a voyage he
had anticipated with great joy.

I am glad to say that a spirited effort is now making to restore this
gorgeous edifice. It was greatly needed, and was commenced in 1846. I do
wish you could see this church and gaze upon its interior. I have
obtained some fine drawings of parts of the edifice, and they will
enable you to form some faint idea of the splendor of the whole. We have
to dine with a friend, and I must close.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 8.


BRISTOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

You have so often expressed a desire to see the fine cathedral churches
and abbeys of the old world, that I shall not apologize for giving you
an account of them; and as they are more in my way, I shall take them
into my hands, and let the lads write you about other things. The next
visit we took, after I wrote you last, was to the cathedral. This is of
great antiquity. In 1148, a monastery was dedicated to St. Augustine.
This good man sent one Jordan as a missionary in 603, and here he
labored faithfully and died. It seems, I think, well sustained that the
venerable Austin himself preached here, and that his celebrated
conference with the British clergy took place on College Green; and it
is thought that the cathedral was built on its site to commemorate the
event. The vicinity of the church is pleasing. The Fitzhardings, the
founders of the Berkeley family, began the foundation of the abbey in
1140, and it was endowed and dedicated in 1148. The tomb of Sir Robert,
the founder, lies at the east of the door, and is enclosed with rails.
Some of the buildings connected with the church are of great antiquity,
and are probably quite as old as the body of the cathedral. A gateway
leading to the cloisters and chapter-house is plainly Saxon, and is
regarded as the finest Saxon archway in England. The western part of the
cathedral was demolished by Henry VIII. The eastern part, which remains,
has a fine Gothic choir. This was created a bishop's see by Henry VIII.
It is interesting to think that Secker, Butler, and Newton have all been
bishops of this diocese, and Warburton, who wrote the Divine Legation of
Moses, was once Dean of Bristol. The immortal Butler, who wrote the
Analogy of Natural and Revealed Religion, lies buried here, and his
tombstone is on the south aisle, at the entrance of the choir. A
splendid monument has been erected to his memory, with the following
inscription from the pen of Robert Southey, himself a Bristolian:--

     Sacred
     to the Memory of
     JOSEPH BUTLER, D.C.L.,
     twelve years Bishop of this Diocese,
     afterwards of Durham, whose mortal remains
     are here deposited. Others had established
     the historical and prophetical grounds of the
     Christian Religion, and that true testimony of Truth
     which is found in its perfect adaptation to the heart
     of man. It was reserved for him to develop its
     analogy to the constitution and course of Nature;
     and laying his strong foundations
     in the depth of that great argument,
     there to construct another and
     irrefragable proof; thus rendering
     Philosophy subservient
     to Faith, and finding
     in outward and
     visible things
     the type and evidence of those within the veil.

     Born, A.D. 1693. Died, 1752.

We noticed a very fine monument by Bacon to the memory of Mrs. Draper,
said to have been the Eliza of Sterne. We hastened to find the
world-renowned tomb of Mrs. Mason, and to read the lines on marble of
that inimitable epitaph, which has acquired a wider circulation than any
other in the world. The lines were written by her husband, the Rev.
William Mason.

    "Take, holy earth, all that my soul holds dear;
      Take that best gift which Heaven so lately gave.
    To Bristol's fount I bore with trembling care
      Her faded form; she bowed to taste the wave,
    And died. Does youth, does beauty read the line?
      Does sympathetic fear their breasts alarm?
    Speak, dead Maria; breathe a strain divine;
      E'en from the grave thou shalt have power to charm.
    Bid them be chaste, be innocent, like thee;
      Bid them in duty's sphere as meekly move;
    And if so fair, from vanity as free,
      As firm in friendship, and as fond in love,--
    Tell them, though 'tis an awful thing to die,
      (Twas e'en to thee,) yet, the dread path once trod,
    Heaven lifts its everlasting portals high,
      And bids the pure in heart behold their God."

In the cloisters we saw the tomb of Bird the artist, a royal
academician, and a native of Bristol. We were much interested with a
noble bust of Robert Southey, the poet, which has just been erected in
the north aisle. It stands on an octangular pedestal of gray marble,
with Gothic panels. The bust is of the most exquisitely beautiful
marble. The inscription is in German text.

     Robert Southey,
     Born in Bristol,
     October 4, 1774;
     Died at Reswick,
     March 21, 1843.

[Illustration: Robert Southey]

The cloisters contain some fine old rooms, which recall the days of the
Tudors. Here we saw the apartments formerly occupied by the learned and
accomplished Dr. Hodges, now organist of Trinity Church, New York. This
gentleman is a native of Bristol, and is held, we find, in respectful
and affectionate remembrance by the best people of this city.

Opposite to the cathedral, and on the other side of the college green,
is the Mayor's Chapel, where his honor attends divine service. In
Catholic days, this was the Church and Hospital of the Virgin Mary. This
edifice was built by one Maurice de Gaunt in the thirteenth century.
Under the tower at the east front is a small door, by which you enter
the church, and on the north another, by which you enter a small room,
formerly a confessional, with two arches in the walls for the priest and
the penitent. In this room are eight niches, in which images once stood.
The roof is vaulted with freestone, in the centre of which are two
curious shields and many coats of arms. In 1830, this chapel was
restored and beautified. A fine painted window was added, and the altar
screen restored to its former beauty, at the expense of the corporation.
The front of the organ gallery is very rich in Gothic moulding, tracery,
crockets, &c. It is flanked at the angles with octagonal turrets, of
singular beauty, embattled, and surmounted with canopies, crockets, &c.
The spandrils, quatrefoils, buttresses, sculptures, and cornices are
exceedingly admired. The pulpit is of stone, and the mayor's throne, of
carved oak, is of elaborate finish. Here are two knights in armor, with
their right hands on their sword hilts, on the left their shields, _with
their legs crossed,_ which indicates that they were crusaders.

In every excursion around Bristol, the boys were struck with the fact
that an old tower was visible on a high hill. The hill is called Dundry,
and it is said that it can be seen every where for a circle of five
miles round the city. Dundry is five miles from Bristol, and fourteen
from Bath, and it commands the most beautiful and extensive prospect in
the west of England. We rode out to it with an early friend of mine, who
is now the leading medical man of Bristol; and when I tell you that we
went in an Irish jaunting car, you may guess that we were amused. The
seats are at the sides, and George was in ecstasies at the novelty of
the vehicle. When oh the summit, we saw at the north and east the cities
of Bath and Bristol, and our view included the hills of Wiltshire, and
the Malvern Hills of Worcestershire. The Severn, from north to west, is
seen, embracing the Welsh coast, and beyond are the far-famed mountains
of Wales. The church has a fine tower, with turreted pinnacles fifteen
feet above the battlements. We rode over to Chew Magna, a village two
miles beyond Dundry. Here I went to a boarding school thirty-eight
years ago, and I returned to the village for the first time. It had
altered but little. The streets seemed narrower; but there was the old
tower where I had played fives, and there was the cottage where I bought
fruit; and when I entered it, Charley, I found "young Mr. Batt"-a man of
eighty-six. His father used to be "old Mr. Batt," and he always called
his son his "boy," and we boys termed him "young Mr. Batt." I came back
and found him eighty-six. So do years fly away. I called on one old
school-fellow, some years my junior. He did not recognize me, but I at
once remembered him. We partook of a lunch at his house. I was sadly
disappointed to find the old boarding school gone, but was not a little
relieved when I heard that it had given place to a Baptist church. I
confess I should have liked to occupy its pulpit for one Sabbath day.
To-morrow we are to spend at Clifton, the beautiful environ of Bristol,
and shall most likely write you again.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 9.


BRISTOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Clifton and the Hot Wells are the suburbs of this city, extending along
for a mile or two on the banks of the Avon. One mile below the city the
Avon passes between the rocks which are known as St. Vincent's on the
one side, and Leigh Woods upon the opposite one. These rocks are amongst
the sublimities of nature, and the Avon for about three miles presents
the wildest and sweetest bit of scenery imaginable. These cliffs have
been for ages the admiration of all beholders, and though thousands of
tons are taken from the quarries every year, yet the inhabitants say
that no great change takes place in their appearance. The Avon has a
prodigious rise of tide at Bristol, and at low water the bed of the
river is a mere brook, with immense banks of mud. The country all around
is exquisitely attractive, and affords us an idea of cultivation and
adornment beyond what we are accustomed to at home. In these rocks are
found fine crystals, which are known every where as Bristol diamonds. We
obtained some specimens, which reminded us of the crystals so frequently
seen at Little Falls, on the Mohawk. The great celebrity of the Hot
Wells is chiefly owing to a hot spring, which issues from the rock, and
possesses valuable medical qualities.

This spring had a reputation as early as 1480. It discharges about forty
gallons per minute, and was first brought into notice by sailors, who
found it useful for scorbutic disorders. In 1680 it became famous, and a
wealthy merchant rendered it so by a dream. He was afflicted with
diabetes, and dreamed that he was cured by drinking the water of this
spring. He resorted to the imagined remedy, and soon recovered. Its fame
now spread, and, in 1690, the corporation of Bristol took charge of the
spring. We found the water, fresh from the spring, at the temperature of
Fahrenheit 76°. It contains free carbonic acid gas. Its use is seen
chiefly in cases of pulmonary consumption. I suppose it has wrought
wonders in threatening cases. It is the place for an _invalid_ who
_begins to fear_, but it is not possible to "create a soul under the
ribs of death." Unhappily, people in sickness too seldom repair to such
aid as may here be found till the last chances of recovery are
exhausted. I have never seen a spot where I thought the fragile and
delicate in constitution might pass a winter, sheltered from every
storm, more securely than in this place. Tie houses for accommodation
are without end, both at the Hot Wells and at Clifton. This last place
is on the high ground, ascending up to the summit of the rocks, where
you enter on a noble campus known as Durdham Down. This extends for some
three or four miles, and is skirted by charming villages, which render
the environs of Bristol so far-famed for beauty.

I never wished to have your company more than when we all ascended the
height of St. Vincent's Rocks. The elevation at which we stood was about
three hundred and fifty feet above the winding river which, it is
thought, by some sudden convulsion of nature, turned from the moors _of_
Somersetshire, its old passage to the sea, and forced an abrupt one
between the rocks and the woods; and the corresponding dip of the
strata, the cavities on one side, and projections on the other, make the
supposition very plausible. A suspension bridge over this awful chasm is
in progress.

The celebrated pulpit orator, Robert Hall, always spoke of the scenery
of this region as having done very much in his early days to form his
notions of the beautiful. In one of his most admirable sermons, preached
at Bristol, when discoursing upon "the new heavens and the new earth,"
he indulged in an astonishing outbreak of eloquence, while he conducted
his audience to the surpassing beauties of their own vicinage,
sin-ruined as it was, and then supposed that this earth might become the
dwelling-place of the redeemed, when, having been purified from all
evil, it should again become "very good." Here, on these scenes of
unrivalled beauty, Southey, and Lovell, and Coleridge, and Cottle have
loved to meditate; and the wondrous boy Chatterton fed his muse amid
these rare exhibitions of the power and wisdom of the Godhead. A Roman
encampment is still visible on the summit of the rocks. We were all
sorry, to see such havoc going on among the quarries, where, to use
Southey's language on this subject, they are "selling off the sublime
and beautiful by the boat load."

[Illustration: Samuel Taylor Coleridge.]

Our favorite walk is on the downs. George seems really penetrated with
the uncommon beauty of the region, and wants to stop as long as
possible, and does not believe any thing can be more beautiful. We look
over the awful cliffs--gaze on the thread of water winding its devious
course at an immense distance below--watch the steamers from Wales and
Ireland shoot up to the city, and the noble West Indiamen, as they are
towed along. The woods opposite are charming, and contain nearly every
forest-tree belonging to the country. Dr. Holland, in his travels
through Greece, refers to this very spot in the following language: "The
features of nature are often best described by comparison; and to those
who have visited Vincent's Rocks, below Bristol, I cannot convey a more
sufficient idea of the far-famed Vale of Tempe than by saying that its
scenery resembles, though on a much larger scale, that of the former
place. The Peneus, indeed, as it flows through the valley, is not
greatly wider than the Avon, and the channel between the cliffs
irregularly contracted in its dimensions; but these cliffs themselves
are much loftier and more precipitous, and project their vast masses of
rock with still more extraordinary abruptness over the hollow beneath."
We devoted a morning to visit Leigh Court, the residence of Mr. Miles, a
wealthy merchant and member in Parliament for Bristol. This is regarded
as one of the finest residences in the west of England. The mansion has
an Ionic portico, supported by massive columns. The great hall is very
extensive. A double flight of steps leads you to a peristyle of the
Ionic order, around which are twenty marble columns, supporting a lofty
dome, lighted by painted glass. The floor is of colored marble. This
residence has been enriched with the choicest treasures from Wanstead
House, and Fonthill Abbey. To us the grand attraction was the Picture
Gallery, which has few superiors in the kingdom. A catalogue, with
etchings, was published a few years ago. You may judge of the merits of
the collection, and the nature of our gratification, when I tell you
that here are the Conversion of Paul, by Rubens; the Graces, by Titian;
William Tell, by Holbein; Pope Julius II., by Raphael; Ecce Homo, by
Carl Dolci; Head of the Virgin, by Correggio; St. Peter, by Guido; St.
John, by Domenichino; Creator Mundi, by Leonardo da Vinci; Crucifixion,
by Michael Angelo; Plague of Athens, by N. Poussin; three Seaports, by
Claude; and a large number by Rembrandt, Salvator Rosa, Paul Potter,
Parmegiano, Velasques, Gerard Dow, &c. This has been a most gratifying
excursion, and our visit here will be a matter of pleasant recollection.
I forgot to say that at Clifton, and at various places near the rocks,
we were beset by men, women, and children, having very beautiful
polished specimens of the various stones found in the quarries, together
with minerals and petrifactions. Of these we all obtained an assortment.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 10.


DEAR CHARLEY:--

We have while at Bristol made two journeys to Bath, and I am sure we are
all of opinion that it is the most elegant city we ever saw. A great
deal of its beauty is owing to the fine freestone of which it is chiefly
built.

We were much pleased with the Royal Crescent, which consists of a large
number of elegant mansions, all built in the same style. Ionic columns
rise from a rustic basement, and support the superior cornice. These
houses are most elegantly finished. All the city is seen from the
crescent, and no other spot affords so grand a prospect. Camden Place is
an elliptical range of edifices, commanding an extensive view of the
valley, with the winding stream of the Avon, and the villages upon its
banks. One of the principal features of Bath is its hills and downs,
which shelter it on every side. The sides on these downs are very fine,
extending for miles, and you see thousands of sheep enjoying the finest
possible pasturage. Talking of sheep, I am reminded how very fine the
sheep are here; it seems to me they are almost as big again as our
mutton-makers.

Queen Square, in Bath, pleases us all, as we are told it does every one.
It stands up high, and is seen from most parts of the city. From north
to south, between the buildings, if is three hundred and sixteen feet,
and from east to west three hundred and six feet. In the centre is an
enclosure, and in that is a fine obelisk. The north side of the square
is composed of stately dwellings, and they have all the appearance of a
palace. The square is built of freestone, and is beautifully tinted by
age. The first thing almost we want to see in these fine towns is the
cathedral, if there be one. I never thought that I should be so pleased
with old buildings as I find I am. Old houses, castles, and churches
have somehow strangely taken my fancy. The Cathedral, or, as they here
call it, the Abbey Church, is a noble one. It was begun in 1495, and
only finished in 1606, and stands on the foundation of an old convent,
erected by Osric in 676. It is famous for its clustered columns, and
wide, elegantly arched windows. The roof is remarkable for having
fifty-two windows, and I believe has been called the Lantern of England.
You know that the city takes its name from its baths. The great resort
of fashion is at the Pump-room and the Colonnade. This building is
eighty-five feet in length, forty-six wide, and thirty-four high. This
elegant room is open to the sick of every part of the world. An
excellent band plays every day from one till half past three.

The King's Bath is a basin sixty-six feet by forty-one, and will contain
three hundred and forty-six tuns. I have been much pleased with Dr.
Granville's works on the Spas of England, and there you will find much
interesting matter respecting Bath.

We made some pleasant excursions in the vicinity of this beautiful city.
We have visited Bradford, Trowbridge, and Devizes. Trowbridge is a fine
old town, and we looked with interest at the church where the poet
Crabbe so long officiated. His reputation here stands high as a good man
and kind neighbor, but he was called a poor preacher. Here, and in all
the neighboring places, the manufacture of broadcloths and cassimeres is
carried on extensively. Devizes is a charming old town. We were greatly
interested with its market-place, and a fine cross, erected to hand down
the history of a sad event. A woman who had appealed to God in support
of a lie was here struck dead upon the spot, and the money which she
said she had paid for some wheat was found clinched in her hand. This
monument was built by Lord Sidmouth, and is a fine freestone edifice,
with a suitable inscription.

Roundaway Down, which hangs over this ancient town, was famous in the
civil wars of Charles I. Here, too, are the relics of an old castle.
Devizes has two great cattle fairs, in spring and autumn; and the market
day, on Thursday, gave us a good idea of the rural population. We have
rarely seen finer looking men than were here to be seen around their
wheat, barley, and oats. We have been pleased to see the great English
game of cricket, which is so universally played by all young men in this
country. It seems to us that the boys here have more athletic games than
with us. Prisoners' bass seems a favorite boys' amusement, and ninepins,
or, as we call it, bowls, are played by all classes freely, and it is
not regarded as at all unministerial. We are going to London this week,
and shall commence sight-seeing in earnest. Above all, we are to be at
the exhibition. When I have seen the lions, I will write you again.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 11.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

The story goes that Mr. Webster, when he first arrived in London,
ordered the man to drive to the Tower. Certainly we boys all wanted to
go there as soon as possible. I do not think that I ever felt quite so
touch excitement as I did when we were riding to the Tower, I had so
many things crowding into my mind; and all the history of England with
which I have been so pleased came at once freshly into my memory. I
wanted to be alone, and have all day to wander up and down the old
prison and palace and museum, for it has been all these things by turns.
Well, we rode over Tower Hill, and got directly in front of the old
fortress, and had a complete view of it.

In the centre stands a lofty square building, with four white towers,
having vanes upon them. This is said to be the work of William the
Conqueror, but has had many alterations under William Rufus, Henry I.,
and Henry II. In 1315, the Tower was besieged by the barons who made war
on John. Henry III. made his residence in this place, and did much to
strengthen and adorn it. About this time the Tower began to be used as a
state prison. Edward I. enlarged the ditch or moat which surrounded the
Tower. In the days of Richard II., when the king had his troubles with
Wat Tyler, the Archbishop of Canterbury was beheaded on Tower Hill, or,
rather, massacred, for it said that he was mangled by eight strokes of
the axe. When Henry V. gained his great victory at Agincourt, he placed
his French prisoners here. Henry VIII. was here for some time after he
came to the throne, and he made his yeomen the wardens of the Tower,
and they still wear the same dress as at that day. The dress is very
rich,--scarlet and gold,--and made very large; the coat short, and
sleeves full. The head-dress is a cap.

We went in at what is called the Lion's Gate, because some time back the
menagerie was kept in apartments close by. The kings of other days used
to have fights between the beasts, and James I. was very fond of combats
between lions and dogs in presence of his court. All these animals were
moved several years ago to the Zoölogical Gardens. We passed through
strong gates, defended by a portcullis, and on our left we saw what the
warden called the Bell Tower, and which was the prison of Bishop Fisher,
who was beheaded for not acknowledging Henry VIII. to be the head of the
church. I wanted to see the Traitor's Gate, and found it was on the
right hand, having a communication with the Thames under a bridge on the
wharf. Through this passage it was formerly the custom to convey the
state prisoners, and many a man in passing this gate bade farewell to
hope.

There is, just opposite to this gate, the bloody tower where Edward V.
and his brother were put to death by the monster Richard, who usurped
the throne. I would have given a great deal to have explored the Tower,
but the things and places I wanted to look into were just what you are
not let see. The old Tower of English history you look at, but must not
go through. Still I have been delighted, but not satisfied. We found the
spot where the grand storehouse and armory were burnt in 1841, and, if I
recollect rightly, the warden said it was three hundred and fifty feet
long, and sixty wide. Here, I suppose, was the finest collection of
cannon and small fire-arms in the world. We saw some few fine specimens
that were saved. Of course, we were curious to see the Horse Armory.
This is a room one hundred and fifty feet in length, and about
thirty-five wide. Some one has said that here is "the History of
England, done in iron." All down the middle of the room is a line of
equestrian figures, and over each character is his banner. All the sides
of the apartment are decorated with trophies and figures in armor. I was
much gratified with the beautiful taste displayed in the arrangement of
the arms upon the walls and ceiling. Some of the suits of armor were
very rich, and answered exactly to my notions of such matters. Here I
saw, for the first time, the coat of mail; and I think the men of that
day must have been stronger than those of our time, or they never could
have endured such trappings. I was much pleased with the real armor of
Henry VIII. This suit was very rich, and damasked. And here, too, was
the very armor of Dudley, Earl of Leicester, who figured at the court
of Elizabeth. It weighs eighty-seven pounds; and close by it is the
martial suit of the unfortunate Essex. He was executed, you know, at
this place, 1601. Among the most beautiful armors we saw were the suits
of Charles I. and a small one which belonged to his younger brother when
a lad. I think one suit made for Charles when a boy of twelve would have
fitted me exactly; and wouldn't I have liked to become its owner! King
Charles's armor was a present from the city of London, and was one of
the latest manufactured in England.

I do not think I ever was in a place that so delighted me. I cannot tell
you a hundredth part of the curiosities that are to be seen s all sorts
of rude ancient weapons; several instruments of torture prepared by the
Roman Catholics, at the time of the Spanish Armada, for the conversion
of the English heretics. One of these was the Iron Collar, which weighs
about fifteen pounds, and has a rim of inward spikes; and besides, we
saw a barbarous instrument, called the Scavenger's Daughter, which
packed up the body and limbs into an inconceivably small space. We
looked with deep interest, you may imagine, Charley, on the block on
which the Scotch lords, Balmerino, Kilmarnook, and Lovat, were beheaded
in 1746. The fatal marks upon the wood are deeply cut; and we had in our
hands the axe which was used at the execution of the Earl of Essex. I
shall read the history of this country, I am sure, with more pleasure
than ever, after walking over the yard and Tower Hill, where so many
great and good, as well as so many infamous, persons have suffered
death. Only think what a list of names to be connected with the
block--Fisher, More, Queen Anne Boleyn, Queen Catherine Howard,
Margaret, Countess of Salisbury, Cromwell and Devereux, both Earls of
Essex, the Duke of Somerset, Lady Jane Grey and her husband, the Duke of
Northumberland, Sir Walter Raleigh, Strafford, Laud,--all perished on
the Tower Green or on the Tower Hill. The spot is easily recognized
where the scaffold was erected.

The regalia, or crown jewels, are kept in an apartment built on purpose
to contain these precious treasures. Here are the crowns that once
belonged to different sovereigns and heirs of the throne. At the death
of Charles I., the crown in use, and said to be as old as the times of
Edward the Confessor, was broken up, and a new one made at the
restoration of Charles II. The arches of this crown are covered with
large stones of different colors, and the cap of the crown is of purple
velvet. The old crown for the queen is of gold, set with diamonds of
great cost, and has some large pearls. There is a crown called "the
Diadem," which was made for James II.'s queen, adorned with diamonds,
and which cost just about half a million of dollars. The crown of the
Prince of Wales is plain gold.

As for orbs, staffs, and sceptres, I can't tell you half the number. One
I noticed called "St. Edward's Staff," of gold, four feet seven inches
long. At the top is an orb and cross, and a fragment of the Savior's
cross is _said_ to be in the orb. Here, too, are all kinds of
swords--called swords of justice and mercy--and vessels to hold the oil
for anointing the monarch at coronation, and a saltcellar of gold which
is used at the same time, and is a model of the Tower. I thought all
this very fine; but I was most pleased with seeing such splendid
specimens of precious stones. Such diamonds, pearls, amethysts,
emeralds, &c., &c., we Yankee boys had never seen, and probably may
never see again. I was very much delighted with a large silver wine
fountain, presented by Plymouth to Charles II., and which is used at
coronation banquets; and also with the font, of silver gilt; used at the
baptism of the Queen. It stands about four feet high. Over all this show
that I have told you of is the state crown made for Victoria. This is
very brilliant, and in the centre of the diamond cross is a sparkling
sapphire, while in front of the crown is a large ruby which was worn by
the Black Prince. Well, Charley, my boy, I would rather go to
Washington and look at our old copy of the Declaration of Independence
than gaze for a whole day at this vast collection of treasure. There is
more to be proud of in that old camp equipage of Washington's up in the
patent office than in all the crown jewels of England--at least, so I
think, and so do you.

Yours affectionately,

GEORGE.


Letter 12.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

George has said his say about the Tower, he tells me; and I assure you
it was a time that we shall often think of when we get back. On our
return, the doctor proposed that we should visit the Thames Tunnel,
which was not far off; and so we went through a number of poor streets,
reminding us of the oldest parts of Boston round Faneuil Hall. The
tunnel connects Rotherhithe and Wapping. This last place, you know, we
have read about enough in Dibdin's Sea Songs, our old favorite.

Several notions about this great idea have been entertained in past
years; but in 1814, Brunei, the great engineer, noticed the work of a
worm on a vessel's keel, where it had sawn its way longitudinally, and
he caught an idea. In 1833, he formed a "Thames Tunnel Company," and in
1825 he commenced operations, but it was not opened till 1843 for
passengers. There are no carriage approaches to it, and it is only
available to foot travellers. The ascent and descent is by shafts of,
perhaps, one hundred steps. I think I heard that the great work cost the
company, and government, who helped them, about half a million sterling.
The passages are all lighted up with gas, and in the way you find raree
shows of a dioramic character, and plenty of music, and not a few
venders of views and models of the tunnel. After leaving this river
curiosity, we went to see the new Houses of Parliament, which run along
the banks of the river, in close neighborhood to Westminster Abbey. I
felt disappointed at the first view, it is altogether so much like a
very large pasteboard model--such a thing as you often see in ladies'
fairs for charity. To my notion, the affair wants character; it is all
beautiful detail. The length is about oho thousand feet. The clock tower
is to be three hundred and twenty feet high. It is vain to describe the
building, which is far too immense and complicated for my pea. I never
was so bewildered in a place before. As I think you would like to have a
correct idea of the House of Lords, I will quote from the description
which was handed us on entering, but even then you will fail to
understand its gorgeous character.

"Its length is ninety feet; height, forty-five feet, and width the
same; so that it is a double cube. It is lighted by twelve windows, six
on each side, each of which is divided by mullions into four, these
being intersected by a transom, making eight lights in each window,
which are made of stained glass, representing the kings and queens,
consort and regnant, since the Conquest. The ceiling is flat, and
divided into eighteen large compartments, which are subdivided by
smaller ribs into four, having at the intersection lozenge-shaped
compartments. The centre of the south end is occupied by the throne,
each side of which are doors opening into the Victoria Lobby. The throne
is elevated on steps. The canopy is divided into three compartments, the
centre one rising higher than the others, and having under it the royal
chair, which is a brilliant piece of workmanship; studded round the back
with crystals. The shape of the chair is similar in outline to that in
which the monarchs have been crowned, and which is in Westminster Abbey,
but, of course, widely different in detail and decoration. On each side
of this chair are others for Prince Albert and the Prince of Wales. At
the north end is the bar of the house, where appeals are heard, and the
Commons assemble when summoned on the occasion of the opening of
Parliament. Above the bar is the reporters' gallery, behind which is the
strangers', and round the sides of the House is another gallery,
intended for the use of peeresses, &c., on state occasions.

"At the north and south ends of the house, above the gallery, are three
compartments, corresponding in size and shape to the windows, and
containing fresco paintings. Those at the north end are 'the Spirit of
Religion,' by J.C. Horsley; 'the Spirit of Chivalry' and 'the Spirit of
Justice,' by D. Maclise, R.A. Those at the south end, over the throne,
are 'the Baptism of Ethelbert,' by Dyce; 'Edward III. conferring the
Order of the Garter on the Black Prince,' and 'the Committal of Prince
Henry by Judge Gascoigne,' by C.W. Cope, R.A. Between the windows are
richly-decorated niches and canopies, which are to have bronze statues
in them. In casting the eye round the whole room, it is almost
impossible to detect scarcely a square inch which is not either carved
or gilded. The ceiling, with its massive gilded and decorated panels,
presents a most imposing and gorgeous effect, and one of truly royal
splendor. The St. Stephen's Hall is ninety-five feet long, thirty feet
wide, and sixty feet high; the roof is stone-groined, springing from
clustered columns running up the side of the hall. The bosses, at the
intersections of the main ribs, are carved in high relief, with
incidents descriptive of the life of Stephen.

"This hall leads through a lofty archway into the central hall, which
is octagon in plan, having columns at the angles, from which spring ribs
forming a grand stone groin finishing in the centre, with an octagon
lantern, the bosses at the intersections of all the ribs elaborately
carved. The size of this hall is sixty-eight feet in diameter, and it is
sixty feet to the crown of the groin."

The House of Commons, which is now in the course of completion, is quite
a contrast to the splendor of the House of Lords. Its length is
eighty-four feet; width, forty-five feet; and height, forty-three feet.
An oak gallery runs all round the house, supported by posts at
intervals, having carved heads, and spandrills supporting the main ribs.
The strangers' gallery is at the south end, in front of which is the
speaker's order gallery. At the north end is the reporters' gallery,
over which is the ladies' gallery--being behind a stone screen. The
libraries are fine rooms, looking out on the river. I have no time to
tell you of the beautiful refreshment rooms, excepting to say that the
one for the peers is one hundred feet long. I must not forget to say
that in the tower is to be a wondrous clock, the dial of which is to be
thirty feet in diameter! We went to see these buildings by an order from
the lord chamberlain. The total cost is estimated at between eight and
ten millions of dollars. It certainly is very rich, and looks finely
from the river; but it is unfortunately too near to the abbey, and wants
force. After leaving the Houses of Parliament, we went to Westminster
Hall, which has some of the finest historical recollections connected
with any public building in England. Really, I felt more awe in entering
this hall than I ever remember to have experienced. I cannot tell you
the size of it, but it is the largest room in Europe without a support,
and the span of the roof is the widest known. The roof, of chestnut, is
exceedingly fine. Only think, my dear fellow, what events have
transpired on this spot. The following trials took place here: Stafford,
Duke of Buckingham, for high treason, 1521; Sir Thomas More, 1535; Duke
of Somerset, for treason, 1552; Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, for his
attachment to Mary, Queen of Scots; Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex,
1601, and Earl of Southampton; Guy Fawkes and the Gun-powder Plot
conspirators; Robert Carr, Earl of Southampton, and his countess, for
murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, 1616; Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, 1641;
Archbishop Laud; Charles I., for his attacks upon the liberties of his
country, 1649; the seven bishops, in the reign of James II.; Dr.
Sacheverel, 1710; in 1716, the Earls Derwentwater, Nithisdale, and
Carnwath, and the Lords Widdington, Kenmure, and Nairn, for the
rebellion of 1715; Harley, Earl of Oxford, 1717; the Earls Cromartie
and Kilmarnock, and Lord Balmerino, 1746, for the rebellion of 1745;
Lord Lovat, 1747; William Lord Byron, for the death of William Chaworth
in a bloody duel, 1765; Lord Ferrers, for the murder of his steward; the
infamous Duchess of Kingston, for bigamy, 1776; and Warren Hastings, for
cruelty in his office as Governor of India, 1788.

And besides all this, here have been the coronation feasts of all
England's monarchs, from William Rufus, who built it in 1099, down to
George IV., 1820. Sad times and merry ones have been here. We stepped
from the hall into the courts of law, which have entrances from this
apartment, and we saw the lord chancellor on the bench in one, and the
judges sitting in another. The courts were small, and not very imposing
in their appearance.

Yours truly,

JAMES.


Letter 13.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

O, we have had a noble treat; and how I longed for your company, as we
spent hour after hour in the British Museum. The building is very fine,
but the inside--that is every thing. The entire front is, I think, about
four hundred feet, and I reckoned forty-four columns forming a
colonnade; these are forty-five feet high. The portico is now receiving
magnificent sculpture in relief; and when the whole is finished, and the
colossal statues surmount the pediment, and the fine iron palisadoes,
now erecting, are completed, I think the edifice will be among the
finest in the world. The entrance hall is most imposing, and the ceiling
is richly painted in encaustic. The staircases are very grand, and their
side walls are cased with red Aberdeen granite, brought to an exquisite
polish. To describe the British Museum would be a vain attempt. In the
hall are several fine statues. Especially did we admire the one of
Shakspeare by Roubilliac, and given by Garrick. We soon found our way to
the Nineveh Gallery, and were wide awake to look after the relics of
Nineveh dug up by Layard on the banks of the Tigris. Here is a monstrous
human head, having bull's horns and ears, many fragments of horses'
heads, bulls, &c., &c. The colossal figure of the king is very grand,
and discovers great art. There is also a fine colossal priest, and the
war sculptures are of the deepest interest. Then we went to the Lycian
Room. The sculptures here were found at Xanthus, in Lycia. These ruins
claim a date of five hundred years before Christ. Here are some
exquisite fragments of frieze, describing processions, entertainments,
sacrifices, and female figures of great beauty.

In the Grand Saloon are numerous Roman remains of sculpture. In the
Phigalian Saloon are marbles found at a temple of Apollo, near Phigalia,
in Arcadia, in 1814. The Elgin Saloon is devoted to the magnificent
marbles taken in 1804, from temples at Athens, by the Earl of Elgin, and
were purchased by Parliament for thirty-five thousand pounds. They are
chiefly ornaments from the Parthenon, a Doric temple built in the time
of Pericles, B.C. 450, by Phidias. No one can fail to be impressed with
the great beauty of these conceptions. The famous Sigean inscription is
written in the most ancient of Greek letters, boustrophedon-wise; that
is, the lines follow each other as oxen turn from one furrow to another
in ploughing.

There are five galleries devoted to natural history, and are named thus:
the Botanical Museum, Mammalia Gallery, Eastern Zoölogical Gallery,
Northern Zoölogical Gallery, and the Mineral Gallery. The specimens in
all these are very fine. Nothing can be finer than the mammalia. The
preservation has been perfect, and far surpasses what I have been
accustomed to see in museums, where decay seems to be often rioting upon
the remains of nature. The department of ornithology is wonderful, and I
could have enjoyed a whole day in examining the birds of all climates.
In conchology the collection is very rich. I do not often get such a
gratification as I had among the portraits which are hanging on the
walls of these galleries. The very men I had heard so much of, and read
about, were here lifelike, painted by the best artists of their day. I
was much pleased with the picture of Mary, Queen of Scots, by Jansen; of
Cromwell, by Walker; of Queen Elizabeth, by Zucchero; of Charles II., by
Lely; of Sir Isaac Newton; of Lord Bacon; of Voltaire; of John
Guttenburg; and of Archbishop Cranmer. As to the library and the MSS.,
what shall I say? The collection of books is the largest in the kingdom,
and valuable beyond calculation. It amounts to seven hundred thousand.
We looked at illuminated gospels, Bibles, missals, till we were
bewildered with the gold and purple splendor; and then we walked from
one glass case to another, gazing upon autographs that made us
heart-sick when we thought of our juvenile treasures in this line. If
ever I did covet any thing, it was some old scraps of paper which had
the handwriting of Milton, Cromwell, Luther, Melancthon, Erasmus, and a
long _et cætera_ of such worthies. You know how much we love medals and
coins; well, here we revelled to our heart's delight. Country after
country has its history here, beautifully illustrated. The museum has
two spacious rooms devoted to reading, and the access to these treasures
is very liberal.

If I could stay in London one year, I should certainly propose to spend
three or four months in study and research at the British Museum; nor do
I imagine that it would be lost time. It seems to me that such a place
must make scholars; but I know, by my own painful recollection, that
opportunities for improvement are not always valued as they should be. I
have been much struck lately with the thought that men of leisure are
not the men who do much in literature. It never has been so. Here and
there a rich man cultivates his mind; but it is your busy men who leave
the mark upon the age.

While in the museum, we were shown Lord Chief Justice Campbell, the
author of the Lives of the Chancellors, &c. He is a working-man, if
there be one in England, and yet he finds time to elaborate volume upon
volume. I feel ashamed when I think how little I have acquired, how very
little I know that I might have understood, and what immensely larger
acquisitions have been made by those who have never enjoyed half my
advantages. There is a boy, only fifteen, who resorts to this museum,
and is said to understand its contents better than most of its visitors;
and a livery servant, some few years ago, used to spend all his hours of
leisure here, and wrote some excellent papers upon historical subjects.
If I have gained any good by my journey yet, it is the conviction, I
feel growing stronger every day, that I must work, and that every one
must work, in order to excel. It seems to me that we are in a fair way
to learn much in our present tour, for every day's excursion becomes a
matter of regular study when we come to our journal, which is now kept
posted up daily, as a thing of course. We are trying, at all events, to
make ourselves so familiar with the great attractions of London, that in
future life we may understand the affairs of the city when we hear of
them.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.


Letter 14.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Ever since we reached London, I have wanted to go to Woolwich, the great
naval arsenal and dockyard, because I expected I should obtain a pretty
good idea of the power of the British navy; and then I like to compare
such places with our own; and I have often, at Brooklyn Navy Yard,
thought how much I should like to see Woolwich. Woolwich is one the
Thames, and about ten miles from the city. You can go at any hour by
steamer from London Bridge, or take the railway from the Surrey side of
the bridge. We were furnished with a ticket of admission from our
minister; but unfortunately, we came on a day when the yard was closed
by order. We were sadly disappointed, but the doorkeeper, a very
respectable police officer, told us that our only recourse was to call
on the commanding officer, who lived a mile off, and he kindly gave us a
policeman as a guide. On our way, we met the general on horseback,
attended by some other officers. We accosted him, and told our case. He
seemed sorry, but said the yard was closed. As soon as we mentioned that
we came from America, he at once gave orders for our admission, and was
very polite. Indeed, on several occasions we have found that our being
from the United States has proved quite a passport.

We had a special government order to go over all the workshops and see
the steam power, &c., &c. I think I shall not soon forget the wonderful
smithery where the Nasmyth hammers are at work, employed in forging
chain cables and all sorts of iron work for the men-of-war. We went in
succession through the founderies for iron and brass, the steam boiler
manufactory, and saw the planing machines and lathes; and as to all the
other shops and factories, I can only say, that the yard looked like a
city.

We were much pleased with the ships now in progress. One was the screw
steamer, the Agamemnon, to have eighty-guns. There, too, is the Royal
Albert, of one hundred and twenty guns, which they call the largest ship
in the world. Of course, we think this doubtful. It has been nine years
in progress, and will not be finished for three more. It is to be
launched when the Prince of Wales attains the rank of post captain. We
saw, among many other curiosities, the boat in which Sir John Ross was
out twenty-seven days in the ice. We went into an immense building
devoted to military stores, and in one room we saw the entire
accoutrements for ten thousand cavalry, including bridles, saddles, and
stirrups, holsters, &c.

The yard is a very large affair, containing very many acres; it is the
depository of the cannon belonging to the army and navy for all the
region, and there were more than twenty thousand pieces lying upon the
ground. Some were very large, and they were of all varieties known in
war.

After a delightful hour spent in listening to the best martial music I
ever heard played, by the band, we took steamboat for Greenwich, and,
landing there, walked to Blackheath, where we had an engagement to dine
at Lee Grove with a London merchant. Here we had a fine opportunity to
witness the luxury and elegance of English social life. This gentleman,
now in the decline of life, has an exquisitely beautiful place, situated
in a park of some sixty acres. The railroad has been run through his
estate, and, of course, has made it very much more valuable for
building; but as it injures the park for the embellishment of the
mansion, it was a fair subject for damages, and the jury of reference
gave its proprietor the pretty verdict of eleven thousand pounds. At the
table we had the finest dessert which the hothouse can furnish. Our host
gave us a very interesting account of his travels in America more than
forty years ago. A journey from New York to Niagara, as related by this
traveller, was then far more of an undertaking than a journey from New
Orleans to New York, and a voyage thence to England, at the present
time.

In the evening, we took the cars for London, and reached our comfortable
hotel, the Golden Cross, Charing Cross, at eleven o'clock. By the way,
we are all very much pleased with the house and its landlord. Mr.
Gardiner is a very gentlemanly man, of fine address and acquirements. He
has been a most extensive traveller in almost every part of the world,
and has a fine collection of paintings, and one of the prettiest
cabinets of coins and medals I ever saw. He has a pretty cottage and
hothouses four or five miles from the city; and his family resides
partly there and at the hotel. The hotel is every thing that can be
desired.

A few evenings ago, Mr. Lawrence had a splendid _soirée_. There were
probably from two to three hundred present. Among the company were Sir
David Brewster, Leslie the artist, Miss Coutts, the Duke of Wellington.
"The duke," as he is called, is the great man of England. All the people
idolize him, and he is known to be a great man. He has become more
identified with the history of England for the last forty years than any
other man. Of course, he was to us Americans the great man of the
country. Whenever I have read of Napoleon, I have had Wellington in my
eye, and to see him was next to seeing the emperor. I never expected the
pleasure, but here it is allotted me. He is quite an old man in his
bearing and gait. He was dressed in a blue coat with metal buttons, wore
his star and garter, and had on black tights and shoes. He had been to
the opera, and then came to this party. Every one pays the most
deferential homage to the old hero. Waterloo and its eventful scenes
came directly before me, and I felt almost impatient for our visit to
the battle-field.

A gentleman who knows the duke told us that he spends from four to five
hours every morning at the Horse Guards in the performance of his duties
as commander-in-chief. Although he looks so feeble in the drawing-room,
he sits finely on his horse; and when I saw him riding down Piccadilly,
he seemed to be full twenty years younger than he was the day before at
the party.

We shall always be glad that we came to England in time to see "the
duke," and if we live twenty or thirty years, it will be pleasant to
say "I have seen the Duke of Wellington."

Yours affectionately,

GEORGE.


Letter 15.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

I know how curious you are to hear all about the royal exhibition, so I
shall do my best to give you such an account of our visits to it as may
enable you to get a bird's eye view of the affair.

Almost as soon as I arrived, I determined upon securing season tickets
for the boys, in order that they might not only see the pageant of the
opening on the 1st of May, but also have frequent opportunities to
attend the building and study its contents before the reduced prices
should so crowd the palace as to render examination and study nearly
impracticable. However, there came a report through all the daily papers
that the queen had abandoned the idea of going in person to inaugurate
the exhibition, and the sale of tickets flagged, and it was thought
prices would be reduced below the three guineas, which had been the
rate. I left London for a few days without purchasing, and on my return
I called for four season tickets, when, to my surprise, I was told that,
just an hour before, orders had been given from the board to raise them
to four guineas. I at once purchased them, although I regarded the
matter as an imposition. A few days after, Prince Albert revoked the
action of the board, and orders were issued to refund the extra guinea
to all who had purchased at the advanced price. This was easily
ascertained by reference to the number on the ticket, and registered at
purchase with the autograph of the proprietor. Of course, we saved our
four guineas.

For several days before the 1st of May all London, I may say all
England, and almost all the world was on tiptoe. Every man, woman, and
child talked of "the Crystal Palace, the great exhibition, the queen,
and prince Albert."

For a week or two there had been a succession of cold rain storms.
Winter had lingered in the lap of April. Men were looking at the 1st of
May with gloomy anticipations of hail, rain, snow, and sleet. Barometers
were in demand. The 30th of April gave a hail storm! The 1st of May
arrives,--_the day,_--and lo!

    "Heaven is clear,
    And all the clouds are gone."

It was as though the windows of heaven were opened to let the glory from
above stream through and bless Industry's children, who are about to
celebrate their jubilee. The queen, it is said, has a charm as regards
the weather. I heard many exclaim, "It is the queen's weather; it is
always her luck." Such a sight as that day afforded was never before
witnessed, and such a spectacle will probably never again be gazed upon.
The streets were thronged early. Every westward artery of the great city
pulsated with the living tide that flowed through it. From the far east,
where the docks border the Thames, came multitudes, though not exactly
stars in the hemisphere of fashion. Ladies in the aristocratic precincts
of Belgravia rose at an early hour, and, for once, followed the queen's
good, every-day example. The lawyers rushed from Lincoln's and Gray's
Inns of Court. The Royal Exchange was so dull at ten o'clock that the
very grasshopper on its vane might have been surprised. Holborn was
crammed at when in olden time people pressed, and struggled, and strove
to see Jack Sheppard, Joshua Wild, Dick Turpin, or any such worthies on
their sad way to Tyburn. But it is no gibbet now allures the morbid
multitude. They are gayly, gently, and gladly travelling to the home of
industry. Among all the pleasant sights that every moment delighted us
none were more pleasant than the happy family groups, who, on every
side, "push along, keep moving." Just see that mechanic; he looks as
proud as a lord,--and why shouldn't he be?--with his wife leaning
trustingly, lovingly on his arm. He, good man, has thrown away the saw,
or plane, or any other tool of handicraft, and now his little boy--O,
the delight, the wonder in that boy's face!--is willingly dragged along.
Well, on we go,--driving across what you would call impassable streets,
and lo! we are wedged up in a crowd,--and such a crowd,--a crowd of all
nations.

At length we reach the palace gates; and there, who can tell the press
and strife for entrance. Long and nobly did the police struggle and
resist, but at length the outward pressure was omnipotent, and the full
tide of lucky ones with season tickets gained, entrance into, not the
palace, but the enclosure. Then came order,--breathing space,--tickets
were examined, and places assigned on cards, given as we entered into
the palace itself. We all obtained good positions--very good ones. This
was at eleven o'clock. At about a quarter to twelve, one standing near
to us remarked, "She will be to her time; she always is." And he was
right; for scarcely had he prophesied before a prolonged shouting told
that the queen was coming. "Plumes in the light wind dancing" were the
outward and visible signs of the Life Guards, who came gently trotting
up. Then came four carriages,--the coachmen and footmen of which were so
disguised with gold lace, and wigs, and hair powder, that their mothers
wouldn't have known them,--and then the queen--not robed and tricked
out like the queens in children's story books, so dreadful as to
resemble thunderbolts in petticoats; not hooped, and furbelowed, and
stomachered, and embroidered all over, as was Elizabeth; nor with a cap,
like Mary, Queen of Scots; not with eight horses prancing before the
queen's carriage, but in her private carriage, drawn by two horses. Off
went all hats. I wish you could have heard the cheering as the queen
entered the wondrous building. O, it was like "the voice of many
waters." Such deep, prolonged, hearty cheering I never, heard. As
Victoria entered, up went the standard of England, and never before did
its folds wave over such a scene. The entrance of majesty was the signal
for the organ to play; the vitreous roof vibrates as the sounds fly
along the transparent aisles; and we had musical glasses on a large
scale. It would require the pen of our favorite Christopher North to
describe the magnificent scene when the queen ascended the throne,
surrounded by all the elegance and nobility of her kingdom. Her husband
reads an address; she replies; the venerable archbishop dedicates the
Temple of Industry. The queen declares the palace opened, and the
procession is formed to walk through its aisles. No small task this; but
then thirty thousand persons are waiting to gaze on the queen and her
court. A ludicrous sight it was to see two of England's proudest peers
walking backward before the queen. The Marquis of Westminster and Earl
of Breadalbane performed this feat, and glad enough must they have been
when they received their dismission. The heralds, some twelve or
fourteen, in black velvet, looked finely. The queen walked like a queen,
and bore herself nobly and womanly. She is a small figure, fair face,
light hair, large, full, blue eyes, plump cheek, and remarkably fine
neck and bust. She leaned upon her husband's right arm, holding in her
hand the Prince of Wales, while Prince Albert led the princess royal. I
was sadly disappointed in the appearance of the Prince of Wales. He is
altogether a feeble-looking child, and cannot have much mental force.
The princess is a fine, energetic-looking girl. We stood within a yard
of the royal party as it passed bowing along. Then came the members of
the royal family; and then visitors from Prussia and Holland; the ladies
and gentlemen of the queen's household; the cabinet ministers; the
foreign ministers; the archbishop in his robe, and the members of the
royal commission; the lord mayor of London, and the aldermen. There,
too, was Paxton, the architect of this great wonder. It was his day of
triumph, and every one seemed to be glad for his fortune. All these were
in gorgeous court dresses. I have seen all sorts and kinds of show, but
never did I witness such a spectacle as was this day afforded to the
congress of the world. The Duke of Wellington, and his companion in
arms, the Marquis of Anglesea, walked arm in arm, "par nobilis fratrum."
It was Wellington's birthday. He is eighty-two, and Anglesea eighty-one.
The Marquis walks well for a man of his age, and who has to avail
himself of an artificial leg. They were most enthusiastically cheered in
all parts of the house. In the diplomatic corps there was great splendor
of costume, but no man carried himself more stately than did Mr.
Lawrence, whose fine, manly figure admirably becomes a court dress. I do
not think that I ever saw a collection of ladies so plain and homely as
the court ladies of Queen Victoria, who walked behind her in procession.
The Duchess of Sutherland has been renowned for her majestic beauty; but
she is _passe_, and her friends are, I think, matchless for entire
destitution of personal charms. But there was enough present to atone
for the want of this in the royal circle. Some of the most exquisite
faces I ever saw were there in those galleries, and forms of beauty that
can hardly be surpassed. I was much surprised at noticing in the vast
crowd, known to be about thirty thousand, that there were so few lads. I
do not believe there were more than ten or fifteen in the palace; and,
as we have already said, the absence of lads is owing to their all being
at boarding-schools. Our boys, you may well suppose, are greatly
pleased with having witnessed the greatest pageant of the age, and one
that can never be surpassed. We shall soon be at the exhibition again,
and apply ourselves to a careful survey of its interesting contents.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 16.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Now that the excitement consequent on the opening of the Crystal Palace
has in some degree subsided and curiosity to a certain extent satisfied,
we are enabled to obtain more lucid ideas of this extraordinary building
and its wondrous contents. The admission for several days was one pound,
and at this high price the visitors were of the most fashionable
character. We have been much pleased in looking at the very fine
equipages that throng the roads around the park. The carriages, horses,
end liveries are in the best possible taste. When we entered, the palace
was no longer heightened in splendor by the presence of the sovereign
and her brilliant court. The superb canopy which overshadowed the _dais_
on which the gorgeous chair had stood, alone remained to indicate that
there England's queen had performed the inaugural rites; but the great
facts of the exhibition remained. The crystal fountain still played, the
magnificent elms appeared in their spring garniture of delicate green
beneath the lofty transept, and the myriad works of skill, art, and
science lay around, above, and beneath us. I entered the building by its
eastern door, and, immediately on passing the screen which interposes
between the ticket offices and the interior, the whole extent of the
palace of glass lay before me. Fancy yourself standing at the end of a
broad avenue, eighteen hundred and fifty feet in length, roofed with
glass, and bounded laterally by gayly-decorated, slender pillars. The
effect was surpassingly beautiful. Right and left of this splendid nave
were other avenues, into which the eyes wandered at will; for no walls,
no barriers are to be found in the whole building; all is open, from
floor to roof, and from side to side, and from the eastern to the
western extremity.

Proceeding westward, I saw the compartments allotted to our own country.
The first thing I noticed was a piece of sculpture,--the dying
Indian,--a fine production, though perhaps a trifle overdone. Then came
an American bridge, which painters were still at work upon; and then,
backed by drapery of crimson cloth, that splendid creation of genius,
the Greek Slave, which will immortalize the name of Hiram Powers. I
shall not, I think, be accused of national partiality when I assert
that this statue is, in sculpture, one of the two gems of the
exhibition. Perhaps, if I were not from the United States, I should say
it was "_the gem_." When I come to tell you of the Italian marbles, I
shall refer to that production of art which can alone be thought to
dispute the palm of superiority with it. Every one expresses the highest
admiration at the Slave, and a crowd is constantly around the spot. One
old gentleman, who was in an ecstasy over the sculpture, very sharply
rebuked a person complaining of the paucity of the American productions,
with "Fie, _there_ is one thing America has sent, that all Europe may
admire, and no one in Europe can equal." Turning aside from this
"breathing marble," I examined the American exhibition of products and
manufactures. I confess to you I felt mortified with the comparative
meagreness of our show, because it contrasts poorly with the abundance
exhibited by nations far inferior to us in skill and enterprise. Still,
we have much to show; but the useful prevails over the beautiful. I am
quite sure, too, that there are things here which will compel attention,
and carry away calm, dispassionate approbation from the jurors. The
United States exhibits numerous specimens of tools, cordage, cotton and
woolen fabrics, shawls, colors, prints, daguerreo-types, silver and gold
plate, pianos, musical instruments, harnesses, saddlery, trunks,
bookbinding, paper hangings, buggies, wagons, carriages, carpetings,
bedsteads, boots and shoes, sculls, boats, furs, hair manufactures,
lithographs, perfumery, soaps, surgical instruments, cutlery, dentistry,
locks, India rubber goods, machinery, agricultural implements, stoves,
kitchen ranges, safes, sleighs, maps, globes, philosophical instruments,
grates, furnaces, fire-arms of all descriptions, models of railroads,
locomotives, &c. You may add to these fine specimens of all our produce,
as cotton, sugar, tobacco, hemp, and the mineral ores--iron, lead, zinc,
plumbago, tin, and copper, coals of all kinds, preserved meats, &c., &c.

I wish, Charley, you could go with me into a door south of the transept,
over which, in oddly-shaped letters, are the words "MEDIÆVAL
COURT." The very name reminds one of Popery, Puseyism, and Pugin.
This mediæval court absolutely dazzles one's eyes with its splendors.
Auriferous draperies line the walls; from the ceiling hang gold and
silver lamps--such lamps as are to be seen in Romish chapels before the
statues of the Virgin; huge candlesticks, in which are placed enormous
candles; Gothic canopies and richly-carved stalls; images of he and she
saints of every degree; crucifixes and crosiers; copes and mitres;
embroideries, of richest character, are all here--things which the
mother of harlots prizes as the chosen instruments by which she
deceives the nations. And truly beautiful are many of these things as
works of art; but it is only as works of art that any Christian can
admire them. As I gazed on the rich tissues and golden insignia, I
mourned for poor corrupt human nature, to which alone such gewgaws could
be acceptable. How would Paul or Peter have stared, had they been
required to don such glittering pontificals as are here to be seen!
While I feel great respect for Pugin's ability as an architect and
designer, I have profound pity for those who are deluded by these
gorgeous symbols of a gloomy, cruel, and heartless creed.

There is a large golden cage, not altogether unlike a parrot's; and
there is a press, indeed. What calls such attention from the multitude?
I join the gazers, and see what at first appears to be three pieces of
irregularly-shaped glass, white and glittering; one large piece, about
the size of a walnut, and two others a little larger than marbles. What
renders that bit of glass so attractive? Glass! no; it is "a gem of
purest ray serene"--a diamond--the diamond of diamonds--the largest in
the world. In short, it is the Kohinoor; or, as the Orientals poetically
called it, "the mountain of light." Its estimated value is two millions
sterling--enough to buy the Crystal Palace itself, nine times over. The
history of this precious gem is romantically curious. It belonged to
Runjeet Sindjb and is now an English trophy.

Let us enter that partially-darkened chamber, and stand before a painted
glass window, the production of Bertini, of Milan. I can't describe this
extraordinary production. It is illustrative of Dante, and, for
brilliancy of color and harmony of combination, it is not surpassed by
the much-vaunted specimens of past ages.

"From the sublime to the ridiculous," said Burke, "there is but a step;"
and at not much greater distance from this Dantean window is a German
toy stand. It is amusing to observe a big, "Tenbroek" sort of son of
Allemagne, arranging tiny children's toys. The contrast between the
German giant and the petty fabrics he is setting off to the best
advantage, provokes a smile.

Let us join the throng rushing into the suite of rooms furnished by the
upholsterers of Vienna. These rooms are indeed magnificent, and must
afford a high treat to the lovers of wood carving. There is a bookcase,
which is almost a miracle of art; the flowers seem to wave, and the
leaves to tremble, so nearly do they approach the perfection of nature.
Then there is, it is said by judges, the most superb bed in the world;
it is literally covered with carvings of the most costly and delicate
description. Since the time of the famous Grinling Gibbons, the English
carver, nothing has been seen like it. These Austrian rooms are among
the great guns of the show, and will repay repeated visits.

Here stands the glorious Amazon of Kiss, of Berlin. This group, of
colossal proportions, represents a female on horseback, in the act of
launching a javelin at a tiger which has sprung on the fore quarter of
her affrighted steed. This is a wonderful work of art, and places its
author in the first rank of sculptors. Nothing can surpass the lifelike
character of the Amazon's horse and the ferocious beast. As a tribute to
the genius of Kiss, a grand banquet is to be given to him by the
sculptors and artists of England. Well does he deserve such an honor.

Close by the Amazon is a colossal lion in bronze. This is the softest
piece of casting I ever saw; the catlike motion of the paw is perfectly
lifelike. I turn back again to that Amazon. I could gaze on the agony of
that horse for hours, and think I should continue to discover new
beauties.

The Crusader, a colossal equestrian statue of Godfrey of Bouillon, is
also very imposing. The entire floor is covered in the centre of the
avenue, from east to west, with beautiful statues, models, &c.

We ascended to one of the galleries for the purpose of taking a bird's
eye view of the gay, busy scene; and a most splendid scene was thrown
open to our gaze. Far as the eye could reach, the building was alive
with gayly-dressed people, who, amidst statues, and trophies, and trees,
and fountains, wandered as in the groves of some enchanted land. As I
strolled onwards, I came to where a tiny fountain sent up its silvery
jet of _eau de Cologne_, and an assistant of Jean Marie Farina, from a
little golden spoon, poured on my handkerchief, unasked, the odoriferous
essence. Then we lingered to witness two of the noblest cakes, the sight
of which ever gladdened the heart of a bride. Gunter, the great pastry
cook, was the architect of the one which was a triumph of taste. The
other was adorned with Cupid and Psyche-like emblems. Then came wax
flowers, beaded artfully with glass, so as to appear spangled with
dewdrops. Then we inspected Cashmere shawls, on which I saw many a lady
cast looks, of admiration, and, I almost fancied, of covetousness.

Down again, and we are beneath the transept. Beautiful, head, far higher
than the tops of the huge elm-trees, is a crystal arch which spans this
intersecting space. Around are marble statues, which gleam lustrously
amid the foliage of tropical plants, which, shielded from the chilling
air without, seem to be quite at home here. And in the midst up rises
Osler's crystal fountain--a splendid affair, twenty-seven feet in
height, and consisting of four tons of cut glass. So exquisitely is it
arranged that no metal, either of joint or pipe, can be seen. It is "one
entire and perfect chrysolite." From its lofty summit issues forth a
dome of water, which separates, and falls in prismatic showers into a
spacious basin beneath. There are three other fountains, but this is the
monarch of all. On either side of this beautiful production of a
Birmingham manufacturer are two equestrian statues of the queen and
Prince Albert, about which I cannot speak in admiration. Groups of
figures line the sides of the transept, and there is a Puck which I
would like all friends to look at. O, he is alive with fun, and there
marble speaks and laughs.

We have been greatly delighted with the English room of sculpture. There
is a fine portrait statue of Flaxman, from the chisel of Franks; a very
clever statue of John Wesley; but if I were to chronicle all the
sculptures here, I may as well write a catalogue at once. But before I
quit the subject of marble, let me just allude to the Italian gallery.
There the specimens are indeed exquisite, and remind us that the genius
of art yet loves to linger in the "land of the cypress and myrtle"--in
that beautiful country

    "Where the poet's eye and painter's hand
     Are most divine."

Among the gems of marble is one which I told, you was the only possible
rival of Powers's Greek Slave. This lovely production is "the Veiled
Vesta." It represents a young and exquisitely-formed girl, kneeling and
offering her oblation of the sacred fire. Her face is veiled; but every
feature is distinctly visible, as it were, through the folds which cover
her face. So wonderfully is the veil-like appearance produced, that
myself and others were almost inclined to believe that some trick of art
had been practised, and a film of gauze actually hung over the features.
It was not so, however; the hard marble, finely managed, alone caused
the deception. Raffael Monti, of Milan, is the illustrious artist of
"the Veiled Vesta."

One of the most interesting machines in the whole exhibition is the
envelope machine of Messrs. De la Rue & Co., of London. In its
operations it more resembles the efforts of human intellect than any
thing I have seen before in machinery. It occupies but a small space,
and is worked by a little boy. In a second, and as if by magic, a blank
piece of paper is folded, gummed, and stamped, and, in fact, converted
into a perfect envelope. As soon as finished, a pair of steel fingers
picks it up, lays it aside, and pushes it out of the way in the most
orderly manner possible. These envelopes, so made, are given to all who
choose to accept them. Opposite to this machine is the stand of
Gillott, of steel pen celebrity. Here are pens of all sizes, and of
various materials. One monster pen might fit a Brobdignagian fist, for
it is two feet long, and has a nib one quarter of an inch broad; and
there are others so small that no one but a Liliputian lady could use
them. Between these extremes are others of various dimensions, arranged
in a very tasteful manner. Something must be got out of this branch of
business, for it is only a month or two since Mr. Gillott purchased an
estate for ninety thousand pounds sterling. Here, too, is a novelty--the
model of St. Stephen's Church, Bolton, Lancashire. The model and the
church itself are both composed of terra cotta. This material was also
employed in the construction of the principal fittings, such as the
screen, pews, organ gallery, pulpit, &c. This is a new adaptation of
terra cotta. The spire severely tests its capabilities, as it is of open
Gothic, or tracery work.

A large model of Liverpool is beautifully constructed to scale, and must
be the result of immense labor. It is twenty-five feet long, and
exhibits at a glance a bird's eye view of the town, the docks, the River
Mersey, and the adjacent places. Hundreds of miniature vessels, amongst
them the Great Britain, crowd the docks; fleets of merchantmen are seen
on the Mersey, sailing to and from the port; and in the busy streets,
so minutely delineated that any particular house may be distinguished,
numerous vehicles are seen, and hundreds, too, of pygmy men and women
are observed walking in the public ways. In short; it is Liverpool in a
glass case, and no mean exhibition in itself.

The Thames Plate Glass Company exhibit the largest plate of glass in the
world; its dimensions are eighteen feet eight inches by ten feet. There
is not a blemish on its brilliant surface, and it is as "true" as
possible. It is placed in such a position that it reflects the whole
length of the main avenue of the Crystal Palace, and the effect produced
is superb. A Catholic bookseller from Belgium makes quite a display of
his editions of devotional works for every country under heaven; and
there, too, are the effigies of Cardinal Boromeo, Thomas à Becket, and
the late Archbishop of Paris, all arrayed in full pontificals. Their
crosiers are very richly jewelled. If the apostles of Christ could
revisit the earth, they would never fancy that these were their
successors in the work and patience of the gospel.

Few things have impressed me more than the exquisite carvings and
elaborate work of the cabinet ware; and I must, Charley, try to describe
one piece of furniture which excites universal praise. It is a cabinet
made by John Stevens, of Taunton. It was prepared at great cost, and is
the gem of the carved work in the exhibition. The wood of which it was
composed was a walnut-tree, which, not long ago, flourished near
Taunton. In order that you may not suppose, I praise every thing too
highly, and without sufficient ground for admiration, I shall give you a
particular description of this incomparable piece of furniture. It
represents, in four beautifully carved male figures, executed after the
style of Gibbons, the periods of Youth, Manhood, Maturity, and Old Age,
whilst other four (female) figures, beautifully brought up in good
relief, are representative of the Passions. Here there was an
opportunity for displaying some fine needlework; and Miss Kingsbury, a
lady of the town, who has received from the hand of royalty a reward for
her talents, has turned the opportunity to good account, and produced
some appropriate work, displaying a skill truly astonishing. This is not
the least attractive portion of the cabinet, and, as we shall again,
have to advert to it in its order, we leave it for the present. The
carved figure of the Youth represents him at twenty years of age. The
countenance is finely wrought, and marks the innocency and candor of the
young heart; the open brow, the love-lighted eye, all exemplifying
characteristics of that period of life, untrammelled with care or
anxious thought. In his hair, well brought out from the solid wood, is
intertwined the violet, the primrose, and the cow-slip, emblematical of
the season--being the spring time of life. In the right hand of the
figure is attached a portion of a festoon of carved flowers, which
connects it with the other four figures. The left hand is extended,
pointing to Manhood. This figure denotes the period when forty summers
have ripened the man, and brought the noblest work of God to that stage
of his more powerful intellect, his keener judgment, stronger frame, and
more lasting energy. These characteristics are most admirably depicted.
In his locks are carved the rose, the lily, the pink, and the carnation,
the strawberry and the gooseberry--emblematical of the summer time of
life. In the right hand the figure receives the festoon of flowers from
Youth, and in the left it supports the frame of the cabinet. The festoon
is carried on to Maturity, which represents the time when sixty years
bring him to the period of decline. Its right hand assists, with the
left of that of Manhood, in supporting the cabinet. Encircling his brow
are corn ears and wine cups, together with barley, wheat, grapes, and
hops, the whole of which are most elaborately and finely chiselled. The
hand of Maturity points downward to Old Age. The furrowed brow, the
sunken cheek, the dim and glassy eye observable in this figure, conveys
the mournful intelligence that the sand of life is fast approaching its
last little grain. The bent form and the thoughtful brow tell that
Time, the consumer of all things, has also ravaged a once erect and
powerful frame. The contemplation of this figure, beautifully executed
as it is, intuitively inculcates a serious consideration of the value
and blessings of a temperate; and well-spent life; it induces a
thoughtful reflection that a life of goodness alone insures an end of
peace. The holly, the mistletoe, the ivy, the acorn shell, the leafless
branch, and the fruitless vine encircle the brow-fit emblems of the
period which marks an exchange of time for eternity. All the figures are
rendered complete by a carved lion's foot, at the bottom of each, and
above the feet is a connecting frame, to make that portion of the stand
perfect. Between the figures of Spring and Summer are carved flowers and
fruit in great profusion, emblematical of the seasons, and forming a
fine piece of work; it represents the all-important fact that time
flies, by an hourglass borne on the wings of a splendidly-carved eagle,
and suspending from the bird's beak are the letters, curiously wrought,
forming TEMPUS FUGIT. This rests on a globe, representative of
the earth, which is half sunk in a shell of water, overflowing the wheel
of time, and shedding on fruit and flowers its refreshing dew. The space
between the figures of Autumn and Winter is filled with carvings of the
chrysanthemum, holly, ivy, and autumn fruit, intertwined with
consummate skill and taste. The garland, or festoon, which is carried
through, and sustained, as before stated, by each of the four figures,
is composed of every flower indigenous to this part of the land, and
introduced emblematically to the time in which they severally bloom.

Above the figures, and resting on their heads, is a stand or frame to
receive the top part, containing the drawers, doors, &c., and is
constructed in a peculiar manner on the bevel, that the eye may easily
rest on some beautiful lines from Thomson's Seasons. Over the head of
Youth, in this frame, is a basket of strawberries, cherries,
raspberries, and early fruit, surrounded with leaf work, enclosing a
panel of needlework, covered with bent plate glass, and the motto,--

    "------ Chief, lovely Spring,
    In these and thy soft scenes the smiling God is seen."

Then follows the carved figure representing Summer. Over the head of it
is a basket, containing currants, strawberries, gooseberries, apples,
pears, peaches, and other fruits, enriched with leaf work, the lily and
the rose completing the centre. Between the Summer and Autumn baskets
and a panel are the following mottoes, each season having one:--

    "Child of the sun! refulgent Summer comes,
    In pride of youth;
    While Autumn, nodding o'or the yellow plain,
    Comes jovial on."

Then follows the Autumn basket, containing grapes, pears, filberts, &c.,
surrounded with leaf work. The panel of needlework next appears for
Winter, with these lines:--

    "See! Winter comes to rule the varied year,
     Sullen and sad;"

and over the head of the Winter figure is placed a basket of walnuts,
medlars, &c. Here is the frame of the cabinet, which contains about
eighty drawers in fine walnut wood, enriched with fuschia drops in
silver, and coral beads for drop handles; the wood work is relieved with
silvered plate glass; also small doors with plate glass for needlework,
in wild flowers. This completes the interior of the frame.

The exterior represents three carved doors, in fine relief: over Spring
and Summer is the convolvulus, entwined round the frame; then follows
the centre door, in fine relief--the grape vine, full of fruit, being
very prominent. The door over Autumn and Winter is enriched with
carvings of barley and hop vine. Between each of these doors are
pilasters, forming four female figures, holding in their hands the
emblems of the seasons, and a newly-invented glass dome head, in an
elegant form, for the protection of knitted flowers in Berlin wool. The
wood work is tastefully arranged, springing from each group of flowers
over the heads of the female figures, with mouldings to receive the
bent plate glass, and is enriched with fine carvings of fruit and
flowers. At the extreme top of this glass dome stands a beautiful figure
of Peace, with extended wings, bending over the globe, holding in one
hand the olive branch, and with the other pointing to the Deity.

Having thus given a description of the carvings of this splendid
cabinet, let me turn your attention to the enrichments in needlework,
worked on black velvet, from nature, by Miss Kingsbury. The mottoes in
frame for the different seasons are worked in floss silk of various
colors; the inside doors--five in number--with wild flowers; and in
front are rich specimens of raised embroidery, extending to the inside,
and protected with plate glass. Miss Kingsbury is a young lady of
Taunton, who has made this kind of work her peculiar forte.

Above the doors, also, are knitted flowers in Berlin wools, which fill
the dome head, and are protected with bent plate glass. Almost every
flower, as they bloom, are to be distinguished in these rich bouquets,
with which the honeysuckle and passion flower are beautifully entwined.

Now, what think you of such a cabinet as this? Well, Charley, there are
scores and scores of objects as much deserving a full description as
this.

The department of machinery and steam power is entirely beyond my
ability to speak of in proper terms. I have little mechanical genius,
and I never am more out of my element than When surrounded by fly
wheels, cylinders, and walking beams.

If our friend Ike had been here, lie would have been perfectly at home;
and his pleasure and profit in this department would have surpassed any
I could experience. I have only glanced at a few of the wonderful things
in this wonderful place, and yet I have far exceeded the bounds of an
ordinary letter.

Yours affectionately,

J.O.C.


Letter 17.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

One evening this week we spent very pleasantly at the Royal Polytechnic
Institution for the advancement of the arts and sciences in connection
with agriculture and manufactures. There is a large theatre, where all
sorts of lectures are delivered, at various hours, upon philosophical
and other subjects. Lecturers occupy the theatre in succession, and take
up about half an hour. These are generally men of respectable abilities.
The building is full of curiosities. We saw the model of the human ear,
about one hundred and forty times larger than the natural organ. We saw
a diving bell in the great hall, which is frequently put into action,
and visitors are allowed to descend. That evening several made the
experiment. The interior of the bell is lighted by thick plate glass. A
very large number of models are to be seen, and there is much to
interest the spectator. We heard a fine lecture respecting the
experiment of Foucault, by which the diurnal rotation of the earth is
said to be rendered visible to the eye. Foucault is a young Parisian,
who, whilst engaged in some investigations with a pendulum in his
mother's cellar, made this discovery, as he claims it to be. We saw the
experiment repeated here on the same scale as it has recently been shown
at the Pantheon at Paris. A brass sphere, weighing about five pounds,
was suspended from the lofty ceiling by a piece of music wire, and made
to vibrate in one plane over a table graduated into degrees. After a few
vibrations, the direction of the pendulum appeared to be changed, as
though the table had moved round on its owns axis.

We passed an hour at the Egyptian Hall to see the opening of the
American Panorama of the Overland Route to California. It bids fair to
make a hit in London. Last Sunday, "great exhibition" sermons were
abundant in London. Exeter Hal, the largest place in London, holding
about five thousand persons, is to be used for three months for the
performance of divine service, to accommodate the strangers who crowd
the city. We all went, Sunday evening, and heard the Rev. Thomas Binney,
who has quite a reputation. The hall was as full as it could be, but we
did not think the discourse as good as it might be. It was rather
declamatory.

You no doubt remember how much our curiosity was excited by hearing that
Mr. Wyld was about to place a model of the globe, of gigantic
dimensions, in the great exhibition. Well, he was unable to obtain the
space required, and so he has erected a spacious building in Leicester
Square. This building is circular, with projecting entrances at the four
cardinal points of the compass. From the centre rises a graceful dome.
Here is placed the model of the earth, fifty-six feet in diameter. The
scale is about ten miles to an inch. The arrangement before used in the
construction of globes is reversed in this case, and the continents,
islands, and seas are seen on the _inner_ surface. This seems like
turning the world, not upside down, but inside out. The mountains and
land are elevated to a scale. The spectators travel round the globe on
winding staircases, at the distance of a few feet from the surface. I
went the other morning to the model, but was far less interested than I
expected. The rest of the party were not present, and are willing to
take my report. I heard that Mr. Wyld has spent twelve thousand pounds
upon his undertaking.

We selected a fine afternoon to visit the Zoölogical Gardens in the
Regent's Park, and, of course, had a treat. I did not think much of the
gardens as far as the horticulture was concerned; but the collection of
animals was far beyond any thing I had before witnessed. There are more
than sixteen hundred specimens. The animals are finely housed, and their
habits consulted in the arrangements of their homes. We had the pleasure
to see the young elephant, only six months old, which had just been
received. It was about the size of a donkey. A hippopotamus had recently
been added to the collection, and we were sadly vexed not to see it. It
was shut up at six o'clock, just as we reached its house. George had his
luck, and obtained a glimpse of the retiring quadruped. We have been
greatly amused with the sight of hundreds of boys about town, dressed in
blue gowns, or long coats with belts, short knee breeches, yellow
stockings, and shoes with tackles, but wear no caps or hats. In all
weathers they are bareheaded. I find that they are the boys belonging to
Christ's Hospital, a school founded by Edward VI., in 1553, and
generally known in London as the Blue Coat School. The scholars
generally range from one thousand to twelve hundred. The education, is
said to be of the best character, and many of the boys belong to
families of high respectability, and it is quite a matter of desire to
obtain scholarship here. They look very funny in their old-fashioned
rig. Each boy wears bands like a clergyman. The school is in Newgate
Street, and is a fine modern edifice in the Tudor style. The front is
flanked by towers, and has eight noble windows, which are separated by
buttresses. Over one of the galleries of the hall is a fine picture, by
Holbein, of Edward VI. granting the charter to the Hospital, as it was
then called. Some of the best scholars of England were educated here;
and we remembered particularly Coleridge and our special favorite,
Charles Lamb.

To-morrow we are to have a treat of the highest kind. We are to spend
the day at Windsor. I feel pretty well acquainted with its history and
associations, but I shall spend the evening with George in brushing up
my information. There is nothing more unpleasant than to find yourself
in the presence of things and places of which you painfully feel an
entire ignorance. If ever we meet again, how much we shall have to chat
over on our favorite topics!

Yours always,

JAMES.


Letter 18.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

It was a fine, clear morning when we started for Windsor by railroad, a
distance of twenty-one miles. The country is fine; but our thoughts were
on the castle. At Slough we took an omnibus, and rode into the town. It
is a pretty, quiet place, of about ten thousand inhabitants. There are
some six or seven streets, and they present but few attractions. The
castle is every thing. You know this has been the favorite residence of
most of the English monarchs, and the scene of many a tournament in the
days of chivalry. The castle was the work of William the Conqueror. John
lived at Windsor while Magna Charta was extorted from him by his barons
at Runnymede. Henry III. did a great deal to the castle, but Edward III.
invested it with its great glory. This was his native place. The
architect he employed was the famous William of Wykeham, Bishop of
Winchester, a man of great genius. He built the noble round tower. This
was in 1315. Wykeham built him a palace worthy of the hero and his noble
son, the Black Prince. Edward IV. built St. George's Chapel, and Henry
VII. and Henry VIII. both made important additions to the fortress.
Young Edward VI. resided here, and did not like its retirement and
gloom. Elizabeth made the terrace and other improvements. When Charles
II. was restored, he brought a foreign taste to the improvement of the
castle, and a great deal of elegancy was attempted, but which poorly
harmonized with the Gothic, baronial style of Wykeham's works.

George IV. was a man of exquisite taste, and he employed Sir Jeffry
Wyatville to carry out the plans of Edward III. and his architect. This
was in 1824, and his immense labors have been successful. These
improvements cost two million pounds sterling. I ought to say that
Windsor Castle was the favorite home of George III., who died here. This
palace stands on a lofty chalk hill, and commands the valley of the
Thames. Around it is the finest, terrace in the world, the descent from
which is faced with a rampart of freestone extending about seventeen
hundred feet. The whole building occupies about twelve acres.

I shall not describe all the towers, for there are some dozen or
fifteen. The round tower of Edward III. is the chief one. Here he
revived the round table of King Arthur, and established the Order of the
Garter. From the battlements of this strong fortress you gaze upon no
less than twelve counties. Prince Albert is constable of this tower.
This was the old prison, or donjon of the castle. Here James I. of
Scotland was a prisoner, and here he wrote his sweet verses and
celebrated Nature's beauties and the praises of his lady-love, Jane
Beaufort. Here, too, Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, long suffered, and
sung the sweetest lays. We had a ticket to see the state apartments.
Suffice it to say that we went through the Queen's Audience Chamber, the
Vandyke Room, the Queen's State Drawing Boom or Zuccharelle Room, the
State Ante-Room, the Grand Staircase and Vestibule, the Waterloo
Chamber, the Grand Ball Room, St. George's Hall, the Guard Chamber, the
Queen's Presence Chamber. All these are very, very beautiful. I was
delighted with the Vandyke Room. Here are twenty-two undoubted
productions of this greatest of portrait painters. Charles I. and
Henrietta were favorite subjects with the artist. Here are several of
them and their children, and they are to be found elsewhere. The
equestrian portrait of Charles I. is a truly grand picture. You know the
beautiful old copy, of a cabinet size, which we have in the study at
home: it will please me more than ever, since I know how faithful it is.
That queen of Charles's who made him so much trouble with her Popery and
temper was a wonderfully beautiful woman. I should not soon be weary
looking at her portrait. She was daughter of Henry IV. of France. Her
fortune was hard, to lose a father by an assassin, and a husband by the
executioner. The Gobelin tapestry, illustrating the life of Esther, in
the Audience Room, is very rich. In the State Ante-Room are the most
wonderful carvings of fowl, fish, fruit, and flowers, by Grinling
Gibbons. They are thought to be unsurpassed in this department of art.
On the Great Staircase is a noble colossal marble statue, of that
excellent sovereign, but bad man, George IV. It is by Chantrey. The
Waterloo Chamber is adorned with thirty-eight portraits of men connected
with Waterloo, and twenty-nine of them are by Sir Thomas Lawrence. St.
George's Hall is two hundred feet long, thirty-four wide, thirty-two
high, and contains some fine portraits of sovereigns by Vandyke, Lely,
Kneller, Gainsborough, and Lawrence. On twenty-four shields are the arms
of each sovereign of the Order of the Garter, from Edward III. to
William IV. The Guard Chamber is a noble room, eighty feet in length.
Immediately on entering, we were struck with the colossal bust of Nelson
by Chantrey, A piece of the mast of the Victory, shot through by a
cannon ball, forms its fitting pedestal. Here, too, we saw the busts of
the great Duke of Marlborough by Rysbach, and the Duke of Wellington by
Chantrey, and their two banners, by the annual presentation of which to
the reigning sovereign, on the anniversaries of Blenheim and Waterloo,
they hold the estates of Blenheim and Strathfieldsaye. There are figures
in armor representing the Duke of Brunswick, 1530; Lord Howard, 1588;
Earl of Essex, 1596; Charles I., when Prince of Wales, 1620; and Prince
Rupert, 1635. These suits of armor are the genuine ones which were worn
by these characters in their lifetime. One thing greatly delighted
me--it was the gorgeous shield, executed by Benvenuto Cellini, and
presented by Francis I. to Henry VIII. at the Field of the Cloth of
Gold. The workmanship is entirely beyond anything I had imagined
possible for delicacy of finish. I hardly wonder that kings used to
quarrel for the residence of this artist.

I know, Charley, you are impatient to hear about St. George's Chapel, of
which you have so often expressed your admiration, when we have looked
at the beautiful engravings of its interior, at home. It is very fine,
and should be seen to be comprehended. It is of what is called the
perpendicular Gothic style. The interior is divided by a screen and
organ gallery, into the body of the church, and the choir. These have
side aisles, and in these are five separate little chapels. Two of these
make up the place of transepts, and the other three, and the chapter
house, form abutments at each angle of the chapel. Now, I think, you
can't fail to get an idea of the building.

The choir is filled with the stalls and banners of the knights of the
garter. Each knight has his banner, helmet, crest, and sword.

The great pointed window was _designed_ by our countryman, Benjamin
West. The altar-piece was painted by West. Here is the tomb of Edward
IV., 1483. He lies under a slab of black marble. In 1789, some workmen
discovered his lead coffin, and it was opened, and the skeleton was in
good preservation, and measured seven feet in length. Horace Walpole
obtained a lock of his hair at this time. Here are the graves of Henry
VI., and of Henry VIII. and his queen, Jane Seymour. Also of Charles I.

Lord Byron says of Henry VIII.'s tomb,

    "Famed for contemptuous breach of sacred ties,
    By headless Charles, see heartless Henry lies"

On the 1st of April, 1813, the coffin of Charles I. was found in Henry
VIII.'s tomb; and I think you will be pleased with an account of what,
transpired. I shall, therefore, copy a paper which is authentic:

"On completing the mausoleum which his present majesty has built in the
Tomb House, as it is called, it was necessary to form a passage to it
from under the choir of St George's Chapel. In constructing this
passage, an aperture was made accidentally, in one of the walls of the
vault of King Henry VIII., through which the workmen were enabled to
see, not only the two coffins which were supposed to contain the bodies
of King Henry VIII. and Queen Jane Seymour, but a third also, covered
with a black velvet pall, which, from Mr. Herbert's narrative, might
fairly be presumed to hold the remains of King Charles I.

"On representing the circumstance to the Prince Regent, his Royal
Highness perceived at once that a doubtful point in history might be
cleared up by opening this vault; and, accordingly, his Royal Highness
ordered an examination to be made on the first convenient opportunity.
This was done on the 1st of April last, 1813,--the day after the funeral
of the Duchess of Brunswick,--in the presence of his Royal Highness
himself; who guarantied, thereby, the most respectful care and attention
to the remains of the dead during the inquiry. His Royal Highness was
accompanied by his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland, Count Munster,
the Dean of Windsor, Benjamin Charles Stevenson, Esq., and Sir Henry
Halford.

"The vault is covered by an arch half a breadth in thickness; is seven
feet two inches in width, nine feet six inches in length, and four feet
ten inches in height, and _is situated in the centre of the choir,
opposite the eleventh knight's stall, on the sovereign's side_.

"On removing the pall, a plain leaden coffin, with no appearance of
ever having been enclosed in wood, and bearing an inscription, 'King
Charles, 1648,' in large, legible characters, on a scroll of lead
encircling it, immediately presented itself to the view. A square
opening was then made in the upper part of the lid, of such dimensions
as to admit a clear insight into its contents. These were an internal
wooden coffin, very much decayed, and the body carefully wrapped up in
cerecloth, into the folds of which a quantity of unctuous or greasy
matter, mixed with resin, as it seemed, had been melted, so as to
exclude, as effectually as possible, the external air. The coffin was
completely full, and, from-the tenacity of the cerecloth, great
difficulty was experienced in detaching it successfully from the parts
which it developed. Wherever the unctuous matter had insinuated itself,
the separation of the cerecloth was easy; and when it came off, a
correct impression of the features to which it had been applied was
observed in the unctuous substance. At length the whole face was
disengaged from its covering. The complexion of the skin of it was dark
and discolored. The forehead and temples had lost little or nothing of
their muscular substance. The cartilage of the nose was gone, but the
left eye, in the first moment of exposure, was open and full, though it
vanished almost immediately; and the pointed beard, so characteristic of
the reign of King Charles, was perfect The shape of the face was a long
oval. Many of the teeth remained, and the left ear, in consequence of
the interposition of some unctuous matter between it and the cerecloth,
was found entire. It was difficult at this moment to withhold a
declaration, that, notwithstanding its disfigurement, the countenance
did bear a strong resemblance to the coins, the busts, and especially to
the picture of King Charles I. by Vandyke, by which it had been made
familiar to us. It is true that the minds of the spectators of this
interesting sight were well prepared to receive this impression; but it
is also certain that such a facility of belief had been occasioned by
the simplicity and truth of Mr. Herbert's narrative, every part of which
had been confirmed by the investigation, so far as it had advanced; and
it will not be denied that the shape of the face, the forehead, an eye,
and the beard, are the most important features by which resemblance is
determined. When the head had been entirely disengaged from the
attachments which confined it; it was found to be loose, and without any
difficulty was taken up and held to view. It was quite _wet_, and gave a
greenish-red tinge to paper and linen which touched it. The back part of
the scalp was entirely perfect, and had a remarkably fresh
appearance--the pores of the skin being more distinct, as they usually
are when soaked in moisture, and the tendons and ligaments of the neck
were of considerable substance and firmness. The hair was thick at the
back part of the head, and, in appearance, nearly black. A portion of
it, which has since been cleaned and dried, is of a beautiful dark-brown
color. That of the beard was of a redder brown. On the back part of the
head it was about an inch in length, and had probably been cut so short
for the convenience of the executioner, or, perhaps, in order to furnish
memorials of the unhappy king. On holding up the head to examine the
place of separation from the body, the muscles of the neck had evidently
retracted themselves considerably, and the fourth cervical vertebra was
found to be cut through its substance transversely, leaving the surfaces
of the divided portions perfectly smooth and even; an appearance which
could only have been produced by a heavy blow, inflicted with a very
sharp instrument, and which furnished the last proof wanting to identify
Charles I. After this examination, which served every purpose in view,
and without examining the body below the neck; it was immediately
restored to its situation, the coffin was soldered up again, and the
vault closed."

This state of things precisely tallied with the account which Herbert,
the faithful servant of Charles, had given as to the place of his
sepulture.

In this chapel, too, is the cenotaph of the late Princess Charlotte,
who was wife to Leopold, now King of Belgium. I do not much admire it.

The exquisite beauty of the windows, and the gorgeous splendor of the
roof, will always make this place live in my memory. The terraces are
very beautiful walks; and from Queen Elizabeth's terrace you have a
noble view of Eton College. Of course, we were pleased to see "the
distant spires and antique towers" which are so celebrated in the lines
of Gray. The college looms up finely, and greatly adds to the prospect.
Eton was founded in 1440, by Henry VI. The number of scholars is about
eight hundred and fifty. This college has produced some of the greatest
men in England, and the young nobility are generally educated here. The
college has two quadrangles, and the chapel is a fine Gothic building.
All this region is beautified by the Thames winding through the valley.
Here is the gem of villages, Datchett, where Sir Henry Wotton and Izaak
Walton used to enjoy the rod and line. No one who has any taste can come
to Windsor and not think of the immortal bard who has made so much
capital out of this place. At all events, we wanted to see Herne's Oak.

We took a carriage and passed the day in riding through the great park,
and took our way through the well-known avenue, called the Long Walk.
This is three miles in length, and has a double row of magnificent
elms. It is directly in front of the south side of the castle, and
terminates in a colossal equestrian statue of George III., standing on
an immense pedestal of blocks of granite. Nothing can exceed in beauty
the beeches of this park, which contains three thousand acres. Immense
herds of deer are seen under the trees. Nowhere have I seen such fine
old trees. Here is a beech-tree thirty-six feet round, seven feet from
the ground! One oak of similar size is called William the Conqueror's
Oak. We went to Virginia Water, the largest sheet of water--that is,
artificial--in Great Britain. We saw the little cottage where George IV.
passed so much of his time. It is a pretty place, but it only shows that
the mind is more likely to be pleased with the simple than the grand.

The gardener at the cottage--which I think is called Cumberland
Lodge--showed us through the conservatory. We did not much admire the
Fishing Temple, or the floating miniature navy. The scenery is charming,
and worthy of Poussin. The walk by the water, to the tavern, cannot be
surpassed. On our return we passed Frogmore, the residence of the
Duchess of Kent; it seems a pretty, unpretending place.

Nothing would repay the tourist better than to pass three or four days,
in this vicinity. Village after village, and villa after villa, claims
the admiration of the traveller; and perhaps England has no more
beautiful rural scenery than may here be found. We had seven or eight
hours of perfect delight upon our ride; and when we reached the White
Hart, at Windsor, we were well prepared for doing justice to an
excellent dinner. Our pleasure at Windsor was much increased by the
company of a gentleman of high literary reputation, and who is
distinguished as the author of several successful works.

Affectionately yours,

WELD


Letter 19.


LONDON

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We are just returned from a most pleasant visit to Sir John Soane's
Museum. This gentleman was an architect, and a most determined
antiquary; and when he died he left his wonderful collection to the
nation, having obtained an act of Parliament for preserving it and
endowing its maintenance. We obtained a government order, and went to
the house which was Sir John's private residence, in Lincoln's Inn
Fields. Never did I behold such a sight. The house is spacious, but
every nook and corner--and it is full of unimaginable ones--is filled up
with precious matters. Here are Roman and Grecian relics; fragments of
vases from Herculaneum; and the far-famed Egyptian sarcophagus brought
over by Belzoni. The latter is made of one piece of alabaster, nearly
ten feet long. It is inscribed all over with hieroglyphics, and cost Sir
John a large sum. I shall see nothing in all Europe that will take my
fancy as much as this museum, I am sure. There are twenty-five distinct
apartments; and if you can find a square foot in the house not occupied,
you would do more than I was able to. The catalogue of this museum I
shall value highly, and that will give you a better idea than I can of
its contents. I had no common pleasure in finding here the original
paintings of the Rake's Progress, by Hogarth, the engravings of which we
have so admired. These pictures were painted in 1734, and were bought by
Sir J. Soane, in 1802, for five hundred and seventy guineas. And here,
too, are Hogarth's great paintings of the Election--a series of four
pictures. These unrivalled works of comic art were bought of Garrick's
widow by Soane, in 1823, for sixteen hundred and fifty guineas! The
collection of paintings is by no means despicable, and we saw a few
pictures not soon to be forgotten. The Views of Venice, by Canaletti,
are very fine; and there are some gems by Reynolds, Danby, Turner,
Hamilton, Lawrence, and Bird. I must tell you how they have economized
room in the apartment devoted to pictures. The ceiling is very richly
adorned with ornaments, forming arched canopies. On the north and west
sides of this room are cabinets, and on the south are _movable planes_,
with space between for pictures. So, in a room of thirteen feet eight
inches by twelve feet four inches, there are as many pictures as could
be placed on the walls of a gallery of the same height, forty-five feet
long and twenty broad. In the crypt is an ancient tomb, and models, in
cork, of tombs, at Capua.

There are some precious _souvenirs_ of Napoleon to be seen,--as
portraits, miniatures, pistols, &c.,--a fine collection of painted
glass, and a countless lot of antiques, intaglios, autographs, and
watches. If ever you find yourself in London, I charge you, get to this
same place for a long morning. In the afternoon we took steamer and Went
to Greenwich, five miles from town, to see the Hospital for Seamen.
Charles II. built this place for a royal palace,--and a noble one it
is,--but William and Mary gave it up to the use of old and worn-out
seamen; and as England owes every thing to Jack Tar, it seems fit that,
when old and crazy, his last days should be made comfortable. A very
large income arises from the exhibition of the fine picture gallery here
to be seen. Here is quite enough to please any one who is curious, and
to gratify boys amazingly; and this you will credit when I tell you some
things that we saw. The coat and waistcoat worn by Nelson when he was
killed, on the Victory, at Trafalgar; models of celebrated ships;
original painting of Sir Walter Raleigh; Sir Cloudesley Shovel, who was
lost, with all his crew, on the Scilly Islands, in Queen Anne's reign;
Admiral Kempenfeldt, lost in the Royal George, 1782; Lord Nelson; Lord
Collingwood; and almost all the great naval commanders of Great Britain.
Then, too, there are large paintings of the great sea fights. One of
Trafalgar, by Turner, is very fine, and so is a large one of Nelson's
death.

There is a room besides all I have alluded to, called the Nelson Room,
and which illustrates all his history; and there are, all about the
rooms, some exquisitely fine colossal busts, executed by Flaxman,
Bailey, and Westmacott. The chapel is thought to be one of the most
beautiful in England. The entire of this great national glory is kept in
the cleanest manner; and the only thing to complain of is a want of
politeness in the guides. This is in contrast to other places; for we
have found the guides very kind and civil at all other places. We have
recently visited the Queen's stables, by order from Mr. Lawrence. Every
thing was very clean and spacious. Some of the horses were exceedingly
beautiful. The harness-room made a display. The cream-colored horses
belonging to the state carriage are noble animals. I believe they are
brought from Hanover, or came originally thence. The state carriage is
an immense lumbering affair, made of carvings and gold. It must be of
great weight. The sides are richly painted. It is never used but at the
opening of Parliament and similar occasions. The queen's carriages which
are ordinarily used are numerous and very elegant, but in good taste.
One of our number--you may guess who it was--sadly wanted a hair from
the tail of the queen's favorite riding horse. The riding school is
spacious, but not much better than a private one that we know in New
York.

We took dinner one day at Soyer's Symposium, at Gore House. Soyer is the
great master of ceremonies in London for all matters of the _cuisine._
Gore House was once the home of Wilberforce and Lord Rodney, but is
better known as the residence of the late Countess of Blessington. It is
now a hotel. The grounds are extensive, and the trees are some of the
finest around London, and I have never seen a lovelier spot of the same
size. It is alive with blackbirds, thrushes, linnets, and goldfinches.
As you enter, you find a vestibule, which is called the cupola of
Jupiter Tonans. Through this you pass to "the hall of architectural
wonders," then to "the Blessington Temple of the Muses." This apartment
leads to "the Transatlantic Ante-Chamber," which is adorned with all
sorts of American emblems. Then there are, in succession, "the Alcove of
White Roses," "the Birth of Gems," and other rooms of great
gorgeousness. One room is the "Palace of the North," which is apparently
made entirely of ice, and out of the wall of which is issuing a polar
bear. In the pleasure grounds is a "baronial hall," one hundred feet
long, fifty broad, and thirty high; and besides this an enormous tent,
called "the Encampment for all Nations." Here, at a table four hundred
feet long, fifteen hundred persons can be dined at a cheap rate. A
table-cloth for this affair cost Soyer two hundred pounds sterling. We
had a very pleasant dinner with the Rev. Dr. Harris, President of New
College, whose works are so well known in America. The room we occupied
was "the Alcove of White Roses." The Symposium stands near to the
Crystal Palace, and accommodates the strangers admirably. That dinner
was two days ago, however; and I am reminded that another is necessary
today, and must leave off to prepare for it.

I am yours truly,

JAMES.


Letter 20.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Yesterday we visited the two great ecclesiastical edifices of the
metropolis,--St. Paul's Cathedral and Westminster Abbey,--and I will
endeavor to convey to your mind some idea of the impression which they
left upon my own. These structures are by name familiar to you, and you
have seen engravings of the mighty dome of St. Paul's and the double
towers of the Abbey. I had often gazed on these pictured
representations, but I find that they did not convey to my mind any
adequate notions of the originals. Like the Pyramids, or our own
Niagara, they must be seen to be understood. In so vast a place as
London, it is absolutely necessary for sight-seers to adopt something
like system in their arrangements; so we agreed to devote one day to the
examination of the metropolitan Cathedral Church, and of the ancient
edifice in which the monarchs of England are crowned. We quitted our
hotel at nine o'clock, and, pushing our way through the hurrying crowds
of the Strand, speedily arrived at Temple Bar. We then turned down a
dingy, narrow passage, on our right hand; this led us to the Temple,
which is like a little town of itself, and is almost exclusively
inhabited by lawyers. It was amusing enough to notice the gentlemen in
powdered horse-hair wigs and flowing black robes, like a clergyman's,
who every now and then emerged from some open door, and flitted across
the courts, each having a bundle of papers tied with red tape, or a book
under his arm. Whilst occupied in observing these Templars of modern
times, the tones of an organ fell on my ear, for we were close to the
Temple Church, one of the most beautiful sanctuaries in the world. The
early morning service was not concluded so we entered without ceremony.
Externally, the building has little in the way of architectural
decorations to recommend it. It is low, destitute of tower or steeple,
and surrounded by gloomy-looking lawyers' offices. But no sooner had we
crossed the threshold than a scene of surpassing beauty burst upon us. I
should here tell you that this edifice, which is intended for the
exclusive use of members of the Temple, is very ancient. The church
formerly belonged to the Knights Templars. It was built in 1185, and the
choir was added in 1240. For years and years the building was neglected
by the legal gentlemen; but in 1839 it was proposed to restore the
former glories of the place, and the outlay of seventy thousand pounds
has caused it to stand out in all its pristine beauty. The form of the
church is octagonal. The ceiling, sides, and altar are all decorated in
the mediæval style. The pipes of the organ dazzle you with their purple
and golden splendors. The floor is of encaustic tiles. On the walls are
displayed the names and coats of arms of those members of the Temple who
have been raised to the dignity of judges. On all these objects the
sunshine, streaming through superbly-painted windows, produced quite a
kaleidoscope effect. The _coup d'oeil_ was almost too dazzling, and
strikingly contrasted in my mind with the primitive simplicity of our
New England churches. In this church I found that some great men had
been buried. The learned Sir John, Selden, the author of "Table Talk;"
Howell, whose old letters we have so much enjoyed together; Gibbon the
historian, and Oliver Goldsmith, lie just outside the church. The
preacher of this church is called the master of the Temple, and the
great Hooker once held this post. Having gratified our curiosity by an
inspection of this gem of church architecture, we quitted the building,
and, after a pleasant stroll through the Temple Gardens,--a sweet spot,
and spoken of by Shakspeare as the place where the distinction of the
Red and White Roses was first seen,--embarked on one of the river
steamboats, which rapidly conveyed us to Blackfriars Bridge.

The finest view of St. Paul's Cathedral is, unquestionably, from the
Thames. When seen from the streets, only portions of its colossal
magnitude can be observed. On all sides it is hemmed in by houses,
which, pygmies though they be, prevent an uninterrupted view of the
architectural giant. But from the middle of the Thames, the cathedral is
seen in all its glory; towering above the surrounding marts of trade, it
stands out the grand point of attraction.

[Illustration: St. Paul's Cathedral.]

Here may be observed, to advantage, the surpassing beauty of the great
dome, which dwarfs the towers and steeples of the surrounding churches
almost into nothingness. The general aspect of the cathedral is said to
resemble St. Peter's, at Rome, but the symmetry of the dome of the
latter is acknowledged to be less beautiful than that of its London
rival.

We landed at Blackfriars Bridge Stairs; and, after ascending Ludgate
Hill, arrived at the great northern door of the cathedral. In reply to
the rap of our knuckles at the huge portals, it slowly swung back on its
hinges, and a grim, surly-looking face appeared. The figure which
belonged to the face was clad in a rusty and seedy black robe, from
beneath which a hand was thrust forth, and the words, "two-pence each,"
sounded harshly on our ears. Two-pence each was accordingly paid, and
then the surly janitor, or verger, as he is called, admitted us within
the building. In a moment afterwards, we were beneath the dome of St.
Paul's. If this part of the edifice has appeared imposing when viewed
from without, how much grander did it seem now that we stood on the
marble pavement below, and gazed upward into the vast concave which the
genius of Sir Christopher Wren had designed. The scene to my mind was
most impressive, and the impressiveness was heightened by a continuous
dull roar, which never ceased for a moment. This ceaseless noise was
produced by the numerous carriages passing and repassing without. The
concavity of the dome, I suppose, condensed the sound into a subdued
thunder, like that which one hears at a short distance from the Falls
of Niagara. Against the huge pillars, and in various niches, were the
statues of eminent men; some of them erected by the nation, as a
commemoration of naval or military services, and others as tributes to
great personal worth, or to public benefactors. Among the statues of the
men of peace, that of Dr. Samuel Johnson, the great lexicographer,
particularly interested me. The celebrated moralist is represented
seated. One hand holds a scroll, the other rests upon a pedestal. The
likeness is said to be well preserved. The sculptor was Bacon. There was
the capacious forehead, the thick bushy eyebrows, the large mouth, the
double chin, the clumsy person, and the thick, ungainly legs, which had
been rendered familiar to me through the portraits which I had seen in
the Johnsonia. As I gazed on that marble tribute to genius and worth, I
could not but remember, Charley, how Johnson had frequently walked the
streets of London all night, because he had not the wherewithal to pay
for a lodging. Near to Johnson's monument was that of Howard the
philanthropist. We noticed a very fine one to Sir Joshua Reynolds; also
statues to Bishop Heber, Abercrombie, Cornwallis, Sir John Moore, Sir
Astley Cooper, Sir Thomas Lawrence, and Benjamin West.

[Illustration: Dr. Samuel Johnson.]

But the greatest attraction of St. Paul's is the sarcophagus, in which
repose the remains of England's greatest naval hero, Lord Nelson.
Situated immediately beneath the centre of the great dome is a
diamond-shaped tablet, which marks the spot beneath which rests, after
his career of glory, the hero of the Nile and Trafalgar. His body rests
in a sarcophagus in the vaults below. Exactly beneath the tablet lies
the huge coffin, with the name "NELSON" engraven on its side.
No epitaph, no labored panegyric, no fulsome praise; and Englishmen, I
think, were right in supposing that the simple name of their hero was
enough for fame. This sarcophagus was made by Cardinal Wolsey; and here
Nelson was placed, in a coffin made out of the mainmast of the French
ship, L'Orient.

The grim verger recommended us to ascend to the dome, and, after paying
fresh fees, we mounted an enormously long and steep-winding staircase,
which led us to the base of the dome. Here was a circular gallery,
surrounded with a railing. Scarcely had we entered this gallery, when
the attendant purposely slammed the entrance door, and immediately a
loud peal, as of thunder, reverberated through the vast building; then
he requested us to listen whilst he whispered against the smooth wall
directly opposite to us. The effect was startling; every word was as
distinct as though the speaker's lips had been close to my ear. This is
known as the Whispering Gallery, and is one of the great lions of the
place.

We now prepared to ascend still higher, and, after a tedious journey,
arrived at the gilded gallery, which surmounts the dome. From hence we
enjoyed a magnificent view of London, for, fortunately, the atmosphere
was comparatively clear, and the everlasting canopy of smoke which
overhangs London was not so dense as usual. Spread out before us lay the
great wilderness of brick and mortar, through which the shining Thames,
like a huge snake, pursued its sinuous course, spanned at intervals by
bridges, and bearing, on its broad bosom the gathered treasures of many
a far-distant nation. The streets, diminished to mere lanes, looked
alive with Lilliputians; miniature horses and carriages appeared like so
many German automaton toys which had been wound up and set a-going. Far
away to the westward patches of green, studded with trees, denoted the
parks, in one of which glittered the glass roof and sides of the Crystal
Palace; and still more remote were glimpses of the free, fresh, open
country, along which, at intervals, would rush railway trains, bearing
hundreds of passengers to various parts of England. Above my head
glittered, in the brilliant sunshine, the ball and cross which, at a
height of four hundred and four feet, stands proudly over London, and
may be seen from various parts of the metropolis. Another fee secured
our passage to the interior of this globe of gilded copper, and which is
about six feet in diameter, and will hold several persons. To reach it,
I had to ascend a ladder and creep through an aperture at the bottom of
the sphere. This was not worth the labor, but then we could say we had
attained the highest point of the cathedral. I hear that ladies
sometimes venture into the ball; if so, their timidity is insufficient
to baffle their curiosity. This accomplished, we retraced our steps, and
visited the portion of St. Paul's in which divine service is performed.
About a dozen boys, dressed in white surplices, were chanting sweetly; a
dull-looking clergyman read the service indifferently; and a score of
poor people, with one or two well-dressed persons, formed the
congregation. We then departed for Westminster Abbey, which must form
the subject of another letter.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.


Letter 21.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

What shall I tell you about Westminster Abbey? I hope I may be able to
say enough to make you long to see it, and determine you to read all you
can about it. By the way, I have satisfied myself that I can learn the
best things about such places by carefully reading good histories and
examining the best engravings. This abbey claims to have been built, in
616, by a Saxon king. It was enlarged by Edgar and Edward the Confessor,
and was rebuilt as it now appears by Henry III. and Edward I. In this
church all the sovereigns of England have been crowned, from Edward the
Confessor down to Victoria; and not a few of them have been buried here.
The architecture, excepting Henry VII.'s Chapel; is of the early
English school. Henry's chapel is of the perpendicular Gothic. The
western towers were built by Sir Christopher Wren.

We entered at the door leading to the Poet's Corner. We gazed with
interest on the monuments of Chatham, Pitt, Fox, and Canning, Prince
Rupert, Monk, Chaucer, Spenser, Beaumont, Fletcher, Ben Jonson, Cowley,
Dryden, Dr. Watts, Addison, Gay, Sheridan, and Campbell. Here, too, are
tablets to Barrow, South, Garrick, Handel, Clarendon, Bishop Atterbury,
Sir Isaac Newton, and old Parr, who died at the age of one hundred and
fifty-two.

[Illustration: Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey.]

The associations of this building are every thing to the stranger. I
will just give you a list of names of the kings and queens buried
here--Sebert, Edward the Confessor, Henry III., Edward I., Queen
Eleanor, Edward III. and his queen, Philippa, Richard II. and his queen,
Henry V., Henry VII. and his queen, Ann of Cleves, queen of Henry VIII.,
Edward VI., Bloody Mary, Mary, Queen of Scots, Queen Elizabeth, James I.
and his queen, Queen of Bohemia, Charles II., William III. and Mary,
Queen Anne, George II. and Queen Caroline.

We took the circuit of the chapels, beginning with St. Benedict. Here
many eminent churchmen have been interred. The next is St. Edmond's,
which contains twenty monuments; the monument of the Earl of Pembroke,
brother of Henry III.; he died 1298. Here, too, are tombs of children of
Edward II. and Edward III. I noticed a very fine brass monument, which
represents a Duchess of Gloucester in her dress as a nun, dated 1399.
There is, too, the effigy of the Duchess of Suffolk, mother of poor Lady
Jane Grey. The third is St. Nicholas's Chapel, where is seen Lord
Burleigh's monument. The fourth is the Virgin Mary's Chapel, called
Henry VII.'s Chapel, and the ascent to which is by twelve or fourteen
steps. This glorious room consists of a central aisle, with five small
chapels and two side aisles. Here you see the stalls and banners of the
Knights of the Bath, who were formerly installed in this chapel. The
altar tomb of Henry VII. is truly beautiful; Lord Bacon said, "It is one
of the costliest and daintiest tombs in Europe." Here are tombs of his
mother, and the mother of Lord George Darnley, and Mary, Queen of Scots,
and the Duke of Buckingham, Queen Elizabeth, and Queen Mary. Here, too,
is a sarcophagus, which is supposed to contain the remains of Edward V.
and the Duke of York, discovered in the Tower in the seventeenth
century, in a box. Charles II., William and Mary, and Queen Anne are in
a vault on the south aisle. George II. and his queen, Caroline, lie
together, a side being taken out of each coffin. The fifth chapel is St.
Paul's. The most striking object here is a colossal portrait statue of
James Watt, the great steam-engine perfecter, if not inventor. This is
by Chantrey, and cost six thousand pounds, and seems quite out of place.
Archbishop Usher lies in this chapel. The sixth chapel, called Edward
the Confessor's, pleased me greatly. In the centre is the shrine of the
monarch saint; it is rich in mosaic adornments. The altar tomb of Henry
III. is very grand, and there is a noble bronze statue of the king.
Edward I. is here, and in 1774 his body was found almost entire. Edward
III. and Philippa, his queen, have tombs. Here, too, was Henry V., the
hero of Agincourt, Richard II. and queen. We were delighted with the two
coronation chairs; in one is the old stone of Scone, on which the early
Scotch kings used to be crowned. Edward I. carried it off, and it has
ever since figured in English coronations. It is a large piece of red
and gray sandstone, and claims to have been the veritable pillow on
which Jacob slept. The seventh chapel is that of St. Erasmus, and leads
to the eighth, which is John the Baptist's. Here rest the early abbots
of the church. It contains a very fine monument to Lord Hunsdon,
chamberlain to Queen Bess. Just outside, in the aisle, we found the
noble monument to General Wolfe, and the celebrated work of Roubilliac
in memory of Mrs. Nightingale, where death is seen throwing his dart at
the wife, who falls into her husband's arms.

All over this noble abbey did we wander again and again in repeated
visits, and admire the finest statuary we have ever seen. Roubilliac was
a wonderful genius, and his monument to Sir Peter Warren is exquisite.
The works of Bacon, Flaxman, Nollekins, Chantrey, and Westmacott have
made me in love with statuary; and I long to see the great works which
are to be seen on the continent.

Many of the tablets and statues are only honorary, as the persons
commemorated were not buried here; as Shakspeare, Southey, Thomson,
Goldsmith, Dr. Watts, &c. I could spend hours looking at Roubilliac's
monument for the Duke of Argyle and his statue for Handel.

We attended divine service one Sunday afternoon, and heard a very fine
sermon from Lord John Thynne. The abbey was crowded; the music the best
I ever heard in a church; the preacher was quite eloquent; and Dr. C.
observed that it was the most evangelical sermon he had heard in
England. The subject was on justification by faith:

I may forget many things that I shall see on our travels, but I think
that this abbey will never vanish from my recollection. I shall always
remember the very position of these great works of art and genius; and I
am more than repaid for all the labor of a voyage.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.


Letter 22.

LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

No one comes to London without being told by every one to go and see the
parks; so we have been to see these fine breathing places. Hyde Park is
about four hundred acres, and has as many as half a dozen great
entrances. Its position is high, and it is the great drive of the people
of fashion. If you want to see London, you must come here on a fine
summer day in June, at about four o'clock, and you will gaze on the
finest and gayest equipages of England. A very pretty piece of water is
in this park, which is called "the Serpentine River." The best skating
of London is to be seen here, we are told, in hard winters. The entrance
from Piccadilly is by a fine threefold arch. Here is the great Achilles
of bronze, in honor of Wellington, made out of the cannon which the duke
captured in Spain. St. James's and the Green Park: this is the oldest in
London, and was made by Henry VIII. A fine arch affords entrance from
Piccadilly, having a bronze colossal equestrian statue of the Duke of
Wellington. You get grand views of the Abbey towers, Buckingham Palace,
the York Column, and other objects of interest. The two parks are about
one hundred and fifty acres. Regent's Park is one of the most
attractive spots in this great city. Here are villas of the finest kind.
Some of the prettiest terraces and rows of houses about London are here
to be seen. This park contains nearly five hundred acres, and, among
other attractions, the Botanical and Zoölogical Gardens, and the
Coliseum. Victoria Park, near Bethnal Green, is a new one, of about
three hundred acres; but we did not visit it.

Besides these, there are more than thirty squares, some of which are
very beautiful, and are finely planted and adorned. Belgrave Square is
exceedingly rich in its appearance; the houses are built in the
Corinthian order.

Northumberland House, at Charing Cross, is the city residence of the
Duke of Northumberland. This, externally, has no great beauty, but is
surmounted by the lion of the Percy family. It was built in 1605. This
noble mansion has been politely opened by its proprietor to the visits
of the foreigners who are here at the exhibition. It is a princely
mansion; and, although we had recently been to Windsor, and seen the
royal residence, yet we thought this palace home almost regal in its
splendor. The staircase is splendid, and the apartments are very
magnificent. The hall and drawing-rooms are quite equal, in decorations
and paintings, to the rooms at Windsor. We were much pleased with two
large pictures--a fox and deer hunt, by Snyders; but there were so
many, that it is difficult to single out those we admired. There are
some beautiful paintings of Napoleon, and exquisite carvings in ivory.
In one of the saloons we were all struck with a large Sevres china vase,
presented to the Duke of Northumberland by Charles X., at his
coronation, at which occasion the duke was present as ambassador
extraordinary, and made a most astonishing display of English wealth and
liberality.

Sion House, near Brentford, is another palace belonging to the duke.
This noble mansion is on the banks of the Thames, and is composed of
freestone. It is very gorgeously furnished, and the hothouses and
conservatories are not much, if any, inferior to Chatsworth. This
mansion has also, been opened to visitors from abroad, and we received
orders from the minister.

One of the sweetest features about the metropolis, to my taste, is the
vast number of charming villages that surround it. Go where you may, you
fall in with cottages, villas, and mansions, that convey to the mind the
ideas of comfort, elegance, and wealth.

I find from Weld that he forgot to tell you that we went to St.
Margaret's Church, which stands only a few yards off from Westminster
Abbey. This is a very old building, and said to be of the days of Edward
I. In this very building the celebrated fast-day sermons of the Long
Parliament were preached, and I felt much interest in thinking how often
Cromwell, Pym, Peters, and Harrison had worshipped God in that house. In
this church, too, the Assembly of Divines worshipped, and also the
Scotch commissioners, and took the covenant. This church boasts a
painted window of exquisite beauty, which came as a present, from
Holland, to Henry VII.; and the historical associations of this window
are very curious, and well worth your reading about. The monuments of
this sanctuary are far from being devoid of interest. I may name, among
others, those to Caxton, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir James Harrington,
author of the great book, "Oceana," the wife of Milton, the mother of
Cromwell, all of whom are here interred.

While I am speaking of churches, let me tell you that, close by our
hotel, is a very fine one, that pleases me exceedingly. It is called St.
Martin's-in-the-Fields, but is at present quite central as it regards
the metropolis. I think the portico is to my eye equal to any piece of
architecture in London. It was built in 1726. A church stood here for
many centuries; and in 1680, Baxter said that forty thousand people of
the parish could not get into the church; and he adds that they "lived
like Americans, without hearing a sermon for many years." This church
has an exquisite chime of bells, and they very much amused me every
morning.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 23.


LONDON.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

I have not written you for some time. But today I have seen a number of
things which I am sure you would be pleased with, and so I will tell you
about them. Early in the morning we went to see the Mansion House. This
is the dwelling-house of the lord mayor of London. It is a fine-looking
building, but has a queer upper story, with small windows, which look
badly, over the noble pillars and portico. The great room used for
public occasions is the Egyptian Hall, for what reason does not appear
from any thing about it. Here the lord mayor has his great feasts. I
should like to be in London on the 9th of November, which is his day of
inauguration; and this is the great day for Londoners. He rides in a
large carved gilt carriage. I believe he goes to Westminster by water,
in a splendid barge, and comes back in his coach. The salary is eight
thousand pounds; but the expenses are beyond this amount, and some
persons refuse to serve, and pay a fine of five hundred pounds; but
this is a rare case, and enough are ready to pay for the honor. In the
city the mayor ranks before the royal family. The title of "your
lordship" ceases at the expiration of his office.

Our next visit was to the Royal Exchange, a very noble quadrangle, which
was finished in 1844. It stands finely between the Bank of England and
the Mansion House, and in front there is a sort of open space, or
widening of the streets. This is the third building which has occupied
the same spot--the two earlier ones were both burnt down. The original
Exchange was built by Sir Thomas Gresham, and opened by Queen Elizabeth
in 1570. It was copied from the famous Burse at Antwerp, which still
stands. It is singular that, in the great fires of 1666 and 1838, the
statue of Sir Thomas Gresham escaped uninjured. The Exchange is built of
Portland stone, and already has acquired, from the smoke of London, a
venerable tinge. The portico, I am told, is the largest in the kingdom;
but the one at St. Martin's Church I like better. Crossing over the
road, we were at the Bank of England. This is a truly immense affair.
The walls measure fourteen hundred and sixty feet. It wad built in 1734,
but has had many alterations and additions, and now covers four acres.
We did not go into it.

The docks of London are among the attractions of the place. They are
called St. Catharine's, London, East India, West India, Commercial, &c.
These are tar too great an affair for me to describe; and to look at
them, and then think of writing an account, is very much like a small
boy opening a book of mathematics and trying to understand it. What do
you think of the tobacco warehouse, at the docks covering five acres?
Then the tea in bonded warehouses was worth twenty-five millions of
dollars; and there are ten millions of pounds of pepper, six millions of
gallons of wine, and other things in proportion. I inquired about the
shipping, and was told that there were about four thousand seven hundred
and fifty vessels, and eighty thousand seamen, employed in the foreign
commerce of the city; and beyond all this, twenty-one thousand coasting
vessels, averaging five or six men to each craft. Nothing in London
amazes us like these docks. Here you see Malays, Turks, Lascars,
Chinese, Russians, Portuguese, Dutch, French, Negroes, and men of all
nations.

We went several times to walk through Covent Garden Market, and to see
it to advantage you must go very early in the morning. The supply of
fruits and flowers is perfectly astonishing, and the perfume is very
fine. You little imagine, Charley, the prices that early vegetables and
fruits fetch. A cucumber and onion, wrapped up in grape leaves, will,
in February, March, and early part of April, find purchasers at two,
three, and four dollars. Strawberries, peaches, and pines are sold in
early season at what we should think "awful" prices. The hothouse grapes
are very beautiful, and the vegetable productions are more carefully
raised, and in greater variety, than with us. If you want to know all
about Covent Garden Market, you must read Mayhew on London Labor--a nice
book.

We boys had a treat the other day at an autograph collector's. His
collection was large and rare, but his prices very high. I have saved a
catalogue for you.

To-morrow we are off for the continent, and we are very busy in making
our arrangements; so I must close. Our next will be from _La Belle
France._

Yours affectionately,

GEORGE.


Letter 24.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

On a fine morning we left London, by rail, for Dover, in company with
the Rev. Dr. Murray, of New Jersey, and Dr. Chetwood, who made quite a
pleasant addition to our party. On reaching Dover, we were gratified
with the commanding position of the castle, which stands upon the white
chalky cliffs so celebrated by Shakspeare. The town lies in a charming
valley. Dover boasts of high antiquity. The Saxons and Romans both left
enduring memorials of their residence. Its importance was felt at a very
early day, on account of its being the best and authorized port to carry
on intercourse with France. Dover Castle was a strong fortification when
William the Conqueror landed. We found a steamer ready to start, and in
a few minutes were all on board. The Straits of Dover are but twenty-one
miles wide; and yet, in this short passage of barely two hours, we all
suffered sadly from sea sickness. The boat was small, the passengers
were numerous, and all were thankful to plant their feet upon the soil
of the republic. The examination of our passports, and refreshment at
the station-house, occupied about half an hour, and we again entered on
our journey by the rail. I shall say nothing of the place, at present,
as we fully intend to pass a day here, on our return, to examine this
interesting old city. We found the cars good, the railroad excellent but
every thing looked strange. No farms laid out in fine fields, and
divided off by hedges, as in England; or fences and stone walls, as with
us. We every where noticed women working in the field. We passed through
St. Omer, a fortified town, of twenty thousand inhabitants. This is a
town where many English Catholics have been sent for education. We then
came to Lille, which looked like a large city. It has about seventy
thousand inhabitants. The fortifications look very strong, and were
constructed by the great Vauban. This place has been besieged several
times--once by the Duke of Marlborough, for three months, when it
surrendered under Marshal Boufflers. We were amazed at the vast number
of windmills--amounting to hundreds--every where to be seen around the
town; and the tall chimneys in the town tell plainly that this is a
great manufacturing place. The windmills are employed in preparing flax
for linen.

Douai was our next town. It has about eighteen thousand inhabitants, and
has a foundery for ordnance. The Theological Seminary here has been
famous, and most of the Catholic clergy of England and Ireland were
formerly educated here. Arras is a town of about twenty-five thousand
population, and is celebrated as the birthplace of Robespierre. It is
said to be a very beautiful place, but we saw little of it. The cars
next passed through Amiens, a city of about fifty thousand inhabitants.
It was at this city that a treaty of peace was made between France and
England, in 1802. Clermont is a very neat little town, of about five
thousand inhabitants. It has a fine old castle, and every thing looked
lively and prosperous. Pontoise, on the River Oise, is a small town;
and I should think that, from the upper part of the town, the prospect
is very beautiful.

We reached Paris in about eleven hours and a half from London. Really,
this seems very strange, that I should breakfast in London and dine at
Paris. After having our luggage examined at the station, by the police,
we repaired at once to the Hotel Windsor, on the Rue Rivoli. This was
the hotel where Dr. C. had his quarters, fifteen years ago; and is it
not strange that we have the same suite of rooms that he then occupied?
We have a fine drawing-room, a dining-room, and three good chambers. Our
hotel is exactly opposite the gardens of the Tuileries, and is in the
pleasantest part of the city. James, you know, was once here for three
months; and he has quite a knowledge of the city, and seems perfectly at
home. We take our breakfast in our apartments or the coffee-room, as
suits us best, at about nine o'clock; our dinners in some good _café_,
in various parts of the city, or at the _table d'hôte_, at Meurice's
Hotel, which is just next door to us. In calling on one or two persons,
we found them in old apartments, but quite noble rooms, as high up as
four and five stories; and we hear that many families live in the same
building, and that many very respectable people live in the sixth, and
even seventh story. This I should never like. Whenever we go out, we
leave our key with the _concierge_ or his wife, who live in a snug
little apartment just inside the great gate, which opens into a
well-paved court. We have determined not to engage a guide in Paris,
because it is often annoying to have a coarse, vulgar mind disturbing
you, when all you ask is silence and your own reflections. It is quite a
mistake to suppose that you cannot get along without a _valet de
place_--for in every hotel, and almost every large establishment, there
are persons to be found who speak English. We paid our respects to our
good friend the consul, and found him very comfortably settled down in
his office, and residing in excellent style. A pleasant evening with his
family made us all think of our old times on board the Arctic. The day
after we arrived was James's birthday, and he was to give us a dinner,
and had invited the consul and his son to dine with us. Well, at five we
met at the consulate, and we boys walked ahead with Mr. G., Jr., leaving
the doctor and the consul to bring up the rear. He supposed that his
father understood where he proposed to take us, and so we went on
speedily. In the Rue Vivienne they lost sight of us; we arrived at the
Café Vachette, on the boulevards, and ordered dinner for the party. The
gentlemen, however, kept walking the street for two hours. At last they
gave up the matter as a bad case, and took refuge for a late dinner by
themselves in a neighboring _café_. At nine we all met, sadly
disappointed. The pleasant occasion had been quite disarranged, and some
hard jokes passed upon our want of tact in not sending out scouts to
search the Rue Vivienne, with the geography of which the doctor declares
he is now perfectly acquainted--having tramped it for two hours with the
consul. Of course, we all have to take their jokes upon our defrauding
them of a fine dinner. We have dined since at the _Trois Frères
Provençaux_, which has the reputation of being one of the best _cafés_
in Paris. Our room commanded a perfect view of the quadrangle of the
Palais Royal, and the spectacle was highly interesting. The
accommodations of the room we occupied were very fine; and nothing could
surpass the beauty of the table linen, plate, &c. We are about to
commence the sights of the city in earnest, and are this evening to
arrange our plans.

Yours affectionately,

GEORGE.


Letter 25.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

I like this city very much--every one seems so happy out of doors. Not
only the poor, but the wealthy, are fond of the open air; and a great
deal of time is spent in the gardens and on the boulevards. Every place
seems to have provision made for the enjoyment of the people. Ices and
lemonade are to be found wherever you go. The appearance of the streets
in Paris is much gayer than those of London. You see a much greater
number of women walking out, and they are generally very neatly dressed.
But the streets do not look as substantial as they do in London. If
there is more that is imposing, there is less that keeps up your wonder.
I do not feel able to think that the people here have much business to
do, for every one seems to be engaged in pleasure; and yet there are
great concerns going on, and the fine manufactures of this city are only
to be done by labor and attention. Nothing, at our first glances at the
city, have pleased us more than the profusion of flowers every where to
be seen. It is quite common to see men with a rose in the button hole,
or a beautiful carnation. The roses are my admiration. I never saw such
beauties before; and whether it is owing to the climate, or to
scientific cultivation, I know not, but certainly I never have beheld
such variety or perfection. In the flower shops you will find very large
bunches of rosebuds, each bunch made up exclusively of buds of one size,
from the dimensions of a pea in all gradations up to the diameter of a
half dollar--not a leaf opened, simply a bouquet of rosebuds, and the
whole embowered in a delicate sheet of white paper. I reckoned the
contents of one, and found two hundred and sixty-seven buds not larger
than a common pea, and the price was only a franc. The moss roses are
beyond all my conceptions of floral beauty; and, go where I may, I find
every niche of ground adorned with standard roses of various hues, and
the walls and windows are beautified with brilliant geraniums, which are
evidently great favorites.

We had a funny affair yesterday. We all went to make a call upon Mr.
D----, and found his residence in a splendid part of the city; but,
instead of being ushered into his drawing-room, we were brought into the
saloon of no less a personage than the Lord Bishop of Jamaica! He
politely directed us to the next apartment, where we spent an agreeable
hour with the family, and found that similar mistakes occur almost
daily.

Our first tramp for a sight was to Notre Dame; and I shall never forget,
Charley, my first view of this cathedral. The exterior is more striking
than any church edifice that I have yet seen. No engraving can afford a
fair idea of its grandeur to one who has not seen it, though it will
help my mind, to recall its beauties whenever I see the picture. You are
so well read about Paris, that I hardly need tell you that eight
centuries have rolled away since Notre Dame was built. It is regarded as
the noblest Gothic pile in France, and is the pride of Paris. The front
is one hundred and twenty feet wide, and the richness of the carvings
upon the exterior is wonderful. I am really glad to see that great pains
are taking to restore and adorn this church. The decayed stones are
taken out, and new ones replaced, and the carvings also are renewed
where necessary, so that future ages may see what so delights us. The
two towers are forty feet square and two hundred high, and you ascend by
a staircase of four hundred steps. The form of the church is that of the
Latin cross. Its dimensions inside are four hundred feet by one hundred
and forty, and the height is one hundred feet. All through the cathedral
is a line of Gothic arches supported by columns, and, as you enter the
great door, you see the entire edifice. The walls look bare to my eye,
in spite of the paintings. We were much pleased at seeing the spot where
Napoleon was crowned; and George was in ecstasies, for you know how
thoroughly he goes in for his beau ideal of the hero. Here are, the
splendid candelabra which the emperor gave on the occasion. We heard
mass, but the service was very formal, and the priest might have been a
real downeaster, for he had a horrid nasal twang, and his
"_sanctissime_" was "_shanktissime_." The history of these churches is
strange, and I think a pretty good book might be written on the romance
of church architecture. The portal of the north aisle of the choir was
erected by a vile assassin, the Duke of Burgundy, who murdered his
cousin, the Duke of Orleans, in 1407. This, of course, was his penance,
and fully expiated his crime. The great bell weighs thirty-two thousand
pounds, and was baptized in presence of Louis XIV., and is called
Emanuel Louise Therese, after his queen. I cannot attempt to describe
the beauties of this building, inside or out. The exterior is all flying
buttresses, crocketed pinnacles, and sculpture. Inside you see chapel
after chapel; and as to windows of painted glass, they are studies for
hours. The rose windows are exquisite.

We repaired to a small chapel used as a sacristy, or treasure-house of
the church. Here we saw the coronation robes of Napoleon, and splendid
capes and embroideries, in gold and silver, given by Charles X. and
Louis Philippe; and here, too, is the vertebræ of the late Archbishop of
Paris, who was killed in the revolution of 1848. The bone has a silver
arrow tracing the course of the bullet, which lies beside it. This is in
time to be a saintly relic, but it seems to me a filthy sight, and in
wretched taste. But Popery knows well what to do with dead men's bones.
For a minute description of this church, I would refer you to three
volumes, called the "History of Paris," published by Galignani. On our
return we went to the Hotel de Ville, and had the company of M. O----n,
whose kindness did much for us on several occasions. The Hotel de
Ville stands in the Place de Grève, where so much blood has been shed in
other days. Here the martyrs of the Protestant faith have been put to
death. Here it was that Dubourg was strangled and burnt by order of
Francis II. Dubourg was a noble character. His last words were, "Father,
abandon me not; neither will I abandon thee."

This noble pile was begun in 1533, and only completed in 1841, and in
the modern improvements fifteen millions have been expended. The whole
now forms an immense quadrangle. The front is Corinthian, with pillars
and niches between the windows. A vast number of statues adorn the
front, and others are in preparation.

It was at the doorway in the centre that Lamartine, "the noblest Roman
of them all," so gloriously withstood the mob in February, 1848,
declaring that the red flag should not be the flag of France. I wish you
could see this palace, for such it is, though occupied by the city
authorities. London has nothing to approach it in splendor. The
staircases are gorgeous, and are so rich in sculpture that only a
sculptor could properly speak of them. We saw the room where Robespierre
held his council and attempted suicide, and also the window where our
Lafayette embraced Louis Philippe, and presented him to the mob in
1830. It is the same window where poor Louis XVI. addressed the savages,
when he wore the cap of liberty. By the way, I hate the sight of that
cap, which always reminds me of the lamp-post executions of the French
capital in 1792-3. Its prevalence in our happy country is owing to the
French mania which once possessed the people, and has very much died
out. The apartments are regal, and some of them, I think, quite superior
to those of Windsor Castle. In this building is a fine library, and here
are deposited the vast collection of American books obtained by
Vattemare, whom, you recollect, we saw at Washington.

I cannot tell you how sorely vexed we are to find the Louvre shut up for
repairs and decoration; every week they say it is to be reopened, but I
fear we shall leave Paris ere it happens.

How much we would all give to have you here; for, though we are glad to
tell you what we see, we feel there are scores of objects which interest
us that we have to pass over, but which would make your eyes glisten, if
you could gaze upon. Well, my dear fellow, stick to your business, make
your fortune, and then come and look at the beautiful and fair in the
old world; and who knows but perhaps we may yet chat cosily together in
Paris? O, I do love to wander through this city by moonlight, and gaze
upon the bright, lofty buildings as they loom up so gloriously in the
mild lustre of a silvery night. God bless you.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 26.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

We have been to dine at the Palais Royal, at the _Trois Frères
Provençaux_, of which I suppose the boys have told you; and I shall only
speak about the fine building, so renowned all over the world. The
Palais Royal is to Paris what Paris is to France. Its history is briefly
this: Cardinal Richelieu built it for himself; but the king, Louis
XIII., was jealous, and the wily old priest gave it to the monarch, and,
after Richelieu's death, he moved into it. In 1692, it fell into the
hands of Philippe, Duke of Orleans, as a gift, or marriage portion, from
Louis XIV., and here the great Orleans collection of paintings was
gathered, and which was sold in 1789, at the breaking out of the great
troubles. In 1814, Louis Philippe obtained it as his inheritance, and
lived there till 1831. The garden is very fine, and is about seven
hundred and fifty feet by three hundred, and has beautiful rows of
lime-trees, trimmed into shape, as are most of these trees in Paris. In
the centre are flower gardens and a basin of water, with a fine
fountain. In this open space are beautiful bronze and marble statues.
One I admired exceedingly; it is Eurydice, stung by a snake. In this
garden are hundreds of persons under the trees, on chairs, which are
hired, where they read and take refreshments. Under the arcades which
surround the area are the most tasty shops of Paris, and where you may
get any thing you please. A gayer sight than this same Palais Royal, or,
as they now call it, Palais National, cannot be seen in this world. I
shall not attempt to tell you about the apartments of the palace, and
which you can read of at your leisure. What a loss it was to the world
when, in February, 1848, six hundred thousand engravings, all classified
by Louis Philippe, and making one hundred and twenty-two enormous
folios, were destroyed by the mob, and the queen's own library also!

We lounged about from one shop to another, and made purchases of some
pretty things, which we hope may serve to show friends at home that we
did not quite forget them.

The Passage d'Orleans will never die out from my memory, nor shall I
ever forget the Café d'Orleans, with its mirrors, walls, and ceilings,
all radiant with a thousand lights. We find at every few steps the
magazine for the Indian weed, and all varieties of pipe, from the
commonest _en bois_ to the elegantly carved _ecume de mer_, which would
cost two or three hundred francs. Here, too, are the Theatres Français
and Palais Royal, and other places of amusement.

In our walks about the city we are sure to have all the notable places
pointed out; and one morning, just after I had obtained a Henry IV.
silver coin, in fine preservation, we were taken home by a long walk
through the Rue St. Honore. The house No. 3, in this street, is the one
in front of which Henry IV. was assassinated by Ravaillac. A bust of the
king stands against the second story, with an inscription. In the Rue
Vivienne, No. 34, we saw the house where Molière died, on which is a
marble tablet, with this inscription: "_Molière est mort dans cette
maison, le _17_ Février_, 1673, _à l'âge de_ 51 _ans._" At the corner of
the same street, where a small passage way branches off, is a fine
monument to the memory of the great poet and the noblest comic writer of
France. The statue is of bronze, in a sitting posture; on each side are
figures,--one humorous, the other serious,--both looking at the statue.
At the foot of the monument is a basin to receive water, which flows
from three lions' heads. This work was put up in 1844, with public
services, on which occasion the first men of France took a part. Another
morning's walk led us to the Rue de l'École de Médecine, and in this
street Marat lived, at No. 20, and here it was, in a small room, that he
was stabbed, while bathing, by Charlotte Corday, in 1793. And in this
same street was held the old club of the Cordeliers.

When I see the places of which I have heard so often it seems very
interesting, and will forever identify the scenes with my future
reading.

We all enjoyed a visit to the palace of the Luxembourg. This edifice was
begun in the sixteenth century, and the present palace was chiefly built
early in the next one, by Marie de Medicis, in imitation of one at
Florence. Bonaparte used it when chief consul. The old senate held its
sessions there till its dissolution, in 1814. I never saw a building
whose proportions appeared to me so elegant. The court is a
parallelogram of three hundred and sixty by three hundred feet. The
front consists of two pavilions, joined by terraces, and in the centre
rises a cupola, around which are statues. In such a palace fine rooms
are to be expected, and here they are in great number. The Senate
Chamber or Chamber of Peers, is very suitable for its purpose. The
library is good, and contains about fifteen thousand volumes. The
picture gallery is large, and at present principally filled with
pictures of living artists, and at his death the picture of each one is
removed to the Louvre. All the great paintings of Napoleon's battles are
gone to Versailles; so we shall see them in the series. The chapel is an
exquisite gem: it has, beyond all comparison, the most devotional air
of any thing I have seen _of the sort_.

The gardens are fine, and have some noble terraces, adorned with plenty
of statues, some of which are quite old; but a great many new ones, by
living artists, are rapidly taking their places. The balustrades of the
terraces are beautified with groups of children, athletæ, &c. Here are
some fine old orange-trees, which were throwing out their blossoms most
fragrantly; and I must not forget the noble clusters of chestnut-trees
which are on the sides of the walks. The garden is a lovely spot, and I
saw hundreds of old and young, who seemed to enjoy themselves highly. I
am half surprised to find myself more delighted in Europe with the
completeness and splendor of the gardens and public grounds than with
the palaces and their internal gorgeousness. If I could carry back to my
own beloved country any thing from England or France, it should be their
gardens, their walks, their libraries and museums. As to the comforts
and elegances of life, we have enough of them for our good. The Musée
d'Artillerie is quite a place of interest, and here are seen some fine
suits of ancient armor. The arrangement is good, and an hour's attention
is well repaid.

Yours affectionately,

WELD.


Letter 27.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

This has been a great day for enjoyment, and has made us all in love
with Paris. We have seen, this morning, that which has pleased me more
than all else I have looked at in Europe. We spent several hours at the
Hotel de Cluny, in the Rue des Mathurins. I am surprised that so many
Americans come to Paris and never see this castle of curiosities. To
understand our gratification, I must bore you a little with its history,
and then you will see what a treat we enjoyed. This venerable pile was
erected on the site of the Palais des Thermes, formerly the
dwelling-place of the Roman governors of Gaul. Here Julian lived when he
was made emperor of Rome, in 360. Of the extraordinary remains of this
palace I shall tell you by and by. On this spot, then, in 1480, an abbot
of Cluny commenced this building, and it was completed in 1505. This
magnificent monastery--the city residence of the monks of Cluny--was
often made the residence of royal and distinguished visitors. Here for
two years lived Mary, the daughter of Henry VII. of England, and widow
of Louis XII. of France, who, while here, married the Duke of Suffolk.
Her chamber still exists, and we saw it in high preservation. This
marriage, you will remember, laid the foundation for the claim of Lady
Jane Grey to the crown. Here, too, for a season, the excellent abbess
and the nuns of Port Royal found a refuge. Some forty years ago, it came
into the hands of M. Sommerard, a man devoted to antiquarian pursuits,
and here he expended a large property in forming a vast collection of
all sorts of relics he could gather belonging to the medieval ages. A
few years ago, he died, and then the government wisely purchased the
hotel and its unrivalled museum for half a million of francs; and
additions are constantly made to it of every curiosity that can
illustrate the habits and manners of the early history of France and
Europe. The building is very striking in its first aspect. It has
several Gothic turrets, and very rich windows, and the court yards and
garden are all in keeping. What good times those old abbots, and monks
must have had in their visits to Paris, in such a palace as this was!
You pass from room, to room, all filled with the antique, till you get
leg-weary. The floors are exquisitely beautiful--some in fine old black
oak, let in, in patterns; others are bricks and tiles, in mosaic. Then
the old mantel-pieces are wonderfully fine. We saw plenty of tapestry,
old as the hills; and one set of hangings was the history of David and
Bathsheba. Some of the bedsteads are very curious. One belonged to
Francis I. Perhaps the largest and most valuable collection of carved
Wood furniture in the world is here to be seen. Such cabinets, chairs,
tables, chests, I never imagined. The work is of the most delicate and
complicated character. Then you find a wonderful collection of glass and
earthen ware--cups and goblets belonging to men of note of every age in
French history. One room is full of ancient armor, another of gems,
enamels, &c, another of pictures of the most curious kind; and as to
mirrors and looking-glasses, they are in great plenty; and china enough
to make some ladies in America whom I know break the commandment.

You can fancy, Charley, what sort of a place this must be, when I tell
you that the catalogue of this collection is a volume of two hundred and
forty octavo pages, and embraces eighteen hundred and ninety-five
particulars. I have the catalogue, and can assure you that it includes
some queer antiquities, of which we cannot speak particularly at
present.

A word or two about the ruins of Julian's Palace of the Baths. Here is
still a vast hall, which was doubtless the place for cold baths. The
dimensions are sixty feet by thirty-five. In the cellars are the evident
remains of the warm baths. The walls are of immense thickness, and will
probably last as long as the earth on which they rest. This hall is the
place of deposit for any Roman sculpture that may be found in the
excavations of the city.

I am sure that, next to the Crystal Palace, this has been our greatest
treat. We enjoyed this morning the more, because we had the company of
Mr. George Sumner, who has lived in Paris so long that he is perfectly
familiar with every object of interest. I never met with any one who
appeared to have so much local knowledge as he possesses. He knows the
history of every thing, and he seems at home on all names, dates, and
facts of other ages. Whenever we read up, after a walk with him, we find
that he knows all that is known; and in truth he talks like a book, but
better than most books. The attention of this gentleman has been very
great to us boys, and he seems never tired when doing us kindness. But
if Mr. S. knows places well, he is no less intimate with men; and
probably no American has ever enjoyed his opportunities to cultivate the
acquaintance of the best and greatest men in Paris.

We have visited the Church of St. Sulpice, which was begun in 1655, and
only completed late in the last century. The portico is very grand, and
is a double row of Doric pillars, forty feet high. It has two towers,
which are over two hundred feet high, and on which are telegraphs. The
church forms a cross, and is four hundred and thirty-two feet in
length, one hundred and seventy-four in width, and ninety-nine in
height. The organ is finely carved, and is more elaborate in its work
than any I have seen yet. The statuary, both in bronze and marble, here,
is beautiful, and the candelabra are greatly admired. As to pictures, I
can only say they are many and fine. The marble monument and statue to
Languet de Gergy, the former _curé_ of this parish, and who mainly
contributed to its erection or completion, is much admired, and on this
tomb is the most elegant inscription of modern times. But I cannot
insert it here. Directly in front of the church, in an open square, is a
very fine fountain, which partakes of the ecclesiastical in its
style--having in four niches the statues of Bossuet, Massillon,
Fléchier, and Fénélon.

In our walk we were all struck with an immense wooden pile, which we
found was the Bibliothèque St. Geneviéve. The front is very chaste, and
has very many arched windows. The library is more than three hundred
feet in length, and is covered on the exterior with the names of all the
great authors of every age and nation. We saw the names of many of our
countrymen--Washington, Franklin, Rumford, Clinton, Cooper, Prescott,
Irving, &c. We were unable to enter, as repairs were in progress, but
were told that the library has two hundred thousand volumes, and
several thousand MSS.

We have all been much gratified with the Church of St. Etienne du Mont.
It boasts an antiquity that dates back to 1131, and its tower and turret
are known to be as early as 1222. The exterior is remarkable for a
strange mixture of architecture, and some of the details are very
beautiful. The interior cannot fail to interest a thoughtful person, I
think. The pictures are very fine indeed, and some of the marbles are of
the highest excellence. We went into the little Chapel of St. Genevieve,
the patron saint of Paris, where is the tomb of the saint. The tomb was
literally stuck over with small tallow candles, and looked like a piece
of meat larded. The room was filled with worshippers, all on their
knees; and two women had as much anguish in their faces as I ever saw.
All the people kneeling at this tomb seemed far more intent and in
earnest than the hundreds at grand mass in the church proper. Just as we
stepped outside this chapel, we found on the wall the monuments of
Racine and Pascal, who are both buried in this church. The church was
full of people, and in one little chapel the priest was baptizing an
infant. We went in and looked on. It was the first time I had ever
witnessed this monstrous mummery in the Catholic church; and I called in
the Dr. and Mr. S., who were looking at some statuary. The priest was
hardly decent at his work. He did it all in a hurry,--put oil and
something else on the child, fore and aft,--and how men and women could
stand and let the stupidity take place on their children, I cannot
understand. After seeing Pascal's grave, and thinking of his immortal
works, it was poor preparation for the mountebank exhibition, and
awkward work of making Christians, that we witnessed. You know, Charley,
that I am not a lover of Romanism, but I never felt so thankful as on
that day for being a Protestant.

The pictures of this church are very well worthy of careful
notice--especially two, said to have been given by the city to the
saint, who caused a famine to stay its ravages, and restored a sick king
by intercession.

Now, pray, do not think me church mad if I carry you once more to
another old one. I am sure, if you had seen it, that it would cause you
to talk about it often. Well, it is the Church St. Germain des Pres.
This is regarded as the oldest in Paris, and was originally an abbey.
There was a church here as early as 560. This was probably built about
the middle of the ninth century, and its completion was in the twelfth;
for it was consecrated by Pope Alexander III. In this church was the
tomb of Childebert, the founder of the first edifice. The abbey had a
refectory, cloisters, &c, was surrounded by a moat, and had been
fortified. A large open field, close by, was the resort of duellists,
and many a bloody affray has there occurred. Casimir, King of Poland,
was an abbot of this church. The revolution was sadly injurious to this
fine sanctuary, and it was for a time converted into a saltpetre
manufactory. Charles X. repaired it, and after him Louis Philippe
carefully superintended its restoration. The inside of the church is a
cross, with a circular choir; and the arches are semi-circular, and
indicate great antiquity. The restoration of the nave and choir has been
most carefully done, at immense expense. The roof of the choir is
painted deep blue, with stars. The capitals of the columns are richly
gilt, and the shafts are painted in red stripes--exact copies of the old
devices. Nothing can be finer than the marble altar and the carved
stalls of the choir. Nor does the church lack for historical names among
its dead. Here are the tombs of Earl Douglass, Descartes, Mabillon,
Montfaucon, and Casimir of Poland, who died, abbot, in 1672. Every thing
here in ecclesiastical architecture is so different from all that we
have in our country, that I examine these noble relics with great
pleasure, and do not know but I shall soon become as antiquarian in my
taste as-you know who.

Yours affectionately,

JAMES.


Letter 28.


PARIS.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

On a fine morning we rode over to the Jardin des Plantes, accompanied by
Mr. R----, whose long residence has made him very familiar with this
lovely spot. I think we all looked forward to this excursion with great
anticipation, because we knew that this was the most famous garden in
Europe; and then, in connection with it, are the richest cabinets in the
world of natural history, mineralogy, geology, and a noble collection of
living animals from all countries. Ever since 1635, the world has been
placed under contribution to enrich this spot. The greatest botanists
and naturalists of Europe have labored here. Buffon himself was the
great man of the place in his day. Even revolutionary fury spared this
retreat and treasury of Nature. Bonaparte made it his pet, and when the
troops of Europe were at the walls of Paris, they agreed to respect and
preserve the spot so dear to science. This establishment is on the banks
of the river, and there are many portals by which entrance may be
obtained. The gardens are very large, but I cannot speak of their exact
size. They are in the neatest order. Every shrub and flower, plant and
tree, is labelled, so that reference is easy. I was delighted to see,
on a lofty eminence, the cedar of Lebanon. It is a glorious tree, and
was planted here in 1734, and is now about twelve feet round at its
base. We also saw some palm-trees which were given by Louis XIV. They
were, I should think, nearly thirty feet high.

The Menagerie has long been famous, and is most admirably laid out in
walks and enclosures, so that the animals have plenty of room for
exercise and pasture. Since the days of Noah's ark, I suppose there
never was such a collection of animals, clean and unclean. The bears,
elephants, lions, and tigers are all what are called first-rate
specimens.

We were pointed out the house where the celebrated Cuvier lived, and
which was his favorite residence. Here was his life's labor, the
Zoölogical Cabinet, which he arranged according to his system. Only
fancy a house about four hundred feet long, having three stories, and
all filled up with nearly two hundred thousand specimens; and the
preparations are almost as fine as the animal was in life.

The Museum of Comparative Anatomy, also, was the labor of Cuvier. The
collections of mineralogy and geology are very extensive; but I did not
have much time to examine them, nor are they as much in my line as some
other things. The specimens of precious stones were curious, and I was
pleased to see amber containing perfect insects, perhaps antediluvian
insects. And so we employed three hours upon what I should have liked to
pass three whole days. But it would take years of diligent study to
understand what is here to be seen.

