Produced by Kevin Handy, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


[Transcriber's note: Minor typos in text corrected and footnotes moved to
end of text.]

[Illustration: JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET.]

[Illustration: HYRUM SMITH, THE PATRIARCH.]


A Young Folks' History

OF THE

CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

By NEPHI ANDERSON


    "_We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us,
    what Work thou didst in their days, in the time of old_"--_Psalm
    xliv:1_.

Published by the
DESERET SUNDAY SCHOOL UNION
Salt Lake City. Utah
1916

_Copyright, 1889,
By Nephi Anderson

Copyright, 1916,
By Joseph F. Smith,
For the Deseret Sunday School Union_.


To Parents and Teachers.


Studying the history of our country creates patriotism and engenders
loyalty. For the same reason, a study of the history of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints will implant in our boys and girls a love for
its heroes, a loyalty to its principles, and an appreciation of its
achievements. By a knowledge of the history of the Church, our young people
will prize more highly that heritage given them of God and preserved for
them by the sweat and blood of their fathers.

The teacher using this little book will understand that it is not
exhaustive, but rather suggestive. The teacher should be in possession of
much more history than is given here. He should fill in much of the
undercurrent of heroism, faith, and devotion exhibited by the characters of
the history, very little of which can be given in the text. The importance
of this larger knowledge on the part of the teacher will be understood by
an examination of the review and questions at the end of each chapter. The
aim in these questions is not only to review the facts of the lesson, but
by suggestions and reference to bring out more fully deductions and
principles.

It is believed that by combining the topical and the question methods the
best results may be obtained. The topics are to be assigned certain pupils
for treatment. Questions should not be limited to those in the book. The
teacher should find many more to ask.

Special attention is called to the maps. Have pupils locate each important
place. Quite a number of dates are found in the text. It is not intended
that the pupils should memorize them all. Most of them should be used
merely in fixing the relative time between events. It is suggested that the
pupils be encouraged to refer to the Church works and other books mentioned
in the text.

For further preparation the teacher is referred to "The History of the
Church," "Cannon's Life of Joseph Smith," "Whitney's History of Utah." The
"Faith Promoting Series," Evan's "Hundred Years of Mormonism," etc., will
give much interesting and valuable information.


CONTENTS


To Parents and Teachers

CHAPTER I.
A Parable

CHAPTER II.
The First Vision

CHAPTER III.
The Angel Moroni

CHAPTER IV.
The Sacred Plates

CHAPTER V.
The Book of Mormon

CHAPTER VI.
The Three Witnesses

CHAPTER VII.
The Priesthood Restored

CHAPTER VIII.
Organization of the Church

CHAPTER IX.
Persecution of Joseph

CHAPTER X.
The Mission to the Indians

CHAPTER XI.
Removal to Ohio

CHAPTER XII.
The Land of Zion

CHAPTER XIII.
Persecution in Jackson County

CHAPTER XIV.
Expulsion from Jackson County

CHAPTER XV.
Zion's Camp

CHAPTER XVI.
The Church at Kirtland

CHAPTER XVII.
The Twelve Apostles--The Seventies--Kirtland Temple

CHAPTER XVIII.
The Mission to England

CHAPTER XIX.
Far West

CHAPTER XX.
Haun's Mill Massacre

CHAPTER XXI.
Driven from Missouri

CHAPTER XXII.
In Missouri Prisons

CHAPTER XXIII.
Nauvoo

CHAPTER XXIV.
The Martyrdom

CHAPTER XXV.
Expulsion from Illinois

CHAPTER XXVI.
The Battle of Nauvoo

CHAPTER XXVII.
Westward

CHAPTER XXVIII.
The Mormon Battalion

CHAPTER XXIX.
The Pioneers

CHAPTER XXX.
Great Salt Lake City

CHAPTER XXXI.
Growth of Utah and the Church

CHAPTER XXXII.
The "Utah War"

CHAPTER XXXIII.
The "Utah War" (Concluded)

CHAPTER XXXIV.
Prosperity

CHAPTER XXXV.
The "Crusade"

CHAPTER XXXVI.
The Presidency of Wilford Woodruff

CHAPTER XXXVII.
Temple Building

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
The Presidency of Lorenzo Snow

CHAPTER XXXIX.
The Presidency of Joseph F. Smith

APPENDIX.

First Presidencies of the Church
List of Twelve Apostles

MAPS.
Fayette and Kirtland
Missouri and Illinois
Routes of Mormon Battalion and Pioneers

ILLUSTRATIONS.
Joseph Smith, the Prophet
Hyrum Smith the Patriarch
Brigham Young
The Hill Cumorah
The Three Witnesses
Sidney Rigdon
President Brigham Young
The Kirtland Temple
President Heber C. Kimball
Haun's Mill
The Nauvoo House
The Nauvoo Mansion
Carthage Jail
A Pioneer Train
Salt Lake Valley in 1847
The Old Fort
Salt Lake Tabernacle (Interior)
Salt Lake Tabernacle (Exterior)
President John Taylor
President Wilford Woodruff
The Pioneer Monument
Salt Lake Temple and Grounds
President Lorenzo Snow
The First Presidency, 1916
Joseph Smith Monument and Memorial Cottage
Church Office Building


A YOUNG FOLKS' HISTORY

OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.


CHAPTER I.

A PARABLE.


Once upon a time the owner of a very large garden planted therein a tree,
the fruit of which was very precious and of great value to all who ate of
it. For a time, the tree grew and bore much good fruit. But the owner of
the garden had an enemy who went about secretly sowing seeds of weeds and
all manner of briers and brush, that they might spread all over the garden
and kill out the good tree which the master had planted. The enemy also
persuaded many of the workmen in the garden to neglect the good tree, and
let the briers and weeds grow up around it and so prevent its growth. Thus
in time the once precious fruit of the good tree became wild and scrubby,
no better than the enemy's trees which grew around it.

Years passed, and the master, grieving that the precious fruit should have
become so worthless, determined to plant the good tree once more in the
garden. He did not try to clear away a spot for it amid the old, overgrown
parts of the land, but he called upon certain workers to go to a distant
part of the garden where nothing had been planted for a long time, and
there prepare the ground for the planting of the tree.

These workers were faithful to their master and did as they were told. Very
few of the enemy's noxious weeds were growing in the new soil, so it was
not such hard work to clear the ground and prepare a place for the master
to plant his tree.

To be better protected against the enemy, the master told his workmen to
build a high, strong wall about that part of the garden. This was all done;
and then one beautiful spring day the owner came with his servants. They
had with them the precious tree taken from some other garden where it had
grown without hindrance from weeds. The tree was planted and put in charge
of other servants to tend it. The warm sun shone on it, the rains came from
heaven to water it, and the tree took firm root and grew.

Now all the boys and girls who read this book will understand that the
little story I have just told is what is called a _Parable_, meant to make
plainer some facts and truths. I can not tell you all about that tree here,
how it grew and bore fruit, and how many people came and ate of its
delicious fruit, notwithstanding the enemy came again and tried to check
its growth. I say, I cannot tell it to you in the form of a parable, but
will tell it as it actually happened. You may, if you like, imagine in your
own minds the rest of the parable, but the real story you will find more
interesting than any made-up tale can be.

First, let me explain to you the meaning of the parable.

The garden means the earth, and the owner is the Lord, who came to the
earth about nineteen hundred years ago to die for the sins of the world. He
also planted the good tree, that is, He brought the gospel and taught it
to his followers. The enemy is the evil one, the devil, who stirred up men
to work against the gospel and to kill those who obeyed it. He also mixed
his lies with Christ's truths, until in time the pure gospel was not to be
found on the earth.

This was the condition of the world for hundreds of years. Then the Lord
wished to restore the true gospel and again establish his Church on the
earth. He therefore chose a place where all would have the right to believe
the truth and be protected in that liberty. The Lord, therefore, moved upon
Columbus to discover this land of America.

The servants spoken of, whom the Lord sent to prepare the land for the
planting, were all those great and good men whom you have read about in
your American history: Washington, Jefferson, Franklin, and many others.
You will remember how these men loved right and liberty, and how they
worked so hard for it; and in reading the history of these men we can
plainly see that the Lord was with them and helped them. These men built
the high wall, which means that they made just laws that would protect the
people and let them worship God in any way they thought right.

Thus was the way prepared for the gospel to be restored again to the earth;
and the Lord himself came from heaven, also his servants Moroni, Peter,
James, and John to bring the glad tidings to all who live on the earth.

Then the Lord called some more servants to preach the gospel to the world
and build up his Church. The first and greatest of these servants is known
by the name of Joseph Smith, the Prophet. How the Lord called him to this
great work and delivered to him the gospel will be told you in the next
chapter.

Topics.--1. The Parable. 2. Explanation.

Questions and Review.--1. Name some of Christ's first disciples. 2: Tell
how some of them were killed. 3. How long was the world without the gospel?
4. Tell how Columbus discovered America. 5. Who were the Pilgrims? 6. What
was the Revolutionary war about? 7. What is the Constitution of the United
States? 8. Find out what it says about religious liberty. 9. Why is America
the "Land of liberty?"


CHAPTER II.

THE FIRST VISION.


At the time when Thomas Jefferson was president of the United States, there
was born among the Green Mountains of Vermont a boy who was to become the
great prophet of the last days. The hills and valleys of Vermont look
beautiful in the summer, but at the time here spoken of they were no doubt
covered with snow, for it was the 23rd of December, 1805, in the town of
Sharon, Windsor county, that Joseph Smith first saw the light of the world.

Joseph was named after his father, whose name was Joseph. His mother's
maiden name was Lucy Mack. Joseph had five brothers and three sisters whose
names were Alvin, Hyrum, (then Joseph), Samuel, William, Don Carlos,
Sophronia, Catherine and Lucy; so you see that there was a large family for
the father and mother to take care of. Joseph's parents were poor and had
to work hard for a living, so when the boys were old enough they had to
help on the farm; this they willingly, did. For this reason Joseph did not
go to school much, but he learned to read, to write fairly well, and to
work some examples in arithmetic. Though Joseph did not get much of an
education at school, yet he was a great student; and then God became his
teacher, so that before he died, as you will see, he became one of the most
learned men in the world.

When Joseph was ten years old they all moved from Vermont to Palmyra, in
the western part of the state of New York. Four years later they moved
again to the small town of Manchester, in Ontario, now Wayne County, New
York.

While the family was living at Manchester there arose a great religious
excitement all through the country. The different religious sects held many
meetings and tried to get people to join them. Joseph was now in his
fifteenth year and he also became interested, as his parents had always
taught him to believe in God and the Bible. Joseph thought he would like to
join the true church of Christ, but what troubled him was to know which of
all these sects was the true church. He could see that all of them could
not be true, as God surely would not have a great many churches, one
striving against the other; also, no doubt, he had read in the Bible that
there was but "one Lord, one faith, one baptism," etc., which the Lord
accepted. Joseph went first to one meeting, then to another. His mother and
some of his brothers and sisters had joined the Presbyterians, but Joseph
could not make up his mind what to do.

But there is a way by which anyone may find out which is the true church
and therefore which to join, and every boy and girl that reads this book
should remember it. It is this: Ask God. Joseph did not know this until one
day while reading in his Testament he came to the fifth verse in the first
chapter of James, which reads as follows:

    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."

This was just the thing. God had surely led him to read that verse. Joseph
certainly lacked wisdom, and here was a way to find out what he wanted to
know about the sects. The Lord would tell him. All he had to do was to ask.
How simple it was!

On a beautiful morning in the spring of the year 1820, Joseph decided to
ask the Lord for wisdom. He went out into a grove near his father's house,
and after looking around to make sure that he was alone, he kneeled down on
the grass under the trees and began to pray. No sooner had he begun than
some awful power which he could not see took hold of him and made it nearly
impossible for him to speak. It soon became dark around the boy, and Joseph
thought the unseen power would kill him; but he struggled hard and tried to
pray to God for help.

Just at that moment Joseph saw a great light coming down from above, and
then the evil power left him. The light was brighter than the sun, and as
it came down and touched the tops of the trees, Joseph wondered why it did
not burn them. Then it shone all around him, and in the light, standing in
the air above him, he saw two persons who looked like men, only they were
shining with a glory that can not be described. One of them, pointing to
the other, said to the boy:

"_Joseph, this is my Beloved Son; hear him_."

Joseph then asked which of all the religions was right, and great was his
surprise when he was told that none was right; that they all had gone
astray from the truth; and that he must join none of them. Joseph was told
many other things, among which was that some day the true gospel would be
made known to him. Then they left him alone in the woods.

What a wonderful thing! God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ had
actually come to Joseph. He had seen them and they had spoken to him. That
same Jesus of whom he had read in his Bible had come from heaven and his
Father had come with him to introduce him to the boy praying in the woods!

This was the first vision and the beginning of the gospel in our day; and
by thinking carefully about this vision, we may see that it teaches us many
things. First, that God has a body like unto man's. Second, that the Father
and the Son are two persons, not one, as many in the world believe. Third,
that the many religions which man has made are not accepted by God. Fourth,
that God has not ceased to give revelations to men on the earth.

Topics.--1. Joseph's Boyhood. 2. The Vision. 3. What may be learned from
the vision.

Questions and Review.--1. When and where was Joseph Smith born? 2. To
what places did Joseph move? 3. What led Joseph to ask God for wisdom? 4.
Repeat James I:5. 5. Why can not all the sects in the world be right? 6.
Did the Father and the Son come to Joseph solely because of this prayer?[1]
7. Why did the evil one try to destroy Joseph? 8. What may we learn from
this vision?


CHAPTER III.

THE ANGEL MORONI.


When Joseph told of his vision to some of his friends he was surprised to
find that they did not believe him, but made fun of what he said. The
strangest thing to the boy was that the preachers of religion, instead of
being glad at such glorious news, told him it was from the devil, and that
God did not give any more revelations from heaven. All such things had
ceased with the apostles of old, they said. Another strange thing was that
these preachers began to tell untruths about him, and seemed to hate him
for what he told. Still Joseph would not deny his story. "I have actually
seen a vision," he said again and again. "I know it, and I know that God
knows it, and I dare not deny it."

So three years went by.

On the evening of September 21, 1823, after Joseph had retired to his room,
he prayed earnestly that the Lord would forgive him his sins and show him
if he was yet accepted of him. While he was yet praying a very bright light
came into the room, and immediately a person stood in the air by his
bedside. As this person was an angel--a being who had died and had been
resurrected with an immortal body--it is interesting to know how he looked.

Joseph describes him as a man having on a robe whiter than anything he had
ever seen. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the
wrists. His feet were also bare a little above the ankles. His head and
neck were also bare. Not only was his robe very white but his whole person
shone with great glory. The room was very light, but not so bright as
close around the angel's person.

The angel called Joseph by name, and said that he was a messenger sent from
God to him, and that his name was Moroni. He told Joseph that God had a
work for him to do, and because of this work, good and evil would be spoken
about his name in all nations. The angel then told him of a record written
on gold plates which were hidden in a hill not far away. This record was a
history of the peoples who had lived on this continent, of whom the Indians
were a part. With the plates was an instrument called the Urim and Thummim,
which God had prepared for the translating of the records. After a time
these things would be given to Joseph, but he must take great care of them
and show them to no one except those to whom the Lord would direct. Then
Moroni showed Joseph, by a vision, the place, where the plates were hidden.

After giving much other instruction, the light in the room began to gather
in towards the person of the angel, leaving the room again in darkness,
except just around the heavenly visitor, who soon disappeared in a shining
path into heaven.

Three times that same night Moroni visited Joseph and told him nearly the
same things over again. About the plates Joseph was further told that he
would be tempted to get them for the purpose of getting rich, as the plates
were of great value; but he must not yield to that spirit as they were
sacred, and he must have no other purpose in view than to do the will of
God and build up his kingdom; otherwise he would not get them. At the close
of the third visit it was morning, and then Joseph knew that he had been
talking with the angel nearly all the night.

That morning Joseph went as usual with his father to work in the field,
but he was so weak that he could do but little. His father, seeing this,
told him to go home.

On the way, as he was climbing over a fence, Joseph fell helpless to the
ground. After that the first thing he knew was that some one was calling
him by name. Looking up he again saw the angel Moroni, who once more told
him all that he had related the night before. He then told Joseph to go
back to the field and tell his father of the vision and the commandments
which he had received.

Joseph obeyed at once, and went back and told all he had seen and heard.
His father believed all he said, and told Joseph to obey the angel, as the
teachings and commandments were surely from the Lord.

Topics.--1. Beginning of persecution. 2. Visit of the angel Moroni. 3.
What Moroni told Joseph.

Questions and Review.--1. What did people say of Joseph's first vision?
2. Why did people persecute a young boy like Joseph? 3. Name the date of
Moroni's visit. 4. What is an angel? (See Doc. and Cov. Sec. 129, also Key
to Theology, Chap. 12.) 5. Describe the Angel Moroni. 6. Why did the angel
repeat so often his instructions to Joseph? 7. How old was Joseph at this
time?


CHAPTER IV.

THE SACRED PLATES.


About two miles south of Joseph's home, in Manchester, is a large hill, the
highest in that part of the country. To this place Joseph went on the
morning after the angel's visit, as this was the spot he had seen in his
vision. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, Joseph found
a large, rounded stone, nearly covered with earth. Prying this up, he found
it to be the lid of a stone box which was buried in the earth. Raising the
lid, he looked in, and there indeed were the sacred treasures about which
the angel had told him. As he stood looking at them in wonder, the angel
Moroni came to his side, and Joseph was taught many things about the
future. He was shown in a vision the glory of the good and the darkness of
the evil.

[Illustration: THE HILL CUMORAH.]

Joseph was about to take the plates from the box, when the angel forbade
him, telling him the time had not yet arrived, but that he should come to
the hill in one year from that date when the angel would meet him. This he
must do for four years, at the end of which time, if Joseph was faithful,
the plates would be given to him to translate and publish to the world.

True to the angel's instructions, Joseph went to the hill Cumorah on the
22nd day of September of each year, at which time Moroni appeared to him
and gave him many teachings about the word of God.

During all this time Joseph had to labor hard on the farm, sometimes hiring
out to work for others. In October, 1825, he worked for a man by the name
of Josiah Stoal, who took Joseph to the State of Pennsylvania, and set him
with other men, digging for a silver mine which he thought he could find.
After working at it for some time, Joseph persuaded his employer to give it
up. It was from this incident that Joseph's enemies sometimes called him a
"money digger."

While working for Mr. Stoal, Joseph boarded for some time with the family
of Isaac Hale. Here he met Emma Hale who became his wife, they being
married in the year 1827.

The four years were now passed. On the 22nd of September, 1827, Joseph went
on his fifth visit to the sacred hill, and on that day the angel Moroni
delivered to him the plates and the Urim and Thummim. He was told to take
good care of them as evil men would try to take them from him; but if he,
Joseph, would do all he could to preserve them, the Lord would come to his
assistance when it would be needed.

The records which Joseph received consisted of a great many gold plates
nearly as thick as common tin. They were about seven by eight inches in
size, and were bound together by three rings running through holes, in the
edges of the plates. This made the plates like a book, so that they might
be turned as the leaves of a book are turned. On each side of every plate
were engraved beautiful letters, in a language which Joseph could not read.
The book was about six inches thick. A part of it was sealed, and Joseph
was told not to open it, as the time had not yet come for that part to be
made known to the world.

The Urim and Thummim consisted of two transparent stones, clear as crystal,
set in two rims of a bow. It was used in ancient times by the seers, and
through it they received revelations of things past and future. You may
read about this instrument in the Bible, in Exodus, 28: 30; and Ezra 2: 63.

As soon as it was known that Joseph had the plates, many evil-minded
persons tried to get them from him, and he had to hide them in different
places to keep them safe. Mobs began to surround his house, men tried to
catch him on the roads or in the fields, and he was even shot at a number
of times. Joseph now saw how timely the angel's warning was.

Living thus in constant fear, Joseph could not do anything towards
translating the records; so he moved, with his wife, to her old home in
Pennsylvania. While on the way an officer overtook him and searched his
wagon for the plates, but could not find them. They were there, however,
safely hidden in a barrel of beans.

Arriving in Harmony, where his father-in-law lived, Joseph began to
translate some of the writings on the plates. As Joseph was a slow writer
he did not make much progress, and so he asked the Lord to send someone to
help him. In answer to this request a man by the name of Martin Harris came
to him from Palmyra, New York. Now the work went better. Martin wrote while
Joseph translated.

They had translated one hundred and sixteen written pages, when Martin
asked Joseph to let him take the writings and show them to some of his
friends. Joseph asked the Lord about it, and the answer was that he must
not; but Martin kept on teasing Joseph till at last the Lord permitted him
to show them to certain persons. But Martin showed them to others, and the
writings were lost. The Lord was displeased at this, and told Joseph not to
translate the same over again, but to write from another part of the plates
which told about the same events. However, the Urim and Thummim was taken
from Joseph for a short time, and when he received it again, his wife Emma
wrote a little for him.

Now the Lord sent another helper to Joseph. He was a young school teacher,
named Oliver Cowdery, and these two men worked hard at the translation. You
will remember that Joseph was poor, and it seemed they would have to stop
translating and find other work whereby to earn means to live. They were
now also again annoyed by evil men and mobs.

In the midst of this trouble the Lord sent aid again. A man named Joseph
Knight came to them with provisions, and soon after Joseph was visited by a
young man named David Whitmer, who came to invite them to his father's
house in Fayette, Seneca county, New York. This invitation was gladly
accepted, and Joseph and Oliver went back with him.

At the Whitmers' they lived and labored in peace until the work was
completed. David, John, and Peter, sons of Peter Whitmer, Sen., helped all
they could, and soon the book was ready to be printed. Martin Harris also
helped Joseph in getting out the work. The first edition of five thousand
copies was printed in Palmyra, in 1830. Since then the book has been
printed in many languages and read by many thousands of people. It is
called THE BOOK OF MORMON. The next chapter will tell you why it is so
called, and a little of what it contains.

Topics.--1. Joseph's visits to Cumorah. 2. Joseph in Pennsylvania. 3.
Description of the plates and Urim and Thummim. 4. The translation.

Questions and Review.--1. Where is the hill Cumorah? 2. What did Joseph
find there? 3. Why did not Joseph carry away the plates the first time? 4.
How many visits did he make to Cumorah? 5. Where did Joseph go to work? 6.
Whom did he marry? 7. When did Joseph get the plates? 8. Describe the
plates. 9. What was the Urim and Thummim? 10. Who first helped Joseph to
translate? 11. Who was Oliver Cowdery? 12. What help did the Whitmers give
Joseph? 13. When was the Book of Mormon published?


CHAPTER V.

THE BOOK OF MORMON.


You will all be interested in knowing what was written on the plates which
the prophet Joseph Smith received from the angel Moroni, so in this chapter
I will tell you very briefly. Some time you will want to read the whole
book, which of course is the better way.

You have read in your histories and geographies that ruins of great cities
have been found in many places in America, showing that at one time there
were people here more civilized than the Indians. The writings on these
plates told the history of these peoples.

Six hundred years before Christ was born, there lived in the city of
Jerusalem a prophet by the name of Lehi. He had at that time four sons,
Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi. The Lord told Lehi that because of the
wickedness of the city, it would soon be destroyed, and if he wished to be
saved he must take his family and travel into the wilderness. This Lehi
did. They went south-eastward until they got to the sea where they built a
ship in which to cross to a promised land. While camping in the wilderness
Lehi sent his sons back to Jerusalem to get some records of their
forefathers, and it was through the faithfulness of Nephi that this was
done.

After many days of sailing, they at last landed on the west coast of South
America in what is now called Chili.

The two older boys, Laman and Lemuel were often disobedient to their
father, and many times they brought trouble to the little company. They
also treated their younger brother, Nephi, badly because he would not agree
with them but tried to do as his father told him.

When Lehi died, Nephi was chosen their leader, but soon Laman and Lemuel
became dissatisfied and again began making trouble. The Lord then told
Nephi to take all who would listen to him and leave the other brothers and
those who upheld them in their evil deeds.

In this way there became two peoples in the land. Those who went with Nephi
were called Nephites, and those who remained with Laman became Lamanites.
The Nephites built houses, planted fields, and lived as civilized people,
and the Lord often revealed his will to them through prophets and holy men.
The Lamanites became lazy, lived in tents in the forests, and killed wild
animals for their food. Their skins also became dark.

The greater part of the Book of Mormon is about these two peoples, their
wars with each other, etc. The Nephites ought to have remained a good
people, because the Lord blessed them so much: yet they often did wrong.
The Lord would prosper them until they became rich; then they would become
proud and at last wicked. Then the Lord would allow the Lamanites to come
upon them, and there would be bloody wars. So the story goes for hundreds
of years.

Both nations became very large and occupied the greater part of North and
South America.

At times the Lord would raise up prophets who would preach to the wicked.
Usually these teachers were Nephites, but sometimes they were Lamanites.
Sometimes great numbers of Lamanites were converted to the Lord, and when
they once accepted the truth, they did not fall away so easily as their
Nephite brethren. At one time two thousand young men whose parents were
converted Lamanites did valiant service for their country and their
religion. There isn't room to tell you about the story here; but you may
read about it in the Book of Mormon, beginning with the 53rd chapter of
Alma.

When Nephi separated from his brethren, he went north and settled in a
place they called the Land of Nephi; but after a time the Lamanites again
annoyed them so much that the Lord told Mosiah, who was their leader then
to take the more faithful part of the people and again go northward. This
they did, and found a city called Zarahemla which had been built by a
people who had also come from Jerusalem at the time that city was
destroyed. The Nephites joined with the people of Zarahemla, and for a long
time this city was the capital of the Nephite people.

In time the Lamanites occupied all of South America except a small part in
the north, on which the Nephites lived. The Nephites' land also extended
far up into North America.

A little over six hundred years after Lehi landed on this continent, Jesus
appeared unto some of the righteous. Before this, however, there had been a
great storm all over the land, and many of the wicked had been destroyed.
Jesus had been crucified at Jerusalem, had risen from the dead, and now he
came to the Nephites with his resurrected body. He taught them the same
gospel that he had taught in Palestine and chose twelve disciples to preach
and build up his church. For nearly two hundred years the people all
belonged to the Church of Christ, and peace was over all the land. Then
they became wicked again. The Lamanites kept driving the Nephites further
north, until they reached what is now the United States. Around a hill in
the western part of the State of New York, then called Cumorah, what was
left of the Nephites gathered for the last struggle. The Lamanites met
them, and there was a great battle in which all but a very few of the
Nephites were killed. Thus ended the Nephite nation, not quite four hundred
years after Christ, and the Lamanites or Indians have lived here ever
since.

During all this time the Lord had some good men keep a record of what
happened among the people. In those days they did not write on paper, so
these histories were recorded on plates of metal. These plates were handed
from one man to another, until about the time of the last great battle, a
prophet by the name of Mormon had all the records. He wrote a short account
from them called an abridgment. What he took from each man's record he
called after the writer's name, as the Book of Alma, Book of Helaman, etc.,
which we might call names of chapters in Mormon's book. Mormon gave all his
writings to his son Moroni, who wrote a little more on the plates. Moroni
also made a short account of another people who had lived in America before
the Nephites. They were called the Jaredites. Their history is told in the
Book of Ether.

After Moroni had seen his people destroyed he hid all the records in the
hill Cumorah.

Topics.--1. What history and geography prove regarding the Book of
Mormon. 2. The Lamanites. 3. The Nephites. 4. Mormon. 5. Moroni.

Questions and Review.--1. Who was Lehi? 2. Name his sons. (Jacob and
Joseph were born after he left Jerusalem.) 3. Tell about Laman and Lemuel.
4. What kind of boy was Nephi? 5. Why did they leave Jerusalem? 6. Why did
Lehi want the records of his forefathers? 7. Who were the Lamanites? 8.
Describe them. 9. Tell about the Nephites. 10. In what land did these
people live? 11. Why were the Nephites destroyed? 12. What is the Book of
Mormon? 13. Who wrote it? 14. Who had charge of the plates? 15. Where were
they hidden? 16. Who translated them into the English language?


CHAPTER VI.

THE THREE WITNESSES.


All who read this book ought to turn to one of the first pages of the Book
of Moromon and read a paragraph signed by three men whose names are Oliver
Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. You will notice in that
paragraph that these men bear a most solemn witness that the book is true;
that an angel of God came to them with the plates and laid them before
their eyes; and that they were translated by the gift and power of God.

The three names signed to this testimony are so important that I wish to
tell you something about these men. You have learned a little about them
already, but here is a good place to tell you something more about their
lives.

[Illustration: THE THREE WITNESSES.]

Martin Harris was a farmer who became acquainted with Joseph about the time
he received the plates. You will remember that Martin visited Joseph in
Pennsylvania and did some writing for him. Martin Harris was the man who
took some of the writings copied from the plates, with their translation,
to the city of New York, and showed them to a learned man named Professor
Anthon. The professor seemed pleased with what was shown him, and gave
Martin a certificate that the writings were true characters. He also
offered to assist in translating the plates, but when Martin told him that
an angel had given Joseph the plates, and that part of the book was sealed,
he took back the certificate and tore it up, saying "I can not read a
sealed book."

If you wish to read something in the Bible that will remind you of this
incident you may find it in Isaiah, 29th chapter, beginning at the 10th
verse.

Oliver Cowdery became acquainted with Joseph's family, while he boarded
with them one winter when he was teaching school. Hearing of Joseph in
Pennsylvania and the work he was there doing, Oliver prayed to the Lord for
light regarding the matter. Receiving a testimony that it was true, Oliver
went to visit Joseph, and there, as we have seen, he wrote for him.

David Whitmer was a friend of Oliver's, and the latter told David many
things regarding Joseph. While he was in Pennsylvania, Oliver wrote to
David telling him to come down and see them. David came, found everything
as had been told him, and took the two young men back to his father's home.

While translating the plates, Joseph came to the passage where it says that
there should be three witnesses to these things. (Book of Mormon, II Nephi
11:3; also 27:12.) On learning this Oliver, David, and Martin asked Joseph
to enquire of the Lord if they might be these witnesses. Joseph did so, and
their request was granted. They, with Joseph then went out into the woods
and prayed so earnestly that an angel came and showed them the sacred
treasure exactly as they have testified.

For some years these three men continued to take a prominent part in the
affairs of the Church as you will see in future chapters.

In April, 1838, Oliver Cowdery was cut off from the Church for a number of
things that a Latter-day Saint should not do. He became a lawyer, and went
to Michigan. For ten years he remained away from the Church; but during all
that time he never once denied his testimony that the Book of Mormon is
true. Often men tried to have him deny it, but he stood firm to that truth.

At a meeting held in Kanesville, Iowa, October 21, 1848, Oliver Cowdery
spoke and bore a strong testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon and
the work of God. Shortly after he asked to be baptized into the Church
again. He did not ask for position or honor, he wanted simply to be a
member of the Church. His wish was granted and he was baptized.

While on his way to Utah, Oliver stopped at Richmond, Missouri, to visit
his friends, the Whitmers. While here he died. David Whitmer said of the
event:

    "Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw. After shaking hands with
    the family, and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, 'Now I lay
    me down for the last time; I am going to my Savior;' and he died
    immediately with a smile on his face."

Martin Harris also left the Church. He was rejected at Kirtland, in 1837,
and remained away from the Church for over thirty years; but all this time
he testified to the truth of the Book of Mormon. In 1870, through the
labors of Elder Edward Stevenson, Martin Harris came to Utah and was again
baptized into the Church of Christ. For five years he continued to tell of
the truth of the work of God in the meetings of the Saints in Utah. He died
July 10th, 1875, at Clarkston, Cache county, Utah. On the afternoon of his
death, he sat propped up in his bed with a Book of Mormon in his hand
bearing his testimony to its truth to those around him.

David Whitmer, after being with the Saints until 1838, apostatized in
Missouri. He moved to Richmond, Ray county, and lived there to the day of
his death, January 25, 1888. He never rejoined the Church; but he always
bore a strong testimony that the Book of Mormon is true. On his death bed
he said to those around him:

    "I want to say to you all that the Bible and the record of the
    Nephites (Book of Mormon) are true, so that you can say that you
    heard me bear my testimony on my death-bed. God bless you all. My
    trust is in Christ forever, worlds without end. Amen."

The world can not deny these three men's testimony. Though they left the
Church and in their darkness they opposed the prophet of the Lord, yet
never did they deny what the angel had shown them. On the same page that
the testimony of the three witnesses is recorded, you will also find the
names of eight others who testify to having seen the plates from which the
Book of Mormon was translated.

Topics.--1. The testimony of the three witnesses. 2. Martin Harris. 3.
Oliver Cowdery. 4. David Whitmer. 5. The eight witnesses.

Questions and Review.--1. Where is the testimony of the three witnesses
found? 2. What does that testimony say? 3. What other testimony is found in
the Book of Mormon? 4. How did the three get their testimony? 5. Tell of
Martin Harris. 6. Of Oliver Cowdery. 7. Of David Whitmer. 8. Name some
things that make their testimony strong. 9. Name the eight witnesses.


CHAPTER VII.

THE PRIESTHOOD RESTORED.


When Joseph and Oliver were engaged in translating the Book of Mormon they
came to a passage which told of baptism in water for the remission of sins.
This was not quite plain to them. They knew, of course, something of the
many kinds of baptism practiced by the various sects of the day, but if the
religions on the earth at that time were not accepted of the Lord as Joseph
had been told, none of the ministers would have a right to baptize;
besides, the passage in the Book of Mormon said that baptism was for the
remission of sins. The preachers did not teach it this way, though they
could read that it was taught in the same manner by the apostles in
Christ's time. (Acts 2:38.)

This right or authority to do things in the name of the Lord is called
Priesthood. The apostles and prophets of old had it, but where were they to
look for this power now?

So Joseph and Oliver on the 15th day of May, 1829, went into the woods to
ask the Lord about it. Their prayer was answered by an angel who told them
that his name was John, called John the Baptist, who had baptized Jesus in
the river Jordan. He said he had come to restore a portion of the holy
Priesthood, even that part which would give them power to baptize for the
remission of sins, but not to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.
He promised them that if they were faithful this other power would be
given them later.

The angel then laid his hands on their heads and ordained them to the
Aaronic Priesthood. He told Joseph to baptize Oliver, after which Oliver
was to baptize Joseph. Then Joseph was to ordain Oliver and Oliver to do
the same to Joseph. All this they gladly did, and immediately they were
filled with great joy.

Thus was the power to baptize for the remission of sins again given to the
earth. Think what a great event it was! None in all the world had this
power, save two unknown young men in the woods of Pennsylvania. Great
things often have small beginnings. Now there are thousands who have this
blessed power, and no doubt the elder that baptized each of you can trace
his ordination which gave him the authority to do so back to Joseph or
Oliver and from them to John the baptist.

Sometime in June, 1829, the promise which John made to the young men was
fulfilled. The ancient apostles Peter, James, and John, who held the keys
of this higher power came to Joseph and Oliver and ordained them to the
Melchizedek Priesthood. This gave them the power to lay on hands for the
gift of the Holy Ghost, and also to go forth and administer in the
ordinances of the gospel.

Topics.--1. Priesthood. 2. Visit of John the Baptist. 3. Visit of Peter,
James, and John.

Questions and Review.--1. What led Joseph and Oliver to ask the Lord
about baptism? 2. What is baptism for? 3. How is it performed? 4. How did
Joseph and Oliver get the authority to baptize? 5. Who was John the
Baptist? 6. What is Priesthood? 7. Name the two grades of Priesthood. 8.
Who baptized you? 9. How did he get the authority to baptize? 10. Who were
Peter, James, and John? 11. What did they do? 12. Give the date of John's
visit.


CHAPTER VIII.

ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH.


By this time many people came to Joseph, some out of curiosity, some to be
taught of the wonderful truths which he had received, and some, I am sorry
to say, came to do him harm. As Joseph and Oliver now had power to baptize,
a number of those who believed were baptized by them.

The time had now come to organize the Church and the Lord revealed to
Joseph that it should be done on the 6th day of April, 1830. Accordingly on
that day six men who had been baptized met at the house of Peter Whitmer,
Sen., at Fayette, Seneca county, state of New York. Their names were Joseph
Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Samuel H. Smith,
and David Whitmer.

Joseph tells us what was done at this meeting as follows:

"Having opened the meeting by solemn prayer to our Heavenly Father, we
proceeded to call on our brethren to know whether they accepted us as their
teachers in the things of the kingdom of God and whether they were
satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a Church according to
the commandments we had received. To this they all consented. I then laid
my hands upon Oliver Cowdery and ordained him an elder of the Church of
Jesus Christ; after which he ordained me also to the office of an elder of
said Church. We then took bread, blessed it, and broke it with them; also
wine, blessed it, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each
member of the Church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was
poured out upon us to a very great degree--some prophesied, whilst we all
praised the Lord and rejoiced exceedingly."

Thus was the true Church of Christ again on the earth. During the hundreds
of years when the world had lain in darkness, not a man could have been
found who had the authority to confirm a member of the church; but now
there was a beginning, a very small beginning it is true, but the promise
is that it will grow and increase until it shall fill the whole earth.

The first public meeting after the Church was organized was held five days
later at the same place. At this meeting Oliver Cowdery preached the first
public discourse. He explained the principles of the gospel, and quite a
number believed and were baptized.

Shortly after this time Joseph went to a town called Colesville, in Broome
county, N.Y., not far from Pennsylvania to visit his friend Joseph Knight
who had aided him when he was at work on the Book of Mormon. Joseph held a
number of meetings in this place and made some friends. Among those who
attended these meetings was Newel Knight, son of Joseph Knight. This young
man had many talks with Joseph about the gospel, but still he kept putting
off doing his duty in being baptized. Because of this the evil one got
power over him and treated him so badly that the prophet was sent for. When
Joseph arrived he found his friend Newel acting strangely. His face and
body twisted in an awful manner and at last he was actually caught up from
the floor and tossed about. Many of the neighbors now came in, but they
could do nothing to help the suffering man.

[Illustration: Map of Fayette and Kirtland]

When Joseph managed to get hold of Newel's hand, he became still and spoke
to Joseph, asking him to cast the devil from him.

"If you know that I can, it shall be done," replied Joseph, whereupon he
commanded the evil one in the name of Jesus Christ to depart. Newel became
all right again at once, and was greatly blessed by the Spirit of God. The
people present wondered greatly at what they had seen, and many of them
afterwards joined the Church.

This was the first miracle performed in the Church. Jesus had said to his
apostles in his day: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved. * *
* And these signs shall follow them that believe: in my name shall they
cast out devils," etc. Thus we see the same signs following the believer in
our day the same as in the days of the first apostles.

On the first of June, 1830, the first conference, of the Church was held in
Fayette. There were about thirty members present besides many others who
came to hear. The Spirit of God was greatly enjoyed at this meeting. Many
prophesied, while others had beautiful visions of the heavens opened to
their eyes.

Topics.--1. Organization of the Church. 2. First meeting, sermon and
conference. 3. First miracle.

Questions and Review.--1. When and where was the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints organized? 2. Name the first six members. 3. What was
done at that meeting? 4. How many members are there in the Church today? 5.
How did you become a member of the Church? 6. Describe the first miracle.
7. How was the evil one cast out in former days? (See Acts 16: 16, 18.) 8.
What proof was given that Joseph and his brethren were true believers. (See
Mark 16: 16, 17.) 9. When was the first conference of the Church held?


CHAPTER IX.

PERSECUTION OF JOSEPH.


By this time you will see that when the Lord set his hand to begin the
great latter-day work, the evil one was also present, trying to hinder its
progress. At the very beginning there were only Joseph and a few friends to
work against, but now the Church was fast becoming established in the land,
and if it were to be stopped some strong effort would have to be made. So
the evil one inspired men to gather in large crowds or mobs to annoy and do
harm to the members of the Church and their friends.

Shortly after the conference mentioned in the last chapter, Joseph and a
number of other elders went to Colesville to hold meetings and baptize some
believers. The brethren built a dam in a creek on Saturday where they were
to baptize on Sunday, but during the night a mob tore the dam away.
However, meeting was held on Sunday, and early on Monday morning the dam
was repaired and the baptisms were attended to; but before they were
through, the mob gathered and followed the Saints to their homes, making
all kinds of threats. That evening as they were going to hold a meeting, a
constable arrested Joseph Smith on the charge of making disorder, setting
the country in an uproar by preaching the Book of Mormon, etc.

The constable was a good man, and told Joseph that the mob was going to try
to take him and perhaps kill him; but he would protect Joseph. In driving
to another town where the court was to be held, the mob lay in waiting by
the road, but the constable whipped up his horse and they got away.

The next day when Joseph was called to be tried, there was a large crowd
and much excitement as many wished to see and hear the young prophet. The
trial commenced and many persons who knew Joseph were called to tell
something about him. Among the number was Mr. Stoal, for whom Joseph had
worked.

"Did not the prisoner, Joseph Smith, have a horse of you?" was asked of Mr.
Stoal.

"Yes, sir," was the answer.

"Did not he go to you and tell you that an angel had appeared unto him and
told him to get the horse from you?"

"No; he told me no such story."

"Well, how had he the horse of you?"

"He bought him of me as another man would do?"

"Have you had your pay?"

"That is not your business."

The same question was asked again.

"I hold his note for the price of the horse," replied Mr. Stoal, "which I
consider as good as the pay, for I am well acquainted with Joseph Smith,
Jr., and know him to be an honest man, and if he wishes, I am ready to let
him have another horse on the same terms."

Many other witnesses were called, but the above is a fair sample of the
questions and the answers received. Nothing wrong was proved against Joseph
and he was discharged.

But no sooner was Joseph released than another constable appeared and
arrested him again. This officer mistreated Joseph shamefully. He would
give him nothing to eat, and he allowed a crowd of men to spit upon him and
otherwise abuse him.

The next day Joseph was tried again, this time at Colesville. His friends
again gathered around to protect him while his enemies tried harder than
ever to have him convicted of some crime. Many witnesses were called who
told untrue stories of Joseph, but when they were questioned they
contradicted each other so that everybody, including the court, could see
they were not telling the truth.

Newel Knight was called as a witness.

"Did the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jr., cast the devil out of you?" asked the
lawyer who was against Joseph.

"No, sir," was the reply.

"Why, have you not had the devil cast out of you?"

"Yes, sir."

"And had not Joe Smith some hand in its being done"

"Yes, sir."

"And did he not cast him out of you?"

"No, sir; it was done by the power of God, and Joseph Smith was the
instrument in the hands of God to do it. He commanded him out of me in the
name of Jesus Christ."

The lawyer could make nothing out of him or the others who were called to
tell of some supposed wrong Joseph had done. Nothing could be found against
him that would send him to prison, and I suppose the judge thought that
even casting the devil out of a man was not such a great crime. So Joseph
was once more released and a free man.

But of course the mob was not satisfied, so they laid a plan to capture
Joseph and tar and feather him; but now the constable who had treated him
so badly, saw by the trial that he was innocent, and came to Joseph and
asked his forgiveness. He told the prophet of the mob's intentions and
helped Joseph to get safely away home.

So the Lord was with his servants and helped them out of the hands of those
who would harm them. The Lord was also kind to the Saints and gave the
Church many revelations which you may find in the book called "Doctrine and
Covenants," which contains the revelations given to the Church through
Joseph the Prophet.

Topics.--1. Persecution of the Saints. 2. The arrests and trials of
Joseph. 3. The Doctrine and Covenants.

Questions and Review.--1. What did Jesus say about persecution? (See St.
Matthew 5:10, 12.) 2. Where is Colesville? 3. What was Joseph's errand in
Colesville? 4. What did the mob do? 5. For what was Joseph arrested? 6.
Tell about his first trial. 7. Who testified at the second trial? 8. After
his discharge what did the mob intend to do to Joseph? 9. Who helped him to
escape? 10. What is the Doctrine and Covenants?


CHAPTER X.

THE MISSION TO THE INDIANS.


In the month of September, 1830, a young man came to the house of Joseph
Smith, at Fayette, and asked to see the prophet. As Joseph was absent, he
was referred to his brother Hyrum who explained to him what he wanted to
know about the Book of Mormon, the revelations of the Lord to his brother,
and the establishing of the Church. The young man was a preacher of the
sect called Campbellites, and his name was Parley P. Pratt. On his journey
from his home in Ohio to New York he had obtained a copy of the Book of
Mormon, had read it, and had been deeply impressed with its beautiful
truths. Wishing to know more about this new revelation of God, he had
sought out Joseph.

Parley P. Pratt joined the Church and soon became one of its leading men,
working with Joseph and his brethren with great energy. He became one of
the Twelve Apostles, traveled in many parts of the earth preaching the
gospel, wrote many fine books, and at last was killed by a wicked man in
the state of Arkansas.

Some day you will want to read a full account of this great man's history
as he wrote it himself, but here I will give you but a few of these
interesting events, because they have much to do with the Church at this
point of our history.

You will remember that the Book of Mormon tells about the early history of
the Indians. In this book it is predicted that some day the gospel should
be preached to them, and the record of their forefathers should also be
brought to their knowledge. At the second conference of the Church held in
Fayette, September 1st, Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson and
Peter Whitmer, Jr., were called to go on a mission to the Indians. They
were to go into the wilderness through the western states and into the
Indian Territory, preaching by the way whenever a chance afforded.

It was late in October when these four elders started on this the first
important mission of the Church. They preached to some Indians near the
city of Buffalo, presented them with the Book of Mormon, and proceeded on
their journey into the state of Ohio. In the northeastern part of this
state is the town of Kirtland where Elder Pratt had some friends. They
stopped here for some time and preached the gospel to the people. Great
interest was aroused, many believed and were baptized. Among these was
Elder Pratt's former teacher, Sidney Rigdon, who also became one of the
Church's leading men. Others who joined the Church at this time were Edward
Partridge who became the first bishop in the Church, Newel K. Whitney who
became the second, Lyman Wight who became an apostle, and many others. In a
few weeks the missionaries had raised up a large branch of the Church at
Kirtland.

Having done this good work, the elders went on their way westward. One
evening they were stopping at the house of one Simeon Carter not far from
Brother Pratt's old home. They were just about to read to him from the Book
of Mormon when an officer entered and arrested Elder Pratt. The elders left
their book with Mr. Carter and went with the officer to a sort of court,
where Brother Pratt was ordered to pay a large sum of money or go to
prison. The prisoner paid no attention to these demands, which made his
persecutors very angry. It was now about midnight, but the elders took it
quietly and sang a hymn or two. Then Elder Pratt said that if the witnesses
who had told false things about them and the judge who had abused and
insulted them, would repent of their evil words and acts and would all
kneel down together he would pray that God might forgive them.

"My big bull-dog pray for me!" said the judge.

"The devil help us!" cried another.

Next morning as Elder Pratt and the man placed to guard him were walking in
the road, the elder asked the officer if he was good at a race.

"No!" was the reply, "but my big dog is. I have trained him and he will
take any man down at my bidding."

"Well," continued Bro. Pratt, "you have given me a chance to preach and
have given me lodging and breakfast. I thank you for your kindness, but I
must be going. Good-day, sir."

With that Elder Pratt left the man and his dog, and had got quite a
distance before the officer had recovered from his surprise. Then he came
running after him, clapping his hands and shouting to his dog.

"Stu--boy, stu--boy, take him Watch, lay hold of him! Down with him!" At
the same time pointing in the direction of the fleeing elder. Just as the
fierce animal was about to overtake him, Elder Pratt began clapping his
hands and shouting like the officer, pointing into the woods just ahead.
The dog bounded past him and was soon lost to sight in the forest, while
the missionary got safely away.

Mr. Carter read the Book of Mormon the elders had left. He believed, went
fifty miles to Kirtland, was baptized, returned home, began to preach, and
soon there was a branch of sixty members in that place.

In western Ohio the missionaries found another tribe of Indians with whom
they stayed a few days. They then went to Cincinnati and from that city to
the mouth of the Ohio river by boat. It was now very cold, and the river
was so blocked with ice that the boat could go no farther. The missionaries
therefore walked the rest of the distance to St. Louis and from there
across the state of Missouri to its western boundary.

The snow was deep, there were no beaten roads, the houses were few and far
between, and the wind blew fierce and cold. For days they had nothing to
eat but corn bread and frozen pork; but at last they reached the town of
Independence, in Jackson county, Missouri, which was then near to the
Indian country.

The elders now took up their labors among the Indians. They were kindly
received, and the chief called a council which Oliver Cowdery addressed.
The Book of Mormon was presented to them and explained, and they became
very much interested. The sectarian preachers heard about this and
complained to the Indian agent, who ordered the elders off the Indian
lands. So after but a few days of preaching the elders had to leave. They
went back to Jackson county and preached to the white settlers, some of
whom believed the word of God and were added to the Church. Four of the
elders remained at Independence, while Bro. Pratt was sent back to Kirtland
to report their labors.

Topics.--1. Parley P. Pratt. 2. The first mission to the Indians. 3. At
Kirtland. 4. Journey to Independence and preaching to Indians.

Questions and Review.--1. Who was Parley P. Pratt? 2. Name some of the
books he wrote. 3. Give a brief sketch of his life. 4. Name those who went
on the first mission for the Church. 5. What was the special object of this
mission? 6. About how far is it from Fayette to Independence, Mo.? 7. Where
is Kirtland? 8. What leading men were converted there? 9. How did Bro.
Pratt escape from the officer? 10. How did people travel in those days? 11.
Why were the missionaries forbidden to preach among the Indians?


CHAPTER XI.

REMOVAL TO OHIO.


The scriptures often speak of a time in the latter days when the people of
God shall be gathered together to build up the Lord's kingdom and prepare
for his second coming. The gospel should be preached to all the world, and
those who would believe should go out from Babylon, or the wicked world,
and came together with the people of the Lord. Every elder who has been on
a mission will tell you that as soon as persons accept the gospel, a desire
comes to them to gather with the main body of the Saints. Thus the Lord
puts the spirit of gathering into the hearts of the believers, and his
purposes are fulfilled.

The Lord told the prophet Joseph that the time for this gathering had come,
and that the central gathering place for the Saints on this land was
somewhere in the West, though at first the exact location was not told him.

In December, 1830, the word of the Lord came to Joseph that the Saints
should gather to Ohio. This was westward and in the proper direction. The
western missionaries had raised up large branches in Ohio, so it was not
like going into a new place. The Church was growing steadily, and many
revelations were given to the Saints. We might say the Lord was assigning
lessons for us, which we have not yet learned very well.

Preparations were made for this removal by holding the third conference of
the Church at Fayette and setting its affairs in order.

One day, about the 1st of February, 1831, a sleigh containing two men and
two women, drove through the streets of Kirtland, Ohio, and stopped at the
door of Gilbert and Whitney's store. One of the men alighted, and springing
up the steps, walked into the store where one of the owners was standing.

"Newel K. Whitney, thou art the man!" exclaimed the visitor, extending his
hand as to an old friend.

"You have the advantage of me," replied the storekeeper, "I could not call
you by name as you have me."

"I am Joseph, the prophet," said the stranger, smiling. "You've prayed me
here; now what do you want of me?"

Mr. Whitney, you will remember, had joined the Church sometime before, and
of course he was delighted to see the prophet. Joseph and his wife, Emma,
stayed at Brother Whitney's house for some time. Shortly after this, Newel
K. Whitney was called to be bishop at Kirtland, and later he became the
second presiding bishop of the Church.

Early next spring, 1831, the Saints from New York began to come to Ohio,
buying land in and around the town of Kirtland.

Before leaving Fayette, Joseph had been visited by a young man who had
walked two hundred miles to see him and have the prophet tell him what his
duty was. This young man was Orson Pratt, brother of Parley P. Pratt.
Joseph received a revelation in which Orson was called to preach the gospel
to the world; and this duty Orson Pratt did all his life.

[Illustration: SIDNEY RIGDON.]

Elder Pratt became one of the Twelve Apostles. He went on a great many
missions in this country and to Europe, during which time he crossed the
ocean sixteen times. He became one of the most learned men in the Church,
and wrote many books on gospel subjects. Read the title, or first page of
the Book of Mormon and the book of Doctrine and Covenants and see what they
say of Orson Pratt. Elder Pratt was one of the pioneers, he and Erastus
Snow being the first two men of that company to enter Salt Lake Valley.

Another man who came to see Joseph while yet at Fayette was Sidney Rigdon,
a former Campbellite preacher whom Parley P. Pratt had baptized at
Kirtland. Elder Rigdon also became a prominent man in the Church, being
first counselor to President Joseph Smith during the life time of the
prophet. He took an active part in all the affairs of the Church up to
within a few months of the prophet's death. He was greatly disappointed
because he was not chosen to succeed Joseph as the leader of the Church,
and soon after apostatized. He died outside the Church.

Thomas B. Marsh was the name of a man who came to Kirtland with the Church.
He became a leader among the Saints and was president of the first quorum
of Twelve Apostles. Elder Marsh did much missionary work and suffered with
the Saints in their persecution; but in 1838 he became dissatisfied and did
some wicked things against his brethren. He was therefore cut off from the
Church. Nineteen years after he came back and was baptized again. He came
to Utah and lived at Ogden, where he died, a poor, broken-down man.

Topics.--1. The gathering. 2. The move to Ohio. 3. Orson Pratt. 4. Sidney
Rigdon. 5. Thomas B. Marsh.

Questions and Review.--1. What is meant by the gathering? 2. Quote some
scriptural passage on the gathering. 3. Where was the first gathering
place? 4. Locate Kirtland. 5. Tell about Joseph's first visit to Kirtland.
6. Who was Newel K. Whitney? 7. When did most of the Saints move to
Kirtland? 8. Tell what you can about Orson Pratt? 9. Name some of his
books. 10. What high position did Sidney Rigdon hold? 11. Why did he leave
the Church? 12. Tell about Thomas B. Marsh.


CHAPTER XII.

THE LAND OF ZION.


The Book of Mormon (13th chapter of Ether) tells us that this land of
America is a "choice land above all other lands;" and the Lord has said
that the people who lived here must serve him or in time be destroyed. This
you will remember was proved so often in the history of the Nephites.

Strictly speaking, the whole of America is the land of Zion, but the Lord
revealed to Joseph that there should be a "center place," where a great
city should be build which should be called the city of Zion, or the New
Jerusalem. This city will be the capital or in the center of a large
district of country full of people who serve the Lord. A grand temple will
be built in the central city, and the glory of the Lord will rest upon it
by day and by night. Then shall there be peace in the earth for a thousand
years, and the Saints will be busy working to save all the people who live
or have ever lived on the earth. Jesus with his angels will no doubt visit
the earth from time to time to look after his work at this glorious period.

Now all this was to have a beginning, one of these small beginnings we have
spoken about.

June 7th, 1831, the Prophet Joseph received a revelation instructing him
and twenty-eight other elders to go on missions. They were to travel two
and two by different routes through the Western states, preaching the
gospel and building up the Church on the way. They were to meet in the
state of Missouri about a thousand miles from Kirtland and there hold a
conference. At this time, if they were faithful, the Lord would reveal to
them the location of the central place and the spot where the temple should
sometime stand.

The brethren went on their missions as they had been instructed, and Joseph
and his party arrived at Independence, Missouri, about the middle of July,
1831. Oliver Cowdery and the other brethren who had been sent on the
mission to the Indians, you will recollect, stopped at Independence. They
were very glad to meet Joseph and his companions again.

Shortly after the prophet's arrival, the Lord made known the exact spot for
the city of Zion. It is where the town of Independence is located, in
Jackson County, Missouri, and the site for the temple was pointed out as
lying westward on a lot not far from the court house.

Some of the Saints now moved to Jackson county, the first to arrive being
what was called the Colesville Branch of the Church. These Saints had come
from Colesville, State of New York, having stopped but a short time near
Kirtland.

The first step towards the founding of Zion was taken on the 2nd day of
August, 1831. On that day twelve men, of which Joseph was one, carried and
placed the first log for the first house. This was in Kaw township, twelve
miles west of Independence, where the Colesville branch was locating.
Sidney Rigdon then dedicated the land. The next day eight of the brethren
went to the temple lot, and Joseph dedicated that sacred spot.

Shortly after, Joseph with some of the other brethren went to Kirtland.

The Saints were now instructed to buy land in the region around that they
might possess it for an inheritance. At that time Missouri was not thickly
settled. There was much government land which could be bought for one
dollar and twenty-five cents per acre. Sidney Gilbert was appointed an
agent to receive money and purchase land, and Bishop Edward Partridge was
chosen to divide the land among the Saints. The rich were told to divide
with the poor that all might have land.

The Saints were especially warned that they must keep all the commandments
which the Lord gave to them or they would not be allowed to remain and
build up Zion at that time, but they first would have to go through much
tribulation, and be "scourged from city to city." You will see presently
how this prediction was fulfilled.

The first winter the Saints were not very comfortably housed, as they had
arrived too late to raise crops or build good houses. The next spring,
however, many Saints arrived, and they soon had growing fields and gardens.
The Prophet visited them again early in the spring, held meetings, and
greatly encouraged the Saints. In June, 1832, the first paper published by
the Latter-day Saints was begun at Independence. It was called _The Evening
and Morning Star_, and was the only paper in that part of the country.

Thus the Saints prospered; but a time of persecution, long and fierce, was
before them.

Topics.--1. The center place of Zion. 2. Gathering to Missouri.

Questions and Review.--1. Where is the land of Zion? 2. What is said in
the Book of Mormon about this land? 3. Where is Jackson county? 4. What
place is now nearly the center of the United States? 5. What river flows by
Jackson county? 6. Where will the New Jerusalem be built? 7. What kind of
city will it be? 8. When, where, and how was the foundation of Zion laid?
9. Where is the temple lot? 10. Who dedicated it? 11. What was the
Colesville Branch? 12. How were the Saints to obtain the land of Zion? 13.
What were the duties of Sidney Gilbert and Edward Partridge? 14. When did
Joseph visit Jackson county the second time?


CHAPTER XIII.

PERSECUTION IN JACKSON COUNTY.


A great many of the old settlers of Jackson county, meaning those who were
there before the Saints, were of a shiftless, ignorant class from the
Southern States. They made but little improvement in their homes, being
content to live in small, log huts, many of them without windows or board
floors. They all believed it right to have negro slaves. They were also
eager to hold public office.

At that time there were also many persons in western Missouri who had fled
from the east on account of crimes which they had committed. Being near the
boundary line of the United States, these persons would need only to cross
the line into Mexico to be safe if an officer should come after them.

You will readily see by this what kind of neighbors the new settlers had.
Of course the Saints could not join with these wicked people in their horse
racing, Sabbath breaking, idleness, drunkenness, and other things which the
Missourians took delight in. Most of the Saints were from the Eastern and
Northern States and did not believe in slavery. They worked hard, and as
the land produced good crops, they were soon prospering, while their idle
neighbors remained in poverty.

All this naturally led the Missourians to hate the "Mormons," and as early
as the spring of 1832 they began to molest them by throwing stones into
their houses, etc. That same fall mobs began to come against the Saints,
burning some of their hay and shooting into their houses.

In April, 1833, the mobbers held a meeting at Independence to discuss plans
whereby they could rid the county of the "Mormons." However, the meeting
broke up in a row. July 20th, they held another meeting which was more
successful. An address was read to the people wherein the Saints were
falsely accused of all manner of wrong doings. It also set forth that no
more "Mormons" must settle in Jackson county; that the "Mormons" already
there should be given a reasonable time to sell their property and then
remove; that the printing of their paper must cease; that the stores of the
Saints must close up their business as soon as possible; and that the
leading brethren should use their influence to have the Saints comply with
these requests. The meeting agreed to all this and a committee was
appointed to wait on the leaders of the Saints to see what they would do
about it. When the committee called, the brethren asked for time to
consider the matter, but fifteen minutes only were given them. Nothing
could be done in that short time, so the committee went back to the meeting
and reported.

The mob then broke loose, yelling like a band of wild Indians. They went to
the house and printing office of W.W. Phelps, forced Mrs. Phelps and the
children, one of whom was sick, out of the house and threw the furniture
out in the street. They then destroyed the printing press and tore the
office down. Then they went through the town hunting for the leading
brethren. They caught Bishop Edward Partridge and Charles Allen, dragged
them to the public square, stripped most of their clothes off, and then
smeared tar all over their bodies. This ended that day's work, and the
frightened women and children who had fled to the woods came back to their
homes.

The third day after this a mob of five hundred men came into Independence.
They were armed with guns, knives, and whips, and they swore they would
kill or whip all who would not agree to leave. The leading brethren, seeing
that it was no longer of any use to plead or resist, made an agreement with
the mob that they with their families would leave the county by the first
of January, and that they would use their influence in trying to induce the
rest of the Saints to leave, one-half by January 1st, the rest by April
1st, 1834. They were also to use all the means they could to prevent more
of the Saints from settling in the county. The mob for their part agreed
not to persecute the Saints while this was being done.

The mob, however, did not keep this promise, but daily broke into houses
and abused the inmates.

The Saints now appealed to the highest officer of the state, Governor
Dunklin, for protection. He told them that the laws were able to protect
everybody in their rights, and advised the Saints to have those arrested
who threatened them, and have them tried in court for their misdeeds.

This, seemingly, was very good advice, and would have worked all right
under other circumstances; but when it is remembered that the very
officers--the constable who would have to do the arresting, the judge who
would try the cases, and in fact all concerned--were men who were
themselves leaders of the mob, you will see how useless such a course would
be. However, the Saints engaged four lawyers to protect them in the courts.

This made the mobbers more angry than ever, and they made preparation for
further action against the Saints.

"We will rid Jackson county of the "Mormons"," they said, "peaceably if we
can, forcibly if we must. If they will not go without, we will whip and
kill the men; we will destroy the children, and abuse their women."

The Saints now resolved to defend themselves, and the men gathered in small
bodies, armed with guns.

On the night of October 31, 1833, a mob marched to the Whitmer settlement
of the Saints where they whipped several of the brethren to death, drove
the women and children into the woods, and tore the roofs from about a
dozen houses.

The next night an attack was made upon the Saints living at Independence. A
party of brethren went to the aid of the Saints, and found a mob tearing
down the store of Gilbert, Whitney & Co. The mobbers fled, but the brethren
captured one of them in the act of throwing brick-bats through the window.
They brought him to a justice of the peace to have papers made out for the
mobber's arrest. The justice would not do it, so the man was released.
Three days after, this same mobber had the brethren arrested. It was no
trouble for him to get papers from the same justice. As one of the brethren
remarked at the time, "Although we could not obtain a warrant against him
for breaking open the store, he had gotten one for us for catching him at
it!"

Topics.--1. The character of the early Missourians. 2. Mobbers' meetings
in Independence. 3. Work of the mob.

Questions and Review.--1. From what sections did most of the early
settlers of Missouri come? 2. From what section did the Saints come? 3.
What difference of opinion existed between the people of the north and the
people of the south? 4. Why did the Missourians hate the "Mormons?" 5. Why
did many outlaws come to Missouri? 6. What did the mobbers want the Saints
to promise? 7. What advice did Governor Dunklin give? 8. Why did the law
not protect the Saints? 9. How was Bishop Partridge abused? 10. Tell about
the arrest of the four brethren.


CHAPTER XIV.

EXPULSION FROM JACKSON COUNTY.


In this small history, an account of all that happened in Missouri during
those cruel times can not be given; but enough can be told to show you what
the Saints had to endure in the early days of the Church. If you will but
think of the sufferings the boys and girls must have gone through when the
mobs tore the roofs from their houses, drove them out on the prairies to go
hungry and cold, and killed or whipped their fathers, you may then
appreciate God's blessings to you who live in peace and comfort.

The persecutions, which began in earnest October 31st, 1833, continued day
after day. On November 2nd a mob attacked a settlement on Big Blue River.
They unroofed one house and were beating a brother by the name of Bennett,
who was sick in bed, when a party of brethren came to the rescue. There was
some firing of guns between them, and a mobber was wounded in the leg.

On November 4th as a band of mobbers started out to make a raid on the
Saints, word was sent to the brethren, and thirty of them soon gathered to
withstand the mob. A battle ensued in which two of the mobbers were killed.
One of the brethren was so badly wounded that he died the next day. Brother
Philo Dibble was shot and severely wounded, but he was administered to and
soon got well.

The whole country was now aroused. Word was sent broadcast that the
"Mormons" had got the Indians to help them, and that they had taken the
town of Independence.

Next morning people flocked into the town and there was great excitement.

And now we must name one of the most cruel and wicked men of that time,
Lilburn W. Boggs. He was lieutenant-governor, which is next to the
governor, the highest officer in the state. Boggs permitted the mob to
organize themselves into a militia and thereby become regular soldiers of
the state. The mob leaders seeing that the Saints had decided to protect
themselves and fight if necessary, raised this militia so that if the
Saints opposed them that they could be classed as law breakers.

The branches of the Church west of Independence having heard that the mob
was going to kill some of the brethren in that town, raised about one
hundred men to go to their rescue. While on the way they heard that there
was no immediate danger, and that the militia had been called out. At this
they were going back to their homes; but just then the militia came up, led
by Colonel Pitcher. He demanded that the "Mormons" give up their arms, but
they would not unless the mob, or militia as it was called, would do the
same. This Colonel Pitcher agreed to have done, and then the brethren gave
up their arms, consisting of fifty-nine guns and one pistol.

No sooner was this done than the most awful scene took place. The mob did
not give up a gun, but bands of them roamed over the country searching for
the Saints. Houses were torn down and burned, men were tied up and whipped,
women and children were driven out into the fields and forests. Many of the
county's leading men took part in these crimes, and even ministers,
preachers of the gospel as they called themselves, were seen leading mobs
from place to place.

The cold winter was now coming on, it being the month of November. At one
place a company of one hundred and ninety--all being women and children
excepting three old men--was driven thirty miles across a burnt prairie,
the ground being coated with sleet. Their trail could be easily followed by
the blood which flowed from their feet.

You will see by the map that Clay county lies north of Jackson, just across
the Missouri river. As the Saints were driven from their homes, most of
them made their way to Clay county whose people received them kindly. Soon
the shores of the river were lined with men, women and children, goods,
boxes, wagons, etc; The ferrymen were kept busy taking them over the river.
At night the place had a strange appearance. Hundreds of people could be
seen in every direction; some in tents and some in the open air around the
fires. The rain descended in torrents. Husbands were asking for their wives
and wives for their husbands, parents for children and children for
parents. Some had managed to escape with a little provisions; many had lost
all their goods.

There were at this time about twelve hundred Saints in Jackson county, so
it took many days for them all to get away. Some of the poorest of the
Saints who could not get away at first were driven out during the cold
storms of that winter.

Early next spring when nearly all the Saints had left, the mob set fire to
the deserted homes. One of the brethren reported that two hundred and three
dwellings and one grist mill were destroyed.

Topics.--1. Contrast between present conditions and past. 2. Mobbing
continued. 3. Saints driven from Jackson county.

[Illustration: Map of Missouri and Illinois]

Questions and Review.--1. What experiences did the Latter-day Saint boys
and girls of Jackson county pass through? (Read the story, "Grandmother's
Rocking Chair," in the Contributor, Vol. 11, page 242.) 2. What happened in
November, 1833? 3. What is the state militia? 4. Why was the Jackson county
militia raised? 5. What happened after the brethren had given up their
arms? 6. Tell about the scene on the banks of the Missouri river. 7. Where
is Clay county? 8. What happened in the spring of 1834?


CHAPTER XV.

ZION'S CAMP.


In the spring of 1834 Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight were sent as
messengers from the Saints in Clay county to Kirtland to tell the Prophet
what had happened and to ask for further advice. Joseph, you may be sure,
was very grieved to hear about the sufferings of the Saints, and he
enquired of the Lord what should be done. In answer, a revelation was given
instructing Joseph to gather the young and middle aged men of the Church
and organize them into a company which was to march to Missouri to bring
aid to the Saints and to assist them to again get possession of their
homes. Five hundred men were to be obtained, but one hundred would do if no
more could be raised.

Accordingly, Joseph and seven other brethren went two and two through the
various branches in the east asking for means and volunteers for this
mission.

New Portage, a village about sixty miles south-west from Kirtland was
selected as a gathering place, and from this point on the 8th of May, 1834,
one hundred and fifty men started for Missouri. They were organized in
regular army order, having officers to see that everything on the march
was done properly. Joseph was the leader.

The distance from Kirtland to Missouri is one thousand miles. That long
journey was not an easy one. The wagons were heavily loaded, and as the
roads were poor there was very little riding. Often the men would have to
help drag the loads over the bad places. Every Sunday the camp rested and
held meetings. Sometimes the people, suspecting they were "Mormons" would
annoy them, so that guards had to be placed around the camp. People were
also curious to know what this strange company of men was and where it was
going. Spies followed the company for many miles. There were some boys in
camp, and the inquisitive people thought it an easy matter to find out
everything from the boys.

"My boy, where are you from?" they would ask.

"From the east," was the answer.

"Where are you going?"

"To the west."

"What for?"

"To see where we can get land cheapest and best."

"Who leads the camp?"

"Sometimes one, sometimes another."

"What name?"

"Captain Wallace, Major Bruce," etc.

The Prophet Joseph believed in being kind to all animals, and he instructed
his brethren in Zion's camp to kill none except for food. Man must first
become peaceful, before animals will lose their fierceness. Not long after
this instruction had been given, a brother became very tired by traveling
and lay down on the ground to sleep. When he awoke, what should he see but
a rattlesnake coiled up not more than a foot away from his head. Just then
some of the brethren came up and wanted to kill the snake; but the brother
said, "No, I'll protect him, for he and I have had a good nap together." He
remembered what Joseph had said.

On June 7th the company having crossed the Mississippi river, camped on
Salt river in Missouri. More of the brethren had joined the company on the
way, and now it numbered two hundred and five men. From this point Parley
P. Pratt and Orson Hyde were sent to Governor Dunklin at Jefferson city,
asking him to use his power as the highest officer in the state to have the
Saints brought back to their homes in Jackson county. The governor said he
thought it right that the Saints should get back their lands, yet he was
afraid if they tried to go back or if he called out soldiers to help them
get their homes, there would be a terrible war and many people killed. So
the governor would do nothing to help them.

While Zion's camp was making its way to the Saints in Clay county, a
meeting was held in Liberty where some mobbers from Jackson county tried to
arouse the people against the Saints. Nothing being done at this meeting, a
party of fifteen men started for Independence to raise an army large enough
to destroy Joseph and the camp.

One of the leaders of this band was James Campbell. As he pushed his
pistols into the holsters before starting, he said with an oath: "The
eagles and turkey buzzards shall eat my flesh if I do not fix Joe Smith and
his army so that their skins will not hold shucks before two days are
passed!" As he and his companions were crossing the Missouri river their
boat sank. Seven of them were drowned and among them was Campbell. What was
left of his body was found three weeks after lodged on a pile of drift
wood. The "eagles and turkey buzzards" had eaten the flesh from his bones.

On the 19th the camp passed through Richmond. They expected to reach Clay
county that night, but were so greatly hindered by accidents that they
camped for the night between two forks of Fishing river. A large mob had
gathered, bent on destroying the camp. A boat containing forty mobbers had
been sent over the river, when a storm arose. The rain fell in torrents,
the lightning flashed, the thunder shook the earth. Great hail stones
destroyed the corn in the fields and stripped the trees of leaves. The mob
scattered in confusion. The river rose nearly forty feet, which made it
impossible for anyone to cross. The brethren took shelter in a schoolhouse
and escaped the storm. Thus again the Lord preserved his people from their
enemies.

The next day the camp moved five miles out on the prairie. While here, some
of the leading men of Ray county called on the brethren to learn what their
intentions were. Joseph told them how the Saints had been persecuted in
Jackson county; and that they had come one thousand miles with clothing and
provisions for their brethren; that they had no intentions of harming any
one, but their mission was to do good, and if possible help their brethren
to get their lands back again. At the close of their talk, the visitors
promised to do what they could to prevent the mobs from disturbing them,
which promise they kept.

The next day, June 22nd, Sheriff Gillium of Clay county came into camp. He
also wanted to know what the camp was going to do. Joseph explained to him.
In order to get back their lands and live in peace, the Saints proposed to
buy the lands from those who could not live with them in Jackson county,
but nothing came of this and other offers that were made to settle the
trouble.

This same day an important revelation was given through the prophet. The
brethren were told that the Lord did not want them to fight, and that they
must wait for a time before Zion should be redeemed.

During the march of the camp, some of the brethren had found fault and had
not listened to the counsels of the prophet. Joseph had told them that if
they did not repent, sickness would come into the camp and many would die.
This was now fulfilled. On June 22nd, that dread disease called the cholera
appeared in the camp. When you are told that during the next four or five
days sixty-eight of the brethren took the disease and thirteen died, you
may perhaps imagine what a terrible time they had.

On June 23rd they marched into Clay county and camped on Rush creek, where
two days later the camp was disbanded. For two weeks Joseph labored among
the Saints and then he returned to Kirtland. Most of the others also went
back to their homes in the east about the same time.

Topics.--1. Organizing Zion's camp. 2. March of Zion's camp. 3. The camp
on Fishing river. 4. The scourge.

Questions and Review.--1. What was Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight's
mission to Kirtland? 2. What instruction did the Lord give them? (See Doc.
and Cov., sec. 103.) 3. How was Zion's camp organized? 4. What was its
object? 5. Through what states did it march? 6. What were Joseph's
teachings about kindness to animals? 7. What was the fate of James
Campbell? 8. How were the brethren saved from their enemies on Fishing
river? 9. What did the brethren propose to the citizens of Jackson? 10. Why
did the scourge come upon the camp? 11. What revelation was given on
Fishing river? 12. Where and when was Zion's camp disbanded?


CHAPTER XVI.

THE CHURCH AT KIRTLAND.


During the time that the Saints were having such a hard time in Missouri,
the Church in and around Kirtland was growing in numbers and strength.
Joseph with many of the elders went on missionary trips to various parts of
the United States and Canada, and many new branches of the Church were
organized.

In September, 1831, Joseph moved to the town of Hiram, about thirty miles
from Kirtland. While living here, he was busy translating the scriptures,
preaching the gospel, and holding meetings. Thirteen of the revelations
found in the Doctrine and Covenants were given at Hiram. One of these
revelations, called the Vision, tells of the three glories which are in
store for the children of God, besides many other grand teachings which
some day you will want to read. (Section 76.)

But wicked men continued to tell false things about Joseph and the Church.
Many people believed these stories, and the result was that the brethren
were often annoyed and badly treated. On the night of March 25th, 1832,
Joseph and Sidney Rigdon were dragged from their homes by an angry mob into
the woods. Sidney was so misused that he was left for dead. Joseph was
beaten and stripped of his clothes, and his body was covered with tar. The
mob also tried to force poison from a bottle into his mouth, but in this
they failed. Notwithstanding this ill treatment, Joseph was able the next
day, it being Sunday, to preach to a large meeting and to baptize three new
converts.

Shortly after this, Joseph made his second visit to Missouri. After his
return, he settled again at Kirtland, where he continued to receive many
revelations and to do much for the building up of the Church.

On December 25, 1832, Joseph received a revelation wherein it was stated
that the time would come when there would be a great war between the
Northern States and the Southern States. Even the place of its beginning
was told, namely, South Carolina.

In February, 1833, a school was opened in Kirtland for the elders of the
Church. It was called the "School of the Prophets," and there the brethren
met and were instructed in the principles of the gospel.

A revelation called the Word of Wisdom was given on the 27th of the same
month. You will find it in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 89, and
every one of you should read it.

On March 18th a very important meeting was held in Kirtland. On that date
Joseph ordained Sidney Rigdon to be his first counselor, and Frederick G.
Williams to be his second counselor, and these three now became the First
Presidency, which is the highest authority in the Church. You have been
told something of Sidney Rigdon. Elder Williams held his position nearly
five years, when he apostatized, and Hyrum Smith was chosen in his stead.
At the death of Joseph Smith, Sen., who was patriarch of the Church, Hyrum
was chosen to fill his position and William Law was called to the office of
second counselor to Joseph. Law held this position until about two months
before the Prophet's death when he was cut off from the Church.

February 17, 1834, the first high council of the Church was organized. This
body consists of twelve men who must be high priests, over which the stake
presidency presides. It is a kind of court. When members of the Church have
trouble one with another which neither they, nor the teachers, nor the
bishop can settle, it is brought before the high council to be adjusted.

Each stake of Zion now has a high council. Here are the names of the first
one organized: besides the First Presidency, Joseph Smith, Sen., John
Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared
Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith and
Luke Johnson.

It was shortly after this that Zion's Camp was organized and made the trip
to Missouri, of which you were told in the last chapter.

After his return Joseph was again busy performing his many duties as
president of the Church.

Topics.--1. Joseph at Hiram. 2. Prophecy on War. 3. Word of Wisdom. 4.
The first presidency. 5. The high council.

Questions and Review.--1. To what two places were the Saints now
gathering? 2. Where is Hiram? 3. What did Joseph do there? 4. Tell about
the mobbing at Hiram. 5. When was the prophecy on war given? 6. How long
after was it fulfilled? 7. What led to the war between the North and the
South? 8. What was the "School of the Prophets?" 9. In the Word of Wisdom,
what does the Lord say is not good for the body? 10. What does He say is
good? 11. What promise is made to those who keep the Word of Wisdom? 12.
What is the First Presidency? 13. Who were the first to fill this position?
14. Who are the present First Presidency? 15. What is the duty of the high
council? 16. Name some members of the high council of your stake.


CHAPTER XVII.

THE TWELVE APOSTLES--THE SEVENTIES--THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE.


[Illustration: PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG.]

On the 14th of February, 1835, Joseph called together the brethren who had
gone with him to Missouri in Zion's Camp. He spoke to the meeting and told
the brethren the Lord had not forgotten them, but had remembered their
faithfulness in answering the call of duty, and now he had a blessing for
them.

Joseph then said the time had come when twelve apostles should be called.
It was the duty of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon to select
twelve men for this high calling, and these three brethren were then
blessed for this purpose by the First Presidency. The following were then
selected to be the first quorum of Twelve Apostles in the Church: Thomas B.
Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Wm. E.
McLellin, Parley P. Pratt, Luke Johnson, William Smith, Orson Pratt, John
F. Boynton and Lyman E. Johnson.

It is the duty of the Twelve Apostles to build up the Church and regulate
its affairs in all the world under the direction of the First Presidency;
also to open the door of the gospel to all nations.

On the 28th of February there was another meeting held, at which the first
quorum of seventy was organized. You will remember that the Savior, after
He had chosen Twelve Apostles to preach the gospel, chose also seventy to
aid the Twelve in their work. So in our day, twelve men could not do all
the work of spreading the gospel, so it was necessary to call other men. In
this body of men seventy form a quorum. The first quorum was organized from
the brethren who were members of Zion's Camp.

It is the special duty of the Seventies to travel and preach the gospel
under the direction of the Twelve.

As early as May, 1833, the Lord told Joseph that the Saints should build a
house to his name. July 23, the foundation was laid. The Saints in Kirtland
were not many, neither were they rich, and it was therefore a great task
for them to build such a house as the temple. However, they gave donations
of what they had and worked willingly with all their might, until at last
it was finished and dedicated to the Lord on Sunday, March 27, 1836.

[Illustration: THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE.]

During the meetings many glorious blessings were received. Angels were seen
by many of the Saints, Brigham Young spoke in tongues, others prophesied,
and many saw glorious visions. At the evening meeting George A. Smith arose
and prophesied, when a noise was heard like the sound of a mighty wind
which filled the temple. All the people arose at once and the Prophet
Joseph told the Saints that the temple was filled with angels, as he could
see them. The people living near the temple, seeing a bright light resting
on the building and hearing a strange sound within, came rushing up to see
what was the matter.

Nearly every day there were meetings held in the temple. The next Sunday
after the dedication, Joseph and Oliver were praying in the sacred house
when the Lord Jesus Christ appeared unto them. He stood on the breastwork
of the pulpit, and Joseph describes Him as a most glorious personage. Jesus
told them that He had accepted the temple and promised them great blessings
if they would continue to keep his commandments.

After this vision had closed, Moses, Elias, and Elijah appeared unto them
and each of them gave to Joseph and Oliver many blessings concerning the
gospel.

You would think that after all these blessings from the Lord the Saints
would never turn away from the truth; but sad to say this was not the case.
During the years 1837 and 1838 many of the brethren in Kirtland began to
buy and sell land and set up stores and banks for the purpose of making
money. Now, there would have been nothing wrong in all this if they had
done all their business honestly; but the trouble was that many wanted to
get rich so fast that oftimes they would cheat each other. This of course
was inspired by the evil one, who did his best to stop the progress of the
Church. It was a very hard trial for Joseph and those of his brethren who
stood by him to see so many leading men fall away into wickedness.

Again, you may also wonder how men who have been in the company of the
Prophet and who have seen angels and heavenly visions can deny the faith,
but the fact is they sometimes do. The whole secret is this:

No matter how much a person has seen or how much he knows, if he sins and
does not repent, the Spirit of God will leave him, and he will be in the
dark. It then becomes an easy matter for him to fall away from the Church.

During the two years named above, four of the Twelve Apostles and many of
the leading men apostatized; and then, not satisfied with so doing, they
began to join the mobs who persecuted Joseph and the Saints. This led the
Church leaders to remove to Missouri, and soon after nearly all the Saints
followed them to the land of Zion.

Topics.--1. The calling of the Twelve Apostles. 2. Calling of the
Seventy. 3. The Kirtland Temple. 4. The apostasy at Kirtland.

Questions and Review.--1. From what body were the first Twelve Apostles
called? 2. Who chose the names? 3. Name the first Twelve Apostles? 4. Name
the present Twelve. 5. What is the duty of the Twelve? 6. What is the duty
of the Seventies? 7. How many Seventies' quorums are there in the Church?
8. Tell about the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. 9. Who appeared to
Joseph and Oliver in the temple? 10. What causes many to fall from the
Church? 11. What is the only safe way to remain faithful.


CHAPTER XVIII.

THE MISSION TO ENGLAND.


In the year 1837, when the evil one was trying with all his might to
overthrow the Church both at Kirtland and in Missouri, the Lord told Joseph
that the time had come for "something new" to be done. This was to send
missionaries to England and open the gospel door to that people.

Elder Heber C. Kimball was chosen to take the lead of this mission, and
with him went Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding, John Goodson,
Isaac Russell, and John Snider.

This was the first mission to any foreign country, and in those days of
slow travel, a trip to Europe was no small matter. The brethren set out on
their journey without purse or scrip, but the Lord opened up their way, and
at last they landed in Liverpool, England, July 20, 1837.

They were in a strange country, had no money, no friends.

[Illustration: PRESIDENT HEBER C. KIMBALL]

"Go to Preston," said the Spirit of the Lord to them. Preston is a city
thirty miles from Liverpool, and there they went. Joseph Fielding had a
brother living in the city, who was a preacher, and on his invitation the
missionaries held their first meeting in his chapel. This was the first
Sunday after their arrival. The people listened eagerly to what the elders
said, for it seems that a great many honest souls had been waiting for just
such a message.

After the third meeting, the Rev. Mr. Fielding would not let the elders use
his church, as he was afraid they would take away his congregation. From
that time he opposed the missionaries, and was soon joined in this by other
preachers.

However, the people had received a taste of the gospel and they wanted
more, so meetings were held in private houses. On the eighth day after the
arrival of the elders in England, nine persons were baptized into the
Church by Elder Kimball.

Thus was the door opened, and the gospel soon spread in a wonderful manner.
The elders now separated and went to different towns, preaching, baptizing,
and organizing branches of the Church. Great crowds came out to hear them,
especially in and around the city of Preston. It was a most glorious time
and full of interesting events which this little book cannot tell you
about; but here is a sample:

One day Elder Kimball told some of the brethren that he thought of going to
a place called Chatburn, to hold meetings. He was told that it would do no
good, as it was a very wicked place, and the people there would have
nothing to do with preachers. Elder Kimball went, however, and large crowds
came out to hear him. While teaching the people the need of repenting of
their evil doings and being baptized for the remission of their sins,
Brother Kimball felt someone pulling at his coat:

"Please sir, will you baptize me?" asked one.

"And me, and me!" exclaimed a dozen voices.

So Elder Kimball went down into the water and baptized twenty-five persons.
As the elders were walking out of the village, the young folks of the place
ran to meet them, the older people stood in their doors to greet and bless
them, while the children ran ahead, hand in hand, singing their songs of
gladness.

At a conference held in Preston, April 8, 1838, there were reports from
twenty-six branches of the Church. The total number of souls in the Church
was reported to be about two thousand; and all this was done in the short
space of eight months.

The next day Elders Kimball, Hyde, and Russell left for home, leaving
Willard Richards to preside over the mission. Many were the sad partings
these brethren had with the Saints, for a great love grows up between the
Saints in the world and the elders who have brought them the gospel.

January 11, 1840, Elders John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff landed in
England. Brother Woodruff was led by the Spirit to go into a part of
England called Herefordshire. Here he found a religious body of people
called United Brethren. They had withdrawn from the Church of England, and
were now praying that the Lord would send them more light. These people
heard Elder Woodruff gladly, and with joy they received the gospel. Within
one month he baptized all their preachers, forty-five in number, and one
hundred and sixty of their members. In eight months time Elder Woodruff
brought eighteen hundred souls into the Church, including all the six
hundred United Brethren, save one.

At one time just as Elder Woodruff was about to begin a meeting, a
constable came to arrest him for preaching. The officer was asked to take a
seat, and was told that after the meeting Elder Woodruff would be at his
service. The constable was very much interested in the sermon. At the close
of the meeting seven persons asked for baptism, and the constable was one
of the number. After this, two clerks of the Church of England were sent as
spies to find out what the Mormon elders preached. Both of these men
believed and joined the Church.

Now came others of the Apostles to England to roll on the work. Brigham
Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, and George A. Smith
arrived on April 6, 1840. At a conference held in Preston on the 14th,
Willard Richards was ordained an Apostle, so that now there were eight of
the Twelve together. At this meeting it was decided to print a paper to be
called _The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star_. This paper has been
published from that day to this, it being the oldest publication in the
Church.

The Church now grew rapidly. Branches were organized in Scotland, Ireland,
Wales, and in many of the large cities in England. At a conference held in
the city of Manchester, April 6, 1841, it was found that there were about
six thousand members of the Church in Great Britain. Eight hundred Saints
had emigrated to America during the year. At this conference, nine of the
Twelve were present, Orson Hyde having arrived on his way to Palestine,
where he was going to dedicate that land for the gathering of the Jews.

Shortly after this conference, the apostles left England to return home,
leaving Parley P. Pratt in charge of the mission. From that time the work
has continued in Great Britain, and many honest souls have come to the
knowledge of the gospel.

Topics.--1. The first mission to England. 2. Wilford Woodruff's
experience. 3. Mission of the eight Apostles.

Questions and Review.--1. When were the first missionaries sent to
England? 2. Who were they? 3. Where was the first sermon preached? 4. How
did the people receive the elders? 5. What happened at Chatburn? 6. What
was accomplished in eight months? 7. Who were the second missionaries to
England? 8. Who were the United Brethren? 9. Tell of President Woodruff's
work among them. 10. Who composed the third party of missionaries? 11. What
was done at the conference held April 14, 1840. 12. What is the Millennial
Star? 13. What was Orson Hyde's mission to Palestine?


CHAPTER XIX.

FAR WEST.


We must now leave the pleasant scenes of preaching the gospel in England,
and go back to the more troubled times among the main body of the Saints in
the State of Missouri.

You will remember that when the Saints were driven from Jackson county,
they found a place to rest in Clay county just north across the river. The
people of Clay received them kindly, and the Saints stayed for about three
years in that county. During this period, they tried many times to regain
their homes by asking the governor and even the president of the United
States to enforce the laws and see that their lands and homes were given
back to them. Governor Dunklin talked very pleasantly about the rights of
the Saints, but in the end he did nothing to protect the people or help
them to gain possession of their property.

At a large meeting held in Liberty, the county seat of Clay county, on the
16th of June, 1834, in order to try to settle the trouble between the
Saints and the Jackson county people, the following offer was made by the
Jackson men to the Saints:

The Jackson people offered to buy all the land of the "Mormons" in Jackson
county, paying them a high price for it within thirty days, or the people
of Jackson offered to sell all their lands to the "Mormons" at the same
high price to be paid for in thirty days. This offer may seem to be fair,
but when it is remembered that the Lord had revealed to them that the city
of Zion should be built in Jackson county, and had told the Saints to buy
and not sell, it will be seen that this offer was not meant in good faith.
Again, the Saints could not buy out all the mobbers' land in Jackson, much
as they would have liked so to do, as there was so much of it, and they had
no money to pay for it in thirty days. The Saints therefore could not agree
to this, but they made an offer to buy out the lands of those who could not
live in peace with them, and pay them in one year.

Nothing came of these offers.

And now the people of Clay county asked the Saints to remove from their
midst. The country was again getting excited about the "Mormons," and the
Clay county people were afraid that the mobs would come to disturb them; so
in order to be on good terms with the people who had been friends to them,
the Saints again left their homes and traveled north-east, away out into
the country where there were hardly any settlers. Here they began to build
a city which they called Far West, and after a time they had a county laid
off which was named Caldwell.

This movement began in September, 1836, and by the next summer nearly all
the Saints had left Clay county.

You will call to mind that the Prophet Joseph, with the brethren in Zion's
Camp had visited the Saints while in Clay county. In the spring of 1838
Joseph arrived at Far West from Kirtland, and from that time on the Prophet
remained with the main body of the Saints in Missouri and Illinois.

The Saints now had peace again for a season. They gathered to Far West and
surrounding places from Kirtland and other eastern localities. Farms were
made, houses built, towns laid out, and it seemed as if the Saints could at
last live and enjoy their rights as Americans.

Joseph was busy setting the Church in order and in receiving the word of
the Lord for the guidance of the Saints.

One of the most important revelations given at this time was regarding the
law of tithing. This law says that the Saints should first put all their
surplus property into the hands of the bishop to be used for the benefit of
the Church, and then after that, they should pay one tenth of all they
made, as a tithing to the Lord; and the Lord further said that if the
Saints did not keep this law, the land whereon they dwelt should not be a
land of Zion unto them.

In the year 1838 the Saints in and around Far West numbered about twelve
thousand. Thus you see they began to be a power in the land, especially
when it came to voting for officers of the state and county. At these times
the Saints would of course vote for good men, men who were their friends,
and this often made the Missourians angry.

At an election in Gallatin, the county seat of Daviess county, August 6,
1838, a mob of Missourians tried to prevent the brethren from voting. A
general fight was the result, in which the "Mormons" defended themselves
with umbrellas, sticks, whips, and their stout fists.

Reports came to Joseph and the people in Far West that some of the brethren
had been killed and that the mobbers would not let their bodies be buried.
At this, Joseph, with about twenty armed men, rode towards the scene of
trouble. On the way he learned that the report was not true. They then
called on a justice of the peace, named Adam Black. Mr. Black promised
Joseph that he would not aid the mob, but would enforce the laws justly.
Next day Joseph and his party held a meeting with some leading men of the
county, wherein both parties promised to keep the peace, and if any person
broke the law in this respect he was to be given up to the officers of the
law and punished.

Some twenty days after Mr. Black had made such good promises, he and some
others had papers made out for the arrest of Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight
for coming into Daviess co., and doing all kinds of wicked deeds. When the
constable called on Joseph at Far West, Joseph said he was willing to stand
trial, but he wanted it to be in Caldwell, instead of Daviess county, as in
the latter there existed too much excitement and ill-feeling. The officer
did not arrest the Prophet at this time, but the report spread that Joseph
had resisted the officer and would not be arrested. To prove how false this
was, Joseph with his brother Hyrum and some others, went to Daviess county
for trial. At this trial Mr. Black swore to some wicked falsehoods, and
although four witnesses told the truth of the matter, Joseph and Lyman were
bound over, that is, they were to be ready to stand trial when the regular
court should meet.

False reports now flew far and wide again, and the mobs began to gather
from other counties to "help drive the Mormons from the State." Some of the
mob painted and dressed themselves up as Indians. The Saints, especially in
the smaller settlements, were attacked, until they had to flee to Far West
for protection. The Saints now thought it time to protect themselves from
the mobs, so they organized a company of state militia. Lyman Wight was an
officer in this militia and he commanded the men. He succeeded in driving
the mob from Daviess county, but this of course, only made the excitement
the greater.

On the evening of October 24, 1838, news reached Far West that a Methodist
preacher by the name of Bogart was leading a mob to destroy the property of
the Saints on Log Creek. That same evening a company of about seventy-five
men led by Captain David W. Patten mounted their horses and rode to the
scene of trouble. Early the next morning, just as it was getting daylight
the mob was found encamped on Crooked River. The Far West Militia
dismounted and marched on to the enemy. A battle took place. The mob took
refuge behind the river bank, while the brethren charged them sword in
hand. The enemy was soon put to flight across the river. As they were
fleeing, one of the mobbers wheeled around from behind a tree and shot
Captain Patten, who instantly fell. A number of brethren were badly
wounded, and two died the next night. One was Patterson O'Banion, and the
other Captain Patten.

Brother Patten was a member of the first quorum of Twelve Apostles. He had
taken an active part in the affairs of the Church up to the time of his
death, having filled many missions and done many great works in the name of
Jesus Christ. Apostle Patten was one of the first martyrs of the Church. Of
him Joseph the Prophet said at his funeral:

"There lies a man who has done just as he said he would; he has laid down
his life for his friends."

Topics.--1. The Saints in Clay county. 2. Removed to Caldwell county. 3.
The beginning of trouble. 4. The Crooked River battle. 5. Apostle David W.
Patten.

Questions and Review.--1. From Jackson county where did the Saints go? 2.
How did they try to get their homes again? 3. What did Governor Dunklin do?
4. What offer did the Jackson people make to the Saints? 5. Why did not
the Saints accept this offer? 6. What did the Saints offer to do? 7. Why
did the people of Clay county wish the Saints to leave them? 8. When and
where did the Saints then go? 9. What is the law of tithing? 10. What was
the case of the new trouble between the Saints and the Missourians? 11.
What came of Joseph's trip to Daviess county? 12. Describe the Crooked
River battle. 13. Tell about David W. Patten.


CHAPTER XX.

THE HAUN'S MILL MASSACRE.


In this chapter I wish to tell you about one of the saddest events that
happened in all that sad time of persecution in Missouri.

It occurred on October 30, 1838, during the time of great excitement, when
bands of armed men roamed over the country doing what damage they could to
the homes of the Saints.

At a point on Shoal Creek, about sixteen miles from Fat West, a brother by
the name of Haun had built a flour mill. Besides the mill there were a
blacksmith shop and half a dozen houses. About thirty families lived here,
some of which had just arrived from the Eastern States and were yet camping
in their tents.

This little body of Saints had been threatened by mobs a number of times,
but on the 28th, a treaty of peace was made in which each party agreed not
to molest the other. Before this, however, Joseph had advised the Saints at
Haun's Mill to move into Far West, which advice they had not taken.

October 30th was a beautiful autumn day. The air was warm, and the breeze
stirred the fields of wheat and rustled the corn. The children were playing
on the banks of the creek, and their merry laugh was echoed by the birds in
the forest close at hand. All seemed peaceful and lovely.

[Illustration: HAUN'S MILL.]

About four o'clock in the afternoon, a company of two hundred and forty
men dashed up to the clearing. Brother David Evans who had command of the
few brethren, ran out to meet them, swinging his hat and crying, "Peace,
peace." The leader of the mob told all who desired to save their lives and
make peace to run into the blacksmith shop. Some of the brethren did this,
but in a few seconds after, a volley was fired into the shop. The bullets
went between the logs, which were far apart, and in at the open door,
killing and wounding the brethren within. Some few shots were fired back,
but the brethren soon saw it was useless to resist, so they tried to save
themselves as best they could. Men, women and children scattered in every
direction taking refuge in the woods, while the bullets of the mobbers flew
thick and fast among them, wounding and killing.

The mob kept on firing at the shop until they thought all within were
killed; then they went about the place killing all they could find alive,
and robbing the houses of everything they could carry off. They even
stripped the dead and dying of their clothes. They went into the blacksmith
shop for this purpose, and there they saw dead men lying in piles, and
wounded men groaning in pain, while pools of blood stood on the floor. A
little ten year old boy named Sardius Smith had crawled under the bellows,
trying to hide from the wicked mobbers; but one of them saw him and dragged
him out. Then putting the muzzle of his gun to the boy's head he killed him
instantly. Sardius' little brother, Alma, seven years old had a great hole
shot in his hip; but he lay still, fearing that if he moved they would
shoot him again. Another boy by the name of Charles Merrick was discovered.
He pleaded with the mobbers not to kill him: "I am an American boy," he
said "O! don't kill me!" The mobber heeded not, but blew out his brains.

Thomas McBride, an old, gray-haired man who had fought in the
Revolutionary War under Washington, gave up his gun to a mobber, and then
pleaded for his life. The cruel mobber took the gun and shot the old man
dead, and then another mobber cut him to pieces with an old corn cutter.

Thus it continued. I cannot tell you half of the horrible things which
happened. At last the mobbers departed, and night came on. Then, lowly and
fearfully, the women and children and what few men were left crept out of
their hiding places to see what had been done and to help as best they
could. Perhaps you can imagine what they saw and how they felt during that
long, dark night in the midst of dead and dying husbands, brothers and
sons.

Next morning it was found that nineteen men and boys were dead, or wounded
so badly that they could not live, and about fifteen others were wounded.
What to do with the dead was the question. There were not men enough to dig
graves; besides, the mob might come back again and finish their awful work;
so the best they could do was to put the nineteen bodies into a large, dry
well that was close by. This was done, and straw and earth placed on top.

Sister Smith, mother of Sardius and Alma, has told some of the experiences
which she passed through during that awful time. Her husband and one son
were killed, while another son had his hip nearly shot away. During that
first night she says that she prayed to God to know what to do for her
wounded boy, and the Lord distinctly whispered to her what kind of poultice
to put on the wound and how to treat him.

"I removed the boy to a house next day," she says, "and dressed his hip,
the Lord directing me as before."

"'Alma, my child,' I said, 'you believe that the Lord made your hip?'

"'Yes, mother.'

"'Well, the Lord can make something there in place of your hip, don't you
believe he can, Alma?'

"'Do you think that the Lord can, mother?'

"'Yes, my son,' I replied, 'He has shown it all to me in a vision.'

"And then I laid him comfortably on his face and said: 'Now you lay like
that and don't move, and the Lord will make you another hip.'

"So I laid Alma on his face for five weeks, until he was entirely
recovered, a flexible gristle having grown in place of the missing joint
and socket."

Alma grew up to be a man and became a useful member of the Church.

Topics.--1. The massacre at Haun's Mill. 2. Sardius and Alma Smith.

Questions and Review.--1. Where was Haun's Mill. 2. What advice did
Joseph give the Saints who lived there? 3. What happened October 30, 1838?
4. Tell about the Smith boys and Charles Merrick. 5. Tell about Thomas
McBride. 6. How many were killed?


CHAPTER XXI.

DRIVEN FROM MISSOURI.


Wild reports now went over the country about the "Mormons;" and to make
these reports seem true some of the mobbers actually set fire to their own
log cabins and then accused the Saints of the act.

In a previous chapter, mention was made of Lilburn W. Boggs. This man was
now governor of the state, and we shall see how he used his power against
the "Mormons," whom he hated so much.

The reports that the "Mormons" were burning houses and driving people from
their homes, reached the governor, and he believed, or pretended to
believe, all these false stories. So he gave orders to the officers of the
state militia to organize an army of 2,000 men, march to the scene of the
trouble, and see that the people whom the "Mormons" had driven from their
homes were returned to them. Note how eager the governor was to restore
these few presumably abused people to their lands--but it was all right
that twelve hundred "Mormons" should be driven from their property!

The next day after the governor had issued this order, the news of the
Crooked River battle reached him, so he changed his instructions to the
commanding officer, General Clark. This order, given October 27, 1838, is
known as Governor Boggs' exterminating order, and is one of the most
disgraceful and wicked commands known in history. Exterminate means to
destroy utterly, to root out completely, and this is what a governor of a
state said should be done to twelve thousand innocent people if they did
not leave the state.

Companies of Missouri militia now came marching from various parts of the
state into Caldwell and other counties nearby. Soon Far West was surrounded
by an army. Niel Gillium was there with his band of men in Indian costume,
who whooped and yelled like true savages. On the evening of October 30th, a
party of men came fresh from the awful massacre, at Haun's Mill, eager for
more blood. Thus the town was surrounded, and as it seemed, doomed to
destruction.

The few brethren in Far West prepared to defend themselves as best they
could. It might appear useless for a handful of men to oppose an army, but
when men are fighting for their homes, their liberty, their wives and their
children, a few can do mighty deeds.

But they were not to fight. Traitors were in the camp of the Saints and
they now betrayed their brethren into the hands of the enemy. Colonel
George M. Hinkle was the commander of the Far West militia, and he went to
the mob commanders and promised to deliver up to them the Church leaders.
He also made an agreement with them that the Saints would deliver up their
arms, sign away their property to pay the expenses of the war, and then
leave the state. This was all done without the knowledge of the "Mormons"
or their leaders.

On the evening of October 30th, Colonel Hinkle told Joseph Smith, Sidney
Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, and George W. Robinson that the
officers of the mob-militia wanted to consult with them and try to arrange
matters. Next morning these brethren went with Hinkle some distance out of
Far West where they were met by General Lucas, and soon most of the mob
came up. Lucas ordered his men to surround the brethren, when Hinkle
stepped up and said:

"General Lucas, these are the prisoners I agreed to deliver to you."

The brethren were then marched into the camp of the mob-militia where they
were received with great shouts, curses, and yells. All that night they
were compelled to lie on the cold ground, and it rained before morning. The
next day Hyrum Smith and Amasa M. Lyman were brought as prisoners into
camp.

That day General Lucas demanded the arms of the "Mormons," promising them
protection, and the return of their guns after the trouble was over; but no
sooner had the mob obtained possession of the arms then they began stealing
and carrying away everything they could lay their hands on. They also
destroyed much property and abused innocent women and children. Those of
the brethren that had property were compelled to sign it away to the mob.

On the evening of November 1st, General Lucas held a court in which Joseph
and his brethren were to be tried. This court was composed of seventeen
preachers and some army officers. None of the prisoners were present, and
knew nothing of what was going on. The brethren were found guilty and
sentenced to be shot next morning at eight, o'clock, on the public square
in Far West. When the sentence was passed Generals Doniphan and Graham said
it was murder, and they would have nothing to do with it. This checked
Lucas in his evil designs and so they decided to take the prisoners to
Jackson county and kill them there. Before starting, they were allowed to
go to their homes and see their families, but they were not permitted to
speak to them. Their wives and children clung to them, crying in their
despair, and were only separated by the cruel swords of the guards.

Fifty-six of the leading brethren were now taken prisoners and sent to the
town of Richmond. Most of them were released shortly after.

On November 6th General Clark made his famous speech to the Saints in Far
West, wherein he told them that he had come to carry out the governor's
orders to destroy them, but he would be lenient and give them a little time
to get out of the state. He advised the Saints to be like other people and
not organize themselves with bishops, presidents, etc. It was a very
foolish, conceited speech.

About twenty-five miles north of Far West was a beautiful settlement of
the Saints. Joseph said it was the place where our father Adam had blessed
his children, and where he will come again to visit his people. So the
place was called Adam-ondi-Ahman. The people here had suffered with the
rest of the Saints, and now in the cold month of November they were driven
from their homes and took refuge for the winter in Far West.

During that hard winter and time of trial when Joseph and many of his
brethren were in prison and many others had apostatized, one name comes to
the front as that of a faithful man. It is Brigham Young. He was ever true
to the Prophet, and Joseph could rely on him. With him were such noble men
as Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, and many others. Brigham was now
president of the Twelve, and it was his duty to take the lead in looking
after the affairs of the Church during the absence of the First Presidency.

In January, 1839, Brigham Young called a meeting to consider what should be
done in aiding the poor Saints to remove from Missouri. President Young
presented a resolution that the brethren should never desert the poor
Saints, but that they should help them to escape from their persecutors. A
great many brethren agreed to this, and that winter and spring the move
eastward to Illinois continued. They did not travel in large bodies, but in
small companies as they got ready. Not one family who wished to go was left
behind.

The sufferings of that winter journey cannot be told you here. Many died on
the way through exposure and hardships. The mobs would not let them alone
even when they were leaving as fast as they could. Mobs often rode into Far
West, abused the people, stole horses, drove off cattle and took anything
that pleased them. The Saints traded their farms for horses and wagons in
which to get away. Sometimes fine farms were nearly given away. It is told
of one brother that he sold forty acres of good land for a blind mare and a
clock.

July 8, 1838, the Lord gave a revelation wherein he called the Twelve
Apostles to go on a mission to England. The Twelve were to take leave of
the Saints at the temple site in Far West, April 26, 1839. (Doc. and Cov.,
Sec. 118.) This time had now come, but it seemed impossible that it could
be carried out, as most of the Saints had left Far West and the mobbers
swore that this was a revelation that should not be fulfilled. They would
kill the first Apostle that came into the place, they said.

However, seven of the Twelve arrived at Far West the night before the 26th,
and early next morning they went to the temple lot, rolled a large stone to
the southeast corner of the temple grounds as a foundation, and then
proceeded to hold a meeting. Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith
were then ordained Apostles, the brethren prayed and sang and then
dismissed the meeting, bidding good-bye to the eighteen Saints present. Not
a mobber was astir that morning, and the word of the Lord was again
fulfilled.

Topics.--1. Governor Boggs' exterminating order. 2. Betrayal of Joseph
and his brethren. 3. Adam-ondi-Ahman. 4. Departure from Far West. 5. The
meeting of the Twelve at Far West.

Questions and Review.--1. How did the mob make the people believe that
the "Mormons" were burning houses, etc.? 2. What reports were brought to
Governor Boggs? 3. What was the exterminating order? 4. What kinds of
"soldiers" surrounded Far West? 5. What did Colonel Hinkle do? 6. What kind
of court did General Lucas have to try Joseph and his brethren? 7. What was
their sentence? 8. Why was it not carried out? 9. What did General Clark
say in his speech? 10. Where was Adam-ondi-Ahman? 11. Why was it so called?
12. What did Brigham Young now do? 13. Tell about the meeting held at Far
West, April 26, 1839.


CHAPTER XXII.

IN MISSOURI PRISONS.


From Far West Joseph and his brethren who had been taken prisoners were
marched towards Jackson county. At first General Wilson who had them in
charge treated the brethren badly, but as they proceeded on their journey
he became quite friendly, and told the prisoners that he was just going to
show the people of Independence what a "set of fine fellows you are."

While on the march the Lord comforted Joseph, and he spoke to the other
prisoners as follows: "Be of good cheer, brethren; the word of the Lord
came to me last night that our lives should be given us, and that whatever
we may suffer during this captivity, not one of our lives shall be taken."

After they had crossed the Missouri river into Jackson county, many people
came to see these wonders, the "Mormons." One lady came up and asked the
guards which of the prisoners the "Mormons" worshiped. Joseph was pointed
out to her. She then asked the Prophet if he professed to be the Lord and
Savior. Joseph said he was only a man sent by Jesus Christ to preach the
gospel. Quite a crowd had gathered around, and Joseph went on explaining
the principles of faith, repentance, etc. Thus Joseph preached a sermon in
Jackson county in fulfillment of a prediction he had made some months
before.

At Independence their treatment was not bad. The people seemed curious to
see them, and the brethren spent their time in talking with people who came
to them.

General Clark, who also wanted some of the "honor" of having these noted
prisoners, now ordered them to Richmond, in Ray county, where the general
had a talk with them. Shortly after this, some guards came into the jail
house and fastened the seven prisoners together by means of a chain and
pad-locks. In this way they lived in a room without chairs or beds,
sleeping on the hard, cold floor at nights. Guards with loaded guns stood
watch over them, and talked to each other of the wicked deeds they had done
at Far West and other places near by. About these horrible acts they
boasted in glee while the prisoners had to lie and hear it all.

One night, says P.P. Pratt, he lay next to Joseph, listening to all this
vile talk, when suddenly Joseph arose to his feet and spoke in a voice of
thunder, or as the roaring lion, these words:

"'_Silence! ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I
rebuke you, and command you to be still. I will not live another minute and
hear such language. Cease your talk, or you or I die this minute_'

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty, chained and
without a weapon; calm, unruffled, and dignified as an angel, he looked
down upon the quailing guards, whose weapons dropped to the ground, whose
knees smote together." The ruffians instantly became still, and were very
glad when a change of guard came so that they could get away.

General Clark tried hard to find some law by which he could have Joseph
tried by an army court, but he failed in this and therefore he handed the
prisoners over to the civil authorities.

Another farce of a trial was now had. About forty men, mostly apostates,
testified against the prisoners. The brethren had no witnesses, and when
the mobber Bogart was sent to Far West for some, he simply arrested them
and put them in prison. The result of the hearing was that Joseph Smith,
Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin
were sent to Liberty, Clay county, to jail. Parley P. Pratt and others were
to remain in Richmond jail, while some others were released.

Joseph with his fellow-prisoners remained in Liberty jail from November 28,
1838, to April 6, 1839. During all this time they suffered the hardships of
prison life, together with abuses not usually imposed on common prisoners.
It is claimed by some that they were offered human flesh to eat. During
this time of trial Joseph was cheerful and told the brethren they would get
out safe. He wrote many letters of instruction to the Saints, bidding them
to be faithful to their religion. The brethren who were at liberty were not
idle. They were appealing continually to the judges and the governor for
justice for their brethren, but it was of little use. At one hearing,
Sidney Rigdon was released but he had to go back to jail for a time because
the mob threatened to kill him.

Seeing that it was useless trying to be released lawfully the brethren
decided to try to escape. The evening of February 7, 1839, when the guard
should come with their supper, was fixed as the time to try; but Hyrum
wanted to be sure about the matter so he asked Joseph to enquire of the
Lord if it was wisdom for them to make the attempt. Joseph did so and was
informed that if they were all united they would be able to escape that
evening. Therefore all but Lyman Wight agreed to the plan. He wanted to
wait till the next day, and as the brethren would not go without him, they
decided to wait.

That evening the guard left the door wide open and gave them a good chance
to escape, but they did not try. The next evening the jailor brought a
double guard with him, and six of the brethren came to see the prisoners.
Though it was a very poor chance to escape, they meant to try. When the
guard went to close the door the prisoners followed and tried to prevent
him, but they did not succeed. All but one of the visiting brethren were
also locked in, and he had a narrow escape from the mob outside who soon
collected and made all kinds of threats against the prisoners.

The visitors now thought that they also were in great danger, but Joseph
told them not to fear, as not a hair of their heads would be injured. This
promise came true, because at a trial they had next day they were all set
free and nothing was taken from them.

April 6, 1839, the prisoners were ordered to Gallatin, Daviess county.
After their long confinement the brethren were weak, and it was hard to
stand the long journey. On the 9th they had another trial or hearing. The
jury consisted mainly of men who had taken part in the Haun's Mill
massacre, and most of the time during the trial they were drunk. The
presiding officer, Judge King, was also as bad as the jury. This mock trial
continued for several days. Men who sat on the jury during the day acted as
guards at night, where they boasted of their murders, thefts, etc., to the
prisoners. This trial resulted in the brethren being held for "murder,
treason, burglary, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing."

The prisoners now asked for a change of venue, that is, a change of place
of trial. This was granted, and on April 15 they started for Boone county
under guard of the sheriff and four men. On the night of the 16th the
sheriff told them he was going to take a drink of grog before going to bed
and they could do as they pleased. The sheriff and three of the guards went
to bed drunk, and the other guard helped the brethren saddle the horses and
get away. They traveled day and night, and after much suffering Joseph
arrived at the city of Quincy, Illinois, April 22, 1839, where he was
gladly welcomed by his family and friends.

Topics.--1. Prisoners taken to Independence. 2. In Richmond jail. 3. In
Liberty jail. 4. The attempt to escape. 5. Their last trial and escape.

Questions and Review.--1. Who were taken as prisoners to Independence? 2.
What prediction did Joseph make while on the way? 3. How did Joseph fulfill
his own prophecy in Jackson county? 4. Where were they taken next? 5. How
were they treated in Richmond jail? 6. Describe Joseph's rebuke. 7. Where
next were they sent? 8. How long were they in Liberty jail? 9. Why was the
attempt to escape a failure? 10. Where were they next taken? 11. Describe
their last trial. 12. How did they escape?


CHAPTER XXIII.

NAUVOO.


From his prison in Missouri, Joseph had advised his brethren to buy land in
the state of Illinois and Iowa. Towards these states, therefore, the Saints
had fled, leaving merciless, blood-stained Missouri to the judgment of God.

Twenty years afterwards when the great war broke out between the North and
the South, Missouri was one of the fiercest battle grounds, and its people
suffered terribly for the misery and bloodshed they had brought upon the
Saints.

The people of Illinois received the homeless Saints kindly, and sold them
land upon which to live. At a small place called Commerce, situated on the
east bank of the Mississippi river, Joseph bought land, and there he
decided to locate the headquarters of the Church. The place was beautifully
situated in a bend of the river. Here a city was laid out and called
Nauvoo, meaning beauty and rest, and Joseph invited the Saints to settle
and build up the place. It was no small task to gather the scattered Saints
into one body again, but early in the summer of 1839 a number of houses
were erected in the new city.

[Illustration: THE NAUVOO HOUSE.]

Now came another trouble. Commerce was not a healthful place, but the
Saints were promised that that would be changed; however, it was not long
before a great many of the Saints became sick. Nearly every house was
afflicted, and Joseph himself also took the fever. On the morning of July
22nd, Joseph arose from his bed and commenced administering to the sick. He
began with those in his own house, then went to some camping in his yard.
The Prophet commanded the sick in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to
arise from their beds and be made whole, and the sick were healed on ever
side. He then went from house to house and from tent to tent upon the bank
of the river, healing the people. Many wonderful healings were performed.
Joseph would take the sick person by the hand, or stand in the door of the
tent and command the afflicted person to arise and be made whole. The
Prophet with some of the brethren who were now with him crossed the river
to the place where Brigham Young was lying ill. President Young was soon
healed and followed with the rest. As there were many whom the Prophet
could not reach, the Twelve were sent to administer to them. Joseph gave
Wilford Woodruff a silk handkerchief which he was to use in healing some
children. President Woodruff kept the handkerchief to the day of his death.

After this, there was very little sickness in Nauvoo. During the summer and
fall of 1839 the city grew rapidly. About this time seven of the Twelve
left for their mission to England, of which you have been told, and the
English Saints soon began to gather to Nauvoo.

Late in October, 1839, Joseph went to the city of Washington to lay the
troubles of the Church before the authorities of the nation. Joseph made
the acquaintance of many leading men, among them John C. Calhoun, and
Henry Clay. Martin Van Buren was president, and to him Joseph told of the
wrongs they had suffered from the people of Missouri. It was then that the
president made the famous remark: "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing
for you." His meaning, no doubt, was that the president of the United
States had no right to interfere with the affairs of a state; but that all
such troubles should be settled by the state itself.

[Illustration: THE NAUVOO MANSION.]

So Joseph returned without any help. Meanwhile, Nauvoo grew into a large
city. Ten wards were laid off and organized. April 6, 1841, the corner
stone of the temple was laid. Many public buildings were erected. Good
houses were built, and beautiful gardens soon bloomed around them. On the
outskirts of the city, fields of grain stretched as far as the eye could
reach. In 1842 there were 20,000 people in the city, and Nauvoo promised to
be one of the largest cities in the West.

The fame of Joseph and the "Mormon" city spread, and many people came to
see the wonder. Missionaries were sent out to preach, the _Times and
Seasons_ published by the Church, printed many Gospel truths and much
important history. The militia was organized and the city had a
well-drilled body of men called the Nauvoo Legion. Peace and prosperity
smiled upon them for a season, and it seemed that at last there would be a
permanent stake of Zion established.

But it was not to be. The hate that burned in the hearts of evil men had
not grown less, but was only waiting for a chance to show itself. Trouble
again arose. It would not be easy to understand the many causes that led to
these troubles, but a few may be noted.

The Saints now had great power at the polls, the same as in Missouri. The
"Mormons" would not vote for men who would not give them their rights, and
so many of these politicians became their enemies and stirred up the people
against the Saints by their many lies. Then, there were the jealousies of
the sectarian preachers; and perhaps worse than all, the evil work of
apostates. Then it happened that a band of thieves troubled the
neighborhood, and of course the "Mormons" were blamed. It was not a hard
matter to find excuses for a further persecution of the Latter-day Saints.

And now came again Governor Boggs, of Missouri. He, it seems, had not had
enough, so he asked Governor Carlin to deliver to him Joseph and the other
brethren who had escaped from Missouri. Governor Carlin of Illinois, made
out the papers for the brethren's arrest, but the officer could not find
them when he went to Nauvoo. He therefore returned without his prisoners,
and nothing more was done in the matter until nearly a year later, when
Joseph was visiting the governor at Quincy. Governor Carlin treated Joseph
kindly, but as soon as the Prophet had left, some of the officers were sent
after him. They overtook Joseph and arrested him on the old charge from
Missouri. However, they went on to Nauvoo, where the sheriff, being sick,
was taken good care of by his prisoner. As it was Joseph's right by law to
be tried in Illinois, he was permitted to have a hearing before Judge
Stephen A. Douglas, in Monmouth, Illinois. There was great excitement at
the trial, some of his enemies trying to excite a mob against him. At the
close of the hearing Joseph was set free by the judge.

Dr. J.C. Bennett was the mayor of Nauvoo, and held other high positions;
but he proved to be a very wicked man. At one time, when the Legion was
having a sham fight, Bennett tried to get Joseph into a position that he
might be shot without anyone knowing who did it. This did not succeed. Then
he began to commit sin, and say that Joseph upheld him in it. Bennett was
of course cut off from the Church, after which he wrote many false things
against Joseph and the Saints and was the means of bringing much
persecution on them.

In May, 1842, Ex-Governor Boggs of Missouri was shot at and wounded by some
person in Independence. Although at this time they were hundreds of miles
from Independence, Joseph Smith and O.P. Rockwell were charged with this
crime, and again papers were issued for their arrest. They were tried in
Nauvoo and acquitted. As the Missourians were trying many schemes to take
Joseph to Missouri and there kill him, he went in hiding for a time. Every
effort was made to take Joseph, and rewards were offered for his capture.
Elder Rockwell was kidnapped and taken to Missouri, where he was
ill-treated, but at last escaped.

Thomas Ford now became governor of Illinois and to him Joseph went. The
governor prevailed upon Joseph to stand another trial, which was held at
Springfield, Illinois. Joseph was again proved innocent and released.

But the fiends from Missouri would not give up. Once again he was taken
while away from Nauvoo, by two officers, who abused him shamefully. I
cannot tell you all about his exciting adventures--that you must read in a
larger history--but at last he arrived safe again in Nauvoo.

Persecution continued. Mobs now gathered around Nauvoo. Threats were made
that mobs would come from Missouri, and join with those of Illinois,
against the "Mormons." There was great unrest. When Joseph was spoken to
about the danger he was in, he said he was not exposed to as much danger
from outside enemies as from traitors within. "_We have a Judas in our
midst_," he said.

Thus ended the year 1843.

Topics.--1. Settlement at Nauvoo. 2. The healing of the sick. 3. City of
Nauvoo. 4. Attempts to take Joseph to Missouri.

Questions and Review.--1. Locate Nauvoo. 2. What was its name before it
was called Nauvoo? 3. Relate how Joseph healed the sick. 4. When did Joseph
go to Washington? 5. What was his mission there? 6. What answer did
President Martin Van Buren make? 7. Why was it useless to expect justice
from Missouri? 8. What kind of city did Nauvoo become? 9. What was the
Times and Seasons? 10. What was the Nauvoo Legion? 11. Name some of the
causes that led to the new persecution. 12. Who was Dr. Bennett, and what
did he do? 13. Tell of the efforts to get Joseph to Missouri.


CHAPTER XXIV.

THE MARTYRDOM.


On January 29, 1844, Joseph Smith was nominated for President of the United
States. Neither he nor his friends had much hopes of his election, but it
gave the citizens of Nauvoo at least a chance to vote for an honest man who
was their friend. Brethren were sent to various parts of the country to
make speeches in his favor, and Joseph published his views on how the
government should be conducted. One of his ideas was that the government
should set the negro slaves free, paying their masters for them. President
Abraham Lincoln, twenty years later, also favored this plan.

Meanwhile, Nauvoo prospered and the Church grew. When the weather would
permit, meetings were held in a grove near the temple, there being no room
large enough to hold the large crowds of people. Joseph continued to give
many glorious truths to the Church about the nature of God, the land of
Zion, baptism for the dead, and many other things.

The Prophet's prediction that there was a Judas in their midst soon proved
too true; and there were more than one. William Law, Joseph's second
counselor, William Marks, president of the Nauvoo Stake, with many other
leading men proved themselves false to Joseph and the Church. They even
planned with Joseph's enemies to have him killed. They were also proved
guilty of other sins and were therefore cut off from the Church. After
this, these men said Joseph was a fallen prophet, and so they organized a
church of their own. It did not amount to anything, however.

Joseph's periods of peace were not many. Apostates were his worst enemies,
and they were all the time annoying him by having him arrested on all
manner of false charges. These men were very bitter, and they howled around
him like a pack of wolves, eager to devour him; but Joseph trusted in the
Saints and they in him, for those who were faithful to their duties knew by
the Spirit of God that Joseph was not a fallen prophet.

In June, 1844, the enemies of the Saints began to publish a paper in
Nauvoo, called the _Expositor_. Its purpose was to deprive the people of
Nauvoo of their rights, so it boldly said. One paper was printed, and that
was so full of false statements and abuse against the city officials that
the city council declared it a nuisance and had the press, type, etc.,
destroyed.

This raised great excitement among the enemies of the Church. Joseph and
seventeen others were arrested, tried before a court in Nauvoo, and
acquitted; but this did not satisfy the mobbers. On the advice of the
United States judge for that district, Joseph and his brethren allowed
themselves to be arrested again and have a trial before Justice Daniel H.
Wells, then not a "Mormon." They were again discharged as innocent of
crime.

Now mobs began to threaten again, but the Nauvoo Legion was ready to defend
the city. As the Legion was drawn up in front of Joseph's house one day--it
was the 18th of June--he got upon a platform and spoke to the soldiers.
That speech was long remembered by those who heard it. It thrilled them
through and through and at the word they would gladly have marched and met
the mob in battle; but that was not Joseph's way. He was always willing to
have the laws carried out even if he suffered thereby, so that his enemies
could have no just excuse. That was the Prophet Joseph Smith's last public
speech.

During the excitement Governor Ford arrived at Carthage, a town about
eighteen miles from Nauvoo, and the county seat of Hancock county. The
governor sent word to Nauvoo that he wanted some explanation of the
trouble, so Joseph sent some of the brethren to him. The governor treated
his callers rudely. Carthage was full of mobs, and the governor seemed to
believe all they told him about the "Mormons." He organized the mobs into
troops. Joseph asked the governor to come to Nauvoo and investigate the
whole matter; but no: Joseph must go to Carthage. The governor said he
would protect him if he would go.

It was on the evening of June 22nd. Joseph and Hyrum had called some
brethren together: "All they want is Hyrum and myself," said the Prophet.
Joseph and Hyrum both seemed certain that if their enemies got them in
their power again they would be killed. Joseph then proposed that he and
Hyrum should escape to the Rocky Mountains. Preparations for this trip were
made and they were rowed over the river to Iowa, when Joseph's wife sent
some of the brethren to plead with him to return. Some brethren also found
fault with him in running away to "leave the flock to the wolves."

Joseph replied, "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of none to
myself." So they went back, Joseph saying, "We shall be butchered."

On the morning of June 24th Joseph and eighteen brethren set out for
Carthage to be tried again on the old charge. As he rode out the Prophet
made many expressions of goodby to his friends. Four miles from Carthage
they met a company of militia going to Nauvoo with an order from the
governor that the Nauvoo Legion give up its arms. Joseph rode back with
them to see that this was done. Twice he bade his family farewell. His face
was pale, and he was suffering.

"I am going like a lamb to the slaughter," he said, "but I am calm as a
summer morning."

At Carthage they were received with oaths and threats by the troops.
Apostates and soldiers swore that the brethren would never leave Carthage
alive.

The next day the governor paraded the prisoners before the troops, who
insulted them as they passed along. Then they were placed in the jail
awaiting their trial.

[Illustration: CARTHAGE JAIL.]

The day following, the prisoners were marched to the court house, guarded
by the troops; but the trial was postponed until the next day, and the
brethren were taken back to jail.

This was the 26th of June. That night Joseph was lying on the floor with
some of the brethren. Brother Dan Jones was on one side and Brother John S.
Fullmer on the other.

"Lay your head on my arm for a pillow, Brother John," said Joseph, and
then he talked with him in a low tone. Joseph expressed a desire to see his
family again and preach to the Saints once more.

To Brother Jones he whispered, "Are you afraid to die?" When Brother Jones
said he was not, Joseph replied, "You will yet see Wales, and fulfill the
mission appointed you, before you die." (Dan Jones did a wonderful
missionary work in Wales.)

The next morning the guards frequently told some of the brethren that if
they did not wish to be killed they had better get away from Joseph. This
was told to Governor Ford, but he paid no attention to it.

At 10:30 that morning, June 27, the governor with the most friendly of the
troops left for Nauvoo, and the brethren were left to their fate.

In an upper room of Carthage jail, Joseph, Hyrum, John Taylor, and Willard
Richards were spending their time in writing letters, singing, talking, and
praying. In the afternoon Joseph asked Elder Taylor to sing the hymn,
commencing:

"A poor wayfaring man of grief."

And when it was done he asked him to sing it again. Brother Taylor said he
could hardly sing it, he felt so sad, but he sang the hymn again.

About 5 o'clock in the afternoon a mob of about two hundred men surrounded
the jail. They had blackened their faces with powder and mud. Then the
firing began. The mob rushed up the stairs, shooting into the room where
the four brethren were. The prisoners sprang to the door to close it but
the guns of the mob forced it open. Elders Taylor and Richards tried to
push the guns aside with their canes. The bullets flew like hail into the
room. One ball came through the door and struck Hyrum in the head. Four
others hit him, and he fell back saying:

"_I am a dead man_."

Joseph gazed on his brother and exclaimed: "Oh! dear brother Hyrum!"

Elder Taylor now tried to jump from the window. A ball struck him, and he
was about to fall from the window, when another bullet from the outside hit
his watch in his vest pocket and threw him back into the room. Here he was
hit by two more balls, and he rolled under the bed.

Then Joseph went to the open window intending to leap out. Two bullets
struck him and he fell outward, exclaiming:

"_O Lord, my God_!"

As soon as he had struck the ground a mobber set him against a well curb a
few feet from the jail, and then, by order of Col. Levi Williams, a mobber
and Baptist preacher, four men sent bullets into his body.

Then the mob fled, and the whole town of Carthage with them, fearing the
vengeance of the people of Nauvoo. But vengeance is the Lord's.

Willard Richards was not hurt. That night he spent in attending to his
wounded brother, John Taylor, and watching over the dead bodies of the
Prophet and Patriarch.

Joseph's earthly work was done, and the Master had called him away from the
haunts of mobs and wicked men. He sealed his testimony with his blood. He
had spent his life in working for the salvation of his fellowman, and even
yet in a freer and grander sphere he is working for the cause of Christ and
the Church.

Topics.--1. Joseph nominated for president. 2. Traitors. 3. The
Expositor. 4. Joseph goes to Carthage. 5. The martyrdom.

Questions and Review.--1. When was Joseph nominated for President of the
United States? 2. What were his ideas of slavery? 3. Where were the large
meetings in Nauvoo held? 4. Who proved false to Joseph? 5. How did the
Saints know that Joseph was not a fallen prophet? 6. What was the Nauvoo
Expositor? 7. Why was it destroyed? 8. Why did Joseph object to being tried
in Carthage? 9. On what occasion did Joseph deliver his last speech? 10.
Why did not Joseph go west to the mountains? 11. What did Governor Ford
promise? 12. Give some expressions of the prophet on going to Carthage. 13.
Who were with Joseph in jail? 14. Tell about the martyrdom. 15. When did it
take place? 16. How old was Joseph when he was killed?


CHAPTER XXV.

EXPULSION FROM ILLINOIS.


When the bodies of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch were brought from
Carthage, they were met by thousands of the Saints from Nauvoo who wept
aloud for the loss of their beloved leaders. The scene was a very sad one.
Elder Willard Richards spoke to the people and advised them to remain
peaceable as they had always been, and let the Lord avenge the murder of
their loved ones.

The bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were buried privately at Nauvoo so that
their enemies might not disturb them.

And now the Saints were a little confused about who should be their
leaders. Joseph, the President of the Church, and Hyrum, one of his
counselors, were dead, and Sidney Rigdon, the other counselors, had some
months before got tired of affairs at Nauvoo and had gone to Pittsburg,
Pennsylvania. He was an apostate at heart, though he had not yet been cut
off from the Church. Most of the Twelve Apostles were away on missions, and
word was sent for them to return as soon as possible.

Though at first there was some misunderstanding among the Saints, the Lord
did not intend his Church should go to pieces because its leader had been
taken away. The Church had been set up never to be thrown down or left to
other people. The Gospel had been given to the earth "for the last time and
for the fullness of times." The Saints had a promise that the kingdom was
theirs "and the enemy shall not overcome." It would be a poor church,
indeed, that would go to pieces every time its chief officer died. No; the
Lord, through Joseph, had organized the Church so well that this could not
be. There was a quorum in the Church that had been given all the power
necessary to carry on the work of the Church in case the First Presidency
was taken away. That quorum was the Twelve Apostles. Now that there was no
First Presidency, it was the duty of the Twelve to preside and regulate the
affairs of the Church until such time that there should be another
president appointed. Brigham Young was the president of the Twelve, so in
reality he was the leading man in the Church.

But now came Sidney Rigdon from Pittsburg. He wanted to be appointed the
leader of the Church, or as he called it, a "guardian." He, with some
others, tried to have a meeting of the Saints before the Twelve could get
home. This meeting was appointed for the 8th of August, 1844. On the 6th of
August President Young and five of the Apostles arrived at Nauvoo.

The meeting was held at the grove, and Sidney Rigdon and some of the
Twelve spoke. When Brigham Young arose to address the meeting, it seemed to
the Saints that both in appearance and speech he was like the Prophet
Joseph. This certainly was a sign to them. At this meeting Sidney Rigdon
was rejected and the Twelve Apostles were upheld as the quorum to lead the
Church.

Sidney Rigdon did not like this. He got a few followers and tried to
organize another church. A number of others did the same, but all these
movements did not amount to much. The Saints kept on under the direction of
the Twelve, building the temple and other public edifices in Nauvoo.

The enemies of the Church were disappointed. They had thought that if they
could get Joseph out of the way that would be the end of "Mormonism." Of
course they did not understand that "Mormonism" is the Lord's work and does
not depend for its success on one or two men. He can raise up any number of
men to carry on his work, and now Brigham Young and his brethren were the
men who could and would carry it on.

In May, 1845, some of the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum were tried, and by
a jury pronounced innocent. This gave the mobbers more courage, and they
gathered again. In the small settlements outside of Nauvoo many houses were
burned and the inmates driven into the fields. These Saints were advised to
move into Nauvoo for protection.

Some time before his death, Joseph had predicted that the Saints would yet
move to the Rocky Mountains; and he had even begun the movement by holding
councils and asking for volunteers from the brethren to go ahead and locate
a place to which the Church might gather. President Young and the Twelve
now began preparing to carry this plan out. They could plainly see that it
was useless to try to live in peace in Illinois. The mobs grew larger and
fiercer. The people living in the counties surrounding Hancock county,
threatened to drive the "Mormons" from the state; and the officers whose
duty it was to enforce the laws would not do so if it was to protect the
"Mormons."

So in August, 1845, it was decided to select three thousand men who, with
their families, were to go to Upper California. All this western country
was then called Upper California. The authorities of the Church promised
the mob leaders that if they would not molest them they would all leave the
state early the next spring.

But the mobbing did not cease at this; so the sheriff of the county, a Mr.
Backenstos, organized a posse, that is, a company of men to help him
enforce the laws and keep order. The sheriff kept after the mob to prevent
them from burning houses, etc., and this made the mobbers very angry. One
day some of them tried to kill the sheriff, but he was saved by two
"Mormons" coming to his rescue. Thus during the summer and fall of 1845
there was much trouble between the mobs, the "Mormons," and the militia.

All this time the Saints had worked hard to finish the temple. It had been
decided to do this even if they had to work with the "trowel in one hand
and a sword in the other." October 5th the temple was near enough finished
that a conference was held in the building. No general conference had been
held for three years, as Joseph had said none should be convened until it
could be held in the temple.

After this the work on the building still went on, and in a short time it
was so far completed that it was dedicated, and a great many of the Saints
received their endowments within its sacred walls.

All that winter, (1845-46) Nauvoo was like a big workshop. Everybody that
could was preparing for the great move westward. Farms and houses were
offered for sale. Wagons were built, and as iron was scarce, many of them
had wooden tires. Horses and cattle were gathered. It was to be the sixth
move of the Saints from their homes, and it was no small undertaking now as
there were many thousands of people, and they were to go to a wild, unknown
land among the deserts and mountains of the West.

The move began on February 4, 1846, and from that date on there was a
continuous stream of wagons crossing the Mississippi river to the Iowa
side. A camp was made on Sugar creek, nine miles from Nauvoo, where the
Saints gathered. Towards the last of the month the weather became very
cold, the river froze over so that teams could be driven across on the ice.
It was a bad time of the year to begin such a move. Many of the Saints were
poorly clad, some had no tents or wagon covers, and in the snow and cold
there was much suffering; but on the Saints went, looking with sad hearts
on their deserted homes; but rather would they face the winter storms and
cold than to live in constant dread of cruel mobs.

Topics.--1. Presiding authority in the Church. 2. The Twelve sustained.
3. Action of Sidney Rigdon. 4. Mobbings. 5. The removal.

Questions and Review.--1. Where were Joseph and Hyrum buried? 2. What
were the feelings of the Saints? 3. Why were the Saints troubled about a
leader? 4. Where were most of the Twelve at the time of the martyrdom? 5.
When the First Presidency is taken away, what is the next presiding
authority in the Church? 6. What did Sidney Rigdon want? 7. What testimony
was given the Saints at the meeting on August 8th? 8. What became of Sidney
Rigdon? 9. What did the enemies of the Church expect to do by killing
Joseph Smith? 10. Who first planned the move to the mountains? 11. Tell
about the work of the mobs. 12. Why did the Saints work so hard to finish
the temple, knowing they would have to leave it? 13. When did the move
westward begin?


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE BATTLE OF NAUVOO.


Leaving the main body of the Saints traveling westward, in this chapter I
wish to tell you about what happened to those who remained in Nauvoo; and
by the way, this is the last chapter of this little history in which mobs
will play an important part.

In the summer of 1846 there were about six hundred Saints in Nauvoo, most
of whom had been unable to get away. Many were poor, some were sick, and
there were many old people and children. Many non-"Mormons" had bought
property from the Saints who had left, and had moved into the city. The mob
called these friendly citizens "Jack Mormons."

Naturally, one would think that these few Saints would be left to get ready
to move in peace; but not so. If there is any doubt of the brutal character
of the mob, what they now did will remove that doubt forever.

On July 11, eight brethren were engaged in cutting grain in a field twelve
miles from Nauvoo. A mob surrounded them, and then taking them one by one,
whipped them severely. Two of these mobbers were afterwards arrested, and
to get even for this, the mob carried away five other brethren who were
abused by the mobbers for twelve days before they were released.

The next move of the mob was to get writs of arrest for many persons in
Nauvoo. A John Carlin was unlawfully appointed a constable to serve these
writs, that is, make the arrests, and he raised a large body of men to help
him; but behind all this, the real object was to drive the remaining
"Mormons" from the city.

Governor Ford was now notified of the actions of these mobbers, and he sent
Major Parker to Nauvoo, who was to raise volunteers and defend the city.
Four companies of troops were organized by the governor's order; but
instead of treating the invaders as they truly were, a mob, Major Parker
made a treaty with their leader in which it was agreed that the "Mormons"
would leave the state within sixty days. The mob leader thought this fair
enough, but the mobbers did not. At this, their leader resigned and a man
by the name of Brockman took command of the crowd. He gave the order to
march towards Nauvoo, which they gladly did.

On the morning of September 10th, 1846, the watchman in the tower of the
temple gave notice that the enemy were coming 1,000 or 1,500 strong. They
had cannon, plenty of ammunition, and came like an army ready for battle.
Many of the new citizens fled, and the little band of defenders numbered
only one hundred and twenty-three men.

Meanwhile, a committee had come from Quincy to try to settle the troubles
without bloodshed. Although with them were Major Flood, sent by the
governor, and Mr. Wood, mayor of Quincy, the mob paid no attention to them,
and so they could do nothing.

There seemed no prospect but that the citizens would have to defend
themselves as best they could. Benjamin Clifford took command of the
volunteers, and Captain William Anderson organized a small body of
sharpshooters called the Spartan Band. As cannon were badly needed, the
brethren got two hollow steamboat shafts, cut them in two, plugged up one
end, and thus made some cannon. They had no cannon balls, but they used
scraps of iron and lead tied up into bags.

On Friday, the 11th, the mob drew up to the city and began firing. They
were met by the "Mormon" troops with their home-made cannon, which
surprised the mobbers very much, and they were compelled to stop their
advance.

On Saturday, the 12th, a flag of truce was brought into the city, and with
it a note to the commander at Nauvoo, stating that if they did not
surrender they would have to take the consequences. Major Clifford replied
that he had been sent by the governor to uphold the laws and that he was
going to do it, advising Brockman to disband his men.

The Nauvoo citizens had held their position during the night and had thrown
up some breastworks. The next day the battle waged fiercer than ever, but
the Nauvoo boys held their ground and the mob could not get in. Twelve
mobbers were wounded. The first one killed among the defenders was Augustus
Anderson, a "Mormon" boy fourteen years old. He left his mother that
morning saying he would fight for her, and went along with his father,
Captain William Anderson. Augustus was struck by a cannon ball, and died in
a few minutes. Shortly after Captain Anderson was also hit.

"I am wounded," he cried. "Take my gun and shoot on."

David Norris was also killed, and a number of other brethren wounded.

For six days that little band of brave defenders kept the mob at bay; and
even when it was seen to be useless to keep the fight up longer, many were
in favor of doing so.

On the 16th a treaty was made. The city was to surrender. The citizens were
not to be molested, and the sick and helpless were to be protected. The
"Mormons" were to leave as soon as possible.

The mob forces entered the city on the 17th; but it was the same old story.
They thought no more of promises or of the treaty. Bands of men went
through the city, stealing, insulting, and in every way abusing the people.
A gang went through the temple and up to the tower where they rang the
bell, yelled and shouted. A preacher who was in the mob went up to the top
of the tower and cried in a loud voice:

"Peace! peace! peace! to the inhabitants of the earth, now the 'Mormons'
are driven!"

The poor Saints had to get away as fast as they could. Some went north,
some south, but most of them crossed the river and camped on the low
bottoms of the Mississippi in Iowa. I shall not attempt to tell you of the
sufferings of these poor people; weak, sick hungry, cold, and wet. It would
make your heart ache to see the picture, one of the saddest in all our
history.

At this time, when it seemed as though these people would starve to death,
a strange thing happened. Great flocks of quail came flying into camp. They
flew against the wagons with such force that they were killed or stunned,
so that they could be picked up. They also alighted all over the camp and
were so tame that they could be taken by the hand. Thus the Lord sent food
to his hungry children.

If you wish to read a very interesting account of this removal from Nauvoo,
read Colonel Kane's lecture, found in many of our larger histories.[2]

Topics.--1. Nauvoo after the main body of Saints had left. 2. The Battle
of Nauvoo. 3. The remnant driven out.

Questions and Review.--1. About how many Saints were left in Nauvoo? 2.
Who were the "Jack Mormons?" 3. Tell of the mob's doings. 4. Who was John
Carlin? 5. What did he do? 6. Who was Major Parker? 7. What did he have
orders to do? 8. Describe the mobbing party. 9. Tell about the Nauvoo
volunteers. 10. Who were William and Augustus Anderson? 11. How long did
the defenders hold out? 12. What was agreed upon in the treaty of peace?
13. Describe the actions of the mob in Nauvoo. 14. To where were the Saints
driven? 15. What was their condition? 16. How were they fed? 17. Who wrote
an interesting account of this exodus?


CHAPTER XXVII.

WESTWARD.


The moving of a nation! What a task it must have been!

Most of you have had some experience in moving, it may be only a family
moving from one house to another, and you know what a lot of worry and work
there are in such a small affair; but here was a nation moving!

This great exodus was very much like the time when the children of Israel
went from under the oppression of Egypt out into the wilderness to journey
to the promised land. When at Nauvoo, Brigham Young said to the Saints: "To
your tents, O Israel," they knew they had another Moses to lead them from
their persecutors.

The camp at Sugar creek grew larger every day through the arrival of exiles
from Nauvoo. Many did not bring provisions enough with them, so that they
were forced to go to the neighboring farms and settlements and work for
corn.

The first move the camp made was on March 1, 1846, when four hundred wagons
started forward. Five miles only was traveled that day, and when they
camped, the snow had to be shovelled away where they pitched their tents.

From that time the Saints moved slowly westward across the territory of
Iowa. As they advanced, the spring rains came and often drenched the
travelers through. The ground now became very muddy, and it was so hard for
the poor teams that some days only a few miles were traveled. Sometimes
their camping places were so wet that they who slept on the ground would
have to lay on branches of trees so that they would not sink into the mud.

At first there was very little feed for their animals, and they had to live
on the bark and twigs of trees, with what, corn could be spared for them.
Many horses were traded for oxen, as they could stand such hardship better.
Trips were made to the nearest settlements to buy food. Those who had no
money traded what they could spare, such as dishes and feather beds for
corn.

For the first few weeks there was not much order in their way of traveling;
but on March 27th the Saints were more perfectly organized. Brigham Young
was sustained as president of the whole camp. Then captains were appointed
over hundreds, over fifties, and over tens. Clerks were chosen to keep the
records, etc., and men were called to see to the buying and distributing of
the food. Thus every one had something to do and everything was done in
order.

[Illustration: A PIONEER TRAIN.]

Often in the evening when supper had been eaten, the logs were piled on the
bonfire, a space was cleared, the musicians brought out their instruments,
and the sorrows and hardships of the day were forgotten in the innocent
dance.

The camp always rested on Sundays, and if the weather would permit,
meetings were held.

On April 24th a point on Grand river was reached, one hundred and
forty-five miles north-west from Nauvoo. Here it was decided to form a
settlement--to build houses and plant crops, that those who came after
would have food and a stopping place. The settlement was called Garden
Grove. Soon it was as lively as a hive of bees. Hundreds of men were busy
making fence rails and fences, building houses, digging wells, clearing
land, and plowing. Meetings were held often and the people were instructed
and encouraged. Parley P. Pratt and a small company were sent ahead to find
another location for a settlement. They found a beautiful place about
thirty miles from Garden Grove, which they called Mount Pisgah. Here houses
were also built, and farms and gardens planted. As many of the Saints were
poor and sick they rested at these two settlements while the main body went
on.

From Mount Pisgah the country was wild Indian lands, there being no white
settlements or roads. The spring rains had now moderated so that the roads
were better. On June 14th President Young and the leading companies arrived
at the Missouri river, where a stop was made. Most of the companies came up
in July. A camp was made on the east side of the river on some high land
called Council Bluffs.

This was on Indian land, but the travelers were received kindly and given
permission to stop.

President Young intended to send a body of picked men into the Rocky
Mountains as soon as possible to locate a gathering place. They were to
push on ahead that summer and put in crops. Arrangements were being made
to this end, when something happened that put a stop to the plan. This was
the call for the Mormon Battalion, about which I will tell you in the next
chapter.

After five hundred of their best men had marched away to fight the battles
of their country, it was impossible for the Saints to get to the mountains
that year. So it was decided to make a third stopping place and remain
there during the winter.

There being a good location for a town on the west bank of the Missouri
river, that place was selected and named Winter Quarters. The town was laid
out regularly into streets, and log houses were built. Some made dugouts in
the sides of the hill, which were quite comfortable during the cold winter.
As the Indians were troublesome on that side of the river a stockade was
built around the town. By December, 1846, five hundred and thirty-eight log
houses and eighty-three sod houses were built, inhabited by three thousand
four hundred and eighty-three people. The town was divided into twenty-two
wards, each presided over by a bishop. A large log house was built in which
meetings and parties were held.

The food of the people that winter consisted largely of corn-bread and
pork. President Young had a grist mill built, but before that time many ate
boiled wheat, and ground their corn in coffee mills.

Because of hardships and poor food there was much sickness at all the
settlements. Graves marked the prairie for hundreds of miles. At Winter
Quarters alone over six hundred were buried.

The poor Saints who were left at Nauvoo were not forgotten. After they had
been driven from Nauvoo, they were met by teams from Winter Quarters, and
all who wished to go were taken to the camps of the Saints.

Perhaps you may get an idea of this great move when you are told that
during that summer there were about two thousand wagons and ten thousand
Saints on the way between Nauvoo and Council Bluffs.

Topics.--1. From Nauvoo to Garden Grove. 2. Garden Grove and Mount
Pisgah. 3. Winter Quarters.

Questions and Review.--1. What might this last move of the Saints be
likened to? 2. After leaving Nauvoo where was the first stopping place? 3.
When did the camp start west? 4. What hindered the traveling? 5. How was
the camp organized? 6. What did the Saints do for amusement? 7. Where were
Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah? 8. What was the object in making these
settlements? 9. What prevented a band of pioneers from going to the
mountains that summer? 10. Where was Winter Quarters? 11. Describe the
place. 12. About how many people were traveling across Iowa that summer?


CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE MORMON BATTALION.


During the summer of 1846 the United States was at war with the republic of
Mexico. A number of battles had been fought in Texas. What is now
California, Nevada, Utah, and Arizona belonged to Mexico, and as President
Polk desired to get this large district of country for the United States,
he sent soldiers westward to the Pacific ocean.

The "Mormon" people traveling from Nauvoo had asked President Polk for
assistance in their journey to the west. They said they wanted to remain
under the protection of the government, and were willing to aid in holding
the western country for the United States.

In the month of June, 1846, Captain James Allen, an officer of the United
States army arrived at Mount Pisgah, Iowa. What he wanted was five hundred
men with which to form a battalion and march across the continent to
California, and take part in the war with Mexico.

This was startling news indeed. The Saints had not expected this kind of
"help" in their journeying through the wilderness. Many of the Saints
looked upon the call as a plan to destroy them. You can hardly blame them
for that, can you, knowing some of their past history?

But President Young and the leading brethren told the officer he should
have his men. They thought it was a test to see if they were true to their
country. Though it was a pretty hard test, thus to take their best and
strongest men away from such a camp as theirs, yet the "Mormon" people
would show to the government and to the whole world that they were loyal to
their country, even though that country had failed to protect them in their
rights to live in peace and worship God.

At a meeting held at Council Bluffs it was decided to raise the men asked
for. Brigham Young and the Twelve took an active part in getting
volunteers. Word was sent to the different settlements of the Saints. The
stars and stripes were hoisted to a tree top, and the work of enrollment
began. Within three days the little army was organized and ready for the
march. Then they had a grand farewell party, held, not in some beautifully
lighted ball room, but in a bowery, where the ground had been packed hard
by the tread of many feet. There fathers and mothers and brothers and
sisters and sweethearts said their goodbyes to each other.

And then the long, dreary march began. The story of that march would fill
a book, so of course very little of it can be told here. If you would like
to read more about it, you will find it in Brother Tyler's "History of the
Mormon Battalion."

There were five hundred and forty-nine souls in the Battalion. Captain
James Allen was the commander. They started on their march July 20, 1846,
to Fort Leavenworth, where they received their guns and other things
necessary for an army. At this point Captain Allen died, which made the men
feel bad, as he was a good, kind officer.

The Battalion began to move from Fort Leavenworth on the 12th of August.
You may see their line of march by looking at the map on page 128. After
suffering much hardship, they reached Santa Fe, October 9th. Here Colonel
Cooke took the command. As many of the soldiers as were too sick to go on
were sent to Pueblo, where they remained all winter, and traveled to Salt
Lake valley the next summer. The main body of the Battalion left Santa Fe,
October 19th, for California. At Tucson they expected to have a battle with
some Mexican soldiers, and prepared for it, but they marched through the
city without being disturbed. From Tucson they continued over the deserts,
and arrived at San Diego, January 29, 1847, where they saw the broad, blue,
ocean, many of them for the first time.

The Battalion remained in and around San Diego for about two weeks. As
there was no fighting to be done, the men built houses, dug wells, made
brick, and helped build up the town. On March 19th most of them marched to
Los Angeles, and on the 16th of July they were mustered out, having served
their full time--one year.

Of this great march Colonel Cooke their commander wrote:

"History may be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry;
nine-tenths of it through a wilderness, where nothing but savages and wild
beasts are found, or deserts, where for want of water, there is no living
creature. There, with almost hopeless labor we have dug deep wells. Without
a guide we have crossed the wilderness, we have ventured into trackless
prairies, where water was not found for several marches. With crowbar and
pickax in hand we have worked our way over mountains, which seemed to defy
aught but the wild goat, and hewed a passage through a chasm of rock, more
narrow than our wagons."

After their release, most of the men took up their march for home. Perhaps
it would be more correct to say to find their families and friends, as they
did not have any home yet. They journeyed northward in California and then
crossed the mountains to Salt Lake valley where most of them arrived in
October, 1847. From there many went right on to Winter Quarters to their
families.

A number of the Battalion men remained in California to earn a little
money. Some got work with a Captain Sutter who had a large ranch on the
American fork of the Sacramento river. The "Mormons" with some others were
set to work building a mill, and it was here while digging in the mill race
that gold was discovered in California. Some of the brethren carried away a
few hundred dollars' worth when they went to Salt Lake Valley the next
summer.

Topics.--1. The call for the Mormon Battalion. 2. Its march. 3. Discovery
of Gold.

Questions and Review.--1. Who was Captain James Allen? 2. What did he
want of the "Mormons?" 3. What was the Battalion wanted for? 4. What did
President Young say? 5. What did many of the Saints think of the call? 6.
Why was it a hardship on the Saints at that time to furnish five hundred
soldiers? 7. Describe the line of march of the Battalion. 8. How long did
it take them? 9. How far was it? 10. What kind of journey was it? 11. What
did Colonel Cooke say about it? 12. What did the Battalion men do in
California? 13. What happened at Nauvoo in the summer of 1846, when the
Battalion was on the march?


CHAPTER XXIX.

THE PIONEERS.


While the Saints were in Winter Quarters during the winter of 1846-7 they
were busily preparing for the march to the mountains next spring. Men for
the advance company were selected, and on April 7, 1847, they began to move
out of Winter Quarters to a place westward, where they were to gather. Ten
days later the first or pioneer camp, was ready for marching. The idea was
to have twelve times twelve men, but one became sick and had to return, so
that left one hundred and forty-three. There were besides the men three
women and two children. They had seventy-two wagons, ninety-three horses,
fifty-two mules, sixty-six oxen, nineteen cows, seventeen dogs, and some
chickens.

For three months and seventeen days this company traveled westward over
plains and mountains. During the first part of their journey they sometimes
followed a wagon road to Oregon, and sometimes they made new roads. The
shallow rivers they forded, the deep ones they built bridges over, and the
large ones they crossed in ferry boats which they built. After these
ferries had been built the pioneers sometimes took over companies on their
way to Oregon and received provisions for their pay.

[Illustration: MAP OF PIONEER ROUTE.]

The map will show you the route they took better than can be told here.

The pioneers did not know exactly where they were to locate. It was to be
in some valley of the Rocky mountains where they could live in peace, free
from mobs. When President Young was asked as to their destination, all he
could say was that he would know the place when he should see it, and that
they should continue to travel the way the Spirit of the Lord directed
them.

On their journey they often met scouts and trappers. One of the best known
of these was Col. James Bridger. He had been all through the valley of the
Great Salt Lake, he said, and he told the pioneers that they could not live
there, as nothing would grow. So sure was he of this that he offered to
give a thousand dollars for the first bushel of corn they could raise in
that valley. President Young simply said, "Wait a little and we will show
you."

When they left the plains and got up in the mountains some of them became
sick with the mountain fever. Among those ailing was President Young. He
became so bad that he could not travel, so when they were in Echo canyon he
instructed Orson Pratt to take the main company on and he with a few men
would remain for a few days.

The main company, therefore, went on down Echo canyon, up Weber valley, and
across the mountains, coming down into Salt Lake valley through Emigration
canyon. President Young had told them that when they got to the open
country on crossing the mountain they were to go to the north and stop at
the first convenient place for putting in their seeds. This the company
did, and on the 23rd of July they camped on the ground where now stands the
beautiful city and county building in Salt Lake City. After offering up
their thanks to God for his preserving care, they at once got out their
tools and began to work. The season was so far advanced that if they were
to raise anything they must hurry. When they tried to plow the land, they
found it so dry and hard that some of the plows were broken. What could
they do? Then the thought came to turn the water in the creek over the land
and soak it up. This was done, and then there was no trouble to plow and
plant. This was the beginning of irrigation in this western part of the
United States.

President Young and his party followed the next day. President Wilford
Woodruff was with him and we will let him tell of it:

"On the 24th I drove my carriage, with President Young lying on a bed in
it, into the open valley. When we came out of the canyon into full view of
the valley, I turned the side of my carriage around, open to the west, and
President Young arose from his bed and took a look at the country. While
gazing on the scene before us, he was enwrapped in vision for several
minutes. He had seen the valley before in vision, and now he saw the future
glory of Zion and of Israel as they would be, planted in the valleys of
these mountains. When the vision had passed, he said:

"'It is enough. This is the right place. Drive on.'"

On August 26th, President Young and a company of one hundred and seven
persons, started on the return trip to Winter Quarters. On the Sweetwater
river they met two large companies of Saints on the way to the valley,
following the trail of the pioneers. There was great rejoicing, as the
Saints now for the first time knew where they were to locate. These
companies arrived safely in Salt Lake valley in September and October.

President Young and company arrived at Winter Quarters October 31. All was
well with the Saints, and they were prospering.

And now a very important event took place. From the death of Joseph the
Prophet up to this time the Church had been led by the Twelve. Now it was
decided to reorganize the First Presidency, and at a meeting held in Winter
Quarters, December 5, 1847, the Twelve chose Brigham Young as President of
the Church. He chose Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as his
counselors, and these now became the First Presidency. This action of the
Twelve was sustained at a conference of the Church on the 27th.

Thus the work prospered. Many meetings were held, and the Church was set in
order. Missionaries were sent to the world, and the Saints, now that they
had another gathering place, began to flock towards the new Zion in the
mountains. Winter Quarters was deserted and a new settlement founded across
the river. It was called Kanesville (now Council Bluffs) in honor of Thomas
L. Kane who did many kind acts for the Saints.

In the spring of 1848 the Saints on the Missouri river were busy getting
ready for the move to the mountains. They started about the beginning of
June, organized into three large companies, all led by President Young.
Altogether there were 2,417 people, 793 wagons, herds of horses and cattle,
a great many sheep, pigs, chickens, etc. Here was surely, if not a nation,
a whole city moving. They followed in the trail of the first companies and
arrived in Great Salt Lake valley in September and October.

Topics.--1. The march of the pioneers. 2. Arrival in Salt Lake valley. 3.
The reorganization of the First Presidency. 4. The main companies.

Questions and Review.--1. How many persons were in the first or pioneer
company? 2. What was the object of the company? 3. How long were they on
the journey? 4. Describe their route. (See map). 5. What did trappers and
hunters say of Salt Lake valley? 6. When did the main body reach Salt Lake
valley? 7. When did President Young arrive? 8. What did he say about the
place? 9. Why did the pioneers know very little about irrigation? 10. Who
returned to Winter Quarters? 11. Whom did they meet? 12. What took place
December 5, 1847? 13. Where was Kanesville? 14. What took place during the
summer of 1848?


CHAPTER. XXX.

GREAT SALT LAKE CITY.


The 25th of July, 1847, came on a Sunday, therefore the pioneers rested and
held meetings.

Monday morning work began in earnest. Plowing and planting had to be
hurried. Exploring parties were also sent out in different directions to
become acquainted with the country.

On the evening of July 28th President Young, accompanied by the Apostles,
went some distance from the camp to select a spot from which to begin
building the city. Arriving at a good location, President Young stopped,
and, striking his cane in the earth, he said: "Here will be the temple of
our God"--and on that spot the temple stands today. It was then decided to
lay out the city north, east, south, and west from the temple site, in ten
acre blocks, the streets to be eight rods wide and the sidewalks twenty
feet. Some time after this it was named Great Salt Lake City.

You will call to mind that some of the Mormon Battalion, owing to sickness,
did not march through to California. This company, together with some
Saints from the state of Mississippi, arrived at the pioneer camp on July
29th, thus making quite an addition to the company. The first building of
any kind erected in the valley by the Saints was a bowery built on the
temple block by the Battalion men. This was used for some time in which to
hold meetings.

It was decided not to settle on the city lots at first, but build a fort
with houses in as a protection from the Indians. The houses were built of
logs, and stood in a row, close together, which formed one side of the
fort. The other three sides were built of adobe walls. The roofs of the
houses were made of soil. The windows and doors faced the inside. Though
better than living all the winter in tents and wagons, you may imagine
these houses were not very comfortable, especially when the rain came
through the roofs onto beds, tables, stoves, etc.

[Illustration: SALT LAKE VALLEY IN 1847.]

A conference was held in the bowery on Sunday, August 22nd, where
considerable business was attended to. The Salt Lake Stake of Zion was
organized, with John Smith as president. It was shortly after this that
President Young and his company went back to Winter Quarters.

The next addition to the settlement was the Mormon Battalion from
California.

At the coming of winter all moved into the fort. That season the winter was
mild, so quite an amount of work was done outside.

The spring of 1848 opened with fine prospects ahead. Five thousand acres of
land were planted, and the grain was growing rapidly; but another trial was
at hand. In May and June great swarms of crickets came from the mountains
and began to devour every growing thing. The settlers fought them as best
they were able, but what could be done with such countless millions of
insects! It seemed hopeless. Their crops were fast disappearing, and with
them their means of living through the next year. Remember, they were a
thousand miles from any other people, with mountains and deserts between
them. They could not get food from other places. They would have to raise
it or to starve.

When they had about given up hope, there came great flocks of white birds
from the lake. They settled on the fields and began eating the crickets.
They would eat all they were able, then vomit, and eat again. This they did
day after day until the crickets were destroyed and part of the crop was
saved.

[Illustration: IN THE OLD FORT.]

That fall President Young with the main body of Saints arrived from the
East. There were now about five thousand people in the valley, and
prospects were not very encouraging, owing to the small crop raised. Food
was scarce, as also was clothing. Many people lived for weeks on "greens"
and the roots of the sego and thistle. A kind of soup was made by cooking
raw-hides. Yet in the midst of these times Heber C. Kimball declared in a
public meeting that it would not be three years before "states goods" would
be sold in Salt Lake cheaper than in St. Louis. No one at that time could
see how it could be possible, but the prophecy was fulfilled within a year,
and it was in this way: That winter gold was discovered in California, and
early the next summer great companies of men came flocking from the east on
their way to the gold mines. Salt Lake City was a sort of half way house.
These gold seekers were heavily laden with all manner of goods, but being
anxious to get to California as soon as possible they traded to the people
in Salt Lake City their goods for lighter wagons, fresh horses, etc. Thus a
great deal of merchandise was brought to the valley, and Brother Kimball's
prophecy was fulfilled.

The city had now been laid out into blocks, and lots were given to the
settlers. Some built houses and moved in that fall, but most of the people
remained in the fort until the spring of 1849.

The city now began to grow rapidly, as companies of Saints were continually
coming from the east. In February, 1849, the city was divided into nineteen
wards and a bishop appointed over each. On the 12th of the same month the
four vacancies in the quorum of the Twelve Apostles were filled by the
calling of Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, and Franklin D.
Richards to the apostleship.

Thus the Church was firmly established again, this time in the peaceful
valleys of the mountains, away from the persecution of its enemies and the
anger of mobs.

Topics.--1. Locating the temple and city. 2. The fort. 3. The crickets
and gulls. 4. Hard times. 5. Heber C. Kimball's prophecy.

Questions and Review.--1. How did President Young locate the temple
spot? 2. How was the city laid out? 3. What was the first building in the
valley? 4. Describe a bowery. 5. What was the fort? 6. Describe it. 7. Who
was the first stake president in Utah? 8. What happened in the spring of
1848? 9. How were the crops saved? 10. Why was food so scarce in 1848? 11.
What kinds of food were eaten? 12. What was Heber C. Kimball's prophecy?
13. How was it fulfilled? 14. How was the city built up? 15. What apostles
were chosen February 12, 1849?


CHAPTER XXXI.

GROWTH OF UTAH AND THE CHURCH.


As you were told in the last chapter, among the first things done by the
pioneers was to send exploring parties out to find other locations for
settlement. They knew that thousands of Saints would follow them to their
new home, and room must be had for them.

In the first company that followed the pioneers was Peregrine Sessions. He,
with some others, moved north from the pioneer camp and settled in what is
now Davis county. Further north, at the junction of the Weber and Ogden
rivers, there lived, before the pioneers came, a trapper and trader by the
name of Goodyear. He claimed a large area of land, nearly all of what is
now Weber county, saying that the Mexican government had granted it to him.
This claim he sold in 1847 to Captain James Brown of the Mormon Battalion
for the sum of $3,000. In the spring of 1848, Captain Brown with his sons
moved to the new location and began putting in crops. They were told that
frost would kill the corn before it could ripen, but they worked on, and in
the fall reaped a large harvest. Soon other families moved in, to whom
Captain Brown gave land. Thus Ogden city and Weber county had their
beginning.

Early in the spring of 1849, the first settlers moved south from Salt Lake
City. They consisted of thirty families led by John S. Higbee, one of the
pioneers. They settled on Provo river, built a fort for protection, and
then began plowing and planting. There were quite a number of Indians in
that part. Their head chief was Sowiette, and under him was Chief Walker.
The first was a kind Indian who wished to live in peace with the whites;
but not so with Walker who delighted in stealing and fighting.

For some months everything went well with the Provo settlers, but in the
fall the Indians began stealing, and once in awhile an arrow came
uncomfortably near some settler when away from the fort. At length a party
of men who were out searching for stolen cattle, had a fight with a band of
Indians in which five of the savages were killed.

The settlers in the fort were now continually annoyed, until in February,
1850, a company of militia was sent from Salt Lake City to their aid. A
fierce battle ensued, in which a number were killed on both sides, and the
Indians were scattered to the mountains.

It was President Young's policy not to harm the Indians if possible, saying
that it was cheaper to feed them than to fight them. But even this kind
policy did not altogether prevent trouble with these wild people. In 1853,
the Indians, led by Chief Walker, made war on the southern settlements,
with the result that about twenty whites and a great many Indians were
killed.

At the close of the war with Mexico all this western country became a part
of the United States. At a convention held in Salt Lake City, March 4,
1849, the people asked Congress for a territorial organization. Later, a
petition was sent asking to be admitted into the Union under the name of
"The State of Deseret." Until Congress could act, a temporary government
was formed which existed for nearly two years. President Young was elected
governor, and there were the other officers usually found in a state.
September 9, 1850, Congress passed an act organizing Utah Territory.
President Millard Fillmore appointed Brigham Young as governor. Out of the
six other officers, three were "Mormons," and three non-"Mormons" from the
East.

At a conference held in Salt Lake City, October 6, 1849, a number of elders
were called to new mission fields. John Taylor, Curtis E. Bolton, and John
Pack were sent to France; Erastus Snow and Peter O. Hansen to Denmark; John
Forsgren to Sweden; Lorenzo Snow and Joseph Toronto to Italy; Addison
Pratt, James S. Brown, and Hiram H. Blackwell, to the Society Islands.
Brother Pratt had but recently returned from a five years mission to these
islands, where twelve hundred souls had been baptized into the Church.

At the April conference, 1851, Edward Hunter was chosen to succeed Newel K.
Whitney as bishop of the Church. There were at that time about thirty
thousand people in Utah.

President Young and the Apostles traveled much throughout the Territory,
locating settlements, organizing wards and putting the Church in order. At
the October conference, 1853, some of the leading brethren were called to
locate in different parts of the Territory. Among them were Elders George
A. Smith and Erastus Snow with fifty families who were called to strengthen
Iron county, and Elder Lorenzo Snow with fifty families to go to Box Elder.

In the summer of 1854 the grasshoppers did much damage to the crops, and
again in 1855 in many parts these insects took every green thing. This
brought on another scarcity. There was much suffering and again the people
were compelled to live on roots. A number of the brethren had stored up
some grain which they now shared with those who had none. In this way all
fared very much alike and the hardships were shared by all.

In the winter of 1856 a very sad thing happened. That year some emigrants
came to Utah in handcart companies. Small, two wheeled carts were made at
the place of starting in Iowa. On these carts were loaded baggage and
provisions, and the men and boys pulled them across the plains. Sometimes
the women and girls helped. A few ox teams usually hauled the heaviest
loads in wagons, and in this way the Saints walked and pulled their carts
over the thirteen hundred miles of their journey. This plan succeeded very
well for those who started early and reached the valley in good time, but a
number of companies started too late and were caught in fierce snow storms
in the mountains. Many of these poor travelers died from hunger and cold,
and if it had not been for some of the brethren who came out from Salt Lake
to their help, no doubt most of them would have perished.

Topics.--1. Making settlements. 2. Trouble with the Indians. 3.
Organizing Utah Territory. 4. Famine of 1855-6. 5. The handcart companies.

Questions and Review.--1. Where was the second settlement in Utah made?
2. When and by whom was Ogden settled? 3. Tell about the settlement of
Provo. 4. What trouble did the Provo settlers have? 5. What was President
Young's Indian policy? 6. Who was Chief Walker? 7. What was done March 4,
1849? 8. What did the people wish to name the state? 9. When was Utah
Territory organized? 10. Who was the first governor? 11. Name the first
missionaries to France; to Denmark; to Sweden; to Italy; to the Society
Islands. 12. Tell something about these missions. 13. Tell about the work
of the Church leaders in making settlements, etc. 14. What was the cause of
the famine in 1855-6? 15. What were the handcart companies?


CHAPTER XXXII.

THE "UTAH WAR."


The president of the United States appoints the leading officers of a
territory. Many of the officers sent to Utah by the president were good men
and did justice to "Mormon" and Gentile alike; but some were men who could
see no good in the Saints, and were therefore always trying to oppress
them. Such men were Judges Stiles and Drummond, and Secretary Ferris, who
were in Utah in 1856. At last they left the territory and sent in a report
to the president. In it Judge Drummond said that the "Mormons" were
traitors to the United States, and would not obey its laws; that they had a
secret organization whose duty it was to murder all who opposed them; that
the court records had been burned; that the government officials were in
danger of their lives, etc. Like reports were made by other persons, and
the result was that a strong feeling was created in the East against the
people of Utah.

On the 24th of July, 1857, the people of Salt Lake City were having a grand
celebration in Big Cottonwood canyon. They were having a happy time. The
band played, the choirs sang, the cannon roared, while the Stars and
Stripes waved from trees and mountain peaks. Suddenly four dusty travelers
rode into the camp. They brought news from the East, and startling news it
was: the president of the United States had sent an army to Utah to
establish law and order among the "Mormons!"

In the evening the Saints were called together, and the news was told them.
President Young spoke with power. "We have transgressed no law, neither do
we intend to," said he; "but as for any nation coming to destroy this
people, God Almighty being my helper, it shall not be."

Two thousand five hundred soldiers were on the march to Utah. General
Harney was appointed commander, but he was succeeded by Colonel Albert
Sidney Johnston. With the army came the new set of officers which the
president had appointed for the territory.

In the commander's orders it was stated that the people of Utah were in
rebellion against the United States, and that it was the duty of the army
to restore the authority of the government and aid and protect the new
officers in the discharge of their duties. On the 8th of September Captain
Van Vliet arrived in Salt Lake City from the army. He told President Young
that their intentions were not to harm the people in any way. President
Young replied that he had had experience with military bodies in Missouri
and Illinois, and he knew what the "Mormons" could expect. The captain
tried to show President Young how useless it would be for a few "Mormons"
to resist a nation like the United States. Even if they prevented the army
from entering the valley that year, more soldiers would be sent in the
spring.

"We are aware that such will be the case," replied the president; "but when
those troops arrive they will find Utah a desert; every house will be
burned to the ground, every tree cut down, and every field laid waste."

The captain was deeply impressed, but such were really the intentions of
the Saints. They could not trust the troops, and they did not intend to
submit tamely to such scenes as they had passed through in Far West and
Nauvoo. They were not in rebellion, and if the president had simply sent
some one to investigate, he would have found out that truth; but he had
acted on the spur of the moment, and the troops were already far on the
way. If they could be checked for a time until the truth could be learned,
the danger of a conflict might be averted; but if not, then, said President
Young, and the people were with him, their homes, fields, and gardens would
be destroyed by fire and the Saints would flee to the mountains.

The army continued its march towards Utah. Col. R.T. Burton was now ordered
by Gen. Daniel H. Wells, commander of the Utah militia, to take a small
body of men and guard the emigrant trains that were coming in. The militia
to the number of 2,500 men was called into service, and in September, 1857,
Gen. Wells and staff went to Echo canyon and there made their headquarters.
Active preparations were now made to stop the enemy. Echo canyon, through
which the troops would have to pass, was fortified by trenches and the
loosening of rocks on the hill sides.

By this time the army was in what is now Wyoming, and was making for Echo
canyon. Small companies of Utah men were sent out to meet them. They were
instructed to annoy the invaders as much as possible, to burn the grass,
drive off their cattle, etc., but they were to shed no blood if it were
possible to prevent it. These orders were followed, and many exciting
encounters and narrow escapes took place. Major Lot Smith, with a small
company of men, at one time rode up to a large wagon train carrying
supplies for the army. After capturing the drivers, they set fire to and
destroy the whole train. Herds of cattle were driven off to Salt Lake
valley, where they were kept during the winter and taken back to the
soldiers in the spring.

Winter came early that year, and in the mountains where the armies were,
the weather became very cold, with snow and sleet. The government troops
made but little progress. They tried hard to reach the valley; but at last
they were compelled to stop for the winter in the mountains of western
Wyoming.

This was all the Utah leaders wanted. Now there would be time for finding
out the truth. Most of the militia returned home, leaving fifty men as a
guard in Echo canyon.

When the government at Washington heard the news from the seat of the "war"
there was considerable excitement, and Congress voted to send another army
to aid the first one. Meanwhile the people of Utah were anxiously waiting
for spring and preparing for the conflict which they thought must then
come.

Topics.--1. Character of some territorial officials. 2. The army for
Utah. 3. What the "Mormons" thought of the army. 4. How the army was
stopped.

Questions and Review.--1. Who was Judge Drummond? 2. What report did he
make to the government about Utah affairs? 3. What led President Buchanan
to send an army to Utah? 4. What was the object of sending this army? 5.
When did the Saints first hear of it? 6. What did the "Mormons" resolve to
do? 7. Why could they not trust the army? 8. What did the Utah militia do?
9. What was the object in annoying the troops? 10. What hindered the troops
from entering Salt Lake valley that year?


CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE "UTAH WAR," (CONCLUDED.)


When that friend of the Latter-day Saints, Colonel, afterwards General
Thomas L. Kane, heard of the troubles in Utah, he left his home in
Philadelphia and went to Washington to see the president. Though feeble in
health, he offered to go to Utah and try to settle the difficulties in a
peaceable manner. The offer was accepted. Colonel Kane arrived in Salt Lake
City in February, 1858, where he was gladly received. In the cold and snow
of that winter he went to the camp of the army and had a talk with the new
governor whom the president had appointed to take Brigham Young's place.
Colonel Kane told the officers with the army that they would be welcomed in
the valley and kindly treated, but the troops must not locate in or near
any settlement of the territory. The Colonel also convinced Governor
Cumming that he had no need of an army to help him take charge of his
office, and even prevailed on him to go back to Salt Lake City with him.

To this, General Johnston of the army was very much opposed. The president
had sent him with an army to put the governor into his office, aided by
sword and cannon; but now, if the governor could enter peaceably upon his
duties there would be no need of him or his soldiers. The general didn't
like it a bit; but nevertheless, Governor Cumming went with Colonel Kane to
Salt Lake City in charge of some of the Utah militia.

Governor Cumming was received with the respect due such an officer, and
duly installed into his position. He found the records and books of the
courts safe, and learned that the reports which had led the president to
send the army were not true.

The new governor was a good man. He said the troops would have to come into
the valley in the spring, but the people's rights would be respected, and
no harm should be done to any of them. The Saints, however, could not trust
the army. They remembered the scenes of the past, and resolved that they
should not be enacted over again in the valleys of Utah. So, early in the
spring, the order came for all the Saints to pack up their goods, get
together their stock, and move southward, leaving their deserted homes in
the care of a few guards who were to set fire to everything should the army
attempt to locate in the settlements.

On seeing the Saints thus leaving their hard-earned homes, the kind-hearted
old governor entreated them not to do so, promising them full protection.
When his wife arrived from the camp of the army and saw the towns lonely
and deserted, she burst into tears and pleaded with her husband to bring
the people back. The governor, however, could do nothing. The 30,000 people
in Salt Lake City and northward took all their goods and moved south, most
of them into Utah Valley.

President Buchanan, now having learned the true condition of affairs, sent
two gentlemen to arrange for peace. They arrived in Salt Lake in June and
had a number of meetings with the leading brethren who came from the south
for that purpose. A letter was read from President Buchanan which, after
telling of the many crimes committed by the "Mormons" against the
government, offered to pardon all who would submit to the laws. In reply
President Young said that he and his brethren had simply stood up for their
rights, and they had done nothing to be pardoned for, except, perhaps the
burning of some government trains, and for that act they accepted the
President's pardon. President Young then said they were willing the troops
should come into the country. They might march through the city but they
were not to make a camp less than forty miles away. "No mobs shall live in
the homes we have built in these mountains," said the president. "That's
the program, gentlemen, whether you like it or not. If you want war, you
can have it; but, if you want peace, peace it is; and we shall be glad of
it." After the meetings the brethren went back to the Saints in the south.

June 26, 1858, "Johnston's Army," marched through Salt Lake City. All day
long the troops and trains passed through the city. The only sounds heard
was the noise made by the horses' hoofs and the roll of the wagons. The
city seemed as if dead. Hardly a person was seen on the streets. Quietly
and orderly the soldiers marched on. Colonel Cooke, once the commander of
the Mormon Battalion, bared his head as he rode through the streets in
honor of the brave "Mormon" boys who had marched under his command.

The army camped that night across the Jordan, and then continued its march
to Cedar Valley, thirty-six miles south of the city. About two years later,
the soldiers went back to the east where they took part in the great Civil
War. The commander, Albert Sidney Johnston, fought on the side of the
south, and fell in the great battle of Shiloh.

The Saints returned to their homes in July, 1858. Thus again, the Lord
preserved his people, and protected them from their enemies.

Topics.--1. The mission of Colonel Kane. 2. Governor Cumming installed.
3. Meeting with peace commissioners. 4. The move south. 5. The entrance of
the army.

Questions and Review.--1. What did Colonel Kane do at Washington? 2.
What was his mission to Utah? 3. Where was the army camped? 4. Who was
Governor Cumming? 5. What did Colonel Kane get the governor to do? 6. What
did the governor find in Salt Lake City? 7. Why did the Saints move south?
8. What did they propose doing if the army came to harm them? 9. What were
Governor Cumming's feelings? 10. Tell about the meeting with the peace
commissioners. 11. Describe the march of the army through Salt Lake City.
12. Where did the soldiers camp? 13. When did they leave Utah, and where
did they go?


CHAPTER XXXIV.

PROSPERITY.


The action of the "Mormons" in again leaving the homes they had newly made
in the wilderness of the West, called the whole world's attention to them.
Many honest people began to see what a mistake it had been to send armed
soldiers against an innocent people.

When the army was withdrawn, peace once more prevailed, and the Church was
again busy preaching the Gospel to the world and gathering the honest from
the nations. Many missionaries were sent out and new fields were opened.

From Europe the Saints came by the thousands. Sometimes a whole ship would
be engaged to take a company of Saints across the ocean, in charge of one
of the Apostles or some leading elder. From the sea, they would travel in
train loads to the end of the railroad, where companies of teams and wagons
would take them the remainder of the journey to Utah.

Now came the telegraph line westward. October 17, 1861, it was completed
to Salt Lake City, and the next day President Young sent the first message
east. At this time the war between the north and the south was beginning,
and in this first telegram President Young said that Utah had not seceded,
but was firm for the Union.

[Illustration: SALT LAKE TABERNACLE (INTERIOR.)]

Following the telegraph came the railroads. The Union Pacific was being
built from the east, while the Central Pacific came from the west. May 10,
1869, the two roads met in Northern Utah near the Promontory, and the last
spike was driven with much ceremony. Thus was completed the first iron road
across the continent.

But true to the past history of the Latter-day Saints, peace was not a
blessing they were permitted to enjoy for many years at a time.

[Illustration: SALT LAKE TABERNACLE (EXTERIOR.)]

In the year 1869 a number of prominent elders in the Church opposed
President Young and the authorities, and were cut off from the Church. One
of these elders was Wm. S. Godbe, therefore those who followed him were
sometimes called "Godbeites." These men joined with the anti-"Mormons" and
formed what was called the Liberal Party. It was the object of this
organization to oppose the "Mormons," and they were aided in this by the
officers sent to Utah by the government. It had been the policy of
Presidents Lincoln and Johnson to let the "Mormons" alone, but when General
Grant became president he changed the program and at once sent officers to
Utah to "straighten out" the "Mormons." President Grant, no doubt obtained
much of his information about the "Mormons" from his friend, the Rev. J.P.
Newman. This minister had held a three days' discussion in the Tabernacle
at Salt Lake City with Apostle Orson Pratt on the subject of polygamy.
Elder Pratt seems to have got the better of the argument, and it can well
be imagined what kind of information this preacher gave to the president.

The Saints never had more bitter enemies than some of these territorial
officers, especially Governor Shaffer and Chief Judge McKean. For years
these officials, aided by the Liberal Party, tried to run affairs their own
way; and you can easily understand that they could do a great many hateful
things against the "Mormons," having the officers of the law, if not the
law itself, on their side. Especially was their hate directed towards
President Young and the leading brethren who were accused of all manner of
crimes. They were arrested, tried, and placed in prison in many unlawful
ways.

Notwithstanding all these annoyances, the Church continued to grow in
strength and numbers. The Sunday Schools, the first of which was organized
in 1849, by Elder Richard Ballantyne, in the Fourteenth Ward of Salt Lake
City, had by this time grown to be a strong institution. The Mutual
Improvement Associations were organized in 1875, and soon did much good
among the young.

President Young and his brethren were busy organizing stakes of Zion,
setting the quorums of the priesthood in order, directing the building of
temples, laying out towns and cities, and attending to the general duties
of the Church. Thus Zion grew and became stronger day by day.

Brigham City is named after President Young. August 19, 1877, the
president was at that place and the Box Elder Stake of Zion was organized.
Shortly after his return home, he was taken ill and died August 29th, at
the age of seventy-six.

Thus passed away the second president of the Church. Joseph had laid the
foundation deep and strong. Brigham had built upon it. For thirty years he
had stood at the head of the Church and had led the Saints through some of
the most trying scenes of their history. Brigham Young was the leading
spirit in the removal from Nauvoo, in the march across the wild prairies
and mountains, in the building up of a great state in the desert valleys of
the Rocky Mountains; and his name will be ever honored as the great pioneer
of the west.

Topics.--1. Prosperity of the Saints. 2. The telegraph and railroad. 3.
The Liberal Party. 4. Death of President Young.

Questions and Review.--1. How did the Saints come from Europe in early
days? 2. Tell about the overland telegraph line in Utah and the first
telegram. 3. Tell about the railroads. 4. Who composed the Liberal party?
5. What was its object? 6. How did President Grant treat the "Mormons?" 7.
Tell about the Newman-Pratt discussion. 8. Why could the Utah officials
greatly annoy the Saints? 9. Who organized the first Sunday School? 10.
Where and when was it? 11. Tell of the death of President Young. 12. Tell
what you can of his life.


CHAPTER XXXV.

THE "CRUSADE."


Those who did not understand the true nature of "Mormonism" thought that at
the death of Brigham Young, the Church would go to pieces; but they soon
found out that the work of God does not depend on any one man. The Twelve
again became the leading quorum in the Church, with John Taylor at its
head. Three years after the death of President Young, October 10, 1880, the
First Presidency was again organized. John Taylor became President, and he
chose George Q. Cannon as first and Joseph F. Smith as second counselor.

[Illustration: PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR.]

President Taylor was seventy-two years old at this time. He had been with
the Church nearly from the beginning, having been an Apostle for forty-two
years. He had filled many missions both in the United States and in Europe,
had written much on gospel subjects, and was in reality as some called him,
the "Champion of Liberty." You will remember that he was with Joseph and
Hyrum at the time of their martyrdom in Carthage jail and was then severely
wounded.

The year 1880 was the jubilee year of the Church, being fifty years since
it was organized. As was the custom in ancient Israel, it was a time of
forgiveness. The Church remitted many debts of the poor, besides giving
them many sheep and cattle. "While God is blessing us, let us bless one
another," said President Taylor; and thus much good feeling was manifested
among the Saints.

But another storm was coming. A trial of another kind was in store for the
Church.

In the days of Nauvoo, in 1843, Joseph the Prophet had received a
revelation from God, saying that it was right for good men holding the
priesthood to have more wives than one. By the time the Church had been in
Utah a few years, quite a number of the Saints had obeyed this law and
entered plural marriage. The enemies of the Church call this practice a
great sin, even though they can read in the Bible that good men of old whom
the Lord loved had many wives. In 1862 Congress passed a law against plural
marriage or polygamy. As many thought it was an unjust law, it was not
enforced for many years. Elder George Reynolds offered to be arrested and
tried under the law in order to have it tested. This was done, and Elder
Reynolds was convicted and sent to prison. His case was taken to the
Supreme Court of the United States where the law was decided to be
constitutional.

But this law was not hard enough on the "Mormons" to suit their enemies.
Sectarian preachers and politicians who wanted some office began to spread
falsehoods all over the country about Utah and its people, all of which had
its effect on Congress. Notwithstanding the protest of the "Mormons,"
another law was passed against them, (March, 1882), called the Edmunds Act.
This law provided that no polygamist should vote or hold office; and if
found guilty of polygamy a man might be fined five hundred dollars and put
in prison for three years. If a man lived with more than one wife, he could
be fined three hundred dollars and imprisoned for six months.

Officers were now sent to Utah to enforce this law, and what is called the
"Crusade" began in earnest. "Mormons" were not allowed to sit on juries or
have anything to do with the courts, so it was an easy matter to convict
all "Mormons" who came to trial.

Arrests now followed fast, and it was indeed a sad time for many of the
Saints. Officers, called deputy marshals, were sent into all the
settlements of the Saints to spy out and arrest those supposed to be
guilty. Many of the brethren left the country or went away in hiding to
avoid being arrested, leaving the women and children to manage as best they
could. In Idaho no "Mormon" was allowed to vote or hold office, no matter
whether he had broken the law or not. Three brethren were sent from Arizona
to the penitentiary at Detroit, Michigan. Nearly all the leading brethren
were in hiding; and, as they could not speak to the people in their
meetings, they wrote epistles which were read to the Saints at their
conferences.

For a number of years this persecution went on. Seemingly, the strongest
anti-"Mormons" should have been satisfied. But no; they asked Congress to
make yet stronger laws to put down the "Mormons." Accordingly, in 1887,
another law was passed, called the Edmunds-Tucker Bill. This law, among
other things, provided that the property of the Church should be
confiscated, that is, taken from the Church. United States officers went to
work at once and took from the Church nearly $800,000 worth of property.
After the officers had gotten some good salaries out of it, the property
was at last given back to the Church.

During the time of this crusade thirteen hundred persons suffered from
fines or imprisonment.

July 25, 1887, President John Taylor died at Kaysville, Davis County, Utah.
He had been in exile for over two years; but the brave spirit was now away
from under the power of persecutors, and the Saints could but look on the
peaceful form and face of their beloved leader.

Topics.--1. President John Taylor. 2. Plural marriage. 3. The Edmunds
Bill. 4. The "Crusade." 5. The Edmunds-Tucker Bill.

Questions and Review.--1. Why was there no danger to the Church at the
death of President Young? 2. When was the First Presidency organized again?
3. Who composed it? 4. Tell what you can about John Taylor. 5. Tell about
the Jubilee year. 6. When and where was plural marriage revealed to the
Church? 7. When was the first law passed against this practice? 8. What is
meant by a law being constitutional? 9. What was the Edmunds Bill? 10. How
was it enforced? 11. What was the Edmunds-Tucker Law? 12. When and where
did President Taylor die?


CHAPTER XXXVI.

PRESIDENCY OF WILFORD WOODRUFF.


At the April conference, 1889, the First Presidency was again organized.
Wilford Woodruff was chosen president and he called the former counselors
to act also with him. President Woodruff was eighty-two years old when this
high calling was placed upon him, but he was still quite strong and
active. His life had been devoted to God and his cause. He joined the
Church in 1833, so you see he had been with it from the beginning. He had
been an Apostle for fifty years. It will give you an idea of how busy
President Woodruff had been when you are told that from 1834 to 1895 he had
traveled through twenty-eight States of the Union, three of the countries
of Europe, and six islands of the sea. He had held 7,555 meetings, preached
3,526 discourses, organized fifty-one branches of the Church, besides doing
a great deal of other work in the Church.

[Illustration: PRESIDENT WILFORD WOODRUFF.]

President George Q. Cannon, first counselor in the presidency, came with
his father's family from England to Nauvoo in the year 1842, and from that
time had been an active worker in the Church. In 1850 he, in company with
other missionaries, went to the Sandwich Islands. Here Elder Cannon
translated the Book of Mormon into the native language, and sometime after
he had it printed. He labored as an editor and a publisher of Church papers
in San Francisco, in Liverpool, and at home with the _Deseret News_. In
1860 he was ordained an Apostle. In 1866 he began to publish the _Juvenile
Instructor_. He spent many years in Washington as delegate from Utah.
President Cannon was the General Superintendent of Sunday Schools to the
time of his death.

The second counselor in the presidency, Joseph F. Smith, was born November
13, 1838, in Far West, Missouri, a few days after the time when his father
Hyrum Smith was taken by the mob and ordered to be shot. As a nine-year-old
boy he drove his mother's yoke of cattle across the plains with an emigrant
train. President Smith has filled many missions to Europe, to the Sandwich
Islands and to various parts of the United States.

He was ordained as one of the Twelve Apostles July 1, 1866.

During the first few years that Wilford Woodruff was president of the
Church, the persecution against those who had more than one family
continued to rage; yet the enemies of the Saints were not satisfied. Though
many of the people had been deprived of the right to vote and hold office,
yet there were enough left to outvote the anti-"Mormons," many of whom were
eager to get into some office. These kept urging Congress to pass other
laws against the "Mormons," and at last a number of bills were introduced
in Congress for the purpose of disfranchising the "Mormons," that is,
taking away from them the right to vote and to hold public office.

During all this trouble the authorities of the Church were asking the Lord
to show them the right thing to do. In answer to these pleadings, the Lord
inspired President Woodruff to issue what is called the manifesto. In this
document President Woodruff, among other things, said:

"Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural
marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of
last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to
use my influence with the members of the Church over which I preside to
have them do likewise.

"... And I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is
to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the law of the land."

At the general conference of the Church held October 6, 1890, President
Woodruff's action was sustained by the vote of the conference.

The enemies of the Church now had no excuse for their persecutions, so,
after a time, peace came once more. The two political parties, the
"Liberal" and "People's" which had been for many years fighting each other
at the polls, now disbanded, and "Mormons" and non-"Mormons" joined either
the Democratic or the Republican party.

In 1893 the great World's Fair was held in Chicago. In September of that
year the Tabernacle choir of Salt Lake City, led by Evan Stephens, went to
Chicago, accompanied by the first presidency and others. The choir gave
concerts in some of the large cities on the way, and at Chicago carried off
the second prize of one thousand dollars for the best singing.

During the World's Fair there was held what was called a Parliament of
Religions. Meetings were convened where people of all religions were
invited to speak and tell of their beliefs. Men came from every part of the
world. There were Catholics and Protestants; there were followers of Brahma
and Buddha from India; there were Greeks and Mohammedans; there were
Japanese, Chinese, and negroes--but, among them all there was one religion
and one church lacking, and that was the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. It had not been invited, and when Elder B.H. Roberts was
sent to Chicago to get a hearing for the Church of Christ, he was treated
in an ungentlemanly manner and was not allowed to properly present the
claims and doctrines of the Church. The Savior once said: "Blessed are ye,
when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their
company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the
Son of Man's sake." May we not draw a great lesson from all this?

On January 4, 1896, President Grover Cleveland signed the paper which
admitted Utah into the Union as a state. Celebrations in honor of the
event were held in all the towns and cities of the State.

Fifty years from the time the pioneers entered Salt Lake Valley, July 24th,
1897, a grand celebration was held in Salt Lake City to honor the event.

[Illustration: THE PIONEER MONUMENT.]

This celebration began Tuesday, July 20, 1897, and closed on the night of
Saturday 24th. On the 20th the Pioneer Monument, which is surmounted by a
bronze statue of President Brigham Young, and situated near the Southeast
corner of the Temple block, Salt Lake City, was dedicated by President
Wilford Woodruff. The same day, at a reception held in the Tabernacle, all
surviving pioneers of 1847, were presented with a golden badge. Memorial
services in honor of the deceased pioneers were held in the Tabernacle on
Sunday 25th.

When the war with Spain broke out the next year, a call was made on Utah
for five hundred volunteers. Utah's young men, many of them sons of the
pioneers and old settlers, heeded the call, and the men were promptly
raised and sent to the seat of war.

President Wilford Woodruff while on a visit to the Pacific coast, took
suddenly ill and died in San Francisco, September 2, 1898.

Topics.--1. Wilford Woodruff. 2. George Q. Cannon. 3. Joseph F. Smith. 4.
The "Manifesto." 5. The Parliament of Religions. 6. Death of President
Woodruff.

Questions and Review.--1. Who constituted the fourth First Presidency of
the Church? 2. Tell something of President Woodruff. 3. Name some positions
President Cannon has held. 4. Tell about President Smith's boyhood. 5. What
further laws did the enemies of the "Mormons" wish passed against them? 6.
What is the "manifesto?" 7. How came it to be issued? 8. When was it
accepted. 9. Tell about the Tabernacle choir's trip to Chicago. 10. What
was the Parliament of Religions? 11. How was the Church treated in that
body? 12. Give some reasons for this treatment. 13. When was Utah admitted
as a state? 14. Tell about the Utah volunteers. 15. When and where did
President Woodruff die?


CHAPTER XXXVII.

TEMPLE BUILDING.


God's goodness, mercy, and watch-care reach to all his children, whether
they be white or black, bond or free; whether they live now or lived
thousands of years ago; yes, whether they are alive or dead. Death is but a
change from one sphere of action to another, and as God is everywhere, it
is not alone in this life that his loving care is manifested. The gospel
also is everlasting. It did not begin with this world, neither will it end
with this life, but its purifying, uplifting power is felt throughout all
time and place.

Salvation is to get from under the powers of sin and death, and live
forever in the hereafter, growing in wisdom and in power, and becoming more
and more like unto our Great Father, God. This salvation is obtained by
obeying the principles of the gospel and performing the ordinances required
therein. You all know what the first of these principles and ordinances
are. One of the ordinances is that a person must be baptized by water for
the remission of sin. "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved,"
said the Savior. This must of course be performed here on earth, and by a
servant of God having authority to do so.

Now, by thinking about it a moment, you will know that there are a great
many of the human race who have not been baptized with this kind of
baptism. Millions there are and have been who never heard of the gospel or
of Jesus Christ. Many others there are and have been who have had a kind of
baptism but not performed by one with authority. What will then become of
all these people?

Many religions of the day teach that there is no chance for people after
they leave this life; if they are not saved when they die, they never can
be afterwards. Can you not see what a cruel thought that is? Think of the
millions who have not had a chance! Surely God would not punish people for
not doing something they had no chance to do.

[Illustration: THE TEMPLE BLOCK.]

Now all this was made plain to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord told him
that all those who died without repentance and baptism would have a chance
in the next world. Christ, while his body lay three days in the tomb, went
and preached to the spirits in prison. Likewise, many of the servants of
God have, and are now preaching the gospel to the children of God in the
spirit world. They can there believe and repent, but can not be baptized.
That must be done for them by someone on the earth. This ordinance can be
performed in any place that God directs, but he has commanded that holy
buildings be erected wherein baptisms for the dead can be performed. This,
then, is one use of our temples. Marriages, sealings and other holy
ordinances are also performed in these buildings.

The first temple site was dedicated in Jackson county, Missouri, August 3,
1831, but, as you have been told, no work was done to erect a building. The
Kirtland temple you also have been told about. After the Saints left
Kirtland the building was neglected. Then it came into the possession of
the Reorganization or "Reorganites," as they are sometimes called, a
religious body founded, and built up for the most part by apostates from
the Church. The Kirtland temple is still standing.

Ground was dedicated for a temple at Far West July 3, 1837, but owing to
the Saints being driven away, no work other than digging the foundation was
done.

The next effort was at Nauvoo. This temple was begun April 6, 1841, and
dedicated April 30th and May 1, 1846. You will remember how the Saints
toiled to complete this building. It was a large, beautiful structure, one
of the finest in the west, and cost about one million dollars. About two
years after the Saints had left Nauvoo, the temple was destroyed by fire.

The Salt Lake temple was begun in 1853, but while it was being built three
others were completed. The first of these is the St. George temple. It was
begun the 9th of November, 1871, and dedicated April 6, 1877. The Logan
temple was begun May 18, 1877, and completed May 17, 1884. The corner
stones of the temple at Manti were laid April 14, 1879, and the building
was dedicated May 21, 1888. All these temples are beautiful buildings, and
many are the blessings the Saints have received in them.

Those of you who have not seen the Salt Lake temple may get a good idea of
its beauty by the picture. It is built of hewn blocks of gray granite, a
hard, beautiful stone. It was forty years in building. The last top stone
on the towers, called the capstone, was laid April 6, 1892. There were at
least forty thousand people on the temple grounds on this occasion. A
platform had been erected on the south side of the temple, whereon the
authorities of the Church were seated. There were services of singing,
prayer, and speaking, and then President Woodruff touched a button which
sent an electric current up a wire to the top of the tower. The electricity
set free the capstone which settled into its place. President Lorenzo Snow
led the vast audience in giving the grand Hosanna shout.

President Woodruff was anxious to live to see the completion of the temple.
It was therefore voted by the large audience present that the inside of the
building be finished in one year.

To accomplish this, means were donated liberally by the Saints, and the
work went on rapidly. On the 6th of April, 1893, the temple was completed,
and on the morning of that day the first meeting was held in the building.
President Woodruff offered the dedicatory prayer. In the afternoon another
meeting was held, and this continued day after day until thirty-one
meetings had been held. Seventy thousand of the Saints witnessed the
dedication exercises, besides thirteen thousand Sunday School children, for
whom special services were held.

Some of you who read this book may have been in one of our temples. Did you
not notice what a calm, sweet feeling came over you while there? Surely,
the Spirit of God is in these sacred buildings, and those who labor therein
for the living and the dead enjoy its blessed influence. Let every one of
you so live that your life may be pure and clean, so that some day you may
be worthy of entering the House of God and partaking of the blessings in
store for you.

Topics.--1. Salvation for the dead. 2. The temples. 3. Salt Lake temple.

Questions and Review.--1. What is salvation? 2. Is salvation limited to
this life? 3. How is salvation obtained? 4. Name some of the first
principles of the gospel. 5. Name some of its first ordinances. 6. What
have some preachers of religion taught regarding salvation? 7. What did the
Lord reveal to Joseph Smith on this subject? 8. Where did Jesus go while
his body lay in the sepulchre? (I Peter 3:18, 20.) 9. What are some of the
uses of temples? 10. How many temples have been built by the Church? 11.
Locate each. 12. Tell something about the Nauvoo temple. 13. Describe the
Salt Lake temple. 14. When was it dedicated? 15. What great blessings are
to be had in a temple?


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

PRESIDENCY OF LORENZO SNOW.


September 13, 1898, the quorum of Twelve Apostles met at Salt Lake City and
chose Lorenzo Snow President of the Church. President Snow chose George Q.
Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors.

President Snow was born in Ohio, April 3, 1814. While yet a young man, he
went to Kirtland, where he became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph.
Joining the Church, he was soon in the field as a missionary, traveling
through the States preaching the gospel. From Nauvoo, he went on a mission
to England, returning in 1843 with a large company of Saints. He was
ordained a member of the Twelve Apostles, February 12, 1849, at Salt Lake
City. Shortly afterwards he was called on a mission to Italy. His labors,
however, were not confined to that country, as he organized many branches
of the Church in other European lands.

[Illustration: PRESIDENT LORENZO SNOW.]

In 1853, President Snow removed to Brigham City, where for many years he
united the people in a system of co-operation, which rapidly built up the
country. At the completion of the Salt Lake temple he was called to preside
in that sacred building.

Though so far advanced in years when called to stand at the head of the
Church, President Snow was quite strong in body and in mind. During the
summer of 1899, with a party of Apostles and, other leading men, he visited
many of the stakes of Zion in their conference gatherings. President Snow
said he had a special message to deliver to the Saints which was that they
should in the future more fully observe the law of tithing. This law had
been neglected in the past, but now, the Prophet said, the Lord expected
the Saints to observe this commandment. It is pleasing to state that most
of the Saints heeded the timely instruction and warning, and there was
great improvement in keeping this law of the Lord.

When President Snow took charge of the affairs of the Church, it was
largely in debt, owing to the troubles incident to the confiscation of its
property by the government some time before. Now, because of the
improvement in the payment of tithes and offerings, the First Presidency
were able to pay some of the debts of the Church, and make arrangements for
the payment of others as they became due.

President Snow put new life into many departments of the Church. The School
system which the Church had established received much attention. The
Latter-day Saints' University at Salt Lake City was established, and one of
its buildings was erected. Many other Church buildings were planned and
begun.

At an election held in the fall of 1898, Brigham H. Roberts was elected to
represent Utah in Congress. At this election the people, as they had done
many times before, voted as either Democrats or Republicans, and both
"Mormons" and non-"Mormons" were elected to office. Now, however, some
anti-"Mormon" newspapers, assisted by many of the Utah sectarian preachers,
made a great stir. The enemies of the Saints continued to send a flood of
falsehood all over the country. Much excitement was worked up and a
determined effort was made to keep Utah's representative out of Congress.

Representative Roberts fought bravely for his own and his people's rights,
but once more hatred against "Mormonism" overcame better judgment, and he
was refused admission to the seat to which he was fairly elected, on the
ground that he had obeyed the law of plural marriage.

August 19, 1899, the Utah volunteers returned from the Philippines where
they had proved themselves valiant soldiers in the service of their
country. A grand celebration was held in Salt Lake City in their honor.

On April 12, 1901, President George Q. Cannon died at Monterey, California,
where he had gone for his health. This great and good man had done much for
the Church, and he was greatly beloved by the Saints.

Elder Heber J. Grant, with Horace S. Ensign, Louis A. Kelsch, and Alma O.
Taylor, left Salt Lake City July 24, 1901, for a mission to Japan. They
landed in that country August 12, and at once set to work learning the
language. September 1, of that year, Elder Grant dedicated the land for the
preaching of the Gospel. Since that time a good beginning has been made in
the distribution of the printed word, and the Book of Mormon has been
translated into Japanese and printed.

President Snow died after a brief illness at his home in Salt Lake City,
October 10, 1901. He was not president of the Church long, but during the
three years of his presidency, the Lord blessed him and gave him power to
do much good.

Four days before he died, President Snow addressed the Saints assembled in
conference in the Tabernacle at Salt Lake City. The burden of this, his
last message was, "God bless you." He urged the presidents of stakes and
the high counselors to take upon themselves more of the responsibility of
looking after the affairs of the Church, so that the Twelve could devote
their time to their special work of preaching the gospel.

Topics.--1. Lorenzo Snow as President. 2. Election of B.H. Roberts to
Congress. 3. The Mission to Japan.

Questions and Review.--1. Who constituted the fifth Presidency of the
Church? 2. Tell what you can about Lorenzo Snow. 3. What is the law of
tithing? 4. What message did President Snow deliver regarding the law of
tithing? 5. Why was the Church in debt? 6. Who opened the Japanese mission?


CHAPTER XXXIX.

PRESIDENCY OF JOSEPH F. SMITH.


The First Presidency of the Church was reorganized for the sixth time
October 17, 1901. Joseph F. Smith was chosen president, and he selected for
his counselors, John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund. At a special conference
held in Salt Lake City November 10, 1901, this presidency was sustained by
the vote of the Church.

From his boyhood President Smith has been an active, earnest member of the
Church over which he now presides. His father was Hyrum Smith the
Patriarch, brother to the Prophet Joseph. You will remember how these two
brothers were so closely together in the beginning of the Church, and how
they were both killed in Carthage jail.

Joseph was thus left fatherless when he was a boy six years old. As a boy
he had not the privilege of going every day to school or of playing
peacefully in the door-yard of his home. Mobs drove them out of Missouri,
and then out of Nauvoo. They had little peace. Two years after his father
had been killed, Joseph's mother, with her family, had to leave her home,
along with the Saints, and undertake the long westward journey. Although
Joseph was only eight years old at the time, he successfully drove a team
of oxen for three hundred miles over the rolling prairies of Iowa. This was
not an easy task for the boy, for the road was often steep or muddy, and
many older drivers had breakdowns on the way.

In chapter 27 of this history you are told of the Saints stopping for a
time at Winter Quarters, getting ready to move westward. Joseph and his
mother were with them. Most of his time was spent in herding his mother's
cattle. And he was a good herdboy, too. He saw to it that none of them was
lost. There were Indians in that country then, and often they would steal
cattle and horses. One day Joseph had a narrow escape. It happened this
way:

Joseph and another boy had driven their cattle to the herd-grounds, and
they were having a good time on their horses which they rode. Suddenly,
they heard the whoop of Indians. On looking up, they saw a band of about
thirty savages riding toward them. They were naked, their bodies daubed
with clay and their hair and faces painted! Joseph's first thought was not
about himself, but about his cattle. If the Indians should drive off his
cattle, the family would not be able to go to the Valley next spring. So,
off he rode to try to save his stock, the Indians coming in the same
direction. They whooped and yelled so that the cattle ran off in great
fright. Then the Indians singled out Joseph, for they wanted his horse,
which was a good one and could run. The chase was now on in earnest. Joseph
turned. Some of the Indians followed, while others slacked to head him off.
Soon he was between two parties of Indians. After a time they closed in on
him. One of the Indians took him by the arm, and another by the leg, and
lifted him from his horse, letting him fall to the ground. The horses
jumped over him, but did not hurt him. The Indians rode off with the horse,
but did not get the cattle.

This is only one of the many thrilling incidents in the life of President
Smith as a boy. When his mother was ready to move West, Joseph drove two
yoke of oxen hitched to a heavily loaded wagon across the plains, a
distance of one thousand miles. He drove into Salt Lake City September 23,
1848.

In those early days, even the boys had to work hard to help make a living
in the new country. Joseph again herded cattle, besides doing work on the
farm and in the canyon. How, then, did the boy get his education? Crossing
the plains, when they were resting in the tent or by the camp fire,
Joseph's mother taught him to read the Bible, and from that day to this, he
has been reading good books. You see, he started early in the reading of
the best books, and that means a lot. Joseph's mother was a very good and
wise woman, and he says that much of his success in life is due to her
teachings, and the fact that he heeded her counsels.

[Illustration: ANTHON H. LUND, JOSEPH F. SMITH, CHARLES W. PENROSE

THE FIRST PRESIDENCY, 1916]

When Joseph was fourteen years old his mother died. When he was fifteen he
went on a mission to the Hawaiian Islands. He worked a number of months in
California to earn money to pay his passage to the Islands. He was greatly
blessed on this mission.

This small history cannot tell you of the many missions President Smith has
filled since that first one. Many times he has been back to the Hawaiian
Islands, and many times to the States and to Europe. Every boy and girl
ought to read the detailed story of President Smith's life. President Smith
is still with us. Most of the Sunday School boys and girls have seen him
and heard him speak. He is a great and good man. He is the prophet of the
Lord to us. Let us be thankful that we live in a day when we can have such
men with us to show us by the example of their lives how to be good boys
and girls, good men and women.

President John R. Winder was born at Biddenden near London, England,
December 11, 1821. He joined the Church when he was a young man and
emigrated to Utah in 1853, since which time he took an active and leading
part in Church matters. In the year 1877 he was chosen to be the second
counselor to Presiding Bishop Wm. B. Preston, which position he held until
he was called to the First Presidency. When the Salt Lake Temple was
nearing completion, he was given special charge of the work, and at the
dedication of the Temple he became the first assistant to President Snow.
He died March 27, 1910. He lived to a good old age, active and strong to
the last. He claimed that this was due to his having obeyed the laws of
God, especially those contained in the Word of Wisdom.

President Anthon H. Lund came from Denmark. He was born in the city of
Aalborg in that far-away country May 14, 1844. Many interesting stories are
told of him as a boy-preacher of the gospel in his native land. When he was
called upon to give his first report at conference he was lifted upon a
table that he might be better seen and heard. He came to Utah when eighteen
years old, and settled in Sanpete county. He was made an Apostle in 1889.
He has filled a number of foreign missions, and at one time he presided
over the European mission. He has also been president of the Manti Temple.

At the death of President Winder, President Lund was chosen First Counselor
to President Smith, and Elder John Henry Smith, one of the quorum of the
Twelve, was called to be the Second Counselor. He was born at Carbunca,
near Council Bluffs, Iowa, September 18, 1848. His father was George A.
Smith, at one time Counselor to President Brigham Young. He came to Utah in
early days, and filled many missions at home and abroad. He died Oct. 13,
1911. President Smith, during his life, became known and well-beloved far
and near. He was always kind and cheerful, and he had a way with him which
won the hearts of all who came to know him.

Elder Charles W. Penrose, of the Council of the Twelve, was chosen to
succeed John Henry Smith in the First Presidency, December 7, 1911.
President Penrose was born February 4, 1832, at Camberwell, London,
England. When he was four years old he could read the Bible. At eighteen he
joined the Church, and being so well versed in the scriptures he was soon
called on a mission. For ten years he traveled about his native land
preaching the gospel, healing many of the sick and organizing branches of
the Church. He suffered from hardships and persecution, but he kept right
on until he was released, when he emigrated to Utah. Since then President
Penrose has filled many missions. He is a clear, forceful speaker, and he
has written much on doctrinal subjects. He was for many years editor of the
_Deseret News_. He wrote a number of our best songs. He was called and
ordained to be an apostle and set apart as one of the Twelve, July 7, 1904.
He presided over the European Mission from December, 1906, to June, 1910.

In January, 1903, Reed Smoot was elected Senator to represent Utah in the
Congress of the United States at Washington. As he is a leading official in
the Church, some anti-"Mormons" objected to his retaining the office to
which he was elected. They sent a protest to the Senate, and that body
appointed a committee to investigate the charges made. President Smith and
many of the brethren were summoned to Washington to give their testimony.
All of this led to much agitation and misrepresentation against the Church.
Senator Smoot retained his seat.

During recent years the Church has been growing both at home and abroad.
Property is being acquired in many parts of the world, and mission houses
are being erected. Carthage Jail, in Illinois, the farm containing the
birthplace of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and a large part of the Temple
grounds at Independence, Missouri, have been purchased by the Church.

In the year 1905 a monument of polished granite was erected and a
comfortable and commodious cottage was built on the site of the Prophet's
birth, on the farm purchased by the Church, in Sharon, Windsor County,
Vermont. The monument is 50 feet and 10 inches high and weighs nearly 100
tons. The shaft is 38-3/4 feet long, each foot corresponding to one year
of the Prophet's life. The cottage is built around the original hearthstone
of the old Smith home. On December 23rd, 1905--the one hundredth
anniversary of the birth of the Prophet--this cottage and monument were
dedicated by President Joseph F. Smith, who, with a number of the leading
brethren of the Church and a few Saints, had gone to Vermont for that
purpose. The monument contains a written description of the Prophet's
testimony and stands as a silent witness of the great work he was called
upon by the Lord to perform.

[Illustration: JOSEPH SMITH MONUMENT AND MEMORIAL COTTAGE.]

For many years past, the Saints had been making settlements in Mexico, and
establishing themselves there in good homes. In the year 1912 the
disturbances in the country broke out into civil war, and because of the
dangers attendant on the fighting between various factions, most of the
Latter-day Saints had to leave the country and their possessions and come
to the United States.

Two new Temples are now being erected, one in Alberta, Canada, and another
at Laie, on the island of Oahu, Hawaiian or Sandwich Islands. Work on the
Canadian Temple was begun in 1913, and the one at Hawaii was commenced in
the summer of 1915. The building of these Temples indicate that the great
work for the dead is being energetically carried out by the Church.

In the summer of 1914, the great European war broke out, which has caused
the death and crippling of millions, and brought misery untold to the
nations engaged in it. Very likely this war is the greatest the world has
ever known. Nearly all our missionaries have had to be withdrawn from
Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Belgium, Holland, and France, and very few
have been left in Great Britain and the Scandinavian countries. We
sympathize with all these nations, and can only hope that the Lord will
make it possible, after the war, that the missionaries will be better able
to reach the people with the gospel of peace and salvation.

At this writing (December, 1916) there are seventy-three stakes of Zion in
the Church, and over eight hundred wards. The quorums of the Priesthood
have been more thoroughly organized, and have regular courses of study in
their classes. The helping organizations of the Church, such as the Sunday
Schools, the Mutual Improvement Associations, and others are doing a
splendid work. The Church has recently completed a beautiful Church office
building in Salt Lake City. The first and second floors of this building
are occupied by the First Presidency and other Church officials. The third
floor is devoted to the Historian's work, and the large collection of books
and Church records. The fourth floor is used by the Genealogical Society,
an organization whose purpose is to help people with their records, and
gather a library of genealogical books, which will help them do the work in
the Temples for their dead.

[Illustration: CHURCH OFFICE BUILDING]

       *       *       *       *       *

Here ends our history for the present. The little tree (mentioned in
Chapter I) planted by God and nurtured by his servants, has in the space of
eighty-six years grown to a large, beautiful tree, whose branches, as it
were, protect thousands of people, and whose fruit nourishes a multitude.
The enemy has striven hard to uproot and destroy it, but every effort has
only made it cling more firmly to the nourishing earth.

The Church is growing in strength and power to save the human family. That
is its mission. It will never be overcome, or left to other people. "No
unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing," said the Prophet
Joseph, "persecution may rage; mobs may combine; armies may assemble,
calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and
independently till it has penetrated every continent; visited every clime,
swept every country; and sounded in every ear; till the purposes of God
shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done."

And now let all the boys and girls who read this book remember what the
Lord expects of them. He must have men and women to carry on the great work
begun so nobly and so well. If He is to use you, you must make your lives
worthy; you must grow in wisdom and power and faith and goodness; be pure
and strong in mind and body; be studious, earnest, prayerful, noble, and
brave to do the right; then God will be pleased to use you, and you
yourselves will become makers of a glorious future history.

Topics.--1. President Joseph F. Smith. 2. John R. Winder. 3. Anthon H.
Lund. 4. John Henry Smith. 5. Charles W. Penrose. 6. The trouble in Mexico.
7. The great war in Europe. 8. Progress of the Church.

Questions and Review.--1. Who was President Joseph F. Smith's father? 2.
Describe some of his boyhood surroundings. 3. Tell about his adventure with
the Indians. 4. How did he cross the plains? 5. Tell of his missions. 6.
How long has he been President of the Church? 7. How many of you have seen
him and heard him speak? 8. Name President Smith's counselors. 9. Tell
something about each of them. 10. What historical places has the Church
purchased and improved? 11. Why have the Saints had to leave Mexico? 12.
Review the great European war. 13. What might be the outcome of this war?
14. Where are new temples being built? 15. How many stakes and wards are
there now in the Church 16. What did the Prophet Joseph Smith say about the
future of the Church?


FIRST PRESIDENCIES OF THE CHURCH.

                     First.--1833-1844.

_President._        _First Counselor._         _Second Counselors._
                                                Frederick G. Williams.
Joseph Smith.        Sidney Rigdon.             Hyrum Smith,
                                                William Law.

                     Second.--1847-1877.

_President._        _First Counselor._         _Second Counselors._
                     Heber C. Kimball,          Willard Richards,
Brigham Young.       George A. Smith,                Jedediah M. Grant,
                     John W. Young.                  Daniel H. Wells.

                     Third.--1880-1887.

_President._        _First Counselor._         _Second Counselors._
John Taylor.         George Q. Cannon.          Joseph F. Smith.

                     Fourth.--1889-1898.

_President._        _First Counselor._         _Second Counselors._
Wilford Woodruff.    George Q. Cannon.          Joseph F. Smith.

                     Fifth.--1898-1901.

_President._        _First Counselor._         _Second Counselors._

Lorenzo Snow.        George Q. Cannon.          Joseph F. Smith.

                     Sixth.--1901-

_President._        _First Counselor._         _Second Counselors._
                     John R. Winder.            Anthon H. Lund.
Joseph F. Smith.     Anthon H. Lund.            John Henry Smith.
                                                Charles W. Penrose.




NAMES OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES.

SINCE THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH.


1 Thomas B. Marsh,
2 David W. Patten,
3 Brigham Young,
4 Heber C. Kimball,
5 Orson Hyde,
6 William E. McLellin,
7 Parley P. Pratt,
8 Luke S. Johnson,
9 William Smith,
10 Orson Pratt,
11 John F. Boynton,
12 Lyman E. Johnson,
13 John E. Page,
14 John Taylor,
15 Wilford Woodruff,
16 George A. Smith,
17 Willard Richards,
18 Lyman Wight,
19 Amasa M. Lyman,
20 Ezra T. Benson,
21 Charles C. Rich,
22 Lorenzo Snow,
23 Erastus Snow,
24 Franklin D. Richards,
25 George Q. Cannon,
26 Joseph F. Smith,
27 Brigham Young, Jun.,
28 Albert Carrington,
29 Moses Thatcher,
30 Francis M. Lyman,
31 John Henry Smith,
32 George Teasdale,
33 Heber J. Grant,
34 John W. Taylor,
35 Marriner W. Merrill,
36 Anthon H. Lund,
37 Abraham H. Cannon,
38 Matthias F. Cowley,
39 Abraham O. Woodruff,
40 Rudger Clawson,
41 Reed Smoot,
42 Hyrum M. Smith,
43 Geo. Albert Smith,
44 Chas. W. Penrose,
45 George F. Richards,
46 Orson F. Whitney,
47 David O. McKay,
48 Anthony W. Ivins,
49 Joseph F. Smith. Jun.,
50 James E. Talmage.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Not.--If we say that the Father and the Son came to Joseph
because of his prayer, we might conclude that every boy who prayed should
receive such a visit. No; the time had come for the ushering in of a new
dispensation, etc. To bring out this thought is the idea of this question.]

[Footnote 2: Jensen's Historical Record, page 838. Whitney's History of
Utah. Vol. I, page 274.]