The composition was more than half written. Trusty friends and competent
judges who had heard the beginning of the work talked of it with such
enthusiasm that many of Mozart's enemies, even, were prepared to hear,
within six months, that his _Don Juan_ had taken all Germany by storm.
His more prudent and moderate friends, who took into consideration the
state of the public taste, hardly expected an immediate and universal
success; and with these the master himself secretly agreed.

Constanze, however, was like all women. If once they hope, particularly
in a righteous cause, they are less apt than men are to give heed to
discouraging features. She still held fast to her favorable opinion, and
had, even now, new occasion to defend it. She did so in her gay and
lively fashion, the more earnestly because Mozart's spirits had fallen
decidedly in the course of the previous conversation. She described
minutely how, after their return, she should use the hundred ducats
which the manager at Prague would pay for the score. That sum would
supply their most pressing needs, and they could live comfortably till
spring.

"Your Herr Bondine will make some money with this opera, you may be
sure; and if he is half as honest as you think him, he will give you
later also a fair per cent. of the price that other theatres pay him for
their copies of _Don Juan_. But, even if he doesn't, there are plenty of
other good things that might happen to us; they are more probable too!"

"What, for instance?"

"A little bird told me that the King of Prussia needs a leader for his
orchestra."

"Oh!"

"A general music director, I mean. Let me build you an air-castle! That
weakness I got from my mother."

"Build away! The higher the better!"

"No, my air-castles are very real ones! In a year from now they'll be
reporting--"

"If the Pope to Gretchen comes a-courting!"

"Keep quiet, you ridiculous goose! I tell you by the first of next
September there will be no 'Imperial Court Composer' of the name of Wolf
Mozart to be found in Vienna."

"May the foxes bite you for that!"

"I hear already what our old friends are saying and gossiping about us."

"What, then?"

"Well, a little after nine o'clock one fine morning our old friend and
admirer Frau Volkstett comes sailing at full speed across the Kahlmarkt.
She has been away for three months. That famous visit to her
brother-in-law in Saxony, that we have heard about every day, has at
last come off. She returned yesterday, and cannot wait any
longer to see her dear friend, the Colonel's wife. Upstairs she goes
and knocks at the door, and does not wait for an answer. You may imagine
the rejoicing and the embracing an both sides. 'Now dearest, best Frau
Colonel,' she begins after the greetings are over, 'I have so many
messages for you. Guess from whom? I didn't come straight from Stendal,
but by way of Brandenburg.'

"'What! Not through Berlin! You haven't been with the Mozarts?' 'Yes,
ten heavenly days!' 'Oh, my dear, good Frau General, tell me all about
them! How are our dear people? Do they like Berlin as well as ever? I
can hardly imagine Mozart living in Berlin! How does he act? How does he
look?' 'Mozart! You should see him! This summer the King sent him to
Karlsbad. When would that have occurred to his dear Emperor Joseph? They
had but just returned when I arrived. He is fairly radiant with health
and good spirits, as sound and solid and lively as quicksilver, with
happiness and comfort beaming from his countenance.'"

And then the speaker began to paint in the brightest colors the glories
of the new position. From their dwelling on Unter den Linden, from their
garden and country-house to the brilliant scenes of public activity and
the smaller circle of the court--where he was to play accompaniments for
the Queen--all were vividly described. She recited, with the greatest
ease, whole conversations, and the most delightful anecdotes. Indeed she
seemed more familiar with Berlin, Potsdam, and Sans Souci than with the
palace at Schönbrunn and the Emperor Joseph's castle. She was, moreover,
cunning enough to depict our hero with many new domestic virtues which
had developed on the firm ground of the Berlin life, and among which
Frau Volkstett had perceived (as a most remarkable phenomenon and a
proof that extremes sometimes meet) the disposition of a veritable
little miser--and it made him altogether most charming.

"'Yes, think of it! He is sure of his three thousand thalers,
and for what? For directing a chamber concert once a week, and
the opera twice. Ah, Frau Colonel, I have seen him, our dear, precious
little man, in the midst of his excellent orchestra who adore him! I sat
with Frau Mozart in her box almost opposite the King's box. And what was
on the posters, do you think? Look, please! I brought it for you,
wrapped around a little souvenir from the Mozarts and myself. Look, read
it, printed in letters a yard long!' 'Heaven forbid! Not _Tarare_!'
'Yes! What cannot one live to see! Two years ago, when Mozart wrote _Don
Juan_, and the wretched, malicious, yellow, old Salieri was preparing to
repeat in Vienna the triumph which he had won with his piece, in Paris,
and to show our good plain public, contented with _Cosa rara_, a hawk or
two; while he and his arch-accomplice were plotting to present _Don
Juan_ just as they had presented _Figaro_, mutilated, ruined, I vowed
that if the infamous _Tarare_ was ever given, nothing should hire me to
go to see it. And I kept my word. When everybody else ran to hear
it--you too, Frau Colonel--I sat by my fire with my cat in my lap, and
ate my supper. Several times after that, too. But now imagine! _Tarare_
on the Berlin stage, the work of his deadly foe, conducted by Mozart
himself!' 'You must certainly go,' he said, 'if it is only to be able to
say in Vienna whether I had a hair clipped from Absalom's head. I wish
he were here himself! The jealous old sheep should see that I do not
need to bungle another person's composition in order to show off my
own.'"

"Brava! Bravissima!" shouted Mozart, and taking his wife by the ears he
kissed her and teased her till the play with the bright bubbles of an
imaginary future--which, sad to say, were never in the least to be
realized--ended finally in laughter and jollity.

Meanwhile they had long ago reached the valley, and were approaching a
town, behind which lay the small modern palace of Count Schinzberg. In
this town they were to feed the horses, to rest, and to take their
noonday meal.

The inn where they stopped stood alone near the end of the village
where an avenue of poplar trees led to the count's garden, not six
hundred paces away. After they had alighted, Mozart, as usual, left to
his wife the arrangements for dinner, and ordered for himself a glass of
wine, while she asked only for water and a quiet room where she could
get a little sleep. The host led the way upstairs, and Mozart, now
singing, now whistling, brought up the rear. The room was newly
whitewashed, clean, and fresh. The ancient articles of furniture were of
noble descent; they had probably once adorned the dwelling of the Count.
The clean white bed was covered with a painted canopy, resting upon
slender green posts, whose silken curtains were long ago replaced by a
more ordinary stuff. Constanze prepared for her nap, Mozart promising to
wake her in time for dinner. She bolted the door behind him, and he
descended to seek entertainment in the coffee-room. Here, however, no
one but the host was to be seen, and, since his conversation suited
Mozart no better than his wine, the master proposed a walk to the palace
garden while dinner was preparing. Respectable strangers, he was told,
were allowed to enter the grounds; besides, the family were away for the
day.

A short walk brought him to the gate, which stood open; then he slowly
followed a path overhung by tall old linden-trees, till he suddenly came
upon the palace which stood a little to the left. It was a light,
plaster building, in the Italian style, with a broad, double flight of
steps in front; the slate-covered roof was finished in the usual manner,
with a balustrade, and was adorned with statues of gods and goddesses.

Our master turned toward the shrubbery, and, passing many flower-beds
still gay with blossoms, took his leisurely way through a dark grove of
pines until he came to an open space where a fountain was playing. The
rather large oval basin was surrounded with carefully kept orange-trees,
interspersed with laurels and oleanders; a smooth gravel
walk upon which an arbor opened ran around the fountain. It was a most
tempting resting-place, and Mozart threw himself down upon the rustic
bench which stood by a table within the arbor.

Listening to the splash of the water, and watching an orange-tree which
stood, heavy with fruit, apart from the rest, our friend was carried
away by visions of the South and favorite memories of his childhood.
Smiling thoughtfully, he reached toward the nearest orange, as if to
take the tempting fruit in his hand. But closely connected with that
scene of his youth there flashed upon him a long-forgotten,
half-effaced, musical memory, which he pondered long and tried to follow
out. Then his glance brightened, and darted here and there; an idea had
come to him, and he worked it out eagerly. Absently he grasped the
orange again--it broke from the tree and remained in his hand. He looked
at it, but did not see it; indeed, his artistic abstraction went so far
that, after rolling the fragrant fruit back and forth before his nose,
while his lips moved silently with the melody which was singing itself
to him, he presently took from his pocket an enameled case, and with a
small silver-handled knife slowly cut open the fruit. Perhaps he had a
vague sense of thirst, but, if so, the fragrance of the open fruit
allayed it. He looked long at the inner surfaces, then fitted them
gently together, opened them again, and again put them together.

Just then steps approached the arbor. Mozart started, suddenly
remembering where he was and what he had done. He was about to hide the
orange, but stopped, either from pride or because he was too late. A
tall, broad-shouldered man in livery, the head-gardener, stood before
him. He had evidently seen the last guilty movement, and stopped,
amazed. Mozart, likewise, was too much surprised to speak, and, sitting
as if nailed to his chair, half laughing yet blushing, looked the
gardener somewhat boldly in the face with his big, blue eyes. Then--it
would have been most amusing for a third person--with a sort of defiant
courage he set the apparently uninjured orange in the middle of the
table.

"I beg your pardon, sir," began the gardener rather angrily, as he
looked at Mozart's unprepossessing clothing, "I do not know whom I have
the honor--"

"Kapellmeister Mozart, of Vienna."

"You are acquainted in the palace, I presume."

"I am a stranger, merely passing through the village. Is the Count at
home?"

"No."

"His wife?"

"She is engaged and would hardly see you." Mozart rose, as if he would
go.

"With your permission, sir, how do you happen to be pilfering here?"

"What!" cried Mozart. "Pilfering! The devil! Do you believe, then, that
I meant to steal and eat that thing?"

"I believe what I see, sir. Those oranges are counted, and I am
responsible for them. That tree was just to be carried to the house for
an entertainment. I cannot let you go until I have reported the matter
and you yourself have told how it happened."

"Very well. Be assured that I will wait here." The gardener hesitated,
and Mozart, thinking that perhaps he expected a fee, felt in his pocket;
but he found nothing.

Two men now came by, lifted the tree upon a barrow and carried it away.
Meanwhile Mozart had taken a piece of paper from his pocket-book, and,
as the gardener did not stir, began to write:

   "_Dear Madam_.--Here I sit, miserable, in your Paradise, like Adam of
  old, after he had tasted the apple. The mischief is done, and I cannot
  even put the blame on a good Eve, for she is at the inn sleeping the
  sleep of innocence in a canopy-bed, surrounded by Graces and Cupids. If
  you require it I will give you an account of my offense, which is
  incomprehensible even to myself.

  "I am covered with confusion, and remain

  "Your most obedient servant,

  "W. A. MOZART.

  "On the way to Prague."

He hastily folded the note and handed it to the impatient servant.

The fellow had scarcely gone when a carriage rolled up to the opposite
side of the palace. In it was the Count, who had brought with him, from
a neighboring estate, his niece and her fiancé, a young and wealthy
Baron. The betrothal had just taken place at the house of the latter's
invalid mother; but the event was also to be celebrated at the Count's
palace, which had always been a second home to his niece. The Countess,
with her son, Lieutenant Max, had returned from the betrothal somewhat
earlier, in order to complete arrangements at the palace. Now corridors
and stairways were alive with servants, and only with difficulty did the
gardener finally reach the antechamber and hand the note to the
Countess. She did not stop to open it, but, without noticing what the
messenger said, hurried away. He waited and waited, but she did not come
back. One servant after another ran past him--waiters, chambermaids,
valets; he asked for the Count, only to be told "He is dressing." At
last he found Count Max in his own room; but he was talking with the
Baron, and for fear the gardener would let slip something which the
Baron was not to know beforehand, cut the message short with: "Go along,
I'll be there in a moment." Then there was quite a long while to wait
before father and son at last appeared together, and heard the fatal
news.

"That is outrageous," cried the fat, good-natured, but somewhat hasty
Count. "That is an impossible story! A Vienna musician is he? Some
ragamuffin, who walks along the high-road and helps himself to whatever
he sees!"

"I beg your pardon, sir. He doesn't look just like that. I thinks he's
not quite right in the head, sir, and he seems to be very proud. He says
his name is 'Moser.' He is waiting downstairs. I told Franz to keep an
eye on him."

"The deuce! What good will that do, now? Even if I should have the fool
arrested, it wouldn't mend matters. I've told you a thousand times that
the front gates were to be kept locked! Besides, it couldn't have
happened if you had had things ready at the proper time!"

Just then the Countess, pleased and excited, entered the room with the
open note in her hand. "Do you know who is downstairs?" she exclaimed.
"For goodness' sake, read that note! Mozart from Vienna, the composer!
Some body must go at once and invite him in! I'm afraid he will be gone!
What will he think of me? You treated him very politely, I hope, Velten.
What was it that happened?"

"What happened?" interrupted the Count, whose wrath was not immediately
assuaged by the prospect of a visit from a famous man. "The madman
pulled one of the nine oranges from the tree which was for Eugenie.
Monster! So the point of our joke is gone, and Max may as well tear up
his poem."

