
On many occasions she experienced wonderful help from God, who, while
performing marvels for the body, which is the least important part,
accomplishes what is far greater, even the salvation of souls.

"Among others, one named B. T----, went to her, who had been suffering
for six months from a disease of his bones, and had been for a
lengthened period in a Swiss hospital, under medical treatment. At
length he, by the advice of Christian friends, sought for relief from
his malady at Dorothea's house. His care began in the first week of his
visit, and in a few weeks he was completely recovered."

On one occasion a young artisan came, in whom cancer had made such
progress as to render any approach to him almost unbearable.

"At the Bible lessons, this once frivolous man, now an earnest inquirer,
learned where the improvement must begin; and from the day that he
confessed his sins against God and man, the disease abated. Some time
afterwards he acknowledged one sin he had hitherto concealed, and then
he speedily recovered his bodily health, and returned to his home cured
in spirit also."

"A lady in S---- had so injured her knee by a fall, that for weeks she
lay in the greatest agony. The doctors declared that dropsy would
supervene; but the Heavenly Physician fulfilled those promises which
will abide until the end of the world; and by prayer, and the laying on
of Dorothea's hand, the knee was cured in twenty-four hours, and the
swelling vanished."


PRAYER, NOT MESMERISM.


"Several people have maintained that her work was one of mesmerism; and
when once she was asked to visit an out patient, she earnestly implored
the Lord _not_ to heal this invalid through her means if she employed
mesmerism; but if not, to permit recovery. The woman was cured in a
short time, though Dorothea had never entered her house, and had,
therefore, no opportunity of placing herself in a mesmeric relation to
this patient."


HELP IN PECUNIARY AFFAIRS.


"In pecuniary affairs, also, the Lord was their helper. Many times
something had to be paid, and they had no means wherewith to meet the
claims. Once, God actually sent aid by means of an enemy, who offered
money; another time, _three thousand francs_ came from Holland, just as
they were needed, and also unexpected on a third occasion they were
about to borrow money to pay for bread, when two hundred and fifty
francs arrived."


THE FAITH LIFE OF MR. ZELLER.


After the death of Dorothea Trudel, the work at Männedorf, instituted by
her, has been furthered and carried on by Mr. Samuel Zeller, who had
been her associate. He has published two reports, which contain many
instances of answers to prayer, showing that the Lord still gave blessed
results, and rewarded their faithful trust.

"No disease is found to be more obstinate than epilepsy, yet several
instances are recorded of patients being restored to perfect health.
Persons afflicted with mental disorder and convulsions are frequently
brought to Männedorf, and many return cured or benefited.

"On one occasion, a lady who had been afflicted with constant headache
for five years, found her disorder removed speedily under the influence
of prayer. In other cases the passion for strong drink was taken away;
fever more or less disappeared; and the subjects of various kinds of
chronic diseases, even some apparently far gone in consumption, have
found their strength return to them under the same influence.

"Unhappy victims of spiritualist delusions have found deliverance at the
mercy-seat; and there, too, many in the bondage of sin have rejoiced in
a present Saviour.

