"You are mistaken; a resemblance deceives you."

Marfa went up to him, and looking straight into his eyes, said, "Art
thou not the son of Peter and Marfa Strogoff?"

Michael would have given his life to have locked his mother in his arms.
But if he yielded now, it was all over with him, with her, with his
mission, with his oath! Completely master of himself, he closed his
eyes that he might not see the inexpressible anguish of his mother.

"I do not know, in truth, what it is you say, my good woman."

"Michael!"

"My name is not Michael. I never was your son! I am Nicholas Horparoff,
a merchant of Irkutsk," and suddenly he left the room, while for the
last time the words echoed in his ears.

"My son! My son!"

Michael Strogoff remembered--"For God, for the Czar, and for my native
land," and he had by a desperate effort gone. He did not see his old
mother, who had fallen back almost inanimate on a bench. But when the
Postmaster hastened to assist her, the aged woman raised herself.
Suddenly the thought occurred to her: She denied by her own son! It was
impossible! As for being herself deceived, it was equally impossible. It
was certainly her son whom she had just seen; and if he had not
recognized her, it was because he would not, because he ought not,
because he had some strong reason for acting thus. And then, her mother
feelings arising within her, she had only one thought: Can I unwittingly
have ruined him?

"I am mad," she said to her interrogators. "This young man was not my
son; he had not his voice. Let us think no more of it. If we do, I shall
end in finding him everywhere."

This occurrence, however, came to the knowledge of Ivan Ogareff, who was
stationed in the town. To obtain possession of any official message,
which, if delivered, would frustrate his plans, and to detain the
courier was his great desire. He succeeded in arresting Michael
Strogoff, and then sent for Marfa to appear before him. Marfa, standing
before Ivan Ogareff, drew herself up, crossed her arms on her breast,
and waited.

"You are Marfa Strogoff?" asked Ogareff.

"Yes."

"Do you retract what you said a few hours ago?"

"No."

"Then you do not know that your son, Michael Strogoff, Courier to the
Czar, has passed through Omsk?"

"I do not know."

"And the man whom you thought you recognized as your son, was not your
son?"

"He was not my son."

"And since then, have you seen him among the prisoners?"

"No."

"If he were pointed out to you, would you recognize him?"

"No."

"Listen! Your son is here, and you shall immediately point him out to
me."

"No."

"All these men will file before you, and if you do not show me Michael
Strogoff, you shall receive as many blows from the knout as men shall
have passed before you."

On an order from Ogareff, the prisoners filed one by one past Marfa, who
was immovable as a statue, and whose face expressed only perfect
indifference. Michael was to all appearances unmoved, but the palms of
his hands bled under the nails which were pressed into the flesh.

Marfa, seized by two soldiers, was forced on her knees on the ground.
Her dress torn off, left her back bare. A saber was placed before her
breast at a few inches' distance. If she bent beneath her sufferings,
her breast would be pierced by the sharp steel. The Tartar drew himself
up and waited.

"Begin," said Ogareff.

The whip whistled through the air, but, before it fell, a powerful hand
stopped the Tartar's arm. Ivan Ogareff had succeeded.

"Michael Strogoff!"

"Ivan Ogareff!" and raising the knout, he struck Ogareff a blow across
the face.

"Blow for blow." Twenty soldiers threw themselves on Michael and in
another instant he would have been slain, but Ogareff stopped them.

"This man is reserved for the Emir's judgment. Search him."

The letter bearing the imperial arms was bound in Michael's bosom; he
had not had time to destroy it. It was handed to Ogareff.

"Your forehead to the ground!" exclaimed Ogareff.

"No!"

Two soldiers tried to make him bend, but were themselves laid on the
ground by a blow from Michael's fist.

"Who is this prisoner?" asked the Emir.

"A Russian spy," answered Ogareff.

In asserting that Michael was a spy, he knew that the sentence would be
terrible. The Emir made a sign, at which all bowed low their heads. Then
he pointed to the Koran which was brought him. He opened the sacred
book, and placing his finger on one of its pages, read in loud voice, a
verse ending in these words: "And he shall no more see the things of
this earth."

"Russian spy, you have come to see what is going on in the Tartar camp;
then look while you may!"

Michael Strogoff's punishment was not death, but blindness. They drew a
red-hot saber across his eyes, and the courier was blind! After the
Emir's orders were executed, thinking they had robbed Michael Strogoff
of all power to do further harm, the Emir retired with his train, and
Michael was left alone. But his desire to reach the Grand Duke was not
quenched by this terrible calamity. He understood that Ivan Ogareff,
having obtained his seal and commission, would try to reach the Grand
Duke before he, himself, could possibly get there, carrying a false
message, which would betray all Siberia. Michael, after disheartening
trials in finding a trusty companion, finally succeeded and pushed on
towards Irkutsk, only hoping he might reach the place before Ogareff
should betray the city. At last, after a most painful fourteen days'
journey, he is at the very gate of the Governor's palace. Entrance is
easy, for confusion reigns everywhere. But Michael is in time. With his
trusty companion he goes distractedly through the passages. No one heeds
him. Michael opens one of the doors and enters a room flooded with
light, and there he stands face to face with the one whose villainous
hand would one instant later have betrayed all Siberia! "Ivan Ogareff!"
he cries.

On hearing his name pronounced, the wretch starts. His real name known,
all his plans will be frustrated. There is but one thing to be done; to
kill the one who had just uttered it. Ogareff rises and sees the blind
courier! Thinking he has an immense advantage over the blind man, he
throws himself upon him. But with one hand Michael grasps the arm of his
enemy and hurls him to the ground. Ogareff gathers himself together like
a tiger about to spring, and utters not a word. The noise of his
footsteps, his very breathing, he tries to conceal from the blind man.
At last, with a spring, he drives his sword full blast at Michael's
breast. An imperceptible movement of the blind man's knife turns aside
the blow. Michael is not touched, and coolly waits a second attack. Cold
drops stand on Ogareff's brow; he draws back a step and again leaps
forward. But like the first, this attempt fails. Michael's knife has
parried the blow from the traitor's useless sword. Mad with rage and
terror, he gazes into the wide open eyes of the blind man. Those eyes
which seemed to pierce to the bottom of his soul, and which did not,
could not, see, exercise a sort of dreadful fascination over him.

Suddenly Ogareff utters a cry: "He sees! He sees!"

"Yes, I see. Thinking of my mother, the tears which sprang to my eyes
saved my sight. I see the mark of the knout which I gave you, traitor
and coward! I see the place where I am about to strike you! Defend your
life! It is a duel I offer you! My knife against your sword!" The
tears, which his pride in vain endeavored to subdue, welling up from his
heart, had gathered under his eyelids, and volatilized on the cornea,
and the vapor formed by his tears interposing between the glowing saber
and his eyeballs had been sufficient to annihilate the action of the
heat and save his sight. Ogareff now feels that he is lost, but
mustering up all his courage he springs forward. The two blades cross,
but at a touch from Michael's knife the sword flies in splinters, and
the wretch, stabbed to the heart, falls lifeless to the ground. The
crash of the steel attracting the attention of the ducal train, the door
is thrown open, and the Grand Duke, accompanied by some of his officers,
enters. The Grand Duke advances. In the body lying on the ground he
recognizes the man whom he believes to be the Czar's courier. Then in
threatening voice, "Who killed this man."

"I," answered Michael.

"Thy name? I know him! He is the Czar's courier."

"That man, your highness, is not a courier of the Czar! He is Ivan
Ogareff!"

"Ivan, the traitor?"

"Yes."

"But who are you, then?"

"Michael Strogoff."

"And you come?"

"For God, for the Czar, and for my native land!"


MRS. TREE[79]

LAURA E. RICHARDS


Mrs. Tree was over seventy, but apart from an amazing reticulation of
wrinkles netted close and fine like a woven veil, she showed little sign
of her great age. As she herself said, she had her wits and her teeth,
and she didn't see what any one wanted with more. In her afternoon gown
of plum-colored satin she was a pleasing and picturesque figure. On this
particular afternoon it was with very little ceremony that "Direxia
Hawkes," her life-long servitor, burst into the room. Direxia had been
to market and had brought all the news with her marketing.

"Ithuriel Butters is a singular man, Mis' Tree--he give me a turn just
now, he did so. I says, 'How's Miss Butters now, Ithuriel?' I knew she'd
been real poorly, but I hadn't heard for a considerable time.

"'I ain't no notion,' says he.

"'What do you mean, Ithuriel Butters?' I says.

"'Just what I say,' says he.

"'Why, where is she?' I says. I thought she might be visitin', you know.
She has consid'able kin 'round here.

"'I ain't no idee,' says he. 'I lef her in the burying ground, that's
all I know.'

"Mis' Tree, that woman has been dead a month and I never knew a single
word about it. They're all singular people, them Butterses."

Just then there was a ring at the door bell and Direxia shuffled away to
answer it; then a man's voice was heard asking some questions. Mrs. Tree
sat alive and alert and called:

"Direxia!"

"Yes'm. Jest a minit. I'm seein' to something."

"Direxia Hawkes!"

"How you do pester me, Mis' Tree; there's a man at the door and I don't
want to let him stay there alone."

"What does he look like?"

"I don't know, he's a tramp, if he's nothing worse. Most likely he's
stealing the umbrellas while here I stand!"

"Show him in here!"

"What say?"

"Show him in here and don't pretend to be deaf when you hear as well as
I do."

"You don't want him in here, Mis' Tree--he's a tramp, I tell ye, and the
toughest looking"--

"Will you show him in here or shall I come and fetch him?"

"Well! of all the cantankerous,--here! come in, you! She wants to see
you," and a man appeared in the doorway--he was shabbily dressed, but it
was noticeable that the threadbare clothes were clean. Mrs. Tree looked
at him and then looked again.

"What do you want here?"

"I ask for food, I'm hungry."

"Are you a tramp?"

"Yes, Madam!"

"Anything else?"

Just here Direxia burst in with "That'll be enough--you come out in the
kitchen and I'll give you something to eat in a paper bag and you can
take it away with you."

"I shall be pleased to have you take supper with me, sir! Direxia, set a
place for this gentleman."

"I--cannot, Madam!--I thank you, but you must excuse me."

"Why can't you?"

"You must excuse me! If your woman will give me a morsel to eat in the
kitchen, or perhaps I had better go at once."

"Stop! Direxia, go and set another place for supper! Shut the door! Come
here and sit down! No, not on that cheer. Take the ottoman with the bead
puppy on it. There! I get crumpled up, sitting here alone. Some day I
shall turn to wood. I like a new face and a new notion. I had a grandson
who used to live with me, and I'm lonesome since he died. How do you
like tramping, now?"

"Pretty well; it's all right in the summer, or when a man has his
health."

"See things, hey, new folks, new faces, get ideas, is that it?"

"That begins it, but after a while,--I really think I must go. Madam,
you are very kind but I prefer to go."

"Cat's foot!"

The shabby man laughed helplessly and just then Direxia stuck her head
in at the door and snapped out, "Supper's ready!"

The shabby man seemed in a kind of dream--half unconsciously he put the
old lady into her chair--then at a sign from her he took the seat
opposite--he laid the damask napkin across his knees and winced at the
touch of it as at the touch of a long-forgotten hand. Mrs. Tree talked
on easily, asking questions about the roads he traveled and the people
he met. He answered briefly. Suddenly close at hand a voice spoke.

"Old friends!"

The man started to his feet, white as the napkin he held.

"It's only a parrot! Sit down again. There he is at your elbow. Jocko is
his name. He does my swearing for me. My grandson and a friend of his
taught him that, and I have taught him a few other things besides. Good
Jocko! Speak up, boy!"

"Old friends to talk; old books to read; old wine to drink! Zooks!
Hooray for Arthur and Will! they're the boys!"

"That was my grandson and his friend. What's the matter? Feel faint,
hey?"

"Yes, I am--faint. I must get out into the air."

"Nothing of the sort! You'll come upstairs and lie down."

"No! no! not in this house. Never! never!"

"Cat's foot! Don't talk to me! Here! give me your arm! Do as I say!
There!"

And as they passed up the stairway the parrot cried, "Old friends!" And
Direxia said, "I'm going to loose the bulldog, Mis' Tree, and Deacon
Weight says he'll be over in two minutes."

"There isn't any dog in the house, and Deacon Weight is at Conference,
and won't be back till the last of the week. That will do, Direxia; you
mean well, but you are a ninny-hammer. This way! This is my grandson's
room--he died here--what's the matter--feel faint--hey?"

"Yes!--I do--"

"Come, Willie--come lie down and rest on Arthur's bed--you are tired,
boy."

"Mrs. Tree, if you would not be so kind it would not be so hard--I
came--to--rob--you."

"Why, so I supposed, or thought it likely. You can have all you want,
without that--there's plenty for you and me. Folks call me close, and I
like to do what I like with my own money. There's plenty, I tell you,
for you and me and the bird. Do you think he knew you, Willie? I believe
he did."

"God knows! When--how did you know me, Mrs. Tree?"

"Get up, Willie Jaquith, and I'll tell you. Sit down; there's the chair
you made together, when you were fifteen. Remember, hey? I knew your
voice at the door, or I thought I did. Then when you wouldn't look at
the bead puppy, I hadn't much doubt; and when I said 'Cat's foot!' and
you laughed, I knew for sure. You've had a hard time, Willie, but you
are the same boy."

"If you would not be kind, I think it would be easier. You ought to give
me up, you know, and let me go to jail. I'm a drunkard and a vagrant,
and worse--but--you won't--do that--you won't do that."

"No! I won't. Hark, there's some one at the door--it's 'Malviny Weight.'
Now you lie down and rest--yes, you will--that press there is full of
Arthur's clothes--then you come down and talk to me--You do as I tell
you, Willie Jaquith, or I'll set the parrot on you; remember when he
bit you for stealing his apple,--there's the scar still on your cheek.
Greatest wonder in the world he didn't put your eye out. Served you
right if he had, too--Yes, Malviny, I'm coming!"

And as Mrs. Tree descended the stairs she was met by Mrs. Weight, who
broke out saying:

"I've waited most an hour to see that tramp come out. Deacon's away, and
I was scairt to death, but I'm a mother and I had to come. How I had the
courage I don't know, when I thought you and Mis' Tree might meet my
eyes both layin' dead in this entry. Where is he? Don't you help or
harbor him now, Direxia Hawkes! I saw his evil eye as he stood on the
doorstep, and I knew by the way he peeked and peered that he was after
no good. Where is he? I know he didn't go out. Hush! Don't say a word!
I'll slip out and round and get Hiram Sawyer. My boys is to
singing-school, and it was a special ordering that I happened to look
out at the window just that moment of time. Where did you say he--"

"Why, good evening, Malviny, what was it you were saying?"

"I'm sure, Mis' Tree, it's not on my own account I come. I'm the last to
intrude, as any one in this village can tell you. But you are an ancient
woman, and your neighbors are bound to protect you when need is. I see
that tramp come in here with my own eyes, and he's here for no good."

"What tramp?"

"Good land, Mis' Tree, didn't you see him? He slipped right in past
Direxia. I see him with these eyes."

"When?"

"'Most an hour ago. I've been watching ever since. Don't tell me you
didn't know about him bein' here, Mis' Tree, now don't."

"I won't."

"He's hid away somewheres! Direxia Hawkes has hid him; he is an
accomplish of hers. You've always trusted that woman, Mis' Tree, but I
tell you I've had my eye on her these ten years, and now I have found
her out. She's hid him away somewheres, I tell you. There's cupboards
and closets enough in this house to hide a whole gang of cutthroats
in--and when you're abed and asleep they'll have your life, them two,
and run off with your worldly goods that you thought so much of. Would
have, that is, if I hadn't have had a special ordering to look out of
the winder. Oh, how thankful should I be that I kept the use of my
limbs, though I was scairt 'most to death, and am now."

"Yes, they might be useful to you, to get home with, for instance.
There, that will do, Malvina Weight. There is no tramp here. Your
eyesight is failing; there were always weak eyes in your family. There's
no tramp here, and there has been none."

"Mis' Tree! I tell you I see him with these--"

"Bah! don't talk to me! There is no tramp here and there has been
none--what you took for a tramp is a gentleman that's come to stay over
night with me--he's upstairs now--did you lock your door, Malvina--There
are tramps about and if Ephraim's away--well, good-night, Malvina, if
you must go. [She goes out.] Now, Direxia, you shut that door and if
that woman calls again to-night you set the parrot on her."

The next morning found Mrs. Tree an early riser and it was with
eagerness she greeted her visitor.

"You are better this morning, Willie, yes, you are--now go on and tell
me--after all your bad luck you took to drink. That wasn't very
sensible, was it?"

"I didn't care," said William Jaquith. "It helped me to forget a bit at
a time. I thought I could give it up any day, but I didn't. Then--I lost
my place, of course, and started to come East, and had my pocket picked
in Denver, of every cent I had. I tried for work there, but between
sickness and drink I wasn't good for much. I started tramping. I thought
I would tramp--it was last spring, and warm weather coming on--till I'd
got my health back, and then I'd steady down and get some work, and come
back to mother when I was fit to look her in the face. Then--in some
place, I forget--I came upon a King's County paper with mother's death
in it."

"What!"

"O! I know I wasn't fit to see her--but I lost all hope then."

"Why don't you give up drink?"

"Where's the use? I would if there were any use, but mother is dead."

