This was removed at the expiration of another five days; but the animal
was totally unable to walk, with very laborious breathing and cold
extremities. A cathartic was given and the legs bandaged; but the wounds
made no progress towards healing, and at the end of three days he died.
On exposing the cavity of the thorax it was almost covered with
variously formed tumours, from the size of a pigeon's egg to that of a
small pea. The intercostal muscles had many of these adhering to them,
and a few small ones were developed on the heart. There were three on
the diaphragm, in the centre of which matter was formed. The
blood-vessels, kidneys, &c., were free from disease. These tumours were
white, or nearly so, rather hard, and of a glandular substance. The
external ones were soft, red, and almost destitute of blood-vessels,
except the first, which bled considerably. There was dropsy of the
abdomen.


SORE FEET

Sore feet constitute a frequent and troublesome complaint. It consists
of inflammation of the vascular substance, between the epidermis and the
parts beneath. It is the result of numerous slight contusions, produced
by long travelling in dry weather, or hunting over a hard and rough
country, or one covered with frost and snow. The irritation with which
it commences continues to increase and a certain portion of fluid is
determined to the feet, and tubercles are formed, hard, hot, and tender,
until the whole foot is in a diseased state, considerably enlarged. The
animal sadly suffers, and is scarcely able to stand up for a minute.
Sometimes the ardour of the chase will make him for a while forget all
this; but on his return, and when he endeavours to repose himself, it is
with difficulty that he can be got up again. The toes become enlarged,
the skin red and tender, and the horny sole becomes detached and drops.
Local fever, and that to a considerable extent, becomes established; it
reacts on the general economy of the animal, who scarcely moves from his
bed, and at length refuses all food. At other times a separation takes
place between the dermis and the epidermis, which is a perfect mass of
serosity.

Still, however, it is only when all this has much increased, or has been
neglected, that any permanently dangerous consequences take place. When
violent inflammation has set in, the feet must be carefully attended to,
or the dog may be lamed for life. One or two physic-balls may be given;
all salted meat should be removed, and the animal supplied with food
without being compelled to move from his bed. The feet should be bathed
with warm water, and a poultice of linseed meal applied to them twice in
the day. If, as is too often the case, he should tear this off, the feet
should be often fomented. It is bad practice in any master of dogs to
suffer them to be at all neglected when there are any tokens of
inflammation of the feet. The neglect of even a few days may render a
dog a cripple for life. If there are evident appearances of pus
collecting about the claws, or any part of the feet, the abscess should
be opened, well bathed with warm water, and friar's balsam applied to
the feet.

When the feet have been neglected, the nail is apt to grow very rapidly,
and curve round and penetrate into the foot. The forceps should he
applied, and the claws reduced to their proper size.

If there are any indications of fever, or if the dog should be
continually lying down, or he should hold up his feet, and keep them
apart as much as he can, scarifications or poultices, or both, should be
resorted to.

When the feet of a dog become sore in travelling, the foolish habit of
washing them with brine should never be permitted, although it is very
commonly resorted to. Warm fomentations, or warm pot-liquor, or
poultices of linseed meal should be applied, or, if matter is apparently
forming, the lancet may be resorted to.

Dogs are frequently sent to the hospital with considerable redness
between the toes, and ichorous discharge, and the toes thickened round
the base of the nails, as if they were inclined to drop off. The common
alterative medicine should be given, and a lotion composed of hydrarg.
oxym. gr. vi., alcohol [Symbol: ounce] j., et aq. calcis [Symbol: ounce]
iiij., should he applied to the feet three times every day. Leathern
gloves should be sewn on them. These cases are often very obstinate.

Generally speaking, the dog has five toes on the fore feet, and four on
the hind feet, with a mere rudiment of a fifth metatarsal bone in some
feet; but, in others, the fifth bone is long and well proportioned, and
advances as far as the origin of the first phalanx of the neighbouring
toe.

[The editor begs leave to add a more detailed and systematic treatise of
the affections generally attacking the feet and limbs of our dogs.


DISEASES OF THE FEET.

SORE FEET.

Inflammation of the feet, a disease somewhat analogous to founder in
horses, and often attended with equally bad results, particularly in the
English kennels, is comparatively rare with us, although there are few
sportsmen but have met with some cases among their dogs. The feet become
tender, swollen, and hot, violent inflammatory action sets in, the toes
become sore, the claws diseased, and the balls very painful, and often
suppurate.

The animal is thus speedily rendered useless; not being able to support
his body, owing to the intense pain, he remains in his house, and
employs the most of his time in temporarily assuaging his sufferings by
constantly licking the diseased members.

'Causes'.--Running long distances over frozen or stony grounds, hunting
over a rough and ill-cleaned country, over-feeding, confinement, and
lazy habits, are all conducive in some measure to this affection.

This form of disease is not uncommon among those dogs used in toling
ducks on the Chesapeake bay, these animals being obliged to run
incessantly to and fro over the gravel shores, in their efforts to
attract the canvass-back.  We have seen many dogs that have been made
cripples by this arduous work, and rendered prematurely old while yet in
their prime. It would certainly be wise and humane on the part of those
who pursue this sport either for pleasure or gain, to provide suitable
boots for these sagacious animals, who in return would repay such
kindness by increased ardour and length of service. These articles might
be made of leather, or some other durable substance, in such a manner
that they could be laced on every morning before commencing their
labours.

The claws should be allowed to project through openings in the boot, as
this arrangement will give much more freedom to the feet, and the boot
itself will not be destroyed so soon by the penetration of the toes
through its substance. Boots thus neatly made will neither interfere
with his locomotive nor swimming powers, but add greatly to the comfort
of the animal, and secure his services for many years.

'Treatment'.--No stimulating applications to the feet are to be used,
such as salt water, ley, fish brine, or urine, but rather emollient
poultices and cooling washes. These last-mentioned remedies should be
carefully applied, and the dog confined to his house as much as
possible: in fact, there is little difficulty in restraining him in this
respect, as he has but little inclination or ability to move about.

Purging balls should be administered every night, and blood abstracted
if there be much fever, as indicated in the heat, swelling, and pain of
the limbs.

If the balls continue to swell, and there is a collection of pus within
them, they may be opened by the lancet, and the contents evacuated,
after which apply a linseed poultice. When the inflammation has
subsided, simple dressings of melted butter or fresh lard will generally
effect a cure.


PUSTULAR AFFECTION OF THE FEET.

Dogs frequently have a pustular eruption between the toes, either
accompanying mange or some other skin disease, or entirely independent
of any other affection.

'Causes'.--Want of cleanliness, bad housing, improper food, vermin, and
depraved constitution.

'Treatment'.--Frequent washing with castile soap and water will correct
this disease; the feet and legs after washing should be rubbed dry,
particularly between the toes.  When the pustules are large, they may be
opened with the lancet and a poultice applied. If the disease appears
complicated with mange, or dependent upon other general causes, the
primary affection must be removed by the proper remedies, which
generally carries off with the secondary disease.


SPRAINS

It is not an uncommon occurrence for dogs, while running, climbing
fences, or jumping ditches, to sprain themselves very severely in the
knee, or more frequently in the shoulder-joint; and if not properly
attended to, will remain cripples for life, owing to enlargement of the
tendon and deposition of matter.

We once had a fine, large, powerful bull-dog, that sprained himself in
the shoulder while running very violently in the street after another
dog, and in some way, owing to the great eagerness to overtake the
other, tripped up when at the top of his speed, fell on his chest, and
when he arose commenced limping, and evidently suffered from
considerable pain. On taking him home, we examined his feet, limbs, and
chest very particularly, expecting to find a luxation or fracture of
some of the bones of the leg or feet, or perhaps the presence of a piece
of glass or other article deeply imbedded in the ball. None of the above
accidents, however, being brought to light by our examination, or that
of a medical friend who expressed a wish to see our patient, we
concluded that a simple sprain of some of the tendons had taken place.

On the following day there was slight swelling and tenderness of the
shoulder-joint, accompanied by great unwillingness to put the foot to
the ground, owing to the pain that seemed to be produced by the
extension of the leg. The limb was fomented, and the dog confined for
several days, till the swelling and tenderness disappeared; but, greatly
to our astonishment and that of others, he still remained lame as
before.

This lameness continued for several months, when we parted with him,
sending him to a relative in the country, who informed us that he never
recovered the use of his limb, but that it became shrivelled and
deformed for want of use.

The cause of lameness in this dog is as unaccountable as some cases of
lameness we see in horses. We are convinced that there was neither
fracture nor luxation, nor any other unnatural displacement of the
parts, and can attribute it to nothing but enlargement of one of the
tendons of the shoulder-joint resulting from inflammation. If it had
been in our power, we should have liked to have examined this animal
after death.

'Treatment'.--Hot fomentations to the part affected, together with
purging balls and bleeding, if there be great tenderness and swelling of
the limb. When the inflammation and tumefaction have disappeared, rub
the parts with opodeldoc, or other stimulating mixtures.


WOUNDS OF THE FEET.

Dogs are apt to cut their feet by stepping upon sharp tools, bits of
oyster-shell, old iron, &c., or by the introduction of thorns, burrs,
nails, bits of glass, and other articles, into their balls.

'Treatment'.--If the cut be very deep, or divides the ball, the foot
must be washed in tepid water, and the edges of the wound drawn together
and retained in their position by a couple of sutures or a strap or two
of adhesive plaster, and the animal confined.

Where thorns or sand-burrs have pierced the foot, diligent search should
be made to extract them, or the wound will suppurate, and the dog
continue lame for a long time. This caution is particularly necessary
when minute particles of glass have entered the foot. A poultice in such
cases should be applied, after removing every particle within our reach,
and the, foot be wrapped up, or, what is better, enclosed in a boot of
some kind, sufficiently strong to protect it from the dirt or other
small particles which otherwise would enter the wound and prevent its
healing. In a case of great emergency, one of our friends hunted a
setter dog three successive days in a leather boot, which we instructed
a country cobbler to put on him to protect his foot from a recent and
deep cut, that he had received from treading upon some farming utensils.
The boot was taken off every night, the foot nicely cleaned, the leather
oiled and replaced ready for the following day. The wound afterwards
healed up, and no trace of the incision now remains. The boot should be
made of stout, flexible leather, and extend beyond the first joint; the
seam must be in front, so as not to interfere with the dog's tread.
There should be openings for the claws, and the sole large enough to
allow the expansion of the ball pads when in motion: a small layer of
tow had better be laid on the bottom of the foot before putting on the
boot.

It is often very difficult to tell the exact spot where a briar or thorn
has entered the foot, owing to its penetrating so far into the substance
of the ball as to be entirely concealed under the skin, or by the
swelling of the parts surrounding it. In all such cases the bottom of
the foot should he gently pressed by the thumb, and the point where the
dog exhibits symptoms of must pain should be, particularly examined,
and, if necessary, cut down upon to extract the extraneous substance, no
matter what it may be.


LONG NAILS OR CLAWS.

The nails of some dogs require occasional cutting, otherwise they grow
so long and fast that they turn in and penetrate the ball of the foot.
If we cut them, a strong, sharp knife is necessary for the purpose;
filing them off we consider far preferable.


LAMENESS

Dogs, as well as horses, become lame from stiff joints, splints, and
sprains. Stiff joints are occasioned by anchylosis, or the deposit of
calcareous or osseous matter within the ligament or around the head of
the bone, which latter defect is known as ring-bone in the horse.

'Treatment'.--Stimulating friction to the parts, such as spirits of
camphor, or camphorated liniment, mercurial ointment, tincture of
iodine, opodeldoc, blistering, c.--L.]


       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XVI.

FRACTURES


These are of not unfrequent occurrence in the dog; and I once had five
cases in my hospital at the same time.

In the human subject, fractures are more frequent in adults, and,
perhaps, in old men, than in infants; but this is not the case with the
smaller animals generally, and particularly with dogs. Five-sixths of
the fractures occur between the time of weaning and the animal being six
months old; not, perhaps, because of their chemical composition, that
the bones are more fragile at this age; but because young dogs are more
exposed to fall from the hands of the persons who carry them, and from
the places to which they climb; and the extremities of the bones, then
being in the state of epiphysis, are easily separated from the body of
the bone. When the fracture takes place in the body of the bone, it is
transverse or somewhat oblique, but there is scarcely any displacement.

A simple bandage will be sufficient for the reduction of these
fractures, which may be removed in ten or twelve days, when the
preparatory callus has acquired some consistence. One only out of twenty
dogs that were brought to me with fractures of the extremities, in the
year 1834, died. Two dogs had their jaws fractured by kicks from horses,
and lost several of their teeth. In one of them the anterior part of the
jaw was fractured perpendicularly; in the other, both branches were
fractured. Plenty of good soup was injected into their mouths. Ten or
twelve days afterwards, they were suffered to lap it; and in a little
while they were dismissed cured.

It will be desirable, perhaps, to describe our usual method of reducing
the greater part of the fractures which come under our notice.

I.--The 'humerus' was fractured just above the elbow and close to the
joint. The limb was enclosed in adhesive plaster, and supported by a
firm bandage. The bones were beginning to unite, when, by some means
concerning which I could never satisfy myself, the 'tibia' was broken a
little above the hock. Nothing could well be done with this second
fracture; but great care was taken with regard to the former. The lower
head of the humerus remained somewhat enlarged; but the lameness became
very slight, and in three weeks had nearly or quite disappeared. Nothing
was done to the second fracture; in fact, nothing more than a slight,
annular enlargement, surrounding the part, remained--a proof of the
renovating power of nature.

II.--A spaniel was run over by a light carriage. It was unable to put
the left hind leg to the ground, and at the upper tuberosity of the
ileum some crepitus could be distinguished. I subtracted six ounces of
blood, administered a physic-ball, and ordered the patient to be well
fomented with warm water several times during the night. On the
following day no wound could be discovered, but there was great
tenderness. I continued the fomentation. Two or three days afterwards
she was evidently easier. I then had the hair cut close, and covered the
loins and back with a pitch-plaster. At the expiration of six days the
plaster was getting somewhat loose, and was replaced by another with
which a very small quantity of powdered cantharides was mingled. At the
expiration of the fifth week she was quite well.

III.--The 'thigh-bone' had been broken a fortnight. It was a compound
fracture: the divided edges of the bone protruded through the
integuments, and there was no disposition to unite. It is not in one
case in a hundred that an animal thus situated can be saved. We failed
in our efforts, and the dog was ultimately destroyed.

IV.--The 'femur' was broken near the hip. I saw it on the third day,
when much heat and swelling had taken place. I ordered the parts to be
frequently bathed with warm water. The heat and tenderness to a
considerable degree subsided, and the pitch-plaster was carefully
applied. At the expiration of a week the plaster began to be loosened. A
second one was applied, and when a fortnight longer had passed, a slight
degree of tenderness alone remained.

V.--The following account is characteristic of the bull terrier. The
'radius' had been broken, and was set, and the bones were decidedly
united, when the dog, in a moment of frantic rage, seized his own leg
and crushed some of the bones. They were once more united, but his wrist
bent under him in the form of a concave semicircle, as if some of the
ligaments of the joint had been ruptured in the moment of rage. It was
evident on the following day that it was impossible to control him, and
he was destroyed.

VI.--A spaniel, three months old, became fractured half-way between the
wrist and the 'elbow'. A surgeon bound it up, and it became swollen to
an enormous size, from the adhesive plaster that had been applied and
the manner of placing the splints. I removed the splints. On the
following morning I had the arm frequently fomented: a very indistinct
crepitus could be perceived at the point of the humerus: I applied
another plaster higher up, and including the elbow. The hair not having
been cut sufficiently close, the plaster was removed, applied much more
neatly and closely, and the original fracture was firmly bound together.
No crepitus was now to be perceived.

I saw no more of our patient for four days, when I found that he had
fallen, and that the elbow on the other side was fractured within the
capsular ligament. A very distinct crepitus could be felt, and the dog
cried sadly when the joint was moved. I would have destroyed him, but he
was a favourite with his master, and we tried what a few days more would
produce. I enclosed the whole of the limb in a plaster of pitch, and
bound it up without splints. Both the bandages remained on nearly a
fortnight, when the fractures were found to be perfectly united, and the
lameness in both legs gradually disappeared.

VII.--July 22, 1843. A spaniel was frightened with something on the bed,
and fell from it, and cried very much. The instep, or wrist, of the
right leg, before was evidently bowed, and there was considerable heat
and tenderness. It was well fomented on the two following days, and then
set, and adhesive plaster was tightly applied, and a splint bound over
that.

24th. The foot began to swell, and was evidently painful. The outer
bandage was loosened a little, but the inner bandage was not touched.

Aug. 4. The bandage, that had not been meddled with for eleven days, now
appeared to give him some pain. For the last two days he has been gently
licking and gnawing it. The splints were removed; but the adhesive
plaster appearing even and firm, was suffered to remain.

26th. Everything appeared to be going on well, when he again leaped from
his bed. The wrist was much more bowed, and was tender and hot. Simple
lint and a firm calico bandage were had recourse to.

27th. He is unable to put his foot to the ground, and the joint is
certainly enlarging. An adhesive plaster, made by a Frenchman, was
applied at the owners request, over which was placed a splint. The dog
soon began to gnaw the plaster, which formed a sticky but not very
adhesive mass. Before night the pain appeared to be very great, and the
dog cried excessively. I was sent for. We well fomented the leg, and
then returned to our former treatment. There was evidently a great deal
of pain, but it gradually passed over, and a slight degree of lameness
alone remained.

I have great pleasure in adding the following accounts of the successful
treatment of fractures in dogs by Mr. Percivall:

  "Hopeless as cases of fracture in horses generally are, from the
  difficulty experienced in managing the patient, they are by no means
  to be so regarded in dogs. I have in several instances seen dogs
  recover, and with very good use of the parts, if not perfect
  restoration of them, when the accidents have been considered, at the
  time they took place, of a nature so irremediable as to render it
  advisable to destroy the animals.

  "May 4, 1839. A valuable Irish spaniel fell from a high wall, and
  fractured his 'off shoulder'. On examination, I found the 'os humeri'
  fractured about an inch above its radial extremity, causing the limb
  to drop pendulously from the side, and depriving the animal of all use
  of it. The arm, by which I mean the fore arm, was movable in any
  direction upon the shoulder, and there was distinct crepitus: in a
  word, the nature of the accident was too plain to admit of doubt; nor
  was there any splinter or loose piece of bone discoverable. I directed
  that the animal might be laid flat upon his sound side in a hamper, or
  covered basket or box, of sufficient dimensions, but not large enough
  to admit of his moving about; to have his hind legs fettered, his
  mouth muzzled, and his injured parts covered with a linen cloth wetted
  with a spirit lotion.

  'May' 5. The parts are tumefied, but not more, nor even so much as one
  night have expected. Continue the lotion.

  '6th'. At my request, Mr. Youatt was called in to give his opinion as
  to the probability of effecting a cure. He thought from the
  inconvenient situation of the fracture, that the chances of success
  were doubtful; and recommended that a plaster, composed of thick
  sheep-skin and pitch, cut to the shape of the parts, should be
  applied, extending from the upper part of the shoulder down upon the
  arm, and reaching to the knee; and that the whole should be enveloped
  in well-applied bandages, one of them being carried over the shoulders
  and brought round between the fore legs, to support the limb, and aid
  in retaining the fractured ends in apposition. Prior to the
  application of the pitch plaster the hair was closely shorn off. Thus
  bound up, the dog was replaced in his hamper, and had some aperient
  medicine given to him.

  '8th'. The medicine has operated; and he appears going on well, his
  appetite continuing unimpaired.

  '10th'. He growls when I open the basket to look at him. On examining
  him (while his keeper had hold of him), I found the plaster loosening
  from its adhesion; I took it off altogether, and applied a fresh one,
  composed of the stopping composition I use for horses' feet.

  June 7. Up to this time everything appears to have been going on
  properly. The fracture feels as if it were completely united, and, as
  the plaster continues to adhere firmly, I thought the bandages
  enveloping it, as they were often getting loose, might now he
  dispensed with, and that the dog might with benefit be chained to a
  kennel, instead of being so closely confined as he has been. In
  moving, he does not attempt to use the fractured limb, but hops along
  upon the three other legs.

  July. He has acquired pretty good use of the limb. Being now at
  liberty, he runs about a good deal; halting, from there being some
  shortness of the limb, but not so much as to prevent him being
  serviceable, as a 'slow' hunter, in the sporting-field.

  "About a twelvemonth ago," continues Mr. Percivall, "I was consulted
  concerning a blood-hound of great size and beauty, and of the cost of
  £50, that had been a cripple in one of his hind limbs for some
  considerable time past, owing, it was said or thought, to having
  received some injury. After a very careful handling, and examination
  of the parts about the hips, the places where he expressed pain, I
  came to the conclusion that there had been, and still existed, some
  fracture of 'the ischial portion of the pelvis', but precisely where,
  or of what nature, I could not determine; and all the treatment I
  could recommend was, that the animal should be shut up within a basket
  or box of some, sort, of dimensions only sufficient to enable him to
  lie at ease, and that he be kept there for at least six months,
  without being taken out, save for the purpose of having his bed
  cleansed or renewed. His owner had previously made up his mind to have
  him destroyed; understanding, however, from me, that there still
  remained a chance of his recovery, he ordered his groom to procure a
  proper basket, and see that the dog's confinement was such as I had
  prescribed. The man asked me to allow him to have his kennel, which,
  being no larger than was requisite for him, I did not object to; and
  to this he had an iron lattice-door made, converting it into a sort of
  wild beast cage. After two months' confinement, I had him let out for
  a short run, and perceived evident amendment. I believe altogether
  that he was imprisoned five months, and then was found so much
  improved that I had him chained to his kennel for the remaining month,
  and this, I believe, was continued for another month. The issue was
  the complete recovery of the animal, very much to the gratification
  and joy of his master, by whom he is regarded as a kind of unique or
  unobtainable production.

  "The fractures of dogs and other animals must, of course, be treated
  in accordance with all the circumstances of their cases; but I have
  always considered it a most essential part of their treatment that
  such portable patients as dogs and cats, &c., should be placed and
  kept in a state of confinement, where they either could not, or were
  not likely to, use or move the fractured parts; and, moreover, I have
  thought that failure, where it has resulted after such treatment, has
  arisen from its not having been sufficiently long persisted in."

In the opinion of Professor Simonds, when there is fracture of the bones
of the extremities, a starch bandage is the best that can be employed.
If applied wet, it adapts itself to the irregularities of the limbs; and
if allowed to remain on twelve hours undisturbed, it forms a complete
case for the part, and affords more equal support than anything else
that can possibly be used.

The following case was one of considerable interest. It came under the
care of Professor Simonds. Two gentlemen were playing at quoits, and the
dog of one of them was struck on the head by a quoit, and supposed to be
killed. His owner took him up, and found that he was not dead, although
dreadfully injured. It being near the Thames, his owner took him to the
edge of the river, and dashed some water over him, and he rallied a
little. Professor Simonds detected a fracture of the skull, with
pressure on the brain, arising from a portion of depressed bone. The dog
was perfectly unconscious, frequently moaning, quite incapable of
standing, and continually turning round upon his belly, his straw, or
his bed. It was a case of coma; he took no food, and the pulsation at
the heart was very indistinct.

  "I told the proprietor that there was no chance of recovery except by
  an operation; and, even then, I thought it exceedingly doubtful. I was
  desired to operate, and I took him home.

  "The head was now almost twice as large as when the accident occurred,
  proceeding from a quantity of coagulated blood that had been effused
  under the skin covering the skull. I gave him a dose of aperient
  medicine, and on the following morning commenced my operation.

  "The hair was clipped from the head, and an incision carried
  immediately from between the eye-brows to the back part of the skull,
  in the direction of the sagittal suture. Another incision was made
  from this towards the root of the ear. This triangular flap was then
  turned back, in order to remove the coagulated blood and make a
  thorough exposure of the skull. I was provided with a trephine,
  thinking that only a portion of the bone had been depressed on the
  brain, and it would be necessary, with that instrument, to separate it
  from its attachment, and then with an elevator remove it; but I found
  that the greater part of the parietal bone was depressed, and that the
  fracture extended along the sagittal suture from the coronal and
  lamdoidal sutures. At three-fourths of the width of the bone, the
  fracture ran parallel with the sagittal suture, and this large portion
  was depressed upon the tunics of the brain, the dura mater being
  considerably lacerated. The depressed bone was raised with an
  elevator, and I found, from its lacerated edges and the extent of the
  mischief done, that it was far wiser to remove it entirely, than to
  allow it to remain and take the chance of its uniting.

  "In a few days, the dog began to experience relief from the operation,
  and to be somewhat conscious of what was taking place around him.  He
  still requires care and attention, and proper medicinal agents to be
  administered from time to time; but with the exception of occasionally
  turning round when on the floor, he takes his food well, and obeys his
  master's call."[1]


[Footnote 1: Trans. Vet. Med. Assoc., i. 51.]


       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XVII.

MEDICINES USED IN THE TREATMENT OF THE DISEASES OF THE DOG.


These are far more numerous and complicated than would, on the first
consideration of them, be imagined. The Veterinary Surgeon has a long
list of them, suited to the wants and dangers, imaginary or real, of his
patients; and he who is not scientifically acquainted with them, will
occasionally blunder in the choice of remedies, or the application of
the means of cure which he adopts. Little attention may, perhaps, be
paid to the medical treatment of the dog; yet it requires not a little
study and experience. I will endeavour to give a short account of the
drugs, and mode of using them, generally employed.

The administering of medicines to dogs is, generally speaking, simple
and safe, if a little care is taken about the matter, and especially if
two persons are employed in the operation. The one should be sitting
with the dog between his knees, and the hinder part of the animal
resting on the floor. The mouth is forced open by the pressure of the
fore-finger and thumb upon the lips of the upper jaw, and the medicine
can be conveniently introduced with the other hand, and passed
sufficiently far into the throat to insure its not being returned. The
mouth should be closed and kept so, until the bolus has been seen to
pass down. Mr. Blaine thus describes the difference between the
administration of liquid and solid medicines:

  "A little attention will prevent all danger. A ball or bolus should be
  passed completely over the root of the tongue, and pushed some way
  backward and forward. When a liquid is given, if the quantity is more
  than can be swallowed at one effort, it should be removed from the
  mouth at each deglutition, or the dog may be strangled. Balls of a
  soft consistence, and those composed of nauseous ingredients, should
  be wrapped in thin paper, or they may disgust the dog and produce
  sickness."

Dogs labouring under disease should be carefully nursed: more depends on
this than many persons seem to be aware. A warm and comfortable bed is
of a great deal more consequence than many persons who are fond of their
dogs imagine. Cleanliness is also an essential point. Harshness of
manner and unkind treatment will evidently aggravate many of their
complaints. I have sometimes witnessed an angry word spoken to a healthy
dog produce instant convulsions in a distempered one that happened to be
near; and the fits that come on spontaneously in distemper, almost
instantly leave the dog by soothing notice of him.

'Acidum Acetum (Vinegar)'.--This is useful for sprains, bruises, and
fomentations.

'Acidum Nitricum (Nitric Acid; Aqua Fortis)'.--This may be used with
advantage to destroy warts or fungous excrescences. A little of the acid
should be dropped on the part and bound tightly down. The protuberance
will slough off and healthy granulations will spring up. A surer
application, however, is the nitrate of silver.

'Acidum Hydrocyanicum (Prussic Acid)'.--This is an excellent application
for the purpose of allaying irritation of the skin in dogs; but it must
be very carefully watched. I have seen a drachm of it diluted with a
pint of distilled water, rapidly allay cuticular inflammation. The
dreadful degree of itching which had been observed during the last two
or three years yielded to this application alone; and to that it has
almost invariably yielded, a little patience being used.

'Acupuncturation' is a practice lately introduced into veterinary
surgery. It denotes the insertion of a needle into the skin or flesh of
a person or animal suffering severely from some neuralgic affection. The
needle is small and sharp: it is introduced by a slight pressure and
semi-rotating motion between the thumb and forefinger, and afterwards
withdrawn with the same motion. This should always employ a quarter of
an hour at least, and in cases of very great pain it should continue two
hours; but when the object is to afford an exit to the fluid collected,
mere puncture is sufficient. It is attended with very little pain; and
therefore it may be employed at least with safety if not with advantage.
The operation was known and practised in Japan, many years ago; but it
was only in the seventeenth century that its singular value was
ascertained. In 1810 some trials of it were made in Paris, and M. Chenel
look the lead. He had a young dog that he had cured of distemper, except
that a spasmodic affection of the left hind leg remained. He applied a
needle, and with fair success. He failed with another dog; but M.
Prevost, of Geneva, relieved two mares from rheumatism, and an entire
horse that had been lame sixteen months. In the Veterinary School at
Lyons acupuncturation was tried on two dogs. One had chorea, and the
other chronic paralysis of the muscles of the neck. The operation had no
effect on the first; the other came out of the hospital completely
cured. In the following year acupuncturation was tried without success
in the same school. Four horses and two dogs were operated upon in vain.

'Adeps (Hog's Lard)' forms the basis of all our ointments. It is
tasteless, inodorous and free from every stimulating quality.

'Alcohol (Rectified Spirit)'.--This is principally used in tinctures,
and seldom or never administered to the dog in a pure state.

'Aloes, Barbadoes'.--From these are formed the safest and best aperients
for the dog--consisting of powdered aloes, eight parts; antimonial
powder, one part; ginger, one part; and palm oil, five parts; beaten
well together, and the size of the ball varying from half a drachm to
two drachms, and a ball administered every fourth or fifth hour. Mr.
Blaine considers it to be the safest general purgative. He says that
such is the peculiarity of the bowels of the dog, that while a man can
take with impunity as much calomel as would kill two large dogs, a
moderate-sized dog will take a quantity of aloes sufficient to destroy
two stout men. The smallest dog can take 15 or 20 grains; half a drachm
is seldom too much; but the smaller dose had better be tried first, for
hundreds of dogs are every year destroyed by temerity in this
particular. Medium-sized dogs usually require a drachm; and some large
dogs have taken two or even three drachms.

'Alteratives' are medicines that effect some slow change in the diseased
action of certain parts, without interfering with the food or work. The
most useful consist of five parts of sublimed sulphur, one of nitre, one
of linseed meal, and two of lard or palm oil.

'Alum' is a powerful astringent, whether employed externally or
internally. It is occasionally administered in doses of from 10 to 15
grains in obstinate diarrhoea. In some obstinate cases, alum whey has
been employed in the form of a clyster.

'Oxide of Antimony', in the form of a compound powder, and under the
name of James's powder, is employed as a sudorific, or to cause a
determination to the skin.

The 'Antimonii Potassio Tartras (Tartar Emetic)', besides its effect on
the skin, is a useful nauseant, and invaluable in inflammation of the
lungs and catarrhal affections of every kind. The 'Black Sesquisulphuret
of Antimony' is a compound of sulphur and antimony, and an excellent
alterative.

'Argenti Nitras--Nitrate of Silver (Lunar Caustic)'.--I have already
strongly advocated the employment of this caustic for empoisoned wounds
and bites of rabid animals. In my opinion it supersedes the use of every
other caustic, and generally of the knife. I have also given it
internally as a tonic to the dog, in cases of chorea, in doses from an
eighth to a quarter of a grain. A dilute solution may be employed as an
excitant to wounds, in which the healing process has become sluggish.
For this purpose, ten grains or more may be dissolved in a fluid ounce
of distilled water. A few fibres of tow dipped in this solution, being
drawn through the channel which is left on the removal of a seton,
quickly excite the healing action. Occasionally one or two drops of this
solution may be introduced into the eye for the purpose of removing
opalescence of the cornea. In cases of fungoid matter being thrown out
on the cornea, the fungus may be touched with a rod of nitrate of
silver, and little pain will follow.

The 'Peruvian Bark', or its active principle the disulphate of quina, is
a valuable tonic in distemper, especially when combined with the iodide
of iron; the iron increasing with the general tone of the system, and
the iodine acting as a stimulant to the absorbents.

'Blisters' are occasionally useful or indispensable in some of the
casualties and diseases to which the dog is liable. They are mostly of
the same description, and act upon the same principles as in the horse,
whether in the form of plaster, or ointment, or stimulating fluid.
Blisters can be kept on the dog with difficulty: nothing short of a wire
muzzle will suffice; Mr. Blaine says, that for very large dogs, he used
to be compelled to make use of a perforated tin one. The judgment of the
practitioner will determine in these cases, as well as with regard to
the horse, whether the desired effect should be produced by severe
measures or by those of a milder character, by active blisters or by
milder stimulants; the difficulty of the measures to be adopted, and the
degree of punishment that may be inflicted, being never forgotten by the
operator.

We have stated in our work on the Horse, that "the art of blistering
consists in cutting or rather shaving the hair perfectly close; then
well rubbing in the ointment, and afterwards, and, what is the greatest
consequence of all, plastering a little more of the ointment lightly
over the part, and leaving it. As soon as the vesicles have perfectly
risen, which will be in twenty or twenty-four hours, the torture of the
animal may be somewhat relieved by the application of olive or
neat's-foot oil, or any emollient ointment.

"An infusion of two ounces of the cantharides in a pint of oil of
turpentine, for several days, is occasionally used as a languid blister;
and when sufficiently lowered with common oil, it is called a 'sweating'
oil, for it maintains a certain degree of irritation and inflammation on
the skin, yet not sufficient to blister; and thus gradually abates or
removes some old or deep inflammation, or cause of lameness." [1]

Iodine in various cases is now rapidly superseding the cantharides and
the turpentine.

'Calomel'--Sufficient has been said of this dangerous medicine in the
course of the present work. I should rarely think of exhibiting it,
except in small doses for the purpose of producing that specific
influence on the liver, which we know to be the peculiar property of
this drug. In large doses it will to a certain extent produce vomiting;
and, if it finds its way into the intestines, it acts as a powerful
drastic purgative.

'Castor Oil (Oleum Ricini)'.--This is a most valuable medicine. It is
usually combined with the syrup of buckthorn and white poppies, in the
proportions of three parts of the oil to two of the buckthorn and one of
the poppy-syrup; which form a combination of ingredients in which the
oleaginous, stimulant, and narcotic ingredients happily blend.

'Catechu.'--This is an extract from the wood of an acacia-tree '(Acacia
catechu)', and possesses a powerful astringent property. It is given in
cases of superpurgation, united with opium, chalk, and powdered gum. A
tincture of it is very useful for the purpose of hastening the healing
principle of wounds. Professor Morton says, that he considers it as the
most valuable of the vegetable astringents.

'Clysters.'--Professor Morton gives an account of the use of clysters.
The objects, he says, for which they are administered, are--1. To empty
the bowels of fæces: thus they act as an aperient. Also, to induce a
cathartic to commence its operations, when, from want of exercise or due
preparation, it is tardy in producing the desired effect. Clysters
operate in a twofold way: first, by softening the contents of the
intestines; and, secondly, by exciting an irritation in one portion of
the canal which is communicated throughout the whole; hence they become
valuable when the nature and progress of the disease require a quick
evacuation of the bowels. The usual enema is warm water, but this may be
rendered more stimulating by the addition of salt, oil, or aloes. 2. For
the purpose of killing worms that are found in the rectum and large
intestines: in this case it is usually of an oleaginous nature. 3. For
restraining diarrhoea: sedatives and astringents being then employed. 4.
For nourishing the body when food cannot be received by the mouth. Gruel
is generally the aliment thus given.  5. For allaying spasms in the
stomach and bowels.

'Copper'--Both the verdigris, or subacetate, and the blue vitriol of
sulphate of copper, are now comparatively rarely used. They are employed
either in the form of a fine powder, or mixed with an equal quantity of
the acetate of lead in order to destroy proud flesh or stimulate old
ulcers. They also form a part of the ægyptiacum of the farrier. There
are many better drugs to accomplish the same purpose.

'Creosote' is seldom used for the dog. We have applications quite as
good and less dangerous. It may be employed as a very gentle excitant
and antiseptic.

'Creta Preparata (Chalk)', in combination with ginger, catechu, and
opium, is exceedingly useful; indeed, it is our most valuable medicine
in all cases of purging, and particularly the purging of distemper.

'Digitalis' is an exceedingly valuable drug. It is a direct and powerful
sedative, a mild diuretic, and useful in every inflammatory and febrile
complaint.

'Gentian' and 'Ginger' are both valuable; the first as a stomachic and
tonic, and the last as a cordial and tonic. It is occasionally
necessary, or at least desirable, to draw this distinction between them.

'Chloride of Lime' is a useful application for ill-conditioned wounds
and for the frequent cleansing of the kennel.

'Epsom Salts', or 'Sulphate of Magnesia', are mild yet effective in
their action: with regard to cattle and sheep, they supersede every
other aperient; for the dog, however, they must yield to the castor-oil
mixture.

'Mercury'--The common mercurial ointment is now comparatively little
used. It has given way to the different preparations of iodine. In
direct and virulent mange, it is yet, however, employed under the form
of calomel, and combined with aloes, but in very small doses, never
exceeding three grains. It is also useful in farcy and jaundice. The
corrosive sublimate is occasionally used for mange in the dog, and to
destroy vermin; but it is a very uncertain and dangerous medicine.

'Palm Oil' would be an excellent emollient, if it were not so frequently
adulterated with turmeric root in powder. It is far milder than the
common lard.

'Nitrate of Potash' is a valuable cooling and mild diuretic, in doses of
eight or ten grains.

'Sulphur' is the basis of the most effectual applications for mange. It
is a good alterative, combined usually with antimonials and nitre, and
particularly useful in mange, surfeit, grease, hide-bound, and want of
condition.

'Turpentine' is an excellent diuretic and antispasmodic; it is also a
most effectual sweating blister and highly useful in strains.

'The Sulphate of Zinc' is valuable as an excitant to wounds, and
promotes adhesion between divided surfaces and the 'radix'.


[Footnote 1: The Horse, p. 501.]


       *       *       *       *       *


APPENDIX.


THE NEW LAWS OF COURSING,

'As Revised and Enlarged at a Meeting of Noblemen and Gentlemen, held at
the Thatched House Tavern, St. James's Street, June 1, 1839'.

I. Two stewards shall be appointed by the members at dinner each day, to
act in the field the following day, and to preside at dinner. They shall
regulate the plan of beating the ground, under the sanction of the owner
or occupier of the soil.

II. Three or five members, including the secretary for the time being,
shall form a Committee of Management, and shall name a person, for the
approbation of the members, to judge all courses--all doubtful cases
shall be referred to them.

III. All courses shall be from slips, by a brace of greyhounds only.

IV. The time of putting the first brace of dogs in the slips shall be
declared at dinner on the day preceding.  If a prize is to be run for,
and only one dog is ready, he shall run a by, and his owner shall
receive forfeit: should neither be ready, the course shall be run when
the Committee shall think fit. In a match, if only one dog be ready, his
owner shall receive forfeit; if neither be present, the match shall be
placed the last in the list.

V. If any person shall enter a greyhound by a name different from that
in which he last appeared in public, without giving notice of such
alteration, he shall be disqualified from winning, and shall forfeit his
match.

VI. No greyhounds shall be entered as puppies unless born on or after
the 1st of January of the year preceding the day of running.

VII. Any member, or other person, running a greyhound at the meeting,
having a dog at large which shall join in the course then running, shall
forfeit one sovereign; and, if belonging to either of the parties
running, the course shall be decided against him.

VIII. The judge ought to be in a position where he can see the dogs
leave the slips, and to decide by the colour of the dogs to a person
appointed for that purpose: his decision shall be final.

IX. If, in running for prizes, the judge shall be of opinion that the
course has not been of sufficient length to enable him to decide as to
the merits of the dogs, he shall inquire of the Committee whether he is
to decide the course or not; if in the negative, the dogs shall be
immediately put again into the slips.

X. The judge shall not answer any questions put to him regarding a
course, unless such questions are asked by the Committee.

XI. If any member make any observation in the hearing of the judge
respecting a course, during the time of running, or before he shall have
delivered his judgment, he shall forfeit one sovereign to the fund; and,
if either dog be his own, he shall lose the course. If he impugn the
decision of the judge, he shall forfeit two sovereigns.

XII. When a course of an average length is so equally divided that the
judge shall be unable to decide it, the owners of the dogs may toss for
it; but, if either refuse, the dogs shall be again put in the slips, at
such time as the Committee may think fit; but, if either dog be drawn,
the winning dog shall not be obliged to run again.

XIII. In running a match the judge may declare the course to be
undecided.

XIV. If a member shall enter more than one greyhound, 'bonâ fide' his
own property, for a prize, his dogs shall not run together, if it be
possible to avoid it; and, if two greyhounds, the property of the same
member, remain to the last tie, he may run it out or draw either, as he
shall think fit.

XV. When dogs engaged are of the same colour, the last drawn shall wear
a collar.

XVI. If a greyhound stand still in a course when a hare is in his or her
sight, the owner shall lose the course; but, if a greyhound drops from
exhaustion, and it shall be the opinion of the judge that the merit up
to the time of falling was greatly in his or her favour, then the judge
shall have power to award the course to the greyhound so falling, if he
think fit.

XVII. Should two hares be on foot, and the dogs separate before reaching
the hare slipped at, the course shall be undecided, and shall be run
over again at such time as the Committee shall think fit, unless the
owners of the dogs agree to toss for it, or to draw one dog; and if the
dogs separate after running some time, it shall be at the discretion of
the Committee whether the course shall be decided up to the point of
separation.

XVIII. A course shall end if either dog be so unsighted as to cause an
impediment in the course.

XIX. If any member or his servant ride over his opponent's dog when
running, so as to injure him in the course, the dog so ridden over shall
be deemed to win the course.

XX. It is recommended to all union meetings to appoint a committee of
five, consisting of members of different clubs, to determine all
difficulties and cases of doubt.


'The following general rules are recommended to judges for their
guidance:'

The features of merit are:

The race from slips, and the first turn or wrench of the hare (provided
it be a fair slip), and a straight run-up.

Where one dog gives the other a go-by when both are in their full speed,
and turns or wrenches the hare. (N. B. If one dog be in the stretch, and
the other only turning at the time he passes, it is not a fair go-by.)

Where one dog turns the hare when she is leading homewards, and keeps
the lead so as to serve himself, and makes a second turn of the hare
without losing the lead.

A catch or kill of the hare, when she is running straight and leading
homewards, is fully equal to a turn of the hare when running in the same
direction, or perhaps more, if he show the speed over the other dog in
doing it. If a dog draws the fleck from the hare, and causes her to
wrench or rick only, it is equal to a turn of the hare when leading
homewards.

When a dog wrenches or ricks a hare twice following, without losing the
lead, it is equal to a turn.

N. B. It often happens when a hare has been turned, and she is running
from home, that she turns of her own accord to gain ground homeward,
when both dogs are on the stretch after her; in such a case the judge
should not give the leading dog a turn.

There are often other minor advantages in a course, such as one dog
showing occasional superiority of speed, turning on less ground, and
running the whole course with more fire than his opponent, which must be
led to the discretion of the judge, who is to decide on the merits.


LOCAL RULES.

I. The number of members shall be regulated by the letters in the
Alphabet, and the two junior members shall take the letters X and Z, if
required.

II. The members shall be elected by ballot, seven to constitute a
ballot, and two black balls to exclude.

III. The name of every person proposed to be balloted for as a member,
shall be placed over the chimney-piece one day before the ballot can
take place.

IV. No proposition shall be balloted for unless put up over the
chimney-piece, with the names of the proposer and seconder, at or before
dinner preceding the day of the ballot, and read to the members at such
dinner.

V. Every member shall, at each meeting, run a greyhound his own
property, or forfeit a sovereign to the Club.

VI. No member shall be allowed to match more than two greyhounds in the
first class, under a penalty of two sovereigns to the fund, unless such
member has been drawn or run out for the prizes, in which case he shall
be allowed to run three dogs in the first class.

VII. If any member shall absent himself two seasons without sending his
subscription, he shall be deemed out of the Society, and another chosen
in his place.

VIII. No greyhound shall be allowed to start if any arrears are due to
this Society from the owner.

IX. Any member lending another a greyhound for the purpose of saving his
forfeit (excepting by consent of the members present) shall forfeit five
sovereigns.

X. Any member running the dog of a stranger in a match shall cause the
name of the owner to be inserted after his own name in the list, under a
penalty of one sovereign.

XI. No stranger shall be admitted into the Society's room, unless
introduced by a member, who shall place the name of his friend over the
chimney-piece, with his own attached to it; and no member shall
introduce more than one friend.

XII. The members of the [erased] Clubs shall be honorary members of this
Society, and when present shall be allowed to run their greyhounds on
payment of the annual subscription.

XIII. This Society to meet on the [erased] in [erased], and course on
the [erased] following days.


       *       *       *       *       *


INDEX.

Acupuncturation, used in neuralgic affections
                 mode of performing
Adam, Mr., on fungus hæmatodes
Adeps, the basis of all ointments
African wild dog, description of the
Agasæi, British hunting dogs, description of
Age, the indications of
Albanian dog, description of the
Alcohol, only used in tinctures
Alicant dog, description of the
Aloes, Barbadoes, the best purgative
Alpine spaniel, description of
Alteratives, the most useful
Alum, a powerful astringent
Amaurosis, symptoms of
American wild dogs, description of the
Anæmia, description of
        causes of
        'post-mortem' appearances
Anasarca, nature of
Andalusian dog, description of the
Angina, nature of
Antimony, the oxide of, a sudorific
          the black sesquisulphuret of, an alterative
Anubis, an Egyptian deity with the head of a dog
Anus, polypus in the
      fistula in the
Aquafortis, a caustic
Argus, the dog of Ulysses
Arrian on hunting
Artois dog, description of the
Ascarides, a species of worms
Ascites, 'see' Dropsy
Attention, an important faculty
Auscultation, use of
Australasian dog, description of the

Barbary dog, description of the
Barbet, description of the
Bark, Peruvian, a valuable tonic
Barry, a celebrated Bernardine dog, anecdote of
Bath, use of in puerperal fits
Beagle, description of the
Bell, Professor, opinion on the origin of the dog
Bernardine dog, description of the
Billy, a celebrated terrier
Bladder, inflammation of the
         rupture of the
Blain, nature, causes, treatment, and 'post-mortem' appearances of
Blaine, Mr., opinion on kennel lameness
                     on tetanus
                     on dropsy
                     on calculus
                     on distemper
                     on mange
Bleeding, best place for
          directions for
          useful in epilepsy
          useful in distemper
Blenheim spaniel, description of the
Blisters, uses of
          composition
          mode of applying and guarding
Bloodhound, description of the
Brain, comparative bulk of in different animals
       description of the
Breaking-in of hounds
       cruelty disadvantageous
Breeding of greyhounds
       should always be permitted
British hunting-dogs, Agasæi, description of
Bronchocele, nature of
             causes and treatment of
Búánsú, or Nepâl dog, description of
Buffon, opinion as to the origin of the dog
Bull-dog, description of the
          crossed with the greyhound
Bull terrier, description of the


Cæcum, description of the
Calculus, nature, causes, and treatment of,
          in the intestines, causes of,
          cases,
Calomel, a dangerous medicine
          should not be used in enteritis
Cancer, symptoms of
        treatment of
Canis, genus
Canker in the ear, causes, symptoms and treatment of
                   cases of
Canute, laws concerning greyhounds by
Cardia, description of the
Castor oil, a valuable purgative
Castration, proper time for
            mode of performing
            not recommended
Catechu, an astringent
Caustic, lunar, the best
Cayotte, description of the
Chabert, anecdote of the dog of
Chalk, an astringent
Charles I, anecdote of the dog of
Charles II's spaniel, description of
Chest, anatomy and diseases of the
       proper form of, in the greyhound
                       in the fox-hound
Chest-founder, nature, causes, and treatment of
Chloride of lime, uses of
Chorea, nature of, causes, treatment
        cases
        in distemper
Chryseus scylex, or dhole, description of the
Claret, a celebrated greyhound
Classification, zoological
Climate, effect of
Clysters, uses of
Coach-dog, description of the
Cocker, description of the
Colic, causes, symptoms, and treatment of
Colon, the
       rupture of the
Colour of the greyhound
       of the pointer
Constipation, causes and treatment of
Copper, preparations of, and their uses
Coryza, the early stage of distemper
Costiveness, causes and treatment of
             means of preventing
Cough, spasmodic, nature and treatment of
Coursing, Ovid's description of
          anecdotes of
          laws of
          general rules for the guidance of judges
          local rules
Creosote, a dangerous medicine
          useful in canker
Creta, an astringent
Cropping of the ears
          deafness frequently caused by
          disapproved of
          proper method of

Cross-breeding, effect of
Cuba, mastiff of
Cur, description of the
Cyprus, greyhounds of, described
Cynosaurus cristatus, an useful emetic
Czarina, a celebrated greyhound


Dakhun wild dog, description of the
Dalmatian dog, description of the
Danish sacrifices of dogs, description of
       dog, description of the
Deab, description of the
Deafness frequently caused by cropping
Deer-hound, description of the
Delafond, Professor, his table of the diagnostic symptoms of pleurisy
                     and pneumonia
Dentition, formula of
Dew-claws
          their removal unnecessary
Dhole, description of the
Diaphragm, description of the
Diarrhoea, causes, nature, and treatment of
           habitual
Dick, Professor, on rabies
                 on the use of ergot of rye
Digestion, the process of
Digitalis, the uses of
Digitigrade, an order of animals
Dingo, description of the
Distemper, origin of the name
           is a new disease
           causes of
           is contagious
           is epidemic
           effects on different breeds
           symptoms
           nature of
           duration
           'post-mortem' appearances
           treatment
           a cause of epilepsy
           sometimes terminates in palsy
Dog, early history of the
          used as a beast of draught
          for food
          uses of the skin of the
          origin of
          mention of, in the Old and New Testaments
          anecdotes of the sagacity and fidelity of
          changes produced in, by breeding and climate
          zoological description of
          natural divisions of
          sacrificed by the Greeks and Romans
                     by the Danes and Swedes
          African wild
          Albanian
          Alicant
          Alpine spaniel
          American wild
          Andalusian
          Artois
          Australasian
          Barbary
          barbet
          beagle
          black and tan spaniel
          Blenheim spaniel
          blood-hound
          British
          bull
          bull terrier
          coach
          cocker
          cur
          Dakhun
          Dalmatian
          Danish
          drover's
          Egyptian
          Esquimaux
          fox-hound
          French matin
          French pointer
          gasehound
          Grecian
          Grecian greyhound
          greyhound
          Hare Indian
          harrier
          Highland greyhound
          Hyrcanian
          Iceland
          Irish greyhound
          Italian greyhound
          Italian wolf
          Javanese
          King Charles's spaniel
          Lapland
          lion
          Locrian
          lurcher
          Mahratta
          Maltese
          mastiff
          Molossian
          Nepal
          Newfoundland
          New Zealand
          otter
          Pannonian
          pariah
          Persian greyhound
          pointer
          Polugar
          poodle
          Portuguese pointer
          Russian greyhound
          Russian pointer
          Scotch greyhound
          Scotch terrier
          setter
          sheep
          shock
          southern hound
          spaniel
          Spanish pointer
          springer
          stag-hound
          Sumatran wild
          terrier
          Thibet
          Turkish
          Turkish greyhound
          water-spaniel
          wild
          wolf

Dog-carts, prohibition of, disapproved
           should be licensed
Dog-pits
Dog-stealing
Dog's-tail grass, the use of
Dogs, Isle of, origin of the name
Dropsy,
       causes of
       cases of
       treatment of
Drover's dog, description of the
Duodenum, the
Dupuy, M., on diseases of the spinal marrow
Dysentery, nature of
           treatment of


Ear, diseases of the
     vegetating excrescences in the
     eruptions in the
     cropping of the
     polypi in the, nature and treatment of
     pain of, an early symptom of rabies
Egyptian worship of the dog
         dog, description of the
Elfric, King of Mercia, possessed greyhounds
Emetic tartar, uses of
Enteritis, causes, symptoms, and treatment of
Epiglottis, description of the
Epilepsy, causes of
          treatment of
          cases
          puerperal
          in distemper
Epsom salts, a purgative
Ergot of rye, use of, in parturition
Esquimaux dog, description of the
Ethiopia, a dog elected king of
Ethmoid bones, description of the
Extremities, bones of the
Eye, distinctive form of the
     diseases of the
     construction of the
     cases of disease of the
     congenital blindness
     ophthalmia
     cataract
     amaurosis
     appearance of in rabies
     appearance of in distemper


Familiaris, sub-genus
Feet, sore
Femur, fracture of the
Fighting-pits
First division of varieties
Fistula in the anus, causes and treatment of
Fits, symptoms of
      treatment of
      distemper
      puerperal
Fitzhardinge, Lord, his management of hounds
Flogging hounds, disapproved of
Food, the dog used for
      of the greyhound
      of the foxhound
      insufficient, a cause of distemper
Fore-arm, fracture of the
Foxhound, description of the
          size and proper conformation of
          pupping
          treatment of whelps
          breaking in
          management in the field
          general management and food of
          Lord Fitzhardinge's management
Fractures, most frequent in young dogs
          of the humerus
          of the thigh
          of the femur
          of the radius
          of the fore-arm
          of the shoulder
          of the pelvis
          of the skull
French pointer, description of the
Fungus hæmatodes, a case of
                  'post-mortem' appearances


Gasehound, description of
Gêlert, the dog of Llewellyn, poem on the death of
Gentian, a stomachic and tonic
Ghoo-khan, or wild ass, hunted by Persian greyhounds
Giddiness, nature and treatment of
Ginger, a cordial and tonic
Glass, powdered, the best vermifuge
Goître, nature of
        cause and treatment of
Good qualities of the dog
Goodwood kennel, description of
                 plan of
Grecian dogs, description of
        sacrifices of dogs
        greyhound, description of the
Greyhound, description of the
           puppies, out of
           origin of
           known in England in the Anglo-Saxon period
           old verses describing the
           cross with the bull-dog
           proper conformation of
           colour of
           breeding
           rules for age
           food
           training
           laws for coursing with
           English
           Grecian
           Highland
           Irish
           Italian
           Persian
           Russian
           Scotch
           Turkish
Grognier, Professor, description of the French sheep-dog
Gullet, description of the


Hare Indian dog, description of the
Harrier, description of the
Head, bones of the
      form of in the foxhound
Heart, description of the
       action of the
       rupture of the
Hecate, dogs sacrificed to
Hepatitis, causes, symptoms, and treatment of
Hertwich, Professor, on rabies
Highland greyhound, description of the
Hindoos regard the dog unclean
Hogg, James, anecdotes of his dog
Hog's lard, the basis of all ointments
Hound, the various kinds of
       blood
       fox
       otter
       southern
       stag
Humerus, fracture of the
Hunting with dogs first mentioned by Oppian
Hunting-kennels
Huntsman, the requisites of a
Hydatids in the kidney
Hydrocyanic acid, useful in cases of irritation of the skin
Hydrophobia, 'see' Rabies
Hyrcanian dog, description of the


Iceland dog, description of the
Ileum, description of the
Incontinence of urine
India, degeneration of dogs in
Inflammation of the lungs
             of the stomach
             of the intestines
             of the peritoneal membrane
             of the liver
             of the kidney
             of the bladder
             of the feet
Intelligence of the dog
                       anecdotes illustrative of the
Intestines, description of the
            inflammation of the
Intussusception, nature and causes of
                 treatment
Iodine, a valuable medicine in goître
                            in dropsy
Irish greyhound, description of the
      wolf-dog
      setter
Italian greyhound, description of the
        wolf-dog


James's powder, a sudorific
Jaundice, causes, symptoms, and treatment of
Javanese dog, description of the
Jejunum, description of the
Jenner, Dr., on distemper
Jews regard the dog with abhorrence
John, kept many dogs
      received greyhounds in lieu of fines


Kamtschatka, uses of the dog as a beast of draught in
Karáráhé or New Zealand dog, description of the
Kennel, description of
        Goodwood
        Plan of Goodwood
        for watch-dog construction of
        hare, use of
        lameness, nature of
        causes of
        means of prevention
Kidney, inflammation of the
        hydatids in the
King Charles's spaniel, description of


Lachrymal duct, description of the
Lapland dog, description of the
Lard, the basis of all ointments
Larynx, description of the
        inflammation of the
Laws of coursing
Leblanc, M., on jaundice
Léonard, M., his exhibition of dogs
Lime, chloride of, the uses of
Lion dog, description of the
Lips, functions of the
      swellings of the
Liver, description of the
       functions of the
       inflammation of the
Llewellyn, poem on the dog of
Locrian dog, description of the
Lunar caustic, the best
               recommended for bites of rabid dogs
Lungs, inflammation of the
       congestion of the
Lurcher, description of the


Madness, canine, 'see' Rabies
Magnesia, sulphate of, a purgative
Mahratta dog description of the
Majendie, his experiments on the olfactory nerves
Major, a celebrated greyhound
Maltese dog, description of the
Mammalia, a class of animals
Management of the pack
Mange, nature of
       is hereditary
       the scabby
       treatment
       causes of
       frequently causes goître
Mastiff, description of the
         used in Cuba to hunt the Indians
Mâtin, description of the
Maxillary bones, description of the
Meatus, description of the
Medicines, a list of the most useful
           mode of administering
Medullary substance of the brain
Memory of the dog
Mercury, preparations of
         uses of
Milk, accumulation of, in the teats
      secretion of, connected with cancer
Mohammedan abhorrence of dogs
Molossian dog, description of the
Moral qualities of the dog
Nasal bones, description of the
      catarrh, nature of
      cavity, polypus in the
Neck, should be long in the greyhound
Nepal dog, description of the
Nerves, description of the
Nervous system, diseases of
Newfoundland dog, description of the
New Holland dog, description of the
New Zealand dog, description of the
Nimrod, opinion on kennel lameness
Nitrate of potash, a useful diuretic
Nitrate of silver, a caustic
                   recommended for the bites of rabid dogs
                   useful in chorea
                   in canker
Nitric acid, a caustic
Norfolk spaniel, description of the
Nose, anatomy of the
      diseases of the
      discharge from the, in distemper


Olfactory nerves, size of, in different animals
                  development of the
                  description of the
Ophthalmia, symptoms of
            causes of
            treatment of
Oppian, the first who mentions hunting with dogs
        description of British dogs by
Orbit of the eye, form of the
Orford, Lord, first crossed greyhounds with the bull-dog
              death of
Otter-hound, description of the
Ovaries, removal of the
Ovid, description of coursing by
Ozæna, nature and treatment of


Palate, veil of the
        inflammation of the
Palsy, causes of
       treatment of
       a consequence of chorea
       consequence of distemper
Palm oil, an emollient
Pancreas, functions of the
Pannonian dog, description of the
Pariah, description of the
Parry, Captain, description of the Esquimaux dog
Parturition, time of
             management during
             use of the ergot of of rye
             inversion of the uterus after
Pelvis, fracture of the
Percival, Mr., on fractures
Pericardium, description of the
             case of a wound in the
Peritonitis, symptoms and treatment of
Persian greyhound, description of the
Peruvian bark, a valuable tonic
Phlegmonous tumour, nature and treatment of
Pleurisy, nature of
          diagnostic symptoms of
Pneumonia, nature and treatment of
           diagnostic symptoms of
           in distemper
           a consequence of small-pox

Pointer, compared with the setter, 136;
          early training of, 144;
          breaking-in, 149;
          English, 140;
          French, 142;
          Spanish, 142
Pollux, the introduction of hunting with dogs attributed to
Polugar dog, description of the
Polypus in the ear
        in the nasal and anal cavities
        in the vagina
Pomeranian wolf-dog, description of
Poodle, description of the
Portuguese pointer, description of the
Potash, the nitrate of, a useful diuretic
Prussic acid, useful in cases of irritation of the skin
Puerperal fits, causes, nature, and treatment of
Pulse of various animals
Pupping, 'see' Parturition
Purging in distemper
                    should be avoided
Pythagoras, his high opinion of the virtues of the dog
Rabies,
          cases
          early symptoms
          progress
          'post-mortem' appearances
          causes
          period of incubation
          duration
          nature of the virus
          nature of the disease
          treatment of persons bitten
          in the horse
          in the rabbit
          in the guinea-pig
          in the cat
          in the fowl
          in the badger
          in the wolf
          trials concerning the death of persons by
Radius, fracture of the
Radcliffe, D., on scent
Rectum, the
Retriever, Newfoundland dog used as
Rheumatism, nature, causes, and treatment of
Richard II, anecdote of the dog of
Richmond, the third Duke of, built Goodwood kennel
Roman sacrifices of dogs, description of
Rottenness of the lungs
Rupture of the heart, case of
                      'post-mortem' appearances
          of the colon
          of the bladder
Russian greyhound, description of the
        pointer, description of the


Saliva, state of in rabies
Salts, a purgative
Scabby mange, nature and treatment of
Scent, the term
       description of
       influence of the atmosphere upon
Scotch greyhound, description of the
       terrier, description of the

Scott, Sir Walter, anecdote of the dog of
                   verses on the dogs of
Second division of varieties
Seton, useful in epilepsy
Setter, description of the
        early training of
        compared with the pointer

Sheep-dog, description of the
           anecdotes of the
           supposed by Buffon to be the original type
           French, description of the
Shock-dog, description of the
Shoulder, fracture of the
          proper form of the, in the greyhound
Siberian dog, description of the
Simonds, Professor, on fractures
Simpson, Mr., on the use of the ergot of rye
Skeleton, description of the
Skin, uses of the
Skull, form of, adopted as the arrangement of the varieties of the dog
       fracture of the
Small-pox, symptoms of
           causes of
           treatment
Smell, the sense of
Snowball, a celebrated greyhound
Sore feet, causes of
           treatment
Southern hound, description of the
Spaniel, origin of the
         description of the
                           Blenheim
                           King Charles's
                           Norfolk
                           water
Spanish pointer, description of the
Spasmodic cough, nature and treatment of
Spaying, mode of performing
Spleen, functions of the
        diseases of the
Springer, description of the

Staghound, description of the
           anecdotes of the
Staling, profuse
Starch, bandage, useful in fractures
Stealing of dogs
Stomach, anatomy and diseases of the
         case of the retention of a sharp instrument in the
Strychnia, a valuable medicine in palsy
Sulphur, the basis of applications for mange
         a good alterative
Sumatra, description of the wild dog of
Surfeit, an eruption resembling mange
Swedish sacrifices of dogs, description of
Sympathetic nerves


Tænia, a species of worm
Tailing
Tape-worm, the
Tapping in cases of dropsy
Tartar emetic, a useful medicine
Teeth, distinctive arrangement of the
       description of the
       cuts showing various signs of growth and decay
       supernumerary
       diseases of the
       very early lost by the Turkish dog
Teres, a species of worm
Terrier, description of the
         training of the
         anecdotes of the
         Scotch, description of the
Tetanus, causes of
         symptoms and treatment of
Thibet dog, description of the
Thigh, fracture of the
Third division of varieties
Thyroid cartilage, description of the
Toes, sore
      number of
Tongue, description of the
        mode of drinking
        worming
        blain
Torsion, mode of performing
         forceps
Training of the greyhound
         of the foxhound
         of the pointer or setter
Trimmer. Mr., description of the Spanish sheep-dog
Trunk, bones of the
Tumour, phlegmonous, nature and treatment of
Turkish dog, description of the
        greyhound, description of the
Turnside, nature and treatment of
Turnspit, description of the
Turpentine, uses of


Unguents, use of, in mange
Unguiculata, a tribe of animals
Uterus, case of inversion of the
        extirpation and cure


Vagina, polyps in the
Van Diemen Land, ravages of wild dogs in
Varieties, three divisions of
                             first division of
                             second division of
                             third division of
Vatel, his observations on the pulse of different animals
Vegetating excrescences in the ear, nature and treatment of
Vermifuge, glass the most effectual
Vertebrated animals, what
Vinegar, useful for fomentations
Voice, change of in rabies
Vyner. Mr., opinion on kennel lameness


Warts, treatment of
Washing of hounds disapproved of
Watch-dog, frequent ill-usage of the
Water-spaniel, description of the
               anecdotes of the
Wild dog, description of the
          of Africa
          of Australia
          of Van Diemen Land

Williamson, Captain, account of the wild dogs of Nepâl
                     on the degeneration of dogs in India
                     description of the dhole
Wolf, supposed to be the origin of the dog
      anecdotes of the
Wolf-dog, Irish
          Italian
Worms, varieties of
       symptoms of
       means of expelling
       cases of
       a cause of sudden death
       causes of
       a cause of epilepsy
       a cause of distemper


Yellow distemper, nature of
                  treatment of
Yellows, the


Zinc, sulphate of, a valuable excitant

Zoological classification of the dog


       *       *       *       *       *


APPENDIX

INDEX TO THE EDITOR'S ADDITIONS.


Affection of dogs
Age of the pointer
Alexander the Great, dog sent to
Aloes, effects of
Amaurosis, causes and treatment of
American greyhound
Anecdotes of rabid dogs
Arctic fox

Bengal, le braque de
Blindness, congenital
Brazen dog of Jupiter
Byron, Lord, his opinion of the dog's memory

Canes Ceteres
Canine fidelity, anecdote of
Canine pathology, Introduction to
Canis Lagopus
Canis Latrans
Canker of the ear
       of the flap
Captain Lyon's account of the Esquimaux dog
Catlin's remarks on the Indian dog
Chesapeake bay, ducks of the
Chorea, accidental cure of
Chronic opthalmia, causes and treatment of
Circulation, state of the
Claims of dogs upon us
Cocker, method of breaking the
        his style of hunting
Colonel Hawker's account of dog-stealing
Colonel Thornton's Spanish pointer
Collyria
Congenital blindness
Cornea, ulceration of the
        spots on the
Coursing, ancient mode of
          Gay's poems descriptive of
Cropping, a barbarous fancy
          recommended by Mr. Skinner
Cross of dog with fox
      between the wolf and, opinions of the Cynegetical writers
      respecting
                            opinions of the moderns
Cure of diseases, remedial means for
     of chorea, accidental

Daniel Lambert's dogs, their price &c.
Dead bodies, dogs kept to devour
Dew-claws, removal of, Mr. Blaine's opinion in reference to
Diana, spotted dogs given by Pan to
Disease, symptoms of
          of the eye
          of the ear
          of the tongue
          of the feet
Disposition of the dog to hunt by scent
Dog, considered as an animal of draught
     length of intestines in the
     Molossian
     fidelity of the
     of Santa Fé and the Chihuahuas
     of the Mexicans, worthless
     prophylactic properties of the
     crossed with the fox
     with the wolf
     Indian
     social invitations extended to
     self-broken
     claim of, upon man
     hospitals for
     rabid, anecdotes of, 234;
     Esquimaux, 95

Duck of the Chesapeake bay, manner of toling the
                            discovery of this method

Duke of Norfolk's breed of King Charles' spaniel

Ear, canker of the, causes and treatment of
     wounds of the
     warts on the
     polypus of the
     mangy edges in the

Editor's remarks on rabies
         his preventive treatment for

English pointer, size and appearance of
Entropium
Epilepsy, treatment of
          mistaken for rabies
Esquimaux dog, Captain Lyons' account of
Extirpation of the eye

Eye and its diseases
    simple inflammation of
    extirpation of the
    protrusion of the
    weak
    washes for the
Eyelids, ulceration of the
         inversion of the, operation for
Eye-washes, various

Feet, diseases of the
Fidelity of the dog
Fistula lachrymalis
Flap, tumours of the
Fouilloux, Jacques du, his recipes for rabies
Fox, Arctic
     cross of dog with the

Glossitis, causes and treatment of
Gay's poems descriptive of coursing
Greeks, ancient, domestic manners of the, respecting their dogs
        greyhound of
Greek sportsman's care of his dogs
Greyhound of America, 55;
          of ancient Greece, 56
Gutta serena

Hawker, Colonel, his account of dog-stealing
Hembel, Mr., his anecdotes of rabid dogs
Herds of the Mexicans, immense, 48
Hippocrates, prophylactic properties of the dog recommended by
Horse doctors
Hospitals for dogs
Hydrophthalmia, treatment of

Indian dog
Introduction to Canine Pathology
Irish setter, inductive reasoning in an

Jacques du Fouilloux, his recipes for rabies

Keyworth, Mr., springer belonging to

Lambert, Daniel, the price of his dogs
Lord Byron's opinion of the dog's memory
Louisiana marmot
Lyon, Captain, his account of the Esquimaux dog, 95

Mangy edges, treatment of
Marmot, the Louisiana
Mexicans, immense herds of the, 48
Mexico, shepherd dogs of
          their introduction into this country
Molossian dogs, 26
Newfoundland dog, as a retriever
                  two varieties of
                  account of two imported into this country
Nictitating membrane of the eye
Norfolk, Duke of, his breed of King Charles' spaniels
Nux vomica, effects of

Ophthalmia
          chronic treatment of
          traumatic
          sympathetic
Otorrhoea, simple, treatment of
Ozæna, injection for


Pathology, Canine, Introduction to
Pointer, English, his size and appearance;
                  merits of, compared with those of the setter;
                  age of;
                  origin of;
                  his disposition to hunt by scent;
                  tailing of the
Polypus in the ear
Predisposition to disease in dogs
Preventative treatment for rabies
Prophylactic properties of the dog, as recommended by Pliny,
             Hippocrates, Aristotle, and others
Protrusion of the eye
Pustular affection of the feet

Rabid dogs, anecdotes of
Rabies, epilepsy taken For;
        remarks on;
        recipes for the cure of;
        preventive treatment for
Remedial means for the cure of diseases
Rheumatism, causes and varieties of

Scent, disposition of the dog to hunt by
Self-broken dogs
Setter, old document respecting the training of;
        merits of, compared with those of the pointer;
        Irish, inductive reasoning in
Shepherd's dog, importance of the, to our agriculturists;
                of Mexico;
                          their introduction into this country
Shepherds of Mexico
Skinner. Mr., cropping recommended by
Social invitations extended to dogs
Sow, account of one finding and standing game
Spaniel, King Charles', breed of
Spanish pointer, Colonel Thornton's
Spirits of turpentine, effects of
Sportsman, Greek, his care of his dogs
Spots on the cornea
Spotted dogs given by Pan to Diana
Sprains
Springer
Stealing dogs, Colonel Hawke's account of
Symptoms of disease

Tailing, objections to
         of pointers
Thornton, Colonel, his Spanish pointer
Throat, foreign articles in the
Toling ducks
Tongue, appearance of the, in disease
Traumatic ophthalmia, treatment of
Turnside, uncommon in the country

Ulceration of the cornea;
           of the eyelids

Youatt, Mr., his opinion approved

Warts of the ear
Weak eyes
Wounds of the ear


       *       *       *       *       *