Disheartened by this disastrous event, the army immediately retreated,
and returned to Kaiúmers, who wept bitterly for the loss of his son, and
continued a long time inconsolable. But after a year had elapsed a
mysterious voice addressed him, saying:--"Be patient, and despair
not--thou hast only to send another army against the Demons, and the
triumph and the victory will be thine.

 "Drive from the earth that Demon horrible,
  And sorrow will be rooted from thy heart."

Saiámuk left a son whose name was Húsheng, whom the king loved much more
even than his father.

  Húsheng his name. There seemed in him combined,
  Knowledge and goodness eminent. To him
  Was given his father's dignity and station.
  And the old man, his grandsire, scarcely deigned
  To look upon another, his affection
  For him was so unbounded.

Kaiúmers having appointed Húsheng the leader of the army, the young hero
set out with an immense body of troops to engage the Demon and his son.
It is said that at that time every species of animal, wild and tame, was
obedient to his command.

  The savage beasts, and those of gentler kind,
  Alike reposed before him, and appeared
  To do him homage.

The wolf, the tiger, the lion, the panther, and even the fowls of the
air, assembled in aid of him, and he, by the blessing of God, slew the
Demon and his offspring with his own hand. After which the army of
Kaiúmers, and the devouring animals that accompanied him in his march,
defeated and tore to pieces the scattered legions of the enemy. Upon the
death of Kaiúmers Húsheng ascended the throne of Persia.


HÚSHENG

It is recorded that Húsheng was the first who brought out fire from
stone, and from that circumstance he founded the religion of the
Fire-worshippers, calling the flame which was produced, the Light of the
Divinity. The accidental discovery of this element is thus described:--

  Passing, one day, towards the mountain's side,
  Attended by his train, surprised he saw
  Something in aspect terrible--its eyes
  Fountains of blood; its dreadful mouth sent forth
  Volumes of smoke that darkened all the air.
  Fixing his gaze upon that hideous form,
  He seized a stone, and with prodigious force
  Hurling it, chanced to strike a jutting rock,
  Whence sparks arose, and presently a fire
  O'erspread the plain, in which the monster perished.
  --Thus Húsheng found the element which shed
  Light through the world. The monarch prostrate bowed,
  Praising the great Creator, for the good
  Bestowed on man, and, pious, then he said,
  "This is the Light from Heaven, sent down from God;
  If ye be wise, adore and worship it!"

It is also related that, in the evening of the day on which the luminous
flash appeared to him from the stone, he lighted an immense fire, and,
having made a royal entertainment, he called it the Festival of Siddeh.
By him the art of the blacksmith was discovered, and he taught river and
streamlet to supply the towns, and irrigate the fields for the purposes
of cultivation. And he also brought into use the fur of the sable, and
the squirrel, and the ermine. Before his time mankind had nothing for
food but fruit, and the leaves of trees and the skins of animals for
clothing. He introduced, and taught his people, the method of making
bread, and the art of cookery.

  Then ate they their own bread, for it was good,
  And they were grateful to their benefactor;
  Mild laws were framed--the very land rejoiced,
  Smiling with cultivation; all the world
  Remembering Húsheng's virtues.

The period of his government is said to have lasted forty years, and he
was succeeded by his son, Tahúmers.


TAHÚMERS

This sovereign was also called Díw-bund, or the Binder of Demons. He
assembled together all the wise men in his dominions, to consider and
deliberate upon whatever might be of utility and advantage to the people
of God. In his days wool was spun and woven, and garments and carpets
manufactured, and various animals, such as panthers, falcons, hawks, and
syagoshes, were tamed, and taught to assist in the sports of the field.
Tahúmers had also a vizir, renowned for his wisdom and understanding.
Having one day charmed a Demon into his power by philters and magic, he
conveyed him to Tahúmers; upon which, the brethren and allies of the
prisoner, feeling ashamed and degraded by the insult, collected an army,
and went to war against the king. Tahúmers was equally in wrath when he
heard of these hostile proceedings, and having also gathered together an
army on his part, presented himself before the enemy. The name of the
leader of the Demons was Ghú. On one side the force consisted of fire,
and smoke, and Demons; on the other, brave and magnanimous warriors.
Tahúmers lifted his mace, as soon as he was opposed to the enemy, and
giving Ghú a blow on the head, killed him on the spot. The other Demons
being taken prisoners, he ordered them to be destroyed; but they
petitioned for mercy, promising, if their lives were spared, that they
would teach him a wonderful art. Tahúmers assented, and they immediately
brought their books, and pens and ink, and instructed him how to read
and write.

  They taught him letters, and his eager mind
  With learning was illumined. The world was blest
  With quiet and repose, Peris and Demons
  Submitting to his will.

The reign of Tahúmers lasted thirty years, and after him the monarchy
descended to Jemshíd, his son.


JEMSHÍD

Jemshíd was eminently distinguished for learning and wisdom. It is said
that coats of mail, cuirasses, and swords and various kinds of armor
were invented and manufactured in his time, and also that garments of
silk were made and worn by his people.

  Helmets and swords, with curious art they made,
  Guided by Jemshíd's skill; and silks and linen
  And robes of fur and ermine. Desert lands
  Were cultivated; and wherever stream
  Or rivulet wandered, and the soil was good,
  He fixed the habitations of his people;
  And there they ploughed and reaped: for in that age
  All labored; none in sloth and idleness
  Were suffered to remain, since indolence
  Too often vanquishes the best, and turns
  To nought the noblest, firmest resolution.

Jemshíd afterwards commanded his Demons to construct a splendid palace,
and he directed his people how to make the foundations strong.

  He taught the unholy Demon-train to mingle
  Water and clay, with which, formed into bricks,
  The walls were built, and then high turrets, towers,
  And balconies, and roofs to keep out rain
  And cold, and sunshine. Every art was known
  To Jemshíd, without equal in the world.

He also made vessels for the sea and the river, and erected a
magnificent throne, embellished with pearls and precious stones; and
having seated himself upon it, commanded his Demons to raise him up in
the air, that he might be able to transport himself in a moment wherever
he chose. He named the first day of the year _Nú-rúz_ and on every
_Nú-rúz_ he made a royal feast, so that under his hospitable roof,
mortals, and Genii, and Demons, and Peris, were delighted and happy,
every one being equally regaled with wine and music. His government is
said to have continued in existence seven hundred years, and during that
period, it is added, none of his subjects suffered death, or was
afflicted with disease.

  Man seemed immortal, sickness was unknown,
  And life rolled on in happiness and joy.

After the lapse of seven hundred years, however, inordinate ambition
inflamed the heart of Jemshíd, and, having assembled all the illustrious
personages and learned men in his dominions before him, he said to
them:--"Tell me if there exists, or ever existed, in all the world, a
king of such magnificence and power as I am?" They unanimously
replied:--"Thou art alone, the mightiest, the most victorious: there is
no equal to thee!" The just God beheld this foolish pride and vanity
with displeasure, and, as a punishment, cast him from the government of
an empire into a state of utter degradation and misery.

  All looked upon the throne, and heard and saw
  Nothing but Jemshíd, he alone was king,
  Absorbing every thought; and in their praise,
  And adoration of that mortal man,
  Forgot the worship of the great Creator.
  Then proudly thus he to his nobles spoke,
  Intoxicated with their loud applause,
  "I am unequalled, for to me the earth
  Owes all its science, never did exist
  A sovereignty like mine, beneficent
  And glorious, driving from the populous land
  Disease and want. Domestic joy and rest
  Proceed from me, all that is good and great
  Waits my behest; the universal voice
  Declares the splendor of my government,
  Beyond whatever human heart conceived,
  And me the only monarch of the world."
  --Soon as these words had parted from his lips,
  Words impious, and insulting to high heaven,
  His earthly grandeur faded--then all tongues
  Grew clamorous and bold. The day of Jemshíd
  Passed into gloom, his brightness all obscured.
  What said the Moralist? "When thou wert a king
  Thy subjects were obedient, but whoever
  Proudly neglects the worship of his God,
  Brings desolation on his house and home."
  --And when he marked the insolence of his people,
  He knew the wrath of Heaven had been provoked,
  And terror overcame him.


MIRTÁS-TÁZÍ, AND HIS SON ZOHÁK

The old historians relate that Mirtás was the name of a king of the
Arabs; and that he had a thousand animals which gave milk, and the milk
of these animals he always distributed in charity among the poor. God
was pleased with his goodness, and accordingly increased his favor upon
him.

  Goats, sheep, and camels, yielded up their store
  Of balmy milk, with which the generous king
  Nourished the indigent and helpless poor.

Mirtás had a son called Zohák, who possessed ten thousand Arab horses,
or Tazís, upon which account he was surnamed Bíwurasp; biwur meaning ten
thousand, and asp a horse. One day Iblís, the Evil Spirit, appeared to
Zohák in the disguise of a good and virtuous man, and conversed with him
in the most agreeable manner.

  Pleased with his eloquence, the youth
  Suspected not the speaker's truth;
  But praised the sweet impassioned strain,
  And asked him to discourse again.

Iblís replied, that he was master of still sweeter converse,
but he could not address it to him, unless he first entered into
a solemn compact, and engaged never on any pretence to divulge
his secret.

  Zohák in perfect innocence of heart
  Assented to the oath, and bound himself
  Never to tell the secret; all he wished
  Was still to hear the good man's honey words.

But as soon as the oath was taken, Iblís said to him: "Thy father has
become old and worthless, and thou art young, and wise, and valiant. Let
him no longer stand in thy way, but kill him; the robes of sovereignty
are ready, and better adapted for thee."

  The youth in agony of mind,
  Heard what the stranger now designed;
  Could crime like this be understood!
  The shedding of a parent's blood!
  Iblís would no excuses hear--
  The oath was sworn--his death was near.
  "For if thou think'st to pass it by,
  The peril's thine, and thou must die!"

Zohák was terrified and subdued by this warning, and asked Iblís in what
manner he proposed to sacrifice his father. Iblís replied, that he would
dig a pit on the path-way which led to Mirtás-Tázi's house of prayer.
Accordingly he secretly made a deep well upon the spot most convenient
for the purpose, and covered it over with grass. At night, as the king
was going, as usual, to the house of prayer, he fell into the pit, and
his legs and arms being broken by the fall, he shortly expired. O
righteous Heaven! that father too, whose tenderness would not suffer
even the winds to blow upon his son too roughly--and that son, by the
temptation of Iblís, to bring such a father to a miserable end!

  Thus urged to crime, through cruel treachery,
  Zohák usurped his pious father's throne.

When Iblís found that he had got Zohák completely in his power, he told
him that, if he followed his counsel and advice implicitly, he would
become the greatest monarch of the age, the sovereign of the seven
climes, signifying the whole world. Zohák agreed to every thing, and
Iblís continued to bestow upon him the most devoted attention and
flattery for the purpose of moulding him entirely to his will. To such
an extreme degree had his authority attained, that he became the sole
director even in the royal kitchen, and prepared for Zohák the most
delicious and savory food imaginable; for in those days bread and fruit
only were the usual articles of food. Iblís himself was the original
inventor of the cooking art. Zohák was delighted with the dishes, made
from every variety of bird and four-footed animal. Every day something
new and rare was brought to his table, and every day Iblís increased in
favor. But an egg was to him the most delicate of all! "What can there
be superior to this?" said he. "To-morrow," replied Iblís, "thou shalt
have something better, and of a far superior kind."

  Next day he brought delicious fare, and dressed
  In manner exquisite to please the eye,
  As well as taste; partridge and pheasant rich,
  A banquet for a prince. Zohák beheld
  Delighted the repast, and eagerly
  Relished its flavor; then in gratitude,
  And admiration of the matchless art
  Which thus had ministered to his appetite,
  He cried:--"For this, whatever thou desirest,
  And I can give, is thine." Iblís was glad,
  And, little anxious, had but one request--
  One unimportant wish--it was to kiss
  The monarch's naked shoulder--a mere whim.
  And promptly did Zohák comply, for he
  Was unsuspicious still, and stripped himself,
  Ready to gratify that simple wish.

  Iblís then kissed the part with fiendish glee,
  And vanished in an instant.

                              From the touch
  Sprang two black serpents! Then a tumult rose
  Among the people, searching for Iblís
  Through all the palace, but they sought in vain.

  To young and old it was a marvellous thing;
  The serpents writhed about as seeking food,
  And learned men to see the wonder came,
  And sage magicians tried to charm away
  That dreadful evil, but no cure was found.

Some time afterwards Iblís returned to Zohák, but in the shape of a
physician, and told him that it was according to his own horoscope that
he suffered in this manner--it was, in short, his destiny--and that the
serpents would continue connected with him throughout his life,
involving him in perpetual misery. Zohák sunk into despair, upon the
assurance of there being no remedy for him, but Iblís again roused him
by saying, that if the serpents were fed daily with human brains, which
would probably kill them, his life might be prolonged, and made easy.

  If life has any charm for thee,
  The brain of man their food must be!

With the adoption of this deceitful stratagem, Iblís was highly pleased,
and congratulated himself upon the success of his wicked exertions,
thinking that in this manner a great portion of the human race would be
destroyed. He was not aware that his craft and cunning had no influence
in the house of God; and that the descendants of Adam are continually
increasing.

When the people of Irán and Túrán heard that Zohák kept near him two
devouring serpents, alarm and terror spread everywhere, and so universal
was the dread produced by this intelligence, that the nobles of Persia
were induced to abandon their allegiance to Jemshíd, and, turning
through fear to Zohák, confederated with the Arab troops against their
own country. Jemshíd continued for some time to resist their efforts,
but was at last defeated, and became a wanderer on the face of the
earth.

  To him existence was a burden now,
  The world a desert--for Zohák had gained
  The imperial crown, and from all acts and deeds
  Of royal import, razed out the very name
  Of Jemshíd hateful in the tyrant's eyes.

The Persian government having fallen into the hands of the usurper, he
sent his spies in every direction for the purpose of getting possession
of Jemshíd wherever he might be found, but their labor was not crowned
with success. The unfortunate wanderer, after experiencing numberless
misfortunes, at length took refuge in Zábulistán.

  Flying from place to place, through wilderness,
  Wide plain, and mountain, veiled from human eye,
  Hungry and worn out with fatigue and sorrow,
  He came to Zábul.

The king of Zábulistán, whose name was Gúreng, had a daughter of extreme
beauty. She was also remarkable for her mental endowments, and was
familiar with warlike exercises.

  So graceful in her movements, and so sweet,
  Her very look plucked from the breast of age
  The root of sorrow--her wine-sipping lips,
  And mouth like sugar, cheeks all dimpled o'er
  With smiles, and glowing as the summer rose--
  Won every heart.

This damsel, possessed of these beauties and charms, was accustomed to
dress herself in the warlike habiliments of a man, and to combat with
heroes. She was then only fifteen years of age, but so accomplished in
valor, judgment, and discretion, that Minúchihr, who had in that year
commenced hostile operations against her father, was compelled to
relinquish his pretensions, and submit to the gallantry which she
displayed on that occasion. Her father's realm was saved by her
magnanimity. Many kings were her suitors, but Gúreng would not give his
consent to her marriage with any of them. He only agreed that she should
marry the sovereign whom she might spontaneously love.

  It must be love, and love alone,[1]
  That binds thee to another's throne;
  In this my father has no voice,
  Thine the election, thine the choice.

The daughter of Gúreng had a Kábul woman for her nurse, who was deeply
skilled in all sorts of magic and sorcery.

  The old enchantress well could say,
  What would befall on distant day;
  And by her art omnipotent,
  Could from the watery element
  Draw fire, and with her magic breath,
  Seal up a dragon's eyes in death.
  Could from the flint-stone conjure dew;
  The moon and seven stars she knew;
  And of all things invisible
  To human sight, this crone could tell.

This Kábul sorceress had long before intimated to the damsel that,
conformably with her destiny, which had been distinctly ascertained from
the motions of the heavenly bodies, she would, after a certain time, be
married to King Jemshíd, and bear him a beautiful son. The damsel was
overjoyed at these tidings, and her father received them with equal
pleasure, refusing in consequence the solicitations of every other
suitor. Now according to the prophecy, Jemshíd arrived at the city of
Zábul in the spring season, when the roses were in bloom; and it so
happened that the garden of King Gúreng was in the way, and also that
his daughter was amusing herself at the time in the garden. Jemshíd
proceeded in that direction, but the keepers of the garden would not
allow him to pass, and therefore, fatigued and dispirited, he sat down
by the garden-door under the shade of a tree. Whilst he was sitting
there a slave-girl chanced to come out of the garden, and, observing
him, was surprised at his melancholy and forlorn condition. She said to
him involuntarily: "Who art thou?" and Jemshíd raising up his eyes,
replied:--"I was once possessed of wealth and lived in great affluence,
but I am now abandoned by fortune, and have come from a distant country.
Would to heaven I could be blessed with a few cups of wine, my fatigue
and affliction might then be relieved." The girl smiled, and returned
hastily to the princess, and told her that a young man, wearied with
travelling, was sitting at the garden gate, whose countenance was more
lovely even than that of her mistress, and who requested to have a few
cups of wine. When the damsel heard such high praise of the stranger's
features she was exceedingly pleased, and said: "He asks only for wine,
but I will give him both wine and music, and a beautiful mistress
beside."

  This saying, she repaired towards the gate,
  In motion graceful as the waving cypress,
  Attended by her hand-maid; seeing him,
  She thought he was a warrior of Irán
  With spreading shoulders, and his loins well bound.
  His visage pale as the pomegranate flower,
  He looked like light in darkness. Warm emotions
  Rose in her heart, and softly thus she spoke:
  "Grief-broken stranger, rest thee underneath
  These shady bowers; if wine can make thee glad,
  Enter this pleasant place, and drink thy fill."

Whilst the damsel was still speaking and inviting Jemshíd into the
garden, he looked at her thoughtfully, and hesitated; and she said to
him: "Why do you hesitate? I am permitted by my father to do what I
please, and my heart is my own.

  "Stranger, my father is the monarch mild
  Of Zábulistán, and I his only child;
  On me is all his fond affection shown;
  My wish is his, on me he dotes alone."

Jemshíd had before heard of the character and renown of this
extraordinary damsel, yet he was not disposed to comply with her
entreaty; but contemplating again her lovely face, his heart became
enamoured, when she took him by the hand and led him along the beautiful
walks.

  With dignity and elegance she passed--
  As moves the mountain partridge through the meads;
  Her tresses richly falling to her feet,
  And filling with perfume the softened breeze.

In their promenade they arrived at the basin of a fountain, near which
they seated themselves upon royal carpets, and the damsel having placed
Jemshíd in such a manner that they might face each other, she called for
music and wine.

  But first the rose-cheeked handmaids gathered round,
  And washed obsequiously the stranger's feet;
  Then on the margin of the silvery lake
  Attentive sate.

The youth, after this, readily took the wine and refreshments which were
ordered by the princess.

  Three cups he drank with eager zest,
    Three cups of ruby wine;
  Which banished sorrow from his breast,
    For memory left no sign
  Of past affliction; not a trace
  Remained upon his heart, or smiling face.

Whilst he was drinking, the princess observed his peculiar action and
elegance of manner, and instantly said in her heart: "This must be a
king!" She then offered him some more food, as he had come a long
journey, and from a distant land, but he only asked for more wine. "Is
your fondness for wine so great?" said she. And he replied: "With wine I
have no enemy; yet, without it I can be resigned and contented.

 "Whilst drinking wine I never see
  The frowning face of my enemy;
  Drink freely of the grape, and nought
  Can give the soul one mournful thought;
  Wine is a bride of witching power,
  And wisdom is her marriage dower;
  Wine can the purest joy impart,
  Wine inspires the saddest heart;
  Wine gives cowards valour's rage,
  Wine gives youth to tottering age;
  Wine gives vigour to the weak,
  And crimson to the pallid cheek;
  And dries up sorrow, as the sun
  Absorbs the dew it shines upon."

