  Observe what the Specials call "News of the Day"
            At night, at night!
  The Dalziel Telegrams startle, and slay,
            At night, at night!
  There's war in the East, or the CZAR is laid low,
  Financiers have failed--Fifty Millions or so!--
  Or they've found Jack the Ripper in far Jericho,
            At night, at night!
  But oh, what a difference
            In the morning!
  Those Latest Wires were lies, small facts adorning.
  "It is not as we stated,
  For the cable's mutilated,"
  And "we hear 'tis contradicted"
            In the morning!

  Regard the young Clerk who's been out for the day,
            At night, at night!
  First to the Derby, and then to the play,
            At night, at night!
  He "spotted a winner" at twenty to one,
  His winnings will far more than pay for his fun;
  He's happy, free-handed, and "sure as a gun,"
            At night, at night!
  But oh, what a difference
            In the morning!
  The bookie bolts, his "gaffer" gives him warning,
  He's not worth half-a-dollar,
  His prospect's "out of collar,"
  And he curses speculation
            In the morning!

  Behold the young playwright who hears his own piece,
            At night, at night!
  He thinks that (ironic) applause will ne'er cease,
            At night, at night!
  His "little one-act thing" is stodgy and slow,
  But the Pit is good-natured, the youth's in a glow,
  And he thinks--with some "cuts"--it will be "a great go,"
            At night, at night!
  But oh, what a difference
            In the morning!
  The critics call the thing "an awful warning,"
  They "guy," and sneer, and scoff,
  And his bantling's taken off,
  "To make room for some old farce, Sir!"
            In the morning!

       *       *       *       *       *

TAKING THE OAT-CAKE.

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--I was very much interested in the statement I saw
in the papers the other day, that the best preservatives of a Lady's
complexion are--Oatmeal and Oranges! I at once began the diet, but
have not succeeded very well at present. Porridge, even with milk and
cream, and plenty of sugar, is such _commonplace_ stuff, and one can't
really be expected to eat oatmeal _raw_, though Scotch gamekeepers are
said to do so. But then they are out in the open air all day, and I am
not. Oranges are nice enough--but oh, _Mr. Punch_, what a lot of them
one has to take before one feels as if one had had a meal! As I have
stopped all other food, I am becoming rather weak. My complexion is,
I think, improved--at all events, it is far less red or pink than it
used to be--but I really haven't the strength to go out of doors to
show it off. Even writing is a burden--so I will close, hoping that my
experiences may benefit others who like to try the regimen.

LYDIA LANGUISH.

P.S.--My Doctor has just stopped the diet!


DEAR SIR,--We are sure that the Oatmeal-and-Orange prescription is an
invaluable one for the complexion. We recently tried it on a Street
Arab, and after one or two doses--accompanied by the employment of
soap and water--he developed such a beautiful pink-and-white skin,
that his parents failed to recognise him. This was unfortunate in one
way, as he has now become chargeable on the rates. Talking of rates,
we may mention that we supply finest Midlothian Campaign Oatmeal at a
more reasonable figure than any other firm in the trade. Price-list on
application.

Yours obediently, McCANNY & Co.

_Edinburgh._


SIR,--I am not less than fifty years' old, and marked with small-pox,
and therefore I think that Oatmeal and Oranges would be sure to do my
complexion good. As mine is perhaps a rather unusual case, I am trying
the remedy in a peculiarly thorough way. I have an Oatmeal-bath twice
a day, during which I suck six oranges. My breakfast consists of
porridge and marmalade. I have engaged a policeman to knock at my
front door three times every night, to wake me. I then sit up in bed
and consume oat-cakes soaked in orange-juice. I also dress in yellow,
and I have written to Belfast to ask if I can be admitted to an Orange
Society there, but hitherto I have received no reply. You will, I
think, agree with me that I am giving the new treatment a fair trial.
Yours truly,

TABITHA NUPKINS.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: UNLUCKY COMPLIMENTS.

_Shy but Susceptible Youth_. "ER--_COULD_ YOU TELL ME WHO THAT YOUNG
LADY IS--SKETCHING?"

_Affable Stranger_. "SHE HAS THE MISFORTUNE TO BE MY WIFE!"

_Shy but Susceptible One_ (_desperately anxious to please, and losing
all presence of mind_). "OH--THE MISFORTUNE'S ENTIRELY _YOURS_, I'M
_SURE_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BAMSGATE SANDS.

  It's hey for the sands, for the jolly Ramsgate Sands,
  Where the children shout and tumble, spade and bucket in their
          hands.
  Where sandy castles rise in scores, I trow a man might float
  A fleet of six-inch pleasure-skiffs on many a deep-dug moat.
  Where, while the banjos discord make, the German bands make noise,
  And nursemaids by the hundred shepherd flocks of girls and boys.
  Where the boys tuck up their trousers, and the girls tuck up their
          frocks,
  A paddling tribe who scorn their shoes and customary socks.

  Ye loud-voiced men of cocoa-nuts, what is it that you say?
  "Come try yer luck, roll, bowl, or pitch; the lydies stand'
          alf-way."
  One youth I saw who took his stand, a clerk of pith was he,
  He shut one eye and aimed with care, then let the ball fly free.
  Twice, thrice, nay, thirty times he flung, his BETSY standing by,
  And scornfully advising him to close his other eye.
  Yet, when at last he had to own he could not do the trick,
  No solitary cocoa-nut had toppled from its stick.

  Papa is in his glory here, that proud and happy man,
  But in spite of all his efforts, he can't get coloured tan.
  Yet every week-day morning, from ten o'clock till one,
  He turns that British face of his unflinching to the sun.
  Mamma she sits beside him; I overheard her say,
  "Lor, Pa, you'll soon be brown as brown, you're not so red to-day."
  But wives can't flatter tints away, and when he leaves the place,
  I'd guarantee to light my pipe at Pa's tomato face.

  A front-row stall I quick secured, a green and gaudy bench,
  And paid my humble penny to a very buxom wench.
  The tide was running out amain, and slowly, bit by bit,
  She moved her back seats forward till she left me in the pit.
  Stout Mr. BIGGS, the hair-dresser, the Bond-Street mould of form,
  Sat next me with his family, and seemed to find it warm;
  And, while admiring Mrs. B. hung on her BIGGS's lips.
  He favoured me, as is his wont, with all the sporting tips.

  But the most delightful object I saw upon that shore
  Was a ruddy-faced and chubby-legged philosopher of four.
  Though his sisters capered round him, the sage refused to budge,
  He continued quietly digging just as solemn as a judge;
  And if he fell, as men may fall, he spurned their proffered aid,
  But lay awhile and pondered, while he clutched his wooden spade;
  Then, having thought some problem out, and found that life was vain,
  He slowly raised his three-foot form, and set to work again.

  And so the round of pleasure goes; a man could scarce believe
  How swift the merry hours spin by from dewy morn to eve.
  The goat-carts never want for fares fresh from their nurses' arms,
  All day the patient donkeys bear some maid's or matron's charms.
  The haughty ones may carp and sneer, we know their sorry style,
  But we who revel on this shore can hear them with a smile.
  We may be vulgar; what's the odds? We're cottage-folk, not "Grands,"
  And our simple pleasures please us on the jolly Ramsgate Sands.

