Transcriber's notes

   The "oe" ligature is represented as [oe].

   The footnotes have been moved and renumbered for easier reading.

   A list of corrections is included at the end of the book.


SUPERSTITIONS OF WITCHCRAFT.

London
Printed by Spottiswoode and Co.
New-Street Square


THE SUPERSTITIONS OF WITCHCRAFT.

by

HOWARD WILLIAMS, M.A.

St. John's College, Cambridge.

'Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
 Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala rides?'


London:
Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, & Green.
1865.


PREFACE.


'THE SUPERSTITIONS OF WITCHCRAFT' is designed to exhibit a
consecutive review of the characteristic forms and facts of a
creed which (if at present apparently dead, or at least harmless,
in Christendom) in the seventeenth century was a living and
lively faith, and caused thousands of victims to be sent to the
torture-chamber, to the stake, and to the scaffold. At this day,
the remembrance of its superhuman art, in its different
manifestations, is immortalised in the every-day language of the
peoples of Europe.

       *       *       *       *       *

The belief in Witchcraft is, indeed, in its full development and
most fearful results, modern still more than mediæval, Christian
still more than Pagan, and Protestant not less than Catholic.


CONTENTS.


PART I.

CHAPTER I.

     The Origin, Prevalence, and Variety of Superstition--The
       Belief in Witchcraft the most horrid Form of
       Superstition--Most flourishing in the Sixteenth and
       Seventeenth Centuries--The Sentiments of Addison,
       Blackstone, and the Lawyers of the Eighteenth Century
       upon the Subject--Chaldean and Persian Magic--Jewish
       Witchcraft--Its important Influence on Christian and
       Modern Belief--Greek Pharmacy and Sorcery--Early Roman
       Laws against Conjuration and Magic Charms--Crimes
       perpetrated, under the Empire, in connection with
       Sorceric Practices--The general Persecution for Magic
       under Valentinian and Valens--German and Scandinavian
       Sagæ--Essential Difference between Eastern and Western
       Sorcery--The probable Origin of the general Belief in an
       Evil Principle                                        PAGE 3


PART II.

CHAPTER I.

     Compromise between the New and the Old Faiths--Witchcraft
       under the Early Church--The Sentiments of the Fathers and
       the Decrees of Councils--Platonic Influences--Historical,
       Physiological, and Accidental Causes of the Attribution
       of Witchcraft to the Female Sex--Opinions of the Fathers
       and other Writers--The Witch-Compact                      47

CHAPTER II.

     Charlemagne's Severity--Anglo-Saxon Superstition--Norman
       and Arabic Magic--Influence of Arabic Science--Mohammedan
       Belief in Magic--Rabbinical Learning--Roger Bacon--The
       Persecution of the Templars--Alice Kyteler                63

CHAPTER III.

     Witchcraft and Heresy purposely confounded by the
       Church--Mediæval Science closely connected with Magic and
       Sorcery--Ignorance of Physiology the Cause of many of the
       Popular Prejudices--Jeanne d'Arc--Duchess of
       Gloucester--Jane Shore--Persecution at Arras              84


PART III.

CHAPTER I.

     The Bull of Innocent VIII.--A new Incentive to the vigorous
       Prosecution of Witchcraft--The 'Malleus Maleficarum'--Its
       Criminal Code--Numerous Executions at the Commencement of
       the Sixteenth Century--Examination of Christian
       Demonology--Various Opinions of the Nature of
       Demons--General Belief in the Intercourse of Demons and
       other non-human Beings with Mankind                      101

CHAPTER II.

     Three Sorts of Witches--Various Modes of Witchcraft--Manner
       of Witch-Travelling--The Sabbaths--Anathemas of the Popes
       against the Crime--Bull of Adrian VI.--Cotemporary
       Testimony to the Severity of the Persecutions--Necessary
       Triumph of the Orthodox Party--Germany most subject to
       the Superstition--Acts of Parliament of Henry VIII.
       against Witchcraft--Elizabeth Barton--The Act of
       1562--Executions under Queen Elizabeth's Government--Case
       of Witchcraft narrated by Reginald Scot                  126

CHAPTER III.

     The 'Discoverie of Witchcraft,' published 1584--Wier's 'De
       Præstigiis Dæmonum,' &c.--Naudé--Jean Bodin--His 'De la
       Démonomanie des Sorciers,' published at Paris, 1580--His
       Authority--Nider--Witch-case at Warboys--Evidence adduced
       at the Trial--Remarkable as being the Origin of the
       Institution of an Annual Sermon at Huntingdon            144

CHAPTER IV.

     Astrology in Antiquity--Modern Astrology and
       Alchymy--Torralvo--Adventures of Dr. Dee and Edward
       Kelly--Prospero and Comus, Types respectively of the
       Theurgic and Goetic Arts--Magicians on the Stage in the
       Sixteenth Century--Occult Science in Southern
       Europe--Causes of the inevitable Mistakes of the
       pre-Scientific Ages                                      157

CHAPTER V.

     Sorcery in Southern Europe--Cause of the Retention of the
       Demonological Creed among the Protestant Sects--Calvinists
       the most Fanatical of the Reformed Churches--Witch-Creed
       sanctioned in the Authorised Version of the Sacred
       Scriptures--The Witch-Act of 1604--James VI.'s
       'Demonologie'--Lycanthropy and Executions in France--The
       French Provincial Parliaments active in passing Laws
       against the various Witch-practices--Witchcraft in the
       Pyrenees--Commission of Inquiry appointed--Its
       Results--Demonology in Spain                             168

CHAPTER VI.

     'Possession' in France in the Seventeenth Century--Urbain
       Grandier and the Convent of Loudun--Exorcism at
       Aix--Ecstatic Phenomena--Madeleine Bavent--Her cruel
       Persecution--Catholic and Protestant Witchcraft in
       Germany--Luther's Demonological Fears and
       Experiences--Originated in his exceptional Position and
       in the extraordinary Circumstances of his Life and
       Times--Witch-burning at Bamburg and at Würzburg          186

CHAPTER VII.

     Scotland one of the most Superstitious Countries in
       Europe--Scott's Relation of the Barbarities perpetrated in
       the Witch-trials under the Auspices of James VI.--The Fate
       of Agnes Sampson, Euphane MacCalzean, &c.--Irrational
       Conduct of the Courts of Justice--Causes of Voluntary
       Witch-Confessions--Testimony of Sir G. Mackenzie,
       &c.--Trial and Execution of Margaret Barclay--Computation
       of the Number of Witches who suffered Death in England and
       Scotland in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
       Centuries--Witches burned alive at Edinburgh in 1608--The
       Lancashire Witches--Sir Thomas Overbury and Dr.
       Forman--Margaret Flower and Lord Rosse                   203

CHAPTER VIII.

     The Literature of Europe in the Seventeenth Century proves
       the Universality and Horror of Witchcraft--The most
       acute and most liberal Men of Learning convinced of
       its Reality--Erasmus and Francis Bacon--Lawyers prejudiced
       by Legislation--Matthew Hale's judicial Assertion--Sir
       Thomas Browne's Testimony--John Selden--The English
       Church least Ferocious of the Protestant Sects--Jewell
       and Hooker--Independent Tolerance--Witchcraft under
       the Presbyterian Government--Matthew Hopkins--Gaule's
       'Select Cases of Conscience'--Judicial and Popular Methods
       of Witch-discovery--Preventive Charms--Witchfinders a Legal
       and Numerous Class in England and Scotland--Remission in the
       Severity of the Persecution under the Protectorship      219

CHAPTER IX.

     Glanvil's Sadducismus Triumphatus--His Sentiments on
       Witchcraft and Demonology--Baxter's 'Certainty of the
       World of Spirits,' &c.--Witch Trial at Bury St. Edmund's
       by Sir Matthew Hale, 1664--The Evidence adduced in
       Court--Two Witches hanged--Three hanged at Exeter in
       1682--The last Witches judicially executed in
       England--Uniformity of the Evidence adduced at the
       Trials--Webster's Attack upon the Witch-creed in
       1677--Witch Trials in England at the end of the
       Seventeenth Century--French Parliaments vindicate the
       Diabolic Reality of the Crime--Witchcraft in Sweden      237

CHAPTER X.

     Witchcraft in the English Colonies in North
       America--Puritan Intolerance and Superstition--Cotton
       Mather's 'Late Memorable Providences'--Demoniacal
       Possession--Evidence given before the
       Commission--Apologies issued by Authority--Sudden
       Termination of the Proceedings--Reactionary Feeling
       against the Agitators--The Salem Witchcraft the last
       Instance of Judicial Prosecution on a large Scale in
       Christendom--Philosophers begin to expose the
       Superstition--Meritorious Labours of Webster, Becker,
       and others--Their Arguments could reach only the
       Educated and Wealthy Classes of Society--These only
       partially enfranchised--The Superstition continues to
       prevail among the Vulgar--Repeal of the Witch Act in
       England in 1736--Judicial and Popular Persecutions in
       England in the Eighteenth Century--Trial of Jane
       Wenham in England in 1712--Maria Renata burned in
       Germany in 1749--La Cadière in France--Last Witch
       burned in Scotland in 1722--Recent Cases of
       Witchcraft--Protestant Superstition--Witchcraft in the
       Extra-Christian World                                    259


PART I.

EARLIER FAITH.


CHAPTER I.

     The Origin, Prevalence, and Variety of Superstition--The
     Belief in Witchcraft the most horrid Form of
     Superstition--Most flourishing in the Sixteenth and
     Seventeenth Centuries--The Sentiments of Addison,
     Blackstone, and the Lawyers of the Eighteenth Century upon
     the Subject--Chaldean and Persian Magic--Jewish
     Witchcraft--Its important Influence on Christian and Modern
     Belief--Greek Pharmacy and Sorcery--Early Roman Laws against
     Conjuration and Magic Charms--Crimes perpetrated, under the
     Empire, in connection with Sorceric Practices--The general
     Persecution for Magic under Valentinian and Valens--German
     and Scandinavian Sagæ--The probable Origin of the general
     Belief in an Evil Principle.


Superstition, the product of ignorance of causes, of the
proneness to seek the solution of phenomena out of and beyond
nature, and of the consequent natural but unreasoning dread of
the Unknown and Invisible (ignorantly termed the supernatural),
is at once universal in the extent, and various in the kinds,
of its despotism. Experience and reason seem to prove that,
inherent to and apparently coexistent with the human mind, it
naturally originates in the constitution of humanity: in ignorance
and uncertainty, in an instinctive doubt and fear of the
_Unknown_. Accident may moderate its power among particular peoples
and persons; and there are always exceptional minds whose
natural temper and exercise of reason are able to free them from
the servitude of a delusive imagination. For the mass of mankind,
the germ of superstition, prepared to assume always a new shape
and sometimes fresh vigour, is indestructible. The severest
assaults are ineffectual to eradicate it: hydra-like, far from
being destroyed by a seeming mortal stroke, it often raises its
many-headed form with redoubled force.

It will appear more philosophic to deplore the imperfection, than
to deride the folly of human nature, when the fact that the
superstitious sentiment is not only a result of mere barbarism or
vulgar ignorance, to be expelled of course by civilisation and
knowledge, but is indigenous in the life of every man, barbarous
or civilised, pagan or Christian, is fully recognised. The
enlightening influence of science, as far as it extends, is
irresistible; and its progress within certain limits seems sure
and almost omnipotent. But it is unfortunately limited in the
extent of its influence, as well as uncertain in duration; while
reason enjoys a feeble reign compared with ignorance and
imagination.[1] If it is the great office of history to teach by
experience, it is never useless to examine the causes and the
facts of a mischievous creed that has its roots deep in the
ignorant fears of mankind; but against the recurrence of the
fatal effects of fanaticism apparent in the earliest and latest
records of the world, there can be no sufficient security.

  [1] That 'speculation has on every subject of human enquiry
  three successive stages; in the first of which it tends to
  explain the phenomena by supernatural agencies, in the
  second by metaphysical abstractions, and in the third or
  final state, confines itself to ascertaining their laws of
  succession and similitude' (_System of Logic_, by J. S.
  Mill), is a generalisation of Positive Philosophy, and a
  theory of the Science of History, consistent probably with
  the progress of knowledge among philosophers, but is
  scarcely applicable to the mass of mankind.

Dreams, magic terrors, miracles, witches, ghosts, portents, are
some of the various forms superstition has invented and magnified
to disturb the peace of society as well as of individuals. The
most extravagant of these need not be sought in the remoter ages
of the human race, or even in the 'dark ages' of European
history: they are sufficiently evident in the legislation and
theology, as well as in the popular prejudices of the seventeenth
century.

