Produced by David Edwards, Markus Brenner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


                        The Strange Little Girl


                         A Story for Children
                               By V. M.


                       Illustrations by N. Roth


                     _The Aryan Theosophical Press
                        Point Loma, California_


                 COPYRIGHT 1911, BY KATHERINE TINGLEY


                            [Illustration]

                     THE ARYAN THEOSOPHICAL PRESS
                        Point Loma, California


[Illustration: IN THE GARDEN OF DELIGHT]


The Strange Little Girl


                                   I


Once upon a time there was a beautiful palace where the king's children
lived as happily as they alone can live. They never wanted anything and
they never knew that there could be others who were not as happy as
they. Sometimes, it is true, they would hear a story which would make
them almost think that perhaps there was a world beyond, which they did
not know, outside the palace of the king and its gardens, but something
would seem to say that after all it was only a fairy story, and they
would forget that it meant anything that might really be true.

One of the little princesses seemed to think more of these stories of a
world beyond the palace garden than the others, and she would sometimes
find herself gazing at the sun, and wondering if the great world lay
beyond the purple forests where the golden-edged clouds shone like dark
mountains in the distance. And the name of this princess was Eline.

More and more as she thought of these things she felt sure that there
must be a world where things were very different from the happy life in
the palace garden; and in the stories which the children heard she
thought of many things, which, with the others, she used to pass by
without notice. Once they used to hear of no sorrow, no pain, but only
joy and peace. Now, in thinking, she sometimes noticed that there were
things which were not spoken; that there were things passed by in
silence; that there were things which travelers passing through the
palace kept back, as though they knew of much which the children must
not know, and yet which they would have told had they dared.

Questions Eline asked, and the answers seldom satisfied her, for they
never seemed to tell her everything. Every time one of the travelers
left the palace to return on his journey there seemed to be a look of
appeal in his eyes, an appeal which only Eline seemed to see, and which
made her wish to follow them for the very love that shone in the kind
faces of these strangers--strangers who told the children stories of
things they loved--of wonderful fairy worlds where they were not as in
the palace; of worlds where Eline seemed to have traveled many times,
long, long ago.

One day she asked her father, the king:

"Shall I never go out of the palace, never leave the garden of delight
and see the world that lies beyond the cloud-mountains, beyond the
sunset and the whispering forests?"

And the king looked intently at Eline.

"These are strange fancies," he said. "Are you not happy here in the
garden?"

"Yes, I am happy," she said, "happier than I can tell. But you have not
answered me. Is there not a world beyond? Shall I ever see it?"

"Some traveler must have been telling you forbidden tales," said the
king. "These things I have said may not be spoken in my garden."

"No traveler has told me," said Eline. "I have seen them looking as
though they would tell me, but could not, of things beyond the garden,
beyond the palace. I have asked them, and they have told me nothing. Yet
I have felt that I long to go with them. I have felt that I remember
strange places, strange sights, things I know not here, when they speak.
Sometimes, even, it seems that I hear a voice like my own repeating a
promise--a promise unfulfilled that must be kept. 'I will return! I
will! I will!' it says. And I hear voices calling in the wind, in the
rustling of the leaves, and in the silence of the day, 'Come back! Come
back!' And the birds say, 'Come!' The pines whisper to me strange
things, and the laughing water in the brooks says 'Come!' What does it
mean?"

"I cannot tell you here," said the king. "But why do you wish to leave
the palace? You are yet young and there are many, many years of
happiness before you. You may stay in the palace where all things are
good, and put these things out of mind. There is another world, but not
for you--yet!"

Eline was troubled, or would have been had such a thing been possible in
the palace of the king.

"May I ever see that land? May I ever leave the palace?"

"The children of the king are free to come and go," he said. "I may not
keep them if they will not stay; for I know that they will come again."


                                  II


Again a traveler came to the palace. He brought with him a harp of seven
strings, on which he played to the children. He sang to them for a while
and then for a space was silent. Eline listened to the strange,
beautiful music. And to her it seemed that there was speech in the
harp--that it spoke. The other children seemed to listen to the music,
but to them it did not seem to speak. To Eline there were echoes of
wonderful things the palace knew not; things that the language of the
king could not tell. The harp spoke in a way that the Princess Eline
knew and understood, although there were no words in its tones. There
were sad and sorrowful notes that told of sorrows the palace never knew.
There were strains of music that sounded harsh to the listening ear,
though to the careless they told of happiness alone. And as she
listened, Eline dreamed. Clearer and more clear she felt that the harp
told of a world of men where sorrow and sadness and strife were not
unknown; where joy should be, and was not; where the people groped their
way through darkness and thought it light. "Return! Return!" called the
harp.

[Illustration: "I WILL RETURN"]

And a mighty resolve came to Eline. "I will return! I will! I will!"

She remembered the king's saying: "The children of the king are free to
come and go," he had said. "I may not keep them if they will not stay,"
he had told her.

She loved him much; but the call came clear, and she dared not seek him
to say farewell, lest she should be persuaded to remain.

She bowed her head and to the harper spoke:

"I will go," she said. "I will return with you."

Then the harp sent forth such a melody of joyous music that it echoed
thrilling through the hot discordant notes of the world beyond the
sunset; and for a moment a chord of harmony ran through the life of men:

"Joy unto you, men of the underworld! Joy unto you, children of sorrow!
Joy unto you, sons of forgetfulness! Joy unto all beings!"

They passed out of the garden together, the musician and the soul.

[Illustration: THROUGH PINE FOREST]


                                  III


Westward they traveled, westward, ever westward. The way was dark and
sometimes dreary, and Eline felt like one awakened from a beautiful
dream before it was ended.

Through the pine forests, over mountains, in deep valleys, and by mighty
streams they traveled. Ever they had the harp to cheer the way, to urge
their footsteps onward. For the path was untrodden where they went.

"There is a path," the harper said, "a pleasant path and broad, but the
journey is long and we must hasten on our way. To the setting sun, to
the gleaming sea, we must go; nor may we seek a beaten track lest we be
too late."

A river there was in whose waters were reflected pictures of all that
surrounded them--such crystal clear reflections that sometimes it seemed
as if they looked at real things in the water mirrored in the things
around them.

[Illustration]

And on the waters grew beautiful lotus-flowers, lilies with cup-shaped
leaves. In the blue and white petals of the lotus also there seemed to
be reflections, so clear were they. The musician plucked one of the
cup-like lily-pads and filled it with the water for Eline.

The still surface of the water shone like silver in its green cup as
Eline held it. Then the musician played. Soft and low and sweet were the
notes of that wonderful harp. Scarcely they rippled the surface of the
water, and yet they vibrated, trembled, spread, until picture after
picture came to the surface of the water in colors of every hue.

Scarcely may it be told what Eline saw in the magic cup in the water of
remembrance. She seemed to see herself--and yet another--in picture after
picture. Now she saw herself as part of a golden sea of selves which
made but one self, so lifelike were they, so glorious was their unity.
Then in life after life Eline seemed to see her other selves living and
loving and working, sleeping and suffering and struggling. She saw that
on a day she had made her great resolve to help the world. "I will
return! I will! I will!"

And now she knew what things they were she had seemed to remember in the
king's garden of delight. Joyously, eagerly, willingly, she saw that she
had determined to return to earth in body after body, to help the men
of sorrow who struggled and slumbered and suffered. She saw that she had
before so done; that her work remained unfinished, to be begun again
where she had laid it down. There was suffering shown to her in the cup;
there were sorrow and grief and pain. But she saw that it must all be,
and was content. For at other times she had desired just such things
that she might know how others felt them, that she might help them the
more with understanding. Happiness she had taken to give to others, and
she must repay the debt. She saw that all things were just, and when the
musician said in a low voice:

"Will you yet proceed?"

"I will!" she said.

"Then drink the cup," he said, "Drink!"

She drained the green cup of the lotus leaf until scarcely a drop
remained, and with that draught she forgot all things that had been--the
garden, the king, the journey and the vision, and the master
harper--all were forgotten. Only there remained a dim remembrance as of a
dream at dawn forgotten.

[Illustration: DOMES AND SPIRES]


                                  IV


A little ship stood by the shore of the great sea; into this Eline
entered. There were other ships, some better, some worse. But somehow
she knew that just this, and not another, was the ship she wanted, and
none questioned her when she entered.

So they sailed away towards the setting sun.

Long was the voyage and lonely; for the seas ran high and all was dark
below in the heart of the ship. Nine months they sailed on the ocean,
until in the time appointed land appeared. Strange dwellings were there,
domes and spires and crowded cities. With wide, wondering eyes Eline
watched them as the ship passed them by in strange procession; for the
men of that land were like none she knew; none of these things could she
remember. For she had forgotten even her name at the river of
forgetfulness, where remembrances are left in the mirror of the waters
until time and their creator bring them back to life.

It seemed as though one of wise and kindly countenance held her as a
little child in his arms and whispered softly, "Remember! I will return!
I will! I will!" A light of happy recollection came to her and she
smiled in reply. He had spoken in her own language as the harp had
spoken, and strangely, strangely she seemed to see in him the harper
whose music had told her of the sorrowful land beyond the sunset. For
this moment, she remembered, and then the thought departed.

At first the air seemed heavy and oppressive to the wanderer; but by
degrees she grew accustomed to it and even, in time, scarcely felt
it. Yet ever and again a dim remembrance of brighter, purer skies came
to her. She spoke of this more than once; but others only laughed and
said: "The child is dreaming!"

[Illustration]

Because she was no longer dressed in shining garments, they did not know
her for the princess she really was. Indeed, she was no way different
from those around her but that at heart she was still the daughter of
the king. They could not see her heart--this they could not know. And
seeing that they did not understand, she said no more of the thoughts
that came to her. They called it dreaming; but Eline thought that if
this were so, a dream were better than a waking life--unless--

Could these be thoughts that came to her of the world beyond the water,
the reflection of the real life? She knew not.

"We must teach this little dreamer what is life!" they said. "She will
not know what life is if we leave her to her dreams."

They made her work and made her play: work that never seemed to do
anyone any good, and play that seemed like work. She nearly forgot that
in what they called her dreams she had ever known of another life.

Sometimes she sang to herself, strange songs that they said sounded sad
and sorrowful, yet of a sweetness all their own.

"Where does she hear them?" people asked.

But Eline never told. For the truth was that they came to her in moments
when her thoughts were far away, dreaming.

"She sings like a bird in a cage that knows of a brighter world
outside," said one. But he was a poet, so they only smiled as if they
themselves would have made the same remark if it had not been so
fanciful.

And though men thought her sad and lonely, there was joy to her in the
hum of the bees and the song of the birds and the rustling of the
leaves. The butterflies and the flowers and the brooks were her friends.

"What a strange child," people said when they heard her talking to these
friends. They did not know of the stories her friends told her, stories
which reminded her of a wonderful garden of delight where men did not
ever stare and stare in gaping wonder because a little child talked with
the fairies that live in all things beautiful, clothed in robes of
sunlight and rainbow hues.

They would have taken her away from these friends but for one old man,
her grandfather, who said:

"The child will be better for the fresh air. Let her live while she
may."

So it was that she played and talked with the flowers and sang to the
brooks and listened to the stories of the forest trees that whispered
among themselves. None dared take her away.

One day she had been for a long ramble by a mighty river, and the sun
had sunk to the westward on its journey; but she turned not to the place
she called her home. Tired and worn out with her play, she lay on a rock
and slept.

In her sleep it seemed that a touch upon her forehead awakened in her a
vision of things she once had known, but had now almost forgotten. There
was the king's garden and the palace, and the other wonderful buildings,
tall and stately--mighty buildings which seemed to speak of mighty
builders, noble thoughts and great men's deeds. Some were even more
stately, some more humble, than the palace. But in all there was a sense
of grander, nobler life than the life those knew who were with her now,
and who, laughing, called her a dreamer.

And she heard a voice repeating, "I will return! I will! I will!"

Again she smiled as she recognized the voice. A feeling of intense
happiness and content came to her and she--awoke. More than ever it
seemed as if that other were the real life, and this a heavy dream.

[Illustration]


                                   V


The twilight glow still lingered in the west and the evening breeze
called her to thoughts of home.

But she had learned wisdom, and when they asked her where she had been,
Eline said she had fallen asleep in the sunshine on a rock by the great
river. Which was true.

Of her dream she said nothing to any except to the old man who alone
seemed to understand her a little. He did not laugh, but looked with
thoughtful eyes intent, into the distance, away to the starlit sky, and
it seemed to her that he also was trying to remember a forgotten dream
of life. And seeing this she put her hand in his trustingly, and they
two knew well each other's thoughts though never a word was spoken.

It seemed to the old man that the child was leading him along a familiar
road to a home forgotten--after many weary days of wandering.

"There are some things the heart can say that words can never tell," he
said to himself when she was gone. "I think we understand one another."

As time passed by Eline came to know more and more of that other life
and she longed to tell these things to the people who struggled and
surged in hot strife to win the things of the world they knew, never
thinking that there was a happier, purer, brighter world. Some thought
they knew of such a one; but all except a few made it seem like the one
in which they lived--only they made it a little more bright by day, a
little more dark by night, and with a little more success in the strife
for the things that change and pass away. These she would tell of the
nobler life she knew, but they listened not at all.

In due time Eline was sent to school to learn. But her teachers found
little that she did not quickly understand. For one thing she remembered
now plainly, how in the garden of delight everything that was done was
well done--were it the telling of a story or the singing of a song or the
watering of the flowers that grew in that fair land. All was done with a
wonderful thoroughness, and Eline now felt that she must do all things
in that way or leave them quite alone. But often they would teach Eline
things about which she seemed to care little and to understand as one in
a dream. Then they would call her attention to the work only to find
that she was learning to understand a great deal more than they
themselves could tell. It was so with numbers. When they asked her what
the numbers were by name, she not only named them all but told them why
they were so named and what each meant. And so with music. With every
chord she seemed to see harmonies of color, like beautiful pictures too
glorious to paint. And when she said that life itself to her was music,
Eline's teachers did not understand.

One said: "She has learned these things before in another life."

Another declared: "She sees the heart of things where we see only the
outer covering. She sees the soul, we the body."

Perhaps they both were right.

But many gave other reasons for these things and all of them were
gravely discussed. But curiously enough, the two who gave the reasons I
have told, were laughed at and told that such things could not be. So
they said little about their thoughts because, like all those who are
sure that they know the truth, they could afford to wait until their
words were proved to be right.


                                  VI

