 But fate, propitious
to me, had dried up his ink-bottle; the expense of replenishing it would
have broken his heart of itself; and the attorney's announcement to me
was, that the will, after blinding the solicitor to the treasury and
three of his clerks, was pronounced to be altogether illegible.

The fact that I was the nearest of kin got into the newspapers; and in
my first drive down St. James's, I had the pleasure of discovering that
I had cured a vast number of my friends of their calamitous defect of
vision. But if the "post equitem sedet atra cura" was the maxim in the
days of Augustus, the man who drives the slower cabriolet in the days of
George the Fourth, cannot expect to escape. The "hour too many" overtook
me in the first week. On one memorable evening I saw it coming, just as
I turned the corner of Piccadilly; fair flight was hopeless, and I took
refuge in that snug asylum on the right hand of St. James's Street,
which has since expanded into a palace. I stoutly battled the foe, for I
"took no note of time" during the next day and night; and when at last I
walked forth into the air, I found that I had relieved myself of the
burden of three-fourths of my reversion. A weak mind on such an occasion
would have cursed the cards, and talked of taking care of the fragment
of his property; but mine was of the higher order, and I determined on
revenge. I had my revenge, and saw my winners ruined. They had their
consolation, and at the close of a six months' campaign saw me walk into
the streets a beggar. I grew desperate, and was voted dangerous. I
realized the charge by fastening on a noble lord who had been one of the
most adroit in pigeoning me. His life was "too valuable to his country,"
or himself, to allow him to meet a fellow whose life was of no use to
any living thing; and through patriotism and the fear of being shot, he
kept out of my way. I raged, threatened to post his lordship, and was in
the very act of writing out the form of the placard declaring the noble
heir of the noble house of ---- a cheat and a scoundrel, when by the
twopenny-post I received a notice from the Horse Guards that I was on
that day to appear in the Gazette as an ensign in his majesty's ----
regiment, then serving in the Peninsula, with orders to join without
delay. This was enough from his lordship, and was certainly better for
me than running the chance of damages in the King's Bench, for provoking
his majesty's subjects to a breach of the peace.

I was gazetted, tried on my uniform before the mirror, entirely approved
of my appearance, and wrote my last letter to my last flirt. The
Portsmouth mail was to start at eight. I had an hour to spare, and
sallied into the street. I met an honest-faced old acquaintance as much
at a loss as myself to slay the hour. We were driven by a shower into
shelter. The rattle of dice was heard within a green-baize-covered door.
We could not stay for ever shivering on the outside. Fortune favoured
me; in half an hour I was master of a thousand pounds; it would have
been obvious folly and ingratitude to check the torrent of success for
the paltry prospects of an ensigncy. I played on, and won on. The clock
struck eight. I will own that I trembled as the first sound caught my
ear. But whether nervous or not, from that instant the torrent was
checked. The loss and gain became alternate. Wine was brought in; I
played in furious scorn of consequences. I saw the board covered with
gold. I swept it into my stake; I soon saw my stake reduced to nothing.
My eyes were dazzled, my hand shook, my brain was on fire, I sang,
danced, roared with exultation or despair. How the night closed, I know
not; but I found myself at last in a narrow room, surrounded with
squalidness, its only light from a high-barred window, and its only
furniture the wooden tressel on which I lay, fierce, weary, and
feverish, as if I lay on the rack. From this couch of the desperate, I
was carried into the presence of a magistrate, to hear that in the
_mélée_ of the night before, I had in my rage charged my honest-faced
acquaintance with palpable cheating; and having made good my charge by
shewing the loaded dice in his hand, had knocked him down with a
violence that made his recovery more than doubtful. He had seen my name
in the Gazette, and had watched me for the express purpose of final
plunder. The wretch died. I was brought to trial, found guilty of
manslaughter, and sentenced to seven years' expatriation. Fortunate
sentence! On my arrival in New South Wales, as I was found a perfect
gentleman, and fit for nothing, there was no resource but to make me try
the labour of my hands. Fortunate labour! From six at morning till six
at night, I had the spade or the plough in my hands. I dragged carts, I
delved rocks, I hewed trees; I had not a moment to spare. The appetite
that once grew languid over venison, now felt the exquisite delight of
junk beef. The thirst that scorned champagne was now enraptured with
spring water. The sleep that had left me many a night tossing
within-side the curtains of a hundred-and-fifty-guinea Parisian bed, now
came on the roughest piece of turf, and made the planks of my cabin
softer than down. I can now run as fast as one of my Newmarket stud,
pull down a buffalo, and catch a kangaroo by the tail in fair field.
Health, vigour, appetite, and activity, are my superabundance now. I
have every thing but time. My banishment expires to-morrow; but I shall
never recross the sea. This is my country. Since I set my foot upon its
shore I have never had a moment to yawn. In this land of real and
substantial life, the spectre that haunted my joyless days dares not be
seen--the "hour too many" is no more.

_The Forget-Me-Not_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MANNERS & CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS.

(_For the Mirror_.)


SELLING MEAT AMONG THE ANCIENT ROMANS, &c.


It was the custom for the buyer to shut his eyes, and the seller to hold
up some of his fingers; if the buyer guessed aright, how many it was the
other held up, he was to fix the price; if he mistook, the seller was to
fix it. These classic _blind-bargains_ would not suit the
Londonbutchers. This custom was abolished by Apronius, the prefect of
Rome; who in lieu thereof, introduced the method of selling by weight.
Among the ancient Romans there were three kinds of established butchers,
viz. two colleges or companies, composed each of a certain number of
citizens, whose office was to furnish the city with the necessary
cattle, and to take care of preparing and vending their flesh. One of
these communities was at first confined to the providing of hogs, whence
they were called _suarii_; and the other two were charged with cattle,
especially oxen, whence they were called _pecuarii_, or _boarii_. Under
each of these was a subordinate class, whose office was to kill,
prepare, &c. called _lanii_, and sometimes _carnifices_.

Two English poets (Swift and Gay) have been rather severe towards the
London butchers, the former says,--

  "Hence he learnt the _Butcher's_ guile,
  How to cut your throat, and smile;
  Like a _butcher_ doom'd for life,
  In his mouth to wear his knife."

The latter,--

  ----"resign the way,
  To shun the surly _butcher's_ greasy tray:
  _Butchers_, whose hands are died with blood's foul stain,
  And always foremost in the hangman's train."

The butchers' company was not incorporated until the 3rd year of King
James I. when they were made a _Corporation_, by the name of master,
wardens and commonalty of the art and mystery of butchers; yet the
fraternity is ancient.

Stowe says, "In the 3rd of Richard II. motion was made that no butcher
should kill any flesh within London, but at Knightsbridge, or such like
distant place from the walls of the citie."

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


STUMBLING AT THE THRESHOLD.


The phrase, "to stumble at the threshold," originated in the
circumstance, that the old thresholds, or steps under the door, were
like the hearths, raised a little, so that a person might stumble over
them, unless proper care were taken. A very whimsical reason for this
practice is given in a curious little tract by Sir Balthazar Gerbier,
entitled, "Council and Advice to all Builders," 1663, in these
words:--"A good surveyor shuns also the ordering of doores with
stumbling thresholds, though our forefathers affected them, perchance to
perpetuate the antient custome of bridegroomes, when formerly at their
return from church they did use to lift up their bride, and to knock her
head against that of the doore, for a remembrance that she was not to
pass the threshold of her house without leave."

W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHINESE PHYSICIANS.


The charitable dispensation of medicines by the Chinese, is well
deserving notice. They have a stone which is ten cubits high, erected in
the public squares of their cities; whereon is engraved the name of all
sorts of medicines, with the price of each, and when the poor stand in
need of relief from physic, they go to the treasury to receive the price
each medicine is rated at.

The physicians of China have only to feel the arm of their patient in
three places, and to observe the rate of the pulse, to form an opinion
on the cause, nature, danger, and duration of the malady. Without the
patient speaking at all, they can tell infallibly what part is attacked
with disease, whether the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the
intestines, the stomach, the flesh, the bones, and so on. As they are
both physicians and apothecaries, and prepare their own medicines, they
are paid only when they effect a cure. If the same rule were introduced
with us, I fear we should have fewer physicians.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TOPOGRAPHER


BOX HILL.

(_For the Mirror_.)


This celebrated eminence is situated in the north range of chalk hills,
beginning near Farnham, in Surrey, and extending from thence to
Folkstone, in Kent. Camden calls it _White Hill_, from its chalky soil;
but Box Hill is its true and ancient name. The box-tree is, in all
probability, the natural produce of the soil; but a generally received
story is, that the box was planted there by Thomas, Earl of Arundel,
between two and three centuries ago. There is, however, authentic
evidence of its being here long before his time, for Henry de Buxeto
(i.e. Henry of Box Hill) and Adam de Buxeto were witnesses to deeds in
the reign of King John.

John Evelyn, who wrote about the middle of the seventeenth century,
says, "Box-trees rise naturally at Kent in Bexley; and in Surrey, giving
name to Box Hill. He that in winter should behold some of our highest
hills in Surrey, clad with whole woods of them, might easily fancy
himself transported into some new or enchanted country."

In Aubrey's posthumous work on Surrey, published in 1718, the northern
part of the hill is described as thickly covered with yew-trees, and the
southern part with "thick boscages of box-trees," which "yielded a
convenient privacy for lovers, who frequently meet here, so that it is
an English Daphne." He also tells us that the gentry often resorted here
from Ebbesham (_Epsom_), then in high fashion. Philip Luckombe, in his
"England's Gazetteer," says, on Box Hill "there is a large warren, but
no houses; only arbours cut out in the box-wood on the top of the hill,
where are sold refreshments of all sorts, for the ladies and gentlemen
who come hither to divert themselves in its labyrinths; for which reason
a certain author has thought fit to call it the Palace of Venus, and the
Temple of Nature; there being an enchanting prospect from it of a fine
country, which is scarce to be equalled for affording so surprising and
magnificent an idea both of earth and sky."

But these delightful retreats, like Arcadia of old, have long since
vanished. The _yews_ were cut down in the year 1780; and their
successors fall very short of the luxuriant descriptions of old
topographers. The _box_ has also at various times produced the
proprietors of the estate great profit. In 1608, the receipt for
box-trees cut down upon the sheepwalk on the hill was 50_l_.; in an
account taken in 1712, it is supposed that as much had been cut down,
within a few years before, as amounted to 3,000_l_.; and in 1759, a Mr.
Miller lamented that "the trees on Box Hill had been pretty much
destroyed; though many remained of considerable bigness."

An immense quantity of box is annually consumed in this country, in the
revived art of engraving on wood. The English is esteemed inferior to
that which comes from the Levant; and the American box is said to be
preferable to ours. But the ships from the Levant brought such
quantities of it in ballast, that the wood on Box Hill could not find a
purchaser, and not having been cut for sixty-five years, was growing
cankered. The war diminished the influx from the Mediterranean; several
purchasers offered; and in 1795 it was put up to auction at 12,000_l_.
The depredations made on Box Hill, in consequence of this sale, did not
injure its picturesque beauty, as twelve years were allowed for cutting,
which gave each portion a reasonable time to renew. In 1802, forty tons
were cut, but the market being overstocked, it fell in value more than
fifty per cent.; and the foreign wood is now universally preferred for
engravings. The trees on Box Hill are, however, again flourishing,
although their value is rather problematical.

For the information of the home tourist, perhaps, I ought to mention
that Box Hill stands about 22 miles on the left of the road from London
to Worthing, Brighton, and Bognor, and about 2 miles N.E. of the town of
Dorking. The road from Leatherhead hence is a constant succession of
hill and dale, richly clothed with wood, interspersed with elegant
villas in all tastes--from the pillared and plastered mansion, to the
borrowed charm of the _cottage orne_. The whole of this district is
called the Vale of _Norbury_, from the romantic domain of that name,
which extends over a great portion of the hills on the right of the
road. Shortly before you reach Box Hill, stands _Mickleham_, a little
village with an ivy-mantled church, rich in Saxon architecture and other
antiquities. You then descend into a valley, passing some delightful
meadow scenery, and the showy mansion of Sir Lucas Pepys, which rises
from a flourishing plantation on the left. In the valley stands Juniper
Hall, late the seat of Mr. Thomas Broadwood, the piano-forte
manufacturer. In the park are some of the finest cedars in England. On
again ascending, you catch a fine view of Box Hill, and the
amphitheatrical range of opposite hills, with one of the most
magnificent _parterres_ in nature. This is called, by old writers, the
_Garden of Surrey_.

You pass some flint-built cottages, and quitting the road here, the
ascent to Box Hill is gradual and untiring, across a field of little
slopes, studded with a few yew-trees, relics of by-gone days. The ascent
further down the road almost amounts to a feat, assisted by the
foot-worn paces in the chalky steep. Here this portion of the hill
resembles an immense wall of _viretum_, down whose side has been poured
liquid mortar. The path winds along the verge of the hill, whilst on the
left is a valley or little ravine, whose sides are clothed with thick
dwarfish box, intermingled with the wild and trackless luxuriance of
forest scenery. Hence the road stretches away to Ashurst, the neat
residence of Mr. Strahan, the King's printer.

Returning to the verge of the hill, you soon reach the _apex_, or
highest point, being 445 feet from the level of the Mole.[1] Here you
enjoy what the French call a _coup d'oeil_, or I would rather say, _a
bird's-eye view_, of unparalleled beauty. Taking the town of Dorking for
a resting point, the long belt is about twelve miles in extent. The
outline or boundary commences from the eminence on which I am supposed
to be standing--with Brockham Hill, whose steep was planted by the late
duke of Norfolk, and whence the chain extends away towards the great
Brighton road. Next in the curve are Betchworth Castle and Park, with
majestic avenues of limes and elms, and fine old chestnut-trees.
Adjoining, is the Deepdene, the classical seat of the author of
"Anastasius," a place, says Salmon, "well calculated for the religious
rites of the Celts," and consecrated by the philosophical pursuits of
the Hon. Charles Howard, who built an oratory and laboratory, and died
here in 1714. Next are several fir-crowned ridges, which shelter Bury
Hill, the mansion of Mr. Barclay, the opulent brewer; whence you ascend
the opposite line of hills, till you reach Denbies, nearly facing the
most prominent point of Box Hill. This elegant seat is the abode of Mr.
Denison, one of the county members, and brother of the Marchioness of
Conyngham. The second range or ledge, beneath Denbies, is the celebrated
Dorking lime-works. The transition to the Norbury Hills, already
mentioned, is now very short, which completes the outline of the view.
It should, however, be remarked that the scenery within this range can
be distinctly enjoyed without the aid of art; whilst beyond it the
prospect extends, and fades away in the South Downs on one hand, and
beyond the metropolis on the other.

The little _parterre_ to be described, includes the sheltered town of
Dorking, environed with rich lawny slopes, variegated with villas in the
last taste; and little heights, from whose clustering foliage peeps the
cottage roof of humble life. But the Paradise immediately at the foot of
Box Hill is the gem of the whole scene, and is one of the most perfect
pictures of rural beauty which pen or pencil can attempt. It appears
like an assemblage of every rural charm in a few acres, in whose
disposal nature has done much, and art but little. Park, lawn, woody
walk, slope, wilderness and dell are among its varieties; and its quiet
is only broken by the sluggish stream of the Mole. Adjoining is a little
inn, more like one of the picturesque _auberges_ of the continent than
an English house of cheer. The grounds are ornamented with rustic
alcoves, boscages, and a bowery walk, all in good taste. Here hundreds
of tourists pass a portion of "the season," as in a "loop-hole of
retreat." In the front of the inn, however, the stream of life glides
fast; and a little past it, the road crosses the Mole by Burford Bridge,
and winds with geometrical accuracy through the whole of this hasty
sketch.

PHILO.

    [1] Here is a stump of wood which denotes the grave of Major
    Labelliere, a deranged officer of the Marines, who, by his own
    request was buried on this spot, with his head downwards; it
    being a constant assertion with him, "that the world was turned
    topsy-turvy, and, therefore, at the end he should be right."

    From this point may be seen _Leith Hill_, with an old prospect
    tower, within which are interred the remains of another
    eccentric gentleman who died in the neighbourhood. In the road
    from Dorking thence is _Wotton_, the family seat of the Evelyns.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF A READER


THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER AND OTHER POEMS.


We usually leave criticism to the _grey-beards_, or such as have passed
the _viginti annorum lucubrationes_ of reviewing. It kindles so many
little heart-burnings and jealousies, that we rejoice it is not part of
our duty. To be sure, we sometimes take up a book in real earnest, read
it through, and have _our say_ upon its merits; but this is only a
gratuitous and occasional freak, just to keep up our oracular
consequence. In the present case, we do not feel disposed to exercise
this privilege, further than in a very few words--merely to say that Mr.
Robert Montgomery has published a volume of Poems under the above
title--that the poems are of unequal merit, and that like Virgil, his
excellence lies in describing scenes of darkness.

The "Universal Prayer" is a devotional outpouring of a truly poetical
soul, with as much new imagery as the subject would admit; and if
_scriptural_ poems be estimated in the ratio of _scriptural_ sermons,
the merit of the former is of the first order.[2]

From the other poems we have detached the following beautiful
specimens:--

CONSUMPTION.

  With step as noiseless as the summer air,
  Who comes in beautiful decay?--her eyes
  Dissolving with a feverish glow of light,
  Her nostrils delicately closed, and on
  Her cheek a rosy tint, as if the tip
  Of Beauty's finger faintly press'd it there,--
  Alas! Consumption is her name.
  Thou loved and loving one!
  From the dark languish of thy liquid eye,
  So exquisitely rounded, darts a ray
  Of truth, prophetic of thine early doom;
  And on thy placid cheek there is a print
  Of death,--the beauty of consumption there.
  Few note that fatal bloom; for bless'd by all,
  Thou movest through thy noiseless sphere, the life,
  Of one,--the darling of a thousand hearts.
  Yet in the chamber, o'er some graceful task
  When delicately bending, oft unseen,
  Thy mother marks then with that musing glance
  That looks through cunning time, and sees thee stretch'd
  A shade of being, shrouded for the tomb.
  The Day is come, led gently on by Death;
  With pillow'd head all gracefully reclined,
  And grape-like curls in languid clusters wreath'd,
  Within a cottage room she sits to die;
  Where from the window, in a western view,
  Majestic ocean rolls.--A summer eve
  Shines o'er the earth, and all the glowing air
  Stirs faintly, like a pulse; against the shore
  The waves unrol them with luxurious joy,
  While o'er the midway deep she looks, where like
  A sea god glares the everlasting Sun
  O'er troops of billows marching in his beam!--
  From earth to heaven, from heaven to earth, her eyes
  Are lifted, bright with wonder and with awe,
  Till through each vein reanimation rolls!
  'Tis past; and now her filmy glance is fix'd
  Upon the heavens, as though her spirit gazed
  On that immortal world, to which 'tis bound:
  The sun hath sunk.--her soul hath fled without
  A pang, and left her lovely in her death,
  And beautiful as an embodied dream.

MORTALITY.

  All that we love and feel on Nature's face,
  Bear dim relations to our common doom.
  The clouds that blush, and die a beamy death,
  Or weep themselves away in rain,--the streams
  That flow along in dying music,--leaves
  That fade, and drop into the frosty arms
  Of Winter, there to mingle with dead flowers,--
  Are all prophetic of our own decay.

BEAUTY

  How oft, as unregarded on a throng
  Of lovely creatures, in whose liquid eyes
  The heart-warm feelings bathe, I've look'd
  With all a Poet's passion, and have wish'd
  That years might never pluck their graceful smiles--
  How often Death, as with a viewless wand,
  Has touch'd the scene, and witch'd it to a tomb!
  Where Beauty dwindled to a ghastly wreck,
  And spirits of the Future seem'd to cry,--
  Thus will it be when Time has wreak'd revenge.

MELANCHOLY.

  When mantled with the melancholy glow
  Of eve, she wander'd oft: and when the wind,
  Like a stray infant down autumnal dales
  Roam'd wailingly, she loved to mourn and muse:
  To commune with the lonely orphan flowers,
  And through sweet Nature's ruin trace her own.

VISION OF HEAVEN.

  An empyrean infinitely vast
  And irridescent, roof'd with rainbows, whose
  Transparent gleams like water-shadows shone,
  Before me lay: Beneath this dazzling vault--
  I felt, but cannot paint the splendour there!
  Glory, beyond the wonder of the heart
  To dream, around interminably blazed.
  A spread of fields more beautiful than skies
  Flush'd with the flowery radiance of the west;
  Valleys in greenest glory, deck'd with trees
  That trembled music to the ambrosial airs
  That chanted round them,--vein'd with glossy streams,
  That gush'd, like feelings from a raptured soul:
  Such was the scenery;--with garden walks,
  Delight of angels and the blest, where flowers
  Perennial bloom, and leaping fountains breathe,
  Like melted gems, a gleaming mist around!
  Here fruits for ever ripe, on radiant boughs,
  Droop temptingly; here all that eye and heart
  Enrapts, in pure perfection is enjoy'd;
  And here o'er flowing paths with agate paved,
  Immortal Shapes meander and commune.
  While with permissive gaze I glanced the scene,
  A whelming tide of rich-toned music roll'd,
  Waking delicious echoes, as it wound
  From Melody's divinest fount! All heaven
  Glow'd bright, as, like a viewless river, swell'd
  The deepening music!--Silence came again!
  And where I gazed, a shrine of cloudy fire
  Flamed redly awful; round it Thunder walk'd,
  And from it Lightning look'd out most sublime!
  Here throned in unimaginable bliss
  And glory, sits The One Eternal Power,
  Creator, Lord, and Life of All: Again,
  Stillness ethereal reign'd, and forth appear'd
  Elysian creatures robed in fleecy light,
  Together flocking from celestial haunts,
  And mansions of purpureal mould; the Host
  Of heaven assembled to adore with harp
  And hymn, the First and Last, the Living God;
  They knelt,--a universal choir, and glow'd
  More beauteous while they breathed the chant divine,
  And Hallelujah! Hallelujah! peal'd,
  And thrill'd the concave with harmonious joy.

VISION OF HELL.

  Apart, upon a throne of living fire
  The Fiend was seated; in his eye there shone
  The look that dared Omnipotence; the light
  Of sateless vengeance, and sublime despair.--
  He sat amid a burning world, and saw
  Tormented myriads, whose blaspheming shrieks
  Were mingled with the howl of hidden floods,
  And Acherontine groans; of all the host,
  The only dauntless he. As o'er the wild
  He glanced, the pride of agony endured
  Awoke, and writhed through all his giant frame,
  That redden'd, and dilated, like a sun!
  Till moved by some remember'd bliss, or joy
  Of paradisal hours, or to supply
  The cravings of infernal wrath,--he bade
  The roar of Hell be hush'd,--and silence was!
  He called the cursed,--and they flash'd from cave
  And wild--from dungeon and from den they came,
  And stood an unimaginable mass
  Of spirits, agonized with burning pangs:
  In silence stood they, while the Demon gazed
  On all, and communed with departed Time,
  From whence his vengeance such a harvest reap'd.

BEAUTIFUL INFLUENCES.

  Who hath not felt the magic of a voice,--
  Its spirit haunt him in romantic hours?
  Who hath not heard from Melody's own lips
  Sounds that become a music to his mind?--
  Music is heaven! and in the festive dome,
  When throbs the lyre, as if instinct with life,
  And some sweet mouth is full of song,--how soon
  A rapture flows from eye to eye, from heart
  To heart--while floating from the past, the forms
  We love are recreated, and the smile
  That lights the cheek is mirror'd on the heart!
  So beautiful the influence of sound,
  There is a sweetness in the homely chime
  Of village bells: I love to hear them roll
  Upon the breeze; like voices from the dead,
  They seem to hail us from a viewless world.

    [2] We know a reverend vicar who once took the trouble to count
    all the quotations from Scripture, which occurred in a charity
    sermon he had just printed: and his great satisfaction at the
    conclusion was, that his was indeed "a scriptural sermon."

       *       *       *       *       *


PERSECUTION OF THE JEWS.


We know it to be a fact, that a Jew, an artist of reputation, who had
conceived a great confidence in a Christian engaged in the promotion of
the conversion of the Israelites, revealed to him, that both he and his
brother had been Christians from their childhood from having been bred
up amongst Christians, but were too indignant at the treatment which
they and their brethren met with at Christian hands, to profess
Christianity; and he earnestly pleaded, as essential to their being
induced to receive the gospel, that those who participate in the attempt
should approach them with a language of decided affection for
Israel.--_Q. Rev._

       *       *       *       *       *


ABSENTEES


Soon become detached from all habitual employments and duties; the
salutary feeling of home is lost; early friendships are dissevered, and
life becomes a vague and restless state, freed, it may seem, from many
ties, but yet more destitute of the better and purer pleasures of
existence.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITINERANT OPERAS.


The first performance of the _opera seria_ at Rome, in 1606, consisted
of scenes in recitative and airs, exhibited in a _cart_ during the
carnival.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GAMUT.


Guido D'Arezzo, a monk of the 13th century, in the solitude of his
convent, made the grand discovery of counterpoint, or the science of
harmony, as distinguished from melody; he also invented the present
system of notation, and gave those names to the sounds of the diatonic
scale still in use:--_ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si_; these being the
first syllables of the first six lines of a hymn to St. John the
Baptist, written in monkish Latin; and they seem to have been adopted
without any special reason, from the caprice of the musician.--_Foreign
Rev._

       *       *       *       *       *

It is said that the first church was erected at Glastonbury; and this
tradition may seem to deserve credit, because it was not contradicted in
those ages when other churches would have found it profitable to advance
a similar pretension. The building is described as a rude structure of
wicker-work, like the dwellings of the people in those days, and
differing from them only in its dimensions, which were threescore feet
in length, and twenty-six in breadth. An abbey was afterwards erected
there, one of the finest of those edifices, and one of the most
remarkable for the many interesting circumstances connected with it. The
destruction of this beautiful and venerable fabric is one of the crimes
by which our reformation was sullied.--_Southey_.

       *       *       *       *       *


GHOST STORY, BY M.G. LEWIS.


A gentleman journeying towards the house of a friend, who lived on the
skirts of an extensive forest, in the east of Germany, lost his way. He
wandered for some time among the trees, when he saw a light at a
distance. On approaching it he was surprised to observe that it
proceeded from the interior of a ruined monastery. Before he knocked at
the gate he thought it proper to look through the window. He saw a
number of cats assembled round a small grave, four of whom were at that
moment letting down a coffin with a crown upon it. The gentleman
startled at this unusual sight, and, imagining that he had arrived at
the retreats of fiends or witches, mounted his horse and rode away with
the utmost precipitation. He arrived at his friend's house at a late
hour, who sat up waiting for him. On his arrival his friend questioned
him as to the cause of the traces of agitation visible in his face. He
began to recount his adventures after much hesitation, knowing that it
was scarcely possible that his friend should give faith to his relation.
No sooner had he mentioned the coffin with the crown upon it, than his
friend's cat, who seemed to have been lying asleep before the fire,
leaped up, crying out, "Then I am king of the cats;" and then scrambled
up the chimney, and was never seen more.

       *       *       *       *       *


RIDICULOUS MISTAKE.


A quantity of Worcestershire china being sent to the _Nawaab_ at
Lucknow, in India, from England, he was as impatient to open it as a
child would be with a new plaything; and immediately gave orders for
invitations to be sent to the whole settlement for a breakfast, _à la
fourchette_, next morning. Tables were accordingly spread for upwards of
a hundred persons, including his ministers and officers of state.
Nothing could be more splendid than the general appearance of this
entertainment; but the dismay may be more easily imagined than
described, on discovering that the servants had mistaken certain
utensils for milk-bowls, and had actually placed about twenty of them,
filled with that beverage, along the centre of the table. The
consequence was, the English part of the company declined taking any;
upon which the _Nawaab_ innocently remarked, "I thought that the English
were fond of milk." Some of them had much difficulty to keep their
countenances.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS


ENGLISH COUNTRY LIFE.


The country seats of England form, indeed, one of the most remarkable
features, not only in English landscape, but yet more in what may be
termed the genius and economy of English manners. Their great number
throughout the country, the varied grandeur and beauty of their parks
and gardens, the extent, magnificence, and various architecture of the
houses, the luxurious comfort and completeness of their internal
arrangements, and their relation generally to the character of the
peasantry surrounding them, justify fully the expression we have used.
No where has this mode of life attained so high a degree of perfection
and refinement. We will allude to two circumstances, amongst many
others, in illustration. The first of these is, the very great number of
valuable libraries belonging to our family seats. It has been sometimes
remarked as singular, that England should possess so few great public
libraries, while a poorer country, like Germany, can boast of its
numerous and vast collections at Vienna, Prague, Munich, Stutgard,
Goettingen, Wolfenbuttel, &c. The fact is partly explained by the many
political divisions and capitals, and by the number of universities in
Germany. But a further explanation may be found in the innumerable
private libraries dispersed throughout England--many of them equal to
public ones in extent and value, and most of them well furnished in
classics, and in English and French literature.

The other peculiarity we would name about our English country-houses is,
that they do not insulate their residents from the society and business
of active life; which insulation is probably a cause, why so many
proprietors in other countries pass their whole time in the metropolis
or larger towns. The facility and speed of communication in England link
together all places, however remote, and all interests, political and
social, of the community. The country gentleman, sitting at his
breakfast table a hundred miles from London, receives the newspapers
printed there the night before; his books come to him still damp from
the press; and the debates in parliament travel to every country-house
in England within fifty or sixty hours of the time when they have taken
place. The like facility exists as to provincial interests of every
kind. The nobleman or country gentleman is a public functionary within
his district, and no man residing on his estates is, or need feel
himself, unimportant to the community. _Quarterly Rev._

       *       *       *       *       *


FLOWERS.


When summer's delightful season arrives, rarely in this country too warm
to be enjoyed throughout the day in the open air, there is nothing more
grateful than a profusion of choice flowers around and within our
dwellings. The humblest apartments ornamented with these beautiful
productions of nature have, in my view, a more delightful effect than
the proudest saloons with gilded ceilings and hangings of Genoa velvet.
The richness of the latter, indeed, would be heightened, and their
elegance increased, by the judicious introduction of flowers and foliage
into them. The odour of flowers, the cool appearance of the dark green
leaves of some species, and the beautiful tints and varied forms of
others, are singularly grateful to the sight, and refreshing at the same
time. Vases of Etruscan mould, containing plants of the commonest kind,
offer those lines of beauty which the eye delights in following; and
variform leaves hanging festooned over them, and shading them if they be
of a light colour, with a soft grateful hue, add much to their pleasing
effect. These decorations are simple and cheap.

Lord Bacon, whose magnificence of mind exempts him from every objection
as a model for the rest of mankind, (in all but the unfortunate error to
which, perhaps, his sordid pursuit in life led him, to the degradation
of his nobler intellect), was enthusiastically attached to flowers, and
kept a succession of them about him in his study and at his table. Now
the union of books and flowers is more particularly agreeable. Nothing,
in my view, is half so delightful as a library set off with these
beautiful productions of the earth during summer, or indeed, any other
season of the year. A library or study, opening on green turf, and
having the view of a distant rugged country, with a peep at the ocean
between hills, a small fertile space forming the nearest ground, and an
easy chair and books, is just as much of local enjoyment as a thinking
man can desire--I reck not if under a thatched or slated roof, to me it
is the same thing. A favourite author on my table, in the midst of my
bouquets, and I speedily forget how the rest of the world wags. I fancy
I am enjoying nature and art together, a consummation of luxury that
never palls upon the appetite--a dessert of uncloying sweets.

Madame Roland seems to have felt very strongly the union of mental
pleasure with that afforded to the senses by flowers. She somewhere
says, "La vûe d'une fleur carresse mon imagination et flatte mes sens à
un point inexprimable; elle réveille avec volupté le sentiment de mon
existence. Sous le tranquil abri du toit paternel, j'étois heureuse des
enfance avec des fleurs et des livres; dans l'étroite enciente d'une
prison, au milieu des fers imposés par la tyrannie la plus revoltante,
j'oublie l'injustice des hommes, leurs sottises, et mes maux, avec des
livres et des fleurs." These pleasures, however, are too simple to be
universally felt.

There is something delightful in the use which the eastern poets,
particularly the Persian, make of flowers in their poetry. Their
allusions are not casual, and in the way of metaphor and simile only;
they seem really to hold them in high admiration. I am not aware that
the flowers of Persia, except the rose, are more beautiful or more
various than those of other countries. Perhaps England, including her
gardens, green-houses, and fields, having introduced a vast variety from
every climate, may exhibit a list unrivalled, as a whole, in odour and
beauty. Yet flowers are not with us held in such high estimation as
among the Orientals, if we are to judge from their poets.

