For example, column No. 4 (Table IV), or some other, one of the four,
may relate to Kan years; No. 1 to Muluc years; No. 2 to Ix years, and
No. 3 to Cauac years. Assuming this to be correct, then the example
heretofore given, where the days named are 1 Cib, 1 Ahau, 1 Kan, 1
Lamat, and 1 Eb, and the month the first (Pop), would indicate only the
years 7 Muluc, 3 Muluc, 12 Muluc, 8 Muluc, and 11 Muluc. These would all
come in Ahau No. VI, as before, but would indicate that the festival, or
whatever they referred to, occurred but once every four years, in the
first month of the year. Hence if the five days of a column (as of the
Manuscript Troano) are all taken from one side of the quadrilateral of
our scheme they will refer to years of one dominical sign only; if
alternately from opposite sides, then to the years of two dominical
signs, but if taken alternately from the four sides they would refer to
the four classes of years. This will reduce the number of dates in the
Manuscript Troano very considerably from the other supposition, but will
not in any way change the position of the Ahaues in the Grand Cycle.

As one further item of evidence in regard to this method of arranging
the twenty days of the month in four groups or columns, I call attention
to what is found on Plate 32 of the Dresden Codex. Here we find the four
columns of five days each, corresponding precisely with the arrangement
of the Maya days into four groups, as heretofore. I present here the
arrangement as found on this plate:

TABLE X.

   _a._         _b._         _c._       _d._
  Manik.      Cib.        Chicchan.   Ix.
  Chuen.      Ahau.       Muluc.      Ezanab.
  Men.        Kan.        Been.       Ik.
  Cauac.      Lamat.      Caban.      Cimi.
  Akbal.      Eb.         Ymix.       Oc.

It will be seen by comparing this grouping with that in Table IV that
column _a_ of this plate contains the same days as column 3 of the
table; column _b_ the same as column 4; column _c_ the same as column 1,
and column _d_ the same as column 2.

But so far have found no entirely satisfactory explanation of the order
given in many of these columns and in three of the sides of the
quadrilateral of the Cortesian plate.

As this discussion is preliminary to a discussion of the assignment of
the symbols of the cardinal points, it becomes necessary, in order to
bring in all the evidence bearing upon the question, to examine certain
points of the Mexican calendar system, as given by various authors and
as exhibited in the Mexican Codices.

If we refer now to Plate 43 of the Borgian Codex, as found in
Kingsborough's "Mexican Antiquities," Vol. III, a photo-engraved copy of
which is presented in our Fig. 4, we shall, as I believe, not only find
additional confirmation of the views I have advanced in reference to the
peculiar arrangement of the days around the quadrilateral in the plate
of the Cortesian Codex, but also strong evidence of a common origin of
the Mexican and Central American calendars.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Copy of plate 43. Borgian Codex.]

This plate of the Borgian Codex, which is Mexican and not Maya, consists
of four groups, the whole arranged in the form of a square; each group,
also a square, is surrounded by a serpent, the heads of the four
serpents being brought near together at the center, which is indicated
by the figure of the sun. Each of these serpents, as I have heretofore
intimated,[9] probably denotes one of the four-year series of the cycle
of fifty-two years, just as in the Maya cycle we would say "the Cauac
series," "Kan series," etc.[10] The thirteen years of each series, is
denoted by the small circles on the serpents. The four large figures
are, as we shall hereafter see, fanciful representations of certain
ideas held by this people in regard to the four cardinal points, each
probably with its significant color as understood by the artist, and
each probably indicating one of the four-year bearers.

But at present our attention is directed to something else to be found
on this plate. In each of the four spaces and around each of the large
figures we observe five Mexican day symbols connected usually with the
main figure by heavy-waved colored lines. What is the signification of
these day symbols in this connection? Precisely the same, I believe, as
those in the four sides of the quadrilateral in the Codex Cortesianus.
But first I would remark that the waved, colored, connecting lines have
no other signification than to denote the parts of the body to which the
days are here severally assigned; hence, as they have no bearing on the
questions now under discussion, I shall have no occasion to take any
further notice of them.

If we arrange the Mexican days in four columns as we did the Maya, that
is, placing the first name in the first column, the second in the second
column, and so on, following the usual orthography and the order given,
the groups will be as follows:

TABLE XI.

     1.            2.            3.            4.
  Cipactli.     Ehecatl.      Calli.        Cuetzpalin.
  Coatl.        Miquiztli.    Mazatl.       Tochtli.
  Atl.          Itzquintli.   Ozomatli.     Malinalli.
  Acatl.        Ocelotl.      Quauhtli.     Cozcaquauhtli.
  Ollin.        Tecpatl.      Quiahuitl.    Xochitl.

Or, to give them their English equivalents as we usually find them, as
follows:

TABLE XII.

    1.            2.            3.            4.
  Dragon.       Wind.         House.        Lizard.
  Snake.        Death.        Deer.         Rabbit.
  Water.        Dog.          Monkey.       Grass.
  Cane.         Tiger.        Eagle.        Vulture.
  Movement.     Flint.        Rain.         Flower.

Comparing these columns with the symbols around each one of these large
figures we find that to each one of the latter are assigned the days of
one of these four columns. In the lower left-hand square, to the large
green figure, those in column 1; thus, at the left foot, the Dragon; to
the back of the head, the Snake; to the eye, Cane; in the right hand,
Water; and below the elbow, but connected with the mouth, Ollin or
movement (sometimes translated earthquake). To the yellow figure, in the
lower right-hand square, are applied those of the second column; to the
black figure, in the upper right-hand square, those of the third column;
and to the red figure, in the upper left-hand square, those of the
fourth column. There is therefore scarcely any doubt that this
arrangement is for precisely the same purpose as that in the plate of
the Codex Cortesianus.

As proof that the Mexicans used these combinations in much the same way
as the Maya priests I call attention to the following examples:

On Plate 59, of the same (Borgian) Codex, we find two columns of days,
one on the right and the other on the left, as follows:

  _Left column._      _Right column._
   Tochtli.            Quauhtli.
   Ehecatl.            Atl.
   Cozcaquauhtli.      Calli.
   Itzquintli.         Ollin.
   Cuetzpalin.         Ozomatli.
   Tecpatl.            Coatl.
   Malinalli.          Quiahuitl.
   Miquiztli.          Acatl.
   Xochitl.            Mazatl.
   Ocelotl.            Cipactli.

Comparing these with the names in the four columns (Table XI), we find
that those on the left were taken alternately from columns 4 and 2, and
those on the right alternately from columns 3 and 1. On Plates 61 and 62
we find substantially the same arrangement, or at least the same idea as
the extract from Codex Peresianus, heretofore referred to. On these two
plates (embracing all of 61, and the lower left-hand square of 62) we
find five squares, each one bordered on two sides with the symbol of a
single day repeated thirteen times and accompanied by numeral signs.

Commencing with the square on page 62, where the repeated day symbol is
Cipactli, and reading the line from left to right and up the column, we
find the numbers to be as follows, filling out the effaced ones in the
line:

_Cipactli_, 1, 8, 2, 9, 3, 10, 4, 11, 5, 12, 6, 13, 7 (the symbol being
repeated with each number.)[TN-10]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Copy of Plates 51 and 52, Vatican Codex B.]

In the next, the lower right-hand square on Plate 61, where the day is
Coatl, the numbers, reading the same way, are as follows (filling out
one effaced one):

_Coatl_, 5, 12, 6, 13, 7, 1, 8, 2, 9, 3, 10, 4, 11.

Taking the lower left-hand square next, the day Atl, and reading in the
same direction, we find the numbers to be as follows (filling out two
effaced groups):

_Atl_, 9, 3, 10, 4, 11, 5, 12, 6, 13, 7, 1, 8, 2.

We take the upper left hand next, reading from left to right and up:

_Acatl_, 13, 7, 1, 8, 2, 9, 3, 10, 4, 11, 5, 12, 6.

Lastly, the upper right-hand square, reading the same way as the last.

_Ollin_, 4, 11, 5, 12, 6, 13, 7, 1, 8, 2, 9, 3, 10.

We have only to turn to our abridged calendar (Table III) to find this
explained. If we take the Ix column and select every fourth day, to wit,
Ix, Ezanab, Ik, Cimi, and Oc, and read the line of numbers opposite
each, we shall find them corresponding precisely with those mentioned
here. For instance, those opposite _Ix_ the same as those opposite
_Cipactli_, &c.

We further notice that these five names, _Cipactli_, _Coatl_, _Atl_,
_Acatl_, and _Ollin_, or, to use the English names, Dragon, Snake,
Water, Cane, and Movement, are precisely those of column 1 of the
arrangement of the Mexican days as heretofore given (Table XI).

On plates 13-17 of the Vatican Codex, B, Kingsborough, Vol. III, we find
precisely the same arrangement as that just described, and where the
numerals are so distinct that there can be no doubt in regard to any of
them. The days are exactly the same--Cipactli, Coatl, Atl, Acatl, and
Ollin--and in the same order, but the plates are to be taken in the
reverse, order, commencing with 17, and the columns and lines are to be
read thus: Commencing at the bottom at the right hand, upward to the
top, and then along the line toward the left.

On Plate 58 of the Borgian Codex we find six lines of days with five in
each line. Five out of these six lines are composed of the five days
just named, simply varied as to the respective positions they occupy in
the line, but maintaining the same order.

On Plate 17, same Codex, we see two lines corresponding with the first
and second columns of the arrangement of the days heretofore given.

But without further reference to these smaller or isolated groups, we
have conclusive proof of this method of arranging the days among the
Mexicans, in three extended series--one found on Plates 49-56 of the
Vatican Codex B; one on Plates 31-38 of the Borgian Codex, and another
on Plates 1-8 of the Bologna Codex.

I give here the arrangement found in the first, which is precisely the
same as that of the Borgian Codex, except that this is to be read from
the left to the right, and that of the Borgian Codex from the right to
the left, both commencing with the bottom line (numbered 5 in the
following list):

A photo-engraved copy of one plate of the former is also given in Fig.
5, as it furnishes proof that the days and the order in which they
follow each other are the same as I have given them.

For the benefit of English readers the list is given in the English
equivalents of the Mexican names.[11]

TABLE XIII.

  1. Water.      Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.
  2. Movement.   Flint.      Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.
  3. Snake.      Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.
  4. Cane.       Tiger.[12]  Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.
  5. Dragon.     Wind.       House.      Lizard.     Snake.

  1. Tiger.      Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.
  2. Wind.       House.      Lizard.     Snake.      Death.
  3. Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.
  4. Flint.      Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.
  5. Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.

  1. Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.       House.
  2. Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.        Monkey.
  3. Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.      Rain.
  4. House.      Lizard.     Snake.      Death.      Deer.
  5. Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.      Eagle.

  1. Lizard.     Snake.      Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.
  2. Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.      Eagle.      Vulture.
  3. Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.       House.      Lizard.
  4. Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.
  5. Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.      Rain.       Flower.

  1. Water.      Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.
  2. Movement.   Flint.      Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.
  3. Snake.      Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.
  4. Cane.       Tiger.      Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.
  5. Dragon.     Wind.       House.      Lizard.     Snake.

  1. Tiger.      Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.
  2. Wind.       House.      Lizard.     Snake.      Death.
  3. Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.
  4. Flint.      Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.
  5. Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.

  1. Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.       House.
  2. Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.        Monkey.
  3. Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.      Rain.
  4. House.      Lizard.     Snake.      Death.      Deer.
  5. Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.      Eagle.

  1. Lizard.     Snake.      Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.
  2. Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.      Eagle.      Vulture.
  3. Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.       House.      Lizard.
  4. Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.
  5. Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.      Rain.       Flower.

  1. Water.      Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.
  2. Movement.   Flint.      Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.
  3. Snake.      Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.
  4. Cane.       Tiger.      Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.
  5. Dragon.     Wind.       House.      Lizard.     Snake.

  1. Tiger.[13]  Eagle.      Vulture.    Movement.   Flint.
  2. Wind.       House.      Lizard.     Snake.      Death.
  3. Dog.        Monkey.     Grass.      Cane.       Tiger.
  4. Flint.      Rain.       Flower.     Dragon.     Wind.
  5. Death.      Deer.       Rabbit.     Water.      Dog.

  1. Rain.       Flower.
  2. Deer.       Rabbit.
  3. Eagle.      Vulture.
  4. House.      Lizard.
  5. Monkey.     Grass.

If we examine the columns of this list, we see that each one contains
the days of some one of the four columns of the arrangement heretofore
given; not always in precisely the same order, but the same days.

Without stopping to attempt a further explanation of this calendar or
_Tonalamatl_, which is not within the scope of our present purpose, I
merely remark that it is evidently a representation of the Mexican
"cycle of two hundred and sixty days," or thirteen months, the common
multiple of 4, 5, 13, and 20, and hence a cycle, at the completion of
which the day, numeral, &c. (except the month), will be the same as at
the beginning.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Published in 1882, as a memoir of the Société d'Ethnographie of
Paris.

[2] Rosny says by mistake "Planche VII-VIII."

[3] A study of the Manuscript Troano.

[4] As the reduction of the cut prevents the insertion of the names of
the days, letters have been substituted for them in the quadrilateral or
inner ring as follows:

_In the top line._--Ymix, _a_; Chicchan, _b_; Muluc, _c_; Been, _d_, and
Caban, _e_.

_In the left column._--Cimi, _f_; Ik, _g_; Oc, _h_; Ix, _i_, and Ezanab,
_j_.

_In the bottom line._--Akbal, _k_; Manik, _l_; Chuen, _m_; Men, _n_, and
Cauac, _o_.

_In the right column._--Kan, _p_; Lamat, _q_; Eb, _r_; Ahau, _s_, and
Cib, _t_.

[5] Study of the Manuscript Troano, p. 11.

[6] It is worthy of note that the numerals on the plate apply only to
the years 1 Cauac, 1 Kan, 1 Muluc, and 1 Ix, the first years of an
Indication or week of years.

[1][TN-7] _Manuscrit dit Mexicain No. 2._--The Bureau of Ethnology has
had the good fortune to obtain a copy of Duruy's photographic
reproduction of this Manuscript, of which, according to Leclerc
(Bibliotheca Americana), only ten copies were issued, though Brasseur in
his Bibliotheque Mexico-Guatémalienne (p. 95) affirms that the edition
consisted of fifty copies. The full title is as follows: "_Manuscrit dit
Mexicain No. 2 de la Bibliothèque Imperiale Photographie (sans
reduction). Par ordre de S. E. M. Duruy, Ministre de l'Instruction
publique, President de la Commission scientifique du Mexique._ Paris,
1864."

Rosny has given a _fac-simile_ copy from the two plates here referred to
in Plate XVI of his _Essai sur le Dechiffrement de l'Ecriture
Hieratique_.

[8] An illustration can be seen, on pp. 36-40, Study Manuscript Troano.

[9] Study Manuscript Troano, p. 86.

[10] Possibly each serpent represents one indication of thirteen years,
but the proper answer to this question is not important in the present
investigation.

[11] In order to accommodate the list to the paging it is divided into
sections, the second section to follow to the right of the first; the
third to the right of the second, and so on to the last, as though
extended continuously to the right. Those numbered 1 would then form one
continuous transverse line, as would also those numbered 2,3, 4 and 5
respectively.

[12] In the original, _Deer_, certainly an error.

[13] In the original, _Deer_.


PLATE 44 OF THE FEJERVARY CODEX.

As a connecting link between the particular topic now under discussion
and the consideration of the symbols of the cardinal points, I wish to
refer to one plate of the Fejervary Codex, to wit, Plate 44, a
_fac-simile_ of which is presented in Plate III:

A little careful inspection of this plate will suffice to convince the
reader that it was gotten up upon the same plan and for the same purpose
as the "Tableau des Bacab," or plate copied from the Codex Cortesianus,
which is reproduced in our Plate I.

The sacred tree or cross, which is represented but once in that plate,
and that in the central area, is here shown four times--once in each of
the four outer spaces opposite the four sides of the inner area.

It is true we do not find here the intermediate ring (or quadrilateral),
of clays, but these are not wanting, for the four groups, corresponding
with those on the four sides of the quadrilateral, are here found at the
four corners wedged in between the colored loops, one group of five at
each corner. The chief marked resemblance is to be found in the outer
looped line, in which the day characters are connected by rows of dots.
But here the lines and loops, although almost precisely in the form, and
relation, to each other as in the plate of the Cortesian Codex, are
variously and brightly colored, and the rows of dots are inclosed by
lateral lines.

Now for the proof that it is designed for the same purpose as the looped
line on the other plate. But it is necessary that I present first, in a
tabular form, a Mexican calendar (Table XIV) similar to the condensed
Maya calendar heretofore given.

I also give, immediately following, a list of Mexican days for thirteen
months, the number necessary to make the circuit of the plate, just as
the list of Maya days heretofore given. In this case I have used the
English equivalents of the Mexican words for the benefit of English
readers.

TABLE XIV.--Condensed Mexican calendar.

  ____________________________________________________________________
         |      |       |      |       _Numbers of the months._
         |      |       |      |______________________________________
  Tochtli|Acatl |Tecpatl|Calli |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
   years.|years.| years.|years.| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13
         |      |       |      |14|15|16|17|18|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
  -------+------+-------+------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--
    [ 1] | [ 6] | [11]  | [16] | 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7
    [ 2] | [ 7] | [12]  | [17] | 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8
    [ 3] | [ 8] | [13]  | [18] | 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9
    [ 4] | [ 9] | [14]  | [19] | 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10
    [ 5] | [10] | [15]  | [20] | 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11
    [ 6] | [11] | [16]  | [ 1] | 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12
    [ 7] | [12] | [17]  | [ 2] | 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13
    [ 8] | [13] | [18]  | [ 3] | 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1
    [ 9] | [14] | [19]  | [ 4] | 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2
    [10] | [15] | [20]  | [ 5] |10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3
    [11] | [16] | [ 1]  | [ 6] |11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4
    [12] | [17] | [ 2]  | [ 7] |12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5
    [13] | [18] | [ 3]  | [ 8] |13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6
    [14] | [19] | [ 4]  | [ 9] | 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7
    [15] | [20] | [ 5]  | [10] | 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8
    [16] | [ 1] | [ 6]  | [11] | 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9
    [17] | [ 2] | [ 7]  | [12] | 4|11| 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10
    [18] | [ 3] | [ 8]  | [13] | 5|12| 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11
    [19] | [ 4] | [ 9]  | [14] | 6|13| 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12
    [20] | [ 5] | [10]  | [15] | 7| 1| 8| 2| 9| 3|10| 4|11| 5|12| 6|13
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  [ 1] Cozcaquauhtli.                 [11] Miquiztli.
  [ 2] Ollin.                         [12] Mazatl.
  [ 3] Tecpatl.                       [13] Tochtli.
  [ 4] Quiahuitl.                     [14] Atl.
  [ 5] Xochitl.                       [15] Itzcuintli.
  [ 6] Cipactli.                      [16] Ozomatli.
  [ 7] Ehecatl.                       [17] Malinalli.
  [ 8] Calli.                         [18] Acatl.
  [ 9] Cuetzpalin.                    [19] Ocelotl.
  [10] Coatl.                         [20] Quauhtli.

This calendar begins the year _Acatl_ with Cipactli to correspond with
what I believe to have been the plan on which the Fejervary plate was
made; this, as will be seen, does not agree with what is generally
supposed to have been the usual method. The following table of days can
be used for either year, but commences as the Acatl years in the
preceding calendar.

[Illustration: PL. III Fac-simile of Plate 44, Fejervary Codex.]

TABLE XV.--A LIST OF MEXICAN DAYS FOR THIRTEEN MONTHS.

[The dark lines indicate the points where the months end.][TN-11]

    1. Dragon.       8. Dragon.        2. Dragon.        9. Dragon.
    2. Wind.         9. Wind.          3. Wind.         10. Wind.
    3. House.       10. House          4. House.        11. House.
    4. Lizard.      11. Lizard.        5. Lizard.       12. Lizard.
    5. Snake.       12. Snake.         6. Snake.        13. Snake.
    6. Death.       13. Death.         7. Death          1. Death.
    7. Deer.         1. Deer.          8. Deer.          2. Deer.
    8. Rabbit.       2. Rabbit.        9. Rabbit.        3. Rabbit.
    9. Water.        3. Water.        10. Water.         4. Water.
   10. Dog.          4. Dog.          11. Dog.           5. Dog.
   11. Monkey.       5. Monkey.       12. Monkey.        6. Monkey.
   12. Grass.        6. Grass.        13. Grass.         7. Grass.
   13. Cane.         7. Cane.          1. Cane.          8. Cane.
    1. Tiger.        8. Tiger.         2. Tiger.         9. Tiger.
    2. Eagle.        9. Eagle.         3. Eagle.        10. Eagle.
    3. Vulture.     10. Vulture.       4. Vulture.      11. Vulture.
    4. Movement.    11. Movement.      5. Movement.     12. Movement.
    5. Flint.       12. Flint.         6. Flint.        13. Flint.
    6. Rain.        13. Rain.          7. Rain.          1. Rain.
   [7. Flower.]     [1. Flower.]      [8. Flower.]      [2. Flower.]

    3. Dragon.      10. Dragon.        4. Dragon.       11. Dragon.
    4. Wind.        11. Wind.          5. Wind.         12. Wind.
    5. House.       12. House.         6. House.        13. House.
    6. Lizard.      13. Lizard.        7. Lizard.        1. Lizard.
    7. Snake.        1. Snake.         8. Snake.         2. Snake.
    8. Death.        2. Death.         9. Death.         3. Death.
    9. Deer.         3. Deer.         10. Deer.          4. Deer.
   10. Rabbit.       4. Rabbit.       11. Rabbit.        5. Rabbit.
   11. Water.        5. Water.        12. Water.         6. Water.
   12. Dog.          6. Dog.          13. Dog.           7. Dog.
   13. Monkey        7. Monkey         1. Monkey.        8. Monkey.
    1. Grass.        8. Grass.         2. Grass.         9. Grass.
    2. Cane.         9. Cane.          3. Cane.         10. Cane.
    3. Tiger.       10. Tiger.         4. Tiger.        11. Tiger.
    4. Eagle.       11. Eagle.         5. Eagle.        12. Eagle.
    5. Vulture.     12. Vulture.       6. Vulture.      13. Vulture.
    6. Movement.    13. Movement.      7. Movement.      1. Movement.
    7. Flint.        1. Flint.         8. Flint.         2. Flint.
    8. Rain.         2. Rain.          9. Rain.          3. Rain.
   [9. Flower.]     [3. Flower.]     [10. Flower.]      [4. Flower.]

    5. Dragon.      12. Dragon.        6. Dragon.       13. Dragon.
    6. Wind.        13. Wind.          7. Wind.          1. Wind.
    7. House.        1. House.         8. House.         2. House.
    8. Lizard.       2. Lizard.        9. Lizard.        3. Lizard.
    9. Snake.        3. Snake.        10. Snake.         4. Snake.
   10. Death.        4. Death.        11. Death          5. Death.
   11. Deer.         5. Deer.         12. Deer.          6. Deer.
   12. Rabbit.       6. Rabbit.       13. Rabbit.        7. Rabbit.
   13. Water.        7. Water.         1. Water.         8. Water.
    1. Dog.          8. Dog.           2. Dog.           9. Dog.
    2. Monkey.       9. Monkey.        3. Monkey.       10. Monkey.
    3. Grass.       10. Grass.         4. Grass.        11. Grass.
    4. Cane.        11. Cane.          5. Cane.         12. Cane.
    5. Tiger.       12. Tiger.         6. Tiger.        13. Tiger.
    6. Eagle.       13. Eagle.         7. Eagle.         1. Eagle.
    7. Vulture.      1. Vulture.       8. Vulture.       2. Vulture.
    8. Movement.     2. Movement.      9. Movement.      3. Movement.
    9. Flint.        3. Flint.        10. Flint.         4. Flint.
   10. Rain.         4. Rain.         11. Rain.          5. Rain.
  [11. Flower.]     [5. Flower.]     [12. Flower.]      [6. Flower.]

    7. Dragon.
    6. Wind.
    9. House.
   10. Lizard.
   11. Snake.
   12. Death.
   13. Deer.
    1. Rabbit.
    2. Water.
    3. Dog.
    4. Monkey.
    5. Grass.
    6. Cane.
    7. Tiger.
    8. Eagle.
    9. Vulture.
   10. Movement.
   11. Flint.
   12. Rain.
   13. Flower.

Although the Mexican equivalents of these names may be inferred from
what has already been given, I will insert the Mexican and English names
of the twenty days here, opposite each other.

TABLE XVI.

  _Mex._     _Eng._        _Mex._     _Eng._
   Cipactli (Dragon).       Ozomatli (Monkey).
   Ehecatl (Wind).          Malinalli (Grass).
   Calli (House).           Acatl (Cane).
   Cuetzpalin (Lizard).     Ocelotl (Tiger).
   Coatl (Snake).           Quauhtli (Eagle).
   Miquiztli (Death).       Cozcaquauhtli (Vulture).
   Mazatl (Deer).           Ollin (Movement).
   Tochtli (Rabbit).        Tecpatl (Flint).
   Atl (Water).             Quiahuitl (Rain).
   Itzcuintli (Dog).        Xochitl (Flower).

Examining the looped line, Plate III, we notice at each of the outer and
inner bends one of the day symbols. (In the plate of the Cortesian Codex
there are two.) We therefore take for granted that this is the _first_
day of the week, or indication of _thirteen days_, hence we should
commence with Cipactli (or Dragon). This we find at the upper right hand
corner of the inner square or right base of the large red loop. Judging
from the direction of the birds' heads and other facts heretofore noted,
we presume the direction in which we are to move is around toward the
left. Counting the day symbol as one, and each of the twelve dots up the
red line as one day, we come to the symbol in the upper right-hand
corner of the loop as the first day of the next week. This we find is
Ocelotl (Tiger), just as we find it to be in the calendar table and list
of days. Moving along the upper red line to the corner at the left we
find the next character is Mazatl (or Deer), agreeing exactly with the
calendar and list. Moving down the left red line to the inner corner we
come to the symbol for Xochitl (or Flower), also agreeing with the
calendar and list. Proceeding from thence up the white line we reach
next the symbol for the day Acatl (Cane) in the red circle surrounded by
a yellow line. Here we see a marked distinction between this and the
other day symbols we have named, a distinction which applies only to the
four at the corners--the four year symbols--_Acatl_, _Tecpatl_, _Calli_,
and _Tochtli_.

In order that the reader may compare the names in this looped line with
the calendar, I present here a scheme of it similar to that given of
the plate from the Cortesian Codex. The explanation given of the other
will enable him to make the comparison without further aid.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Scheme of Plate 44, Fejervary Codex.]

The numbers in the little circles at the corners and loops replace the
days of the original as follows: 1, Cipactli; 2, Ocelotl; 3, Mazatl; 4,
Xochitl; 5, Acatl; 6, Miquiztli; 7, Quiahuitl; 8, Malinalli; 9, Coatl;
10, Tecpatl; 14, Ozomatli; 12, Cuetzpalin; 13, Ollin; 14, Itzcuintli;
15, Calli; 16, Cozcaquauhtli; 17, Atl; 18, Echecatl;[TN-12] 19, Quauhtli;
20, Tochtli.

As before stated, the four groups of five day symbols are found wedged
in between the loops at the corners.

In the upper left-hand corner we see the following: Cipactli, Acatl,
Coatl, Ollin, and Atl (or, to give the English equivalents in the same
order, Dragon, Cane, Snake, Movement, and Water), the same as those of
column 1 of Tables XI and XII. In the lower left-hand corner, Ehecatl,
Itzcuintli, Tecpatl, Miquiztli, and Ocelotl (Wind, Dog, Flint, Death,
and Tiger), the same as column 2; in the lower right-hand corner,
Quauhtli, Calli, Ozomatli, Quiahuitl, and Mazatl (Eagle, House, Monkey,
Rain, and Deer), the same as column 3; and in the upper right-hand
corner, Tochtli, Cozcaquauhtli, Cuetzpalin, Malinalli, and Xochitl
(Rabbit, Vulture, Lizard, Grass, Flower), the same as column 4. But the
arrangement of the days in the respective columns, as in the "Table of
the Bacabs," varies from that obtained by placing the days of the month
in four groups, as heretofore explained.

