"Marster John Crawford, son of the distinguished William H. Crawford,
was my owner. Indeed, he was good to us. I'll tell you after awhile
about the time he wouldn't let the town marshal whip my mother. They
told me his wife was a fine woman and that she was as good to her slaves
as she could be. She died very young in life and Marse John's sisters,
Miss Fannie and Miss Susan, kept house for him after that. Marse John's
three children were Miss Fannie, Miss Rosa, and Marse Allie. Miss Rosa
married Marse Tom Golden, and Miss Fannie married a Gerdine; I've
forgotten his first name.

"Marse John may have had an overseer on one of his plantations, but I
don't remember. I do know he didn't have a carriage driver for he didn't
have a carriage. I don't believe I can describe the peculiar shape of
his fine eight-room house. It was on Dougherty Street, right back of
Scudder's School. The Crawfords were considered very uppity people and
their slaves were uppish too. Marse John didn't have many slaves and
they had to get up and get going early every morning. Marse John was
postmaster of Athens and had to be in his office by eight o'clock every
morning so he ordered that his breakfast be served regularly at
seven-thirty.

"No Mam, our white folks didn't teach their slaves to read and write
because it was against the law. However, they did read the Bible to us,
and the slaves that were smart enough, were asked to repeat the verses
they had learned from hearing Miss Fannie, Miss Sue, and Marse John
read. The Crawford children were caught teaching my mother to read and
write, but they were made to stop. Mother was quick to learn and she
never gave up. She would steal the newspapers and read up about the war,
and she kept the other slaves posted as to how the war was progressing.
She knew when the war was over, almost as soon as Marse John did.

"I don't recall any certain reason why the slaves were punished; they
needed it, I'm sure of that. Some folks need to be punished now. Miss
Sue, as we called her, whipped the slaves for misbehavior. I remember
one time there was quite a commotion. The town marshal came to our house
to whip my mother. It had been told that she had been writing letters,
asking people to buy whiskey from her, but Marse John wouldn't let the
marshal touch her. There was a jail, but I don't recall that any of
Marse John's slaves were ever put in there. I was told that his slaves
were, as a rule, well behaved and that they gave him no trouble.

"Yes Mam, we went to church, that is, those of us who cared to go did.
There wasn't any separate church for colored people in Athens, that I
can remember. We went to church and Sunday School at the First
Presbyterian Church, where the slaves were allowed to sit in the
gallery. I recall that Dr. Hoyt used to pray that the Lord would drive
the Yankees back. He said that 'Niggers were born to be slaves.' My
mother said that all the time he was praying out loud like that, she was
praying to herself: 'Oh, Lord, please send the Yankees on and let them
set us free.' I wasn't enough of a singer to have a favorite song, and I
was too happy playing with the Crawford children to be interested in
going to baptizings and funerals.

"I did go to my father's funeral. When he was taken sick Dr. Holt
attended his case, and it was not long before he told Marse John that
Father would never get well. When he died Mother hollered and screamed
something terrible. Miss Sue told her not to cry because, 'the Lord
knows best.' 'Yes, Miss Sue,' answered Mother, 'but you have never loved
a man to lose.' With that, they both cried. When anyone died in those
days, the people sat up all night and didn't go to bed until the funeral
was over. Now, no real sympathy is shown.

"I don't believe any of Marse John's slaves ever went to the war. He was
good to them and everyone of them loved him. I heard of patterollers
chasing slaves and whipping them if they were caught away from home
without a pass, and sometimes they locked them up. However, nothing of
the kind ever happened to any of Marse John's slaves. He was a highly
respected citizen and everyone in Athens knew better than to touch his
Negroes.

"After the work for the day was finished at the big house, the slaves
went to their quarters to weave cloth and sew, but when ten o'clock came
and the bell sounded, everything had to be quiet. Slaves on our place
worked Saturday afternoons the same as any other day. On Saturday nights
the young folks and a few of the older folks danced. Some of them got
passes from Marse John so they could visit around. They popped corn,
pulled candy, or just sat around and talked. Those of us who desired
went to Sunday School and church on Sundays; others stayed at home and
did their washing and ironing, and there was always plenty of that to be
done.

"Christmas was a grand time at Marse John's. We had everything good to
eat under the sun at that time and, as my mother was the cook, I was
sure of getting my share of the good things. Miss Fannie and Miss Sue
played Santa Claus to slave children. I was sorry when Mary got too
smart and peeped to see what it was all about, for after that they just
came to our house and handed us the things that would have come as Santa
Claus.

"New Year's Day was no different from other days, except that Marse John
gave the grown folks whiskey to drink that day like he did on Christmas
morning. They couldn't risk giving slaves much whiskey because it made
them mean, and then they would fight the white folks. They had to be
mighty careful about things like that in order to keep down uprisings.

"My mother went to cornshuckings, cotton pickings, and quiltings. They
must have had wonderful times, to hear her tell it. She said that after
the corn was shucked, cotton picked, or quilts quilted, they always gave
them plenty of good things to eat and drink and let them aloose to enjoy
themselves for the balance of the night. Those things took place at
harvest time, and everyone looked forward to having a good time at that
season. Mother said that Marse John was particular with his slaves, and
wouldn't let them go just anywhere to these things.

"About the only game I can remember playing as a child was a doll game.
The Crawford children would use me for the doll, and then when my turn
came to play mamma and claim one of them for my doll, Miss Fanny or Miss
Sue would appear and then I would have to be a doll for them. I didn't
mind, for I dearly loved them all.

"Now about Raw Head and Bloody Bones; I am going to tell you, Miss, my
Marster's people were cultured and refined, and they wouldn't allow such
things told to their own children or to their slaves' children. They
didn't want anything said or done to frighten any little children, and
if a nurse or anyone else was caught doing such a thing, that person was
punished for it. With the heritage of training like that I could hardly
be expected to believe in such things.

"Marse John was grand to sick slaves. He always sent for Dr. Moore, who
would make his examination and write out his prescription. When he left
his parting word was usually 'Give him a sound thrashing and he will get
better.' Of course he didn't mean that; it was his little joke. Dr.
Holt, Dr. Crawford Long, and Dr. Jones Long were sometimes called in for
consultation on particularly serious cases. We didn't like Dr. Moore and
usually begged for one of the other doctors. I don't think my white
folks used teas made of herbs, leaves or roots; they may have, but I
don't remember it. However, I do know that we wore little sacks of
asafetida around our necks to keep off diseases, and the white folks
wore it too.

"On the day we learned of the surrender, the Negroes rallied around the
liberty flag pole that they set up near where the city hall is now. All
day long they cut up and there was a song they sung that day that went
something like this:

  'We rally around the flag pole of liberty,
   The Union forever, Hurrah! Boys Hurrah!'

"Next morning when the Negroes got up the white folks had cut that pole
down. We were mortally afraid of the Yankees when they appeared here a
short time after the surrender. We were afraid of the Ku Klux Klan
riders too. The Negroes did act so bad; there were lots of killings
going on for a long time after the war was supposed to be over.

"Mother was glad and sorry too that she was free. Marse John had been so
good to all his slaves that none of them really wanted to leave him. We
stayed on a while, then mother left and rented a room. She worked hard
and bought a house as soon as she could; others did the same. There were
very few slaves that had any money at all to begin on.

"Immediately following the surrender northern people opened Knox
Institute. One of my teachers was Miss Dora Brooks, a white woman from
the North. The principal was a white man, he was Mr. Sortur. After I
graduated from Knox Institute, I went to the Atlanta University four
years, then came back to Athens and taught school here forty years. I
taught whatever grade they assigned me to each year, never any certain
grade from year to year. First and last, I've taught from first grade
through high school. I would be teaching now if it were not for my bad
health. I receive a teacher's pension, but have never applied for an old
age pension.

"My husband was Samuel B. Davis, publisher of the _Athens Clipper_. I
published this newspaper myself for a short while after his death, then
sold it. We didn't have a big wedding, just a very simple one at my
mother's house. I was married in a nice white dress, but it was nothing
fancy. Our two children were born dead. Once I had a nice home,
beautifully furnished. All I have left of it is this old house and my
good bedroom suite. The rest of my possessions have gotten away from me
during my continued illness.

"I often think of Abraham Lincoln; he did a good deed for my race. Jeff
Davis was a good man and, no doubt, he thought he was doing the right
thing. Booker T. Washington was a man of brilliant mind, but he was
radically wrong in many of his views pertaining to education of the
black race. He lectured here once, but I didn't bother to hear him
speak.

"Yes Mam, indeed I had rather be free. Oh! religion is glorious. If God
has set you free from the bonds and penalties of sin, I think you ought
to live up to your Lord's commands. I dearly love to go to church and
hear the preacher tell of God. It gives me strength to live until He is
ready for me to go.

"Now, Miss, I hope I have told you what you wanted to know, but I must
admit the things that took place way back there are rather vague in my
mind. I'm an old woman and my mind is not as clear as it once was. Next
week, if I am strong enough to make the trip, I am going to spend the
day with Mary Colbert, and go over the old times you and I have
discussed. She remembers them better than I do, because she is older."


Whitley
[HW: Unedited
Atlanta]
E. Driskell

EX-SLAVE MOSE DAVIS
[APR 8 1937]


In one of Atlanta's many alleys lives Mose Davis, an ex-slave who was
born on a very large plantation 12 miles from Perry, Georgia. His master
was Colonel Davis, a very rich old man, who owned a large number of
slaves in addition to his vast property holdings. Mose Davis says that
all the buildings on this plantation were whitewashed, the lime having
been secured from a corner of the plantation known as "the lime sink".
Colonel Davis had a large family and so he had to have a large house to
accommodate these members. The mansion, as it was called, was a great
big three-storied affair surrounded by a thick growth of cedar trees.

Mose's parents, Jennie and January Davis, had always been the property
of the Davis family, naturally he and his two brothers and two sisters
never knew any other master than "The Old Colonel".

Mr. Davis says that the first thing he remembers of his parents is being
whipped by his mother who had tied him to the bed to prevent his running
away. His first recollection of his father is seeing him take a drink of
whiskey from a five gallon jug. When asked if this was'nt against the
plantation rules "Uncle Mose" replied: "The Colonel was one of the
biggest devils you ever seen--he's the one that started my daddy to
drinking. Sometimes he used to come to our house to git a drink
hisself".

Mose's Father was the family coachman. "All that he had to do was to
drive the master and his family and to take care of the two big grey
horses that he drove. Compared to my mother and the other slaves he had
an easy time," said Uncle Mose, shaking his head and smiling: "My daddy
was so crazy about the white folks and the horses he drove until I
believe he thought more of them than he did of me. One day while I was
in the stable with him one of the horses tried to kick me and when I
started to hit him Daddy cussed me and threatned to beat me."

His mother, brothers, and sisters, were all field hands, but there was
never any work required of Mose, who was play-mate and companion to
Manning, the youngest of Colonel Davis' five sons. These two spent most
of the time fishing and hunting. Manning had a pony and buggy and
whenever he went to town he always took Mose along.

Field hands were roused, every morning by the overseer who rang the
large bell near the slave quarters. Women [TR: and] young children were
permitted to remain at home until 9 o'clock to prepare breakfast. At 9
o'clock these women had to start to the fields where they worked along
with the others until sundown. The one break in the day's work was the
noon dinner hour. Field hands planted and tended cotton, corn, and the
other produce grown on the plantation until harvest time when everybody
picked cotton. Slaves usually worked harder during the picking season
than at any other time. After harvest, the only remaining work was
cleaning out fence corners, splitting rails building fences and numerous
other minor tasks. In hot weather, the only work was shelling corn.
There was no Sunday work other than caring for the stock.

On this plantation there were quite a few skilled slaves mostly
blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, plasterers, and a cobbler. One of
Mose's brothers was a carpenter.

All slaves too old for field work remained at home where some took care
of the young children, while others worked in the loom houses helping
make the cloth and the clothing used on the plantation. Since no work
was required at night, this time was utilized by doing personal work
such as the washing and the repairing of clothing, etc.

On the Fourth of July or at Christmas Colonel Davis always had a
festival for all his slaves. Barbecue was served and there was much
singing and dancing. These frolics were made merrier by the presence of
guests from other plantations. Music was furnished by some of the slaves
who also furnished music at the mansion whenever the Col. or some of the
members of his family had a party. There was also a celebration after
the crops had been gathered.

Although there was only one distribution of clothing per year nobody
suffered from the lack of clothes because this one lot had enough to
last a year if properly cared for. The children wore one piece garments,
a cross between a dress and a slightly lengthened shirt, made of
homespun or crocus material [TR note: "crocus" is a coarse, loosely
woven material like burlap]. No shoes were given them until winter and
then they got the cast-offs of the grown ups. The men all wore pants
made of material known as "ausenberg". The shirts and under wear were
made of another cotton material. Dresses for the women were of striped
homespun. All shoes were made on the premises of the heaviest leather,
clumsely fashioned and Uncle Mose says that slaves like his father who
worked in the mansion, were given much better clothing. His father
received of "The Colonel" and his grown sons many discarded clothes. One
of the greatest thrills of Mose's boyhood was receiving first pair of
"ausenberg" pants. As his mother had already taught him to knit (by
using four needles at one time) all that he had to do was to go to his
hiding place and get the socks that he had made.

None of the clothing worn by the slaves on this particular plantation
was bought. Everything was made by the slaves, even to the dye that was
used.

Asked if there was sufficient food for all slaves, Uncle Mose said "I
never heard any complaints." At the end of each week every family was
given some fat meat, black molasses, meal and flour in quantity varying
with the size of the family. At certain intervals during the week, they
were given vegetables. Here too, as in everything else, Mose's father
was more fortunate than the others, since he took all his meals at the
mansion where he ate the same food served to the master and his family.
The only difference between Week-day and Sunday diet was that biscuits
were served on Sundays. The children were given only one biscuit each.
In addition to the other bread was considered a delicacy. All food stuff
was grown on the plantation.

The slave quarters were located a short distance below the mansion. The
cabins one-roomed weatherboard structures were arranged so as to form a
semi-circle. There was a wide tree-lined road leading from the master's
home to these cabins.

Furnishings of each cabin consisted of one or two benches, a bed, and a
few cooking utensils. These were very crude, especially the beds. Some
of them had four posts while the ends of others were nailed to the
walls. All lumber used in their construction was very heavy and rough.
Bed springs were unheard of--wooden slats being used for this purpose.
The mattresses were large ausenberg bags stuffed to capacity with hay,
straw, or leaves. Uncle Mose told about one of the slaves, named Ike,
whose entire family slept on bare pine straw. His children were among
the fattest on the plantation and when Colonel Davis tried to make him
put this straw in a bag he refused claiming that the pine needles kept
his children healthy.

The floors and chimneys on the Davis Plantation were made of wood and
brick instead of dirt and mud as was the case on many of the other
surrounding plantations. One window (with shutters instead of window
panes) served the purpose of ventilation and light. At night pine knots
or candles gave light. The little cooking that the slaves did at home
was all done at the open fireplace.

Near the living quarters was a house known as the "chillun house." All
children too young for field work stayed at this house in the care of
the older slave women. There was no hospital building on the premises.
The sick had to remain in their individual cabins where they too were
cared for by slaves too old for field work.

Only one family lived in a cabin. Mose's mother and father each had a
separate cabin. He did not explain the reason for this but said that he
was made to live in his father's cabin. Whenever he could, (usually when
his father was away with the Colonel for a day or two) he stayed in his
mothers cabin. "The only difference between the houses we lived in
during slavery and those that some of us live in now who said is that we
had more room there than we have now." He says that even the community
cook house was larger than some of the living quarters of today. All
cabins were white washed the same as the other buildings on the
plantation, and the occupants were required to keep the interiors and
the surrounding clean at all times. The overseer's cabin was located a
short distance away from the slave cabins, so that it would be easier
for him to keep check on his charges.

There was little if any sickness but Colonel Davis employed a doctor who
visited the plantation each week. On other occasions the overseer
administered such remedies as castor oil, turpentine, etc., and the
slaves had remedies of their own. For stomach ache they used a tea made
of Jimson weeds. Another medicine was heart leaf tea. Manual and
religious training were the only types allowed on the plantation. Trades
like carpentry, blacksmithing, etc. were learned from the white
mechanics sometimes employed by Colonel Davis. All slaves were required
to attend church and a special building was known as "Davis' Chapel." A
Negro preacher officiated and no white people were present. Uncle Mose
doesn't know what was preached as he and Manning always slipped into
town on Sundays to see the girls. Uncle Mose says he and Manning were
together so much that occasionally they even slept in the same
bed,--sometimes in Manning's house and sometimes at his own house.

A pool for baptism was filled with well water. The colored pastor
performed all baptisms and marriages.

Book learning was prohibited in any form. Sometimes Mose tried to
persuade Manning to teach him to read and write but Manning always
refused. Mose's cousin who was taught to read and write forged Colonel
Davis' name to a check and drew the money from the bank before the hand
writing was discovered. For this act he was given a sound whipping and
assigned to hard labor by the master, "And", said Uncle Mose, "he didn't
even have the pleasure of spending one penny". When asked if his cousin
was arrested and placed in jail he replied that the jails were not for
the slaves, as their punishment was usually left to their individual
masters. When his cousin was whipped this was an exception to "The
Colonel's rule"; he was entirely against any form of whipping. His usual
method of punishment was to cut off individual privileges for a limited
amount of time (in proportion to the nature of the offense), along with
an assignment of extra heavy work.

The fame of the "Paddle-Rollers" was widespread among the slaves, but
none of Colonel Davis' servants attempted to run away or leave the
plantation often without the required pass (if they did they were never
caught).

There was very little talk on the plantation about the actual beginning
of the Civil War. Slaves was very guarded in their talk as they feared
the master's wrath. Uncle Mose thought little or nothing about the War
and had even less to say.

When the Yankee soldiers came to the plantation they drove wagons to the
smoke house and took all the meat away. "The funny part about it was
that "The Colonel" had taken shelter in this particular house when he
saw the Yankees coming," said Uncle Mose. "He didn't have time to hide
any of his other belongings." When the soldiers had left, The Colonel
looked around and said to Manning and Mose: "Just like I get that, I
guess I can get some more."

Uncle Mose says that when freedom was declared, his father came rushing
to their cabin waving his arms like a windmill, shouting: "Boy we is
free--you can go and git yourself a job 'cause I ain't goin' to hitch up
no more horses". Some of the slaves remained on the plantation where
they worked for wages until their deaths. His father was one of them and
after his death, his mother moved to another plantation to live with
another son. Meanwhile Mose started traveling from place to place as
soon as he was told that he was free to go as he pleased. He paid one
visit to the plantation where he learned of his father's death. He then
asked Manning, who was operating the plantation, for the ox that had
belonged to his father and when Manning refused to part with this
animal, he made a secret visit back, that night, and took the animal
away. He has not been back since.

At this time Mr. Davis stretched himself, saying: "Well, I guess that's
about as straight as I can get it--Wish that I could tell you some more
but I can't." Smiling broadly, he bade the interviewer a pleasant
good-bye.


EX-SLAVE INTERVIEW

IKE DERRICOTTE, Age 78
554 Hancock Avenue
Athens, Georgia

Written by:
Miss Grace McCune
Athens

Edited by:
Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Athens

and
John N. Booth
District Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Residencies 6 & 7
Augusta, Georgia

August 19, 1938

[TR: One page of this interview was repeated in typescript; where there
was a discrepancy, the clearer version was used.]


Ike Derricotte's brown-painted, frame bungalow, well back from the
street, faces a wide grassy yard where tall pecan trees provide summer
shade and winter nuts.

A mulatto woman answered the knock at the front door. Her long,
straight, white hair was neatly arranged in a low-pinned coil at the
back of her head. Her print frock and white shoes were immaculate. "Yes
Mam, Ike is at home," was the answer to the inquiry for her husband.
"Jus' have a seat on de porch here 'cause it's so much cooler dan inside
de house, and I'll call Ike. He's jus' piddlin' 'round de back yard dis
mornin'."

Almost at once a tall, well-built man of gingercake color appeared. He
wore an old black cap, blue work shirt, blue wool trousers, and black
shoes. "Howdy-do, Miss! Did you want to see me?" was his greeting. His
eyes sparkled when he learned that we wished to record the story of his
life. "Yes Mam, I'll be glad to tell you what I kin," he promised, "and
Miss, I'll jus' bet I kin tell you somepin dat very few folks kin say
'bout dem old days. I was born right here on dis same street, and I'm
still livin' on it, but dis house and lot ain't my birthplace. When I
was born, dis section was mostly in woods. Jus' look at it now; houses
has been built up and down both sides of what was den jus' de big road.
Times has changed in lots of ways since dem days.

"My mother's name was Myra, and she was a laundry 'oman owned by Mr.
Stevens Thomas. Mr. Thomas was one of de biggest merchants in Athens dem
days. He owned de square between Thomas Street and Wall Street, and it
s'tended back to Clayton Street.

"William Derricotte was my father, and he belonged to Col. Robert
Thomas. My father spent most of his time beautifyin' de yards 'round de
big house, and in dese days and times he would be called a landscape
gardener. Dey jus' called 'em yard boys den. Atter Pa and Ma was
married, Marster Stevens sold Ma to Marster Robert, so dat dey could be
together. Mr. Robert Thomas' place was right up dis same old street,
whar de Y.W.C.A. is now, and right dar is whar I was born. Dat was in
1860, a long time ago; and lots of things has happened since den. Lots
of people has moved away and lots more has died out, 'til dere ain't
many of de folks left here dat lived in Athens den. De Thomases,
Dorseys, and Phinizys was some of de oldest families here.

"I was too little to know much about de war but, little as I was, dere's
one thing dat's still as fresh in my memory now as den, and dat's how
people watched and waited to hear dat old Georgia train come in. Not
many folks was able to take de papers den, and de news in 'em was from
one to two weeks old when dey got here. All de men dat was able to fight
was off at de front and de folks at home was anxious for news. De way
dat old train brought 'em de news was lak dis: if de southern troops was
in de front, den dat old whistle jus' blowed continuously, but if it
was bad news, den it was jus' one short, sharp blast. In dat way, from
de time it got in hearin', evvybody could tell by de whistle if de news
was good or bad and, believe me, evvybody sho' did listen to dat train.

"Times was hard durin' de war but from what I've heared de folks dat was
old folks den say, dey warn't near as bad here as in lots of other
places. Yes Mam! Sho' I kin 'member dem Yankees comin' here, but dat was
atter de war was done over. Dey camped right here on Hancock Avenue.
Whar dey camped was mostly woods den, and deir camp reached nearly all
de way to whar Milledge Avenue is now. Us chillun was scared to death of
dem soldiers and stayed out of deir way all us could. My Marster, Mr.
Stevens Thomas, hid all of his family's silver and other valuables dat
could be put out of sight, for dem Yankees jus' went 'round takin'
whatever dey wanted. Dey stole all kinds of food out of de homes, went
into de smokehouses and got hams, and cotched up de chickens. Dey jus'
reached out and tuk what dey wanted and laughed about it lak dey hadn't
been stealin'.

"Dem Yankees brought de smallpox here wid 'em and give it to all de
Athens folks, and dat was somepin awful. Folks jus' died out wid it so
bad. Dey built a hospital what dey called de 'pest house' out whar de
stockade is now. It was rough and small but I reckon it helped some. It
warn't near large enough for all de folks dat was sick wid smallpox at
one time, and so dey finally got to whar dey used it jus' for de colored
folks, 'cause it seemed dat smallpox went harder wid dem dan wid de
white folks.

"When de war ended us didn't leave Mr. Stevens Thomas. Ma kept on
cookin' and wukin' 'round de house, and Pa wuked lots for other folks,
larned to do brick-work, build walls, and things lak dat. Atter he got
to be a brickmason he allus had plenty to do.

"Marbles was de favorite game of de chillun dem days but us never got to
play much lak chillun does dese days, 'cause times was so hard right
atter de war dat as soon as chillun got big enough dey had to go to wuk.
Some of our very best times was at de old swimmin' hole. Us dammed up
dat little crick right back of whar de Seaboard Depot is now and it made
a fine pool to swim in. It was cool for it was shady off down dar in de
woods, and us spent many a hour dar on days as hot as dis one is. When
dey missed us at home, dat was de fust place dey thought of when dey
come to hunt us. I had some mighty good times in dat crick and I
couldn't begin to count de duckin's I got dar and de whuppin's my Ma and
Pa give me for stayin' so long.

"De biggest time in all de year was de Commencement Day; evvybody got
busy and fixed up for dat. My Marster allus had lots of company at
commencement times, and us had de most good things to eat. Out in town
dey was 'pared for it too. Tables was all along de sidewalks whar you
could buy any kind of 'freshments you wanted. Course dere warn't as many
kinds of 'freshments den as dey has now, but dere was allus plenty of de
strong sort. One time durin' commencement week, Ma give me a whole
quarter to spend. I was de happiest and de richest boy in dis town;
jus' had more money to spend dan anybody, and I walked de streets from
one table to another tryin' to see whar I was gwine to spend all dat
money." Here, Ike laughed heartily. "Miss," he said, "you jus' never
could guess what I spent all dat money for. I bought a whole quarter's
worth of ginger-cakes and lit out for de swimmin' hole. Us chillun had a
fine time down at de swimmin' hole dat day. De Cobbs and Lumpkins owned
all dat land in dar 'round our swimmin' hole den. Dey owned from de
Catholic Church straight through to College Avenue.

"I mighty well 'member de fust wuk I ever done. I was still jus' a
little fellow when Miss Belle Brumby told Ma she wanted me for a butler
boy and dat she would pay me $2.50 a month. I jus' jumped up and down
and begged her to let me wuk for Miss Belle. Why, I jus' knowed I would
git rich right away, 'cause $2.50 was a mighty lot of money." Ike
laughed as he said: "How many boys would wuk for dat pay for a week now,
let alone a whole month? Ma did let me wuk for Miss Belle and I was
happy, but I know my Mist'ess had a time wid me 'cause, when I got on
dat white coat dey let me wear to wait on de table, I knowed more dan
evvybody else put together and dere couldn't nobody tell me how to keep
de flies off de table. Miss Belle is one fine 'oman, dey jua' don't come
no finer and no better.

"When I was fourteen my Pa hired me out to be a shoemaker. De shop whar
I was 'prenticed was down on Broad Street, jus' about whar de Bernstein
Furniture Store is now. Dat old buildin' was tore down long years ago
and evvything 'long dar is changed now. De Athens Hardware Store is de
only Broad Street business of dem days dat has stood in de same place
and endured through all dese years.

"When I went to wuk for Mr. Joe Barry in his shoe shop on Jackson
Street, right in back of whar Mr. Lee Morris' store is now, I felt lak I
had got to be a real sho' 'nough important shoemaker. I wuked for him
'bout 12 or 14 years. He was a good man to wuk for and he was de only
shoemaker I ever knowed to git rich at his trade; he really did make
money in dat shop. I've been a shoemaker ever since 1874, but I never
have been able to git far ahead. In spite of all our trouble for 85
years atter de war, it seems to me dat times was much better den dan dey
is now. Course, folks didn't make as much den as dey does now.
Carpenters, bricklayers, shoemakers, in fact 'most any kind of laborers
who got from $1.00 to $1.50 a day thought dey had fine wages den. Boys
was paid from $2.50 to $5.00 a month. Cooks got $5.00 to $6.00 a month,
and of course, dey got deir meals whar dey wuked. Sometimes odds and
ends of old clothes was give to 'em, and dey got along very well, even
if most of 'em did have families and big families at dat. Folks could
live on less den 'cause things was cheaper. You could git meal for 50¢ a
bushel; side meat was 5¢ to 6¢ a pound; and you could git a 25-pound
sack of flour for 50¢. Wood was 50¢ a load. House rent was so cheap dat
you didn't have to pay over $3.00 a month for a 2 or 3 room house, and
lots of times you got it cheaper. Most evvybody wore clothes made out of
homespun cloth and jeans, and dey didn't know nothin' 'bout ready-made,
store-bought clothes. Dem clothes what dey made at home didn't cost very
much. Livin' was cheap, but folks lived mighty well in dem days.

"Us has been married more dan 50 years and dey has all been happy years.
Us has had our troubles and hard luck, but dey come to evvybody. De Lord
has been mighty good to us, 'specially in lettin' us be together so
long. It was what you might call a case of love at fust sight wid us. I
was visitin' down at Camak, Georgia at Christmastime. She lived at
Sparta, and was spendin' Christmas at Camak too, but I didn't see her
'til I was 'bout to leave for Athens. I jus' thought I never could go
'way atter I fust seed her, but I did, and I didn't git to see her again
for 12 long months. Us writ to one another all dat year and got married
at Christmastime, one year from de time us fust met.

"Us has still got dat old pen I used when I writ and axed her to marry
me; I'd lak to show it to you. 'Scuse me please whilst I goes in de
house to git it." Soon Ike returned. "Ain't it a sight?" he proudly
exclaimed as he displayed the relic. "I made it up myself in December
1886 and it got her consent to marry me, so I'se kept it ever since. My
wife and me wouldn't part wid it for nothin'." The wooden pen staff is
very smooth as though from long usage except at the tip end, where it
appears to have been gnawed. It looks very much as though Ike may have
chewed on it as he wrote that all important letter. The iron pen point,
much too large to fit the standard grooves of the ordinary pen staff,
was placed on the staff and tightly wrapped. After 52 years of service
the pen point and its staff are still in good condition. Ike has the
Prince Albert coat that he wore on his wedding day and he insists that
it looks and fits as well now as it did on the occasion of his marriage.
"I'm keepin' de coat and pen for our chillun," he declared.

Before resuming the conversation, Ike went back in the house to put the
treasured pen away. In a few moments he returned. "God has been good to
us," he said, "for He let us have all nine of our chillun 'til dey was
grown up. Us wuked mighty hard to raise 'em and give all of 'em a good
education. Dat was somepin us couldn't have when us was growin' up and
I'm thankful to be able to say dat us was able to send 'em all to
college. Four of our chillun has gone on ahead to de next world, and de
five dat's left is scattered from place to place; none of 'em is wid us
now, but dey don't forgit us. Dey writes to us and visits us often and
us goes to see dem. One son is goin' mighty well as a lawyer in
Washin'ton, D.C., and our baby lives in New York City. It's been 'bout 3
years now since my daughter Juliette died atter a automobile wreck near
Dalton, Georgia. Did you know 'bout Juliette? She give her life to wuk
for de Y.W.C.A., and she went all over de world tryin' to make things
better for de young women of our race. Somebody writ a memorial book
'bout her. I wish dere was a copy of dat book here for you to see, but
it was borrowed from us and it ain't been returned.

"Did you know I had jus' come back from Washin'ton, whar I visited dat
lawyer son of mine? He sends for me nearly evvy summer and I enjoy
visitin' dar, but I wouldn't lak to live up dar 'cause dem folks ain't
lak our own southern people. I must say dey is mighty nice and good to
me when I goes dar though. Once when I was dar somebody told me dat if I
wanted to have a good time I mustn't let nobody know I was a Georgian
'cause dey said dat de northerners don't lak our State. De rest of de
time I was dar on dat visit I tuk partic'lar pleasure in tellin'
evvybody how proud I was of my State and my home.

"Dat reminds me of Miss Sally Hodgson. She was in de North, and one
evenin' she was tryin' to tell de folks up dar dat de southern people
warn't as bad as some of de Yankees had said dey was, and dat de white
folks down South didn't mistreat de colored folks. Miss Sally said dat
de very next mornin' de papers up dar was full of news 'bout de lynchin'
of 8 Negroes in one night at Watkinsville. If you had knowed Miss Sally,
you would know how funny dat was," Ike laughed. "She said atter dat dere
warn't no way she could convince dem folks up dar dat Georgia was a good
place to live in.

"Us had some good friends in de North and sometimes dey comes down here
to see us. One of my wife's friends, a 'oman wid a lot of education has
jus' gone back to Philadelphia atter a visit here in our home. Us
travels a good deal and us has found dat de world ain't so large but dat
us is allus runnin' up against somebody dat us knows wherever us goes.

"Sometimes when you is in a strange place it's mighty handy to find
somebody you have knowed a long time ago. I 'member one time when I was
visitin' in Washin'ton and wanted to git a glimpse of de President. I
didn't say nothin' to nobody 'bout what was on my mind, but atter my son
went to his wuk in de mornin' I slipped off to de capitol widout tellin'
nobody whar I was gwine. I found a waitin' room outside de President's
office and I made up my mind I would set dar 'til de President had to go
out for dinner or to go home for supper. I never thought about he might
have a side door he could come and go from widout usin' de door to de
waitin' room. Atter I had set dar in dat waitin' room de best part of
two days watchin' for de President, somebody said: 'Howdy, Uncle Ike!
What is you doin' here in de President's waitin' room?' I looked up and
dar stood Albon Holsey. He had growed up in Athens. He was de boy dey
'signed to wait on President Taft when he was at Miss Maggie Welch's
home for a day and night in January 'fore he was inaugurated. I bet
Albon is still got dat $5.00 Mr. Taft give him de mornin' he left
Athens, but he don't need to spend it now 'cause folks say he got rich
off of his chain of stores for colored folks, and anyhow he's got a fine
job dese days. Well, I s'plained to Albon dat I was jus' waitin' to git
a peep at de President whenever he happened to pass through dat room.
Albon he smiled sort of wise-like. He tuk out one of his cyards and writ
sompin on it, and axed a lady to take it right in to de President. She
warn't gone 2 minutes 'fore she come back and said: 'De President will
see Mr. Holsey and his friend now.' I was wuss skeered dan I has ever
been at any other time in my life. Us walked in and I was 'fraid de
President could hear my knees knockin' together, and my heart was
beatin' so fast and loud it seemed to me lak it was 'bout to bust. De
President spoke to us and when he found out dat I was from Athens, he
axed me lots of questions. He said dat he was interested in Athens. Soon
Albon said us must be goin' and when us got out of dar I was right weak,
but I was might proud and happy to think de President had tuk time to
talk pleasant lak wid a pore old Negro shoemaker.

"Another time in Washin'ton a friend of my son's tuk me to a club one
night whar some of de richest of our race is members. Dat night I met a
man who had went to school wid de Mr. Teddy Roosevelt dat was President
atter Mr. McKinley; den I met another Negro dat had been a classmate of
President Hoover and one dat went to school wid President Franklin D.
Roosevelt. It's right strange how dey all heads for Washin'ton, D.C. to
stay.

"Athens has allus been a real quiet town, and dere never was no real
serious trouble here 'tween de races, not even when Matt Davis and Pink
Morton was Postmasters here. People was allus predictin' trouble 'bout
dat, but de folks here was too level-headed for dat. Dey knowed dey
could straighten out deir own troubles widout havin' to fly off de
handle in a race riot, and so dey 'tended to deir own business' and de
races got along all right through it all.

"Atter all, Athens is a good place to live in. Here us has de best
neighbors in de world; dey's allus ready to look atter one another in
times of sickness and trouble. Wid de kind of good, Christian folks dat
lives here, Athens is bound to go ahead."


PLANTATION LIFE

BENNY DILLARD, Age 80
Cor. Broad and Derby Streets
Athens, Ga.

Written by:
Grace McCune [HW: (white)]
Athens

Edited by: Sarah H. Hall
Athens

and
John N. Booth
District Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Residencies 6 & 7
Augusta, Ga.


Benny's rocky little yard is gay with flowers and a flourishing rose
vine shades the small porch at the front of his ramshackle two-room
cabin. The old Negro was busily engaged at washing his clothes. He is of
medium size, darker than gingerbread in color, and his clothing on this
day consisted of a faded blue shirt, pants adorned with many patches,
and brogans. A frayed sun hat covered the gray hair that is "gittin'
mighty thin on de top of my haid."

Benny was singing as he worked and his quavering old voice kept tune and
rhythm to a remarkable degree as he carefully and distinctly pronounced:

  "Jesus will fix it for you,
   Just let Him have His way
   He knows just how to do,
   Jesus will fix it for you."

Almost in the same breath he began another song:

  "All my sisters gone,
   Mammy and Daddy too
   Whar would I be if it warn't
   For my Lord and Marster."

About this time he looked up and saw his visitor. Off came the old sun
hat as he said: "'Scuse me, Missy, I didn't know nobody was listenin' to
dem old songs. I loves to sing 'em when I gits lonesome and blue. But
won't you come up on my porch and have a cheer in de shade? Dere's a
good breeze on dat little porch." Having placed a chair for the visitor
and made himself comfortable on a crude bench, Benny began his story:

"Missy, de good Lord gives and he takes away, and us old darkies is
a-passin' out of dis world. Dat was why I was a-singin'. One of my
bestest friends done passed on to Glory dis very mornin'. I knows I'se
goin' to miss old Randal Clayton 'cause both of us warn't no good but
for to set and talk 'bout old times." Tears rolled down his face as he
told of his friend, and the visitor, fearful that he was too much
overcome by grief to be able to give a good story, suggested that
another engagement be made to record his reminiscences, but he objected.
"Lawsy, Missy!" he protested. "Please don't go now, for dem old times is
on my mind today and I would so love to talk 'bout 'em now, if you don't
mind. If I talks too much, jus' tell me, 'cause I'se mighty apt to do
dat when onct I gits started.

"My Mammy and Daddy, dey warn't from dis part of de country. My Mammy
said dat not long atter she got to America from a trip on de water dat
took nigh 6 months to make, dey brung her from Virginny and sold her
down here in Georgy when she was jus' 'bout 16 years old. De onliest
name she had when she got to Georgy was Nancy. I don't know whar my
Daddy come from. Him and Mammy was both sold to Marse Isaac Dillard and
he tuk 'em to live on his place in Elbert County, close to de place dey
calls Goose Pond. Dey lived at home on dat big old plantation. By dat, I
means dat Marse Isaac growed evvything needed to feed and clothe his
folks 'cept de little sugar, coffee, and salt dey used. I don't 'member
so much 'bout times 'fore de big war 'cause I warn't but 6 years old
when us was made free. Tellin' de slaves dey was free didn't make much
diff'unce on our place, for most of 'em stayed right on dar and wukked
wid Old Marster jus' lak dey allus done. Dat plantation was jus' lak a
little town, it was so big and it had evvything us wanted and needed.

"Slaves lived in log cabins what had red mud daubed in de cracks 'twixt
de logs. De roofs was made out of boards what had so many cracks 'twixt
'em, atter a few rains made 'em swink (shrink), dat us could lay in bed
and see de stars through dem big holes. Even if us did have leaky
houses, folkses didn't git sick half as much as dey does now. Our
homemade beds was made out of rough planks nailed to high poles;
leastways de poles was high for de headpieces, and a little lower for de
footpieces. For most of dem beds, planks was nailed to de wall for one
long side and dere was two laigs to make it stand straight on de other
long side. Dey never seed no metal springs dem days but jus' wove cords
back and forth, up and down and across, to lay de mattress on. I never
seed no sto'-bought bed 'til atter I was married. Bedticks was made out
of homespun cloth stuffed wid wheatstraw, and sometimes dey slept on rye
or oatstraw. Pillows was stuffed wid hay what had a little cotton mixed
in it sometimes. Atter a long day of wuk in de fields, nobody bothered
'bout what was inside dem pillows. Dey slept mighty good lak dey was.
Dey fixed planks to slide across de inside of de holes dey cut out for
windows. De doors swung on pegs what tuk de place of de iron hinges dey
uses dese days. Dem old stack chimblies was made out of sticks and red
mud.

"De fireplaces was a heap bigger dan dey has now, for all de cookin' was
done in open fireplaces den. 'Taters and cornpone was roasted in de
ashes and most of de other victuals was biled in de big old pots what
swung on cranes over de coals. Dey had long-handled fryin' pans and
heavy iron skillets wid big, thick, tight-fittin' lids, and ovens of all
sizes to bake in. All of dem things was used right dar in de fireplace.
Dere never was no better tastin' somepin t'eat dan dat cooked in dem old
cook-things in open fireplaces.

"Chillun never had no wuk to do. Dey jus' et and frolicked around
gittin' into evvything dey could find. Dey never got no lickin's 'less
dey was mighty bad, 'cause our Marster said he warn't gwine to 'low no
beatin' on his Niggers 'cept what he done his own self, and dat was
pow'ful little. In hot weather chillun played on de crick and de best
game of all was to play lak it was big meetin' time. White chillun loved
to play dar too wid de little slave chillun. Us would have make-believe
preachin' and baptizin' and de way us would sing was a sight. One of dem
songs us chillun loved de best went lak dis:

  'Why does you thirst
   By de livin' stream?
   And den pine away
   And den go to die.

  'Why does you search
   For all dese earthly things?
   When you all can
   Drink at de livin' spring,
   And den can live.'

"When us started playin' lak us was baptizin' 'em, us th'owed all us
could ketch right in de crick, clothes and all, and ducked 'em. Whilst
us was doin' dat, us was singin':

  'Git on board, git on board
   For de land of many mansions,
   Same old train dat carried
   My Mammy to de Promised Land.'

"One day our Marster hid in de trees and watched us 'cause Mist'ess had
done been fussin' down 'bout chillun all comin' in soaked to de hide. He
waited 'til he seed all de preachin' and baptizin', den he hollered for
us to stop and he tuk de ones what was doin' all de baptizin' and made
'em pray and sing, den he ducked 'em good in de water and made us all go
up to de house to show Mist'ess how come so many of dem pore chillun
had done been gittin' wet so much. Us got a tannin' den dat Marster
'lowed would help us to git sho' 'nough 'ligion.

"De wooden bowls what slave chillun et out of was made out of sweetgum
trees. Us et wid mussel shells 'stid of spoons. Dem mussel shells was
all right. Us could use 'em to git up plenty of bread and milk, or
cornpone soaked wid peas and pot likker. Dey never let chillun have no
meat 'til dey was big enough to wuk in de fields. Us had biscuit once a
week, dat was Sunday breakfast, and dem biscuits was cakebread to us. De
fust bought meat us chillun ever seed was a slab of side-meat Daddy got
from de sto' atter us had done left de plantation, and us was skeered to
eat it 'cause it warn't lak what us had been used to.

"Chillun jus' wore one piece of clothes in summertime and dey all went
bar'foots. De gals' summer gyarment was a plain, sleeveless apron dress,
and de boys wore skimpy little shirts and nothin' else. Dey mixed
cow-hair wid de cotton when dey wove de cloth to make our winter clothes
out of, and I'm a-tellin' you Missy, dat cow-hair cloth sho' could
scratch, but it was good and warm and Marster seed to it dat us had all
de clothes us needed. De 'omans made all de cloth used on de place; dey
cyarded, spun, and den wove it. Mammy was de weaver; dat was all she
done, jus' wove cloth. Dey dyed it wid red mud and ink balls, and sich
lak.

"Marster never lakked to git up real early hisself in slavery time, so
he had one man what got de Niggers up out of bed so early dat dey had
done et breakfast and was in de field when daylight come. Atter de war
was over and evvybody was free, all de Niggers used to jus' piddle and
play 'round evvy mornin' whilst dey was waitin' for Marster to come. Dem
and de mules would be jus' a-standin' still and when de word was passed
dat Marster had done got up all of 'em would start off wid a rush, jus'
a-hollerin': 'Whoa, dar! Gee haw!' jus' lak dey had done been wukkin'
hard all mornin'. One day Marster cotch 'em at it, and he didn't say a
word 'til time come to pay off, and he tuk out for all de time dey had
lost.

"Sometimes slaves run away and hid out in caves. Dey would pile up rocks
and sticks and pine limbs to hide de caves, and sometimes dey would stay
hid out for weeks, and de other Niggers would slip 'em somepin t'eat at
night. Dere warn't many what run off on our place, 'cause our Marster
was so good to all of 'em dat dere warn't nothin' to run from.

"Marster made all his wuk tools at home. Plow-sheers was made out of
wood trimmed to de right shape and fastened to a iron point. When dey
was plowin' in de young cotton, dey nailed a board on one side of de
plow to rake de dirt back up 'round de cotton plants.

"Marster's gin was turned by a mule. Dat big old gin wheel had wooden
cogs what made de gin wuk when de old mule went 'round and 'round
hitched to dat wheel. Dat old cotton press was a sight. Fust dey cut
down a big old tree and trimmed off de limbs and made grooves in it for
planks to fit in. It was stood up wid a big weight on top of it, over de
cotton what was to be pressed. It was wukked by a wheel what was turned
by a mule, jus' lak de one what turned de gin. A old mule pulled de pole
what turned de syrup mill too. Missy, dem old mules done deir part 'long
side de Niggers dem days, and Marster seed dat his mules had good keer
too. When dem mules had done turned de mill 'til de juice was squez out
of de sugarcane stalks, dey strained dat juice and biled it down 'til it
was jus' de finest tastin' syrup you ever did see. Marster's mill whar
he ground his wheat and corn was down on de crick, so de water could
turn de big old wheel.

"Dem old cornshuckin's was sho' 'nough big times, 'cause us raised so
much corn dat it tuk several days to shuck it all. Us had to have two
generals. Dey chose sides and den dey got up on top of de biggest piles
of corn and kept de slaves a-singin' fast so dey would wuk fast. De fust
crowd what finished got de prize. Dere ain't much I can 'member of words
to dem old cornshuckin' songs. One general would start off singin':
'Shuck up dis corn, shuck up dis corn, 'cause us is gwine home,' and de
other general would be a-shoutin': 'Make dem shucks fly, make dem shucks
fly, us is gwine to go home.' Over and over dey kept on singin' dem
lines. Come nighttime Marster would have big bonfires built up and set
out torches for 'em to see how to wuk, and evvy time he passed 'round
dat jug of corn likker shucks would fly some faster. When all de corn
was done shucked and de big supper had been et, dere was wrastlin'
matches and dancin' and all sorts of frolickin'.

"'Til dey could git a colored preacher, slaves had to go to church wid
deir white folks. Missy, I 'members yit, de fust preacher I ever heared.
He was a white man, Preacher Gibson dey called him, and his sermons made
you mind what you was 'bout 'cause he preached straight from de Bible.
Dat day when I fust heared him his text was: 'If you gits lost in sin,
den you is lost from God's word, and will have to be borned again.'
Dat's de trufe, Missy, it sho' is. Young folks dese days is headed plumb
straight for 'struction, 'cause dey won't listen to de Gospel. If dey
don't change from de way dey is goin' now de old debbil is gwine to
ketch 'em sho. All of us had better mind what us is 'bout, for 'ligion
most times now is by our own minds and thoughts, and somebody else is
apt to follow de 'ligion he sees in us. De Bible says to teach young
folks de way dey should go, and dey won't depart from deir raisin'. You
sho' can't raise 'em right by jus' teachin' 'em dese days; it evermore
do take plenty of layin' on of dat rod. I would jus' lak to see how dese
young folks would lak it if dey had to ride for miles and miles in a
oxcart, or else walk it, to git to 'tend church. Dere wouldn't be many
of de ones I knows 'round here would git dar. Us used to have four
steers hitched to our old cart, and it was slow-goin', but us got dar.

"Atter us got our own churches us still had to have white preachers for
a long time and den us was 'lowed to have colored preachers. When
somebody wanted to jine our church us 'zamined 'em, and if us didn't
think dey was done ready to be tuk in de church, dey was told to wait
and pray 'til dey had done seed de light. Anybody can jine up wid de
church now, Missy, and it ain't right de way dey lets 'em come in widout
'zaminin' 'em. De good Lord sho' don't lak dat way of handlin' His
church business. One of dem cand-i-dates was a mean Nigger and our
preacher and deacons wouldn't let him in our church. Den he went over to
another church and told 'em dat he had talked wid de Lord 'bout how us
wouldn't let him jine up wid us, and he 'lowed dat de Lord said to him:
'Dat's all right. I done been tryin' to jine up in dat church for 15
years myself, and can't git in, so you go on and jine another church.'
Dat other church let dat bad Nigger in and it warn't long 'fore dey had
to turn him out, 'cause he warn't fittin' to be in no church.

"Our preacher used to give us parables. One of 'em was lak dis: 'I'se
seed good cotton growin' in de grass.' He 'splained it dat dere was some
good in de wust sinners. Another of his parables was: 'If you can't keep
up wid de man at de foot, how is you gwine to keep up wid de higher-up
folks?' Dat meant if you can't sarve God here below, how is you gwine to
git along wid him if you gits to Heben? Our preacher told us to sarve
both our marsters. De fust Marster was God, he said, and de other one
was our white marster.

"I ain't never been inside no courtroom and don't never 'spect to be
dar, 'cause, missy, I don't mind nobody's business but my own, and dat's
all I can do.

"No Mam, I don't never git much sick. I had a bad old haid cold last
winter, but I stopped dat wid coal oil and by breathin' in smoke from
scorched leather. Light'ood splinter tea is helpful when I has a chist
cold. Salts ain't de best thing for old folks to be doctored wid. I
takes common cookin' soda sweetened wid a little sugar. Dem is old-time
doses from way back in de old days, and I still use 'em all.

"Durin' of de war time, soda and salt was both hard to git. Dey biled
down de dirt from under old smokehouses to git salt, and soda was made
out of burnt corncobs. You would be s'prised to see what good cookin'
could be done wid dat old corncob soda.

"Us wukked for Mr. Green Hubbard de fust year us left de old plantation,
but he wouldn't pay us so us left him and rented some land to farm. Den
I went to wuk for Mr. Stephens and stayed wid him 25 years. He was one
of de owners of de Georgy Railroad and I used to drive for him when he
went to 'Gusty (Augusta) to dem board meetin's. He had one of dem
old-time gins what run by mule power, and us sho' did gin a heap of
cotton. Lots of times he had us to haul it all de way to 'Gusty on dem
wagons. Mr. Stephens' place was at Crawford, Georgy.

"Me and my gal runned away to git married. If you please, Mam, come
inside and look at her pitcher. Ain't she a fine lookin' gal? Well, she
was jus' as good as she looks. I keeps her pitcher hangin' right over my
bed so as I can look at her all de time." The small room was tidy and
clean. In one corner a narrow, single bed, neatly made, stood beneath
the picture of Benny's wife, Mary. The picture showed a young woman
dressed in white in the style of the period when tight waists and
enormous puffed sleeves were in vogue. An old washstand supporting a
huge mirror, a small table, evidently used as a dining table, two
chairs, a small cupboard filled with dishes, and a small, wood-burning
stove completed the furnishings of the room. Back on the porch again,
Benny resumed the story of his marriage.

"Her daddy wouldn't 'gree for us to git married 'cause he wanted her to
stay on and wuk for him. She warn't but seventeen. My boss-man let us
use his hoss and buggy and, Missy, dat fast hoss is what saved de day
for us. When I got to whar I was to meet her, I seed her runnin' down de
road wid her daddy atter her fast as he could go on foot. I snatched her
up in dat buggy and it seemed lak dat hoss knowed us was in a hurry
'cause he sho' did run. Squire Jimmie Green married us and when us got
back to my boss-man's house her daddy had done got dar and was a-raisin'
cane. Boss Stephens, he come out and told her daddy to git on 'way from
dar and let us 'lone, 'cause us was done married and dere warn't nothin'
could be done 'bout it. Us had a hard time gittin' started housekeepin',
'cause my daddy couldn't holp us none. Our bed was one of dem home-made
ones nailed to de side of de house. Us lived together 43 years 'fore de
Lord tuk her home to Heben 15 years ago. Dem 43 years was all of 'em
happy years. Since she's been gone I'se mighty lonesome, but it won't be
long now 'til I see her, for I'se ready to go whenever de Good Lord
calls me."


[HW: Atlanta
Dist. 5
Driskell]

THE EXPERIENCE OF GEORGE EASON IN SLAVERY TIME
[MAY 8 1937]


Mr. George Eason was born in Forsyth, Ga., on the plantation of Mr. Jack
Ormond. In addition to himself there were six other children, one of
whom was his twin brother. He and his brother were the oldest members of
this group of children. His mother, who was the master's cook, had
always belonged to the Ormond family while his father belonged to
another family, having been sold while he (George) was still a baby.

It so happened that Mr. Ormond was a wealthy planter and in addition to
the plantation that he owned in the country, he also maintained a large
mansion in the town.

The first few years of his life were spent in town where he helped his
mother in the kitchen by attending to the fire, getting water, etc. He
was also required to look after the master's horse. Unlike most other
slave owners who allowed their house servants to sleep in the mansion,
Mr. Ormond had several cabins built a short distance in the rear of his
house to accommodate those who were employed in the house. This house
group consisted of the cook, seamstress, maid, butler, and the wash
woman. Mr. Eason and those persons who held the above positions always
had good food because they got practically the same thing that was
served to the master and his family. They all had good clothing--the
women's dresses being made of calico, and the butler's suits of good
grade cloth, the particular kind of which Mr. Eason knows nothing about.
He himself wore a one-piece garment made of crocus.

Mr. Eason was about 7 or 8 years of age when he was first sent to work
in the field. It was then that his troubles began. He says that he was
made to get up each morning at sun-up and that after going to the field
he had to toil there all day until the sun went down. He and his fellow
slaves had to work in all types of weather, good as well as bad.
Although the master or the overseer were not as cruel as some he had
heard of they tolerated no looseness of work and in case a person was
suspected of loafing the whip was applied freely. Although he was never
whipped, he has heard the whip being applied to his mother any number of
times. It hurt him, he says, because he had to stand back unable to
render any assistance whatever. (This happened before he was sent to the
plantation.) When his mother got these whippings she always ran off
afterwards and hid in the woods which were nearby. At night she would
slip to the cabin to get food and while there would caution him and the
other children not to tell the master that they had seen her. The
master's wife who was very mean was always the cause of her receiving
these lashings.

Some nights after he and the other slaves had left the field they were
required to do extra work such as ginning cotton and shelling peas and
corn, etc. The young women were required to work that in some respects
was as hard as that the men did, while the older women usually did
lighter work. When the time came to pick the cotton all hands were
converted into pickers. Night was the only time that they had to do
their washing and to cultivate the small gardens they were allowed to
have.

During the months when there was little field work to do they were kept
busy repairing fences, etc. on the farm. Every day was considered a
working day except Sunday, Thanksgiving and Christmas. They were not
allowed to celebrate on these days as were the slaves on other nearby
plantations.

Clothing on the Ormond plantation was usually insufficient to satisfy
the needs of the slave. Each year one issue was given each slave. For
the men this issue consisted of 1 pair of brogan shoes, several homespun
shirts, a few pairs of knitted socks, and two or three pairs of pants.
The brogans were made of such hard leather until the wearers' feet were
usually blistered before the shoes were "broken in." The women, in
addition to a pair of shoes and some cotton stockings were given several
homespun dresses. On one occasion Mr. Eason says that he wore his shoes
out before time for an issue of clothing. It was so cold until the skin
on his feet cracked, causing the blood to flow. In spite of this his
master would give him no more shoes. All clothing was made on the
plantation except the shoes.

Those women who were too old for field work did the sewing in addition
to other duties to be described later.

Indigo was cultivated for dyeing purposes and in some instances a dye
was made by boiling walnut leaves and walnut hulls in water. In addition
to her duties as cook, Mr. Eason's mother had to also weave part of the
cloth. He told of how he had to sit up at night and help her and how she
would "crack" him on the head for being too slow at times.

The amount of food given each slave was also inadequate as a general
rule. At the end of each week they all went to a certain spot on the
plantation where each was given 1 peck of meal, 1 gal. of syrup, and 3
pounds of meat. They often suffered from that particular stomach ailment
commonly known as hunger. At such times raids were made on the
smokehouse. This was considered as stealing by the master and the
overseer but to them it was merely taking that which they had worked
for. At other times they increased their food by hunting and fishing.
Possums and coons were the usual game from such a hunting expedition.
All meals usually consisted of grits, bacon, syrup, corn bread and
vegetables. On Sundays and holidays the meals varied to the extent that
they were allowed to have biscuits which they called "cake bread." The
slaves made coffee by parching corn meal, okra seed or Irish potatoes.
When sufficiently parched any one of the above named would make a vile
type of coffee. Syrup was used for all sweetening purposes. The produce
from the gardens which the master allowed them could only be used for
home consumption and under no circumstances could any of it be sold.

The cabins that the slaves occupied were located on one section of the
plantation known as the "quarters." These dwellings were crude
one-roomed structures usually made from logs. In order to keep the
weather out mud was used to close the openings between the logs. In
most instances the furnishing of a cabin was complete after a bed, a
bench (both of which were made by the slave) and a few cooking utensils
had been placed in it. As there were no stoves for slave use all cooking
was done at the fireplace, which, like the chimney, was made of mud and
stones. One or two openings served the purpose of windows, and shutters
were used instead of glass. The mattresses on which they slept were made
from hay, grass or straw. When a light was needed a tallow candle or a
pine knot was lighted.

Absolute cleanliness was required at all times and the floors, if they
were made of wood, had to be swept and scrubbed often. In addition to
the private dwellings there was one large house where all children not
old enough to go to the field were kept. One or two of the older women
took charge of them, seeing that they had a sufficient amount of corn
bread, vegetables and milk each day. All were fed from a trough like
little pigs.

These old women were also responsible for the care of the sick. When
asked if a doctor was employed, Mr. Eason replied that one had to be
mighty sick to have the services of a doctor. The usual treatment for
sick slaves was castor oil, which was given in large doses, salts and a
type of pill known as "hippocat." (ipecac)

Although they were not permitted any formal type of learning religious
worship it was not denied them. Each Sunday Mr. Ormond required that all
his slaves attend church. All went to the white church where they sat in
back and listened to the sermon of a white preacher. Mr. Eason says that
the slaves believed in all kinds of and every conceivable type of signs.
Their superstitions usually had to do with methods of conjure.

A preacher was never used to perform a wedding ceremony on the Ormond
plantation. After the man told the master about the woman of his choice
and she had been called and had agreed to the plan, all that was
necessary was for the couple to join hands and jump over a broom which
had been placed on the ground.

Mr. Ormond permitted few if any celebrations or frolics to take place on
his farm. When he did grant this privilege his slaves were permitted to
invite their friends who of course had to get a "pass" from their
respective masters. They, too, were required to secure a pass from Mr.
Ormond if they wanted to visit off the premises. If caught by the
"Paddle Rollers" (Patrollers) without this pass they were soundly
whipped and then taken to their master.

At the beginning of the Civil War all the slaves talked among themselves
concerning the possible outcome of the war. However, they never let the
master or the overseer hear them because it meant a whipping.

When Sherman and his army marched through they burned all the gin houses
on the Ormond plantation and took all the available live stock. Mr.
Ormond took a few prized possessions and a few slaves (one of whom was
Mr. Eason) and fled to Augusta, Ga.

After freedom was declared he was still held in bondage and hired out by
the day. Once he ran away but was found and brought back. In 1867 the
remaining members of the Ormond family moved to Atlanta, bringing him
along with them. After most of them had died he was finally permitted to
go or stay as he pleased.

Immediately after freedom had been declared he had the good fortune to
find his father. However, he never got a chance to spend any time with
him as the Ormonds refused to release him.

Says Mr. Eason: "Slavery had a good point in that we slaves always felt
that somebody was going to take care of us." He says that he has heard
some wish for the good old days but as for himself he prefers things to
remain as they are at present.


PLANTATION LIFE AS VIEWED BY EX-SLAVE

CALLIE ELDER, Age 78
640 W. Hancock Avenue
Athens, Georgia

Written by:
Sadie B. Hornsby
Athens

Edited by:
Sarah H. Hall
Athens

Leila Harris
Augusta

and
John N. Booth
District Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Residencies 6 & 7
[JUN 6 1938]


Callie lives with her daughter, Cornelia, in a 6-room house near the
crest of a hill. Their abode is a short distance from the street and is
reached by steep stone steps. In response to the call for Callie, a tall
mulatto woman appeared. Her crudely fashioned blue dress was of a coarse
cotton fabric and her dingy head rag had long lost its original color.
Straight black hair, streaked with gray, and high cheek bones gave the
impression that in her ancestry of mixed races, Indian characteristics
predominate. Her constant use of snuff causes frequent expectoration and
her favorite pastime seems to be the endeavor to attain an incredible
degree of accuracy in landing each mouthful of the amber fluid at the
greatest possible distance. As she was about to begin conversation, a
little yellow boy about five years old ran into the room and Callie
said: "'Scuse me please, I can't talk 'til I gits my grandboy off so he
won't be late to school at Little Knox. Set down in dat dar cheer and
I'll be right back."

Soon Callie returned and it was evident that her curiosity was aroused.
When the interviewer explained the purpose of the visit, she exclaimed:
"Lordy! Miss, what is de government gwine do next? For de God's truth, I
never knowed I would have to tell nobody what happened back in dem days,
so its jus' done slipped out of my mind.

"Anyhow, I warn't even born in Clarke County. I was born in Floyd
County, up nigh Rome, Georgia, on Marse Billy Neal's plantation. Ann and
Washin'ton Neal was my Mammy and Pappy. No Ma'am, no preacher never
married 'em. Marse Billy Neal, he owned bofe of 'em and atter my Pappy
axed him could he marry Mammy, Marse Billy made 'em go up to de hall of
de big house and jump backwards over a broom.

"Dere was six of us chillun: me and Frances, Beulah, Thomas, Felix, and
Scott. Dere was mighty little wuk done by chillun in slav'ry days. I
jus' played 'round and kicked up my heels wid de rest of de chillun.
When us played our hidin' game, us sung somepin' lak dis:

  'Mollie, Mollie Bright
   Three score and ten,
   Can I git dere by candlelight?
   Yes, if your laigs is long enough!'

"Sometimes us played what us called de 'Crow' game. Us spread our
fingers out, side by side and counted 'em out wid a rhyme. De one de
last word of de rhyme fell on had to be de crow. I didn't love to be
counted out and made de crow, but it was a heap of fun to count de
others out. Since I been knee high to a grasshopper, I ain't never done
nothin' but wuk 'round white folks' houses.

"Our log cabins what us lived in was daubed inside and out wid mud to
keep out bad weather. Our beds was held together by cords what was
twisted evvy which way. You had to be mighty careful tightenin' dem
cords or de beds was liable to fall down. Us slept on wheat straw
mattresses and had plenty of good warm quilts for kiver.

"Grown folks was fed cornbread and meat wid plenty of vegetables in de
week days and on Sunday mornin's dey give 'em wheat bread, what was
somethin' slaves didn't see no more 'til de next Sunday mornin'. 'Bout
four o'clock on summer atternoons, dey sot a big old wooden bowl full of
cornbread crumbs out in de yard and poured in buttermilk or potliquor
'til de crumbs was kivered. Den dey let de chillun gather 'round it and
eat 'til de bowl was empty. In winter chillun was fed inside de house.

"'Possums, Oh, mussy me! My grandpa hunted 'possums at night and fetched
in two and three at a time. Don't say nothin' 'bout dem rabbits for dere
warn't no end to 'em. Rabbits stewed, rabbits fried, and rabbits dried,
smoked, and cured lak hog meat! I et so many rabbits when I was young I
can't stand to look at 'em now but I could eat 'possums and gnaw de
bones all day long. Marse Billy let grandpa go fishin' and he was all
time bringin' back a passel of minnows and other fishes. Us rubbed 'em
down wid lard and salt and pepper, den rolled 'em in cornmeal and baked
'em. I never seed no fried meat 'til I was a big strappin' gal. Dere was
one big gyarden whar dey raised 'nough vegetables for all de white folks
and slaves too. All de bilin' was done in pots swung on cranes over
coals in de fireplace.

"Our clothes was made new for us in de fall out of cloth wove in looms
right dar on de plantation. Top clothes was dyed wid hick'ry bark. De
full skirts was gathered to tight fittin' waisties. Underskirts was made
de same way. De dresses had done wore thin 'nough for hot weather by de
time winter was gone so us wore dem same clothes straight on through de
summer, only us left off de underskirts den. Slave chillun didn't never
wear no shoes. Our foots cracked open 'til dey looked lak goose foots.
Us wore de same on Sunday as evvy day, 'cept dat our clothes was clean,
and stiff wid meal starch when us got into 'em on Sunday mornin's.

"Marse Billie Neal was our owner and Miss Peggy was his old 'oman. Dey
was jus' as good to us as dey could be. Deir two chillun was Marse Tom
and Marse Mid. De car'iage driver never had much to do but drive Marse
Billy and Miss Peggy 'round and, course he had to see dat de hosses and
car'iage was kept clean and shiny. I don't 'member if he tuk de chillun
'round. Chillun didn't stand de show dey does now.

"Oh, no Ma'am, I sho' can't tell nothin' t'all 'bout how big dat old
plantation was, but it was one whoppin' big place. Dere was too many
slaves on dat plantation for me to count. De overseer got 'em up by 4:00
o'clock and de mens had to be in de fields by sunrise. De 'omans went
out 'bout 8:00 o'clock. Dey stopped wuk at sundown and by de time dey et
and done de chores for de day it was 10:00 o'clock 'fore dey hit de bed.
De cabins was built in a circle and de overseer went de rounds evvy
night to see if de slaves was in bed.

"Yes Ma'am, dey whupped de Niggers. My Pappy and grandpa was de wust
ones 'bout gittin' licked. Evvy time Pappy runned away Marse Billy
sicked dem hounds on his heels and dey was sho' to ketch him and fetch
him back. Dey had to keep knives from Pappy or when dem dogs cotch him
he would jus' cut 'em up so dey would die. When dey got him back to de
house, dey would buckle him down over a barrel and larrup him wid a
plaited whup. 'Omans warn't whupped much. My grandpa York was so bad
'bout runnin' 'way Marse Billy made him wear long old horns. One Sunday
Marse Billy went by our church to see if all his Niggers was dar what
was sposen to be dar. And dere grandpa was a-sottin' wid dem horns on
his head. Marse Billy told him he could take de horns off his head
whilst he was in de meetin' house. At dat grandpa dropped dem horns, and
lit a rag to de woods and it tuk de dogs days to find him.

"If one slave kilt another, Marse Billy made de overseer tie dat dead
Nigger to de one what kilt him, and de killer had to drag de corpse
'round 'til he died too. De murderers never lived long a-draggin' dem
daid ones 'round. Dat jus' pyorely skeered 'em to death. Dere was a
guard house on de farm, whar de wust Niggers was kept, and while dey was
in dat guard house, dey warn't fed but once a day. It warn't nothin'
unusual for Marse Billy to sell slaves, but he never sold his best
Niggers. De ones he sold was allus dem he couldn't git no wuk out of.

"Not a Nigger could read or write on Marse Billy's plantation. Dey was
all too dumb to larn. Dere was a shackly sort of church house on our
plantation and on Sundays atter de Niggers had cleaned deyselfs up, if
dey told Marse Billy dey wanted to go to church, he sent 'em on. All I
knows 'bout baptizin's is dey jus' tuk 'em to de river and plunged 'em
in. Dey sung somepin' 'bout: 'Gwine to de River for to be Baptized.' Us
had prayer meetin's on Wednesday nights sometimes.

"Oh, Mussy! Don't ax me 'bout fun'rals. I got de misery in my laigs and
I feels too bad dis mornin' to let myself even think 'bout fun'rals.
Back den when slave folks died dey jus' put 'em in home-made pine
coffins what dey throwed in a wagon and tuk 'em to de graveyard. At dem
buryin's, dey used to sing:

  'Am I born to die
   To let dis body down.'

"None of our Niggers ever runned away to de North. Dey was too busy
runnin' off to de woods. Jus' to tell de truth dem Niggers on our place
was so dumb dey didn't even take in 'bout no North. Dey didn't even know
what de war was 'bout 'til it was all over. I don't know whar to start
'bout dem patterollers. Dey was de devil turned a-loose. Dere was a song
'bout 'Run Nigger run, de patteroller git you!' and dey sho' would too,
I want to tell you.

"What de slaves done on Saddy night? Dey done anything dey was big
'nough to do. Dere warn't no frolickin' 'cept on Sadday night. Niggers
on our place wukked all day Sadday 'cept once a month. Some of de slaves
would slip off and stay half a day and de overseer wouldn't miss 'em
'cause dere was so many in de field. It was jus' too bad for any Nigger
what got cotched at dat trick. Sadday night, slaves was 'lowed to git
together and frolic and cut de buck.

"Christmas Day Marse Billy called us to de big house and give us a
little fresh meat and sweet bread, dat was cake. Christmas warn't much
diff'unt f'um other times. Jus' more t'eat. Us jus' had dat one day off,
and New Year's Day was used as a holiday too.

"Oh, dem cornshuckin's! All day 'fore a cornshuckin' dey hauled corn and
put it in great piles as high as dis here house. Us sung all de time us
was shuckin' corn. Dere was a lot of dem old shuckin' songs. De one us
sung most was: 'Whooper John and Calline all night.' Marse Billy, he
give 'em coffee and whiskey all night and dat made 'em git rough and
rowdy. Den de shucks did fly. Us had one more grand feast when de last
ear of corn had done been shucked. Dere warn't nothin' lackin'.

"Cotton pickin's warn't planned for fun and frolic lak cornshuckin's. If
Marse Billy got behind in his crops, he jus' sent us back to de fields
at night when de moon was bright and sometimes us picked cotton all
night long. Marster give de 'oman what picked de most cotton a day off,
and de man what picked de most had de same privilege.

"Old Aunt Martha what nussed de chillun while deir Mammies wukked in de
field was de quiltin' manager. It warn't nothin' for 'omans to quilt
three quilts in one night. Dem quilts had to be finished 'fore dey
stopped t'eat a bit of de quiltin' feast. Marse Billy 'vided dem quilts
out 'mongst de Niggers what needed 'em most.

"Dem blue and white beads what de grown 'omans wore was jus' to look
pretty. Dey never meant nothin' else. Mammy would skeer us down 'bout
Rawhead and Bloody Bones. Us was all time a-lookin' for him, but he
never got dar. What skeered us most was painters (panthers) a-howlin'
close to our cabins at night. You could hear 'em most any night. When
Mammy wanted to make us behave all she had to say was: 'I hears dem
painters comin'!' Dat made us jus' shake all over and git mighty still
and quiet. De mens tried to run dem painters down, but dey never did
ketch one.

"One of de cabins was allus ha'nted atter some of de slaves got kilt in
it whilst dey was fightin'. Nobody never could live in dat cabin no more
atter dat widout ha'nts gittin' atter 'em. De wust of 'em was a 'oman
ha'nt what you could hear sweepin' up leaves in de yard and all dat time
you might be lookin' hard and not see a leaf move. In dat cabin you
could all time hear ha'nts movin' cheers and knockin' on de wall. Some
of dem ha'nts would p'int a gun in your face if you met 'em in de dark.
Dem ha'nts was too much for me.

"Our white folks was good as dey knowed how to be when us got sick. I
don't 'member dat dey ever had a doctor for de slaves, but dey give us
all kinds of home-brewed teas. Pinetops, mullein and fat light'ood
splinters was biled together and de tea was our cure for diff'unt
ailments. Scurvy grass tea mixed wid honey was good for stomach
troubles, but you sho' couldn't take much of it at a time. It was de
movin'est medicine! Round our necks us wore asafetida sacks tied on
strings soaked in turpentine. Dat was to keep diseases off of us.

"What does I 'member 'bout de war? Well, it was fit to fetch our
freedom. Marse Billy had a fine stallion. When de sojers was comin', he
sont Pappy to de woods wid dat stallion and some gold and told him not
to let dem yankees find 'em. Dat stallion kept squealin' 'til de yankees
found him, and dey tuk him and de gold too. Grandma was a churnin' away
out on de back porch and she had a ten dollar gold piece what she didn't
want dem sojers to steal, so she drapped it in de churn. Dem yankees
poured dat buttermilk out right dar on de porch floor and got grandma's
money. Marse Billy hid hisself in a den wid some more money and other
things and dey didn't find him. Dey tuk what dey wanted of what dey
found and give de rest to de slaves. Atter de sojers left, de Niggers
give it all back to Marster 'cause he had allus been so good to 'em.

"Us stayed on wid Marse Billy for sev'ral years atter de war. He paid us
$10 a month and he 'lowanced out de rations to us evvy week; most allus
on Monday 'cause Sundays us had 'nough company to eat it all at one
time. He give us three pounds of fat meat, a peck of meal, a peck of
flour, 25¢ worth of sugar, and a pound of coffee. Dat had to last a
whole week.

"I didn't take in nothin' 'bout Abraham Lincoln, Jefferson Davis and dat
dar Booker T. Washin'ton man, but I heared folks say dey was all right.

"What is you talkin' 'bout Miss? I didn't need to have no big weddin'
when I married Lige Elder. It was a big 'nough thing to git a man lak
what I got. What did I want to have a big weddin' for when all I was
atter was my man? Us had done been married 25 years 'fore us had no
chillun. Dis here Cornelia what I lives wid was our first chile. She
ain't got no chillun. Isaac, my boy, has got four chillun. My old man
died 'bout two years ago.

"I j'ined de church 'cause I was happy and wanted de world to know I had
done got 'ligion. I think evvybody ought to git 'ligion. God says if us
do right he will give us all a home in His Heaven.

"I'd rather have de days as dey is now in some ways. But one thing I
does lak to do is eat and us had a plenty of good eatin' den and never
had to worry none 'bout whar it was a-comin' f'um. Miss, ain't you
through axin' me questions yet? I'm tired of talkin'. I done let de fire
go out under my washpot twice. Dem white folks ain't gwine to lak it if
dey has to wait for deir clothes, and dis misery in my laigs, it sho'
does hurt me bad dis mornin'."


MARTHA EVERETTE, EX-SLAVE
Hawkinsville, Georgia

(Interviewed By Elizabeth Watson--1936)
[JUL 20 1937]


Born in Pulaski County about 1848, the daughter of Isaac and Amanda
Lathrop, Martha Everette has lived all her life near where she was born.

Prior to freedom, her first job was "toting in wood", from which she was
soon "promoted" to waiting on the table, house cleaning, etc. She make
no claims to have ever "graduated" as a cook, as so many old
before-the-war Negresses do.

"Aunt" Martha's owner was a kind man: he never whipped the slaves, but
the overseer "burnt 'em up sometimes." And her mother was a "whipper,
too"--a woman that "fanned" her children religiously, so to speak, not
overlooking Martha. All the Watson slaves attended the (White) Baptist
church at Blue Springs.

Rations were distributed on Sunday morning of each week, and the slaves
had plenty to eat. The slaves were also allowed to fish, thus often
adding variety to their regular fare.

Negro women were taught to sew by the overseers' wives, and most of the
slaves' clothes were made from cloth woven on the plantation. The
Yankees visited the Lathrop plantation in '65, asked for food, received
it, and marched on without molesting anything or any body. Truly, these
were well-behaved Yankees!

"Aunt" Martha says that she remembers quite well when the Yankees
captured Jefferson Davis. She and other slave children were in the "big
house" yard when they heard drums beating, and soon saw the Yankees pass
with Mr. Davis.

"Aunt" Martha, now old and decrepit, lives with one of her sons, who
takes care of her. This son is a gardener and a carpenter and, being
thrifty, fares much better than many Negroes of his generation.


[HW: Dist. 5
Ex-Slave #30]
By E. Driskell
Typed by A.M. Whitley
1-29-37

FIRST COPY OF ARTICLE ENTITLED:
"AN INTERVIEW WITH LEWIS FAVOR," EX-SLAVE
[MAY 8 1937]

[TR: informant also referred to as Favors in this document.]


Among Atlanta's few remaining ex-slaves is one Lewis Favors. When he
fully understood this worker's reasons for approaching him he consented
to tell what he had seen and experienced as a slave. Chewing slowly on a
large wad of tobacco he began his account in the following manner: "I
was born in Merriweather County in 1855 near the present location of
Greenville, Georgia. Besides my mother there were eight of us children
and I was elder than all of them with one exception. Our owner was Mrs.
Favors, but she was known to everybody as the "Widow Favors." My father
was owned by a Mr. Darden who had a plantation in this same county. When
the "Widow's" husband died he left her about one-hundred acres of land
and a large sum of money and so she was considered as being rich. She
didn't have many slaves of her own and so her son (also a plantation
owner) used to send some of his slaves over occasionally to help
cultivate her crops, which consisted of cotton, corn, and all kinds of
vegetables."

In regard to her treatment of the slaves that she held Mr. Favors says:
"She wasn't so tight and then she was pretty tight too."

Those slaves who were field hands were in the field and at work by the
time it was light enough to see. They plowed, hoed, and then later in
the season gathered the crops. After the harvesting was over the fences
were repaired and rails were split. In rainy weather nobody had to work
out of doors, instead they shelled the peas and corn and sometimes
ginned the cotton. At night the women were required to spin and to
weave. In the winter season no work was required at night unless they
had not spun as much thread as was required. At such times they had to
work at night until the amount set had been reached.

Mr. Favor's mother was the cook for the "Widow Favors" and her two
neices who lived with her. The Favors had paid the owner of a hotel Four
hundred dollars to have the hotel cook teach her (Mr. Favors mother) to
prepare all kinds of fancy dishes. His father was a field hand on the
Darden plantation. In addition to this he repaired all the shoes when
this was necessary.

As a child Mr. Favors was not very strong physically and because of this
the "Widow" made him her pet. He never had to do any work other than
that of waiting on the mistress while she ate her meals. Even in this he
had to get up at four o'clock in the morning and help his mother in the
kitchen. Sometimes he would sweep the yards if he felt like doing so.
When he grew older he was given the task of picking the seed out of the
cotton at night.

On Sundays all the servants were free to do as they pleased, that is,
with the exception of Mr. Favors, his mother, and the two women who
serve as maids to the "Widow's" two neices. At other times if a task was
done before the day was over with they were given the remaining time to
do as they pleased. However, everybody had a one week holiday at
Christmas.

Mr. Favors made the following statement in regard to the clothing:
"Everybody wore the homespun cotton clothes that were made on the
plantation by the slave women. The women wore striped ausenberg dresses
while the men wore ausenberg pants and shirts that had been made into
one garment. My clothes were always better than the other little
fellows, who ran around in their shirttails because I was always in the
house of the "Widow." They used red clay to do the dyeing with. In the
winter time cracked feet were common. The grown people wore heavy shoes
called brogans while I wore the cast-off shoes of the white ladies. We
all wrapped our feet in bagging sacks to help them to keep warm. We
were given one complete outfit of clothes each year and these had to
last until the time for the next issue."

Sheets for the beds were also made out of homespun material while the
heavier cover such as the quilts, etc., were made from the dresses and
the other clothing that was no longer fit for wear.

As a general rule all of the slaves on this plantation had enough food
to keep them well and healthy. At the end of each week the field hands
were given enough food to last them seven days. For most of them the
week's supply consisted of three and one-half pounds of pork or fat
meat, one peck of meal, flour, and black molasses. The only meals that
they had to prepare from the above mentioned articles were breakfast and
supper. Dinner was cooked in the plantation kitchen by one of the women
who was too old for work in the fields. For this particular meal the
slaves had some different type of vegetable each day along with the fat
meat, corn bread, and the pot liquor which was served every day. They
were allowed to come in from the fields to the house to be served.
Breakfast usually consisted of fat meat, molasses, and corn bread while
supper consisted of pot-liquor, bread, and milk. The only variation from
this diet was on Sunday when all were allowed to have bisquits instead
of corn bread. Mr. Favors was asked what happened if anyone's food was
all eaten before it was time for the weekly issue and he answered: "It
was just too bad for them 'cause they would have to do the best they
could until the time came to get more." When such a thing happened to
anyone the others usually helped as far as their limited supplies would
permit.

Mr. Favors says that he, his mother, and the two maids ate the same kind
of food that the "Widow," and her nieces were served. After he had seen
to the wants of all at the table he had to take a seat at the table
beside his owner where he ate with her and the others seated there.

There were two one-roomed cabins located directly behind the four-roomed
house of the "Widow," the entire lot of them were built out of logs.
These two cabins were for the use of those servants who worked in the
house of their owner. At one end of each cabin there was a wide
fireplace which was made of sticks, stones, and dried mud. Instead of
windows there were only one or two small holes cut in the back wall of
the cabin. The beds were made out of heavy planks and were called
"Georgia Looms," by the slaves. Wooden slats were used in the place of
bed springs while the mattresses were merely large bags that had been
stuffed to capacity with hay, wheat straw, or leaves. The only other
furnishings in each of these cabins were several benches and a few
cooking utensils. Mr. Favors says: "We didn't have plank floors like
these on some of the other plantations; the plain bare ground served as
our floor." As he made this statement he reminded this worker that he
meant his mother and some of the other house servants lived in these
cabins. He himself always lived in the house with the "Widow Favors,"
who had provided a comfortable bed along with a small chair for his use.
These slaves who worked in the fields lived in several cabins that were
somewhat nearer to their fields than the other two cabins mentioned
above.

The remaining buildings on the Favors' plantation were the smokehouse
and the cook house where in addition to the cooking the younger children
were cared for by another old person. The woman who cared for these
children had to also help with the cooking.

Whenever any of the slaves were sick the doctor was called if
conditions warranted it, otherwise a dose of castor oil was prescribed.
Mr. Favors stated that after freedom was declared the white people for
whom they worked gave them hog-feet oil and sometimes beef-oil both of
which had the same effect as castor oil. If any were too ill to work in
the field one of the others was required to remain at the cabin or at
some other convenient place so as to be able to attend to the wants of
these so indisposed.

When Mr. Favors was asked if the servants on this plantation ever had
the chance to learn how to read or to write he answered: "They was all
afraid to even try because they would cut these off," and he held up his
right hand and pointed to his thumb and forefinger. At any rate the
"Widow," nieces taught him to read a few months before the slaves were
set free.

On Sunday all were required to attend the white church in town. They sat
in the back of the church as the white minister preached and directed
the following text at them: "Don't steal your master's chickens or his
eggs and your backs won't be whipped." In the afternoon of this same day
when the colored minister was allowed to preach the slaves heard this
text: "Obey your masters and your mistresses and your backs won't be
whipped." All of the marriages ware performed by the colored preacher
who read a text from the Bible and then pronounced the couple being
married as man and wife.

Although nobody was ever sold on the Favors plantation Mr. Favors has
witnessed the selling of others on the auction block. He says that the
block resembled a flight of steps. The young children and those women
who had babies too young to be separated from them were placed on the
bottom step, those in their early teens on the next, the young men and
women on the next, and the middle-aged and old ones on the last one.
Prices decreased as the auctioneer went from the bottom step to the top
one, that is, the younger a slave was the more money he brought if he
was sold.

Sometimes there were slaves who were punished by the overseer because
they had broken some rule. Mr. Favors says that at such times a cowhide
whip was used and the number of lashes that the overseer gave depended
on the slave owner's instructions. He has seen others whipped and at
such times he began praying. The only punishment that he ever received
was as a little boy and then a switch was used instead of the whip. If
the "Patter-Roller" caught a slave out in the streets without a pass
from his master they proceeded to give the luckless fellow five lashes
with a whip called the cat-o-nine-tails. They gave six lashes if the
slave was caught out at night regardless of whether he had a pass or
not.

As none of the slaves held by the "Widow" or her son ever attempted to
run away there was no punishment for this. However, he has heard that on
other plantations blood hounds were used to trail those who ran away and
if they were caught a severe beating was administered.

Sometime after the civil war had begun the "Widow Favors" packed as many
of her belongings as possible and fled to LaGrange, Georgia. He and his
mother along with several other slaves (one of whom was an old man) were
taken along. He never heard any of the white people say anything about
the war or its possible results. At one time a battle was being fought a
few miles distant and they all saw the cannon balls fall on the
plantation. This was when the journey to LaGrange was decided upon.
Before leaving the "Widow" had the slaves to bury all the meat, flour,
and other food on the plantation so that the Yankee soldiers would not
get it. Mr. Favors was given about two thousand dollars in gold currency
to keep and protect for his owner. At various intervals he had to take
this money to the "Widow". so that she might count it. Another one of
the slaves was given the son's gold watch to keep on his person until
the Yanks left the vicinity.

Before freedom was declared Mr. Favors says that he prayed all of the
time because he never wanted to be whipped with the cowhide, like others
he had seen. Further he says that it was a happy day for him when he was
told that he could do as he pleased because he realized then that he
could do some of the things that he had always wanted to do.

When freedom was declared for the slaves the Favors family freed slaves
valued at one-hundred and fifty thousand dollars. The live stock that
they sold represented a like sum. Mr. Favors and his mother remained
with the "Widow," who gave him his board in return for his services and
paid his mother twenty-five dollars per year for hers as cook.

"Even after the war things were pretty tough for us" stated Mr. Favors.
"The plantation owners refused to pay more than thirty or forty cents to
a person for a days work in the fields. Some of them would not allow an
ex-slave to walk in the streets in front of their homes but made them
take to the out-of-the-way paths through the woods to reach their
various destinations. At other times white men cut the clothes from the
backs of the ex-slaves when they were well dressed. If they didn't beg
hard enough when thus accosted they might even be cut to death!" After
the first three years following the war conditions were somewhat better,
he continued.

Mr. Favors says that his old age is due to the fact that he has always
taken good care of himself and because he has always refrained from
those habits that are known to tear a person's health down.


[HW: Dist. 6
Ex-Slave #28]

THE STORY OF AUNT MARY FERGUSON, EX-SLAVE
1928 Oak Street
Columbus, Georgia
December 18, 1936


"Aunt" Mary Ferguson, née Mary Little, née Mary Shorter, was born
somewhere in Maryland; the exact locality being designated by her simply
as "the eastern shore" of that state. She was born the chattel of a
planter named Shorter, so her first name, of course, was Mary Shorter.

For many years she has resided with a daughter and a granddaughter, at
1928 Oak Avenue, Columbus, Georgia.

"Aunt" Mary was about thirteen years old when, in 1860, she was sold and
brought South. The story of which, as told in her own words is as
follows:

"In 1860 I wuz a happy chile. I had a good ma an a good paw; one older
bruther an one older suster, an a little bruther an a baby suster, too.
All my fambly wucked in de fields, 'ceptin me an de two little uns,
which I stayed at home to mind. (mind--care for).

"It wuz durin' cotton chopping time dat year (1860), a day I'll never
fergit, when de speckulataws bought me. We come home from the fiel'
'bout haf atter 'leven dat day an cooked a good dinner, I hopin her. O,
I never has forgot dat last dinner wid my fokes! But, some-ow, I had
felt, all de mawnin, lak sumpin was gwineter hapin'. I could jes feel it
in my bones! An' sho nough, bout de middle of the even', up rid my young
Marster on his hoss, an' up driv two strange white mens in a buggy. Dey
hitch dere hosses an' cum in de house, which skeered me. Den one o' de
strangers said, 'git yo clothers, Mary; we has bought you frum Mr.
Shorter." I c'menced cryin' an' beggin' Mr. Shorter to not let 'em take
me away. But he say, 'yes, Mary, I has sole yer, an' yer must go wid
em.'

"Den dese strange mens, whose names I ain't never knowed, tuk me an' put
me in de buggy an' driv off wid me, me hollerin' at de top o' my voice
an' callin' my Ma! Den dem speckulataws begin to sing loud--jes to drown
out my hollerin.'

"Us passed de very fiel whar paw an' all my fokes wuz wuckin, an' I calt
out as loud as I could an', as long as I could see 'em, 'good-bye, Ma!'
'good-bye, Ma!' But she never heared me. Naw, nah, daz white mens wuz
singin' so loud Ma could'n hear me! An' she could'n see me, caze dey had
me pushed down out o' sight on de floe o' de buggy.

"I ain't never seed nor heared tell o' my Ma an' Paw, an' bruthers, an'
susters from dat day to dis.

"My new owners tuck me to Baltymore, whar dey had herded tergether two
two-hoss wagon loads o' Niggers. All o' us Niggers wuz den shipped on a
boat to Savannah, an' frum dar us wuz put on de cyars an' sont to Macon.

"In Macon, us wuz sold out, and Doctor (W.R.) Little, of Talbotton,
bought me at oxion (auction) an' tuck me home wid 'im. Den I wuz known
as Mary Little, instid of Mary Shorter."

In the continuation of her narrative, "Aunt" Mary said that the Littles
trained her to be a nurse. Before the war ended, she was inherited by
Mr. Gus (the late Hon. W.A.) Little.

She remembers that all the "quality", young white men who went to the
war from Talbotton took Negro men-servants (slaves) along with them.
These were usually called body-servants, and it was a body-servant's
duty to cook, wash, and do general valet service for his master. In a
pinch, he was also supposed to raid a hen roost, or otherwise rustle
food for his "white fokes".

According to "Aunt" Mary, the Little Negroes were very religious and
given to much loud praying and singing, which often so disturbed Dr.
Little that he gave orders for them to stop it, and also ordered that
all lights in the slave quarters be out at 9 o'clock each night.

"So us tuck to slippin' off to a big gully in de pastur to sing and pray
whar de white fokes couldn' hear us.

"My fust baby wuz bawned in 1862, during de secon' year o' de war. I has
had several husbants, my las' un, he died 'bout seventeen years ago.

"I ain't never seed but one hant in my life, an' I didn' know it wuz a
hant 'til Aunt Peggy (an old slave woman) tole me so. Dis hant was in de
shape o' a duck, an' it followed me one day frum de big house kitchen
ter de hawg pen whar I wuz gwine ter slop de hawgs. When I got back, I
said, 'Aunt Peggy, dar's a strange duck done tuck up wid us!' And she
say, 'hush, chile, dat's a hant!' I been seein' 'im fur severrel years!
An' dat sholy skeert me!"

When asked if she had ever been whipped when a slave, "Aunt" Mary
replied, "Yes, and thank God fur it, fur ole Miss taught me to be hones'
an' not to steal." She admitted that being whipped for stealing made her
an honest woman.

"Aunt" Mary's oldest child is now a man of 74. Her hair is as white as
cotton and her eye sight is dim, but she is still mentally alert. She
says that colored people are naturally religious and that they learned
all their "devilment" from the Whites. She deplores the wickedness into
which the world has drifted, but thanks God that slavery ended when it
did.

She has never had any particular love for the Yankees, and thinks that
they treated the Southern white folks "most scandalously" after the
war, yet feels that she owes them a debt of gratitude for freeing her
people. She admits that her awful hatred of slavery was born of her sad
experience as a girl when she was so unceremoniously separated from her
loved ones, as previously told. She is also of the firm opinion the
those "speculataws" who brought her from Maryland to Georgia in 1860 are
"brilin in hell fur dey sin" of seperating her from her people.

  Must Jesus bear the cross alone
  and all the world go free?
  No, there is a cross for every one;
  there's a cross for me;
  This consecrated cross I shall bear til
  death shall set me free,
  And then go home, my crown to wear;
  there is a crown for me.

Sung for interviewer by Mary Ferguson, ex-slave, December 18, 1936.


FOLKLORE INTERVIEW

CARRIE NANCY FRYER
415 Mill Street
Augusta, Georgia

Written by:
Miss Maude Barragan
Federal Writers' Project
Residency #13
Augusta, Georgia


An angular, red-skinned old Negro women was treading heavily down the
dusty sidewalk, leaning on a gnarled stick and talking to a little black
girl. A "sundown" hat shaded a bony face of typical Indian cast and her
red skin was stretched so tight over high cheek bones that few wrinkles
showed.

"Auntie," she was asked, "have you time to tell me something about
slavery times?" "No'm, I sorry," she answered, "but I gwine to see a
sick lady now, and I gots to 'tend to somepin'." "May I come back to see
you at your house?" "Yas'm, any time you wants. I live in de lil' house
on de canal, it has a ellum tree in front. I riz it from sapling. I name
dat lil' tree 'Nancy' so when I gone, folks kin come by and bow and say
'Howdy, Nancy.'"

She seated herself on a stone step and spread her many skirts of gray
chambray, hand-sewed with big white stitches. An old woman came by, her
shining black face puckered with anxiety, dressed in a starched white
uniform and a battered black hat, well brushed.

"Morning, Nancy," she said. "You look mighty peak-ked dis morning."

"Hunh!" grunted Nancy, "I oughter. I bin to see de mayor. I say 'Mr.
Mayor, here I is. I ain' got nuttin' to eat--it ain' right for a woman
my age to beg food. Now what yer gwine do 'bout it?' De mayor say:
'Auntie, you go right down to de welfare office at de Court House and
tell de lady I sont you to git somepin' to eat.' I done dat--dey promise
to send a lady, but I ain' see no lady yit." A heavy sigh rolled out. "I
didn' lef' skin of meat in my house or a piece of cornpone. But I didn'
take nuttin' to heart 'cause de Lord is my helper."

The old woman sighed too. "Yeah, Nancy, das de way dey does. I ain'
gwine keep nasty house for nobody. But white people's funny. Dey think
if you got clean house and bleachin' sheets you mus' have somepin' to
eat inside." She clenched her fist, and her voice rose. "I tells you
right now--I gwine keep my house neat jus' like I bin taught, ef I never
gits no somepin' t'eat and ain' got cornpone in de oven."

"A poor creeter come to my house today to beg for somepin' to eat," said
Nancy, "I ain' got nuttin' and I tell her so. She say she gwine to de
court-house too."

"T'won't do no good," answered the other woman. "Come over here, Nancy.
I wants to talk to you."

With a dignified excuse, Nancy creaked to her long length and moved
deliberately to the edge of the sidewalk. Whisperings followed, the
voices of the two old women rising in their excitement.

"I ain' gwine into somepin' I don't know nuttin' about."

"Nobody gwine 'swade me either."

"My husband didn' put no composin' on me. If I don't git but one meal a
day, I ain' gwine dirty. I didn' have mouthful t'eat in my house."

The interested eavesdropper decided that the welfare office had talked
social security to the women instead of direct relief, and they were
worried and suspicious about the matter. The old black woman was getting
angrier and angrier.

"If any of 'em lookin' for me to have nasty old tore-up house, I ain'
gwine did it. You dunno when sickness come. When my boy got his leg
broke up, soon as dey could, dey put him off on me. Miz' Powell say:
'Steve, if you don't be good to your ma, de Lord gwine take your
blessing from you.' Dey paid Steve $137.00, Nancy, and he ain't gimmie a
nickle! He spent it on a woman in Edgefield. But my gal is diffunt. If
she ain' got but one mouthful she gwine give me half."

Nancy nodded: "Dat like my gal too."

The old woman took up her complaint again: "Um got daughter. When you
walk in her house, you think dey is a white person's house. When I was
workin and able, I put down as many bleachin' sheets as any white
'oman."

Nancy's ponderous sigh rolled out. She was very "peaked" indeed on this
hot September morning. "If sister got a hoecake of bread, she gwine give
it to me. Ain' nobody else to help now--de Lord done come along and got
ev'y one of my mother's chillun but me."

Seeing that present necessities were too important to permit an
interview, the visitor said: "Nancy, I'll see you tomorrow." A
preoccupied goodbye followed the interviewer, and the excited
conversation rose again.

Three days later Nancy was found on the cluttered back porch of her
house by the canal. She was moving heavily about, picking up behind a
white boy and her bright-faced grandchild. Her face was still worried,
but her manner was warm and friendly.

"I knowed you'd be comin'," she said, smiling, "but I looked for you
yesterday." She sat down and settled herself for conversation, her long
hands, still nice looking in spite of rheumatism, moving nervously over
her gray chambray lap. "Dis las' gone August I was 72 years old," she
began, "my sister say I older dan dat, but I know I born las' year of de
war. I was born on governor Pickens' place, de Grove place fur out, and
my mother was Lizbeth Cohen. Must have was my father a Indian, he
brighter dan me, but redder. I kin' member Miss Dooshka Pickens, de one
what went to Europe. Dey put all de lil' chillun in a row for her to
look at, and she sittin' up on her lil' pony lookin' at us chillun. She
was a pretty thing, yeah, I knowed her well. After de war my mother and
father rented land, paid de rent. We liveded well. I would go to school
three months when we first gether all de krep (crop). We had a colored
teacher in de Baptist Church where dey taught school. De name was Spring
Grove.

"My father died and mother, she moved over in Ca-lina on General
Butler's place. She work in de fields. I wouldn' go to school but three
months in de year. When I growed up I work for Colonel Doctor McKie in
de house. He de fines' doctor I ever knowed. I got married to General
Butler's place where my mother was. I done had six chillun before I come
to Augusta. I nused to work for Dr. Sam Litchenstein, 17 years. He moved
to Louisville and dat thow me out anything to do. He tried to git me to
go down dere wid him but I fell in bad health. Den my daughter and dis
yere grandchild, I couldn' bear to leave dem. I cried when Dr. Sam lef',
he was good to me. I nused to carry dis grandchild to his house wid me
all de time."

As Nancy's plantation recollections seemed vague, she was prompted to
talk about remedies and cures and on these her mind worked with speed
and decision.

"I had high blood pressure so bad I couldn' walk right. My head nused to
spin, laying down all night, couldn' res. One night I doze off in my
sleep and a lady's spirit come to me. Her and my mother was two friends,
her name was Cyndie Gardenigh. She say: 'Honey, in de morning when you
git up, you git you some jimpson weed and put it wid cookin' salt and
bind it on your head.' I done det. I nused to have long hair to my
shoulder. Jimpson weed done cut my hair off, but it cured my blood
pressure. Mus' did kill 'em!"

Asked how she treated her rheumatism, Nancy replied:

"Git a pint glass wid a pint of kerosene in it, and a block of camphor.
Cut up de camphor and mix it round in de kerosene. Pat it on when de
pain come. When I got up dis morning, dis yere hand I couldn' move, and
now it feel a heap better. Lord, I done work so hard thoo' life, and all
done tuk from me!"

A moment's silence brought shadows to Nancy's face. A twinge in her knee
reminded her of rheumatism cures. She rubbed the painful spot and
resumed: "You know what I am wearin' on my leg now? I made me two lil'
bags and put a Irish potato in it, and when it drawed up jus' as hard as
a log it done me good. But you got to _steal_ two Irish potatoes, and
put around both legs jus' below de knee. I just' be leanin' back stiff
all de time, couldn' walk. A old white man told me about dat. He see me
walkin' along crooked and he say: 'Auntie, what's de matter?' I told
him. He say: 'Now, I'll tell you what cure me. I was off in a furn
(foreign) country, and a man say; me walking cripple, and he told me to
steal two Irish potatoes and wear 'em, and when dey git hard you burn
'em up.' I specked I bin crooked up all kind of fashion if I ain't done
dat: I always bind a piece of brass around my leg. Das' good like gold."

The eager grandchild was hanging over Nancy's shoulder, listening and
smiling. The white boy edged up, and Nancy laughed. "Hunh! I spects dese
chillun kin 'member tomorrow every word I tells you today. Dey knows
everything." Her bony arm encircled the Negro child. "Jooroosalom
oak--we got some and give it to dis lil' thing for worms. She went off
in a trance and never come out until 2 o'clock nex' day. I think we got
de wrong thing and give her root instead of seed. I never fool wid it no
more it skeered me so. Thought we had killed de child."

Nancy was asked what her methods were in raising children.

"Bin so long I mos' forgot," she said. "All my babies growed straight
'cause I swep' 'em 9 times for 9 mornings from de knees down on out,
dataway, and bathed 'em wid pot liquor and dish water. I ain' nused no
root cep' sassafax roots to make tea outten das good to purge your blood
in de spring of de year. Drinkin' water from a horse trough, I hearn'
tell das good for whoopin' cough and all lika-dat."

"Dat daughter of mine, she had a wen on her neck big as a apple. An old
lady come to me. 'I come to git my child today,' she say, 'a lady died
dis morning and I wants to take her dere.' Well I didn' want my child
gwine to de death house but she take her. De corpse ain' cold yit. She
put her 9 times across, nine times straight, and dat child was cured.
Yas'm, she got jus' as pretty face now! Ain' no use talkin', she
straighten my child, her and de Lord! De wen went and jus' pass away.
You got to do it before de corpse git cold, jus' after de breaf' pass
out of de body."

"I done mark three of my chillun. Yas'm, I ruin't three of 'em. I was
een de country and I was gwine thoo' de orchard, and de cherries was
scarce. I looked up in de man's cherry tree, and one tree was full of
fruit. Dey jus' as pretty! I say: 'Jim, please sir, give me one of dem
cherries.' Jim say: 'No!' I stood dere wishin' for dem cherries,
scratchin' my wrist, and my child born wid cherry on his wrist, right
where I scratch! I took de baby and showed him to old man Jim, and he
cry and pray over dat cherry and told me to forgive him and he never
would do it no more. But he done it den."

"I live in de country. I come to town where a white man was down here on
McKinne Street makin' dat soft white candy. I stood up and wished for
it. It did look so pretty and I wanted some so bad and I didn' have no
money. I was cryin', scratchin' my forehead over my right eye near de
hair. He didn' give me none. When my gal born, she had white mark right
on her forehead in de place I scratched."

"My sister-in-law made me ruin't my other child. Twas an old man coming
along. He was ruptured. He had on a white ap'on, and she bus' out
laughin' and say: 'Look at dat!' I jus' young gal, ain' be thinkin' and
I bus' out laughin' too, he did look funny. I ruin't my boy. He was in
de same fix and when I look at him I feel so bad, and think 'dat didn'
have to be.'"

"Dis kin happen: anybody see another person wid pretty hair and rub dey
hair down, dat child gwine have mustee hair too. A old black 'oman had a
baby. She seen somebody wid dat mustee hair (das what we calls black
folks wid smooth straight hair) and when her child born, everybody say:
'Look what dis baby got! Long black hair!"

Asked about persons born with cauls, Nancy grunted:

"Hunh! My mother said it cover my head, shoulders and all! I kin see
ghosts. Was a man lived right dere in dat house yonder. His name was
Will Beasley but we call 'im Bee. De fus' time he got sick he had a
stroke, den he git up. De doctor told him to be careful but he would go
out. One night about 8 o'clock I see him go. I stay sittin' here on dis
porch, and about 10 o'clock here come Bee out of his house, in his night
clothes out de open door and cross de yard. He go behind dat house. I
call out: 'Bee, I thought you was gone off? He didn' notice me no more
dan I never spoke. I got worried about him bein' sick and when he come
out from behind de house I say: 'Bee, you bes' be gwine indorrs, dress
lika-dat. You git sick again.' He walk straight back in de house. Pretty
soon here come Bee down de street, all dressed up in his brown pants and
white shirt! I grab de bannister just' a-tremblin' and de hair rizzed up
on my head. I knowed den he ain' got long for here. He come on by and
say: 'Nancy, how you feelin'?' I say: 'Bee, how long you bin out?' He
say: 'Why, I bin gone since 8 o'clock.' I didn't say nuttin' but I
knowed I seed his spirit and it was his death. He tooken sick two or
three weeks later jus' before Labor Day, and died all paralyzed up. A
woman come to my house and say: 'Nancy, give dis to Bee.' I didn' want
to see him if he dyin' but I went on over. I call: 'Bee! Bee!' He say:
'Who dat, you, Miz' Nancy?' I say: 'Here's a bottle of medicine Miss
Minnie sont you.' He say: 'I can't move my right side.' He was: laying
wid his leg and arm in the air: stiff as a board. He say: 'Miz Nancy?' I
say: 'Hunh?' He say: 'Go down de canal bank and tell my Minnie please
come and rub me 'cause she know how. I want my Minnie.' Das de 'oman he
bin livin' wid since his wife lef' him. I wait till de King Mill boys
come along and call 'em. 'Tell Miz' Minnie dat Will Bee want her to come
and rub him.' But she never did come till 12 o'clock and he was dead
before she come.

"I did had a niece what died. She was about 20 years old and a good
boy. Twas a year in August. I went on so over him, his mother say:
'Don't you know his last words was, 'I'm on my way to heaven and I ain'
gwine turn back?' Don't worry, Nancy.' But I did worry. Dat night he
come to me in spirit. He stand dere and look at me and smile, and he
say: 'Aunt, I am all right. Aunt, I am all right,' over and over. Den it
went off. I was jus' as satisfy den, and I never worry no more."

Nancy said she saw ghosts all through her childhood. She did not
characterize them as "hants" but spoke of them throughout as ghosts.

"I seed 'em when I was chillun," she said, "me and my sister one night
was comin' from spring. Twas in de winter time and jus' as cold, twas
dark and I had de light. Sister say: 'Babe, don't let dat light go out.'
Jus' den I seed it--a horse's head all spread out in fore! A big ball of
fire! I yelled: 'Oh, sister, look at de horse wid a head of fire!' She
knock me out for dead! She grab dat light and run home and lef' me in de
wood. When I come to I run to my mother crying and she say: 'Now Nancy,
you know you kin see 'em but you ought not to tell de other chillun and
skeer 'em. You mus' keep it to yourself.' Ever since den, I won't tell
nobody what I kin see. Yas'm, I wake up in de nighttime and see 'em
standin' all 'bout dis house. I ain' skeered--when you born wid de veil
it jus' be natchel to see 'em. Why, I sees 'em on de canal bank when de
fog sprangles through de trees and de shape forms on de ground'.

"I hears de death alarm too. One kind of call comes from out de sky, a
big howlin' noise, loud like singin'--a regular tune. De other kind goes
'hummmmmmm' like somebody moanin'. I was settin' down and de bull bat
come in de house. Me and de chillun done all we could to git him out de
house. A woman nex' door was name Rachel. I say: 'Rachel! Dere's a bull
bat in here and we can't get him out.' You know what she done? She turn
her pocket inside out and dat bat went out de door jus' like it come in!
Dat a simple thing to do, ain' it? But it done de work. Dat was on
Thursday night. Saturday morning I got de news that my babiest sister
was dead. One of my boys was wid her. I was settin' down wid my head
bowed, prayin', and a white man dressed in a white robe come in de house
and stood before me and say: 'Oh, yeah! I gwine take your sister! Den
what your child gwine do?' I sot down and studied and I said: 'Lord,
I'll do de bes' I kin.' And Miss you know I had to take dat child back!

"Before I los' my husband ev'y time he go out to work I couldn' hear
nuttin' but knockin'--ever he step out de house somebody come to de door
and knock four slow knocks. If he go off in de night it wouldn' stop
till he git back. I wouldn' tell him 'cause I knowed twould worry him. I
say: 'Sam, les' us move.' He say: 'Honey, we ain' long bin move here.'
But us 'cided to move anyway. Twas a big show in town. I let all de
chillun go to de show. Time I got my things fix up to move and went to
cook my dinner come de knockin' four times. I knowed he'd be took sick
pretty soon. He didn' 'low me to work. Dat was a good husband! I had six
chillun. He say: 'Honey, no! I workin' makin' enough to support you. All
I want you to do is keep dis house clean and me and my chillun, and I
will pay you de five dollars every week de white lady would pay you.'
And he done dat, gimme five dollars every week for myself.

"A white lady was crazy about my work, jus' her and her husband. I got
up soon one morning, time he left, and runned up dere and washed her
clothes and ironed dem. Den I started back home 'bout noon. I heared
somethin' walkin' behind me. 'Bip! Bip!' I look round and didn' see
nuttin'. I kep' a lookin' back and den I heard a voice moanin' and kind
of singing: 'Oh, yeah! I bin here and done took your mother. I bin here
and done took your sister! Now I'm a-comin' to take your husband!'
Talking to me like-dat in de broad open daytime! I say: 'No, you won't!
No, you won't!' I commence a runnin', cryin' inside. When I got home I
thow myself on de bed shiverin' and shakin'. Twas no dinner done dat
day. When he come home dat night he tooken sick and never got up again.
He knock on de head of de bed jus' like de knocks come at de door, when
he want me to go to him! He never lived but two weeks and went on to de
judgment!

"One night dey was givin' my husband toddy. He drink some and wanted me
to finish it. I told him no, I ain' drinkin' after no sick folks 'cause
it mean death. His first cousin tooked it and drank it. He was a fine
looking man in two months he was gone too!

"My husband come to me in spirit any time I git worried up. When I git
in trouble he'll come and stand over me wid his arms folded behind him.
He told me one night: 'You must pray, Nancy. You must pray! Um gwine
help, and de Lord gwine help you too.' Missy, how you reckon he gwine
help me if he dead? I ask de Lord and beg him to take me too, beg him to
please carry me home."

Nancy was becoming more and more doleful, and to take her mind from the
thought of her dead husband, she was asked about remedies.

"When us had de mumps mother git sardines and take de oil out and rub us
jaws and dat cure us good. Sassafax for measles, to run de numor (humor)
out de blood. When de fever gone, she would grease us wid grease from
skin of meat. Git fat light'ood, make fire, cut de skin off bacon meat,
broil it over flame and let grease drip into a pan, den rub us all over
for de rash. Couldn' wash us you see, 'cep' under de arms a little
'cause water musn' tech us. For a sty in de eye we nused to say: 'Sty!
Lie!' You see dat call 'em a lie and dey go on off. 'Um got a sty! Sty!
Lie!' When witches ride me I took a sifter. An old lady told me de nex'
time dey come, 'you put de sifter in de bed.' I done dat and dey ain'
bother me since. A basin of water under de bed is good too."

Nancy had an experience with a gold digger. He came to board, and had an
inconvenient habit of staying up all night. "I nused to have a old man
stay here wid me. One night I couldn' lay down it was so cold, so I sit
up and wrop in a blanket. He say: 'Nancy, see yonder! In de corner of
your yard is a pot of gold.' Now I knows if you go and git de money what
de dead done bury, you don't see no peace, so I told him he couldn' dig
in my yard. I made him move. A 'oman say he went to stay wid her and
when she got up one morning he had dug a hole in de yard big as a well,
so she runned him off too. He had all de implee-ments but he wouldn' let
nobody see him digging in de night. Well Miss, I knowed dat gold was
truly in my yard, because I got up one night and looked out dere, and a
white 'oman was standin' right where de old man say twas gold pot. I
look at de white lady, a high white lady, and she kep' her eye down in
dat corner guardin' de gold what she bury! Den I seed her go on off
thoo' de gate and I knowed twas de spirit of de woman what bury it."

Nancy did not remember any stories about witches, booger-men or animals,
but she did give a version of the story of the mistress who was buried
alive.

"Dat really did happen in Edgefield," she said. "Marster los' his
daughter and den his butler went to de cemetery and dugged her up. He
was gittin' de jewelries off of her finger when she moan; 'Oh, you
hurtin' my finger!' He runned back to de house and she got up out of de
coffin and went to de Big House. She knock on de door and her father
went, and he fainted. Her mother went, and she fainted. Everyone went to
de door fainted. But her father come to himself and he was so happy to
have his daughter back, he said God let de man dig her up and git her
out alive. He made dat nigger rich. Gin him a whole plantation and two
big carriage horses and a great big carriage and I dunno how much gold
and silver. Told him he didn' want him to do anything but sit down and
live off of what he gin him de res' of his life."

Nancy asked her visitor to write a postcard to her "dear doctor" in
Louisville and tell him she was having a hard time. She insisted that
the card be signed: "Your Carrie Fryer what used to work for you, with
love."

"Come back and see me some more," she begged wistfully, "I bin callin'
you in my mind all week."


PLANTATION LIFE

ANDERSON FURR, Age 87
298 W. Broad Street
Athens, Georgia

Written by:
Sadie B. Hornsby [HW: (white)]
Athens

Edited by:
Sarah H. Hall
Athens

Leila Harris
Augusta

and
John N. Booth
District Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Residencies 6 & 7


Anderson Furr's address led the interviewer to a physician's residence
on Broad Street, where she was directed to a small frame house on the
rear of the lot. The little three-room cottage has a separate entrance
from Pulaski Street. Three stone steps lead from the street to the
narrow yard which is enclosed by a low rock coping. Anderson rents only
one room and the remainder of the house is occupied by Annie Sims and
her husband, George, who works at the Holman Hotel.

Reclining comfortably in a cane-backed chair, with his walking stick
conveniently placed across his knees, Anderson was enjoying the shade of
a wide spread oak tree in the tidy yard. His costume consisted of a
battered old black felt hat, a dingy white shirt, dark gray pants, and
scuffed black shoes. Asked if he remembered the days when the North was
fighting the South for his freedom, Anderson replied: "'Member fightin'!
Why, Lady! Dey ain't never stopped fightin' yit. Folks has been
a-fightin' ever since I come in dis world, and dey will be fightin' long
atter I is gone.

"I dis'members what was de name of de town whar I was borned, but it was
in Hall County. Lydia and Earl Strickland was my Ma and Pa. All of deir
chillun is daid now 'cept me and Bob. De others was: Abe, Bill, Jim,
and Sarah. Dere ain't much to tell 'bout what us done dem days, 'cept
play and eat. Dem what was big 'nough had to wuk.

"Lordy, Miss! It's lak dis: I is a old Nigger, and I done been here for
many years, but dese last few years I sho' has been a sick man, and now
I can't git things straight in my mind lak dey was den. I knows us lived
in log houses what had great big chimblies made out of sticks and mud.
Why, dem fireplaces was 'bout eight feet wide, and you could put a whole
stick of cord wood on de fire. Us slept on high-up old timey beds what
had big posties and instead of springs, dey had stout cords wove 'cross
to hold de mattress. De last time I slept on one of dem sort of beds was
when I was a little boy, sleepin' wid my Ma. Pa and Ma was both field
hands. Ma's mammy was de onliest one of my grandmas I ever seed. Her
name was Ca'line and she lived wid Grandpa Abe on another plantation.
Ma's sister, my aunt Ca'line was cook up at our Old Marster's big house.

"Money? Yessum! Dey gimme a little money now and den for totin' water to
de field, sweepin' de yards, and a million other things dey used to make
me do. De most dey ever gimme was 50 cents. I never spent none of it,
but jus' turned it over to my Ma. Chillun warn't 'lowed to spend money
den lak dey does now, 'cause dey had evvything dey needed anyhow. Old
Marster, he give us plenty somepin t'eat, such as it was. Dere was lots
of cornbread, a little meat now and den, collards, whip-poor-will peas
and dem unknown peas what was most big as a dime, and black 'lasses--dat
was lallyho.

"Us cotch lots of 'possums, but mighty few of 'em us Niggers ever got a
chance to eat, or rabbits neither. Dey made Niggers go out and hunt 'em
and de white folks et 'em. Our mouths would water for some of dat
'possum but it warn't often dey let us have none. I don't know nothin'
'bout no fishin' bein' done dem days. Yessum, slaves had deir own
gyardens, and dey better wuk 'em good if dey wanted any gyarden sass to
eat. Cookin' was done in dem big open fireplaces, mostly in pots and
thick iron skillets what had lids on 'em.

"Boys wore long blue striped shirts in summer and nothin' else a t'all.
Dem shirts was made jus' lak mother hubbards. Us wore de same thing in
winter only dem shirts was made new for winter. By summer dey had done
wore thin. When de weather got too cold, Marster give us old coats, what
grown folks had done most wore out, and us warn't none too warm den wid
de wind a-sailin' under our little old shirt tails. Our shoes was rough
old brogans what was hard as rocks, and us had to put rags inside 'em to
keep 'em from rubbin' de skin off our foots. Us didn't know what socks
and stockin's was dem.

"Marse Earl Strickland owned us. Miss Sarah was his old 'oman and dey
was sho' mighty good to deir slaves. White folks was heap better folks
den dan dey is now anyhow. Now-a-days dey will knock you up right now,
and won't be long 'bout it. I can't git up no ricollections 'bout 'em
havin' no chillun a t'all. Seems lak I know for sho' dey didn't have
none. Dey never had no fine house neither; jus' a plain common house wid
a chimbly at both ends.

"Oh, Lord! Marster never had no overseer; no car'iage driver neither;
didn't even have no car'iage yit. He did have a surrey what he hitched
mules to and driv for hisself. Warn't no hoss on dat plantation, nothin'
'cept mules.

"How big was dat plantation? Good Granny! it was so big I never did git
all de way over it, and dere must a been 15 or 20 slaves. Old Marster
got us up 'bout sunrise and fetched us in at sundown. He was all time
knockin' on his Niggers 'bout somepin. He 'lowed dey didn't do dis, or
dat, or somepin else right--he allus had to have some 'scuse to knock
'em 'round."

A little Negro boy, possibly five years old, came up to Anderson with a
peach in his hand and said: "Look, Uncle Anderson, C.T. done gimme dis
peach what he stole off dat dar wagon." The old man reached out his
hand. "Boy, you gimme dat peach," he commanded. "You knows I lak
peaches. Give it to me, I say. I do declar', nigger chillun jus' got to
steal anyhow. Run git yourself 'nother peach off dat wagon, but don't
you let dat man see you git it. Put dat peach under your shirt 'til you
gits in dis yard, and if you leave dis yard 'gain I'll buss your haid
wide open. Does you hear me, Boy?

"What was dat you was a-axin' 'bout jails, Miss? Yessum, us had 'em.
Niggers would git too rowdy-lak, drinkin' liquor and fightin', and dat
was when de white folks slapped 'em in de gyardhouse, widout a bite to
eat. Gyardhouses is called jails dese days. I'se lak my Ma. I'se a
fighter. Ma would jump on anybody what looked at her twice. De onliest
time I ever got in de gyardhouse was a long time atter de end of de big
War. A man owed me some money, and when I axed him for it, he got mad
and knocked me down. I got right up and knocked him out, and right den
and dar I was sont to de gyardhouse.

"Good Lord, Miss! Slave folks warn't 'lowed no time for to larn readin'
and writin'. Deir time was all tuk up in de field at wuk. Slaves went to
de white folks' church, but one thing sho' dey couldn't read de Bible
for deirselfs and couldn't write none. Jus' to tell de truth, I didn't
take in what dey sung at church, but I ain't forgot dem baptizin's. I'se
been to so many of 'em. Evvybody went in dem days. Dere warn't no place
in de church houses for to be ducked dem days, so de white folks had a
pool dug out by de branch for de baptizin's, and white folks and slaves
was ducked in de same pool of water. White folks went in fust and den de
Niggers. Evvybody what come dar sung a song 'bout 'My Sins has all been
Washed Away, and I is White as Snow.'

"Slave fun'rels was mournful sights, for sho'. Dem home-made coffins was
made out of pine planks, and dey warn't painted or lined or nothin'. And
slave coffins warn't no diffunt from de ones de white folks used. Our
Marster sot aside a spot in his own buryin' grounds for de slaves'
graveyard. When dey was a-buryin' folks dey sung a song what went
somepin lak dis: 'Oh, Lord! Us takes 'em to de Graveyard, Never to fetch
'em Back.'

"If slaves did run off to de North, I never heared nothin' 'bout it.
Oh, Lord! I jus' can't talk 'bout dem patterollers, for it looked lak
all de white folks tried to jine up wid 'em. How dey did beat up us pore
Niggers! Us had to git a pass for dis and a pass for dat, and dere jus'
warn't nothin' us could do widout dem patterollers a-beatin' us up. Dey
beat you wid a cowhide lash what cut a gash in your back evvy time it
struck you. Yessum, white folks and Niggers was all time quar'ellin' and
fightin'.

"When slaves got in from de fields dey et deir somepin t'eat and went to
bed. Dey didn't have to wuk on Saddays atter dinnertime. When our old
Marster turned us loose, he turned us loose; and when he wuked us, us
sho' was wuked. De young folks had deir big times on Sadday nights. Dey
danced and frolicked 'round sort of lak dey does now. Evvybody went to
de meetin' house on Sunday, and dere's whar Niggers had a good time
a-courtin'.

"Christmas was de time when old Marster let us do pretty much as us
pleased. Us had all kinds of good things t'eat, and atter us drunk a lot
of liquor it warn't long 'fore dere was a Nigger fight goin' on. Yessum,
us had cornshuckin's, cotton pickin's, quiltin's, log rollin's, and all
sich as dat. Wid plenty t'eat and good liquor to drink on hand, Niggers
would shuck corn or pick cotton all night. It was de big eats and lots
of liquor dat made slaves lak dem things.

"Little slave boys played wid sun-baked marbles, made of mud, and old
rag balls, what was sho' a heap diffunt from what chilluns thinks dey
has got to have dese days 'fore dey kin have a good time.

"Marster had mighty good keer tuk of his slaves when dey got sick. Dere
warn't many doctors dem days. Dey jus' used home-made medicines, mostly
teas made out of yarbs (herbs). I jus' can't git up no ricollection of
what yarbs dey did put in dem teas. I does 'member dat chillun had to
live wid bags of assfiddy (asafetida) 'round deir necks to keep off
ailments. Ma give me and Bob, each one, a block of dat assfiddy for good
luck. I throwed my block 'way a few years ago, and I ain't had nothin'
but bad luck ever since. Dat's why I can't git up de things you wants to
know 'bout. My mind jus' don't wuk right no more.

"Dem yankees was on de go all de time. One of 'em come to old Marster's
house and axed one of my uncles to go off wid him. Uncle was old and
skeered and he thought de yankees might kill him or somepin lak dat.
When de War was done over, old Marster told us 'bout how things was. He
said us was free and would have to do de best us could for ourselfs. Dem
was happy days for Niggers. Dey sho' didn't take no more foolishment off
of white folks atter dat, and dey don't pay 'em no mind now. Niggers got
so bad atter dey got deir freedom dat de Ku Kluxers come 'round and made
'em be'have deirselfs. One of dem Kluxers come to our house and set down
and talked to us 'bout how us ought to act, and how us was goin' to have
to do, if us 'spected to live and do well. Us allus thought it was our
own old Marster, all dressed up in dem white robes wid his face kivvered
up, and a-talkin' in a strange, put-on lak, voice. None of Marster's
Niggers never left him for 'bout two or three years. Dere warn't no way
for Niggers to buy no land 'til atter dey could make and save up some
money. Marster jus' paid up his Niggers once a year, at de end of crap
time. It warn't long atter de War was over 'fore dere was some few
schools for Niggers scattered 'round 'bout.

"When did I git married? Lordy, Miss! Such things de giverment do want
to know 'bout pore old Niggers! It warn't 'til ten years atter us was
freed, dat me and Martha Freeman got married up together. Dat was one
sho' 'nough fine weddin' what Miss Sallie Morton and our other white
friends give us. Dey give us evvything us had at dat big old feast. Dere
was three tables full, one for de white folks, and two for de Niggers,
and dem tables was jus' loaded down wid good things. Willie and Ida was
de onliest chillun me and Martha had, and dey never lived to git grown.
Martha died out and den I married up wid Mamie White. Us didn't have no
chillun and Mamie's daid now. Dey's all daid 'cept me.

"I thinks it was a good thing Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Davis did set us free,
and I sho hopes de giverment won't never fetch slavery back no more.

"I never will forgit de day I jined up wid Morton's Baptist Church. I
had done helped my Pa build it from a brush arbor to a sho' 'nough
church house. De reason I jined up was 'cause de Marster had done
changed me from nature to Grace. I thinks evvybody ought to jine up in
de church 'cause it's de Lord's will.

"Miss, I done told you all I knows and I'se a sick man, so go 'long wid
you and let me take my rest."