_Carr Pedigree_ (Vol. vii., p. 408.).--The pedigree description of Lady
Carr is "Gresil, daughter of Sir Robert Meredyth, Knt., Chancellor of the
Exchequer in Ireland." Sir George Carr died Feb. 13, 1662-3, and was buried
in Dublin. His sons were 1, Thomas, and 2, William; and a daughter Mary,
who married 1st, Dr. Thomas Margetson (son to the Archbishop of Armagh);
and 2ndly, Dr. Michael Ward. The pedigree is continued through Thomas the
eldest son, who was the father of the Bishop of Killaloe. It does not
appear that William left any issue. His wife's name was Elizabeth, daughter
of Edward Sing, D.D., Lord Bishop of Cork.

W. ST.

_Banbury Cakes_ (Vol. vii., p. 106.).--In _A Treatise of Melancholy_, by T.
Bright, doctor of physic, and published in 1586, I find the following:

    "Sodden wheat is of a grosse and melancholicke nourishment, and bread
    especially of the fine flower unleavened: of this sort are bag-puddings
    or pan-puddings made with flour, frittars, pancakes, such as we call
    _Banberie cakes_, and those great ones confected with butter, eggs,
    &c., used at weddings; and howsoever it be prepared, rye and bread made
    thereof carrieth with it plentie of melancholie."

H. A. B.

_Detached Belfry Towers_ (Vol. vii., pp. 333. 416. 465.).--To your already
extensive list of church towers separate from the church, Launceston
Church, Cornwall, and St. John's Church, Chester, may not unfittingly be
added.

T. HUGHES.

Chester.

Elstow, Bedfordshire, is an instance of a bell tower separated from the
body of the church.

B. H. C.

_Dates on Tombstones_ (Vol. vii., p. 331.).--A correspondent asks for
instances of dates on tombstones prior to 1601. I cannot give any, but I
can refer to some slabs lying upon the ground in a churchyard near Oundle
(Tausor if I remember aright), on which appear in relief recumbent figures
with the hands upon the breast, crossed, or in the attitude of prayer.
These are of a much earlier date, and I should be much pleased to know if
many or any such instances elsewhere occur.

B. H. C.

_Subterranean Bells_ (Vol. vii., pp. 128. 328.).--Bells under ground and
under water, so often referred to, remind me of the Oundle Drumming Well,
which I remember seeing when a child. There is a legend connected with it
which I heard, but cannot accurately recollect. The well itself is referred
to in Brand, vol. ii. p. 369. (Bohn's ed.), but the legend is not given.

B. H. C.

_Mistletoe in Ireland_ (Vol. ii., p. 270.).--I have just received, in full
blossom, a very fine spray from a luxuriant plant of this parasite growing
on an apple tree in the gardens of Farmley, the seat of William Lloyd
Flood, Esq., in the county of Kilkenny. This plant of mistletoe has existed
at {513} Farmley beyond the memory of the present generation; but Mr.
Flood's impression, communicated to me, is, that it was artificially
produced from seed by some former gardener. If natural, which _may_ be the
case, this instance of its occurrence in Ireland is, I believe, unique.

JAMES GRAVES.

Kilkenny.

_Stars and Flowers_ (Vol. iv., p. 22.; Vol. vii., p. 151. 341.).--Passages
illustrative of this similitude have been quoted from Cowley, Longfellow,
Hood, and Moir. The metaphor is also made use of by Darwin, in his _Loves
of the Plants_:

 "Roll on, ye stars! exult in youthful prime,
  Mark with bright curves the printless steps of time;
  _Flowers of the sky!_ ye, too, to age must yield,
  Frail as your silken sisters of the field."

CUTHBERT BEDE, B.A.

_The Painting by Fuseli_ (Vol. vii., p. 453.).--The picture by the late
Henry Fuseli, R.A., inquired after by MR. SANSOM, is in the collection at
Sir John Soane's Museum; it was purchased by him in 1802.

It was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1780, and is thus entered in the
Catalogue of that year:

    "No. 77. Ezzelin Bracciaferro musing over Meduna, destroyed by him, for
    disloyalty, during his absence in the Holy Land. _Fuseli._"

There is an engraving of the picture in _Essays on Physiognomy_, by J. C.
Lavater, translated from the French by Henry Hunter, D.D., 4to.: London,
1789. The _second_ volume, p. 294.

The inscription under that engraving, by Holloway, is as follows:

    "Ezzelin, Count of Ravenna, surnamed Bracciaferro or Iron Arm, musing
    over the body of Meduna; slain by him, for infidelity, during his
    absence in the Holy Land."

GEORGE BAILEY.

The subject of your correspondent J. SANSOM'S inquiry is in the Soane
Museum, Lincoln's Inn Fields. Search among the Italian story-tellers will
not discover the origin of the picture of Count Ezzelin's remorse: it
sprung from that fertile source of fearful images--Henry Fuseli's brain.
The work might well have been left without a name, but for the requirements
of the Royal Academy Catalogue, and, it must be added, Fuseli's desire to
mystify the Italian as well as the other scholars of his day.

For confirmation of the correctness of these statements, I refer your
correspondent to the _Life of Fuseli_ by Knowles, and to that by Cunningham
in the _Lives of the British Painters_.

R. F., Jun.

_"Navita Erythræum"_ (Vol. vii., p. 382.).--Since I requested a reference
to these lines, I have possessed myself of a very elaborate Latin work on
_Bells_, in two vols. 8vo., published at Rome, 1822, by Alexander
Lazzarinus, _De Vario Tintinnabulorum usu apud veteres Hebræos et
Ethnicos_: wherein, in a section on the effect of the sound of bells on
different animals, he quotes those very lines from "Cornelius Kilianus
Dufflæus in suis poematibus."

I shall now be thankful to be told something about the said Dufflæus,--who
and what he was,--when and where he lived?

H. T. ELLACOMBE.

Rectory, Clyst St. George.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

NOTES ON BOOKS, ETC.

The success which has attended _The Chronological New Testament_ has
encouraged the publisher of that most useful work to undertake an edition
of the entire Scriptures on a similar plan; and we have now before us the
First Part of _The English Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments
according to the authorised Version: newly divided into Paragraphs, with
concise Introductions to the several Books; and with Maps and Notes
illustrative of the Chronology, History, and Geography of the Holy
Scriptures; containing also the most remarkable Variations of the ancient
Versions, and the chief Results of modern Criticism_. Even this ample
title-page does not, however, point out the many helps towards a better
understanding of the Word of God, which, by improvements in its division
and typographical arrangement, are here furnished for the use of the devout
student: and which has this great recommendation in our eyes, as we have no
doubt it will be its greatest in that of many of our readers, that it is no
endeavour to furnish a new translation, but only an attempt to turn our
noble authorised version to the best account. The present Part completes
the Book of Genesis, and we have little doubt that its success will be such
as to secure for the publisher that patronage which will enable him to
complete so desirable a work as his "_New Edition of the authorised Version
of the Bible_." While on this subject, we may fitly call attention to the
eighth number of _The Museum of Classical Antiquities: a Quarterly Journal
of Ancient Art_, and its accompanying _Supplement_, both of which are
entirely occupied with a question which, from its connexion with our
holiest and most religious feelings, must always command our deepest
attention,--namely, the true site of Calvary, and of the Holy Sepulchre.
The question is discussed at considerable length, and with great learning
and acuteness; and, we trust, from its generally interesting character, may
have the effect of drawing attention to a journal which deserves the
patronage of scholars to a greater extent than, from the prefatory notice,
it would appear to have received up to the present time.

The Second Part of _The Ulster Journal of Archæology_ has just appeared. We
cannot better recommend it to our antiquarian friends than by pointing out
that it contains the following papers:--1. Metropolitan Visitation of the
Diocese of Derry, A.D. 1397. 2. Iona. 3. Anglo-Norman Families of Lecale,
County Down. {514} 4. Ogham Inscriptions. 5. Irish Surnames, their past and
present Forms. 6. The Island of Tory in the Pagan Period. 7. Origin and
Characteristics of the People in the Counties of Down and Antrim. 8. King
William's Progress to the Boyne. 9. Antiquarian Notes and Queries. 10.
Annals of Ulster.

We ought, in the same way, to specify the various papers to be found in the
recently-published _Reports and Papers read at the Meetings of the
Architectural Society of the Archdeaconry of Northampton and the Counties
of York and Lincoln; and of the Architectural and Archæological Society of
the County of Bedford during the Year 1852_,--but such a course is
obviously impossible. There is one paper in the volume which, as especially
worthy the attention of those interested in our Ecclesiastical History,
deserves to be particularly noticed, namely, the Rev. G. A. Poole's
_Synchronological Table of the Bishops of the English Sees from the Year
1050 to 1550_. How much good service might be done to Historical Literature
by the compilation and printing of many documents of a similar character!

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

SCOTT, REMARKS ON THE BEST WRITINGS OF THE BEST AUTHORS (or some such
title).

SERMONS BY THE REV. ROBERT WAKE, M.A. 1704, 1712, &c.

HISTORY OF ANCIENT WILTS, by SIR R. C. HOARE. The last three Parts.

REV. A. DYCE'S EDITION OF DR. RICHARD BENTLEY'S WORKS. Vol. III. Published
by Francis Macpherson, Middle Row, Holborn. 1836.

DISSERTATION ON ISAIAH XVIII., IN A LETTER TO EDWARD KING, ESQ., by SAMUEL
LORD BISHOP OF ROCHESTER (HORSLEY). The Quarto Edition, printed for Robson.
1779.

BEN JONSON'S WORKS. 9 Vols. 8vo. Vols. II., III., IV. Bds.

SIR WALTER SCOTT'S NOVELS. 41 Vols. 8vo. The last nine Vols. Boards.

JACOB'S ENGLISH PEERAGE. Folio Edition, 1766. Vols. II., III., and IV.

GAMMER GURTON'S NEEDLE.

ALISON'S EUROPE. (20 Vols.) Vols XIII., XX.

ABBOTSFORD EDITION OF THE WAVERLEY NOVELS. Odd Vols.

THE TRUTH TELLER. A Periodical.

*** _Correspondents sending Lists of Books Wanted are requested to send
their names._

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest prices, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices to Correspondents.

L. M. M. R. _If our Correspondent will forward copies of the_ Note and
Queries, _they shall have immediate attention._

X. Z. _We cannot undertake to recommend any particular houses for
photographic apparatus or chemicals. Our advertising columns show
sufficiently where they may be procured._

_Many Replies to Correspondents are unavoidably omitted._

_A few complete sets of_ "NOTES AND QUERIES," Vols. i. _to_ vi., _price
Three Guineas, may now be had; for which early application is desirable._

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them to
their Subscribers on the Saturday._

       *       *       *       *       *


Now ready, 8vo., 7s. 6d.

THE TEXT OF SHAKESPEARE VINDICATED from the Interpolations and Corruptions
advocated by John Payne Collier, Esq., in his "Notes and Emendations." By
SAMUEL WELLER SINGER.

 "To blot old books and alter their contents."
                  _Rape of Lucrece._

Also, preparing for immediate Publication, in Ten Volumes, fcap. 8vo., to
appear Monthly,

THE DRAMATIC WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKSPEARE, the Text completely revised, with
Notes, and various Readings. By SAMUEL WELLER SINGER.

London: Published by WM. PICKERING.

       *       *       *       *       *


Just published in 4to. price 22s. cloth,

CATALOGI CODICUM MANUSCRIPTORUM BIBLIOTHECÆ BODLEIANÆ--PARS PRIMA
RECENSIONEM CODICUM GRÆCORUM continens, confecit H. O. COXE, A.M.,
Hypo-Bibliothecarius.

Oxonii.: Typographeo Academico. Sold by JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford, and 377.
Strand, London; and GARDNER, 7. Paternoster Row.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO PARENTS, GUARDIANS, RESIDENTS IN INDIA, &c.--A Lady residing within an
hour's drive westward of Hyde Park, and in a most healthy and cheerful
situation, is desirous of taking the entire charge of a little girl, to
share with her only child (about a year and a half old) her maternal care
and affection, together with the strictest attention to mental training.
Terms, including every possible expense except medical attendance, 100l.
per annum. If required, the most unexceptionable references can be
furnished.

Address to T. B. S., care of MR. BELL, Publisher, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


JUST PUBLISHED, PRICE FOURPENCE,
Or sent Free on Receipt of Six Postage Stamps,

FENNELL'S SHAKSPEARE REPOSITORY,

NO. II.

       *       *       *       *       *

Containing Interesting Articles on the Medical Practice of Shakspeare's
Son-in-Law, DR. JOHN HALL, of Stratford-on-Avon: including Curious Notices
of Numerous Old Families connected with Gloucestershire, Northamptonshire,
Shropshire, and Warwickshire; more Notes on Shakspeare's Plays, by THOMAS
WHITE, B.A., of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge; Curious Ancient Proclamations
against Actors; Old English Proverbs; Report of the recent Shakspearian
Festival at Stratford; Review of J. P. Collier's New Work, &c. &c.

No. I. of the SHAKSPEARE REPOSITORY may also be had, PRICE SIXPENCE, or
sent Free on Receipt of Six Postage Stamps.

Also may be had Free on Receipt of Three Postage Stamps, a Fac-simile of a
remarkably Curious and Amusing Newspaper of the Reign of King Charles II.

Published by JAMES H. FENNELL, 1. Warwick Court, Holborn, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


Published in September last, Second Edition, price 15s.

ON THE ANCIENT BRITISH, ROMAN, AND SAXON ANTIQUITIES AND FOLK-LORE OF
WORCESTERSHIRE. By JABEZ ALLIES, Esq., F.S.A.

The work details the Antiquities, and elucidates the Ancient Names of
Fields and Places, in every part of the County; traces the Ancient Roads,
discusses the Folk-lore, and notices the Border Antiquities. This edition
contains 500 pages, demy 8vo., with 6 illustrative Engravings, upwards of
40 Woodcuts, and a copious Index. The former edition contained 150 pages.
Those who have, and likewise those who may be pleased to purchase the Work,
can obtain at the publishers, free of charge, a Supplement containing some
additions and corrections, and also high Commendations of the Work, which
have been extracted from various Reviews and Periodicals.

Published by J. H. PARKER, 377. Strand, London; and J. GRAINGER, 18.
Foregate, Worcester.

       *       *       *       *       *


This day is published in 8vo., pp. 542, price 12s. 6d.

HISTORY of the BYZANTINE EMPIRE, from DCCXVI. to MLVII. By GEORGE FINLAY,
Esq., Honorary Member of the Royal Society of Literature.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London;

Who have lately published, by the same Author,

GREECE UNDER THE ROMANS: a Historical View of the Greek Nation, from the
time of its Conquest by the Romans until the Extinction of the Roman Empire
in the East, B.C. 146-A.D. 717, 8vo., pp. 554, price 16s.

HISTORY OF GREECE, from its Conquest by the Crusaders to its Conquest by
the Turks, and of the EMPIRE OF TREBIZOND, 1204-1461, 8vo., pp. 520, price
12s. {515}

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--HORNE & CO.'S Iodized Collodion, for obtaining Instantaneous
Views, and Portraits in from three to thirty seconds, according to light.

Portraits obtained by the above, for the delicacy of detail rival the
choicest Daguerreotypes, specimens of which may be seen at their
Establishment.

Also every description of Apparatus, Chemicals, &c. &c. used in this
beautiful Art.--123. and 121. Newgate Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PICTURES.--A Selection of the above beautiful Productions
(comprising Views in VENICE, PARIS, RUSSIA, NUBIA, &c.) may be seen at
BLAND & LONG'S, 153. Fleet Street, where may also be procured Apparatus of
every Description, and pure Chemicals for the practice of Photography in
all its Branches.

Calotype, Daguerreotype, and Glass Pictures for the Stereoscope.

BLAND & LONG, Opticians, Philosophical and Photographical Instrument
Makers, and Operative Chemists, 153. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--Collodion (Iodized with the Ammonio-Iodide of Silver).--J. B.
HOCKIN & CO., Chemists, 289. Strand, were the first in England who
published the application of this agent (see _Athenæum_, Aug. 14th). Their
Collodion (price 9d. per oz.) retains its extraordinary sensitiveness,
tenacity, and colour unimpaired for months; it may be exported to any
climate, and the Iodizing Compound mixed as required. J. B. HOCKIN & CO.
manufacture PURE CHEMICALS and all APPARATUS with the latest Improvements
adapted for all the Photographic and Daguerreotype processes. Cameras for
Developing in the open Country. GLASS BATHS adapted to any Camera. Lenses
from the best Makers. Waxed and Iodized Papers, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


Just published, price 1s., free by Post 1s. 4d.,

THE WAXED-PAPER PHOTOGRAPHIC PROCESS of GUSTAVE LE GRAY'S NEW EDITION.
Translated from the French.

Sole Agents in the United Kingdom for VOIGHTLANDER & SON'S celebrated
Lenses for Portraits and Views.

General Depôt for Turner's, Whatman's, Canson Frères', La Croix, and other
Talbotype Papers.

Pure Photographic Chemicals.

Instructions and Specimens in every Branch of the Art.

GEORGE KNIGHT & SONS, Foster Lane, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PAPER.--Negative and Positive Papers of Whatman's, Turner's,
Sanford's, and Canson Frères' make, Waxed-Paper for Le Gray's Process.
Iodized and Sensitive Paper for every kind of Photography.

Sold by JOHN SANFORD, Photographic Stationer, Aldine Chambers, 13.
Paternoster Row, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENNETT'S MODEL WATCH, as shown at the GREAT EXHIBITION, No. 1. Class X.,
in Gold and Silver Cases, in five qualities, and adapted to all Climates,
may now be had at the MANUFACTORY, 65. CHEAPSIDE. Superior Gold London-made
Patent Levers, 17, 15, and 12 guineas. Ditto, in Silver Cases, 8, 6, and 4
guineas. First-rate Geneva Levers, in Gold Cases, 12, 10, and 8 guineas.
Ditto, in Silver Cases, 8, 6, and 5 guineas. Superior Lever, with
Chronometer Balance, Gold, 27, 23, and 19 guineas. Bennett's Pocket
Chronometer, Gold, 50 Guineas; Silver, 40 guineas. Every Watch skilfully
examined, timed, and its performance guaranteed. Barometers, 2l., 3l., and
4l. Thermometers from 1s. each.

BENNETT, Watch, Clock, and Instrument Maker to the Royal Observatory, the
Board of Ordnance, the Admiralty, and the Queen.

65. CHEAPSIDE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLERICAL, MEDICAL, AND GENERAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Established 1824.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIVE BONUSES have been declared: at the last in January, 1852, the sum of
131,125l. was added to the Policies, producing a Bonus varying with the
different ages from 24½ to 55 per cent. on the Premiums paid during the
five years, or from 5l. to 12l. 10s. per cent. on the Sum Assured.

The small share of Profit divisible in future among the Shareholders being
now provided for, the ASSURED will hereafter derive all the benefits
obtainable from a Mutual Office, WITHOUT ANY LIABILITY OR RISK OF
PARTNERSHIP.

POLICIES effected before the 30th of June next, will be entitled, at the
next Division, to one year's additional share of Profits over later
Assurers.

On Assurances for the whole of Life only one half of the Premiums need be
paid for the first five years.

INVALID LIVES may be Assured at rates proportioned to the risk.

Claims paid _thirty_ days after proof of death, and all Policies are
_Indisputable_ except in cases of fraud.

Tables of Rates and forms of Proposal can be obtained of any of the
Society's Agents, or of

GEORGE H. PINCKARD, Resident Secretary.

_99. Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London._

       *       *       *       *       *


The Twenty-eighth Edition.

NEUROTONICS, or the Art of Strengthening the Nerves, containing Remarks on
the influence of the Nerves upon the Health of Body and Mind, and the means
of Cure for Nervousness, Debility, Melancholy, and all Chronic Diseases, by
DR. NAPIER, M.D. London: HOULSTON & STONEMAN. Price 4d., or Post Free from
the Author for Five Penny Stamps.

"We can conscientiously recommend 'Neurotonics,' by Dr. Napier, to the
careful perusal of our invalid readers."--_John Bull Newspaper, June 5,
1852._

       *       *       *       *       *


PULLEYN'S COMPENDIUM.
One Volume, crown 8vo., bound in cloth, price 6s.,

THE ETYMOLOGICAL COMPENDIUM: or, PORTFOLIO OF ORIGINS AND INVENTIONS;
relating to--

  Language, Literature, and Government.
  Architecture and Sculpture.
  Drama, Music, Painting, and Scientific Discoveries.
  Articles of Dress, &c.
  Titles, Dignities, &c.
  Names, Trades, Professions.
  Parliament, Laws, &c.
  Universities and Religious Sects.
  Epithets and Phrases.
  Remarkable Customs.
  Games, Field Sports.
  Seasons, Months, and Days of the Week.
  Remarkable Localities, &c. &c.

By WILLIAM PULLEYN.

The Third Edition, revised and improved, by MERTON A. THOMS, ESQ.

London: WILLIAM TEGG & CO., 85 Queen Street, Cheapside.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPECTACLES.--WM. ACKLAND applies his medical knowledge as a Licentiate of
the Apothecaries' Company, London, his theory as a Mathematician, and his
practice as a Working Optician, aided by Smee's Optometer, in the selection
of Spectacles suitable to every derangement of vision, so as to preserve
the sight to extreme old age.

ACHROMATIC TELESCOPES, with the New Vetzlar Eye-pieces, as exhibited at the
Academy of Sciences in Paris. The Lenses of these Eye-pieces are so
constructed that the rays of light fall nearly perpendicular to the surface
of the various lenses, by which the aberration is completely removed; and a
telescope so fitted gives one-third more magnifying power and light than
could be obtained by the old Eye-pieces. Prices of the various sizes on
application to

WM. ACKLAND, Optician, 93. Hatton Garden, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY,

3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

Founded A.D. 1842.

_Directors._

  H. E. Bicknell, Esq.
  W. Cabell, Esq.
  T. S. Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
  G. H. Drew, Esq.
  W. Evans, Esq.
  W. Freeman, Esq.
  F. Fuller, Esq.
  J. H. Goodhart, Esq.
  T. Grissell, Esq.
  J. Hunt, Esq.
  J. A. Lethbridge, Esq.
  E. Lucas, Esq.
  J. Lys Seager, Esq.
  J. B. White, Esq.
  J. Carter Wood, Esq.

_Trustees._

W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.; L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.; George Drew, Esq.

_Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

_Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through temporary
difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given upon application to
suspend the payment at interest, according to the conditions detailed on
the Prospectus.

Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100l., with a Share in
three-fourths of the Profits:--

  Age      _£  s.  d._
   17       1  14   4
   22       1  18   8
   27       2   4   5
   32       2  10   8
   37       2  18   6
   42       3   8   2

ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

Now ready, price 10s. 6d., Second Edition, with material additions,
INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION: being a TREATISE on BENEFIT BUILDING
SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of Land Investment, exemplified in
the Cases of Freehold Land Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a
Mathematical Appendix on Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR
SCRATCHLEY, M.A., Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3.
Parliament Street, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


CITY OF LONDON LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY, 2. Royal Exchange Buildings, London.

Subscribed Capital, a Quarter of a Million.

          _Trustees._
  Mr. Commissioner West, Leeds.
  The Hon. W. F. Campbell, Stratheden House.
  John Thomas, Esq., Bishop's Stortford.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Society embraces every advantage of existing Life Offices, viz. the
Mutual System without its risks of liabilities: the Proprietary, with its
security, simplicity, and economy: the Accumulative System, introduced by
this Society, uniting life with the convenience of a deposit bank:
Self-Protecting Policies, also introduced by this Society, embracing by one
policy and one rate of premium a Life Assurance, an Endowment, and a
Deferred Annuity. No forfeiture. Loans with commensurate Assurances. Bonus
recently declared, 20 per Cent.

EDW. FRED. LEEKS, Secretary. {516}

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW WORKS

PUBLISHED BY

ADDEY & CO., 21. OLD BOND STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

In One Volume, post 8vo., price 10s. 6d. cloth,

AUSTRALIA VISITED AND REVISITED:

A Narrative of recent Travels and old Experiences in the Golden, Pastoral,
and Agricultural Districts of Victoria and New South Wales.

By SAMUEL MOSSMAN, Author of "The Gold Regions of Australia," &c. and
THOMAS BANISTER, Author of "England and her Dependencies," &c.

With Maps by A. K. JOHNSTON, Geographer to Her Majesty.

    "The narrative is of a truthful, matter-of-fact character. The writers
    tell us what they saw, with little if any colouring or exaggeration.
    Wherever there is any interest in the things themselves, it is
    preserved in the book, whether it relates to the appearance of the
    gold-diggings and the diggers or their mode of life--to the places
    frequently depopulated of _men_ by the gold fever pervading the
    colonies, to the night bivouac of quiet people to avoid the close
    atmosphere and riotous companions at the roadside inns from the crowds
    rushing to or returning from the diggings, or to many other more
    permanent scenes of still or animated life. With the actual are mingled
    remarks on Australia, and advice to emigrants, the latter of which is
    of a judicious kind."--_Spectator._

    "The authors of this compact volume have well worked out the purpose
    they had in view, as put forth in the preface, making the book a real
    book, indulging in no flights of imagination lest injury should be
    inflicted thereby upon the uninformed and ingenuous.... This
    straightforward and eminently practical book."--_Lloyd's Weekly News._

       *       *       *       *       *

In fcap. 4to., printed and bound in the style of the period, price 21s., or
in morocco, 36s.

THE DIARY AND HOURES OF THE LADYE ADOLIE,

