A violent tumult now spread throughout the court, and the whole
assembly. Friends and enemies were all eager to divine for what purpose
the king had demanded this conference with the two houses, and what it
was his intention to propose to them.

Colonel Downs, a member of the court, expressed a wish that the king's
proposition should be heard.

"Since one of the members desires it," said Bradshaw, gravely, "the
court must retire;" and they immediately passed into a neighbouring
hall. * * *

In about half an hour the court returned, and Bradshaw informed the king
that his proposition was rejected.

Charles appeared to be subdued, and no longer insisted with any degree
of vigour.

"If you have nothing to add," said Bradshaw, "the court will proceed to
give sentence."

"I shall add nothing, sir," said the king; "and only request that what I
have said may be recorded." Without replying to this, Bradshaw informed
him that he was about to hear his sentence; but before he ordered it to
be read, he addressed to the king a long discourse, as a solemn apology
for the proceedings of parliament, enumerating all the evil deeds of the
king, and imputing to him alone all the misfortunes of the civil war,
since it was his tyranny that had made resistance as much a matter of
duty as of necessity. The orator's language was harsh and bitter, but
grave, pious, free from insult, and stamped with profound conviction,
though with a slight mixture of vindictive feeling. The king heard him
without offering any interruption, and with equal gravity. In
proportion, however, as the discourse drew towards a close, he became
visibly troubled; and as soon as Bradshaw was silent, he endeavoured to
speak: Bradshaw prevented him, and commanded the clerk to read the
sentence; this being done, he said, "This is the act, opinion, and
unanimous judgment of the court," and the whole court rose up in token
of assent: "Sir," said the king, abruptly, "will you hear one word?"

_Bradshaw._ "Sir, you cannot be heard after sentence has been
passed."

_The King._ "No, sir!"

_Bradshaw_. "No, sir, with your permission, sir. Guards, remove the
prisoner."

_The King_. "I can speak after sentence.--With your permission,
sir, I have still a right to speak after sentence.--With your
permission--Stay--The sentence, sir--I say, sir, that--I am not
permitted to speak--think what justice others are to expect!"

At this moment he was surrounded by soldiers, and removed from the bar.

_From the French of M. Guizot_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SELECTOR;

AND

LITERARY NOTICES OF

_NEW WORKS_.

       *       *       *       *       *


GALLANTRY.


In Spain, after a lady had obliged her gallant by all possible
civilities and compliance, to confirm her kindness she would show him
her foot, and this they called the highest favour. The feet and legs of
queens were so sacred, that it was a crime to think, or at any rate to
speak of them. On the arrival of the Princess Maria Anna of Austria, the
bride of Philip IV. in Spain, a quantity of the finest silk stockings
were presented to her in a city where there were manufactories of that
article. The major domo of the future queen threw back the stockings
with indignation, exclaiming, "Know that the queens of Spain have no
legs." When the young bride heard this, she began to weep bitterly,
declaring she would return to Vienna, and that she would never have set
foot in Spain had she known that her legs were to be cut off. This
ridiculous etiquette was on one occasion carried still further; one day
as the second consort of Charles II. was riding a very spirited horse,
the animal reared on his hinder legs. At the moment when the horse
seemed on the point of falling back with his fair rider, the queen
slipped off on one side, and remained with one of her feet hanging in
the stirrup. The unruly beast, irritated still more at the burden which
fell on one side, kicked with the utmost violence in all directions. In
the first moments of danger and alarm, no person durst venture to the
assistance of the queen for this reason, that excepting the king and the
chief of the menimos, or little pages, no person of the male sex was
allowed to touch any part of the queens of Spain, and least of all their
feet. As the danger of the queen augmented, two cavaliers ran to her
relief. One of them seized the bridle of the horse, while the other drew
the queen's foot from the stirrup, and in performing this service
dislocated his thumb. As soon as they had saved her life they hastened
away with all possible expedition, ordered their fleetest horses to be
saddled, and were just preparing for their flight out of the kingdom,
when a messenger came to inform them that at the queen's intercession,
the king had pardoned the crime they had committed in touching her
person.--_Meiner's History of the Female Sex._

       *        *        *        *        *


ADVANTAGES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.


In the year 1825, Henry Drummond, Esq. of Albury Park, Surrey, and
formerly of Christchurch, subjected his estate in Surrey with a yearly
rent-charge of 100_l._ for the endowment of a professorship in
Political Economy, under certain conditions. Mr. Senior, whose name is
not unknown to students of political economy, has been appointed first
professor, and in his first lecture gives the following illustration of
the advantages of the science:--

If we compare the present situation of the people of England with that
of their predecessors at the time of Cæsar's invasion; if we contrast
the warm and dry cottage of the present labourer, its chimney and glass
windows, (luxuries not enjoyed by Cæsar himself,) the linen and
woollen clothing of himself and his family, the steel, and glass, and
earthenware with which his table is furnished, the Asiatic and American
ingredients of his food, and above all, his safety from personal injury,
and his calm security that to-morrow will bring with it the comforts
that have been enjoyed to-day; if, I repeat, we contrast all these
sources of enjoyment with the dark and smoky burrows of the Brigantes or
the Cantii, their clothing of skins, their food confined to milk and
flesh, and their constant exposure to famine and to violence, we shall
be inclined to think those who are lowest in modern society richer than
the chiefs of their rude predecessors. And if we consider that the same
space of ground which afforded an uncertain subsistence to a hundred, or
probably fewer, savages, now supports with ease more than a thousand
labourers, and, perhaps, a hundred individuals beside, each consuming
more commodities than the labour of a whole tribe of Ancient Britons
could have produced or purchased, we may at first be led to doubt
whether our ancestors enjoyed the same natural advantages as ourselves;
whether their sun was as warm, their soil as fertile, or their bodies as
strong, as our own.

But let us substitute distance of space for distance of time; and,
instead of comparing situations of the same country at different
periods, compare different countries at the same period, and we shall
find a still more striking discrepancy. The inhabitant of South America
enjoys a soil and a climate, not superior merely to our own, but
combining all the advantages of every climate and soil possessed by the
remainder of the world. His valleys have all the exuberance of the
tropics, and his mountain-plains unite the temperature of Europe to a
fertility of which Europe offers no example. Nature collects for him,
within the space of a morning's walk, the fruits and vegetables which
she has elsewhere separated by thousands of miles. She has given him
inexhaustible forests, has covered his plains with wild cattle and
horses, filled his mountains with mineral treasures, and intersected all
the eastern face of his country with rivers, to which our Rhine and
Danube are merely brooks. But the possessor of these riches is poor and
miserable. With all the materials of clothing offered to him almost
spontaneously, he is ill-clad; with the most productive of soils, he is
ill-fed: though we are told that the labour of a week will there procure
subsistence for a year, famines are of frequent occurrence; the hut of
the Indian, and the residence of the landed proprietor, are alike
destitute of furniture and convenience; and South America, helpless and
indigent with all her natural advantages, seems to rely for support and
improvement on a very small portion of the surplus wealth of England.

It is impossible to consider these phenomena without feeling anxious to
account for them; to discover whether they are occasioned by
circumstances unsusceptible of investigation or regulation, or by causes
which can be ascertained, and may be within human control. To us, as
Englishmen, it is of still deeper interest to inquire whether the causes
of our superiority are still in operation, and whether their force is
capable of being increased or diminished; whether England has run her
full career of wealth and improvement, but stands safe where she is; or,
whether to remain stationary is impossible, and it depends on her
institutions and her habits, on her government, and on her people,
whether she shall recede or continue to advance.

The answer to all these questions must be sought in the science which
teaches in what wealth consists, by what agents it is produced, and
according to what laws it is distributed, and what are the institutions
and customs by which production may be facilitated, and distribution
regulated, so as to give the largest possible amount of wealth to each
individual. And this science is _Political Economy.--Senior's Lecture
on Political Economy._

       *       *       *       *       *


PROLONGING LIFE.


The notion of prolonging life by inhaling the breath of young women, was
an agreeable delusion easily credited: and one physician who had himself
written on health, was so influenced by it, that he actually took
lodgings in a boarding-school, that he might never be without a constant
supply of the proper atmosphere. Philip Thicknesse, who wrote the
"Valetudinarian's Guide," in 1779, seems to have taken a dose whenever
he could. "I am myself," says he, "turned of sixty, and in general,
though I have lived in various climates, and suffered severely both in
body and mind; yet having always partaken of the breath _of young
women, whenever they lay in the way_, I feel none of the infirmities
which so often strike the eyes and ears in this great city (Bath) of
sickness, by men many years younger than myself."

_Wadd's Memoirs._

       *       *       *       *       *


FELLOW FEELING.


It is told of a certain worthy and wealthy citizen, who has acquired
the reputation of being a considerable consumer of the good things of
the table, and has been "widened at the expense of the corporation,"
that on coming out of a tavern, after a turtle feast, a poor boy
begged charity of him--"For mercy's sake, sir, I am so very hungry!"
"Hungry!--hungry!--hey!--what!--complain of being hungry!--why I never
heard the like!--complain of being hungry!!--Prodigious!!!--why I'd give
a guinea to be hungry!!!--why, a hungry man (with a good dinner before
him) is the happiest fellow in the world!--There, (giving the boy
half-a-crown,) there, I don't want you to take my word for it: run
along, my fine fellow, and make the experiment yourself."--_Dr.
Kitchener._

       *       *       *       *       *


ARCANA OF SCIENCE,

OR REMARKABLE FACTS AND DISCOVERIES IN NATURAL HISTORY, METEOROLOGY,
CHEMISTRY, MINERALOGY, GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ZOOLOGY, PRACTICAL MECHANICS,
STATISTICS, AND THE USEFUL ARTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Under this head it is proposed, in the future numbers of the MIRROR, to
  assemble all new and remarkable facts in the several branches of science
  enumerated above. These selections will be made from the Philosophical
  Journals of the day, the Transactions of Public Societies, and the
  various Continental Journals. The advantages of such a division in
  accordance with the high and enlightened character of the present age,
  must be obvious to every reader of our miscellany. At the same time it
  will be our object to _concentrate_ or _condense_ from all
  other authentic sources such new facts in science as are connected with
  the arts of social life, and which from being scattered through
  elaborate and expensive works, might thereby be lost to some portion of
  our readers. In short, _popular_ discoveries in science, or all
  such new facts as bear on the happiness of society will be the objects
  of our choice; neither perplexing our readers with abstract research,
  nor verging into the puerile amusements of a certain ingenious but
  almost useless class of reasoners; it not being our object to "ring the
  changes" on words. Our selections will occasionally be illustrated with
  engravings; for by no means are philosophical subjects better elucidated
  than by the aid of the graphic art.]


_Longevity_.

The relative advantages of town and country, in point of salubrity, are
shown by the following table of deaths:--

1. In _great towns_, from 1-19 or 1-20, to 1-23 or 1-24.

2. In _moderate towns_, from 1-25 to 1-28.

3. In _small villages_ and the _open country_, from 1-35 or
1-40, to 1-50 or 1-60.

Thus, in London one person in 20 of the whole population dies annually;
while in the healthiest villages and open country, the rate of annual
mortality is not more than 1 in 55 or 60.


_Atmosphere of Theatres_.

Lavoisier, the French chemist, found, in a theatre, that, from the
commencement to the end of the play, the oxygen, or vital air, was
diminished in the proportion of from 27 to 21, or nearly one-fourth, and
was in the same proportion less fit for respiration than before.


_Butterflies_.

In June, 1826, a column of butterflies, from 10 to 15 feet broad, was
seen to pass over Neuchatel, in Switzerland. The passage lasted upwards
of two hours, without any interruption, from the moment when the
butterflies were first observed.--_Brewster's Journal_.


_Water Plant_.

A shrub has been discovered in our new Indian countries, from whose
stem, when divided, there issues a copious vegetable spring of limpid
and wholesome water. The natives know this well, and hence we rarely
meet with an entire plant. It is a powerful climber, and is quite new
and nondescript.--_Letter from India_.


_Malaria and Fevers_.

