It is announced that a baby born in Ramsgate on August 6th is to be
christened "Geddes." We are given to understand that the news has not yet
been broken to the unfortunate infant.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Exasperated Partner._ "LOOK HERE--DON'T YOU EVER GET YOUR
SERVICE INTO THE RIGHT COURT?"

_Partner._ "NO, AS A MATTER OF FACT I DON'T. BUT IT WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY
UNPLAYABLE IF I DID."]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RESULT OF A LEAP-YEAR.

    "Bishop ---- says he will not be able to consider any more proposals
    for engagements till after the summer of 1921."--_Local Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *

AN ECHO FROM BISLEY.--A musical correspondent writes to point out that
sol-faists have an unfair advantage in the running-deer competition,
because they are always practising with a "movable Doh."

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM SPA AND SHORE.

GROGTOWN.--All available accommodation has been monopolised by Glasborough
visitors, among whom this resort is becoming more alarmingly popular every
year. Sixty charabancs arrived on Monday and the Riot Act was read several
times before the passengers could be induced to desist from their badinage
of the residents, most of whom have since retired behind the wire-
entanglements at Kelrose. The municipal orchestra was subjected to a brisk
fusillade of rock-cakes on Saturday night; the conductor and several of the
instrumentalists suffered contusions, and their performances have since
been discontinued. This has not unnaturally given rise to a certain amount
of dissatisfaction amongst the visitors, but otherwise there has been no
recrudescence of rioting. A company of the Caithness Highlanders, with
machine-guns, are now encamped on the links, and sunshine is all that is
needed to complete the success of the season.

KEGNESS.--On Tuesday the Mayor presented a jar of whisky, fifty years old,
to the winning charabanc team in the bottle-throwing competition, and the
subsequent scenes afforded much diversion. A notable feature at present is
a large whale, which was washed ashore in a gale about six months ago. The
oldest inhabitants declare that they have never known anything like it, and
it is certainly an unforgettable experience to be anywhere within a mile of
this apparently immovable derelict. Excursions to all surrounding places
out of nose-shot are extremely popular, and the beach is practically
deserted save by a few juvenile natives engaged in the blubber industry.

MUDHALL SPA.--Without the least reflection on chalybeates and the rest, it
must be allowed that the most popular beverage in Mudhall at present is
that which draws its virtue from a cereal and not a mineral source.
Hilarity is rife at all hours, and the effort to enlist a body of local
volunteers to control the exuberance of anti-Sabbatarian "charabankers" is
meeting with unexpected support. The casualties in the daily collisions
between the Hydropathic League and the Anti-Pussy-Foot-Guards are steadily
increasing and now compare favourably with those of any other Midland
health-resort.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "A Boylston (Massachusetts) farm labourer is said to havt bees
    identified as one of the heirs to a £400,000 estate at Dundte, for whom
    starches have betn made for years, but nothing is known at Dundee of
    such an estate."--_Daily Paper._

But this lucid paragraph should help to clear up the mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMONG THE PEDESTALS.

The rumour that a number of London's statues are to be moved to make room
for new has caused many a marble heart to beat faster; and on making a
round of calls I gathered that Sir ALFRED MOND has few friends in stone or
bronze circles. Not the least uneasy is George IV. in Trafalgar Square.
Uneasiness of body he has always known, riding there for ever without any
stirrups; but now his mind is uneasy too. "If they take Father from
Cockspur Street," he argued very naturally, "why not me?"

A few of the figures feel secure, of course, but very few. Nelson on his
column has no fears; Nurse Cavell is too recent to tremble; so is Abraham
Lincoln. But the others? They are in a state of nervous suspense, wondering
if the sentence of banishment is to fall and resenting any disturbance of
their lives. "_J'y suis, j'y reste_" is their motto.

Abraham Lincoln gave me a hearty welcome and extended an invitation that is
not within the power of any other graven image in the city. "Take a chair,"
he said.

I did so and am thus, I suppose, the first Londoner to put that comfortable
piece of furniture to its proper use.

"How do you like being here?" I asked.

He said that he enjoyed it. The only blot on his pleasure was the fear that
the Abbey might fall on him, and he therefore hoped that _The Times'_ fund
was progressing by leaps and bounds.

His immediate neighbours, on the contrary, exhibited no serenity whatever,
and I found Canning and Palmerston shivering with apprehension in their
frockcoats. The worst of it was that I could say nothing to reassure them.

Here and there, however, a desire for locomotion was expressed. Dr.
Johnson, in the enclosure behind St. Clement Danes, is very restive. I
asked him if he would object to removal. "Sir," said the Little
Lexicographer (as his sculptor has made him), "I should derive satisfaction
from it. A man cannot be considered as enviable who spends all his time in
the contemplation, from an unvacatable position, of a street to the
perambulation of which he devoted many of his happiest hours."

I ventured to agree.

"Nor," continued the sage, "is it a source of contentment to a man of
integrity to observe an unceasing procession of Americans on their way to
partake of pudding in a hostelry that has made its name and prosperity out
of a mythical association with himself and be unable to correct the error."

"Are you in general in favour of statuary?" I made bold to ask.

"Painting," said he, "consumes labour not disproportionate to its effect;
but a fellow will hack half a year at a block of marble to make something
in stone that hardly resembles a man. Look around you; look at me. The
value of statuary is owing to its difficulty. You would not value the
finest head cut upon a carrot."

But one effect of this General Post among the statues is good, and it
should delight Mr. ASQUITH. Cromwell, now outside Westminster Hall, is to
be moved into the House.

E.V.L.

       *       *       *       *       *

FLOWERS' NAMES.

          MARIGOLDS.

  As MARY was a-walking
    All on a summer day,
  The flowers all stood curtseying
    And bowing in her way;
  The blushing poppies hung their heads
    And whispered MARY'S name,
  And all the wood anemones
    Hung down their heads in shame.

  The violet hid behind her leaves
    And veiled her timid face,
  And all the flowers bowed a-down,
    For holy was the place.
  Only a little common flower
    Looked boldly up and smiled
  To see the happy mother come
    A-carrying her Child.

  The little Child He laughed aloud
    To see the smiling flower,
  And as He laughed the Marigold
    Turned gold in that same hour.
  For she was gay and innocent--
    He loved to see her so--
  And from the splendour of His face
    She caught a golden glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN OPTIMIST.

    "I have just completed a fortnight's tour on a tandem, and can
    recommend this form of a holiday as the best I know of.... One Sunday
    in June, without exaggeration, I was nearly killed twice, and my wife
    was overcome with fright."--_C.T.C. Gazette._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "In a competition at Claygate, Surrey, three children caught 182 green
    wasps."--_Daily Paper._

It is believed that they would not have been caught if they had not been
green.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a recent Admiralty Order:--

    "Approval has been given for frocks to be issued to N.C. Officers and
    men (Royal Marines) during the current year, for walking out purposes
    only."

It is believed that His Majesty's Jollies have received the order without
enthusiasm, on the ground that no mention is made of anything being inside
the frocks.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE ICONOCLAST.

SIR ALFRED MOND. "I'M SORRY TO HAVE TO DISTURB YOUR MAJESTY, BUT, OWING TO
THE SHORTAGE OF SITES--"

GEORGE III. "SHORTAGE OF SIGHTS, INDEED!"

[It is understood that a number of London statues, including that of George
III. in Cockspur Street, are to be removed by the Office of Works to make
room for new ones.]]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Heavy Father._ "PUT YOUR 'AT ON THIS MINUTE, SIR. DO YOU
WANT TO CATCH YOUR DEATHERCOLD?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE VISIONARY.

  'Twas last week at Pebble Bay
    That I saw the little goat,
  Harnessed to a little shay.
    Old was he and poor in coat,
  And he lugged his load along
  Where the barefoot children throng
  Round the nigger minstrels' song.

  But his eye, aloof and chill,
    Said to me as plain as plain,
  "I am waiting, waiting still,
    Till the gods come back again;
  Starved and ugly, mean, unkempt,
  I have dreams by you undreamt,
  And--I hold you in contempt!

  "Dreams of forest routs that trooped,
    Shadowy maidens crowned with vines,
  Dreams where Dian's self has stooped
    Darkling 'neath the scented pines;
  Or where he, old father Pan,
  Took the hooves of me and ran
  Fluting through the heart of man.

  "Surely he must come again,
    He the great, the hornéd one?
  Shan't I caper in his train
    Through the hours of feast and fun!"
  And he looked with eyes of jade
  Through the sunshine, through the shade,
  Far beyond Marine Parade.

      * * * * *

  Should you go to Pebble Bay,
    Golfing or to bathe and boat--
  Should you see a loaded shay,
    In the shafts a scarecrow goat,
  Tell him that you hope (with me)
  Pan will shortly set him free,
  Pipe him home to Arcady.

       *       *       *       *       *

CRICKET NOTES.

Mr. P.F. WARNER has received countless expressions of regret on his
retirement from first-class cricket. Among these he values not least a
"round robin" from the sparrows at Lord's, all of whom he knows by name. In
the score-book of Fate is this entry in letters of gold:

  "Plum" _c_ Anno _b_ Domini 47.

Long may he live to enjoy the cricket of others!

       *       *       *       *       *

The test team of Australia being now complete, all correspondence on the
subject of its exclusions must cease. We therefore do not print a number of
letters asking why there is no one named Geddes on the side.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. FENDER and HOBBS are said to be actuated by the same motto, "For Hearth
and Home." Both are pledged to return covered with "the ashes."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the recent Surrey and Middlesex match Mr. SKEET bewildered the crowd by
fielding as if he liked it. Hitherto this vulgar manifestation has been
confined to HITCH and HENDREN.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although so late in the season Yorkshire has great hopes of a colt named
HIRST, who has just joined the side. He was seen bowling at Eton and was
secured at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a strong feeling in Worcestershire that a single-wicket match
between LEE of Middlesex and Mr. PERRIN of Essex would be a very saucy
affair.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE PLAY.

