Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections)


THE CONTINENTAL MONTHLY: DEVOTED TO LITERATURE AND NATIONAL POLICY.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. III.--JUNE, 1863.--No. VI.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE VALUE OF THE UNION.


II.

Having taken a hasty survey, in our first number, of the value and
progress of the Union, let us now, turning our gaze to the opposite
quarter, consider the pro-slavery rebellion and its tendencies, and mark
the contrast.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have seen, in glancing along the past, that while a benevolent
Providence has evidently been in the constant endeavor to lead mankind
onward and upward to a higher, more united, and happier life, even on
this earth--this divine effort has always encountered great opposition
from human selfishness and ignorance.

We have also observed, that nevertheless, through the ages-long
_external_ discipline of incessant political revolutions and changes,
and also by the _internal_ influences of such religious ideas as men
could, from time to time, receive, appreciate, and profit by, that
through all this they have at length been brought to that religious,
political, intellectual, social, and industrial condition which
constituted the civilization of Europe some two and a half centuries
since; and which was, taken all in all, far in advance of any previous
condition.

Under these circumstances, the period was ripe for the germs of a
religious and political liberty to start into being or to be quickened
into fresh life, with a far better prospect of final development than
they could have had at an earlier epoch. Born thus anew in Europe, they
were transplanted to the shores of the new world. The results of their
comparatively unrestricted growth are seen in the establishment and
marvellous expansion of the republic.

Great, however, as these results have been, the fact is so plain that he
who runs may read, that they would have been vastly greater but for a
malignant influence which has met the elements of progress, even on
these shores. Disengaged from the opposing influences which surrounded
them in Europe--from the spirit of absolutism, of hereditary
aristocracy, of ecclesiastical despotism, from the habits, the customs,
the institutions of earlier times, more or less rigid, unyielding on
that account, and hard to change by the new forces, disengaged from
these hampering influences, and planted on the shores of America--these
elements of progress, so retarded even up to the present moment in
Europe, found themselves most unexpectedly side by side with an
outbirth of human selfishness in its pure and most undisguised form.
This was not the spirit of absolutism, or of hereditary aristocracy, nor
of ecclesiastical and priestly domination. All of these, which have so
conspicuously figured in Europe, have perhaps done more at certain
periods for the advancement of civilization, by their restraining,
educating influence, than they have done harm at others, when less
needed. All of these institutions arose naturally out of the
circumstances, the character, and wants of men, at the time, and have
been of essential service in their day. But the great antagonist which
free principles encountered on American soil; which was planted
alongside of the tree of liberty; which grew with its growth, and
strengthened with its strength; which, like a noxious parasitic vine,
wound its insidious coils around the trunk that supported it--binding
its expanding branches, rooted in its tissues, and living on its vital
fluids;--this insidious enemy was slavery--a thoroughly undisguised
manifestation of human selfishness and greed; without a single redeeming
trait--simply an unmitigated evil: a two-edged weapon, cutting and
maiming both ways, up and down--the master perhaps even more than the
slave; a huge evil committed, reacting in evil, in the exact degree of
its hugeness and momentum. Yes! this great antagonist was slavery--an
institution long thrown out of European life; a relic of the lowest
barbarism and savagism, the very antipodes of freedom, and flourishing
best only in the rudest forms of society; but now rearing its hideous
visage in the midst of principles, forms, and institutions the most free
and advanced of any that the world has ever witnessed.

In the presence of this great fact, one is led to exclaim: 'How
strange!' How monstrous an anomaly! What singular fatality has brought
two such irreconcilable opposites together? It is as if two individuals,
deadly foes, should by a mysterious chance, encounter each other
unexpectedly on some wide, dreary waste of the Arctic solitudes. Whither
no other souls of the earth's teeming millions come, thither these two
alone, of all the world beside, are, as if helplessly impelled, to
settle their quarrel by the death of one or the other. Thus singular and
inexplicable does it at first sight seem--this juxtaposition of freedom
and slavery on the shores of the new world.

On second thoughts, however, we shall find this apparent singularity and
mystery to disappear. We are surprised only because we see a familiar
fact under a new aspect, and do not at once recognize it. What we see
before us in this great event is only an underlying fact of every
individual's _personal_ experience, expanded into the gigantic
proportions of a _nation's_ experience. In every child of Adam are the
seeds of good and of evil. Side by side they lie together in the same
soil; they are nourished and developed together; they become more and
more marked and individualized with advancing years, swaying the child
and the youth, hither and thither, according as one or the other
prevails; until at some period in the full rationality of riper age
comes the deadly contest between the power of darkness and the power of
light--one or the other conquers; the man's character is fixed; and he
travels along the path he has chosen, upward or downward.

So it is now with the great collective individual, the American
republic. So it is and has been with every other nation. The powers of
good and evil contend no less in communities and nations than in the
individuals who compose them; and, according as one or the other
influence prevails in rulers or in ruled, have human civilization and
human welfare been advanced or retarded.

In the American Union, the contrast has been more marked, more vivid,
and of greater extent than the world has ever seen, because of the
higher, freer, more humane character of our institutions, and the extent
of region which they cover. The brighter the sunshine, the darker the
shadow; the higher the good to be enjoyed, the darker, more deplorable
is the evil which is the inverse and opposite of that good. Hence, with
a knowledge of this prevalent fact of fallen human nature, and also of
the fact that nations are but individuals repeated--one might almost
have foreseen that if institutions, more free and enlightened than had
ever before blessed a people, were to arise upon any region of the
globe--something proportionately hideous and repulsive in the other
direction would be seen to start up alongside of them, and seek their
destruction.

Is this so strange then? It is only in agreement with the great truth,
that the best men endure the strongest temptations. He who was sinless
endured and overcame what no mere mortal could have borne for an
instant. So the highest truths have ever encountered the most violent
opposition. The most salutary reforms have had to struggle the hardest
to obtain a footing; in a word, the higher and holier the heaven from
whence blessings descend to earth, the deeper and more malignant is the
hell that rises in opposition. With the truly-sought aid of Him,
however, who alone has all power in heaven, earth, and hell, victory is
certain to be achieved in national no less than in individual trials.

But in both national and individual difficulties it is indispensable, in
order that courage may not waver, that hope may not falter--it is
indispensable that there should be, as already urged, a clear
intellectual comprehension of the full nature of the good thing for
which battle is waged. The brilliant vision of attainable good must be
preserved undimmed--ever present in sharp and radiant outline to the
mental eye; and so its lustre may also fall in a flood of searching
light on the evil which is battled against, clearly revealing all its
hideousness.

A clear understanding by the people at large, of what that is in which
the value of the Union consists, is only next in importance to the Union
itself; since the preservation of the Union hangs upon the nation's
appreciation of its value. Then only can we be intensely, ardently
zealous; full of courage and motive force; full of hope and
determination that it shall be preserved at whatever cost of life or
treasure. But without the deep conviction of the untold blessings that
lie yet undeveloped in the Union and its Constitution, without the
hearty belief that this Union is a gift of God, to be ours only while we
continue fit to hold it, and to be fought for as for life itself (for a
large, free individual life for each one of us is involved in the great
life of the Union), without this deep, rock-rooted conviction in the
heart of the nation, we shall tend to lukewarmness--to an awful
indifference as to how this contest shall end; and begin to seek for
present peace at any price. We say _present_ peace, for a permanent
peace, short of a thorough crushing of the rebellion, is simply a sheer
impossibility--a wild hallucination. Nor is it a less mad fantasy to
suppose that the rebellion can be effectually crushed without
annihilating slavery, the sole and supreme cause of the rebellion. Such
lukewarmness and untimely peace sentiments, widely diffused through the
loyal States, would be truly alarming. Those who feel and talk thus, are
like blind men on the verge of a fathomless abyss; and should a majority
ever be animated by such ideas, we are gone--hopelessly fallen under the
dark power, never perhaps to rise again in our day or generation. But we
have no fears of such a dismal result; the nation is in the divine
hands, and we feel confident that all will be right in the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have presented two reasons why the Union is priceless. Still further
may this be seen by a glance at the opposite features and tendencies of
the rebellion; and by the consideration of three or four points of
radical divergence and antagonism between slavery and republicanism.

We set out with the following general statements:

The less selfish a man becomes--the more that he rises out of
himself--in that degree (other conditions being equal) does he seek the
society of others from disinterested motives, and the wider becomes the
circle of his sympathies.

On the other hand, the more selfish he is--the lower the range of
faculties which motive him--in that degree, the more exclusive is
he--the more does he tend to isolate himself from others, or to
associate only with those whose character or pursuits minister to his
own gratification. Beasts of prey are solitary in their habits--the
gentle and useful domestic animals are gregarious and social.

Now the same is true of communities. The more elevated their
character--the more that the moral and intellectual faculties
predominate in a community; or the more virtuous, intelligent, and
industrious--in short, the more civilized it is--the closer are the
individuals of that community drawn together among themselves, and the
greater also is its tendency to unite with other communities into a
larger society, while it preserves, at the same time, all necessary
freedom and individuality. The more civilized and humanized a nation is,
the greater are the tendency and ease with which it organizes a
_diversified_, as distinguished from a homogeneous unity; or, the
greater the ease with which it establishes and maintains the integrity
and freedom of the component parts, of the individuals and communities
of individuals, as indispensable to the freedom and welfare of the whole
national body.

Thus advancing civilization will multiply the relations of men with each
other, of communities with communities, of states with states, of
nations with nations; and will also organize these relations with a
perfection proportioned to their multiplicity; and thus draw men ever
closer in the fraternal bonds of a common humanity.

On the other hand, the more a community becomes immoral, ignorant, and
indolent--the lower its aims and motive, the less it cultivates the
mental powers, the fewer industries it prosecutes, and the less
diversified are its productions--in proportion as it declines in all
these modes, in that degree does it tend to disintegration, to
separation and isolation of all its parts, and toward the establishment
of many petty and independent communities; in other words, it tends to
lapse into barbarism.

Such a movement is, however, against the order of Providence, and thus
is an evil that corrects itself. Men are happier (other conditions being
equal) in large communities than in small; and when selfishness and
ambition have broken up a large state into many small and independent
ones, the same principle of selfishness, still operating, keeps them in
perpetual mutual jealousy and collision, until, whether they will or
not, they are forced into a mass again by some strong military despot,
or conquered by a superior foreign power, and quiet is for a time again
restored.

       *       *       *       *       *

From these considerations we conclude that civilization, as it advances,
is but the index of the capacity of human beings to form themselves into
larger and larger nationalities (perhaps ultimately to result in a
federal union of all nations), each consisting of numerous parts,
performing distinct functions; yet so organized harmoniously that each
part shall preserve all the freedom that it requires for its utmost
development and happiness, and yet depend for its own life upon the life
of the entire national body.

It may also be concluded that this capacity of men so to organize is
just in proportion to the development of the higher elements and
faculties of the mind, the religious, moral, social, and intellectual,
and the diminished influence of the lower, animal, and selfish nature.

Consequently, when in such a large and harmoniously organized
nationality as the American Union, there arises a movement which,
without the slightest rational or high moral cause, aims to break away
from this advanced, this free and humanizing political organization; and
not only to break away from the main body, but also maintains the right
of the seceding portion itself to break up into independent
sovereignties; then, the conclusion is forced upon every impartial mind
that the spirit which animates such a disruptive movement is a spirit
opposed to civilization, since it runs in precisely the opposite
direction; as, instead of tending to unity, to accord, to a large
organization with individual freedom, it tends to disunity, separation,
the splitting up of society into many independent sovereign states, or
fractions of states, certain, absolutely certain to clash and war with
each other, especially with slavery as their woof and warp; and thus
bring back the reign of barbarism, and the ultimate subjection of these
warring little sovereignties to one or more iron despotisms.

The inevitable tendency of the rebellion, if successful, and its
doctrine of secession _ad libitum_, is (even without slavery--how much
more with it!) to hurl society to the bottom of the steep and rugged
declivity up which, through the long ages, divine Providence, the guide
of man, has been in the ceaseless and finally successful endeavor to
raise it. The American republic is the highest level, the loftiest table
land yet reached by man in his political ascent; and the forces that
would drag him from thence are forces from beneath, the animal, selfish,
devilish element of depraved human nature, which so long have held the
race in bondage; and which, now that they see their victim slipping from
their grasp, and rising beyond reach into the high region of unity,
peace, and progress, are moving all the powers of darkness for one final
and successful assault. Will it be successful? We cannot believe it.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is the cause of this wicked, heaven-defying, insane movement on the
part of the South? The answer is written in flames of light along the
sky, and in letters of blood upon the breadth of the land. Slavery
first, slavery middle, and slavery last. Accursed slavery! firstborn of
the evil one--the lust of dominion over others for one's own selfish
purposes, in its naked, most shameless, and undisguised form. Dominion
of man over man in other modes, such as absolute monarchy, aristocracy,
feudalism, ecclesiastical rule--all these justify their exactions under
the plea of the welfare of the subject, or the salvation of souls.
Slavery has nothing of the kind behind which to hide its monstrosity;
nor does it care to do so, except when hard pushed, and then it feebly
pleads the christianization of the negro! A plea at which the common
sense of mankind and of Christendom simply laughs.

Now slavery, we know, is just the reverse of freedom, and hence it is
only natural to expect that the fruits, the results of slavery, wherever
its influence extends, would closely partake of the nature of their
parent and cause. Slavery, then, as the antipodes of freedom, must
engender in the community that harbors and fosters it, habits,
sentiments, and modes of life continually diverging from, and ever more
and more antagonistic to, whatever proceeds from free institutions.

Let us look at some of these. There are four points of antagonism
between free and slave institutions that seem to stand out more
prominently than others; at any rate, we shall not now extend our
inquiry beyond them.

Slavery, then, begets in the ruling class:

     1. An excessive spirit of domineering and command;

     2. A contempt of labor;

     3. A want of diversified industry;

     4. These three results produce a fourth, viz., a division of slave
     society into a wealthy, all-powerful slaveholding aristocracy on
     the one hand; and an ignorant, impoverished, and more or less
     degraded non-slaveholding class on the other.

It is at once seen how slavery develops to the utmost, in the master and
dominant race, a habit of command, of self-will, of determination to
have one's own way at all hazards, of intolerance of any contradiction
or opposition; of quickness to take offence, and to avenge and right
one's self. The possession and exercise of almost irresponsible power
over others tend to destroy in the master all power of self-control;
foster intolerance of any legal restraint, of any law but one's own
will, that must either rule or ruin. It is a spirit that is cultivated
assiduously from childhood to youth, and from youth to full age, by
constant and ubiquitous subjection of the negro, young and old, to the
petty tyranny, the whims and caprices of little master and miss, and by
the exercise of authority at all times and in all places by the white
over the black race. It is a spirit that is essential to the slave
driver; and when the habit of dictation and command to inferiors has
grown into every fibre of his nature, he cannot dismiss it when he deals
with his equals, whenever his wishes are opposed. Hence the violence,
the lawlessness, the carrying and free use of deadly weapons, the duels
and murders that are so rife in the South, and the haughty manners of so
many Southern Congressmen. The rebellion is simply the culmination and
breaking forth of this arrogant, domineering, slavery-fostered spirit on
a vast scale. Failing to hold the reins of the National Government, it
must needs destroy it.

Such a temper and disposition is evidently incompatible with human
equality and equal rights; and in it we have one of the roots of
Southern ill-concealed antagonism to free republican government.

2d. The second Southern, or slavery-engendered element that is
antagonistic to free institutions, is contempt of labor.

Could anything else be expected? Because slaves work, and are compelled
to it by the overseer's lash, _all_ labor necessarily partakes of the
disgrace which is thus attached to it. It is surprising how perverted
the Southern mind is upon this point. Because slavery degrades labor,
they maintain that the converse must also be true, viz., that all who
labor must unavoidably possess the spirit of slaves; and hence they
supposed that the North would not make a vigorous opposition, because
all Northerners are addicted to labor.

The truth however is this: Where labor is despised no community can
flourish as it is capable of doing; much less one with free
institutions. We might just as well talk of a body without flesh and
bones; of a house without walls or timbers; of a country without land
and water, as of free institutions without skilled and honorable labor.
It is the very ground on which they stand.

This then is another source of antagonism between slave and free
institutions.

3d. A third point, not only of difference, but also of antagonism
between slave society and free, consists in the permanent contraction or
limitation of the field of labor in the former, and its perpetual
expansion and multiplication of the branches of industry in the latter.
Not only does the slave perform as little work as he can with safety,
but besides this, the sphere in which slave labor can be profitably
employed is a limited one. Agriculture on an extensive scale, on large
plantations, is the only one that the slaveholder finds to repay him.
All articles, or the vast majority of them, used by the South, that
require for their production a great number of different and subdivided
branches of labor, come from the North.

We have said that labor, skilled, honored, educated labor, is the
material foundation, the solid ground upon which free institutions rest.
We now further add this undeniable and important truth, viz., that as
branches of labor are multiplied; as each branch itself is subdivided
and diversified; as new branches and new details are established by the
aid of the ever-increasing light of scientific discovery, and the
exhaustless fertility of human inventive genius; as all these numerous
industries are more or less connected and interlocked; as this great
network of ever-multiplying and diversified human labors expands its
circumference, while also filling up its interior meshes, in the degree
that all this takes place, the broader and firmer becomes this
industrial foundation for free institutions.

It is on this broad platform of diversified and interlocked labors that
man meets his brother man and equal. The variety and diversity of labors
adapts itself to a like and analogous diversity of human characters,
tastes, and industrial aptitudes and capacities. And the mutual
dependence and interlocking of these multiplied branches of industry
bring the laborers themselves into more numerous, more close, and
independent relations. Men are first drawn together by their mutual
wants and their social impulses; but when thus brought together, they
tend to remain united, not merely by affinity of character, but also,
and often mainly by their having something to _do_ in common--by their
common labors and pursuits. Advancing civilization, since it ever brings
out and develops more and more of man's nature, must, as a natural
result, ever also multiply his wants. These multiplying wants can be
satisfied for each individual only by the diversified activities of
multitudes of his fellows; the results of whose united labors, brought
to his door, are seen in the countless articles that go to make up a
well-built and well-furnished modern dwelling. Labor is thus the great
_social cement_; and can any one fail to see that it is upon the basis
of such a diversified and interwoven industry that a corresponding
multiplicity, intermingling, and union of human relations are
established; and also that it is only under free institutions in the
enjoyment of equal rights, where all are equal before the law, and where
political authority and order emanate from the people themselves, that
labor itself can be free; and not only free, but ennobled, and at full
liberty to expand itself broadly and widely in all departments, without
any conceivable limits? While at the same time, by the interlacing of
its countless details, it cements the laborers, the respective
communities, the entire nation into a noble brotherhood of useful
workers.

We have yet to learn the elevating, refining power of labor, when
organized as it can, and assuredly will be. At present we have no
adequate conception of this influence. It is solely for the sake of
labor, for the sake of human activity, that it may fill as many and as
wide and deep channels as possible, and thus permit man's varied life
and capacities to flow freely forth, and expand to the utmost; it is
solely for this end that all government is instituted; and under a free,
popular government, under the guidance of religion and science, labor is
destined to reach a degree of development and a perfection of
organization, and to exert a reactive influence in ennobling human
character that shall surpass the farthest stretch of our present
imaginings. Our rare political organization is but the coarse, bold
outlines--the rugged trunk and branches of the great tree of liberty.
Out of this will grow the delicate and luxuriant foliage of a varied,
beautiful, scientific, and dignified industry and social life.

This is the glorious, towering, expanding structure, which the insane
rebellion, the dark slave power, is raging to destroy! to tear it,
branch by branch, to pieces, and scatter the ruins to the four winds, in
order to set up, what? in its place. A foul, decaying object--a slave
oligarchy, which, do what it will, is, at each decennial census, seen to
fall steadily farther and farther into the rear even of the most laggard
of the Free States, in all that goes to make up our American
civilization.[1] And all this because it sees that the life of the
republic is the death of slavery, and free labor the eternal enemy of
slave.

This difference in the conditions of labor, then, forms the third point
of antagonism between free and slave institutions.

It is an antagonism that is ever on the increase--ever intensifying, and
utterly irremediable in any conceivable way or mode. Much as the nation
longs for peace, this is utterly hopeless, let it do what it
will--compromise, try arbitration, mediation--nothing can bring lasting
peace but the death of slavery. Freedom may be crushed for a season, but
as it is the breath of God himself, it will live and struggle on from
year to year, and from age to age, and give the world no rest until it
has vanquished all opposition, and asserted its divine right to be
supreme.

If slave society, therefore, thus necessarily diverges ever farther and
farther from the conditions which characterize, and those which result
from the operations of free institutions, such society must of course be
fast on its way to a monarchical, or even an absolute and despotic
government. The whites of the South even now may be considered as
separated into two distinct classes--the governing and the governed. The
slaveholders are virtually the governing class, through their superior
wealth, education, and influence; and the non-slaveholders are as
virtually the subject class, since slavery, being the great, paramount,
leading interest, overtopping and overshadowing all things else, tinging
every other social element with its own sombre hue, is fatal to any
movement adverse to it on the part of the non-slaveholder. Everything
must drift in the whirl of its powerful eddy, a terrible maelstrom, into
which the North was fast floating, when the thunder of the Fort Sumter
bombardment awoke it just in time to see its awful peril and strike out,
with God's help, into the free waters once more.

       *       *       *       *       *

From these considerations, can we be surprised at the rumors that now
and then come from the South, of incipient movements toward a
monarchical government? Not at all. Should the rebellion succeed--a
supposition which is, of course, not to be harbored for a moment--but in
such an improbable contingency there can be hardly a reasonable doubt
that a monarchy would be the result. Not probably at first. The
individual States would like to amuse themselves awhile with the game of
secession, and the joys of independent sovereignty, State rights, etc.,
as Georgia has already begun to do, in nullifying the conscription law
on their bogus congress. But eventually their mutual jealousies, their
'quick sense of honor,' their contentious and intestine wars (and
nothing else can reasonably be looked for) will bring them under an
absolute monarchy, more or less arbitrary, or under the yoke of some
foreign power.

       *       *       *       *       *

The antagonism between free and slave institutions, which we have
inferred, from a glance at the peculiar workings of each, finds its
complete confirmation in certain statements made by Mr. Calhoun, some
twenty years ago, which were to this effect, viz.:

     'Democracy in the North is engendering social anarchy; it is
     tending to the loosening of the bonds of society. Society is not
     governed by the will of a mob, but by education and talent.
     Therefore the South, resting on slavery as a stable foundation, is
     a principle of authority: it must restrain the North; must resist
     the anarchical influence of the North; must counterbalance the
     dissolving influence of the North. He upheld slavery because it was
     a bulwark to counterbalance the dissolving democracy of the North;
     that the dissolving doctrines of democracy took their rise in
     England, passed into France, and caused the French Revolution; that
     they have been carried out in the democracy of the North, and will
     there ultimate in revolution, anarchy, and dissolution.' (Taken
     from Horace Greeley, in _Independent_ of December 25th, 1862.)

These are Mr. Calhoun's own words, and he will probably be allowed to be
a fair exponent of Southern sentiment: we may gather from these
utterances how the free republicanism of the North is regarded by the
slave oligarchy.

We cannot forbear adding another statement of Mr. Calhoun, made to
Commodore Stuart, as far back as 1812, in a private conversation at
Washington, which was in substance as follows, viz.: That the South, on
account of slavery, found it necessary to ally herself with one of the
political parties; but that if ever events should so turn out as to
break this alliance, or cause that the South could not control the
Government, that then it would break it up.

Comment upon this is unnecessary. Let no loyal man forget these
expressions; they reveal the egg from whence, after fifty years'
incubation, this rebellion has been hatched.

But our theme, 'The Value of the Union,' continually expands before us;
nevertheless we must bring our article to a close. We do so with the
following remarks:

An individual is truly free, not in the degree only in which he governs
himself, but in the degree that he governs himself according to the
central truth and right of things, or according to the loftiness of the
standard by which he regulates his conduct.

It is by the possession of truth, and by obedience to what that truth
teaches, that a man rises out of evil and error, and out of bondage
thereto.

The possession of truth constitutes intelligence.

But intelligence is worse than useless without obedience to its highest
requirements, which is virtue.

Virtue, or morality, in its turn (or decent exterior conduct), is
nothing without that which constitutes the soul's topmost and central
faculty, viz., the religious sentiment, or that which links the soul to
God, the centre of all things. As the parts of any organism, as we have
seen, fall into confusion and discord when the central bond is wanting;
so do the powers of the soul, when it closes itself by evil doing
against the entrance of the beams of life and light that unceasingly
flow upon it from God, the spiritual sun and centre of the universe.

Now, as individuals make up the nation, this will be free, and the Union
valued and preserved, in the degree that each individual is intelligent,
virtuous, and religious.

Upon those, then, who educate the individual, those to whom the infant,
the child, the youth, is entrusted, to mould and imbue at the most
pliant and receptive period of life--on those, whose office it is to
form the young mind into the love and practice of all things good and
true, and an abhorrence of their opposites; upon these, the parents, the
teachers, and the pastors of the land; upon these, when this hurricane
of civil war shall have passed away, do the preservation of this Union
and the hopes of mankind more than ever depend. Upon home education and
influence; on the schools and on the churches on these three forces
centred upon, interwoven, and vitalized by true Christian doctrine, as
revealed in the Sacred Scriptures or inspired Word of God, rest the
destinies of the American republic. May those who wield them live and
act with an ever more vivid and growing consciousness of their great
responsibility.


A MERCHANT'S STORY.

'All of which I saw, and part of which I was.'


CHAPTER XXV.

Joe led Slema away, and, springing from the block, I pressed through the
crowd to where Larkin was standing.

'Larkin,' I said, placing my hand on his arm, 'come with me.'

'Who in h---- ar ye?' he asked, turning on me rather roughly.

'My name is Kirke. You ought to know me.'

'Kirke! Why ye ar! I'm right down glad ter see ye, Mr. Kirke,' he
exclaimed, seizing me warmly by the hand.

'Come with me; I want to talk with you.'

He sprang from the bench, and followed me into the mansion.

Entering the library, I locked the door. When he was seated, I said:

'Now, Larkin, who do you want this girl for?'

'Wall, I swar! Mr. Kirke, ye fire right at th' bull's eye!' Then,
hesitating a moment, he added:

'Fur myself.'

'No, you don't; you know that isn't true.'

'Ha!--ha! This ar th' second time ye've told me I lied. Nary other man
ever done it twice, Mr. Kirke; but I karn't take no 'fence with ye,
nohow--ha! ha!'

'Come, Larkin, don't waste time. Tell me squarely--_who_ do you want
this girl for?'

'Wall, Mr. Kirke, I can't answer thet--not in honor.'

'Shall _I_ tell _you_?'

'Yas, ef ye kin!'

'John Hallet.'

'Wall, I'm d----d ef ye doan't take th' papers. Who in creashun told ye
thet?'

'No one; I _know_ it, Hallet's only son is engaged to this girl. He
wants her, to balk him.'

'Ye're wrong thar. He wants har fur _himself_.'

'For himself!'

'Yas; he's got a couple now. He's a sly old fox; but he's one on 'em.'

'Is he willing to pay eighty-two hundred dollars for a mistress?'

'Wall, Preston owes him a debt, an' he reckons 'tain't wuth a hill o'
beans. Thet's th' amount uv it.'

Thus the wrong of the father was to be atoned for by the dishonor of the
child! Preston was right: the curse which followed his sin had fallen on
all he loved--on his wife, his mistress, the octoroon girl, his manly,
noble son; and now, the cloud which held the thunderbolt was hovering
over the head of his best-loved child! And so He visiteth 'the sins of
the fathers upon the children!'

'But he is wrong! Preston's estate will pay its debts. If it does not,
Joe will make good the deficiency, I will guarantee Hallet's claim. See
him, and tell him so.'

'He hain't yere, an' woan't be yere. He allers fights shy. An'
'twouldn't be uv no use. He's made up his mind to hev th' gal, an' hev
har he will. He's come all th' way from Orleans ter make sure uv it.'

'But, Larkin, you've a heart under your waistcoat; _you_ won't lend
yourself to the designs of such a consummate scoundrel as Hallet!'

'Scoundrel's a hard word, Mr. Kirke. 'Tain't used much round yere; when
it ar, it draws blood like a lancet.'

'I mean no offence to you, Larkin; but it's true--I will prove it;' and
I went on to detail my early acquaintance with Hallet; his vast
profession and small performance of piety; his betrayal of Frank's
mother; his treatment of his son, and all the damning record I have
spread before the reader.

As I talked, Larkin rose, and walked the room, evidently affected; but,
when I concluded, he said:

''Tain't no use, Mr. Kirke; I'd ruther ye wouldn't say no more. It makes
me feel like the cholera. An' 'tain't no use! I've _got_ ter buy th'
gal.'

'You have _not_ got to buy her! You need only go away. I will give you a
thousand dollars, if you will go at once.'

'No, no, Mr. Kirke; I karn't do it. I'd like ter 'blige ye, and I need
money like th' devil; but I karn't leave Hallet in th' lurch. 'Twouldn't
be far dealin' 'tween man an' man. He trusts me ter do it, an' I'm in
with him. I _must_ act honest.'

'How _in_ with him?'

'Why, he an' ole Roye ar tergether. The' find th' money fur my
bis'ness--done it fur fifteen yar. The' git th' biggest sheer, but I
karn't help myself, I went inter cotton, like a d--d fool, 'bout a yar
ago, an' lost all I hed--every red cent; an' now I shud be on my beam
ends ef it warn't fur them.'

'Then Hallet has made his money dealing in negroes!'

'Yas, a right smart pile, in thet, an' cotton. He got me inter th' d--d
staple. I hed nigh on ter sixty thousan' then--hard rocks; but I lost it
all--every dollar--at one slap; though I reckon _he_ managed, somehow,
ter get out.'

'Yes, of course, _he_ got out, and saddled the loss upon you. Were you
such a fool as not to see that?'

'P'raps he did; but he covered his trail. He's smart; ye karn't track
_him_. But it makes no odds; I _hev_ ter keep in with him. I couldn't do
a thing, ef I didn't.'

'Yes, you could. Come North. I'll give you honest work to do.'

'You're a gentleman, Mr. Kirke, an' I'm 'bliged ter ye; but I karn't
leave yere. I've got a wife an' chil'ren, an' the' wouldn't live 'mong
ye abolitionists, nohow.'

'You have a wife and children?'

'Yas'; a wife, an' two as likely young 'uns as ye ever seed--boy 'bout
seven, an' gal 'bout twelve.'

'Well, Larkin, suppose _your_ little girl was upon that auction block;
suppose some villain had hired _me_ to aid in debauching her; suppose
you, her father, should come to me and plead with me not to do it;
suppose I should tell you what you have told me, and then--should go out
and buy _your_ child; what would you do? Would you not curse me with
your very last breath?'

He seated himself, and hung down his head, but made no reply.

'Answer me, like the honest man you are.'

'Wall, I reckon I shud.'

'Selma is to marry my adopted son. She is as dear to me as your child is
to you. Can you do to her, what you would curse me for doing to _your_
child? Look me in the face. Don't flinch--answer me!'

I rose, and stood before him. In a few moments he also rose, and,
looking me squarely in the eye--there was a tear in his--he brought his
hand down upon mine with a concussion that might have been heard a mile
off, and said:

'No, I'm d--d ter h--ef I kin.'

'You are a splendid, noble fellow, Larkin.'

'Ye're 'bout th' fust man thet ever said so, Mr. Kirke. Ye told me
suthin' like thet nigh on ter twelve yar ago. I hain't forgot it yit,
an' I never shill.'

'You're rough on the outside, Larkin, but sound at the core--sound as a
nut. I wish the world had more like you. Leave this wretched work!'

'I'd like ter, but I karn't. What kin a feller do, with neither money
nor friends?'

'Get into some honest business. I know you can. I'll help you--Joe will
help you. We'll talk things over to-night, and I know Joe will rig out
something for you.'

He remained seated for a while, saying nothing; then he rose, and, the
moisture dimming his eyes, said:

'I reckon ye're not over pious, Mr. Kirke, an' I _know_ ye'd stand a
hand at a rough an' tumble; but d--d ef thet ain't th' sort o' religion
I like. Come, sir; ef I stay yere, ye'll make a 'ooman on me.'

As we passed into the parlor, I said to Joe, who was seated there with
Selma:

'Give Larkin your hand, Joe; he's a glorious fellow.'

'My _heart_ is in it, Larkin,' said the young man, very cordially. 'It
would have come hard to draw a bead on _you_.'

'I knows it would, Joe, an' I wus ter blame; but I never could stand a
bluff.'

We passed out together to the auction stand. Selma and her brother
ascended the block, while Larkin and I mingled with the buyers, who had
collected in even larger numbers than before. The auctioneer brought
down his hammer:

'Attention, gentlemen! The sale has begun. I offer you again the girl,
Lucy Selma. You've h'ard the description, and (glancing at Joe, and
smiling) you know the _conditions_ of the sale. A thousand dollars is
bid for the girl, Lucy Selma; do I hear any more? Talk quick, gentlemen;
I shan't dwell on this lot; so speak up, if you've anything to say. One
thousand once--one thousand twice--one thousand third and last call. Do
I hear any more?' A pause of a moment. 'Last call, gentlemen.
Going--g-o-i-n-g--go--'

The word was unfinished; the hammer was descending, when a voice called
out:

'Two thousand!'

'Whose bid is that?' cried Joe, striding across the bench, the glare of
a hyena in his eyes.

'Mine, sir!' said the man, with a look of sudden surprise. His face was
shaded by a broad-brimmed Panama hat, and his hair and whiskers were
dyed, but there was no mistaking his large, eagle nose, his sharp,
pointed chin, and his rat-trap of a mouth. It was Hallet! Springing upon
a bench near by, I cried out:

'John Hallet, withdraw that bid, or your time has come! I warn you. You
cannot leave this place alive!'

He gave me a quick, startled look--the look of a thief caught in the
act--but said nothing.

'Who is he?' cried a dozen voices.

'A Yankee nigger-trader! A man that seduced and murdered the woman who
should have been his wife; that cast out and starved his own child, and
now would debauch this poor girl, who is to marry his only son!'

'Wall, he _ar_ a han'some critter.' ''Bout like th' Yankees gin'rally.'
'Clar him out!' cried several voices.

'If you allow him to bid here, you are as bad as he,' I continued,
unintentionally fanning the growing excitement.

'Wall, we woan't.' 'Pitch inter him!' 'Douse him in th' pond!' 'Ride him
on a rail!' 'Give him a coat uv tar!' and a hundred similar exclamations
rose from the crowd, which swayed toward the obnoxious man with a quick,
tumultuous motion.

'He'm in de darky trade; leff de darkies handle him!' cried Ally,
seizing Hallet by the collar, and dragging him toward the pond.

The face of the great merchant turned ghastly pale. Paralyzed with fear,
he made no resistance.

Pressing rapidly through the crowd, and tossing Ally aside as if he had
been a bundle of feathers, Larkin was at Hallet's side in an instant.
Planting himself before him, and drawing his revolver, he cried out:

'Far play, gentlemen, far play. He's a cowardly scoundrel, but he shill
hev far play, or my name ain't Jake Larkin!'

Instinctively the crowd fell back a few paces, and Larkin, with more
coolness, continued:

'Th' only man yere thet's got anything ter say in this bis'ness ar Joe
Preston; an' _he'll_ guv even a Yankee far play. Woan't ye, Joe?' he
cried. Then, turning quickly to his partner, he added: 'Ye didn't know
th' kunditions, Mr. Hallet, did ye? Speak quick.'

'No--I--didn't know I was--giving offence,' stammered Hallet, looking in
the direction in which Larkin's eyes were turned.

Selma had taken the auctioneer's chair, and Joe stood, with folded arms,
glaring on Hallet.

'Come, Joe,' continued Larkin, 'I've done ye a good turn ter-day. Let
him off, an' put it ter my 'count.'

'As you say, Larkin; but he must withdraw his bid, and leave the ground
at once.'

'I withdraw it, sir,' said Hallet, in a cringing tone, clinging fast to
the negro trader.

'Doan't hold on so tight, Mr. Hallet. Lord bless ye! nary one yere'll
hurt ye; they'm gentler'n lambs--ha! ha! But when ye want anuther gal,
doan't ye come _yere_ fur yer darter-in-law--ha! ha!'

Putting his arm within Hallet's, he then attempted to press through the
crowd; but the blood of the chivalry had risen, and, spite of Joe's
remarks, they showed no inclination to let the Yankee off so cheaply.
Forming a solid wall around him, they blocked Larkin's way at every
turn, and cries of 'Let him alone, Larkin!' 'Cool him off, boys!'
'Doan't ye spile th' fun, Larkin!' 'Guv th' feller a little
hosspitality!' echoed from all directions.

Putting up his revolver, Larkin turned to them, and said, in the mildest
and blandest tone conceivable:

'Thet's right, boys--ye _orter_ hev some fun; but this gintleman's sick.
Doan't ye see how pale he ar? He couldn't stand it, nohow. But thar's a
feller thet kin,' pointing to Mulock, who stood looking on, at the outer
edge of the crowd. 'Ef ye're spilin' fur sport, ye moight try yer hand
on him!'

'Yas, he'm de man!' cried Ally. 'He holped whip de young missus. He
telled on har fur twenty dollar. He'm de man!'

Mulock did not seem to realize, at once, that he was the subject of
these remarks. The moment he did, he sprang out of the crowd, and darted
off for the woods at the top of his speed. A hundred men followed him,
with cries of 'Mount, head him off!' 'Five dollars ter th' man thet
kotches him!' 'Take him, dead or alive!'

Amid the universal excitement and confusion that followed, Larkin walked
rapidly away with Hallet.

'You can heat the kettle, boys; Mulock can't run,' cried Joe, from the
platform. 'But you must give him a fair trial.

'We'll do thet, never ye fear!' echoed a dozen voices.

'I nominate his friend, Mr. Gaston, for judge,' said Joe.

'Gaston it is!' Gaston it is!' 'Mount the bench, Mr. Gaston!' shouted a
hundred 'natives.'

Gaston got upon the auction stand, and said:

'I'll serve, gentlemen; but, before we select jurors, the sale must go
on. Miss Preston is not sold yet.'

'All right! all right! Hurry up, Mr. Hammerman!' shouted the crowd.

The auctioneer took his place:

'A thousand dollars is bid for this young lady. Going--gone--_gone_, to
Mr. Joseph Preston.'

Selma put her arms about Joe's neck, and, in broken tones, said: 'My
brother! my dear brother!' Then she laid her head on his shoulder, and
wept--wept unrestrainedly.

Who can fathom the untold misery she had endured within those two hours?


CHAPTER XXVI.

The impromptu judge took his seat on the bench, and the excited
multitude once more subsided into quiet. In about fifteen minutes a
tumult arose in a remote quarter of the ground, and Mulock and his
pursuers appeared in sight, shouting, screaming, and swearing in a
decidedly boisterous manner. The most of the profanity--to the credit of
the self-appointed _posse comitatus_ be it said--was indulged in by the
ex-overseer, who, with his clothes torn in shreds, and his face covered
with blood, looked like the battered relic of a forty years' war. A red
bandanna pinioned his arms to his sides, and a strong man at each elbow
spurred his flagging footsteps by an occasional poke with a pine branch.
Ally followed at a few paces, looking about as dilapidated as the
culprit himself. To him evidently belonged the glory of the capture.

As they approached the stand. Gaston rose, and called out:

'Do not insult justice, by bringing the prisoner into court in this
condition. Let his face be washed, his garments changed, and his wounds
bound up, before he appears for trial. Dr. Rawson, I commission you
special officer for the duty.'

'I'm at your service, Major Gaston,' said the doctor, stepping out from
the crowd into the open semicircle in front of the bench. 'Will some one
procure the loan of a coat, hat, and trousers at the mansion?'

Ally started for the needed clothing, and the physician led the way to
the small lake. In about twenty minutes the volunteer officials returned
with the criminal, clothed in a more respectable manner, and Gaston said
to him.

'Prisoner, take your place.'

Resistance was useless, and Mulock, with a slow step, and a sullen,
dogged air, ascended the platform, and seated himself in the chair
provided for him at its further extremity. Gaston sat at the other end,
facing him; and four brawny 'natives,' with revolvers in their hands,
took positions by his side.

'Silence in the court!' cried Gaston.

The noisy multitude became quiet, and the extempore official
proceeded--with greater solemnity than many another judge of more
regular appointment exhibits on similar occasions--to say:

'Prisoner, you are charged with two of the highest offences known to our
laws; namely, with aiding and abetting an illegal and cruel assault on a
white woman, and with procuring and inciting the murder of your own
wife. You are about to be tried for these crimes by a jury of your
countrymen and I am appointed judge, that full and impartial justice may
be done you. It shall be done. Counsel will be awarded you; and, that
you may not be condemned by prejudiced men, you will be given the
privilege of peremptory challenge against four out of every five of the
jurors I shall nominate, I shall now proceed to name the jury, and you
will signify your objection to those you do not approve. Thomas
Murchison.'

That gentleman came forward, and Mulock said:

'I take him.'

'Godfrey Banks.'

'He's inimy ter me.'

The man stepped aside; and thus they proceeded, the prisoner taking full
advantage of the liberty of choice allowed him, until, out of a panel of
nearly sixty, twelve respectable, yeomanly-looking men had been
selected. As each juror was approved of by the crowd (who had the final
decision), he took a seat on a row of benches facing the 'judge' and the
prisoner. When the last one had taken his place, Gaston said:

'Prisoner, you have heard the charges against you; are you guilty, or
not guilty? If you think proper to acknowledge your guilt of either or
both the crimes with which you are charged, I shall feel it my duty to
award you a lighter punishment.'

'I hain't guilty uv 'ary one on 'em,' said Mulock, without looking up.

'What legal gentleman will appear for the people?' cried Gaston, turning
to the audience. Several sprigs of the law shot out from the multitude,
'I accept _you_, Mr. Flanders. Who will act for the prisoner?'

Each one of the volunteers fell back, and no response came from any part
of the ground. Mulock evidently was neither blessed nor cursed with many
friends.

'Does no one appear for the prisoner? Gentlemen of the legal profession,
I am sorry to see this reluctance to aid a defenceless man. Will not
some one oblige _me_, by volunteering? I shall consider it a personal
service,' said Gaston.

Still no response was heard. At least five minutes passed, and the
'judge's' face was assuming a look of painful concern, when Larkin
approached the bench.

'Gintlemen,' he said, 'th' man hain't no friends, an' it's a d--d shame
not ter come out fur a feller as stands alone. Ef I knowed lor, I'd go
in fur him, ef he wus th' devil himself.'

No one came forward in answer to even this appeal; and, turning on the
crowd, while warm, manly scorn glowed on his every feature, the
negro-trader cried out:

'Ye're a set uv d--d sneakin' hounds, every one on ye. Ye're wuss than
th' parsons, an' the' hain't fit ter tote vittles ter a bar.' Turning to
the 'judge,' he added, in a more respectful tone: 'I doan't know th'
fust thing 'bout lor, Major Gaston, an' this man's nigh as mean a cuss
as th' Lord ever made; but ef ye'll 'cept me, I'll go in fur him!'

'I will accept you with pleasure. You're doing a gentlemanly thing, Mr.
Larkin.'

A murmur of applause went round the assemblage, as Larkin and the other
counsel took seats near the jury.

The 'judge' then rose, and said:

'Gentlemen of the jury: You have engaged in a solemn office. You are
about to try a fellow being for his life. It is a painful duty, but it
is an obligation you owe to the community, and to yourselves, and you
will not shrink from it. Society is held together by laws made to
protect the innocent and punish the guilty. But, as _our_ society is
organized, there are some offences which our tribunals cannot reach. In
such cases the people, from whom all laws proceed, have a right to take
the law into their own hands.

'The prisoner is charged with crimes which, from the circumstances
surrounding their commission, cannot be reached by regular courts of
justice. They were witnessed by none but blacks, whose testimony, by our
statutes, is not admissible. We, the people, therefore, are to try him;
and, to get at the facts, we shall receive the evidence of negroes. You
will judge for yourselves as to its credibility. If any doubt of the
prisoner's guilt rests in your minds, you will give him the benefit of
it, and acquit him; but if, on the other hand, you are fully persuaded
that he committed either or both the crimes of which he is accused, you
will convict him. _You_ will patiently hear the testimony that may be
presented; _I_ will honestly and impartially give sentence, according to
the decision at which you may arrive. The trial will now proceed.'

The witnesses were then examined. Ally was the first one sworn. He
deposed to the circumstances attending the whipping of Phyllis, and the
assault on Selma; but, as his evidence was altogether hearsay--he not
being present on either occasion--it was ruled out, as was also his
account of the bribing of Mulock by the mistress.

Three other negroes were then called, and they proved that Mulock aided
in dragging Selma to the whipping rack, and witnessed the beating; but
they failed to show that he was privy to or participated in the assault
on his wife. Others were examined, who saw parts of the two
transactions, and then the testimony closed.

As the last witness left the stand, Gaston said:

'I shall allow the prisoner the benefit of the final appeal. The
attorney for the people will now address the jury.'

The lawyer, a young man of no especial brilliancy or ability, rose, and,
going rapidly over the testimony, drew the conclusion from it that
Mulock had instigated the beating of both mother and daughter, and was
therefore guilty of the assault and the murder, and should accordingly
be punished with death.

The motive actuating him he held to be revenge on Preston, for having,
long previously, debauched his wife Phyllis. This passion, held in check
during Preston's lifetime by fear of the consequences which might follow
its indulgence, had broken out after his death, and wreaked itself on
the two defenceless women.

The gentleman's reasoning was not very cogent, but, what he lacked in
logic, he made up in bitter denunciation of Mulock, who, according to
his showing, was a little blacker than the prime minister of the lower
regions.

As he took his seat, Larkin rose, and, addressing himself to both the
jury and the multitude, spoke, as near as I can recollect, as follows:

'Gintlemen, this yere sort o' bis'ness is out uv my line. I'm not used
ter speechifyin', an' I may murder whot's called good English; but I'd a
durned sight ruther murder _thet_, then ter joodiciously, or ary other
how, murder a human bein'; an' it's my private 'pinion _ye'll_ murder
Mulock, ef ye bring him in guilty uv death.

'A man hain't no right ter take human life, 'cept in self-defence. Even
ef Mulock was so bad as this loryer feller tries ter make him out--but
he hain't, 'cause 'tain't in natur for a man ter be wuss than th' devil
himself--ye'd hev no right to stop his breath. Ye didn't guv it ter him;
it doan't b'long ter ye, an' th' lor doan't 'low ye ter take what hain't
your'n. Ef ye does, it's stealin', an' I knows thet none on the
gintlemen uv the jury ar so allfired mean as ter steal--'ticularly ter
steal whot woan't be uv no sort o' use ter 'em, nohow.

'The loryer yere, hes spread hisself on Mulock's motive fur doin' this
thing; 'sistin' thet fur seventeen yar he's ben a nussin'
suthin--nussin' it as keerfully as a mother nusses her chil'ren. Now,
young 'uns gin'rally walks when they's 'bout a yar old; but this one
thet Mulock's ben a nussin' didn't git 'round till it wus seventeen; an'
I reckon a bantlin' thet karn't gwo alone afore it's thet age, woan't
never do much hurt ter nobody.

'But these hain't th' raal p'ints uv th' case. I'm loryer 'nuff ter tell
ye, ye must gwo on th' evidence; an' thar hain't no evidence ter show
thet Mulock hed anything ter do with th' whippin' uv his wife; an' th'
_murder_ wus in thet. He _did_--so th' nigs say, an' I reckon the' tells
th' truth; an' thet's whot nary loryer kin do ef he try; so ye sees, a
_nig_ is smarter nor a loryer. Wall, the nigs say he holped in whippin'
th' white 'ooman; an', as 'torney fur th' _truth_, gintlemen, which I'm
gwine in fur yere, I've got ter 'low it. He did aid an' 'bet, as the
loryers call it, in thet, an' thet proves him 'bout as mean as a white
man ever gits ter be; an', 'sides thet, he did _sell_ har fur twenty
dollars--a 'ooman thet even th' 'judge'--an' he _ar_ a _judge_ uv sech
things--was willin' ter pay twenty-five hun'red fur; he _did_ sell har
fur _twenty dollars_; an' thet proves him a fool! Now, fur bein' both
mean an' a fool, I 'low he orter be punished. But doan't ye kill him,
gintlemen! Guv it ter him 'cordin' ter his natur an' his merits.' Just
luk at him. Hev ye ever seed sech a face, an' sech an eye as thet, in
ary human bein'? Why, his eye ar jest like a snake's; an' its natural,
ye knows, fur snakes ter crawl; the' karn't do nuthin' else, an' the'
hain't ter blame fur it. No more ye karn't blame Mulock for bein' whot
he ar. So guv him a coat uv tar--a ride on a rail--a duckin' in th'
pond--arything thet's 'cordin' ter his natur an' his merits; but doan't
ye take 'way his _life_! Ef ye does thet, he's _lost_--LOST
furever; fur, I swar ter ye, his soul ar so small, thet ef it was once
out uv his body, th' LORD himself couldn't find it, an' th'
pore feller'd hev ter gwo wand'rin' 'round with nary whar ter stay, an'
nary friends, aither in heaven or t'other place! So be easy with him,
gintlemen! Guv him one more chance. Let him stay yere a spell longer,
fur yere his soul may grow. An' it _kin_ grow! Everything in natur
grows--even skunks; an' who knows but Mulock may sprout out yit, an'
grow ter be a MAN!

'I'se nuthin' more ter say, gintlemen, only this: Afore ye make up yer
minds ter bring Mulock in guilty uv death, jest put yerselfs inter his
place, an' ax yerselfs ef _ye'd_ like ter hev a rope put 'round yer
windpipe, as ye'd put it 'round his'n! Ef ye wudn't, jest remember,
'tain't manly ter use ary 'nother man in a how ye wudn't like ter be
used yerselfs. I'm done.'

Larkin was frequently interrupted, during the delivery of this address,
by the loud shouts and laughter of the crowd; but, at its close, a
perfect tornado of applause swept over the multitude, and a hundred
voices called out:

'No; doan't ye hang him.' 'Give him one more chance.' 'Doan't gwo more'n
the tar.' 'Larkin's a loryer, shore.'

Amid these and similar exclamations, the jury retired to the little
grove of liveoaks. In about fifteen minutes they returned to their
seats.

'Gentlemen of the jury,' said Gaston, 'have you agreed on your verdict?'

''Greed on one thing, Major Gaston,' said the foreman, rising; 'hain't
on t'other.'

'On what have you agreed?'

'On whippin' th' young 'ooman.'

'What say you on that--guilty, or not guilty?'

'Guilty.'

'And so say you all?'

'Yas, Major.'

'How do you stand on the other charge?'

'Four gwo in fur guilty; th' rest on us think Jake Larkin 'bout right as
ter hangin' on him.'

'It is not for Mr. Larkin, or you, to say what shall be done with the
prisoner. You are to decide whether he is or is not guilty of
instigating the murder of his wife. You must retire again, until you
agree upon that.'

''Twouldn't be uv no use; Major. We reckon he's mean 'nuff ter hev done
it; but whether he done it, or no, we gwo fur givin' him a chance ter
live.

'Ye're white men, I swar!' cried Larkin, springing from his seat, and
grasping the hands of several of the jurors in turn.

'Take your seat, and observe order, Mr. Larkin,' said the judge, smiling
in spite of himself.

'All right,' said Larkin; 'ye're _some_ as a judge, Major--'bout up ter
me as a loryer, an' thet's saying a heap; so jest be easy on th' pore
devil. _Do_, yer _Honor!_'

'Silence, sir!' said Gaston, laughing.

Larkin took his seat, and the 'judge' continued:

'Prisoner, you have heard the verdict. Have you anything to say why
sentence for aiding in the assault on the white lady should not now be
passed upon you?'

'No, Major Gaston; I've nothin' ter say,' said Mulock, dejectedly.

Gaston continued: 'You have been tried by a jury of your own selection.
They are unanimous in pronouncing you guilty of a cowardly and
unwarrantable assault on a white woman. They evidently deem you guilty
of the worse crime of abetting the murder of your own wife, and humane
feelings only deter them from saying so. In these circumstances, I feel
it my duty to award you a more severe punishment than I should have done
had you been fully acquitted of the last charge. I shall therefore
sentence you to be coated with warm tar, ducked, in that condition,
three times in the pond, and then ridden on a rail to your shop at
Trenton; and may this example of public indignation lead you to a better
life in future. Mr. Larkin, I commission you to superintend the
execution of the sentence.'

'No, ye don't, Major--yer _Honor_, I mean! I'll stand by, an' see Mulock
hes far play; but I woan't do nary one's dirty work, I swar.'

'Well, who will volunteer for the duty?' said Gaston, appealing to the
audience.

About a score of 'natives' offered themselves; but, fixing his eye on a
stout, goodnatured-looking man, who had not volunteered, Gaston said:

'Won't _you_ do it, Mr. Moore?'

'Yas, ter 'blige ye, Major, I will,' replied the man.

The 'judge' then pronounced the court adjourned, and the crowd escorted
Mulock and the impromptu executioners to the site of the old
distilleries. There an iron kettle filled with tar was already simmering
over a light-wood fire, and, being divested of his borrowed plumage,
Mulock was soon clad in a close-fitting suit of black. He was about to
be led to the pond, when Ally appeared on the ground. Making his way
through the crowd, he called out:

'De young missus doan't want dis ting to gwo no fudder. She'll 'sider it
a 'ticular favor ef de gemmen'll leff Mulock gwo.'

'We karn't let him off without consent uv the judge,' said Mr. Moore.

A messenger was sent for Gaston, who soon appeared, and consented that
further proceedings should be stopped. Mulock was at once released, and,
coatless, hatless, and all but trouserless, he made his way through the
hooting multitude, and left the plantation, a blacker, if not a wiser
and a better man.

As we walked away from the 'scene of execution,' I said to the
negro-trader:

'Larkin, you should have been a lawyer; you managed that thing
admirably.'

'Th' boys hed got thar blood up, an' I know'd I couldn't clar him. A man
stands a sorry chance in sech a crowd, ef they's raally bent on
mischief.'

On the following morning the remainder of the negroes were purchased by
Joe; and in the afternoon I was on my way home.


CHAPTER XXVII.

As I was sitting in my library, late one evening, rather more than a
month after the events recorded in the last chapter, a hasty ring came
at the street door.

'Who can be calling so late?' said Kate. 'Had _you_ not better go?'

Drawing on my boots, I went to the door. As I opened it, my hand was
suddenly seized, and a familiar voice exclaimed:

'What about Selly? How is she?'

'Lord bless you, Frank! is this you? How did you get here?'

'How is Selma! Tell me!'

'Safe and well--in Mobile with Joe.'

'Thank GOD! thank GOD for _that!_'

'How did you get here?'

'By the Africa; she's below. I managed to get up by a small boat. I
_couldn't_ wait.'

'Well, go up stairs. Your mother is in the library.'

After the first greeting had passed between Kate and the newcomer, he
plied me with questions in regard to Selma, I told him all, keeping
nothing back. Meanwhile, he walked the room, struggling with contending
emotions--now joy, now rage, now grief. He said nothing till I mentioned
Hallet's connection with the affair; then he spoke, and his words came
like the rushing of the tornado when it mows down the trees.

'That is the _one_ thing too much. I have held back till now. Now he
_dies_!'

'Don't say that, my son!' exclaimed Kate. 'Leave him to his conscience,
and to GOD. 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the
LORD!''

'Vengeance is MINE! Don't talk to me mother! I want no sermons
now!'

She looked at him sadly through her tears, and said:

'Have I deserved this of _you_, Frank?'

'Forgive me! forgive me, my mother!' and he buried his face in her
dress, and wept--wept as he never did when a child.

A half hour passed, and no one spoke. Then he rose, and said to me:

'When did you hear from her last?'

'_I_ had a letter yesterday; here it is,' said Kate. 'You see, she is
expecting you.'

He took it, and read it over slowly. All trace of his recent emotion had
gone, and on his face was an expression I had never seen there before.
For the first time I noticed his resemblance to his father!

'When will you go!' continued Kate.

'I don't know. I cannot _now_.'

'Why not _now_? What is there to prevent?'

'I must go home first. I must see Cragin.'

'Cragin does not expect you for a fortnight,' I said; 'you can be back
by that time.'

'But I _cannot_ go now!' and again he rose, and walked the room. 'I'm
not ready yet. My mind isn't made up.' After a pause, he added: 'Would
you have me marry a slave--a woman of negro blood?'

'I would have you do as your feelings and your conscience dictate.'

'You cannot love her, if you ask that question,' said Kate, kindly, but
sorrowfully.

'I _do_ love her. I love her better than man ever loved woman; but can I
make her my _wife_? A negro wife! negro children!--ha! ha!' and he
clasped his hands above his head, and laughed that bitter, hollow laugh,
which is the sure echo of fearful misery within.

'I cannot advise you, my son. You must act, _now_, on your own judgment.
I will only say, that through it all--when put at slave work--when bound
to the whipping stake--when she stood on the auction block for two long
hours--she was sustained _only_ by trust in _you_. It is true--she told
me so; and if you forsake her now, it will'----

'Kill her! I know it! I know it, O my GOD! my GOD!'
and he groaned in agony--such agony as I never before saw rend the
spirit of mortal man.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning he started for Mobile. Ten days afterward, the
following telegram was handed me:

     'Selma is dead. Frank is here, raving crazy. Come on at once.

     JOSEPH PRESTON.'

       *       *       *       *       *

That night I was on my way, and that day week I reached Mobile. The
first person I met, as I entered Joe's warehouse, was Larkin.

'Where is Joe?'

'Ter th' plantation. He's lookin' fur ye. I'll tote ye thar ter onst.'

In half an hour we were on the road. We arrived just before dark, and
at once I entered the mansion. Joe's hand was in mine in a moment.

'What caused this terrible thing?' I asked, hastily, eagerly.

'I don't know. When he arrived, Frank was low-spirited and moody, but
very glad to see me. I brought him up here at once. He seemed overjoyed
at meeting Selma, and would not let her go out of his sight for a
moment. Still he appeared excited and uneasy, till I met him at the
supper table. Then he was more like himself. I went with them into the
parlor, and there conversed with Frank on business matters for fully two
hours. We planned some shipments to Europe, and talked over sending
Larkin to Texas to buy cattle for the New Orleans market. We agreed on
it. I was to provide means, by keeping ninety-day drafts afloat on them
(I'm short, just now, having paid out so much for the negroes), and they
and I were to divide the profits with Larkin. Frank's head was as clear
as a bell. I had no idea he was so good a business man. Well, about
eight o'clock I left them together, and, a little after nine, went to
bed. Selma's room is next to mine, and it couldn't have been later than
eleven when I heard her go to it.

'The next morning she didn't come down as usual. I had a servant call
her. She made no reply; but I thought nothing of it, till half an hour
afterward. Then I went up myself. I rapped repeatedly, but got no
answer. Becoming alarmed, I sent a servant for an axe. Frank brought it
up, and I battered down the door, and found her lying on the bed,
dressed as usual, a half-empty bottle of laudanum beside
her--DEAD!'

'My GOD! And Frank made her do it!'

'Don't say that. If he _did_, he is fearfully punished; he has suffered
terribly.'

'Where is he?'

'In the front room. He has raved incessantly. At first four men couldn't
hold him. Somehow, he got a knife, and cut himself badly. I got it away,
but he threw me in the struggle, and nearly throttled me. He's calmer
now, and I've had him untied; but old Joe has to stay with him night and
day. Nobody else can manage him.'

We went into the room. Frank sat in one corner, pale, haggard, only the
shadow of what he was but ten days before. His head was leaning against
the wall, and he was gazing out of the window.

As I entered, 'Boss Joe' came forward and greeted me, but neither of us
spoke. Approaching Frank, I laid my hand on his shoulder.

'My boy, I have come for you.'

He rose, and looked at me, a wild glare in his eyes.

'Well, it's high time; I've waited long enough. I'm ready. I don't deny
it--I killed her. Make short work of it. I'd have saved you the trouble,
but this infernal nigger told me I'd go to hell if I did it; and I know
_she_ isn't there. I want to see her again! I want her to forgive me--to
forgive me! Oh! oh!' and he sank into his chair, and moaned piteously.

'He tinks you'm de sheriff, massa Kirke,' whispered Joe.

I leaned over him. The tears started from my eyes, and fell on his face,
as I said:

'You _will_ see her again. She does pity and forgive you.'

He sprang from his seat, and clutched my hands. 'Do you believe it? Joe
says so; but Joe is a nigger, and what does a _nigger_ know?' Then,
putting his mouth close to my ear, he added: 'They told me _she_ was
one. It was false--false as hell; but'--and he threw his arms above his
head, and groaned the rest--'but it made me say it. O my GOD!
my GOD! it made me say it!' His head sank on my shoulder, and
again he gave out those piteous moans.

'Have comfort, my boy. I know she loves and pities you, _now_!'

He looked up. 'Say that again! For the love of God say that again!'

'It is so! As sure as there's another life, it is so!'

He gazed at me fixedly for a few moments--then again commenced pacing
the room.

'I wish I could believe it. But _you_ ought to know; you look like a
parson. You are a parson, aren't you?'

'Yes; I'm a parson. I _know_ it is so!'

'Well, tell them to hurry up. I want to go to her at once--_now_! I
can't live another week in this way. Tell them to hurry up.'

'Yes, I will; and you'll go with me to-morrow, won't you?'

He gave me again, a long, scrutinizing look. 'You're the sheriff, aren't
you?'

'Yes.'

'Well, then, I'll go with you. But you must promise to make short work
of it.'

'Yes, yes; I'll promise that. But lie down now, and be quiet. I'll be
ready for you in the morning.'

'Well, well, I'll try to be patient;' and he threw himself on the small
cot in one corner of the room. 'But you'll let old Joe stay with me,
won't you?'

'Yes; certainly.'

'Thank you, sir. Joe, bring me a cigar--that's a good fellow. You're the
decentest nigger I ever knew. It's an awful pity you're black. They told
me _she_ was black. 'Twas an infernal lie! I know it, for I saw her last
night, and she was whiter than any woman you ever saw. Black! Pshaw!
nobody but the devil's black; and _she_--she's an angel NOW!'

As we passed out of the room, Joe said to me:

'Would you like to see Selma?'

'Have you kept the body?'

'Yes; I knew you would want to see her.'

He led the way up stairs to her chamber. In a plain, air-tight coffin,
lay all that was left of the slave girl. Her hands were crossed on her
bosom; her long, glossy, brown hair fell over her neck, and on her face
was the look the angels wear. She seemed not dead, but sleeping!

As I turned away, Joe took my hand, and, while a nervous spasm passed
over his face, he said:

'She was all that I had; but I--I forgive him!'

'And for that, GOD will forgive _you_!'

The next day we buried her.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Boss Joe' accompanied us to the North. We reached home just after dark.
When we entered the parlor, Frank gazed around with an eager, curious
look, as if some familiar scene was returning to him. In a few moments
Kate entered. She rushed to him, and clasped him in her arms. He took
her face between his two hands, and looked long and earnestly at her.
Then, dropping his head on her shoulder, and bursting into tears, he
cried:

'My mother! O my mother!'

He had awoke. The terrible dream was over. From that moment he was
himself.

What passed between him and Selma on that fatal evening, I never knew.
He has not spoken her name since that night.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Mrs. Dawsey lay at the mansion, under guard, for several weeks. When
finally able to be moved she was conveyed to the 'furnished apartments'
bespoken for her by Joe. Her husband, after a short confinement in jail,
was set at liberty, and then made strenuous efforts to effect his wife's
release on bail. He did not succeed. Public feeling ran very high
against her; and that, probably more than the fact that she was charged
with an unbailable crime, operated to prolong her residence at the
public boarding house kept for runaway slaves and common felons at
Trenton.

At the next session of the 'county court,' after an imprisonment of
four months, she was arraigned for trial. Owing to the death of Selma,
Mulock was the only white witness against her. He told a straightforward
story, the most rigid cross-examination not swerving him from it, and
deposed to Dawsey's having attempted to bribe him to go away. His
evidence was conclusive as to the prisoner's guilt; but her counsel, an
able man, made so damaging an assault on his personal character, that
the jury disagreed. Mrs. Dawsey was then remanded to jail to await a new
trial, at the next sitting of the court.

Shortly after the trial, Mulock suddenly disappeared. Hearing of it, and
suspecting he had been spirited away by Dawsey, Joseph Preston went to
Trenton, and, procuring a judge's order for Mulock's arrest as an
absconding witness, caused a thorough search to be made for him in Jones
and the adjoining counties. He himself visited Chalk Level, in Harnett
County, and there found him, living again with his white wife. That lady
had previously won and lost a second spouse, but, it appeared, was then
in such straits for another husband, that she was willing to take up
with her own cast-off household furniture. Whether a new marriage
ceremony was performed, or not, I never learned; but I have been
reliably informed that Mulock complained bitterly of his wife for having
defrauded him of twenty-five of the fifty dollars she had agreed to pay
as consideration for his again sharing her 'bed and board.'

Mulock admitted having received four hundred dollars from Dawsey for
absenting himself, and gave, as an excuse for accepting the bribe, his
conviction that Mrs. Dawsey could not be found guilty on his testimony.
After his arrest he was confined in the same jail with the 'retired'
schoolmistress.

The second trial was approaching; but, late on the night preceding the
sitting of the court, the jailer's house--which adjoined and
communicated with the prison--was forcibly entered by four armed men
disguised as negroes. They bound and gagged the jailer, his wife, and
two female servants, and, seizing the keys, entered the jail, and
carried Mulock off by force. The keeper heard a desperate struggle, and
it was supposed Mulock was foully dealt by. The footprints of four men
were the next morning detected leading to a spot on the bank of the
river, where a boat appeared to have been moored; but there all traces
were lost, and the overseer's fate is still shrouded in mystery.

Mrs. Dawsey, whose cell adjoined Mulock's, was not disturbed, but public
suspicion connected her husband with the affair. There was, however, no
evidence against him, and he went 'unwhipped of justice.'

The lady was arraigned for trial on the following day, but, no witnesses
appearing against her, she was--after a tedious confinement of ten
months--set at liberty. Thus, at last, she achieved 'a plantation and a
rich planter;' but her darling object in life--to lead and shine in
society, for which her education and character peculiarly fitted
her--she missed. With the exception of her brutal husband, an ignorant
overseer, and a superannuated 'schulemarm,' imported from the North, she
has no associates. Society has built up a wall about her, and, with the
brand of Cain on her forehead, she is going through the world.

Larkin, after breaking off his connection with his 'respectable
associates,' descended from trading in human cattle, to trafficking in
fourfooted beasts, and all manner of horned animals. Joe offered him an
interest in his business; but the negro-trader had too long led a roving
life to be content with the dull routine of regular business. Young
Preston, and Cragin, Mandell & Co., stipulating for a half of his
profits, furnished him a capital of fifty thousand dollars; and with
that he embarked largely in 'cattle driving.' He bought in Texas, and
sold in New Orleans, and did a profitable business until the breaking
out of the rebellion. Since that event he has been an officer in the
confederate army.

Frank remained at my house for a fortnight after his return from the
South, and then, apparently restored, went to Boston. Business had grown
distasteful to him, and he sought a dissolution with Cragin; but the
latter prevailed on him to remain in the firm, and go to Europe. He
continued there until news reached Liverpool of the fall of Fort Sumter.
Then he took the first steamer for home. Arriving in Boston, he at once
effected a dissolution with Cragin, and then came on to New York to make
his 'mother' a short visit prior to entering the army. He expressed the
intention of enlisting as a private, and I tried to dissuade him from
it, by representing how easily he could raise a company in Boston, and
go as an officer. 'No,' he replied; 'I know nothing of tactics. I am
unfit to lead; I can only fire a musket. With one on my shoulder, I will
go and sell my life as dearly as I can.'

On the 18th of May, 1861, he left New York, a private in Duryee's
Zouaves (5th Regiment N. Y. V.), and on the 10th of June following,
while fighting bravely by the side of York, Winthrop, and Greble, at Big
Bethel, fell, badly wounded by a musket ball.

When he was fit to be moved, I had him conveyed home. His recovery was
slow, but, as soon as he was able to go out, and, while still suffering
from his wound, he went on to Boston to render Cragin some assistance in
his business. General Butler's expedition was then fitting out for New
Orleans. Weak as he was, Frank raised a company of Boston boys for it,
and went off as their captain.

He was present at the bombardment and capture of New Orleans; but
growing weary of the inactivity which followed those events, and hearing
of the stirring times in Tennessee, he resolved to resign his
commission, and seek service in the Western army.

After his resignation had been accepted, and on the eve of his departure
for the North, when returning, one night, to his lodgings, he was
accosted by a woman of the street. Her face seemed familiar, and he
asked her name. She answered, 'Rosey Preston.' He went with her to her
home--a miserable room in the third story of a tumbledown shanty in
Chartres street--and there found her child, a bright little fellow of
about six years. With them, on the following day, he sailed for the
North.

Arriving here, he settled on Rosey the income of a small sum, and
procured her apartments in a modest tenement house in East Thirtieth
street. There Rosey now works at her needle, and the little boy attends
a public school.

Within the week of Frank's arrival, and when he was about setting out
for the West, I was surprised one morning, by Ally's appearance in my
office. Newbern had fallen, and he had made his way, with his mother,
into the Union lines, and, after a good deal of difficulty, had secured
a passage on a return transport to New York. I provided employment for
his mother, but Ally insisted on going into the war with Frank. He went
as his servant, but fought at his side at Lawrenceburgh, Dog Walk,
Chaplin Hills, and Frankfort, and in three of those engagements was
wounded. His bones now whiten the plains of Tennessee. Rosey he never
saw, and never forgave.

Frank was with the small body of regulars who, at Murfreesboro, on the
31st of December, checked the advance of Hardee's corps after McCook's
division had been driven from the field, and who saved the day. He was
wounded in the arm, early in the morning, but kept the field, and joined
in that heroic movement wherein fifteen hundred men marched through an
open field, and charged a body of ten thousand posted in a grove of
cedars. Six hundred and forty-six of the brave band were left on the
field. Frank was one of them. A Belgian ball pierced his side, and came
out at his back. He saw and recognized the man who gave him the wound,
and, raising himself on his elbow, fired a last shot. It did its work.
The rebel lies buried where Frank fell.

The telegram which informed me of this event, said: 'He is desperately
wounded, but may survive.' He is now at home, slowly recovering. What he
saw and did while serving in Kentucky and Tennessee, I may at some
future time narrate to the reader.

In relating actual events, a writer cannot in all cases visit artistic
justice on each one of his characters; for, in real life, retribution
does not always appear to follow crime. But, whatever _appearances_ may
be, who is there that does not feel that virtue is ever its own reward,
and vice its own punishment? and what one of my readers would exchange
'a quiet conscience, void of offence toward God and toward man,' for the
princely fortune of John Hallet--who is still the great merchant, the
'exemplary citizen,' the 'honest man'?


LAST WORDS.

Whoever comes before the American people in a time of great _deeds_ like
this, with mere _words_, should have no idle story to tell. He should
have something to say; some fact to relate, or truth to communicate,
which may awaken his countrymen to a true estimate of their interests,
or a true sense of their duties.

The writer of these articles _has_ something to say; some facts to
relate which have not been told; some truths to communicate about
Southern life and society, which the public ought to know. Some of these
facts, gathered during sixteen years of intimate business and social
intercourse with the planters and merchants of the South, he has
endeavored to embody in this volume.

He has woven them into a story, but they are nevertheless facts, and
all, excepting one, occurred under his own observation. That one--the
death of old Jack--was communicated to him as a fact, by his friend, Dr.
W. H. Holcombe, of Waterproof, La., now an officer in the confederate
army.

The author does not mean to say that his story is true as a connected
whole. It is not. In it, persons are brought into intimate relations who
never had any connection in life; events are grouped together which
happened at widely different times; and incidents are described as
occurring in the vicinity of Newbern--the slave auction, for
instance--parts of which occurred in Alabama, parts in Georgia, and
parts in Louisiana. But all of the characters he has described _have_
lived, and all of the events he has related _have_ transpired. He would,
however, not have the reader believe that all he says of himself is
true. Some of it is; some of it is not. The story needed some one to
revolve around; and, as he began by using the personal pronoun, he
continued its use, even in parts--like the scenes with Hallet, wherein
the _I_ stands for entirely another individual.

The real name of the character whom he has called Selma (he can state
this without wounding the feelings of any one, as none of her relatives
are now living), was Selma Winchester. She was educated at Cambridge,
Mass., was a slave, and died of a broken heart shortly after being put
at menial labor in her mother-in-law's kitchen. Her character and
appearance, even the costume she wore on the occasion of her visit to
the opera--a scene which many residents of Boston and vicinity will
remember--are attempted to be described literally. She was not the
daughter of Preston; _her_ father was a very different sort of man. Nor
was she sold at auction. The young woman who was engaged to 'Frank
Mandell,' and bought at the sale by her brother, was equally as
accomplished, though not so beautiful as Selma. She committed suicide,
as herein related. The author has blended the two characters into one,
but in no particular has he departed from the truth.

The gentleman called Preston in the story was for many years one of the
writer's correspondents. He had two wives, such as are described, and
was the father of Joe and Rosey, whose connection was as is related. He
was _not_ the owner of 'Boss Joe.' The original of that character
belonged (and the writer trusts still belongs) to a cotton planter in
Alabama. He managed two hundred hands, and in no respect is he overdrawn
in the story. His sermon is repeated from memory, and is far inferior to
the original. He was a Swedenborgian, and one of the finest natural
orators the writer ever listened to. Old Deborah was his mother, and
died comfortably in her bed. The old woman who fell dead on the auction
block, was the nurse of the young woman who was engaged to Frank. The
excitement of the scene, and her anxiety for her 'young missus,' killed
her.

Larkin's real name is Jacob Larkin. He was at one time connected with
the person called Hallet. He was well known in many parts of the South,
and relinquished Negro trading under circumstances similar to those
related in the story. He is now--though a rebel in arms against his
country--an honest man.

John Hallet, the writer is sorry to say, is also a real character; but
he does not disgrace the good city of Boston. He operates on a wider
field.

       *       *       *       *       *

That most excellent woman, Mrs. C. M. Kirkland, said to the author,
shortly after the fall of Fort Sumter: 'If you cannot shoulder a musket,
you can blow a bugle.' In this, and in a previous book, he has attempted
to blow that bugle. If the blasts are not as musical as they might be,
he has no apology to make for them. They have, at least, the ring of
_truth;_ and whether they please the public ear, or not, the author is
satisfied; for he knows that each one of his children will say of him,
when he is gone:

'_My_ father did not stand by with folded arms, while this great nation
was threatened with ruin. Against his best friends--against the
convictions of a lifetime--he spoke the TRUTH! He _tried_ to do
something for his country.'


'MAY MORNING'


  Oh! the sky is blue, and the sward is green,
    And the soft winds wake from the balmy west,--
  The leaves unfold in their gilded sheen,
    And the bird, in the tree top, builds its nest;
  The truant zephyr plumes her wings
    Once more, and quitting her perfumed bed,
  Soft calls on the sleeping flowers to wake,
    And sportive roams o'er each dewclad head.

  The bluebells nod within the wood,
    The snowdrop peeps from its milky bell,
  The motley Thora bends her hood,
    Whilst beauteous wild flowers line the dell;
  The wildbrier rose its fragrance breathes,
    The violet opes her cup of blue,
  The timid primrose lifts its leaves,
    And kingcups wake, all bathed in dew.

  From flower to flower the wild bee roams,
    Then buried within the cowslip's cup,
  He murmurs his low and music tones,
    Till she folds the wanton intruder up;
  The spring bird, wakening, soars on high,
    Gushing aloft its melting lay;
  Whilst painted clouds flit o'er the sky,
    All ushering in the dawn of May!

  Like a laughing nymph she springs to light,
    And tripping along in the world of flowers,
  Brushes the dew, in the morning bright,
    And weaves a joy for each heart of ours!
  With frolic hands, the daisy meek,
    From her lap of green she playful throws;
  Whilst the loveliest flowers spring round her feet,
    And fragrance bursts from the wild wood rose!

  Oh! glad is the heart, as through leafing trees
    The soft winds roam and in music play;
  Whilst the sick come forth for the healing breeze,
    And rejoice in the birth of the beauteous May,
  And glad is the heart of the joyous child,
    As bounding away through the tangled dell,
  It roams 'mid the flowers in greenwoods mild,
    And hunts the caged bee in the cowslip's bell!

  Oh! bright is this world--'tis a world of gems--
    And loveliness lingers where'er we tread;
  On the mountain top--or in lone wood glens:
    A spirit of beauty o'er all is spread!
  Then warmed be our hearts to that kindly Power
    That scatters bright roses o'er life's rough way;
  That unfolds the cup of the snowdrop's flower,
    And mantles the earth with the gems of May!


THE NAVY OF THE UNITED STATES.


There is perhaps no branch of our service which is more efficient at the
present time than that of the navy. Since the war of 1812, we have been
comparatively inactive, with the exception of some coast service during
the Mexican war, which was scarcely worth mentioning. In the present
civil war, however, our navy has increased in a tenfold
proportion--increased in activity and efficiency--and to-day, with its
superior force of iron-clad steamers, will favorably compare with any
navy on the globe in power, even though it may be inferior in a
numerical point.

Though crippled at first at the commencement of this rebellion by the
traitors among her officers in command--crippled by the loss of vessels
and property destroyed by rebels--her ranks thinned by resignations and
desertions, the navy struggled onward, slowly but surely, gaining
vitality and power, until, under the present administration, it has
'lengthened its cords and strengthened its stakes,' attaining its
present efficiency. Accessions have been made in vessels, new grades of
officers have been appointed, the various bureaus have been enlarged,
and an immense number of volunteer officers have been appointed, mostly
chosen from petty officers and seamen, or from the merchant service, to
command armed transports and the smaller craft used for the shallow
waters of the Atlantic coast. A strong blockade has been effected, a
number of valuable prizes taken, and the navy has rendered invaluable
service by its bombardments of the enemy's towns and fortifications, on
the coast of the United States as well as along the banks of the
Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennessee rivers. In fact, much is due to the
navy for its great efficiency in the present civil war in America.

We will give to the reader some statistics, taken from the September
issue of the Naval Register for 1862, from which an idea can be formed
of the great strength of this branch of our service. As these statistics
are official, they will serve as a valuable source of information to
those who are interested in the welfare of the country. Let us then
review the organization of the United States navy.

The organization of the navy is as follows: The Navy Department, which
consists of the office of the Secretary of the Navy and its various
bureaus, and the officers of the navy, consisting of officers of the
navy, officers of the marine corps, and warrant officers, besides
volunteer and acting volunteer officers, these two last being new
grades. There is no list of petty officers and seamen published in the
Register, these being simply kept on the unpublished rolls, kept in the
office of the Secretary of the Navy.

In the Navy Department proper may be found the following officers: The
Secretary of the Navy; his Assistant; the chiefs of the bureaus of yards
and docks, equipment, and recruiting, navigation, ordnance, construction
and repair, steam engineering, provisions and clothing, and medicine and
surgery. Since the publishing of the last annual Register, one of these
bureaus is a new organization--the bureau of navigation not yet
perfected. It will be seen by referring to this Register that the office
of the Secretary of the Navy and the bureaus attached, require, besides
the chief officers, one engineer, forty-four clerks, five draughtsmen,
and eight messengers.

The officers of the navy proper are divided into the following grades:
Rear admirals, commodores, captains, commanders, lieutenant commanders,
lieutenants, surgeons ranking with commanders, surgeons ranking with
lieutenants, passed assistant surgeons ranking next after lieutenants,
assistant surgeons ranking next after masters, paymasters ranking with
commanders, paymasters ranking with lieutenants, assistant paymasters,
chaplains, professors of mathematics, masters in the line of promotion,
masters not in the line of promotion, passed midshipmen, midshipmen
detached from the naval academy and ordered into active service,
boatswains, gunners, carpenters, sailmakers, navy agents, naval store
keepers, naval constructors, officers of the naval academy, officers on
special service, engineers in chief, first assistants, second
assistants, third assistants, and officers of the marine corps.

The volunteer officers of the navy are acting lieutenants, acting
volunteer lieutenants, acting masters, acting ensigns, acting master's
mates, acting assistant surgeons, acting assistant paymasters and
clerks, and acting first, second, and third engineers.

The petty officers of the navy are comprised as follows: Yeomen,
armorers, boatswains, gunners, carpenters, sailmakers, and armorer's
mates, master-at-arms, ship's corporals, coxswains, quarter masters,
quarter gunners, captains of forecastle, tops, afterguard, and hold,
coopers, painters, stewards, ship's officers, surgeons, assistant
surgeons and paymasters, stewards, nurses, cooks, masters of the band,
musicians, first and second class, seamen, ordinary seamen, landsmen,
boys, first and second class firemen, and coal heavers.

The ranking of officers of the navy compared to the grades of the army
may thus be enumerated: An admiral of the navy ranks with a major
general in the army, a commodore as a brigadier general, a captain as a
colonel, a commander as a lieutenant colonel, a lieutenant commander as
a major, a lieutenant as a captain, a master as a first lieutenant, and
an ensign (the new grade) as second lieutenant. The senior rear admiral
of the navy, Charles Stewart of Pennsylvania, now on the retired list,
ranks as a major general commanding in chief, and is the highest
official in the navy except the Secretary.

The pay of the navy is quite an item in the list of Government
expenditures. A few statistics relative to the expenditures will not
prove uninteresting to the reader. The pay of seven admirals in the
active list, commanding squadrons, and of fourteen rear admirals in the
retired list, is $87,000; of twenty-six commanders and six on the
retired list, is $117,860; of seventy captains on the active list,
$239,300; thirty-two on the retired list, $85,400; one hundred and
seventy commanders on active list, $554,380, and nine on the reserved
list, $18,800; two hundred and forty-four lieutenant commanders, active
list, $672,000; one hundred and eighty surgeons of various grades,
$708,000; ten passed assistant surgeons, $8,700; two hundred and
eighteen assistant surgeons, $422,900; eighty-one paymasters, $81,000;
sixty assistant paymasters, $67,850; twenty-three chaplains, $34,500;
twelve professors of mathematics, $21,600; seventeen masters, $18,320;
three passed midshipmen, and one midshipman (old list), $4,308; four
hundred and eighteen midshipmen, graduates of the naval academy,
$259,600; fifty-four gunners, $67,500; forty-two acting gunners,
$33,600; sixty carpenters, $60,000; forty-six sailmakers, $43,650; eight
navy agents, $25,000; twelve naval store keepers, $18,000; nine naval
constructors, $16,200; engineers and assistants, $756,700; officers of
the naval academy, $759,000; officers of the marine corps, $536,000;
acting volunteer officers of the navy of all grades, $2,975,300, and
petty officers and seamen, $2,560,000; making a total of $10,863,118,
for pay alone.

Let us add to this, other expenses to swell out the list. For clerk hire
alone it is said that $600,000 is annually paid out; for navy yards and
depots, $12,583,280 64; for the different bureaus, $8,325,161; and for
contingent expenses, $2,600,000. Add to this the pay of the hospitals,
$1,200,000; for magazines, $200,000; repair and equipment, $11,400,000;
chartering and purchasing of vessels for naval purposes, $10,800,000;
thus making a total of $47,708,441 64, which, added to the pay of the
navy, makes the annual expenditure $58,571,559 64.

Let us now turn our attention to the vessels of the United States navy.
In this department has the navy greatly increased within a few years. To
give the reader an idea of our navy, we append the following statistical
account of the vessels, giving their class, tonnage, number of guns,
name, and station, which cannot but be of great interest to all who are
interested in the affairs of the nation. We will give them in the
following table:

SHIPS OF THE LINE--6.

  Alabama        84 guns,   2,663 tons.
  New Orleans    84 "       2,805 "
  North Carolina 84 "       2,633 "
  Ohio           84 "       2,757 "
  Vermont        84 "       2,633 "
  Virginia       84 "       2,633 "

Of these, the Alabama is on the stocks at Kittery, Maine, the New
Orleans on the stocks at Sackett's Harbor, and the Virginia on the
stocks at Boston. The Vermont is store ship at Port Royal, South
Carolina, while the North Carolina and Ohio are receiving ships at
Boston and New York. The Pennsylvania, 120-gun ship, was destroyed by
the rebels at Gosport, Virginia, last year. This class of vessels are
the most ineffective we have in the service, the Ohio being the only one
which has done good service.

SAILING FRIGATES--6.

  Brandywine      50 guns,  1,726 tons.
  Potomac         50 "      1,726 "
  Sabine          50 "      1,726 "
  Santee          50 "      1,726 "
  St. Lawrence    50 "      1,726 "
  Independence[2] 50 "      2,257 "

The Brandywine, Independence, and Potomac are used as receiving and
store ships. The Sabine is at New London recruiting, the Santee is in
ordinary at Boston, and the St. Lawrence is attached to the East Gulf
Squadron.

SAILING SLOOPS--21.

  Constitution     50 guns,  1,607 tons.
  Constellation    22 "      1,452 "
  Cyane            18 "        792 "
  Dale[3]          15 "        566 "
  Decatur          10 "        566 "
  Falmouth          2 "        703 "
  Fredonia          2 "        800 "
  Granite           1 "        --- "
  Jamestown        22 "        985 "
  John Adams       18 "        700 "
  Macedonian       22 "      1,341 "
  Marion           15 "        566 "
  Portsmouth       17 "      1,022 "
  Preble           10 "        566 "
  Saratoga         18 "        882 "
  Savannah         24 "      1,726 "
  St. Marys        22 "        958 "
  St. Louis        18 "        700 "
  Vandalia         20 "        783 "
  Vincennes        18 "        700 "
  Warren            2 "        691 "

  BRIGS--4.

  Bainbridge        6 guns,    259 tons.
  Bohio             2 "        196 "
  Perry             9 "        280 "
  Sea Foam          3 "        264 "

Of the sailing sloops and brigs the following are in active service:
Saratoga, coast of Africa; Mediterranean Squadron, the Constellation;
the West Gulf Squadron, Portsmouth, Preble, and Vincennes; Pacific
Squadron, Cyane, and St. Marys; St. Louis on special service; the Dale
and Vandalia in the South Atlantic Squadron; the Constitution,
Macedonian, Marion, and Savannah, as school and practice ships; the
Falmouth, Warren, and Fredonia as store ships, and the sloop of war,
Decatur, in ordinary. In the West Gulf Squadron are the brigs Bohio and
Sea Foam; in the East Gulf Squadron is the brig Perry, while the
Bainbridge is at Aspinwall.

TRANSPORT SHIPS--14.

  Charles Phelps    1 gun,     362 tons.
  Courier           3 "        554 "
  Fearnot           6 "      1,012 "
  Ino               9 "        895 "
  Kittatinny        4 "        421 "
  Morning Light     8 "        937 "
  Nightingale       1 "      1,000 "
  National Guard    4 "      1,046 "
  Onward            8 "        874 "
  Pampero           4 "      1,375 "
  Roman             1 "        350 "
  Supply            4 "        547 "
  Shepard Knapp     8 "        838 "
  William Badger    1 "        334 "

The ships are divided as follows: The Supply and William Badger are in
the North Atlantic Squadron; the Ino, the Onward, and Shepard Knapp in
the South Atlantic Squadron; the Fearnot, the Kittatinny, and Morning
Light in the West Gulf Squadron; the Courier is used as a store ship at
Port Royal, the Charles Phelps as a coal ship, and the Roman as ordnance
vessel at Hampden Roads, Virginia.

TRANSPORT BARKS--16.

  Amanda           6 guns,  368 tons.
  Arthur           6 "      554 "
  A. Houghton      2 "      326 "
  Braziliera       6 "      540 "
  Ethan Allen      7 "      556 "
  Fernandina       6 "      297 "
  J. C. Kuhn        5 "      888 "
  Jas. L. Davis    4 "      461 "
  Jas. S. Chambers 5 "      401 "
  Kingfisher       5 "      450 "
  Midnight         5 "      386 "
  Pursuit          6 "      603 "
  Release          2 "      327 "
  Roebuck          4 "      455 "
  Restless         4 "      265 "
  Wm. G. Anderson  7 "      593 "

In the East Gulf Squadron are the barks Amanda, Ethan Allen, Jas. L.
Davis, Jas. S. Chambers, Kingfisher, and Pursuit. In the West Gulf
Squadron, the Arthur Houghton, J. C. Kuhn, Midnight, and W. G. Anderson.
In the South Atlantic Squadron the Braziliera, Fernandina, Roebuck, and
Restless, while the Release is a store ship in the Mediterranean. To
these may be added one barkantine, the Horace Beals, of 3 guns and 296
tons, employed in the Western Gulf Squadron.

SCHOONERS--8.

  Beauregard     1 gun,  101 tons.
  Chotank        1 "      53 "
  Dart           1 "      94 "
  G. W. Blunt    1 "     121 "
  Hope           1 "     134 "
  Sam Rotan      2 "     212 "
  Sam Houston    1 "      66 "
  Wanderer       4 "     300 "

In the Potomac Flotilla is the schooner Chotank. The G. W. Blunt and the
Hope are in the South Atlantic Squadron; the Dart and Sam Houston in the
West Gulf Squadron, while the Sam Rotan, Wanderer, and Beauregard (the
last named captured from the rebels) are in the East Gulf Squadron.

YACHTS--2

  America: South Atlantic Squadron.
  Corypheus: West Gulf Squadron.

These vessels are used chiefly as tenders and despatch vessels.

MORTAR SCHOONERS--18.

  Arletta           3 guns,  199 tons.
  Adolf Hugel       3 "      269 "
  C. P. Williams    3 "      210 "
  Dan Smith         3 "      149 "
  Geo. Mangham      3 "      274 "
  Henry Janes       3 "      261 "
  John Griffith     3 "      246 "
  M. Vassar         3 "      182 "
  Maria A. Wood     2 "      344 "
  Norfolk Packet    3 "      349 "
  Orvetta           3 "      171 "
  Para              3 "      190 "
  Racer             3 "      252 "
  Rachel Seman      2 "      303 "
  Sophronia         3 "      217 "
  Sarah Bruen       3 "      233 "
  T. A. Ward        3 "      284 "
  Wm. Bacon         3 "      183 "

Of these eighteen mortar schooners, five are at Baltimore, two in the
North Atlantic Squadron, five in the West Gulf Squadron, one in the East
Gulf Squadron, four in the Potomac Flotilla, and one in the James River
Flotilla.

We have thus given the statistics of the sailing vessels of the navy. We
now give a table of the steam vessels of all descriptions in our navy,
which are the most valuable auxiliaries we have. It is probably the
most effective steam navy in the world, and in its department of huge
iron-clads cannot be excelled even by the navies of the old world. The
steam vessels of our navy may thus be enumerated:

STEAM FRIGATES--9.

  Colorado               48 guns, 3,435 tons.
  Niagara                34  "    4,582  "
  Powhatan               11  "    2,415  "
  Minnesota              48  "    3,307  "
  Mississippi[4]         12  "    1,692  "
  Princeton               8  "      900  "
  San Jacinto            12  "    1,446  "
  Saranac                 9  "    1,446  "
  Susquehanna            17  "    2,450  "

The Niagara, one of the finest screw frigates in the navy, and which,
with the Colorado, is now repairing, is noted for being connected with
the Atlantic cable expedition, as well as for conveying the Japanese
embassy home. She is the pet of the navy, and great credit is due the
late George Steers for such a splendid specimen of naval architecture.
The Powhattan, Minnesota, and Mississippi are attached to the South
Atlantic Squadron; the San Jacinto to the East Gulf Squadron; the
Susquehanna to the West Gulf Squadron, and the Saranac to the Pacific
Squadron. The old Princeton is the receiving ship at Philadelphia. Of
these steam frigates, six are screw, and three sidewheel.

STEAM SLOOPS--10.

  Brooklyn          24 guns,   2,070 tons.
  Canandaigua        9  "      1,395  "
  Dacotah            6  "        997  "
  Hartford          25  "      1,990  "
  Housatonic         9  "      1,240  "
  Lancaster         22  "      2,362  "
  Oneida             9  "      1,032  "
  Pensacola         22  "      2,158  "
  Richmond          26  "      1,929  "
  Wachusett          9  "      1,032  "

The Brooklyn, Hartford, Housatonic, Pensacola, Richmond, and Oneida are
in the West Gulf Squadron; the Canandaigua in the South Atlantic
Squadron; the Lancaster in the Pacific, and the Dacotah and the
Wachusett in the West India Squadron.

STEAM GUNBOATS--40.

  Conemaugh        8 guns,     955 tons.
  Crusader         6  "        545  "
  Cambridge        5  "        858  "
  Chippewa         4  "        507  "
  Cayuga           6  "        507  "
  Chocura          4  "        507  "
  Huron            4  "        507  "
  Itasca           4  "        507  "
  Kanawha          4  "        507  "
  Kennebec         4  "        507  "
  Kineo            4  "        507  "
  Katahdin         4  "        507  "
  Mohawk           7  "        459  "
  Mohican          6  "        994  "
  Mystic           4  "        451  "
  Marblehead       4  "        507  "
  Monticello       7  "        665  "
  Miami            7  "        630  "
  Naragansett      5  "        809  "
  Ottawa           4  "        507  "
  Owasco           4  "        507  "
  Octorora         6  "        829  "
  Pawnee           9  "      1,289  "
  Pocahontas       5  "        694  "
  Pembina          4  "        507  "
  Penobscot        4  "        507  "
  Panola           4  "        507  "
  Penguin          6  "        389  "
  Pontiac          8  "        974  "
  Seminole         5  "        801  "
  Sciota           4  "        507  "
  Seneca           4  "        507  "
  Sagamore         4  "        507  "
  Sebago           6  "        832  "
  Tahoma           4  "        507  "
  Unadilla         4  "        507  "
  Wyandotte        4  "        458  "
  Wyoming          6  "        997  "
  Wissahickon      4  "        507  "
  Winona           4  "        507  "

Of these gunboats, some of them rated as steam sloops of the third
class, twelve are in the South Atlantic Squadron; five in the North
Atlantic Squadron; ten in the West Gulf Squadron; three in the East Gulf
Squadron; two in the Potomac Flotilla; one in the East Indies; one in
the Pacific; one at Philadelphia; and five under repairs at the
different navy yards.

AUXILIARY STEAM GUNBOATS--47.

  Anacostia        2 guns, 217 tons.
  Aroostook        4  "    507   "
  Albatross        4  "    378   "
  Currituck         5 guns, 193 tons.
  Perry             4 "     513 "
  Barney            4 "     513 "
  Clifton           6 "     892 "
  Ellen             4 "     341 "
  E. B. Hale        4 "     192 "
  Fort Henry        6 "     519 "
  Genesee           4 "     803 "
  Huntsville        4 "     817 "
  Hunchback         4 "     517 "
  Harriet Lane[5]   4 "     619 "
  John Hancock      3 "     382 "
  Jacob Bell        3 "     229 "
  Louisiana         4 "     295 "
  Mercidita         7 "     776 "
  Montgomery        5 "     787 "
  Mt. Vernon        3 "     625 "
  Maratanza         6 "     786 "
  Memphis           4 "     791 "
  Norwich           5 "     431 "
  New London        5 "     221 "
  Potomska          5 "     287 "
  Patroon           5 "     183 "
  Paul Jones        6 "     863 "
  Port Royal        8 "     805 "
  Saginaw           3 "     453 "
  Sumter            4 "     460 "
  Stars and Stripes 5 "     407 "
  Somerset          6 "     521 "
  Sachem            5 "     197 "
  Southfield        4 "     751 "
  Tioga             6 "     819 "
  Uncas             3 "     192 "
  Underwriter       4 "     331 "
  Valley City       5 "     190 "
  Victoria          3 "     254 "
  Water Witch       3 "     378 "
  Wasmutta          5 "     270 "
  Western World     5 "     441 "
  Wyandank          2 "     399 "
  Westfield         6 "     891 "
  Yankee            3 "     328 "
  Young Rover       5 "     418 "
  Yantic            4 "     593 "

Six of these auxiliary steam gunboats are in the Potomac Flotilla; eight
in the West Gulf Squadron; thirteen in the North Atlantic Squadron; nine
in the South Atlantic Squadron; four in the Eastern Gulf Squadron; one
in the West India Fleet; one at San Francisco, and five in ordinary.

TRANSPORT STEAMERS ALTERED INTO WAR VESSELS--58

  Alabama           8 guns, 1,261 tons.
  Alleghany         6 "       989 "
  Augusta           8 "     1,310 "
  Bienville        10 "     1,558 "
  Florida          10 "     1,261 "
  Flag              9 "       963 "
  Hatteras          3 "     1,100 "
  Jas. Adger        9 "     1,151 "
  Keystone State    9 "     1,364 "
  Kensington        3 "     1,052 "
  Massachusetts     5 "     1,155 "
  Quaker City       9 "     1,600 "
  Rhode Island      7 "     1,517 "
  R. R. Cuyler      8 "     1,202 "
  South Carolina    6 "     1,165 "
  Santiago de Cuba 10 "     1,667 "
  State of Georgia  9 "     1,204 "
  Tennessee         1 "     1,275 "
  Cimmerone         10 "       860 "
  Connecticut       5 "     1,800 "
  Dawn              3 "       391 "
  Daylight          4 "       682 "
  Delaware          3 "       357 "
  Dragon            1 "       118 "
  Flambeau          2 "       900 "
  Issac Smith       9 "       453 "
  Mahaska           6 "       832 "
  Morse             2 "       513 "
  Planter           2 "       300 "
  Satellite         2 "       217 "
  Shasheen          2 "       180 "
  Sonoma            6 "       955 "
  Thos. Freeborn    2 "       269 "
  A. C. Powell      1 "        65 "
  Alfred Robb       4 "        75 "
  Ceres             1 "       144 "
  C[oe]ur de Leon   2 "        60 "
  Cohasset          2 "       100 "
  Ella              2 "       230 "
  Eastport          8 "       700 "
  Henry Brinker     1 "       108 "
  Hetzel            2 "       --- "
  John P. Jackson   6 "       777 "
  John L. Lockwood  2 "       182 "
  Leslie            2 "       100 "
  Mercury           2 "       187 "
  Madgie            2 "       218 "
  O. M. Petit       2 "       165 "
  Pulaski           1 "       395 "
  Resolute          1 "        90 "
  Reliance          1 "        90 "
  Rescue            1 "       111 "
  Stepping Stones   1 "       226 "
  Teaser            2 "        90 "
  Vixen             2 "       --- "
  Whitehead         1 "       136 "
  Young America     1 "       171 "
  Zouave            1 "       127 "

Most of these auxiliary altered steamers have been purchased and
refitted for naval service. A number of our ocean mail steamers have
been purchased by the Department, such as the Augusta, Florida, Alabama,
Quaker City, Keystone State, and State of Georgia; while others have
been taken from our rivers flowing into the Atlantic, on which this last
class of vessels were formerly plying. In the South Atlantic Squadron
are fifteen of this class of transport steamers; fifteen in the North
Atlantic; four in the Western Gulf; one in the East Gulf; one in the
Brazil, and three in the West India Squadrons. There are also twelve in
the Potomac Flotilla; one in the Western Flotilla; two supply steamers;
and three in ordinary; with one receiving ship. In the Potomac Flotilla
is the captured rebel gunboat Teaser. The De Soto may also be added to
this class, carrying 9 guns of 1,600 tons, and at present attached to
the Western Gulf Squadron.

We now call the attention of the reader to that most formidable class of
vessels in our navy,

IRON-CLAD STEAMERS--15.

The iron-clads of our navy are divided into two classes--the river and
ocean steamers, as also steam rams. We will first notice the ocean
class:

  Galena         6 guns, 738 tons.
  Monitor[6]     3 "     776 "
  New Ironsides 18 "   3,486 "
  Roanoke        6 "   3,435 "

The Galena and Monitor have been well tested in the present war, but the
Galena at present is considered a failure. The New Ironsides, now on
special service, is said to be one of the most formidable iron-clad
vessels in the world. Of the iron-clad river steamers, we enumerate the
following:

  Benton          16 guns, 1,000 tons.
  Baron de Kalb   13 "       512 "
  Cairo           13 "       512 "
  Cincinnati      13 "       512 "
  Carondelet      13 "       512 "
  Essex            7 "     1,000 "
  Louisville      13 "       468 "
  Lexington        7 "       500 "
  Mound City      13 "       512 "
  Pittsburgh      13 "       512 "
  Tyler            9 "       600 "

The Galena is in the North Atlantic Squadron; the New Ironsides in
special service; the Roanoke repairing in New York; and the river
iron-clads are attached to the Western Flotilla.

IRON-CLAD RAMS--12.

  General Bragg        2 guns, 700 tons.
  Gen. Sterling Price  - "     400 "
  General Pillow       2 "     500 "
  Great Western.       - "     800 "
  Kosciusko            - "     --- "
  Lafayette            - "   1,000 "
  Little Rebel         3 "     400 "
  Lioness              - "     --- "
  Monarch              - "     --- "
  Queen of the West[7] - "     --- "
  Switzerland          - "     --- "
  Simpson              - "     --- "

Six of these rams, though finished, have not received their armament.
They are all attached to the Western River Flotilla. Five of these were
captured from the rebels, and one was purchased.

OTHER VESSELS NOT CLASSED--22.

  Iroquois         9 guns, 1,016 tons.
  Kearsage         7 "     1,031 "
  Tuscarora       10 "       997 "
  Wabash          48 "     3,274 "
  Clara Dolsen    -- "     1,000 "
  Choctaw         -- "     1,000 "
  Conestoga       -- "       --- "
  Darlington      -- "       --- "
  Ellis            2 "       --- "
  Eugenie         -- "       --- "
  Gem of the Sea   4 "       371 "
  Gemsbok          7 "       622 "
  Judge Torrence  -- "       600 "
  King Philip     -- "       --- "
  Michigan         1 "       582 "
  Mount Washington-- "       --- "
  Magnolia         3 "       --- "
  Oliver H. Lee    3 "       199 "
  Philadelphia    -- "       --- "
  Relief           2 "       468 "
  Stetten         -- "       --- "
  Ben Morgan      -- "       407 "

Among these vessels unclassed, are one steam frigate, three steam
sloops, eight ocean and four river steamers, three barks, one schooner,
and one mortar schooner.

UNFINISHED VESSELS OF THE NAVY

STEAM FRIGATE--1.

  Franklin       50 guns 3,684 tons.

STEAM SLOOPS--7.

  Lackawanna      9 guns,  1,533 tons.
  Ticonderoga     9 "      1,533 "
  Shenandoah      9 "      1,378 "
  Monongahela     9 "      1,378 "
  Sacramento      9 "      1,367 "
  Juniata         9 "      1,240 "
  Ossipee         9 "      1,240 "

STEAM GUNBOATS--28.

  Puritan (iron-clad).  4 guns, 3,265 tons.
  Tonawanda             4 "     1,564 "
  Tecumseh              2 "     1,034 "
  Onondaga              4 "     1,250 "
  Ascutney              8 "       974 "
  Agawam                8 "       974 "
  Chenango              8 "       974 "
  Chicopee              8 "       974 "
  Eutaw                 8 "       974 "
  Iosco                 8 "       974 "
  Mattabeeset           8 "       974 "
  Mingoe                8 "       974 "
  Mackinaw              8 "       974 "
  Metacomet             8 "       974 "
  Otsego                8 "       974 "
  Pontoosac             8 "       974 "
  Sassacus              8 "       974 "
  Shamrock              8 "       974 "
  Taconey               8 "       974 "
  Tallapoosa            8 "       974 "
  Wateree               8 "       974 "
  Wyalusing             8 "       974 "
  Lenape                8 "       974 "
  Maumee                4 "       593 "
  Com. Morris           1 "       532 "
  Com. McDonough        6 "       532 "
  Calhoun               4 "       508 "
  Com. Hull             3 "       376 "

IRON CLAD OCEAN GUNBOATS--22.

  Dunderburg    10 guns, 5,019 tons.
  Dictator       2 "     3,033 "
  Monadnock      4 "     1,564 "
  Miantonimah    4 "     1,564 "
  Agamenticus    4 "     1,564 "
  Canonicus      2 "     1,034 "
  Manhattan      3 "     1,034 "
  Mahopac        2 "     1,034 "
  Manayunk       2 "     1,034 "
  Catskill       2 "       844 "
  Camanche       2 "       844 "
  Lehigh         2 "       844 "
  Montauk        2 "       844 "
  Nantucket      2 "       844 "
  Nahant         2 "       844 "
  Patapsco       2 "       844 "
  Passaic        2 "       844 "
  Sangamon       2 "       844 "
  Weehawken      2 "       844 "
  Moodna         2 "       677 "
  Marietta       2 "       479 "
  Sandusky       2 "       479 "

IRON CLAD RIVER GUNBOATS--12

  Catawba        2 guns, 1,034 tons.
  Tippecanoe     2 "     1,034 "
  Chickasaw      4 "       970 "
  Kickapoo       4 "       970 "
  Milwaukee      4 "       970 "
  Winnebago      4 "       970 "
  Tuscumbia      3 "       565 "
  Ozark          2 "       578 "
  Osage          2 "       523 "
  Neosho         2 "       523 "
  Indianola[8]   2 "       442 "
  Chillicothe    2 "       303 "

The most formidable class of these unfinished vessels are the iron-clad
gunboats. Of these are four of immense size, viz., the Puritan,
Tonawanda, Tecumseh, and Onondaga. The mammoth iron-clad of all is the
enormous Dunderburg, carrying 10 guns of from fifteen to twenty inches
in calibre, and having a tonnage of 5,019 tons. The Dictator is another
immense iron-clad. Of the river Gunboat Fleet, the Catawba and
Tippecanoe stand as first class, carrying heavy nine and eleven inch
Dahlgren guns.

The building of these ocean iron-clads is at the following places: Nine
of them are building at New York; three at Brooklyn; one at Portsmouth;
two at Jersey City; four at Boston; two at Chester; two at Pittsburgh;
one at Brownsville, Pennsylvania; and one at Wilmington, Delaware. The
river iron-clads are built at the following places: Five at Cincinnati;
six at St. Louis; and one at Mound City, Illinois. Of the first-class
steam gunboats, eleven are building at New York; four at Boston; two at
Portland, Maine; two at Portsmouth, New Hampshire; one at Bordentown,
New Jersey; one at Brooklyn; two at Philadelphia; one at Chester; and
two at Baltimore, Maryland.

The other vessels building in the yards are as follows: the steam
frigate Franklin, at Portsmouth, New Hampshire; the steam sloops
Juniata, Monongahela, and Shenandoah, at Philadelphia; the Lackawanna
and Ticonderoga, at New York; and the Ossipee and Sacramento, at
Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

There are a large number of contracts out for new gunboats and steamers,
which, when completed, will make us the most formidable navy in the
world. In conclusion, we will give to the reader the following table,
classifying the vessels now in our navy, and giving statistics of their
tonnage and the number of guns which they carry:

RECAPITULATION.

                        Vessels.    Guns.  Tons.
  Ships of the line          6      504    16,124
  Sailing frigates           7      348    14,161
  Sailing sloops            24      372    21,151
  Brigs                      4       20       999
  Transportation ships      16       64    11,420
  Transportation barks      16       91     8,468
  Schooners                  8       12     1,081
  Yachts                     2       --     -----
  Mortar schooners          18       52     4,316
  Steam frigates             9      199    21,673
  Steam sloops              10      161    16,205
  Steam gunboats            40      200    24,783
  Auxiliary steam gunboats  47      209    23,875
  Transport steamers altered
  to war vessels            58      240    36,170
  Iron-clad ocean steamers   4       32     8,435
  Iron-clad river steamers  11      130     6,640
  Iron-clad rams            12        7     3,800
  Other vessels not classed 14        9     3,788

Unfinished Vessels of the Navy.

  Frigates                   1       50     3,684
  Steam sloops               7       68     9,669
  Steam gunboats            28      184    35,160
  Iron-clad ocean gunboats  22       58    26,955
  Iron-clad river gunboats  12       33     8,682

The total number of vessels of all classes in the navy, is 376, having a
tonnage of 307,234 tons, and carrying 3,038 guns of heavy calibre.

With these statistics, compiled from 'official' sources, we conclude
this article, and in our next shall take up the subject of naval gunnery
in the United States.


THREE MODERN ROMANCES.


'GUY LIVINGSTONE,' 'SWORD AND GOWN,' AND 'BARREN HONOR.'

This terrible power of fictitious invention, wherewith God has endowed
man, and which now-a-days we take readily enough, without comment, is
yet the growth of comparatively modern times, the development within a
few centuries of a new faculty. The Greek never solaced his leisure with
the latest tale of a gifted Charicles or Aristarchus, and the grave
Roman would have been as much startled by a 'new novel' as by the
apparition of a steam engine. The famous Minerva press was the first
mighty wellspring whence gushed the broad and rapid torrent of cheap
fiction. This perennial fountain has long ceased to flow, yet has its
disappearance left no unsatisfied void. The procreation of human kind
has failed to support the elaborate theory of Malthus, but had the sage
philosopher transferred his calculations from the sons of men to works
of fiction, then indeed he might stand forth the prophet of a striking
truth. The extensive plain over which this flood is spread seems even to
be extending its limits, and a spongy soil of unlimited capacity is
ready ever to absorb the fresh advance of waves. It is indeed striking
to observe how authors and men of talent have increased, so vastly out
of all proportion with other classes of men. Observing it, the political
economist may well shout 'Io triumphe!' for that even in so delicate and
intangible a matter as intellectual gifts, the famous doctrine of supply
and demand is so thoroughly carried out. We raise, however, no hue and
cry after 'poor trash.' Neither have we the blood-thirsty wish to run to
ground the panting scribbler, or to adorn ourselves with the glories of
his 'brush.' Let those who countenance him by reading his works, and who
can reconcile the purchase thereof with their consciences, answer to
their fellow men for the inevitable consequences. But it must be
confessed that there is in this department a sad want. All readers of
moderate discrimination must have felt it painfully. In the literature
of fiction we need organization. How do we know a good tea from a bad?
Is it by the universal consent of the good people of China--by a
democratic 'censeatur' of the celestial nation? Not at all. Every
variety is tasted by men who rinse their mouths after each swallow, and
the comparative merits are gauged and graduated by adepts, who make it
the sole business and profession of their lives. A similar process we
need in fiction. The old system of criticism in reviews and magazines
worked well in its day, but it won't do now. The era of the
old-fashioned novel critic has gone by. He knows it, and his voice is
seldom heard. Even a numerous body, working promiscuously and without
conjunction, could not accomplish much. The only manner in which the
requisite result could be brought about would be by a regularly
organized set of men, working under direction and regulated by
authority, like the body of tax assessors or national judiciaries. Such
a corps should be trained to their work as to a profession like that of
law or medicine, having brotherhoods in every publishing town or city,
working together and subordinately, like the order of the Jesuits. They
should test every work before it was given to the public, and brand it
with precisely its mark of real merit. And thus might be accomplished a
most inestimable public service. In France such a system might be
practicable, and not hostile to the spirit and institutions of a nation
accustomed to have everything, even to the play programmes of the
theatre, regulated by the powers that be. But in America, home of
democracy and fatherland of individual independence, such a scheme, so
invaluable though so impossible, must, we fear, ever remain a
tantalizing vision. As it is, of course many a man of real ability is
drowned in the rushing waves of multitudinous authors, and his works
pass undistinguished to that unknown grave which gapes so mysteriously
in some hidden recess of the universe, and silently swallows yearly the
vast masses of printed paper which has done its brief work and been
thrown by read or unread, forgotten. It is to assist in the rescue of a
struggling author from this yawning abyss that the present article is
sent forth, a plank in the shipwreck.

Who may be the object of our present criticism, we must confess we know
not. Whether it be a brother man, or whether our words of praise may win
us the kind regards of a 'gentle ladye,' we can only conjecture. Our
process must be _in rem_, not _in personam_. 'It'--for thus perforce we
must speak of our Unknown--weareth an iron mask of inscrutable mystery,
as complete as that of the all-baffling Junius. The field, however, of
speculation is open to our wandering reflection. Herein we guide
ourselves by natural signs, the configurations of the stars and the
marks of the soil. We judge from the mould in which the favorite male
characters are cast, and from the traits invariably bestowed upon the
heroines, also by the general choice of scenery, by the groupings, the
'properties.' Upon such authority of intrinsic evidence we have no
hesitation in pronouncing the writer to be a man. Certain novel-writing
ladies indeed are given to depicting most royal heroes, types of the
ideal man, glorified beings endowed with every charm of physique and of
spirit. Such find an irresistible fascination in allowing their fancy to
run wild riot and poetic revel in contemplation of a wonderful male
creature, so graceful, so beautiful, so strong, so brave, so masterly,
so bad or so good as the case may be--a spirit of chivalry incarnate in
the perfection of the flesh. They cannot build a shrine too lofty, nor
burn too generous store of incense before this exalted one. The man, as
he reads, smiles. Such a brother has never been born to him of
woman--never since the days of Adam in paradise, neither ever shall be.
The fair votaress standeth without the vail of the temple, nor have its
mystic recesses ever disclosed to her scrutinizing vision actual 'Man.'
Let us not however harshly dispel such illusions, neither drench with
the cold flood of unnecessary ingenuousness the glowing embers of myrrh
and frankincense. Occasionally, perchance, some sinful human, conscious
within himself of no demerits beyond his fellows, may repine at passing
comparison with this shadowy conception. But as a general rule, it is
wise enough to tolerate such pleasant vagaries of worshipping woman. Of
this fair description are the proud statues which look out upon us in
Apollo-like majesty from the galleries in 'Guy Livingstone,' 'Sword and
Gown,' 'Barren Honors.' Guy, Royston Keene, and Alan Wyverne, are such
fanciful delineations, such marvels of bodily glory and chivalrous
spirit. They might be drawn by a woman. The accompaniments are in
admirable keeping; and the whole scenery is gotten up to match, and most
unexceptionally. Our characters are dissipated upon a scale suited to
the heroic age and the primeval constitution of the race. They gamble
quite _en prince_, and carouse most royally. They have a capacity for
terrible potations, should mischance or crossed affections so incline
them; yet they can seldom plead the latter excuse, for we are given to
understand that woman-kind are born to be their helpless slaves and
victims. They are perpetually doing deeds of terrible '_derring-do_;'
upon the backs of unmanageable steeds they leap limitless chasms and the
tallest of walls; they gallop to death in battle and dispel _ennui_ in
midnight conflicts with desperate poachers. Such scenes are quite within
the scope of some feminine imaginations, but scarcely such a power of
description as that wherewith we have them here set forth. Women thrill
sometimes at fierce tales of stalwart knock-down struggles, many of them
will back fearlessly the most mettlesome of thoroughbreds; but when it
comes to talk thereof, they strive in vain for adequate power of
language. The best words and the strongest sentences will not come.
These demand the clarion roundness and ring essentially masculine--very
_virile_ indeed. The muscular gripe of a man--not the white, tapering
fingers of any maiden--held the pen which wrote so gloriously of
Livingstone's terrible riding, of Royston Keene's bloody sabre charges.
We know it by unerring instinct, as we could tell a morsel of the smooth
cheek of the damsel from the grizzled jowl of man.

But as usual, the crowning glory of most anxious labor is to be sought
in the female characters. These are nearly all of the majestic, haughty,
and queen-like caste--tall, imperious beauties, empresses of society, to
whom men are slaves, and life a triumphal march of unbroken conquests.
So it is at least until they meet some one terrible subduer of woman--a
Guy or a Keene--in whom they recognize masterhood, and the right and
power to reign. With the last stateliness of royalty these magnificent
presences glide through the proud pomp and pageantry of their
surroundings, graceful as swans, faultless in classic form, and face as
white as Grecian marbles, domineering as sisters of Cæsars, violet eyed,
statuesque, cold upon the chiselled surface, but aglow with the white
heat of feeling and forceful passion beneath. How blue are their clear
veins interlacing beneath a crystalline skin!--for their blood is a more
sublimed fluid than that which waters the clay of ordinary humanity.
They have with them an unutterable glory of conscious power, the
magnificence of a perfect, God-given nature, such a haughty spirit of
rivalless dominion as might have swelled the soul of a Jewish queen,
monarch of Israel, ruler of God's chosen people in the day of their
unbroken pride, when she felt that none greater than herself dwelt upon
the globe. But with inevitable tread approaches the universal moral
which points the tale. The measured step of the godlike hero echoeth
along the corridors. The royal maiden, hearing the ominous tramp, is
cognizant of an unwonted thrill and a sensation unfelt before. Her
prophetic instinct telleth her too truly that her wild independence is
concluded, that the day of bondage and of fetters has dawned, that the
inexorable One, who alone in all the millions of created men is able, is
even now present with, the gyves of her slavery in his hand. But the
denouement is never at the bridal altar. Our host entertaineth us with
no loves of Strephon and Phillis, nor leads beneath shady arcades to a
vine-clad cottage, wherein is love and rich cream and homemade butter.
The three sisters, the dread Moiræ, in their darksome cavern, spinning
the golden thread of destiny, reel from their distaff no bright soft
film of wedded happiness. The polished metal, many times refined, would
never show half its qualities were it not subject to unwonted tests. We
suffer according to our powers of endurance, and are tried according to
our gifts. Else why are the powers and the gifts given to us by a
Providence which never wasteth, nor doeth in freakish negligence. The
yoke of love is not weighty enough to bow sufficiently the curving neck.
With a love which cannot be satisfied comes the mighty temptation to sin
and disgrace. Even into this black chasm our beauties look with steady
eye, and meditate the step. It is a part of their self-sustaining nature
and towering spirit to wreak their own will. Once let them give their
love to man, and it is the passion of their lives. Of gossip and the
wagging tongue of scandal, and of that vague, shadowy phantom,
reputation, they reck not. These unsubstantial fleeting barriers are
dissipated in an instant before the mighty breath of their omnipotent
passion. Their love is the great fact of their lives. Why should it
yield to less powerful sentiments, to inferior satisfactions. If the
laws and sentiments of the commonalty of mankind oppose, why gain the
lesser, palling pleasure of a fair character among our fellows whom we
care not for, and lose the one joy of existence? Such, in all three of
these novels, to a greater or less extent, is the theory of action of
the female characters.

They are however rescued from the last degree of actual crime in each
case by the good taste of the author, feeling that such chapters had
better not be written voluntarily in fiction, or perchance by his love
for his proud maidens, whom he cannot taint with degradation in act,
even if the sin upon their souls be wellnigh as black in the eyes of a
strict judge, arbiter alike of the seen and the unseen. Such are hardly
the conceptions wherewith the brain of a cultivated woman would teem. It
were too glaring treason to her sex and to her own nature. Although it
must be said that there is no word of coarseness or bold suggestion of
wickedness to be found upon any page. So far from it, we scarcely find
recognized the crime to which the maidens are tempted, and we
half-ignorantly wonder at the existence of compunctions, excited at we
can scarcely say what. But the author knew probably well enough, and if
she were one of the sisterhood of women, then must she be isolated and
at enmity with them all. Her hand is against every woman's and every
woman's hand against her.

Perhaps there is a fault in the tone of these novels. This may have been
inferred by some strict moralists from the preceding paragraph. But they
have indeed not the slightest trace of impropriety about them. They are
not tainted in the slightest with the insidious viciousness of French
novels. Their fault arises from rather an opposite tendency of mind and
a different train of feelings. They are of the world, worldly. They are
cold and sarcastic; they inculcate self-sufficiency, and preach to man
to be a tower of strength in himself, not always in the praiseworthy
Christian way. There is no single word of scoffing or disrespect for
religion, no slur upon it whatsoever. Only we are aware, as by an
instinct, that in the circle of our characters it is wholly ignored. In
their world it is not an agent, whether for themselves or others. It is
as unrecognized a system as is Mohammedanism or Buddhism with ourselves.
The heroes have all 'seen the world' in the most thorough and terrible
sense of those words. For them virtue and vice are much alike. Their
wills are iron. They fix their eye upon their goal, and straight thereto
they firmly march over the obstacles of precipices, through the
blackness of quagmires, crashing athwart laws, customs, and
conventionalities, as elephants calmly striding through underbrush. They
disregard the prejudices of the world equally for evil and for good. And
a moral independence which might furnish forth the most glorious of
martyrs in invincible panoply is quite as likely to assist a hardy
sinner. The sneer and sarcasm and contempt are for the conventionalities
of the world, for the belief of the mass of mankind in right and wrong,
and for the customs and habits which the republic of humanity has
established for better assistance in the paths of virtue--as if,
forsooth, such were vulgar because common, and to be despised by the
mighty because useful to the feeble. This is not the proper spirit for
the satirist. If he wields his pen in support of such a theory he will
do more harm than good. A conventionality is not necessarily bad or
contemptible merely as such. Not a promiscuous and indiscriminate
slashing, but a careful pruning is the proper method in the garden of
society. The indiscreet hand will cut what it should leave, and leave
perhaps what might have been better sacrificed. The artificial trellises
whereon we train our feeble virtues, which may hardly stand by their own
strength, must not be shattered in a general slaughter of weeds which
have taken root and nourishment in the rank soil of fashionable
etiquette. Let us not dash the image from the altar, nor quench the fire
at the shrine, before we have another idol and another shrine to give to
the old worshippers, who must worship still. Such reckless iconoclasm is
too dangerous. It is in this point of discretion that our author is most
reprehensible. The moral tone of his works might have been improved had
his independent tendencies been rather more judiciously indulged. There
is, however, one character of loveliness and purity almost sufficient to
leaven the whole mass and to dash our entire reprehension. In all the
scope of our novel reading, nowhere do we remember to have met a more
exquisitely charming character than that of fair Constance Brandon.
Every charm of spirit and of person is lavished upon her. At the same
time she is conceived with faultless taste. No feeble extravagance
offends our feelings; no tinsel or affectation thwarts our admiration.
The execution is worthy of the thought, which is simply beautiful. The
portrait is like Raphael's divinest Madonna, with the changing radiance
and velvety warmth of life thrown into the matchless face. Why could we
not have had more such, instead of such indifferent domesticities as La
Mignonne?

When we say that none of these three novels are destined to pass into
the eternal literature of the language, we pass no very harsh or damning
judgment. Men of the highest powers must bow to the same decree. Our
author, though his thews and sinews are stalwart, is yet hardly cast in
the mould to indicate such excessive vitality. He can hardly trouble the
stride of those lordly veterans of the turf, Scott or Thackeray; yet
without exertion spurning the rearward turf, he clicks his galloping
hoofs in the faces of the throng of the ordinary purveyors of fiction.
His fancy is exuberant; his imagination brilliant, florid, verging at
times almost upon the apoplectic. But the cognate mental member,
invention, is most sadly destitute of free and sweeping action. His
plots are of the simplest, and betray indubitably a numbness or
imperfect development of the inventive faculties of the brain. People
who read novels for the denouement, who ride a steeple chase through
them, leaping a five-page fence here, a ditch of a chapter there, and
anon clearing at a mighty bound a rasper of some score or more
paragraphs, resolute simply to be in at the death in the last chapter,
anxious to see the wedding torches extinguished, and the printer setting
up 'Finis'--such would find little satisfaction in 'Barren Honor,'
almost none in 'Sword and Gown.' Reading these works is like passing
through a wondrously beautiful country. But it is not the indolent
beauty of southern climes, to lounge through sleepily in a slow-rolling
travelling carriage. You must ride through it on the proud back of a
blooded steed. Canter, run, if you like, when the ground is fit and the
spirit moves, as often enough it may; but do not fix your eyes upon any
distant gaol, and time your arrival thereat. Enjoy what is close at
hand. Admire now the blue glories of the proud hills, recumbent in
careless grace of majesty in the indolent sunlit atmosphere; gaze then
into the sombre depths of solemn retreating forest; tremble anon in the
black shadow of the fierce rock beetling over your bridle way; and fill
your rejoicing being with the fresh-distilled vigor of the springy step
of your charger on the turf. It will put bounding manliness into your
sluggish civilian blood. Read each page, each chapter for itself; or
regard it as one handsome marble square in the tesselated pavement of a
haughty palace, not as a useful brick in the domestic sidewalk, which is
to carry you straight to a homely destination. Observe the description
of scenes, how powerful! the delineation of character, how fascinating!
and be pleased with the luxuriance of the style and the gorgeous drapery
of language wherewith so royally the thoughts are robed.

Our author is not true to nature--he is extravagant, high-wrought.
Nobody ever met his heroes or his heroines in real life, nor lived the
scenes told of in his poetry. His men and women are the men and women of
an enthusiastic fancy; his scenes and incidents are the scenes and
incidents of our romantic dreams. We know none so lovely as ethereal
Constance Brandon; we never gazed into the violet-flashing eyes of a
Cecil Tresilyan; none of our friends are quite prototypes of the
omnipotent 'Cool Captain;' they betray neither the athletic chivalry of
Livingstone nor the winning beauty and high-souled nobility of generous
Alan Wyverne. We never saw such models, for such never quitted their
ideal essences to become incarnate in the flesh. But why need this be an
insuperable objection? We don't find Achilles any the less interesting
because we doubt the ability of any degenerate modern to calmly destroy
such outnumbering hosts of his fellow beings, and send such a throng of
warrior souls to hades without scath or scar to his invulnerable self.
Ivanhoe got out of some very awkward scrapes by the exertion of a
prowess quite exceptional in such a 'light-weight.' The extravagance is
not glaring enough to discompose us. Surely a tolerable proximate
approach to possible existence ought to satisfy a not viciously captious
critic. We are reading of shadowy beings: why should not the facile
mists be permeated with a somewhat subtler light, and melt into somewhat
airier forms of perfection than we have been accustomed to catch
imprisoned in the substantial dulness of the flesh? If we will only
choose, we may revel in the company of somewhat glorified mortals. It
may be a luxury to us, if we will not be jealously illiberal and
envious. It is pleasant to emerge from our little chintz-furnished
parlor, and lounge in castles of dimly magnificent extent, where we are
sure to meet the choicest society; where some order their mighty hunters
from the capacious stables, and others go out to drop a stag, or run a
fox, or bag a few pheasants in the preserves, just to get an appetite
for dinner, from which stupendous meal, tended by hosts of velvet-footed
menials and florid old-family butlers, resplendent ladies rise to retire
to gorgeous drawing rooms of any draperied dimensions we may choose to
fancy, leaving perhaps a score of gentlemen guests to quaff cobwebbed
wines in unstinted goblets. Why isn't it pleasant to linger sometimes in
these royal abodes, and to saunter in the endless lawns and forest
glades of the rich and the great, where we may encounter ladies rather
handsomer and gentlemen rather haughtier than they are generally made in
our own circle? Let us not be captious, but agreeably appreciative.

In a short sentence in one of the opening chapters of 'Sword and Gown,'
our author proclaims probably the intention, certainly the result of his
literary labors--to produce a string of beautiful cameos, with just
thread enough of story to string them upon. This task is done, and well
done. The classical allusions are numerous, and seldom can we blame one
as out of place. Generally they are wrought into beautiful little
pictures, complete in themselves. He manages them with wonderful
dexterity, never making too much of them, nor dwelling upon them too
long; but with his masterly skill in language he handles his words as a
painter his colors, and now we have a bold royal sketch, cloudy outlines
of gigantic proportions, shadowy scenes of indefinite grandeur, done
with a few strong, words and magnificent adjectives; and now a little
paragraph, charming in its exquisite daintiness, like a miniature rarely
done upon the face of a costly gem. It is in this word-painting that he
is surpassingly admirable. Delineation, description, portraiture are his
forte. The same quality of mind which gives dreams of princely men and
divine women seems to have brought also a generous endowment of warm,
rich words, wherewith to do justice to the imaginings. All the beauty,
dignity, and glory of English logography seem to be his: he marshals an
array of adjectives and phrases which seem all of the blood royal of our
munificent mother tongue. Oftentimes his page sounds like the
deep-rolling anthem of a mighty cathedral organ. Might and music are in
his syllables; and without sifting his sentences for a noble thought or
a beautiful idea, we may be pleased by the stately tread of their
succession, and their rich harmonious cadences.

The scenes are apt to be rather melodramatic. Wonderful passions work
wonderfully. Eyes flash, lips are set, cheeks grow pale, quite often.
Great coolness, vast powers, are continually displayed; yet they are
well displayed, after the fashion of gentlemen, not of bravoes or
villains or highwaymen. He handles thunder and lightning, the terrific
weapons of the mighty Jove himself, in a very haughty, Jove-like
manner, it must be confessed. He isn't afraid of singing his fingers
with the thunderbolts, but seizes them with the familiar gripe of
unquestionable authority. In a glorified language he paints glorified
visions. Very little of the calm domestic sunlight of the working
noonday glimmers among his pages, but a perpetual, everlasting
gorgeousness of deep-colored sunset radiance. For merit of style all
these novels are well worthy of commendation and of study. Education and
extensive reading have preserved them from faults of gaudiness and
meretricious ornament. They are chastened by good taste and regulated by
gentlemanly cultivation. They are written by a scholar, and not by a
scribbler; and while reading their magnificent pages we need have no
misgiving that we are admiring the flashy ornaments of wordy or
half-educated mediocrity. Far the best of them is also the first, 'Guy
Livingstone.' The poorest is 'Sword and Gown;' this has the feeblest
plot, in fact a mere apology for a story, and contains more passages
which seem unfinished, and what on a second reading would scarce have
satisfied their own writer. 'Guy Livingstone,' though not faultless, is
a work of power, talent, and brilliancy. Guy himself is an Olympian
character, sketched upon the scale and model of a Torso, a giant in his
virtues and his vices and his frame--but exaggerated with such tact and
ability that even the impossible hugeness charms and fascinates. The
feats of the hero in the dance and carpeted salon, on his mighty hunter
leading the breakneck chase, carry us away with all the heat and ardor
of sympathy; nor do we stumble in our companionable excitement over any
unwelcome snag of commonplace thought or vulgar daring. Constance
Brandon, as we have above intimated, we consider a splendid
masterpiece--a woman lovely as the imagination of man fondly likes to
dream, with every winning grace of manner and amiable charm of purity.
She is the finest character and the fairest face beyond all compare in
the gallery; and the scenes in which she figures are the most able, the
most moving, and the most unexceptionable in every point of view, of all
that our author has given us.


MILL ON LIBERTY.


Any work from the pen of John Stuart Mill will arrest the attention of
readers and thinkers wherever the English language is spoken, and,
indeed, wherever the spirit of inquiry and improvement has aroused the
intellect of man. This author has proved himself a veritable instructor
and benefactor of his race. His writings have been always grave and
valuable, addressed to the understanding of men, indicating arduous
study on his own part, and eliciting reflection of the profoundest
character in the mind of his reader. In his well known work 'On Logic,'
published twenty years ago, he exhibited the highest capacity for
abstract speculation, and placed himself by the side of Aristotle and
Bacon in the rank of philosophers; while that 'On the Principles of
Political Economy,' more practical in its aims, entitles him to the
reputation of an able and enlightened statesman.

Last year we had published in this country, a treatise from the same
fertile pen on the subject of 'Representative Government,' which,
however, was subsequent in the order of composition to that which has
just now appeared in the United States from the press of Ticknor &
Fields, of Boston. Both these productions, that on 'Representative
Government,' and that 'On Liberty,' are valuable to the American people,
teaching lessons important to be learned even by them. From the nature
of our institutions, and especially from the vainglorious sentiments too
generally entertained by us, we are apt to consider ourselves so well
versed in the principles of civil liberty and of representative
government, as to be incapable of learning anything on these subjects,
especially from English writers. Unfortunately, recent events are
calculated rudely to disturb our self-satisfaction, and to arouse within
us a serious distrust, not indeed of the principles embodied in our
institutions, but of our practical ability to carry them out to their
legitimate results, and thus to enjoy, fully and permanently, the
advantages of the system of free government of which we have always been
so boastful.

It is perhaps natural that the mass of the American people should
conceive the whole of liberty as comprised in the privilege of voting,
and its substantial benefits as being fully secured by the popular form
of government. This, however, would be an inconsiderate conclusion,
involving a most pernicious error; and so far is it from constituting
any important part of the discussion, that in the whole of Mr. Mill's
work, there is scarcely more than a glance at this aspect of the
question. The liberty which the author investigates and commends by the
most unanswerable arguments, is not that which is embodied in political
institutions, so much as that which results from the liberal and
enlightened spirit pervading and controlling the social organization. It
is not the power to choose representatives and to make laws, but it is
rather the privilege, in all proper cases, of being a law to one's self,
and of representing in one's own individuality the peculiar ideas and
capacities which each one is best fitted to unfold and develop for his
own good without injury to society. Political tyranny, at this day, is
by no means the chief danger to which men are anywhere exposed; and that
subject has been so thoroughly understood in modern times, that books
are hardly required now to be written upon it. It is social
despotism--the tyranny of custom and opinion--which chiefly enlists the
intellect of our philosophical and interesting author, though he does
not fail to lay down the true limits of the legislative authority as
well. He is thoroughly versed in the history of 'the struggle between
liberty and authority,' which he says 'is the most conspicuous feature
in the portions of history with which we are earliest familiar,
particularly in that of Greece, Rome, and England. But in old times this
contest was between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the
government. By liberty was meant protection against the tyranny of
political rulers.' This struggle has been carried on for ages, until it
has now come to be an axiom, universally received in civilized nations,
that government is instituted solely for the good of the governed. And
in the progress of amelioration and improvement, it has been supposed
that the popular principle of universal suffrage, with frequent
elections, and consequent responsibility of political agents, would
effectually prevent the exercise of tyranny in governments; and this
especially when governments are instituted under written constitutions,
with powers limited and clearly defined therein. The people, through
their chosen representatives, wielding the whole power of the national
organization, could not be expected to tyrannize over themselves.
Experience, however, soon proved that the tyranny of the majority in
popular governments is to be guarded against quite as carefully as that
of despotic rulers in any other form of polity. For, says Mr. Mill,
'when society is itself the tyrant--society collectively over the
individuals which compose it--its means of tyrannizing are not
restricted to the acts which it may do by the hands of its political
functionaries.' The obvious truth of this statement needs no elaborate
attempt at illustration. In all the departments of thought and action,
of opinion and habit, the power of society over its separate members is
tremendous and unlimited, sometimes penetrating 'deeply into the details
of life, and enslaving the soul itself.' It would not be difficult for
any man of intelligence and observation to recall instances, within his
own knowledge, in which this arbitrary power of the community has been
most unjustly exerted to oppress and injure individuals. The injury and
oppression have been none the less, because their operation has been
silent, attended with no physical force or legal restraint, but reaching
only the mind and heart of the sufferer, crushing them with the moral
weight of unjust opprobrium, and torturing them with all the ingenious
appliances of social tyranny.

The remedy for this sort of despotism--the most dangerous of all, if not
the only danger to be feared in civilized communities and in liberal
governments--is not to be found in laws or constitutions, but in the
enlightened liberality and trained habits and sentiments of society
itself. 'Some,' says Mr. Mill, 'whenever they see any good to be done or
any evil to be remedied, would willingly instigate the government to
undertake the business; while others prefer to bear almost any amount of
social evil, rather than to add one to the departments of human
interests amenable to governmental control.' And, upon the whole, he
thinks, 'the interference of government is, with about equal frequency,
improperly invoked and improperly condemned.' The only device which Mr.
Mill proposes, as the effectual means of counteracting this sort of
tyranny, either political or social, is the establishment of a rule or
principle, by which the limits of authority over individuals shall, in
both cases, be strictly and philosophically defined. He does not
undertake to say how this rule is to be enforced--by what sanctions, or
by what authority it can be made effectual for the protection of
individual rights. But as the evil to be remedied is one arising chiefly
from the errors of public opinion, the corrective would naturally seem
to be the inculcation of sound principles and just sentiments, infusing
them into the social organization, and gradually enthroning them in the
public conscience. The bare announcement of truth, in a matter of such
transcendent importance, is an immense progress toward the goal of
improvement. Principles, well founded and of real value, once
understood, will eventually make their way. With all the errors of
society, and the wrong-headed stubbornness and selfishness of humanity,
with the immense obstructive power of established interests, the haughty
despotism of old opinions, and the petrified rigidity of social customs,
the solvent energy of truth nevertheless will penetrate every part of
the imposing fabric, and gradually undermine its foundations. Underlying
the whole, there is a broad foundation for improvement; and there is a
natural tendency in society to seize upon and appropriate good, whenever
fairly exhibited to its view and placed within its reach.

As embodying the general purpose of the author, and the principle which
he seeks to establish, we give the following passage, in his own words:

     'The object of this essay is to assert one very simple principle,
     as entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the
     individual in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means
     used be physical force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral
     coercion of public opinion. That principle is, that the sole end
     for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in
     interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is
     self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be
     rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community,
     against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good,
     either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant. He cannot
     rightfully be compelled to do or forbear, because it will be better
     for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the
     opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even right. These
     are good reasons for remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him,
     or persuading him, but not for compelling him, or visiting him with
     any evil in case he do otherwise. To justify that, the conduct from
     which it is desired to deter him, must be calculated to produce
     evil to some one else. The only part of the conduct of any one, for
     which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In
     the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of
     right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the
     individual is sovereign.'

This statement has the great merit of being, at least, perfectly clear
and definite. In some particular cases, the principle may be difficult
of application; but in the principle itself, as defined in this passage,
there is not the slightest uncertainty or indistinctness. The author is
very careful, however, to except from its operation all persons who are
not in the maturity of their faculties, as well as all those backward
nations who are not capable of being improved by free and equal
discussion. The condition of society in which alone this liberal maxim
will be safe and appropriate, must be that of a people so far elevated
and enlightened, that persuasion and conviction are the most powerful
means of improvement. Wherever is to be found an advanced civilization,
with all the complex moral and social relations which grow out of it,
there the necessity for physical force will be found to have declined.
Public opinion will have acquired great authority, if not absolute
control; and the rights of individuals will require, for their
protection against the overpowering weight of the social combination,
all those safeguards against possible tyranny, which can only be
afforded by the general acceptance of the liberal principle just quoted.
The social authority must be educated and restrained by its own willing
recognition of individual rights. As the power most likely to be abused
for purposes of oppression is that of opinion and custom, too often
operating silently and insidiously, the corrective is only to be applied
by the establishment of a counteracting spiritual authority, in the
bosom of society itself, at all times ready to utter its mandate and to
proclaim the inviolable sanctity of individual liberty, within the
limits fixed by enlightened reason and conscience. In the earlier stages
of civilization, or in societies of more simple and primitive character,
individual development has not reached the point which either requires
such principles or admits of their application. The merely physical life
of such people can hardly give rise to these questions: political power
and actual force necessarily occupy the place of those subtle and
all-pervading moral and social influences which prevail in the
subsequent stages of progress. As men become more enlightened, they
become also more capable of self-control, and are consequently entitled
to greater liberty of action. Sooner or later, the necessity for
conceding it to the utmost limit of the principle stated, will be fully
acknowledged.

But it is notable that the author does not attempt to maintain his dogma
on the ground of right or morality, but solely on that of a wise and
broad utility. He foregoes all the advantage he might obtain in the
argument by resorting to the moral considerations which sustain it. It
is better for the real interests of society that individual members
should enjoy the largest measure of liberty; and if this be not
equivalent to the assertion that it is also their right, upon the
plainest moral grounds, it is at least certain that the two principles
are coincident in this case, as they will be found to be in all others,
where the real interests of mankind are concerned. So true is it, that
what ever, in a large sense, is best for the permanent advantage of any
society is, at the same time, always right and consistent with sound
moral principles.

In a matter of such vital importance as that of human liberty, which, in
the language of another eminent writer, 'is the one thing most essential
to the right development of individuals, and to the real grandeur of
nations,' it was necessary that its foundations should be made so broad,
in any correct philosophical analysis of its nature, as to comprehend
the whole field of human activity. Accordingly, Mr. Mill includes within
its proper domain the three great departments: consciousness, or the
internal operations of our own minds; will, or the external
manifestation of our thoughts and feelings in acts and habits; and
lastly, association, or coöperation with others, voluntarily agreed
upon, and not interfering with the rights and liberties of those who may
choose to stand aloof from such combinations. In reference to the first
of these, which asserts the undoubted right to enjoy our own thoughts
and feelings, with absolute freedom of opinion on all subjects, Mr. Mill
remarks that 'the liberty of expressing and publishing opinions may seem
to fall under a different principle, since it belongs to that part of
the conduct of an individual which concerns other people; but being
almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, and
resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable
from it.' But, in truth, the right of expression, which does not
properly come under the head of consciousness or thought, but under that
of will or action, is the only one of the two which at this day is of
any practical importance. The idea of controlling thought or belief has,
in effect, been everywhere abandoned. Indeed, it may be questioned
whether any such control ever has been or could have been exercised; for
thought itself could never be known except through some outward
manifestation. It was therefore the _expression_ which was punished, and
not the inward consciousness. Opinions, it is true, have too often been
the avowed ground of oppression and persecution. Men have been injured
in various ways, on account of their known or suspected belief; even in
modern times and in communities claiming to be free, political
disabilities, social reprobation, and the stigma of disqualification as
witnesses have been imposed upon persons entertaining certain views on
theological questions. But these persecutions may have compelled the
suppression or disavowal of obnoxious opinions, and may have made
hypocrites; they never changed belief, or produced any other conviction
than that of wrong and outrage. The soul itself is beyond the reach of
any human authority, not to be conquered by any device of terror or
torture.

Difference of opinion is unfortunately the ground of natural aversion
among men; and it requires much enlightenment and liberal training to
enable society to overcome this universal prejudice and to inaugurate
complete and absolute toleration. 'In the present state of knowledge,'
says Buckle, the historian, 'the majority of people are so ill informed,
as not to be aware of the true nature of belief; they are not aware that
all belief is involuntary and is entirely governed by the circumstances
which produce it. What we call the will has no power over belief, and
consequently a man is nowise responsible for his creed, except in so far
as he is responsible for the events which gave him his creed.' It may be
doubted whether the majority of people are quite so ignorant as Mr.
Buckle here represents them; for the conflict between beliefs is rather
the result of feeling or passion than of judgment. Because men who
differ in opinion hate each other, it does not follow that they must
therefore deny the right to freedom of thought, or maintain that belief
may be changed at will. The red man and the white man may cordially
hate each other; but it would hardly be accurate to say that the former
denies the right of the latter to his color, or thinks him morally
responsible for it. Yet men are quite as much responsible for the color
of their skin as for the character of their honest convictions, and they
have almost equal power to control the one or the other. In truth, the
hatred arising from conflict of opinion is not the offspring of thought,
but of emotion. It is chiefly a derangement of the affections; not so
much an error of the reason. The most unenlightened man has the innate
conviction that he is entitled to his peculiar belief, because it is
impossible for him to admit any other; nor is it at all natural or
necessary that one individual should question the sincerity of another's
opinion on any subject, because it differs from his own. Intolerance in
this particular has been the result mostly of interference and
usurpation--the consequence of that theological despotism to which men
have, in some form or other, in all ages, been more or less subjected.

It is not, therefore, the liberty of thought and belief that Mr. Mill
finds it necessary to defend, in his exposition of the first division of
the subject; but it is only that of expression and discussion--the
liberty of the press--the right to make known opinions upon any subject,
and to produce arguments in support of them. In this country, it may be
supposed to be wholly unnecessary to investigate this subject, inasmuch
as the liberty of the press is here maintained to the most unlimited
extent. So far as the mere legal right is involved, this is undoubtedly
true; the established laws interpose no impediment to the expression and
publication of opinions, except those indispensable regulations which
are intended to preserve the public peace and morality, and to protect
private character from wanton injury. We have no reason to fear any
invasion of the liberty of the press--any political interference with
the right of free discussion--unless in times of great public danger,
or, as Mr. Mill says, 'during some temporary panic, when fear of
insurrection drives ministers and judges from their propriety.' But
there is a despotism of society, in this country as well as elsewhere,
which, independent of law or authority, often imposes silence on
unpopular opinions, and suppresses all discussion, by means of those ten
thousand appliances and expedients adopted by communities to express
displeasure and to command obedience. Even, however, if there were not
the slightest evidence of intolerance in the country, if the rational
principles of liberty were universally acknowledged and practised upon,
it would still be most useful and interesting to follow this author in
his admirable discussion of the subject. It would be a matter of no
little importance to understand the rational grounds on which the great
and acknowledged principles of liberty are actually founded, and to see
the perfect frankness and fearlessness with which this philosophic
author follows the doctrine to its extreme but inevitable conclusions.
For instance, Mr. Mill does not hesitate to say, 'if all mankind minus
one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the contrary
opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one
person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing
mankind.' And this position is maintained not solely or chiefly on the
ground of injustice to the person holding the obnoxious opinion, but
because the forcible suppression of it would do even greater injustice
to those who conscientiously reject it. For if the opinion be true, its
establishment and dissemination would benefit mankind; and even if it be
false, it is equally important it should be freely made known, inasmuch
as it would contribute to 'the clearer perception and livelier
impression of truth produced by its collision with error.' Besides, no
man can certainly know that any opinion is true, so long as anything
which can be said against it is not permitted to be presented and freely
discussed. Liberty is the indispensable atmosphere of truth. Without it,
truth will as surely languish and die, as animals or plants will perish
without air. All great improvements have been accomplished only through
the conflicts of adverse opinion. Progress is change, and if all
discussion is prohibited, change and improvement are impossible.

It is interesting also to see the unlimited scope allowed to this bold
doctrine, and the fearlessness with which it is applied to subjects
usually deemed sacred and forbidden to all question or controversy. The
existence of a God, the certainty of a future state, the truth of
Christianity--all these are the proper subjects of free discussion and
untrammelled opinion, quite as much as any other questions, however
unimportant or indifferent. It becomes the devoutest Christian to hear
discussions on these transcendent subjects without the least ill will or
intolerance toward the adversary who may thus endeavor to shake his
faith in those sublime truths which he holds indisputable and more
sacred than all others. It is doing the highest possible service to the
doctrines to attack them; for if they be sound and true, they will
certainly survive, and be all the more glorious for having passed safely
through the ordeal. Christianity itself was more vital and effective in
its earlier stages, when fighting its way into existence against all
sorts of persecutions, than it has ever been since in the palmiest days
of its power. When its doctrines are no longer questioned, it will cease
to be a living spirit controlling the hearts of men. It will be a cold
and formal thing, resting on the general acquiescence, but no longer
exhibiting its all-conquering power in the active effort to overthrow
opposing creeds.

No genuine liberty can exist, until the community shall have reached
that elevated condition of liberality and wisdom which will gladly
submit its most cherished sentiments to the analysis of unsparing logic,
and that without the least effort to punish, in any way, the daring
attempt to undermine its faith. The champions of truth will be
strengthened by the encounter with error; weak and false arguments,
which really injure truth, will give way, and the solid foundations of
impregnable logic will be substituted in their place. It is impossible
to overestimate the service done to a good cause, by exposing it
fearlessly to the worst attacks of its enemies. 'The fatal tendency of
mankind to leave off thinking about a thing when it is no longer
doubtful, is the cause of half their errors. A contemporary author has
well spoken of 'the deep slumber of a decided opinion.'' And another
author enthusiastically exclaims: 'All hail, therefore, to those who, by
attacking a truth, prevent that truth from slumbering. All hail to those
bold and fearless natures, the heretics and innovators of the day, who,
rousing men out of their lazy sleep, sound in their ears the tocsin and
the clarion, and force them to come forth that they may do battle for
their creed. Of all evils, torpor is the most deadly. Give us paradox,
give us error, give us what you will, so that you save us from
stagnation. It is the cold spirit of routine which is the nightshade of
our nature. It sits upon men like a blight, blunting their faculties,
withering their powers, and making them both unable and unwilling to
struggle for the truth, or to figure to themselves what it is they
really believe.'

The chapter which Mr. Mill devotes to this subject--the liberty of
discussion and publication--is thoroughly exhaustive in its character.
It presents the question in almost every light in which it is desirable
to see it, and successfully meets every objection which can be made to
his doctrine. For the first time, a logical and philosophical exposition
of the great principles of liberty is presented to the world, and that
too in a most readable and attractive form. The work is calculated to do
immense good. It places liberty on a rational foundation, and dispels
every doubt which might have been entertained by the timid, as to the
safety and propriety of permitting free discussion on those points of
belief which are too often held to be beyond the domain of investigation
and argument. We do not pretend, here, to give anything like a synopsis
of the grounds assumed, and the reasonings adopted by the author. A full
and correct idea of these can only be obtained from the book itself. But
before leaving this part of the work, we cannot forbear quoting a
passage on this subject from an essay by Henry Thomas Buckle. Even at
the risk of prolonging this article beyond its proper limits, we quote
at some length, on account of the vast interest of the topic and the
different notions which too generally prevail as to the propriety of its
discussion:

     'If they who deny the immortality of the soul, could, without the
     least opprobrium, state in the boldest manner all their objections,
     the advocates of the doctrine would be obliged to reconsider their
     own position and to abandon its untenable points. By this means,
     that which I revere, and an overwhelming majority of us revere, as
     a glorious truth, would be immensely strengthened. It would be
     strengthened by being deprived of those sophistical arguments which
     are commonly urged in its favor, and which give to its enemies an
     incalculable advantage. It would moreover be strengthened by that
     feeling of security which men have in their own convictions, when
     they know that everything is said against them which can be said,
     and that their opponents have a fair and liberal hearing. This
     begets a magnanimity and a rational confidence which cannot
     otherwise be obtained. But, such results can never happen while we
     are so timid, or so dishonest, as to impute improper motives to
     those who assail our religious opinions. We may rely upon it that
     as long as we look upon an atheistical writer as a moral offender,
     or even as long as we glance at him with suspicion, atheism will
     remain a standing and permanent danger, because, skulking in hidden
     corners, it will use stratagems which their secrecy will prevent us
     from baffling; it will practise artifices to which the persecuted
     are forced to resort; it will number its concealed proselytes to an
     extent of which only they who have studied this painful subject are
     aware; and, above all, by enabling them to complain of the
     treatment to which they are exposed, it will excite the sympathy of
     many high and generous natures, who, in an open and manly warfare,
     might strive against them, but who, by a noble instinct, find
     themselves incapable of contending with any sect which is
     oppressed, maligned, or intimidated.'

The most interesting, and perhaps the most remarkable part of Mr. Mill's
book, is that which he devotes to individuality as one of the elements
of well being. Having very fully discussed the question of liberty in
thought and expression--the right of controlling one's own mind, and of
making known its conclusions--he proceeds to apply the same principle to
the conduct and whole scheme of human life, maintaining that every man
ought to be entirely free to act according to his own taste and judgment
in all matters which concern only himself. The sole condition or
limitation which society may rightfully impose upon the eccentricities
of individuals, is the equal right of all others to be unmolested and
unobstructed in their occupations and enjoyments. Every man is endowed
with faculties, capacities, and dispositions peculiar to himself, there
being quite as much diversity in the mental character of men as in their
physical appearance. It is this infinite diversity of thought and
feeling, as much perhaps as anything else, which distinguishes man from
the lower animals. It is of the utmost importance to the progress of
society, for it is only by departing from the common path, and pursuing
new and untried modes of existence and action, that improvements are
gradually made. If there were no disposition on the part of individuals
to deviate from the ordinary customs which have descended from
generation to generation, it is evident there would never be any
important change in the modes of human life nor in the institutions of
mankind, and if there could be any improvement at all, it would be
extremely slow and unimportant. It is the peculiarities of individuals
which alone can furnish the points of departure for new modes of action
and new plans of life. Hence it is not less the right of individuals
than it is the interest of the race that every one should not only be
permitted, but should even be encouraged to follow the dictates of his
own genius, with the most perfect and unlimited freedom consistent with
the peace and security of other men. Each one of the numberless buds on
a full-grown tree is the germ of another individual precisely similar to
the one from which it is taken. But if new trees are propagated from
these buds, they will exhibit not the slightest diversity in character
from that of the parent stock. It is only from the seed, original
centres of vitality and individuality that new varieties are produced
and improvements obtained either in the flower or the fruit. So in human
society: if each life is only an offshoot from the main body--a mere bud
from the parent tree--with no diversities in character, and no salient
points of original activity, it is evident that men would remain
substantially the same from generation to generation, and society would
stand still forever. Such, it is well known, is the case in those
Eastern nations in which a rigid system of caste prevails, the same
positions and occupations descending from father to son, without the
possibility of one generation escaping from the fatal routine to which
its predecessor was subjected.

Hence it is that Mr. Mill, with great earnestness, insists that 'there
should be different experiments in living,' and 'that the worth of
different modes of life should be proved practically, when any one
thinks fit to try them;' for, he continues, 'where not the person's own
character, but the traditions and customs of other people are the rule
of conduct, there is wanting one of the principal ingredients of human
happiness, and quite the chief ingredient of individual and social
progress.' Undoubtedly, that man who acts in conformity with his own
nature and disposition, if they do not mislead and betray him, will have
greater satisfaction and enjoyment than he who is constrained by the
opinions or authority of others to pursue courses not conformable to his
taste and judgment. That which men naturally incline to undertake and
ardently desire to accomplish, is usually that which they are best
fitted to do, and which will give the most appropriate exercise to their
peculiar faculties. It is evidently the general interest that every
individual in society should be employed in that peculiar work which he
can best perform. More will be effected, with less dissatisfaction and
suffering. And obviously, no better mode can be devised to put every man
to the thing for which he is capacitated by nature, than to give full
scope to his individuality, under the multiplied and powerful influences
which liberal education and elevated society are calculated to exert in
impelling him forward. The effect will be not only to do more for
society as a whole, but to make superior men by means of self-education.
'He who does anything because it is the custom, makes no choice. He
gains no practice either in discerning or desiring what is best. The
mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are improved only by being
used. The faculties are called into no exercise by doing a thing merely
because others do it, no more than by believing a thing only because
others believe it. If the grounds of an opinion are not conclusive to a
person's own reason, his reason cannot be strengthened, but is likely to
be weakened by adopting it: and if the inducements to an act are not
such as are consentaneous to his own feelings and character (where
affection or the rights of others are not concerned), it is so much done
toward rendering his feelings and character inert and torpid, instead of
active and energetic.'

Against these views, and, indeed, against the great body of valuable
thoughts so admirably presented in this work, no rational objection
would seem to be fairly adducible. But there are some very striking
passages liable to a very different criticism--passages which, if not
founded on actual misconception of facts, are, at least, so exaggerated
in statement as to require very material modifications, both as to the
existence of the evil they allege and the remedy they propose. Mr. Mill
complains of the despotism of society as having utterly suppressed all
spontaneity or individuality, and reduced the mass of mankind to a
condition of lamentable uniformity. He thinks this evil has not only
gone to a dangerous extent already, but that it threatens a still
further invasion of individual liberty with even greater disasters in
its train. It is better, however, to let Mr. Mill speak for himself in
the following passages:

     'But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and
     the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess but the
     deficiency of personal impulses and preferences.' * * *

     'In our times, from the highest class of society down to the
     lowest, every one lives as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded
     censorship.' * * *

     'I do not mean that they choose what is customary, in preference to
     what suits their inclination. It does not occur to them to have any
     inclination except for what is customary. Thus the mind itself is
     bowed to the yoke; even in what people do for pleasure, conformity
     is the first thing thought of; they like in crowds; they exercise
     choice only among things commonly done; peculiarity of taste,
     eccentricity of conduct, are shunned equally with crimes; until by
     dint of not following their own nature they have no nature to
     follow; their human capacities are withered and starved; they
     become incapable of any strong wishes or native pleasures, and are
     generally without either opinions or feelings of home growth or
     properly their own.'

And so, speaking of men of genius as being less capable than other
persons 'of fitting themselves, without hurtful compression, into any of
_the small number of moulds_ which society provides in order to save its
members the trouble of forming their own character,' he continues:

     'If they are of a strong character and break their fetters, they
     become a mark for the society which has not succeeded in reducing
     them to commonplace, to point at with solemn warning, as 'wild,'
     'erratic,' and the like; much as if one should complain of the
     Niagara river for not flowing smoothly between its banks like a
     Dutch canal.'

Mr. Buckle also bears testimony to the same effect in the following
language:

     'The immense mass of mankind are, in regard to their usages, in a
     state of social slavery; each man being bound under heavy
     penalties, to conform to the standard of life common to his own
     class. How serious these penalties are, is evident from the fact
     that though innumerable persons complain of prevailing customs, and
     wish to shake them off, they dare not do so, but continue to
     practise them, though frequently at the expense of health, comfort,
     and fortune. Men not cowards in other respects, and of a fair share
     of moral courage, are afraid to rebel against this grievous and
     exacting tyranny.'

Now, we are decidedly of opinion that the expressions used by both these
eminent writers are altogether too strong. We think it is true, both in
Europe and America, that whenever the masses of society recognize a man
of real genius, they are ever ready to welcome him with all his
peculiarities--not merely to overlook his ordinary eccentricities, but
to pardon grave offences against morality, and even to imitate his
errors. It may well be that the multitude are not quick to distinguish
superiority; though with the proper information and opportunity of
judging, they seldom fail instinctively to appreciate great qualities,
especially if these be such as relate to practical life, or artistic
development, rather than to abstract and speculative science. Men
addicted to pursuits of the latter kind, make their merits known more
slowly; but when they are known, they command unbounded respect in
society.

The real difficulty, unfortunately, is, that the vast majority of men
are not gifted with marked individuality, or great genius. They do not
break through the trammels of custom, not so much because these trammels
are strong, as because their impulses are weak. Whenever a man of real
energy appears, the crowd separates before him, the cobwebs of custom
are brushed away as he advances, and the world receives him very
generally for what he is worth, and too often for more. That impostors
and pretenders frequently succeed in deceiving society, is owing to the
fact that it is ever anxious and ready to receive and reward its
benefactors.

But even Mr. Mill himself recognizes the wisdom of paying due deference
to the experience of mankind, and of considering established customs as
_prima facie_ good, and proper to be followed. He admits 'that people
should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know and benefit by the
ascertained results of human experience,' and that 'the traditions and
customs of other people are, to a certain extent, evidence of what their
experience has taught _them_; presumptive evidence, and as such, have a
claim to his deference.' From all which, it is plain that there is a
just medium between what is recognized and established, and what is
newly proposed as a substitute for the old. The masses of mankind are
incapable of judging between the value of prevailing usages and novel
practices; much less are they capable themselves of striking out new
paths fit to be followed by their fellow men. The true difficulty then
is the want of energetic individuality and original genius, rather than
the want of a field for the exhibition of their power, or an opportunity
for their exertion. It cannot be denied, however, that there is a
certain inertia in society, requiring no little exertion to overcome it,
even in the case of unquestionable improvements. But this is
unavoidable, and at the same time most fortunate for the safety of
mankind; for otherwise, we should be subjected to perpetual changes and
sudden convulsions, which would make even progress itself a doubtful
good.

There is also another important aspect in which this question may be
advantageously considered. No one doubts that coöperation in society
contributes vastly to the increase of human power, production, and
happiness. Unanimity in sentiment promotes harmony, and contributes to
prosperity. Nor will it be denied that if truth could be certainly
attained upon any point whatever, it would be desirable that it should
be universally recognized and accepted. Undoubtedly, if any man in the
community should be disposed to dispute that truth, he ought to be
permitted freely to do so; but we cannot see that this opposition would
be better than his acquiescence. Now, the problem is to reconcile the
degree of unanimity and coöperation which is requisite for the full
exertion of social power, with that amount of individuality which would
be useful in promoting a progressive change. Spontaneity or originality
is disintegrating in its immediate tendency. It disturbs the order of
society, though, in the end, on the whole, it is advantageous. Thus we
have the tenacity of old habits and prevailing sentiments on the one
hand, tending to the harmony of society, and enabling all its members to
coöperate in the great works which make communities powerful. On the
other hand, we have the sporadic and disturbing efforts of individual
genius, ever seeking to withdraw the social current into new channels,
and eventually, through many trials, errors, failures, and triumphs,
alluring and leading it into better paths. It is not good for society
that either of these conflicting forces should gain the decided
ascendency; nor do we believe with Mr. Mill, that the preponderance at
the present time belongs to the former.

As to the influence of fashion, which is evidently alluded to in the
passages quoted, that plainly stands on a different and peculiar
footing. It has a double power to enforce its decrees. The one is
economical and commercial--the power of capital to control productions,
and the advantages of producing largely after a few forms or patterns;
the other is the social or psychological influence--the natural sympathy
among men which induces uniformity of dress and habit. Extravagant
excess often rules. Yet there is never wanting in the public of all
civilized countries, a disposition to adopt improvements when they
contribute to the general convenience, economy, and happiness; and we
believe, on the whole, the tendency is to become more and more rational
every day. Besides, a certain degree of uniformity is desirable in this
as in all other things. No little loss and inconvenience would ensue if
the fancies of every individual were permitted to run riot, and no man's
taste were modified by that of his neighbor, or controlled by the
general inclination. It is impossible to conceive the motley and
discordant mass which a community of such people would present.

The bearing of these social phenomena in other directions and upon other
interests, is the subject of equal condemnation by the author. The
effect upon government, and the general tendency of the democratic
principle, are represented in such highly colored pictures as these:

     'In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid to
     real or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things
     throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power
     among mankind.

            *       *       *       *       *

     'At present, individuals are lost in the crowd. In politics it is
     almost a triviality to say that public opinion rules the world. The
     only power deserving the name is that of masses, and of
     governments, while they make themselves the organ of the tendencies
     and instincts of masses. This is as true in the moral and social
     relations of private life as in public transactions. Those whose
     opinions go by the name of public opinions, are not always the same
     sort of public; in America they are the whole white population; in
     England, chiefly the middle class. But they are always a mass, that
     is to say, collective mediocrity.

            *       *       *       *       *

     'Their thinking is done for them by one mind like themselves,
     addressing them or speaking in their name, on the spur of the
     moment, through the newspapers. I do not assert that anything
     better is compatible, as a general rule, with the present low state
     of the human mind. But that does not hinder the government of
     mediocrity from being mediocre government. No government by a
     democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political acts,
     or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of mind which it fosters,
     ever did or could rise above mediocrity, except in so far as the
     sovereign many may have let themselves be guided (which in their
     best times they have always done) by the counsels and influence of
     a more highly gifted and instructed One or Few. The initiation of
     all wise or noble things comes and must come from individuals;
     generally at first from some one individual.'

In all this there is too much truth; but it is truth which is wholly
unavoidable. Nor are the circumstances complained of peculiar to the
present age, or to the institutions which now generally prevail.
Democratic and representative forms of government have so degenerated,
as to fail in the vital point of bringing the best and ablest men to the
control of affairs. But has any more despotic or hereditary form been
equally successful, in the long run, in promoting the freedom, progress,
and grandeur of nations? Is the mediocrity of a whole people more
injurious to humanity than the precarious superiority of distinguished
families, or the selfish power of haughty privileged classes? One
important consideration seems to be overlooked by Mr. Mill in these
one-sided views of the present condition of society; and that is, the
comparatively greater elevation and improvement of the whole mass of
civilized communities; and the question is suggested, whether humanity
is more interested in the mediocre power of the millions, or the
exceptional greatness of a few men of extraordinary genius; whether the
influence of individual originality is actually lost to the world,
because it is apparently overshadowed by the moderate intelligence of
the countless masses of men. We maintain that the loss of this influence
is not real, but merely apparent: like some great wave in the boundless
ocean, it seems to sink into the quiet surface, while in truth its
effects are necessarily felt on the shores of the most distant
continents and islands. Society, at the present time, is in a state of
transition; it is engaged in absorbing ideas and influences which seem
utterly to disappear in its fathomless depths, while it is simply
preparing for higher exertions and nobler conquests over ignorance and
tyranny.

One thing at least may be said with obvious truth, and with certainty of
large compensation for the evils supposed to exist in the present
condition of society, as represented by Mr. Mill; it is this: if public
opinion is so omnipotent in the enforcement of mediocre schemes and
ideas, it can bring to bear a vast fund of power, whenever real genius
may be so fortunate as to make itself felt and respected. No man having
any faith in humanity, not even Mr. Mill himself, will deny the power of
individual genius to make its impression even on the mediocre masses;
for that would be to deny the essential nature and efficiency of
originality, and its capacity to accomplish the work which it is
destined to do for the benefit of mankind. Actual conditions at the
present moment, may possibly place unusual obstructions in the way of
genius; though the entire freedom and accessibility of the press would
seem to negative that view. At any rate, it follows from the very
premises of Mr. Mill and those who think with him, that the actual
organization of society, of which he complains, if it can be wielded in
the interest of great ideas, is possessed of an authority which will
make its decrees irresistible. In this fact we see ground of hope,
rather than of despair, for the future of mankind. Mediocrity cannot
always hold the reins and direct the progress of human society.

In his work on representative government, Mr. Mill fully recognizes the
operation of free institutions as 'an agency of national education;' and
he well says, 'a representative constitution is a means of bringing the
general standard of intelligence and honesty existing in the community,
and the individual intellect and virtue of its wisest members more
directly to bear upon the government, and investing them with greater
influence in it than they would have under any other mode of
organization.' It cannot be otherwise. The masses are gradually rising
in intelligence, as well as in the capacity and disposition to recognize
and receive real superiority wherever it may be found. Certain cumbrous
machinery heretofore used in social and political action, now stands in
the way of free and efficient efforts to reach the best results. But
these impediments will soon be swept away. They cannot remain eternally
in the path of society; for, if by no other means, they will be removed
by the flood of discontent and denunciation which now surges violently
against them, and threatens them every instant with demolition and
destruction.


CLOUD AND SUNSHINE.


  A dusky vapor veils the sky,
    And darkens on the dewy slopes;
  Chill airs on rustling wings flit by,
    Sad as the sigh o'er buried hopes:
  I tread the cloistered walk alone,
    Between the shadow and the light,
  While from the church tower thronging down
    Pale phantoms greet the coming night.

  My heart swells high with scorn and hate
    At social fictions, narrow laws
  By which the few maintain their state,
    And build us out with golden bars:
  'She wears a careless smile,' I said,
    'And regal jewels on her brow;
  Those queenly lips, ere now, have made
    Rare mockery of her broken vow.

  'And what was I,--to touch that heart?
    Only a poet, made to pour
  Love's silver phrase with subtle art
    In tides of music at her door.
  What though she bore a brightened blush,
    As if the echo linger'd long?
  Even so she listens to the thrush
    That thrills the air with eddying song.

  'How sweet, on summer-scented morns,
    To hear through all our lingering walk,
  As soft as dew on fragrant lawns,
    The wandering music of her talk!
  Ah! dreaming heart, that asked no more
    When dower'd with that o'erflowing smile:
  Ah! foolish heart, to linger o'er
    The memories that can still beguile.'

  I paused. On distant breezes borne,
    A silken stir floats slowly by,
  And from the clouds a silver dawn
    Breaks through the vapor-shrouded sky;
  The cloister'd walk is paved with light,
    And bathed in crystal beams she stands:
  No jewels crown her presence bright,
    A single rose is in her hands.

  'Oh! fair white rose,' she softly said,
    'Make peace between my love and me;
  Lest from my life the colors fade,
    And leave me faint and pale like thee:
  Tell him that dearer is the flower
    Once honored by his poet hand,
  Than ermined rank, and princely power,
    With any noble in the land.'

         *       *       *       *       *

  Then soft as rose-leaf on my brow
    A sudden kiss comes floating down,
  On wings as light as angels know,
    And crowns me with a kingly crown.
  And banish'd by a touch divine,
    Fled all the memories of pain;
  I clasped the pleading hands in mine,
    And told her all my love again.

  The pale mist like an incense cloud
    From some great altar drifts away,
  In silvery fullness o'er us flows
    The glory of a pallid day.
  Amid the opening buds of hope
    I smile at half-forgotten fears;
  For love, I said, grows holier still
    And purer through baptismal tears.


'IS THERE ANYTHING IN IT?

'A true bill.'-SHAKSPEARE.


I used to be 'verdant' in the art of legislation. A short time since I
paid my initiation fee, and learned the mystery. It is true I had heard
much of legislative corruption, and had often seen paragraphs relating
thereto in the newspapers, but I looked upon them as political squibs,
put forth by the 'outs' in revenge for the defeat of their party
schemes. Here let me stoutly assert that I cannot testify of my own
knowledge to any instance of legislative corruption. _Mem:_ This
declaration is intended to save me from being called before any of the
numerous investigating committees, which, like the schoolmaster, are
abroad just now. At the same time I propose to relate in brief terms how
I was initiated, and the reader may rest assured that it is 'an ower
true tale.'

In the winter of 186-, not very long ago, you will perceive, the
corporation of which I was a member found it important to obtain some
legislation which would be very serviceable to those concerned. I was
selected to go to Harrisburg, to see the members of the Legislature
individually, and request them, if there was nothing objectionable in
the bill, to vote for it. I had no doubt but that my reasons would prove
satisfactory, especially as our business was of a nature to essentially
contribute to the development of the mineral and agricultural resources
of the State. With these honest and innocent ideas of legislation, I
started on my mission. On arriving at the capitol, I called on our
immediate member, Mr. Jones, who, if his own professions were to be
trusted, was anxious to do all he could to promote the object of my
visit. He was an old member, and 'knew the ropes.' From him I had every
reason to expect aid in procuring the passage of my bill. His room was
at a hotel, where a large number of the members of both houses boarded,
and he knew them all. Of course, it was a very proper place for me to
take rooms. I accompanied Jones to the gentlemen's sitting room in the
evening, where he introduced me to many of his fellow legislators, at
the same time hinting to them that I might have a bill of some
importance for them to consider. In one or two instances, I noticed that
knowing glances were exchanged between Jones and those to whom he
introduced me. On one occasion a member called him aside, and, after
some other conversation, in a low tone, said: _'Is there anything in
it?'_ The remark was so decidedly foreign to anything that could refer
to my bill, that I concluded that it related to some rumor that was
floating about without any certainty of its truth.

During the next day, I employed myself in listening to the debates and
watching the course of business in the House. It was all new to me, and,
of course, very interesting. While seated in the lobby, a middle-aged
man of short stature, dark whiskers, and limping gait, whom I had heard
designated as 'Sheriff,' and who appeared to have no visible means of
support in Harrisburg, except his cane, carelessly dropped into a seat
by my side, and engaged in commonplace conversation. He soon approached
a more business-like matter, and said he had understood I was interested
in some local legislation which would come before the House. I told him
that I had charge of a bill which I should endeavor to have passed, 'It
requires some tact and experience,' said he, 'to engineer a bill through
such a House as this;' and he ended this preliminary conversation by
asking the same mysterious question I had heard the night previous,
viz.; _'Is there anything in it?'_ I answered that I hoped there would
be something in it, if it passed, for the parties interested, as it
would enable us to develop certain matters of interest to the State, as
well as to make a profit for the stockholders. 'If,' said he, 'it is a
bill of such importance, you ought to have some man of experience to
assist you in putting it through.' I assured him that 'our member' was a
man of experience, and would stand by me, and be ready and willing to
impart any instruction that might be necessary. The answer I received
was a sarcastic smile, and the 'Sheriff' left.

I continued to watch the course of legislation for a few days, and soon
discovered that I was the object of considerable interest to a number of
outsiders. Whenever I entered the lobby, the 'Sheriff' and several
gentlemen, who were always in his company, would cast their eyes in the
direction of my seat, and then confer together. They seemed to keep a
strict watch on my movements. At last, when an opportunity offered, I
asked Jones what this 'Sheriff' was doing about the House. 'He seems to
have no business, and is constantly watching the proceedings of both
Houses, vibrating between them like an animated pendulum,' said I. 'Oh,'
said Jones, 'he is a member of the _Third House!_' Here was a new thing
to me. I evidently had not learned all the machinery of legislating. I
asked for an explanation, and soon learned that the 'Third House'
consisted of old ex-members of either House or Senate, broken-down
politicians, professional borers, and other vagrants who had made
themselves familiar with the _modus operandi_ of legislation, and who
negotiated for the votes of members on terms to be agreed upon by the
contracting parties--in short, these were the Lobby members of the
Legislature--a portion of mankind which I had never heard mentioned in
terms other than contempt and disgust. Was I then to become familiar
with these leeches--these genteel loafers, who, having no apparent
business, yet manage to live at the best hotels, drink the best of
wines, and go home at the end of the session with more money than any of
the _honest_ members? The sequel will show.

After waiting a week, I became impatient at the want of interest on the
part of Jones in my bill, which so materially concerned a large number
of his constituents. He, better than any other member, knew how much our
company was doing for the development of the country, the furnishing of
employment for laborers, and the increase of taxable inhabitants. He
knew that not a man in the county had an objection to urge, or a
remonstrance to present against our proposition. Why, then, did he not
take my ready-drawn bill and present it without any further delay?

Jones was a member of the committee on corporations, and was said to
have much influence in that important vestibule to the temple whence
corporate privileges issue. He might, then, if so disposed, soon have my
bill through that committee, I determined to bring the matter to a point
at once, and cut short my board bill by a speedy presentation of my
legislative bill, or obtain the unequivocal refusal of 'our member' to
act. I had spent one Sunday in Harrisburg, and did not wish to suffer
another infliction of the kind, if any effort of mine could avoid it. On
Monday the House did not meet until three o'clock, as those members who
live within a few hours' ride of the capital always wish to go home, and
another class wish to spend Saturday and Sunday in Philadelphia,
enjoying the various _hospitalities_ of the city of Brotherly Love, and
the superior facilities for religious instruction, of which legislators
generally stand in great need. These two parties combine, and have no
difficulty in adjourning over from Friday noon to Monday evening.

At the meeting of the House, I was promptly on hand, and at once
attacked Jones. I handed him my bill, drawn in due form, saying:

'Mr. Jones, I have been here a week, and have made no progress in the
business for which I came. I am anxious to be at home attending to other
duties. I propose to leave the bill in your hands, and depend upon you
to see it through. There seems to be no necessity of my being detained
longer, for I cannot hasten the matter. There cannot be the slightest
objection, I presume, to its passage, when once introduced.'

Jones saw that I was becoming impatient, and seemed to be entirely
satisfied that I should be quite so; and he informed me that the chief
difficulty would be in passing it through the committee on corporations.
The bills referred to that committee, he said, were always scrutinized
very closely, and it would need some engineering. He clapped his hands,
and called a page to his seat, whispered a few words to him, when he,
like Puck, darted off on his errand. Jones then turned to me, and
renewed the conversation. I soon saw the veritable Third House
'Sheriff,' whom I have described, approaching us. 'Our member' then
handed him the bill, saying:

'My friend here is very desirous of pushing his bill through. Do you
think there will be any difficulty about it?'

I could not see the propriety of consulting this Third House borer,
especially as he was a total stranger to me. The 'Sheriff' looked wise
a short time, and then said:

'Well' (addressing his conversation to me), 'you know that we have all
kinds of men to deal with here, and some of them will pay no attention
to a bill, however meritorious, _if there is nothing in it_--I mean, if
it brings no money to their pockets. It is very lamentable that such is
the case, but long experience has taught me that no bill of as much
importance as yours, can get through here, without the aid of money.'

I was dumb with indignation! The flood of legislative light thus
suddenly shed upon my unsophisticated mental vision, was too dazzling
for me. I replied, when I could command my voice, with some very severe
animadversions on bribery and corruption, with which the 'Sheriff' and
Jones expressed a hearty agreement, but they said we must take men as we
find them, and deal with them accordingly, or do without what we knew to
be our just dues; and the 'Sheriff' hobbled away, and took a seat in the
lobby. I left Jones with a determination to go over to the Senate and
consult with the Senator from our district, and ascertain whether he
entertained the same views of necessary appliances for legislation, as
did my friends of the Second and Third Houses. Our Senator was a very
sedate man, who had a reputation for honesty and piety, equalled only by
that of Jones himself. I explained my business, showed him my bill, and
he read it carefully through. On handing it back to me, he said,
quietly:

'If there _is anything in it,_ it will pass without much opposition. If
not, it will hardly go through the House. There is a _Ring_ formed over
there, which will prevent any legislation of this kind, unless it is
well paid for.'

Here was another legislative idiom! 'The Ring.' What did that mean? I
was not long kept in ignorance, for I soon learned that it was a
combination of members who had agreed to vote for no bill unless
approved by them, and not only approved, but well paid for. It was easy
for twenty or thirty individuals to control all important legislation in
this way, by casting their votes for one side or the other. This ring is
always in alliance with the Third House, and always in market, as I
learned by my brief experience.

