IN reply to Mr. WOODALL, Mr. J.L. TOOLE said he was happy to come there.
_Name is JOHN LAWRENCE TOOLE_? Yes. "JACK with my familiars,"--hem!--
SHAKSPEARE. Being in Witness-box,--JACK in the Box. _What he would take_?
Nothing, thanks, not even his oath. He was quite prepared to kiss the
book--in the absence of the belle. Little joke that--has heard of "bell,
book, and candle." Couldn't bring the candle in,--would if he could,
though, just to--ahem!--make it a light entertainment. Would they excuse
his glove? What did they want to know? _Whether the sanitary arrangements
at his Theatre were good_? Rather--he could only say they were "fust-rate."
A 1, in fact, like the performance. The house held over two thousand
pounds, and was crowded nightly to see _Walker, London. Did he consider the
structure safe_? Of course he did--safe as Houses--that is, safe as his
houses for _Walker, London_ were going to be for the next three years and a
half, when his tenancy would expire, and he should then be in the Army.
_Did the Committee want to know how it was that he would be in the Army_?
He'd tell them; because, when he gave up that Theatre, he would be a "Left
Tenant." Not bad that, for a beginner. We're a getting on, we are. As to
ventilation--well, he couldn't have too much ventilation for _Walker,
London_. He should like it aired everywhere. _Then the Committee might take
it that he was satisfied with the structure_? Well--if they put it in that
way--yes--he thought the structure a bit faulty---but what's the odds as
long as the public like the piece? He didn't consider _Walker, London_, a
model of dramatic construction, but he looked upon the House Boat built on
the stage as quite a model of construction; the end of the piece was a bit
hazy, and he didn't yet know why everybody allowed him to go off with the
punt, which they wouldn't get back, unless his friend, Mr. SHELTON, who was
splendidly made up as a riverside boatman, brought it back, and, begging
the Committee's pardon if they'd excuse his glove, he couldn't tell; not
that it was a secret, because the clever author, a very nice retiring chap
called BARRIE, hadn't confided it to him,--but--what was he saying?--oh,
yes--he couldn't tell how it was all the characters on board didn't see
ELIZA JOHNSON as _Sarah_ in the punt. But as _Walker_ says, "Oh, that's
nothing! that's nothing!" _The Chairman wished to know if there is an
egress at the back of the Theatre?_ He (Mr. TOOLE) did not remember ever
having seen a negress there. There were two beautiful young ladies--Miss
IRENE VANBRUGH and Miss MARY ANSELL--now playing, and, he might say it who
shouldn't, playing charmingly in _Walker, London_. _The Chairman didn't
mean that_. No? But _he_ (Mr. TOOLE) did, and he might add, though "it was
nothing, a mere nothing," that the performance of his three young men--Mr.
C.M. LOWNE, as the sensible lover; Mr. SEYMOUR HICKS, as the young medical
student; and Mr. CECIL RAMSEY, as "W.G.," a youthful athlete, was
admirable. They were all in _Walker, London_. In reply to Mr. T.H. BOLTON,
who wished to know _if the Witness considered his Theatre a substantial
edifice_, Mr. TOOLE said that he certainly did, because, you see, the
Theatre would never go to pieces as long as the pieces went to the Theatre,
and as long as it was supported by the public. _Have I any complaint_?
Nothing to speak of, except a touch of gout. Oh, beg pardon, you meant
_complaint as to the Theatre_? Oh, no, except it's not large enough to hold
the millions who can't be crammed in nightly. Has an excellent Acting
Manager in Mr. GEORGE LEE, and as to friend BILLINGTON'S stage-management
of the House Boat (the scene, he might say, was painted by Mr. HARKER, a
name not unknown at the Mansion House), it is the best thing of the sort
ever done. Any evening that Mr. PLUNKET, Mr. WOODALL, or Mr. BOLTON, or any
other of the Honourable Gentlemen would like to look in and see _Walker,
London_, they have only to send to the Box Office, or any of the Libraries,
and book in advance--he couldn't say fairer than that--because it was
advice that he always gave to "Friend IRVING," and which he had adopted. No
more? Hope he doesn't intrude. Would the Committee excuse his glove? Yes?
Then, remember, _Walker, London_.

Mr. J.L. TOOLE then hurried out. After his departure it was found that all
the spectators had on their backs adhesive labels advertising _Walker,
London_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A WARNING.

_Archie_ (_to his Sister, who has been reading him Fairy Tales_). "WON'T
THERE BE A LOT OF _US_, IF NONE OF US GO AND GET MARRIED? WORSE THAN _HOP
O'MY THUMB_!"

_Sister._ "YES; BUT YOU KNOW _I_ MEAN TO BE MARRIED!"

_Archie._ "DO YOU MEAN TO SAY YOU'D GO AND LIVE ALONE WITH A MAN AFTER
READING _BLUEBEARD_?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

A WAITING GAME.

WARY WILLIAM, _loquitur_:--

  _Drat that dog_!
    Dogs are mixed,--like men.
  Few know how to _jog_;
    Hasty tongue and pen,
  Many a bungler bog,
    Steady! _I_'ll say when!

  Lots of dogs I've bred.
    Most want whip, a deal.
  This one, be it said,
    Is more hot than leal;
  Wants to go ahead,
    Hates to come to heel!

  Skies are overcast;
    Slowly comes the spring,
  Quarry's tracked--at last,
    Strong, though, on the wing.
  Steady! Not so fast!
    Waiting game's the thing.

  'Tother WILLIAM'S style
    Rather spoiled this pup.
  _Steady_! Wait awhile!
    H-RC-RT's like a Krupp.
  I can stroll, and smile--
    Till the birds get up.

  Half-bred dogs--well, well,
    Mustn't talk like that!
  Else they'll call _me_ "swell."
    _Down! What are you at_?
  Scurry and pell-mell
    Do not 'bell the cat.'

  Sport is not a mere
    Game of "Spill and pelt"
  Patience! End is near.
    _Down_! Brute wants a welt!
  Modern breed runs queer;
    That I long have felt.

  'Tother WILLIAM snorts,
    L-BBY only grins;
  But at most all sports
    It is _judgment_ wins.
  Breed, though, now consorts
    With mongrels--for its sins!

  Long the sport I've loved,
    Mean to try again,
  I should be reproved
    Did I speak too plain:
  But--are dogs improved
    By that Irish strain?

  Steady, my lad, steady!
    Nearly slipped me then!
  You're too hot and heady--
    (Like no end of men!--)
  _Near_!--but not _quite_ ready.
    Steady! _I_'ll say when!

       *       *       *       *       *

VESTRYMEN CLIMBING DOWN.--Say the unfortunate Nonconformist Vestrymen of
St. George's, Southwark,--"We won't pay the Rector's Rate; but we won't go
to prison, at any rate."

       *       *       *       *       *

PRUDES AND NUDES.

    [An "Officer of high rank" has written to _Truth_, complaining of the
    naked statues and pictures he saw at Londonderry House, at a sale on
    behalf of Irish Home Industries.]

  ATTEND and hear the story of a most uncommon _militaire_,
    Whom the sight of naked statues caused to tingle to his boots,
  Who was seen to beat his breast, and (which was far more flat and silly)
      tear
    His hair by blushing handfuls from its shocked and modest roots.

  It was dreadful! There were Duchesses (Heav'n bless their handsome
      faces!)
    And a host of pretty Countesses, and Maidens by the score,
  And they sold some Irish Industries--embroideries and laces--
    And MADGE described to AMY all the pretty frocks they wore.

  But the statues and the paintings didn't seem at all to worry them,
    Having work to do they did it just as quiet as a mouse,
  Though this soldier took his daughter and his wife, and tried to hurry
      them
    In the cause of outraged virtue far from Londonderry House.

