  'N'es-tu pas le Beowulf qui essaya ses forces à la nage sur la mer
  immense avec Breca quand, par bravade, vous avez tenté les flots
  et que vous avez follement hasardé votre vie dans l'eau profonde?
  Aucun homme, qu'il fût ami ou ennemi, ne put vous empêcher
  d'entreprendre ce triste voyage.--Vous avez nagé alors sur la
  mer[14], vous avez suivi les sentiers de l'océan. L'hiver agitait
  les vagues[15]. Vous êtes restés en détresse pendant sept nuits
  sous la puissance des flots, mais il t'a vaincu dans la joûte
  parce qu'il avait plus de force que toi. Le matin, le flot le
  porta sur Heatho-ræmas et il alla visiter sa chère patrie[16] le
  pays des Brondingas, où il possédait le peuple, une ville et des
  trésors. Le fils de Beanstan accomplit entièrement la promesse
  qu'il t'avait faite.'


_Criticism of the Extract and Translation._

If the translation is compared with the text, the reader will be struck
by the characteristic beauty of the words omitted. We may agree with the
translator regarding the difficulty of rendering compound and kenning
into French, and yet the very absence of an attempt to do this
jeopardizes the value of the translation more than the omission of many
episodes, for it brings it dangerously near to paraphrase. 'Vous avez
nagé alors sur la mer, vous avez suivi les sentiers de l'océan,' cannot
possibly be called a translation of--

                  þ[-a] git on sund r[-e]on;
  þ[-æ]r git [-e]agor-str[-e]am    earmum þehton,
  m[-æ]ton mere-str[-æ]ta, mundum brugdon,
  glidon ofer g[-a]r-secg.

ll. 512, ff.

A part of the story has been thrown away with the adjectives. The force
and beauty of the passage are gone.

But there is another danger in this paraphrastic method. In omitting
words and phrases, the translator will often misinterpret his original.
This is especially true of Botkine's work in the obscure episodes where
he wishes to make the meaning perfectly clear. In attempting to simplify
the Old English, he departs from the original sense. Instances of this
may be brought forward from the Finn episode:

                      Folcwaldan sunu
  d[-o]gra gehwylce Dene weorþode,
  Hengestes h[-e]ap hringum wenede,
  efne sw[-a] sw[-i]ðe sinc-gestr[-e]onum
  f[-æ]ttan goldes, sw[-a] h[-e] Fr[-e]sena cyn
  on b[-e]or-sele byldan wolde.

ll. 1089 ff.

The idea is misinterpreted in Botkine's--

  Le fils de Folcwalda (stipulait qu'il) leur ferait chaque jour une
  distribution de trésors. (p. 50.)

Again, at line 1117 it is said of the lady--

  earme on eaxle    ides gnornode,

meaning that the lady stood by the body (shoulder) of the corpse as it
lay on the pyre. Botkine makes of this--

  'Elle poussait des lamentations en s'appuyant sur le bras de son
  fils.' (p. 50.)

The rendering is not without its amusing features, chiefly illustrations
of the inability of the French language to accommodate itself to
typically Germanic expressions. Thus when Hrothgar says what is the
equivalent of 'Thanks be to God for this blessed sight,' Botkine puts
into his mouth the words: 'Que le Tout-Puissant reçoive mes profonds
remercîments pour ce spectacle!'--which might have been taken from a
diplomatic note.

    [Footnote 1: See infra, p. 123.]  [[Sandras]]

    [Footnote 2: Save Michel. An account of his work may be found in
    Wülker's _Grundriss_, § 102.]

    [Footnote 3: _Analyse historique et géographique._ Paris, Leroux,
    1876.]

    [Footnote 4: p. 4.]

    [Footnote 5: See supra, p. 55.]  [[Grein]]

    [Footnote 6: See supra, p. 63.]  [[Heyne]]

    [Footnote 7: See supra, p. 22.]  [[Gruntvig]]

    [Footnote 8: See supra, p. 37.]  [[Ettmüller]]

    [Footnote 9: See supra, p. 49.]  [[Thorpe]]

    [Footnote 10: See supra, p. 33.]  [[Kemble]]

    [Footnote 11: Omits m[-o]dges mere-faran.]

    [Footnote 12: Omits middan-geardes.]

    [Footnote 13: Omits under heofonum.]

    [Footnote 14: Omits lines 513-515a.]

    [Footnote 15: Omits wintrys wylum.]

    [Footnote 16: Omits l[-e]of his l[-e]odum.]


LUMSDEN'S TRANSLATION


Beowulf, an Old English Poem, translated into Modern Rhymes, by
Lieut.-Colonel H. W. Lumsden[1]. London: C. Kegan Paul & Co., 1881.
8vo, pp. xx, 114.

Beowulf, an Old English Poem, translated into Modern Rhymes, by
Lieut.-Colonel H. W. Lumsden, late Royal Artillery. Second edition,
revised and corrected. London: Kegan Paul, Trench and Co., 1883. 8vo,
pp. xxx, 179.

Fifth English Translation. Ballad Measures.


_Differences between the two Editions, and Indebtedness to Preceding
Scholars._

In the first edition of the translation a number of passages were
omitted. Some of these omissions were owing to corrupt text, some to
extreme obscurity of the original, and some merely to the fact that the
original was deemed uninteresting. The principal omissions were: 83-86;
767-770; 1724-1758; 1931-1963; 2061-2062; 2214-2231; 2475; 2930-2932;
3150-3156. These passages were inserted in the second edition.

  'In this edition I have endeavoured to remove some of the blunders
  which disfigured its predecessor.... Some parts have been entirely
  rewritten, and the passages formerly omitted ... have been
  inserted.... A few notes have been added; and the introduction has
  been materially altered and, I hope, improved.' --Preface to the
  Second Edition, p. v.


_Aim and Nature of the Translation._

Lumsden's desire was to produce a readable version of the poem. Thus his
work resembles that of Wackerbarth[2]; and, like Wackerbarth, he couched
his translation in ballad measures. Lumsden does not vary his measure,
but preserves the iambic heptameter throughout. His lines rime in
couplets.

No attempt is made to preserve alliteration or archaic diction.

The Introduction and Notes contain popular expositions of the work of
preceding scholars. Several of the Notes are original and well worth
while (see Notes A, C, G, M).


_Texts Used._

The translation is based on Grein's text of 1857[3] and Arnold's text
(1876)[4]. Garnett has shown[5] that Lumsden ignored the 1867 text of
Grein and the editions of Heyne. These defects were remedied to some
extent in the second edition. Lumsden himself never emends the text.


EXTRACT[6].

  IV. HUNFERD AND BEOWULF.

  Hunferd the son of Ecglaf spoke--at Hrothgar's feet sat he--
  And thus let loose his secret grudge;
        (for much did him displease
  The coming of Beowulf now--bold sailor o'er the seas.
  To none on earth would he allow a greater fame 'mong men
  Beneath the heavens than his): 'Art thou the same Beowulf then,
  Who swam a match with Breca once upon the waters wide,
  When ye vainglorious searched the waves,
        and risked your lives for pride
  Upon the deep? Nor hinder you could any friend or foe
  From that sad venture. Then ye twain did on the waters row;
  Ye stretched your arms upon the flood;
        the sea-ways ye did mete;                                   10
  O'er billows glided--with your hands them tossed--though
        fiercely beat
  The rolling tides and wintry waves! Seven nights long toilèd ye
  In waters' might; but Breca won--he stronger was than thee!
  And to the Hathoræms at morn washed shoreward by the flood,
  Thence his loved native land he sought--the Brondings'
        country good,
  And stronghold fair, where he was lord of folk and burg
        and rings.
  Right well 'gainst thee his vaunt he kept.


_Criticism of the Translation._

The extract illustrates the paraphrastic nature of parts of the
translation. Lumsden frequently seems to feel it necessary to read a
meaning into the obscure lines and passages that do not easily lend
themselves to translation; cf. lines 11, 12. At line 2258 Lumsden
translates:--

                                The mail that bite of sword
  O'er clashing shield in fight withstood must follow its dead lord.
  Never again shall corselet ring as help the warriors bear
  To comrades far.

The Old English from which this passage is taken reads:--

  ge swylce s[-e]o here-p[-a]d,  s[-i]o æt hilde geb[-a]d
  ofer borda gebræc    bite [-i]rena,
  brosnað æfter beorne;    ne mæg byrnan hring      2260
  æfter w[-i]g-fruman    w[-i]de f[-e]ran
  hæleðum be healfe.

The passage is certainly obscure, and the readings are not all
undoubted, but the words can never be tortured into meaning what Lumsden
tries to make them mean.

But it would be manifestly unfair to judge a translation addressed to
the general reader merely by scholarly tests. The work must make its
appeal as a literary rendering.

The propriety of adopting a ballad measure may be questioned. Probably
no measure could be found more unlike the Old English lines. Moreover,
by reason of its long association with purely popular poetry, it
constantly suggests the commonplace and the trivial. But above all, it
is reminiscent of a medievalism wholly different from that of _Beowulf_.

The saving grace of the ballad measure is its readableness. It is rather
effective in passages not too dignified, calling for action. But in
passages of elevation the line is found wanting:--

  They mourned their king and chanted dirge,
        and much of him they said;
  His worthiness they praised,
        and judged his deeds with tender dread.

But, like Wackerbarth's, Lumsden's translation had the advantage of
being readable.

    [Footnote 1: Col. Lumsden's translation of the Battle of Maldon,
    _Macmillan's Magazine_, 55: 371, has been generally admired.]

    [Footnote 2: See supra, p. 45.]  [[Wackerbarth]]

    [Footnote 3: See supra, p. 56.]  [[Grein's Texts]]

    [Footnote 4: See supra, p. 72.]  [[Arnold: Criticism...]]

    [Footnote 5: See _American Journal of Philology_, ii. p. 355.]

    [Footnote 6: From the second edition.]


GARNETT'S TRANSLATION


Beowulf: An Anglo-Saxon Poem, and the Fight at Finnsburg, translated by
James M. Garnett, M.A., LL.D., Boston, U.S.A.: published by Ginn, Heath,
& Co., 1882. 8vo, pp. xl, 107.

Second Edition, Ginn, Heath, & Co., 1885. 8vo, pp. xlvi, 110.

Third Edition, Ginn & Co., 1892. Reprinted 1899. 8vo, pp. liii, 110.

Fourth Edition, 1900.

Sixth English Translation. Imitative Measures.


_Differences between the Editions._

In the second edition the translation was collated with the Grein-Wülker
text, and wherever necessary, with the Zupitza _Autotypes_. Additions
were made to the bibliography:--

  'I have revised certain passages with a view to greater accuracy,
  but I have not changed the plan of the work, for that would have
  necessitated the re-writing of the whole translation.' --Preface
  to the second edition.

The third and fourth editions are simple reprints, with some additions
to the bibliography.


_Circumstances of Publication._

As has been pointed out above in the sections on Arnold[1] and
Lumsden[2], no satisfactory literal translation of _Beowulf_ existed in
English. Furthermore, an American translation had never appeared. It was
with a view to presenting the latest German interpretations of the poem
that Garnett prepared his literal version of the poem. The original
draft of the translation was made at St. John's College, Md., in the
session of 1878-79.--Preface to first edition.


_Texts Used._

The translation is based on Grein's text of 1867. Notes are added
showing the variants from Heyne's text of 1879. In the second edition
notes are added showing the variants from the Grein-Wülker text of 1883.


_Method of Translation._

The translation is intended for 'the general reader' and for the 'aid of
students of the poem.' --Preface to second edition.

The translation is a literal line-for-line version. Of this feature of
his work Professor Garnett says:--

  'This involves naturally much inversion and occasional obscurity,
  and lacks smoothness; but it seemed to me to give the general
  reader a better idea of the poem than a mere prose translation
  would do, in addition to the advantage of literalness. While it
  would have been easy, by means of periphrasis and freer
  translation, to mend some of the defects chargeable to the
  line-for-line form, the translation would have lacked literalness,
  which I regarded as the most important object.' --Preface to the
  first edition.


_Nature of the Verse-form._

  'In respect to the rhythmical form, I have endeavored to preserve
  two accents to each half-line, with cæsura, and while not seeking
  alliteration, have employed it purposely wherever it readily
  presented itself. I considered that it mattered little whether the
  feet were iambi or trochees, anapæsts or dactyls, the preservation
  of the two accents being the main point, and have freely made use
  of all the usual licences in Early English verse.... To attain
  this point I have sometimes found it necessary to place unemphatic
  words in accented positions, and words usually accented in
  unaccented ones, which licence can also be found in Early English
  verse.... While the reader of modern English verse may sometimes
  be offended by the ruggedness of the rhythm, it is hoped that the
  Anglo-Saxon scholar will make allowances for the difficulty of
  reproducing, even approximately, the rhythm of the original. The
  reproduction of the sense as closely as possible had to be kept
  constantly in view, even to the detriment of the smoothness of the
  rhythm.' --Preface to the first edition.


EXTRACT.

  III.

  Hunferth's taunt. The swimming-match with Breca. Joy in Heorot.

  IX. Hunferth then spoke, the son of Ecglaf,
  Who at the feet sat of the lord of the Scyldings,          500
  Unloosed his war-secret (was the coming of Beowulf,
  The proud sea-farer, to him mickle grief,
  For that he granted not that any man else
  Ever more honor of this mid-earth
  Should gain under heavens than he himself):                505
  'Art thou that Beowulf who strove with Breca
  On the broad sea in swimming-match,
  When ye two for pride the billows tried
  And for vain boasting in the deep water
  Riskéd your lives. You two no man,                         510
  Nor friend nor foe, might then dissuade
  From sorrowful venture, when ye on the sea swam,
  When ye the sea-waves with your arms covered,
  Measured the sea-ways, struck with your hands,
  Glided o'er ocean; with its great billows                  515
  Welled up winter's flood. In the power of the waters
  Ye seven nights strove: he in swimming thee conquered,
  He had greater might. Then him in the morning
  On the Heathoremes' land the ocean bore up,
  Whence he did seek his pleasant home,                      520
  Dear to his people, the land of the Brondings
  His fair strong city, where he had people,
  A city and rings. All his boast against thee
  The son of Beanstan truly fulfilled.'


_Criticism of the Translation._

The translation, in its revised form, is throughout a faithful version
of the original text. The fault of Garnett's translation is the fault of
all merely literal translations--inadequacy to render fully the content
of the original. The rendering may be word for word, but it will not be
idea for idea. Examples of this inadequacy may be given from the printed
extract. 'Grief' in line 502 is a very insufficient rendering of
_æf-þunca_, a unique word which suggests at once vexation,
mortification, and jealousy. Had the poet simply meant to express the
notion of _grief_, he would have used _sorh_, _cearu_, or some other
common word. In line 508 'pride' hardly gives full expression to the
idea of _wlence,_ which signifies not only _pride_, but _vain pride, of
empty end_. In line 517 'conquered' is insufficient as a translation of
_oferfl[-a]t_, which means to _overcome in swimming, to outswim_.

Examples of this sort can be brought forward from any part of the poem.
At line 2544 Garnett translates--

  Struggles of battle when warriors contended,

a translation of--

  G[-u]ða ... þonne hnitan f[-e]ðan

Here 'hnitan f[-e]ðan' refers to the swift clash in battle of two armed
hosts, a notion which is ill borne out by the distributive 'warriors'
and the vague 'contended.'

At line 2598 we find--

  they to wood went

for

  h[-y] on holt bugon,

which, whatever be the meaning of 'bugon,' is surely a misleading
translation.

The nature of the verse has been sufficiently illustrated by the
quotations from the author's preface. It would seem from the way in
which the measure is used that it was a kind of second thought, incident
upon the use of a line-for-line translation. It is hard to read the
lines as anything but prose, and, if they appeared in any other form
upon the page, it is to be questioned whether any one would have guessed
that they were intended to be imitative.


_Reception of Garnett's Translation._

Garnett's volume had a flattering reception. The book received long and
respectful reviews from the Germans. Professor Child and Henry Sweet
expressed their approbation. The book has passed through four editions.
This cordial welcome has been due in large measure to the increasing
attention given the poem in American colleges and secondary schools.
Being strictly literal, the book has been of value as a means of
interpreting the poem.

    [Footnote 1: See supra, p. 71.]  [[Arnold]]

    [Footnote 2: See supra, p. 79.]  [[Lumsden]]


GRION'S TRANSLATION


Beovulf, poema epico anglosassone del vii secolo, tradotto e illustrato
dal Dott. Cav. Giusto Grion, Socio Ordinario.

_In_ Atti della Reale Accademia Lucchese di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti.
Tomo XXII. Lucca: Tipografia Giusti, 1883. 8vo, pp. 197-379.

First Italian Translation. Imitative Measures.


_Contents._

Full discussions of (1) Mito; (2) Storia; (3) Letteratura. The latter is
a fairly complete bibliography of what had been done on _Beowulf_ up to
this time.


_Author's Preliminary Remarks._

  'Il poema consiste di 3183 versi fra cui alcuni in frammenti che
  noi abbiamo cercato di completare senza alterare lettera del
  testo. Una mano recente lo ha diviso in 43 canti, detti in ags.
  fitte; ne notiamo il numero anche nella versione. I versi che il
  Müllenhoff reputa interpolati, sono disposti in linee rientranti;
  quelli attributi ad A portano di più questa lettera nella versione
  nostra interlineare, che segue la parola del testo in maniera da
  mantenervi anche la sintassi, e sì che nessuna parola d'un verso
  prenda posto in un' altra riga. Le parentesi quadre [ ] segnano
  nel testo riempiture di lacune. Nella versione sono queste segnate
  per lettere corsive.' --Prefazione, p. 251.


_Texts Used._

The translator makes use of all the texts and commentaries that had
appeared up to his time, and even goes so far as to emend the text for
himself (cf. lines 65, 665, 1107, 2561, 3150).

The Notes are rather full. They are sometimes merely explanatory;
sometimes there are discussions of the MS. readings, of proposed
emendations, of history, myth, &c.


_Method of Translation._

The translation is literal; the medium an imitative measure of four
principal stresses, varied occasionally by the expanded line. The
diction is simple.


EXTRACT.

  VIII.

