Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file made using scans of public domain works from Biblioteca
de la Universitat de Barcelona.)


  [Unless otherwise noted, spelling and punctuation are unchanged.
  Errors are listed at the end of the text.]


  THE
  Accomplisht Cook,
  OR THE
  ART & MYSTERY
  OF
  COOKERY.

  Wherein the whole ART is revealed in a
  more easie and perfect Method,
  than hath been publisht in any language.

  Expert and ready Ways for the Dressing
  of all Sorts of FLESH, FOWL, and FISH,
  with variety of SAUCES proper for each of them;
  and how to raise all manner of _Pastes_;
  the best Directions for all sorts of _Kickshaws_,
  also the _Terms_ of _CARVING_ and _SEWING_.

  An exact account of all _Dishes_ for all _Seasons_
  of the Year, with other _A-la-mode Curiosities_.

  The Fifth Edition, with large Additions
  throughout the whole work:
  besides two hundred Figures of several Forms
  for all manner of bak'd Meats,
  (either Flesh, or Fish)
  as, Pyes Tarts, Custards; Cheesecakes,
  and Florentines, placed in Tables,
  and directed to the Pages they appertain to.

  Approved by the fifty five Years
  Experience and Industry of _ROBERT MAY_;
  in his Attendance on several Persons of great Honour.

  _London_, Printed for _Obadiah Blagrave_
  at the _Bear_ and _Star_
  in St. _Pauls Church-Yard_, 1685.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  _CONTENTS_

  [Added by transcriber using author's section headings.]

    Directions for the order of carving Fowl.

    Bills of Fare for every Season in the Year

  SECTION I:
    Perfect Directions for the A-la-mode Ways of dressing all manner
    of Boyled Meats, with their several sauces, &c.

      To make several sorts of Puddings.
      Sheeps Haggas Puddings.
      To make any kind of sausages.
      To make all manner of Hashes.
      Pottages.
      Divers made Dishes or _Capilotado's_.

  SECTION II:
    An hundred and twelve excellent wayes for the dressing of Beef.

  SECTION III:
    The A-la-mode ways of dressing the Heads of any Beasts.

  SECTION IV:
    The rarest Ways of dressing of all manner of Roast Meats,
    either of Flesh or Fowl, by Sea or land, with their Sauces
    that properly belong to them.

  SECTION V:
    The best way of making all manner of Sallets.

  SECTION VI:
    To make all manner of Carbonadoes, either of Flesh or Fowl;
    as also all manner of fried Meats of Flesh, Collops and Eggs,
    with the most exquisite way of making Pancakes, Fritters,
    and Tansies.

  SECTION VII:
    The most Excellent Ways of making All sorts of Puddings.

  SECTION VIII:
    The rarest Ways of making all manner of Souces and Jellies.

  SECTION IX:
    The best way of making all manner of baked Meats.

  SECTION X:
    To bake all manner of Curneld Fruits in Pyes, Tarts,
    or made Dishes, raw or preserved, as Quinces, Warden,
    Pears, Pippins, &c.

  SECTION XI:
    To make all manner of made Dishes, with or without Paste.

  SECTION XII:
    To make all manner of Creams, Sack-Possets, Sillabubs,
    Blamangers, White-Pots, Fools, Wassels, &c.

  SECTION XIII:
    The First Section for dressing of Fish.
    Shewing divers ways, and the most excellent, for Dressing
    of Carps, either Boiled, Stewed, Broiled, Roasted, or Baked, &c.

  SECTION XIV:
    The Second Section of Fish.
    Shewing the most Excellent Ways of Dressing of Pikes.

  SECTION XV:
    The Third Section for dressing of Fish.
    The most excellent ways of Dressing Salmon, Bace, or Mullet.

  SECTION XVI:
    The fourth Section for dressing of Fish.
    Shewing the exactest ways of dressing Turbut, Plaice,
    Flounders, and Lampry.

  SECTION XVII:
    The Fifth Section of Fish.
    Shewing the best way to Dress Eels, Conger, Lump, and Soals.

  SECTION XVIII:
    The Sixth Section of Fish.
    The A-la-mode ways of Dressing and Ordering of Sturgeon.

  SECTION XIX:
    The Seventh Section of Fish.
    Shewing the exactest Ways of Dressing all manner of Shell-Fish.

  SECTION XX:
    To make all manner of Pottages for Fish-Days.

  SECTION XXI:
    The exactest Ways for the Dressing of Eggs.

  SECTION XXII:
    The best Ways for the Dressing of Artichocks.

  SECTION XXIII:
    Shewing the best way of making Diet for the Sick.

  SECTION XXIV:
    Excellent Ways for Feeding of Poultrey.

  [Index] THE TABLE

  [Publisher's Advertising]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  _To the Right Honourable my _Lord Montague,_ My _Lord Lumley,_
    and my _Lord Dormer;_ and to the Right worshipful Sir
    _Kenelme Digby,_ so well known to this Nation for their
    Admired Hospitalities._


_Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful_,

He is an Alien, a meer Stranger in _England_, that hath not been
acquainted with your generous House-keepings; for my own part my
more particular tyes of service to you my Honoured Lords, have built
me up to the height of this Experience, for which this Book now at
last dares appear to the World; those times which I tended upon your
Honours were those Golden Days of Peace and Hospitality when you
enjoyed your own, so as to entertain and releive others.

Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful, I have not only been an
eye-witness, but interested by my attendance; so as that I may
justly acknowledge those Triumphs and magnificent Trophies of
Cookery that have adorned your Tables; nor can I but confess to the
world, except I should be Guilty of the highest Ingratitude, that
the only structure of this my Art and knowledge, I owed to your
costs, generous and inimitable Epences; thus not only I have derived
my experience, but your Country hath reapt the Plenty of your
Humanity and charitable Bounties.

Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful, Hospitality which was once a
Relique of the Gentry, and a known Cognizance to all ancient Houses,
hath lost her Title through the unhappy and Cruel Disturbances of
these Times, she is now reposing of her lately so alarmed Head on
your beds of Honour: In the mean space that our English World may
know the _Mecæna_'s and Patrons of this Generous Art, I have exposed
this Volume to the Publick, under the Tuition of your Names; at
whose Feet I prostrate these Endeavours, and shall for ever remain

  _Your most humble devoted Servant._
   _ROBERT MAY._

  _From _Soleby_ in _Leicestershire_,
    September 29. 1684._


  _To the Master Cooks, and to such young Practitioners
    of the Art of Cookery, to whom this Book may be useful._

To you first, most worthy Artists, I acknowledg one of the chief
Motives that made me to adventure this Volume to your Censures, hath
been to testifie my gratitude to your experienced Society; nor could
I omit to direct it to you, as it hath been my ambition, that you
should be sensible of my Proficiency of Endeavours in this Art. To
all honest well intending Men of our Profession, or others, this
Book cannot but be acceptable, as it plainly and profitably
discovers the _Mystery_ of the _whole Art_; for which, though I may
be _envied by some that only value their private Interests above
Posterity, and the publick good_, yet God and my own Conscience
would not permit me _to bury these my Experiences with my Silver
Hairs in the Grave_: and that more especially, as the advantages of
my Education hath raised me above the _Ambitions_ of others, in the
converse I have had with other _Nations_, who in this _Art_ fall
short of what I _have known experimented by you my worthy Country
men_. Howsoever, the _French by their Insinuations, not without
enough of Ignorance_, have bewitcht some of the _Gallants of our
Nation_ with Epigram Dishes, smoakt rather than drest, so strangely
to captivate the _Gusto_, their _Mushroom'd Experiences_ for _Sauce_
rather than _Diet_, for the generality howsoever called _A-la-mode_,
not worthy of being taken notice on. As I live in _France_, and had
the Language and have been an eye-witness of their _Cookeries_ as
well, as a Peruser of their Manuscripts, and Printed _Authors_
whatsoever I found good in them, I have inserted in this _Volume_.
I do acknowledg my self not to be a little beholding to the
_Italian_ and _Spanish_ Treatises; though without my fosterage, and
bringing up under the _Generosities_ and _Bounties of my Noble
Patrons and Masters_, I could never have arrived to this
_Experience_. To be confined and limited to the narrowness of a
Purse, is to want the _Materials_ from which the _Artist_ must gain
his knowledge. Those _Honourable Persons_, _my Lord_ Lumley, and
others, with whom I have spent a part of my time, were such whose
generous cost never weighed the Expence, so that they might arrive
to that right and high esteem they had of their _Gusto's_. Whosoever
peruses this _Volume_ shall find it amply exemplified in _Dishes_ of
such high prices, which only these _Noblesses Hospitalities_ did
reach to: I should have sinned against their (to be perpetuated)
Bounties, if I had not set down their several varieties, that the
_Reader_ might be as well acquainted with what is extraordinary, as
what is ordinary in this _Art_; as I am truly sensible, that some of
those things that I have set down will amaze a not thorow-paced
_Reader_ in the _Art of Cookery_, as they are Delicates, never till
this time made known to the World.

_Fellow Cooks_, that I might give a testimony to my _Countrey_ of
the _laudableness of our Profession_, that I might encourage young
Undertakers to make a Progress in the _Practice of this Art_, I have
laid open these Experiences, as I was most unwilling to hide my
Talent, but have ever endeavoured to do good to others;
I acknowledge that there hath already been _several Books publisht_,
and amongst the rest some out of the _French_, for ought I could
perceive to very little purpose, _empty and unprofitable Treatises_,
of as little use as some _Niggards Kitchens_, which the _Reader_ in
respect of the confusion of the Method, or barrenness of those
_Authors_ experience, hath rather been puzled then profited by; as
those already extant Authors have trac't but one common beaten Road,
repeating for the main what others have in the same homely manner
done before them: It hath been my task to denote some _new Faculty
or Science_, that others have not yet discovered; this the _Reader_
will quickly discern by those _new Terms of Art_ which he shall meet
withal throughout this _whole Volume_. Some things I have inserted
of _Carving and Sewing_ that I might demonstrate the whole Art. In
the contrivance of these my labours, I have so managed them for the
general good, that those whose Purses cannot reach to the cost of
rich Dishes, I have descended to their meaner Expences, that they
may give, though upon a sudden Treatment, to their Kindred, Friends,
Allies and Acquaintance, a handsome and relishing entertainment in
all seasons of the year, though at some distance from Towns or
Villages. Nor have my serious considerations been wanting amongst
direction for Diet how to order what belongs to the sick, as well as
to those that are in health; and withal my care hath been such, that
in this Book as in a Closet, is contained all such Secrets as relate
to _Preserving_, _Conserving_, _Candying_, _Distilling_, and such
rare varieties as they are most concern'd in the _best husbandring
and huswifering_ of them. Nor is there any Book except that of the
_Queens Closet_, which was so _enricht with Receipts_ presented to
her _Majesty_, as yet that I ever saw in any _Language_, that ever
contained so many _profitable Experiences, as in this Volume_: in
all which the _Reader_ shall find most of the _Compositions_, and
mixtures easie to be prepared, most pleasing to the Palate, and not
too chargeable to the Purse; since you are at liberty to employ as
much or as little therein as you please.

In this Edition I have enlarged the whole Work; and there is added
two hundred several Figures of all sorts of Pies, Tarts, Custards,
Cheesecakes, &c. more than was in the former: You will find them in
Tables directed to the _Folio_ they have relation to; there being
such variety of Forms, the Artists may use which of them they
please.

It is impossible for any _Author_ to please all People, no more than
the best Cook can fancy their Palats whose Mouths are always out of
taste. As for those who make it their business to hide their Candle
under a Bushel, to do only good to themselves, and not to others,
such as will curse me for revealing the Secrets of this Art, I value
the discharge of my own Conscience, in doing Good, above all their
malice; protesting to the whole world, that I have not _concealed
any material Secret_ of above my _fifty and five years Experience_;
my Father _being a Cook_ under whom in my Child-hood I was bred up
in this Art.

To conclude, the diligent Peruser of this _Volume_ gains that in a
small time (as to the _Theory_) which an _Apprenticeship_ with some
_Masters_ could never have taught them. I have no more to do, but to
desire of God a blessing upon these my Endeavours; and remain.

  _Yours in the most ingenious
    ways of Friendship_,
      ROBERT MAY.

  Sholeby in Leicestershire,
    _Sept. 30. 1664_.


  _A short Narrative of some Passages of the Authors Life._


For the better knowledge of the worth of this Book, though it be not
usual, the _Author_ being living, it will not be amiss to acquaint
the _Reader_ with a breif account of some passages of his Life, as
also the eminent Persons (renowned for their House-keeping) whom he
hath served through the whole series of his Life; for as the growth
of Children argue the strength of the Parents, so doth the judgment
and abilities of the Artist conduce to the making and goodness of
the Work: now that such great knowledge in this commendable Art was
not gained but by long experience, practise, and converse with the
most able men in their times, the _Reader_ in this breif Narrative
may be informed by what steps and degrees he ascended to the same.

He was born in the year of our Lord 1588. His Father being one of
the ablest _Cooks_ in his time, and his first Tutor in the knowledge
and practice of Cookery; under whom having attained to some
perfection in this Art, the old Lady _Dormer_ sent him over into
_France_, where he continued five years, being in the Family of a
noble Peer, and first President of _Paris_; where he gained not only
the _French_ Tongue but also bettered his Knowledge in his
_Cookery_, and returning again into _England_, was bound an
Apprentice in _London_ to Mr. _Arthur Hollinsworth_ in _Newgate
Market_, one of the ablest Work-men in _London_, Cook to the
_Grocers Hall and Star Chamber_. His Apprentiship being out, the
Lady _Dormer_ sent for him to be her Cook under Father (who then
served that Honourable Lady) where were four Cooks more, such Noble
Houses were then kept, the glory of that, and the shame of this
present Age; then were those Golden Days wherein were practised the
_Triumphs and Trophies of Cookery_; then was Hospitality esteemed,
Neighbourhood preserved, the Poor cherished, and God honoured; then
was Religion less talkt on, and more practised; then was Atheism &
Schism less in fashion: then did men strive to be good, rather then
to seem so. Here he continued till the Lady _Dormer_ died, and then
went again to _London_, and served the Lord _Castlehaven_, after
that the Lord _Lumley_, that great lover and knower of Art, who
wanted no knowledge in the discerning this mystery; next the Lord
_Montague_ in _Sussex_; and at the beginning of these wars, the
Countess of _Kent_, then Mr. _Nevel_ of _Crissen Temple_ in _Essex_,
whose Ancestors the _Smiths_ (of whom he is descended) were the
greatest maintainers of Hospitality in all those parts; nor doth the
present M. _Nevel_ degenerate from their laudable examples. Divers
other Persons of like esteem and quality hath he served; as the Lord
_Rivers_, Mr. _John Ashburnam_ of the Bed-Chambers, Dr. _Steed_ in
_Kent_, Sir _Thomas Stiles_ of _Drury Lane_ in _London_, Sir
_Marmaduke Constable_ in _York-shire_, Sir _Charles Lucas_; and
lastly the Right Honourable the Lady _Englefield_, where he now
liveth.

Thus have I given you a breif account of his Life, I shall next tell
you in what high esteem this noble Art was with the Ancient Romans:
_Plutarch_ reports, that _Lucullus_ his ordinary diet was fine
dainty dishes, with works of pastry, banketting dishes, and fruit
curiously wrought and prepared; that, his Table might be furnished
with choice of varieties, (as the noble Lord _Lumley_ did) that he
kept and nourished all manner of Fowl all the year long. To this
purpose he telleth us a story how _Pompey_ being sick, the
Physitians willed him to eat a Thrush, and it being said there was
none to be had; because it was then Summer; it was answered they
might have them at _Lucullus_'s house who kept both Thrushes and all
manner of Fowl, all the year long. This _Lucullus_ was for his
Hospitality so esteemed in _Rome_, that there was no talk, but of
his Noble House-keeping. The said _Plutarch_ reports how _Cicero_
and _Pompey_ inviting themselves to sup with him, they would not let
him speak with his men to provide any thing more then ordinary; but
he telling them he would sup in _Apollo_, (a Chamber so named, and
every Chamber proportioned their expences) he by this wile beguil'd
them, and a supper was made ready estimated at fifty thousand pence,
every _Roman_ penny being seven pence half penny _English_ money;
a vast sum for that Age, before the _Indies_ had overflowed
_Europe_. But I have too far digressed from the Author of whom I
might speak much more as in relation to his Person and abilities,
but who will cry out the Sun shines? this already said is enough to
satisfie any but the malicious, who are the greatest enemies to all
honest endeavours. _Homer_ had his _Zoilus_, and _Virgil_ his
_Bavius_; the best Wits have had their detractors, and the greatest
Artists have been maligned; the best on't is, such Works as these
outlive their _Authors_ with an honurable respect of Posterity,
whilst envious Criticks never survive their own happiness, their
Lives going out like the snuff of a Candle.

  _W. W._


  _Triumphs and Trophies in Cookery, to be used at Festival Times,
    as _Twelfth-day_, &c._


Make the likeness of a Ship in Paste-board, with Flags and
Streamers, the Guns belonging to it of Kickses, bind them about with
packthread, and cover them with close paste proportionable to the
fashion of a Cannon with Carriages, lay them in places convenient as
you see them in Ships of war, with such holes and trains of powder
that they may all take Fire; Place your Ship firm in the great
Charger; then make a salt round about it, and stick therein
egg-shells full of sweet water, you may by a great Pin take all the
meat out of the egg by blowing, and then fill it up with the
rose-water, then in another Charger have the proportion of a Stag
made of course paste, with a broad Arrow in the side of him, and his
body filled up with claret-wine; in another Charger at the end of
the Stag have the proportion of a Castle with Battlements,
Portcullices, Gates and Draw-Bridges made of Past-board, the Guns
and Kickses, and covered with course paste as the former; place it
at a distance from the ship to fire at each other. The Stag being
placed betwixt them with egg shells full of sweet water (as before)
placed in salt. At each side of the Charger wherein is the Stag,
place a Pye made of course paste, in one of which let there be some
live Frogs, in each other some live Birds; make these Pyes of course
Paste filled with bran, and yellowed over with saffron or the yolks
of eggs, guild them over in spots, as also the Stag, the Ship, and
Castle; bake them, and place them with guilt bay-leaves on turrets
and tunnels of the Castle and Pyes; being baked, make a hole in the
bottom of your pyes, take out the bran, put in your Frogs, and
Birds, and close up the holes with the same course paste, then cut
the Lids neatly up; To be taken off the Tunnels; being all placed in
order upon the Table, before you fire the trains of powder, order it
so that some of the Ladies may be perswaded to pluck the Arrow out
of the Stag, then will the Claret-wine follow, as blood that runneth
out of a wound. This being done with admiration to the beholders,
after some short pause, fire the train of the Castle, that the
pieces all of one side may go off, then fire the Trains, of one side
of the Ship as in a battel; next turn the Chargers; and by degrees
fire the trains of each other side as before. This done to sweeten
the stink of powder, let the Ladies take the egg-shells full of
sweet waters and throw them at each other. All dangers being
seemingly over, by this time you may suppose they will desire to see
what is in the pyes; where lifting first the lid off one pye, out
skip some Frogs, which make the Ladies to skip and shreek; next
after the other pye, whence come out the Birds, who by a natural
instinct flying in the light, will put out the Candles; so that what
with the flying Birds and skipping Frogs, the one above, the other
beneath, will cause much delight and pleasure to the whole company:
at length the Candles are lighted, and a banquet brought in, the
Musick sounds, and every one with much delight and content rehearses
their actions in the former passages. These were formerly the
delight of the Nobility, before good House-keeping had left
_England_, and the Sword really acted that which was only
counterfeited in such honest and laudable Exercises as these.


[Decoration]

  _On the Unparalell'd Piece of _Mr. May_ His Cookery._


  See here a work set forth of such perfection,
  Will praise it self, and doth not beg protection
  From flatter'd greatness. Industry and pains
  For gen'ral good, his aim, his Countrey gains;
  Which ought respect him. A good _English_ Cook,
  Excellent Modish Monsieurs, and that Book
  Call'd _Perfect Cook_, _Merete's_ Pastery
  Translated, looks like old hang'd Tapistry,
  The wrong side outwards: so Monsieur adieu,
  I'm for our Native _Mays_ Works rare and new,
  Who with Antique could have prepar'd and drest
  The Nations _quondam_ grand Imperial Feast,
  Which that thrice Crown'd Third _Edward_ did ordain
  For his high Order, and their Noble Train,
  Whereon St. _George_ his famous Day was seen,
  A Court on Earth that did all Courts out-shine.
    And how all Rarities and Cates might be
  Order'd for a Renown'd Solemnity,
  Learn of this Cook, who with judgment, and reason,
  Teacheth for every Time, each thing its true Season;
  Making his Compounds with such harmony,
  Taste shall not charge with superiority
  Of Pepper, Salt, or Spice, by the best Pallat,
  Or any one Herb in his broths or Sallat.
  Where Temperance and Discretion guides his deeds;
  _Satis_ his Motto, where nothing exceeds.
  Or ought to wast, for there's good Husbandry
  To be observ'd, as Art in Cookery.
  Which of the Mathematicks doth pertake,
  Geometry proportions when they bake.
  Who can in paste erect (of finest flour)
  A compleat Fort, a Castle, or a Tower.
  A City Custard doth so subtly wind,
  That should Truth seek, she'd scarce all corners find;
  Platform of Sconces, that might Souldiers teach,
  To fortifie by works as well as Preach.
  I'le say no more; for as I am a sinner,
  I've wrought my self a stomach to a dinner.
  Inviting Poets not to tantalize,
  But feast, (not surfeit) here their Fantasies.

  _James Parry._


  _To the Reader of (my very loving Friend) Mr. _Robert May_
    his incomparable Book of Cookery._

  See here's a Book set forth with such things in't,
  As former Ages never saw in Print;
  Something I'de write in praise on't, but the Pen,
  Of Famous _Cleaveland_, or renowned _Ben_,
  If unintomb'd might give this Book its due,
  By their high strains, and keep it always new.
  But I whose ruder Stile could never clime,
  Or step beyond a home-bred Country Rhime,
  Must not attempt it: only this I'le say,
  _Cato_'s _Res Rustica_'s far short of _May_.
  Here's taught to keep all sorts of flesh in date,
  All sorts of Fish, if you will marinate;
  To candy, to preserve, to souce, to pickle,
  To make rare Sauces, both to please, and tickle
  The pretty Ladies palats with delight;
  Both how to glut, and gain an Appetite.
  The Fritter, Pancake, Mushroom; with all these,
  The curious Caudle made of Ambergriese.
  He is so universal, he'l not miss,
  The Pudding, nor Bolonian Sausages.
  Italian, Spaniard, French, he all out-goes,
  Refines their Kickshaws, and their Olio's,
  The rarest use of Sweet-meats, Spicery,
  And all things else belong to Cookery:
  Not only this, but to give all content,
  Here's all the Forms of every Implement
  To work or carve with, so he makes the able
  To deck the Dresser, and adorn the Table.
  What dish goes first of every kind of Meat,
  And so ye're welcom, pray fall too, and eat.
  _Reader_, read on, for I have done; farewell,
  The Book's so good, it cannot chuse but sell.

  _Thy well-wishing Friend_,

    John Town.


[Decoration]

  _The most Exact, or A-la-mode Ways of Carving and Sewing._


  _Terms of Carving._

Break that deer, leach that brawn, rear that goose, lift that swan,
sauce that capon, spoil that hen, frust that chicken, unbrace that
mallard, unlace that coney, dismember that hern, display that crane,
disfigure that peacock, unjoynt that bittern, untach that curlew,
allay that pheasant, wing that partridge, wing that quail, mince
that plover, thigh that pidgeon, border that pasty, thigh that
woodcock; thigh all manner of small birds.

Timber the fire, tire that egg, chine that salmon, string that
lamprey, splat that pike, souce that plaice, sauce that tench, splay
that bream, side that haddock, tusk that barbel, culpon that trout,
fin that chivin, transon that eel, tranch that sturgeon, undertranch
that porpus, tame that crab, barb that lobster.


  _Service._

First, set forth mustard and brawn, pottage, beef, mutton, stewed
pheasant, swan, capon, pig, venison, hake, custard, leach, lombard,
blanchmanger, and jelly; for standard, venison, roast kid, fawn, and
coney, bustard, stork, crane, peacock with his tail, hern-shaw,
bittern, woodcock, partridge, plovers, rabbits, great birds, larks,
doucers, pampuff, white leach, amber-jelly, cream of almonds,
curlew, brew, snite, quail, sparrow, martinet, pearch in jelly,
petty pervis, quince baked, leach, dewgard, fruter fage, blandrells
or pippins with caraways in comfits, wafers, and Ipocras.


  _Sauce for all manner of Fowls._

Mustard is good with brawn, Beef, Chine of Bacon, and Mutton,
Verjuyce good to boil'd Chickens and Capons; Swan with Chaldrons,
Ribs of Beef with Garlick, mustard, pepper, verjuyce, ginger; sauce
of lamb, pig and fawn, mustard, and sugar; to pheasant, partridge,
and coney, sauce gamelin; to hern-shaw, egrypt, plover, and crane,
brew, and curlew, salt, and sugar, and water of Camot, bustard,
shovilland, and bittern, sauce gamelin; woodcock, lapwhing, lark,
quail, martinet, venison and snite with white salt; sparrows and
thrushes with salt, and cinamon. Thus with all meats sauce shall
have the operation.


  Directions for the order of carving Fowl.


  _Lift that Swan._

The manner of cutting up a Swan must be to slit her right down in
the middle of the breast, and so clean thorow the back from the neck
to the rump, so part her in two halves cleanly and handsomly, that
you break not nor tear the meat, lay the two halves in a fair
charger with the slit sides downwards, throw salt about it, and let
it again on the Table. Let your sauce be chaldron for a Swan, and
serve it in saucers.


  _Rear the Goose._

You must break a goose contrary to the former way. Take a goose
being roasted, and take off both his legs fair like a shoulder of
Lamb, take him quite from the body then cut off the belly piece
round close to the lower end of the breast: lace her down with your
knife clean through the breast on each side your thumbs bredth for
the bone in the middle of the breast; then take off the pinion of
each side, and the flesh which you first lac't with your knife,
raise it up clear from the bone, and take it from the carcase with
the pinion; then cut up the bone which lieth before in the breast
(which is commonly call'd the merry thought) the skin and the flesh
being upon it; then cut from the brest-bone, another slice of flesh
clean thorow, & take it clean from the bone, turn your carcase, and
cut it asunder the back-bone above the loin-bones: then take the
rump-end of the back-bone, and lay it in a fair dish with the
skinny-side upwards, lay at the fore-end of that the merry-thought
with the skin side upward, and before that the apron of the goose;
then lay your pinions on each side contrary, set your legs on each
side contrary behind them, that the bone end of the legs may stand
up cross in the middle of the dish, & the wing pinions on the
outside of them; put under the wing pinions on each side the long
slices of flesh which you cut from the breast bone, and let the ends
meet under the leg bones, let the other ends lie cut in the dish
betwixt the leg and the pinion; then pour your sauce into the dish
under your meat, throw on salt, and set it on the table.


  _To cut up a Turkey or Bustard._

Raise up the leg very fair, and open the joynt with the point of
your knife, but take not off the leg; then lace down the breast with
your knife on both sides, & open the breast pinion with the knife,
but take not the pinion off; then raise up the merry-thought betwixt
the breast bone, and the top of the merry-thought, lace down the
flesh on both sides of the breast-bone, and raise up the flesh
called the brawn, turn it outward upon both sides, but break it not,
nor cut it not off; then cut off the wing pinion at the joynt next
to the body, and stick on each side the pinion in the place where ye
turned out the brawn, but cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, take
the middle piece, and that will just fit the place.

You may cut up a capon or pheasant the same way, but of your capon
cut not off the pinion, but in the place where you put the pinion of
the turkey, you must put the gizard of your capon on each side half.


  _Dismember that Hern._

Take off both the legs, and lace it down to the breast with your
knife on both sides, raise up the flesh, and take it clean off with
the pinion; then stick the head in the breast, set the pinion on the
contrary side of the carcase, and the leg on the other side, so that
the bones ends may meet cross over the carcase, and the other wings
cross over upon the top of the carcase.


  _Unbrace that Mallard._

Raise up the pinion and the leg, but take them not off, raise the
merry-thought from the breast, and lace it down on each side of the
breast with your knife, bending to and fro like ways.


  _Unlace that Coney._

Turn the back downwards, & cut the belly flaps clean off from the
kidney, but take heed you cut not the kidney nor the flesh, then put
in the point of your knife between the kidneys, and loosen the flesh
from each side the bone then turn up the back of the rabbit, and cut
it cross between the wings, and lace it down close by the bone with
your knife on both sides, then open the flesh of the rabbit from the
bone, with the point of your knife against the kidney, and pull the
leg open softly with your hand, but pluck it not off, then thrust in
your knife betwixt the ribs and the kidney, slit it out, and lay the
legs close together.


  _Sauce that Capon._

Lift up the right leg and wing, and so array forth, and lay him in
the platter as he should fly, and so serve him. Know that capons or
chickens be arrayed after one sauce; the chickens shall be sauced
with green sauce or veriuyce.


  _Allay that Pheasant._

Take a pheasant, raise his legs and wings as it were a hen and no
sauce but only salt.


  _Wing that Partridg._

Raise his legs, and his wing as a hen, if you mince him sauce him
with wine, powder of ginger, and salt, and set him upon a chafing
dish of coals to warm and serve.


  _Wing that Quail._

Take a quail and raise his legs and his wings as an hen, and no
sauce but salt.


  _Display that Crane._

Unfold his Legs, and cut off his wings by the joynts, then take up
his wings and his legs, and sauce them with powder of ginger,
mustard, vinegar, and salt.


  _Dismember that Hern._

Raise his legs and his wings as a crane, and sauce him with vinegar,
mustard, powder of ginger and salt.


  _Unjoynt that Bittern._

Raise his legs & wings as a heron & no sauce but salt.


  _Break that Egript._

Take an egript, and raise his legs and his wings as a heron, and no
sauce but salt.


  _Untach that Curlew._

Raise his legs and wings as a hen, & no sauce but salt.


  _Untach that brew._

Raise his legs and his wings in the same manner, and no sauce but
only salt.


  _Unlace that Coney._

Lay him on the back, and cut away the vents, then raise the wings
and the sides, and lay bulk, chine, and sides together, sauce them
with vinegar and powder of ginger.


  _Break that Sarcel._

Take a sarcel or teal, and raise his wings and his legs, and no
sauce but only salt.


  _Mince that Plover._

Raise his leg and wings as a hen, and no sauce but only salt.


  _A Snite._

Raise his legs, wings and his shoulders as a plover, and no sauce
but salt.


  _Thigh that Woodcock._

Raise his legs as a hen, and dight his brain.


  _The Sewing of Fish._


  _The First Course._

To go to the sewing of Fish, Musculade, Minews in few of porpos or
of salmon, bak'd herring with sugar, green fish pike, lamprey,
salent, porpos roasted, bak'd gurnet and baked lamprey.


  _The Second Course._

Jelly white and red, dates in confect, conger, salmon, birt, dorey,
turbut holibut for standard, bace, trout, mullet, chevin, soles,
lamprey roast, and tench in jelly.


  _The Third Course._

Fresh sturgeon, bream, pearch in jelly, a jole of salmon sturgeon,
welks, apples and pears roasted; with sugar candy, figs of molisk,
raisins, dates, capt with minced ginger, wafers, and Ipocras.


  _The Carving of Fish._

The carver of fish must see to peason and furmety, the tail and the
liver; you must look if there be a salt porpos or sole, turrentine,
and do after the form of venison; _baked herring_, lay it whole on
the trencher, then white herring in a dish, open it by the back,
pick out the bones and the row, and see there be mustard. Of salt
fish, green-fish, salt salmon, and conger, pare away the skin; salt
fish, stock fish, marling, mackrel, and hake with butter, and take
away the bones & skins; _A Pike_, lay the womb upon a trencher, with
pike sauce enough, _A salt Lamprey_, gobbin it in seven or eight
pieces, and so present it, _A Plaice_, put out the water, then cross
him with your knife, and cast on salt, wine, or ale. _Bace_,
_Gurnet_, _Rochet_, _Bream_, _Chevin_, _Mullet_, _Roch_, _Pearch_,
_Sole_, _Mackrel_, _Whiting_, _Haddock_, and _Codling_, raise them
by the back, pick out the bones, and cleanse the rest in the belly.
_Carp Bream_, _Sole_, and _Trout_, back and belly together.
_Salmon_, _Conger_, _Sturgeon_, _Turbut_, _Thornback_, _Houndfish_,
and _Holibut_, cut them in the dishes; the _Porpos_ about, _Tench_
in his sauce; cut two _Eels_, and _Lampreys_ roast, pull off the
skin, and pick out the bones, put thereto vinegar, and powder.
A _Crab_, break him asunder, in a dish make the shell clean, & put
in the stuff again, temper it with vinegar, and powder them, cover
it with bread and heat it; a _Crevis_ dight him thus, part him
asunder, slit the belly, and take out the fish, pare away the red
skin, mince it thin, put vinegar in the dish, and set it on the
Table without heating. _A Jole of Sturgeon_, cut it into thin
morsels, and lay it round about the dish, _Fresh Lamprey bak'd_,
open the pasty, then take white bread, and cut it thin, lay it in a
dish, & with a spoon take out Galentine, & lay it upon the bread
with red wine and powder of Cinamon; then cut a gobbin of Lamprey,
mince it thin, and lay it in the Gallentine, and set it on the fire
to heat. _Fresh herring_, with salt and wine, _Shrimps_ well
pickled, _Flounders_, _Gudgeons_, _Minews_, and Muskles, Eels, and
Lampreys, Sprats is good in few, musculade in worts, oysters in few,
oysters in gravy, minews in porpus, salmon in jelly white and red,
cream of almonds, dates in comfits, pears and quinces in sirrup,
with parsley roots, mortus of hound fish raise standing.


  _Sauces for Fish._

Mustard is good for salt herring, salt fish, salt conger, salmon,
sparling, salt eel and ling; vinegar is good with salt porpus,
turrentine, salt sturgeon, salt thirlepole, and salt whale, lamprey
with gallentine; verjuyce to roach, dace, bream, mullet, flounders,
salt crab and chevin with powder of cinamon and ginger; green sauce
is good with green fish and hollibut, cottel, and fresh turbut; put
not your green sauce away for it is good with mustard.


  _Bills of _FARE_ for every Season in the Year; also how to set
    forth the _MEAT_ in order for that Service, as it was used
    before Hospitality left this Nation._


  _A Bill of Fare for _All-Saints-Day_, being _Novemb. 1_._

      Oysters.
  1   A Collar of brawn and mustard.
  2   A Capon in stewed broth with marrow-bones.
  3   A Goose in stoffado, or two Ducks.
  4   A grand Sallet.
  5   A Shoulder of Mutton with oysters.
  6   A bisk dish baked.
  7   A roast chine of beef.
  8   Minced pies or chewits of capon, tongue, or of veal.
  9   A chine of Pork.
  10  A pasty of venison.
  11  A swan, or 2 geese roast.
  12  A loyn of veal.
  13  A French Pie of divers compounds.
  14  A roast turkey.
  15  A pig roast.
  16  A farc't dish baked.
  17  Two brangeese roasted, one larded.
  18  Souc't Veal.
  19  Two Capons roasted, one larded.
  20  A double bordered Custard.


  _A Second Course for the same Mess._

      Oranges and lemons.
  1   A souc't pig.
  2   A young lamb or kid roast.
  3   Two Shovelers.
  4   Two Herns, one larded.
  5   A Potatoe-Pye.
  6   A duck and mallard, one larded.
  7   A souc't Turbut.
  8   A couple of pheasants, one larded.
  9   Marinated Carp, or Pike, or Bream.
  10  Three brace of partridg, three larded.
  11  Made Dish of Spinage cream baked.
  12  A roll of beef.
  13  Two teels roasted, one larded.
  14  A cold goose pie.
  15  A souc't mullet and bace.
  16  A quince pye.
  17  Four curlews, 2 larded.
  18  A dried neats tongue.
  19  A dish of anchoves.
  20  A jole of Sturgeon.
      Jellies and Tarts Royal, and Ginger bread, and other Fruits.


  _A Bill of Fare for Christmas Day, and how to set the Meat
    in order._

      Oysters.
  1   A collar of brawn.
  2   Stewed Broth of Mutton marrow bones.
  3   A grand Sallet.
  4   A pottage of caponets.
  5   A breast of veal in stoffado.
  6   A boil'd partridge.
  7   A chine of beef, or surloin roast.
  8   Minced pies.
  9   A Jegote of mutton with anchove sauce.
  10  A made dish of sweet-bread.
  11  A swan roast.
  12  A pasty of venison.
  13  A kid with a pudding in his belly.
  14  A steak pie.
  15  A hanch of venison roasted.
  16  A turkey roast and stuck with cloves.
  17  A made dish of chickens in puff paste.
  18  Two bran geese roasted, one larded.
  19  Two large capons, one larded.
  20  A Custard.


  _The second course for the same Mess._

      Oranges and Lemons.
  1   A young lamb or kid.
  2   Two couple of rabbits, two larded.
  3   A pig souc't with tongues.
  4   Three ducks, one larded.
  5   Three pheasants, 1 larded
  6   A Swan Pye.
  7   Three brace of partridge, three larded.
  8   Made dish in puff paste.
  9   Bolonia sausages, and anchoves, mushrooms, and Cavieate,
        and pickled oysters in a dish.
  10  Six teels, three larded.
  11  A Gammon of Westphalia Bacon.
  12  Ten plovers, five larded.
  13  A quince pye, or warden pie.
  14  Six woodcocks, 3 larded.
  15  A standing Tart in puff-paste, preserved fruits, Pippins,
        _&c._
  16  A dish of Larks.
  17  Six dried neats tongues.
  18  Sturgeon.
  19  Powdered Geese.
      Jellies.


  _A Bill of Fare for _new-years Day_._

      Oysters.
  1   Brawn and Mustard.
  2   Two boil'd Capons in stewed Broth, or white Broth.
  3   Two Turkies in stoffado.
  4   A Hash of twelve Partridges, or a shoulder of mutton.
  5   Two bran Geese boil'd.
  6   A farc't boil'd meat with snites or ducks.
  7   A marrow pudding bak't
  8   A surloin of roast beef.
  9   Minced pies, ten in a dish, or what number you please
  10  A Loin of Veal.
  11  A pasty of Venison.
  12  A Pig roast.
  13  Two geese roast.
  14  Two capons, one larded.
  15  Custards.


  _A second Course for the same Mess._

      Oranges and Lemons.
  1   A side of Lamb
  2   A souc't Pig.
  3   Two couple of rabbits, two larded.
  4   A duck and mallard, one larded.
  5   Six teels, three larded.
  6   A made dish, or Batalia-Pye.
  7   Six woodcocks, 3 larded.
  8   A warden pie, or a dish of quails.
  9   Dried Neats tongues.
  10  Six tame Pigeons, three larded.
  11  A souc't Capon.
  12  Pickled mushrooms, pickled Oysters, and Anchoves in a dish.
  13  Twelve snites, six larded
  14  Orangado Pye, or a Tart Royal of dried and wet suckets.
  15  Sturgeon.
  16  Turkey or goose pye.
      Jelly of five or six sorts, Lay Tarts of divers colours and
        ginger-bread, and other Sweet-meats.


  _A Bill of Fare for _February_._

  1   Eggs and Collops.
  2   Brawn and Mustard.
  3   A hash of Rabbits four.
  4   A grand Fricase.
  5   A grand Sallet.
  6   A Chine of roast Pork.


  _A second Course._

  1   A whole Lamb roast.
  2   Three Widgeons.
  3   A Pippin Pye.
  4   A Jole of Sturgeon.
  5   A Bacon Tart.
  6   A cold Turkey Pye.
      Jellies and Ginger-bread, and Tarts Royal.


  _A Bill of fare for _March_._

      Oysters.
  1   Brawn and Mustard.
  2   A fresh Neats Tongue and Udder in stoffado.
  3   Three Ducks in stoffado.
  4   A roast Loin of Pork.
  5   A pasty of Venison.
  6   A Steak Pye.


  _A second Course._

  1   A side of Lamb.
  2   Six Teels, three larded.
  3   A Lamb-stone Pye.
  4   200 of Asparagus.
  5   A Warden-Pye.
  6   Marinate Flounders.
      Jellies and Ginger-bread, and Tarts Royal.


  _A Bill of fare for _April_._

      Oysters.
  1   A Bisk.
  2   Cold Lamb.
  3   A haunch of venison roast.
  4   Four Goslings.
  5   A Turkey Chicken.
  6   Custards of Almonds.


  _A second Course._

  1   Lamb, a side in joynts.
  2   Turtle Doves eight.
  3   Cold Neats-tongue pye.
  4   8 Pidgeons, four larded.
  5   Lobsters.
  6   A Collar of Beef.
      Tansies.


  _A Bill of Fare for _May_._

  1   Scotch Pottage or Skink.
  2   Scotch collops of mutton
  3   A Loin of Veal.
  4   An oline, or a Pallat pye.
  5   Three Capons, 1 larded.
  6   Custards.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Lamb.
  2   A Tart Royal, or Quince Pye
  3   A Gammon of Bacon Pie.
  4   A Jole of Sturgeon.
  5   Artichock Pie hot.
  6   Bolonia Sausage.
      Tansies.


  _A bill of Fare for _June_._

  1   A shoulder of mutton hasht
  2   A Chine of Beef.
  3   Pasty of Venison, a cold Hash.
  4   A Leg of Mutton roast.
  5   Four Turkey Chickens.
  6   A Steak Pye.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Jane or Kid.
  2   Rabbits.
  3   Shovelers.
  4   Sweet-bread Pye.
  5   Olines, or pewit.
  6   Pigeons.


  _A bill of Fare for _July_._

      Muskmelons.
  1   Pottage of Capon.
  2   Boil'd Pigeons.
  3   A hash of Caponets.
  4   A Grand Sallet.
  5   A Fawn.
  6   A Custard.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Pease, of French Beans.
  2   Gulls four, two larded.
  3   Pewits eight, four larded.
  4   A quodling Tart green.
  5   Portugal eggs, two sorts.
  6   Buttered Brawn.
      Selsey Cockles broil'd.


  _A Bill of Fare for _August_._

      Muskmelons.
  1   Scotch collops of Veal.
  2   Boil'd Breast of Mutton.
  3   A Fricase of Pigeons.
  4   A stewed Calves head.
  5   Four Goslings.
  6   Four Caponets.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Dotterel twelve, six larded
  2   Tarts Royal of Fruit.
  3   Wheat-ears.
  4   A Pye of Heath-Pouts.
  5   Marinate Smelts.
  6   Gammon of Bacon.
      Selsey Cockles.


  _A Bill of Fare for _September_._

      Oysters.
  1   An Olio.
  2   A Breast of Veal in stoffado.
  3   twelve Partridg hashed.
  4   A Grand Sallet.
  5   Chaldron Pye.
  6   Custard.


  _A second Course._

  1   Rabbits
  2   Two herns, one larded.
  3   Florentine of tongues.
  4   8 Pigeons roast, 4 larded.
  5   Pheasant pouts, 2 larded.
  6   A cold hare pye.
      Selsey cockles broil'd after.


  _A bill of Fare for _October_._

      Oysters.
  1   Boil'd Ducks.
  2   A hash of a loin of veal.
  3   Roast Veal.
  4   Two bran-geese roasted.
  5   Tart Royal.
  6   Custard.


  _A second Course._

  1   Pheasant, pouts, pigeons.
  2   Knots twelve.
  3   Twelve quails, six larded.
  4   Potato pye.
  5   Sparrows roast.
  6   Turbut.
      Selsey Cockles.


  _A bill of Fare formerly used in Fasting days, and in _Lent_._

  _The first Course._

       Oysters if in season.
  1    Butter and eggs.
  2    Barley pottage, or Rice pottage.
  3    Stewed Oysters.
  4    Buttered eggs on toasts.
  5    Spinage Sallet boil'd.
  6    Boil'd Rochet or gurnet.
  7    A jole of Ling.
  8    Stewed Carp.
  9    Oyster Chewits.
  10   Boil'd Pike.
  11   Roast Eels.
  12   Haddocks, fresh Cod, or Whitings.
  13   Eel or Carp Pye.
  14   Made dish of spinage.
  15   Salt Eels.
  16   Souc't Turbut.


  _A second Course._

  1   Fried Soals.
  2   Stewed oysters in scollop shells.
  3   Fried Smelts.
  4   Congers head broil'd.
  5   Baked dish of Potatoes, or Oyster pye.
  6   A spitchcock of Eels.
  7   Quince pie or tarts royal.
  8   Buttered Crabs.
  9   Fried Flounders.
  10  Jole of fresh Salmon.
  11  Fried Turbut.
  12  Cold Salmon pye.
  13  Fried skirrets.
  14  Souc't Conger.
  15  Lobsters.
  16  Sturgeon.


  [Decoration]

  THE

  ACCOMPLISHT COOK,

  OR,

  The whole Art and Mystery of
  COOKERY, fitted for all
  Degrees and Qualities.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION I.

  _Perfect Directions for the A-la-mode Ways of dressing all manner
    of Boyled Meats, with their several sauces_, &c.


  _To make an Olio Podrida._

Take a Pipkin or Pot of some three Gallons, fill it with fair water,
and set it over a Fire of Charcoals, and put in first your hardest
meats, a rump of Beef, _Bolonia_ sausages, neats tongues two dry,
and two green, boiled and larded, about two hours after the Pot is
boil'd and scummed: but put in more presently after your Beef is
scum'd, Mutton, Venison, Pork, Bacon, all the aforesaid in Gubbins,
as big as a Ducks Egg, in equal pieces; put in also Carrots,
Turnips, Onions, Cabbidge, in good big pieces, as big as your meat,
a faggot of sweet herbs, well bound up, and some whole Spinage,
Sorrel, Burrage, Endive, Marigolds, and other good Pot-Herbs a
little chopped; and sometimes _French_ Barley, or Lupins green or
dry.

Then a little before you dish out your Olio; put to your pot,
Cloves, Mace, Saffron, _&c._

Then next have divers Fowls; as first

  _A Goose, or Turkey, two Capons, two Ducks, two Pheasants,
  two Widgeons, four Partridges, four stock Doves, four Teals,
  eight Snites, twenty four Quails, forty eight Larks._

Boil these foresaid Fowls in water and salt in a pan, pipkin, or
pot, _&c._

Then have _Bread_, _Marrow_, _Bottoms of Artichocks_, _Yolks of hard
Eggs_, _Large Mace_, _Chesnuts boil'd and blancht_, _two
Colliflowers_, _Saffron_.

And stew these in a pipkin together, being ready clenged with some
good sweet butter, a little white wine and strong broth.

Some other times for variety you may use Beets, Potato's, Skirrets,
Pistaches, PineApple seed, or Almonds, Poungarnet, and Lemons.

Now to dish your Olio, dish first your Beef, Veal or Pork; then your
Venison, and Mutton, Tongues, Sausage, and Roots over all.

Then next your largest Fowl, Land-Fowl, or Sea-Fowl, as first,
a Goose, or Turkey, two Capons, two Pheasants, four Ducks, four
Widgeons, four Stock-Doves, four Partridges, eight Teals, twelve
Snites, twenty four Quailes, forty eight Larks, _&c._

Then broth it, and put on your pipkin of Colliflowers Artichocks,
Chesnuts, some sweet-breads fried, Yolks of hard Eggs, then Marrow
boil'd in strong broth or water, large Mace, Saffron, Pistaches, and
all the aforesaid things being finely stewed up, and some red Beets
over all, slic't Lemons, and Lemon peels whole, and run it over with
beaten butter.


  _Marrow Pies._

For the garnish of the dish, make marrow pies made like round
Chewets but not so high altogether, then have sweet-breads of veal
cut like small dice, some pistaches, and Marrow, some Potato's, or
Artichocks cut like Sweetbreads: as also some enterlarded Bacon;
Yolks of hard Eggs, Nutmeg, Salt, Goosberries, Grapes, or
Barberries, and some minced Veal in the bottom of the Pie minced
with some Bacon or Beef-suit, Sparagus and Chesnuts, with a little
musk; close them up, and bast them with saffron water, bake them,
and liquor it with beaten butter, and set them about the dish side
or brims, with some bottoms of Artichocks, and yolks of hard Eggs,
Lemons in quarters, Poungarnets and red Beets boil'd, and carved.


  _Other Marrow Pies._

Otherways for variety, you may make other Marrow Pies of minced Veal
and Beef-suit, seasoned with Pepper, Salt, Nutmegs and boiled
Sparagus, cut half an inch long, yolks of hard Eggs cut in quarters,
and mingled with the meat and marrow: fill your Pies, bake them not
too hard, musk them, _&c._


  _Other Marrow Pies._

Otherways, Marrow Pies of bottoms of little Artichocks, Suckers,
yolks of hard eggs, Chesnuts, Marrow, and interlarded Bacon cut like
dice, some Veal sweet-breads cut also, or Lamb-stones, Potato's, or
Skirrets, and Sparagus, or none; season them lightly with Nutmeg,
Pepper and Salt, close your Pies, and bake them.


  __Olio_, Marrow Pies._

  _Butter three pound, Flower one quart, Lamb-Stones three pair,
  Sweet-Breads six, Marrow-bones eight, large Mace, Cock-stones
  twenty, interlarded Bacon one pound, knots of Eggs twelve,
  Artichocks twelve, Sparagus one hundred, Cocks-Combs twenty,
  Pistaches one pound, Nutmegs, Pepper, and Salt._

Season the aforesaid lightly, and lay them in the Pie upon some
minced veal or mutton, your interlarded Bacon in thin slices of half
an inch long, mingled among the rest, fill the Pie, and put in some
Grapes, and slic't Lemon, Barberries or Goosberries.

  1. Pies of Marrow.

  _Flower, Sweet bread, Marrow, Artichocks, Pistaches, Nutmegs,
  Eggs, Bacon, Veal, Suit, Sparagus, Chesnuts; Musk, Saffron,
  Butter._

  2. Marrow Pies.

  _Flower, Butter, Veal, Suet, Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, Sparagus, Eggs,
  Grapes, Marrow, Saffron._

3. Marrow Pies.

  _Flower, Butter, Eggs, Artichocks, Sweet-bread, Lamb-stones,
  Potato's, Nutmegs, Pepper, Salt, Skirrets, Grapes, Bacon._


To the garnish of an extraordinary Olio: as followeth.

  _Two Collers of Pigbrawn, two Marrow Pies, twelve roste Turtle
  Doves in a Pie, four Pies, eighteen Quails in a Pie, four Pies,
  two Sallets, two Jelleys of two colours, two forc't meats,
  two Tarts._

Thus for an extraordinary Olio, or Olio Royal.


  _To make a Bisk divers ways._

Take a wrack of Mutton, and a Knuckle of Veal, put them a boiling in
a Pipkin of a Gallon, with some fair water, and when it boils, scum
it, and put to it some salt, two or three blades of large Mace, and
a Clove or two; boil it to three pints, and strain the meat, save
the broth for your use and take off the fat clean.

Then boil twelve Pigeon-Peepers, and eight Chicken Peepers, in a
Pipkin with fair water, salt, and a piece of interlarded Bacon, scum
them clean, and boil them fine, white and quick.

Then have a rost Capon minced, and put to it some Gravy, Nutmegs,
and Salt, and stew it together; then put to it the juyce of two or
three Oranges, and beaten Butter, _&c._

Then have ten sweet breads, and ten pallets fried, and the same
number of lips and noses being first tender boil'd and blanched, cut
them like lard, and fry them, put away the butter, and put to them
gravy, a little anchove, nutmeg, and a little garlick, or none, the
juyce of two or three Oranges, and Marrow fried in Butter with
Sage-leaves, and some beaten Butter.

Then again have some boil'd Marrow and twelve Artichocks, Suckers,
and Peeches finely boil'd and put into beaten Butter, some Pistaches
boiled also in some wine and Gravy, eight Sheeps tongues larded and
boiled, and one hundred Sparagus boiled, and put into beaten Butter,
or Skirrets.

Then have Lemons carved, and some cut like little dice.

Again fry some Spinage and Parsley, _&c._

These forefaid materials being ready, have some _French_ bread in
the bottom of your dish.

Then dish on it your Chickens, and Pidgeons, broth it; next your
Quaile, then Sweet breads, then your Pullets, then your Artichocks
or Sparagus, and Pistaches, then your Lemon, Poungarnet, or Grapes,
Spinage, and fryed Marrow; and if yellow Saffron or fried Sage, then
round the center of your boiled meat put your minced Capon, then run
all over with beaten butter, &c.

  1. For variety, Clary fryed with yolks of Eggs.

  2. Knots of Eggs.

  3. Cocks Stones.

  4. Cocks Combs.

  5. If white, strained Almonds, with some of the broth.

  6. Goosberries or Barberries.

  7. Minced meat in Balls.

  8. If green, Juyce of Spinage stamped with manchet, and strained
  with some of the broth, and give it a warm.

  9. Garnish with boiled Spinage.

  10. If yellow, yolks of hard Eggs strained with some Broth and
  Saffron.

And many other varieties.


  _A Bisk otherways._

Take a Leg of Beef, cut it into two peices, and boil it in a gallon
or five quarts of water, scum it, and about half an hour after put
in a knuckle of Veal, and scum it also, boil it from five quarts to
two quarts or less; and being three quarters boil'd, put in some
Salt, and some Cloves, and Mace, being through boil'd, strain it
from the meat, and keep the broth for your use in a pipkin.

Then have eight Marrow bones clean scraped from the flesh, and
finely cracked over the middle, boil in water and salt three of
them, and the other leave for garnish, to be boil'd in strong broth;
and laid on the top of the Bisk when it is dished.

Again boil your Fowl in water and Salt, Teals, Partridges, Pidgeons,
Plovers, Quails, Larks.

Then have a Joint of Mutton made into balls with sweet Herbs, Salt,
Nutmeggs, grated Bread, Eggs, Suit, a Clove or two of Garlick, and
Pistaches, boil'd in Broth, with some interlarded Bacon, Sheeps
tongues, larded and stewed, as also some Artichocks, Marrow,
Pistaches, Sweet-Breads and Lambs-stones in strong broth, and Mace a
Clove or two, some white-wine and strained almonds, or with the yolk
of an Egg, Verjuyce, beaten butter, and slic't Lemon, or Grapes
whole.

Then have fryed Clary, and fryed Pistaches in Yolks of Eggs.

Then Carved Lemons over all.


  _To make another curious boil'd meat, much like a Bisk._

Take a Rack of Mutton, cut it in four peices, and boil it in three
quarts of fair Water in a Pipkin, with a faggot of sweet Herbs very
hard and close bound up from end to end, scum your broth and put in
some salt: Then about half an hour after put in thre chickens finely
scalded and trust, three Patridges boiled in water, the blood being
well soaked out of them, and put to them also three or four blades
of large Mace.

Then have all manner of sweet herbs, as Parsley, Time, Savory,
Marjorim, Sorrel, Sage; these being finely picked, bruise them with
the back of a ladle, and a little before you dish up your boil'd
meat, put them to your broth, and give them a walm or two.

Again, for the top of your boil'd meat or garnish, have a pound of
interlarded Bacon in thin slices, put them in a pipkin with six
marrow-bones, and twelve bottoms of yong Artichocks, and some six
sweet-breads of veal, strong broth, Mace, Nutmeg, some Goosberries
or Barberries, some Butter and Pistaches.

These things aforesaid being ready, and dinner called for, take a
fine clean scoured dish and garnish it with Pistaches and
Artichocks, carved Lemon, Grapes, and large Mace.

Then have sippets finely carved, and some slices of _French_ bread
in the bottom of the dish, dish three pieces of Mutton, and one in
the middle, and between the mutton three Chickens, and up in the
middle, the Partridge, and pour on the broth with your herbs, then
put on your pipkin over all, of Marrow, Artichocks, and the other
materials, then Carved Lemon, Barberries and beaten Butter over all,
your carved sippets round the dish.


  _Another made Dish in the French Fashion, called an
    _Entre de Table_, Entrance to the Table._

Take the bottoms of boil'd Artichocks, the yolks of hard Eggs, yong
Chicken-peepers, or Pidgeon-peepers, finely trust, Sweetbreads of
Veal, Lamb-stones, blanched, and put them in a Pipkin, with
Cockstones, and combs, and knots of Eggs; then put to them some
strong broth, white-wine, large Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper, Butter, Salt,
and Marrow, and stew them softly together.

Then have Goosberries or Grapes perboil'd, or Barberries, and put to
them some beaten Butter; and Potato's, Skirrets or Sparagus boil'd,
and put in beaten butter, and some boil'd Pistaches.

These being finely stewed, dish your fowls on fine carved sippets,
and pour on your Sweet-Breads, Artichocks, and Sparagus on them,
Grapes, and slic't Lemon, and run all over with beaten butter, _&c._

Somtimes for variety, you may put some boil'd Cabbidge, Lettice,
Colliflowers, Balls of minced meat, or Sausages without skins, fryed
Almonds, Calves Udder.


  _Another French boil'd meat of Pine-molet._

Take a manchet of _French_ bread of a day old, chip it and cut a
round hole in the top, save the peice whole, and take out the crumb,
then make a composition of a boild or a rost Capon, minced and
stampt with Almond past, muskefied bisket bread, yolks of hard Eggs,
and some sweet Herbs chopped fine, some yolks of raw Eggs and
Saffron, Cinamon, Nutmeg, Currans, Sugar, Salt, Marrow and
Pistaches; fill the Loaf, and stop the hole with the piece, and boil
it in a clean cloth in a pipkin, or bake it in an oven.

Then have some forc't Chickens flead, save the skin, wings, legs,
and neck whole, and mince the meat, two Pigeons also forc't, two
Chickens, two boned of each, and filled with some minced veal or
mutton, with some interlarded Bacon, or Beef-suet, and season it
with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Salt, and some grated parmison or none,
grated bread, sweet Herbs chopped small, yolks of Eggs, and Grapes,
fill the skins, and stitch up the back of the skin, then put them in
a deep dish, with some Sugar, strong broth, Artichocks, Marrow,
Saffron, Sparrows, or Quails, and some boiled Sparagus.

For the garnish of the aforesaid dish, rost Turneps and rost Onions,
Grapes, Cordons, and Mace.

Dish the forced loaf in the midst of the dish, the Chickens, and
Pigeons round about it, and the Quails or small birds over all, with
marrow, Cordons, Artichoks or Sparagus, Pine apple-seed, or
Pistaches, Grapes, and Sweet-breads, and broth it on sippets.


  _To boil a Chine of Veal, whole, or in peices._

Boil it in water, salt, or in strong broth with a faggot of sweet
Herbs, Capers, Mace, Salt, and interlarded Bacon in thin slices, and
some Oyster liquor.

Your Chines being finely boiled, have some stewed Oysters by
themselves with some Mace and fine onions whole, some vinegar,
butter, and pepper _&c._

Then have Cucumbers boiled by themselves in water and salt, or
pickled Cucumbers boiled in water, and put in beaten Butter, and
Cabbidge-lettice, boiled also in fair water, and put in beaten
Butter.

Then dish your Chines on sippits, broth them, and put on your stewed
Oysters, Cucumbers, Lettice, and parboil'd Grapes, Boclites, or
slic't lemon, and run it over with beaten Butter.


  _Chines of Veal otherways, whole, or in pieces._

Stew them, being first almost rosted, put them into a deep Dish,
with some Gravy, some strong broth, white Wine, Mace, Nutmeg, and
some Oyster Liquor, two or three slices of lemon and salt, and being
finely stewed serve them on sippits, with that broth and slic't
Lemon, Goosberries, and beaten Butter, boil'd Marrow, fried Spinage,
_&c._ For variety Capers, or Sampier.


  _Chines of Veal boiled with fruit, whole._

Put it in a stewing pan or deep dish, with some strong Broth, large
Mace, a little White Wine, and when it boils scum it, then put some
dates to, being half boil'd and Salt, some white Endive, Sugar, and
Marrow.

Then boil some fruit by it self, your meat and broth being finely
boil'd, Prunes and Raisons of the Sun, strain some six yolks of
Eggs, with a little Cream, and put it in your broth, then dish it on
sippets, your Chine, and garnish your dish with Fruit, Mace, Dates
Sugar, slic't Lemon, and Barberries, _&c._


  _Chines of Veal otherways._

Stew the whole with some strong broth, White-wine, and Caper-Liquor,
slices of interlarded Bacon, Gravy, Cloves, Mace, whole Pepper,
Sausages of minced Meat, without skins, or little Balls, some
Marrow, Salt, and some sweet Herbs picked of all sorts, and bruised
with the back of a Ladle; put them to your broth, a quarter of an
hour before you dish your Chines, and give them a warm, and dish up
your Chine on _French_ Bread, or sippits, broth it, and run it over
with beaten butter, Grapes or slic't Lemon, _&c._


  _Chines of Mutton boil'd whole, or Loins, or any Joint whole._

Boil it in a long stewing-pan or deep dish with fair water as much
as will cover it, and when it boils cover it, being scumm'd first,
and put to it some Salt, White-wine, and some Carrots cut like dice;
your broth being half boil'd, strain it, blow off the fat, and wash
away the dregs from your Mutton, wash also your pipkin, or stewing
pan, and put in again your broth, with some Capers, and large Mace:
stew your broth and materials together softly, and lay your Mutton
by in some warm broth or dish, then put in also some sweet Herbs,
chopped with Onions, boil'd among your broth.

Then have Colliflowers ready boil'd in water and salt, and put in
beaten butter, with some boil'd marrow, then the Mutton and Broth
being ready, dissolve two or three yolks of Eggs with White-Wine,
Verjuyce or Sack; give it a walm, and dish up your meat on sippets
finely carved, or _French_ bread in slices, and broth it; then lay
on your Colliflowers, Marrow, Carrots, and Gooseberries, Barberries
or Grapes, and run it over with beaten Butter.

Sometimes for variety, according to the seasons, you may use
Turnips, Parsnips, Artichocks, Sparagus, Hopbuds or Colliflowers,
boild in water and salt, and put in beaten Butter, Cabbidge sprouts,
or Cabbidge, Lettice, and Chesnuts.

And for the thickning of this broth sometimes, take strained
Almonds, with strong broth, and Saffron, or none.

Other-while grated bread, Yolks of hard Eggs, and Verjuyce, _&c._


  _To boil a Chine, Rack, or Loin, of Mutton, otherways,
    whole, or in pieces._

Boil it in a stewing-pan or deep dish, with fair water as much as
will cover it, and when it boils scum it, and put to it some salt;
then being half boil'd, take up the meat, strain the broth, and blow
off the fat, wash the stewing-pan and meat, then put in again the
crag end of the Mutton, to make the broth good, and put to it some
Mace.

Then a little before you take up your mutton, a handful of picked
Parsley, chopped small, put it in the broth, with some whole
marigold flowers, and your whole chine of mutton give a walm or two,
then dish it up on sippets and broth it. Then have Raisins of the
Sun and Currans boiled tender, lay on it, and garnish your Dish with
Prunes, Marigold-flowers, Mace, Lemons, and Barberries, _&c._

Otherways without Fruit, boil it with Capers; and all manner of
sweet herbs stripped, some Spinage, and Parsley bruised with the
back of a Ladle, Mace, and Salt, _&c._


  _To boil a Chine of Mutton, whole or in peices,
    or any other Joint._

Boil it in a fair glazed pipkin, being well scummed, put in a faggot
of sweet herbs, as Time, Parsly, Sweet Marjoram, bound hard and
stripped with your Knife, and put some Carrots cut like small dice,
or cut like Lard, some Raisins, Prunes, Marigold-flowers, and salt,
and being finely boiled down, serve it on sippits, garnish your dish
with Raisins, Mace, Prunes, Marigold-flowers, Carrots, Lemons,
boil'd Marrow, _&c._

Sometimes for change leave out Carrots and Fruit.

Use all as beforesaid, and add white Endive, Capers, Samphire, run
it over with beaten Butter and Lemons.


  _Barley Broth._

  _Chine of Mutton or Veal in Barley Broth, Rack, or any Joynt._

Take a Chine or Knuckle, and joynt it, put it in a Pipkin with some
strong broth, and when it boils, scum it, and put in some French
Barley, being first boiled in two or three waters, with some large
Mace, and a faggot of sweet herbs bound up, and close hard tied,
some Raisins, Damask Prunes, and Currans, or no Prunes, and
Marigold-flowers; boil it to an indifferent thickness, and serve it
on sippets.


  _Barley Broth otherwise._

Boil the Barley first in two waters, and then put it to a Knuckle of
Veal, and to the Broth, Salt, Raisins, sweet Herbs a faggot, large
Mace, and the quantity of a fine Manchet slic't together.


  _Otherwise._

Otherways without Fruit: put some good Mutton-gravy, Saffron, and
sometimes Raisins only.


  _Chine or any Joint._

Otherways stew them with strong broth and White-Wine, put it in a
Pipkin to them, scum it, and put to it some Oyster-Liquor, Salt,
whole peper, and a bundle of sweet herbs well bound up, some Mace,
two or three great Onions, some interlarded Bacon cut like dice, and
Chesnuts, or blanched Almonds and Capers.

Then stew your Oysters by themselves with Mace, Butter, Time and two
or three great Onions; sometimes Grapes.

Garnish your dish with Lemon-Peel, Oysters, Mace, Capers, and
Chesnuts, _&c._


  _Stewed Broth._

To make stewd Broth, the Meat most proper for it is.

  _A Leg of Beef, Marrow-Bones, Capon, or a Loin or Rack of Mutton
    or a knuckle of Veal._

Take a Knuckle of Veal, a Joynt of Mutton, two Marrow bones,
a Capon, boil them in fresh water, and scum them; then put in a
bundle of sweet herbs well bound up or none, large Mace, whole
Cinamon, and Ginger bruised, and put in a littlerag, the spice being
a little bruised also. Then beat some Oatmeale, strain it, and put
it to your broth, then have boil'd Prunes and Currans strained also
and put it to your broth, with some whole raisons and currans; and
boil not your fruit too much: then about half an hour before you
dish your meat, put in a pint of Claret Wine and Sugar, then dish up
your meat on fine sippits, and broth it.

Garnish your dish with Lemons, Prunes, Mace, Raisins, Currans, and
Sugar.

You may add to the former Broth, Fennel-roots and Parsley roots tied
up in a bundle.


  _Stewed Broth new Fashion._

Otherways for change; take two Joints of Mutton, Rack and Loin,
being half boiled and scummed, take up the Mutton, and wash away the
dregs from it, strain the broth, and blow away the fat, then put to
the broth in a pipkin a bundle of sweet Herbs bound up hard, and
some Mace, and boil in it also a pound of Raisins of the Sun being
strained, a pound of Prunes whole, with Cloves, Pepper, Saffron,
Salt, Claret, and Sugar: stew all well together, a little before you
dish out your broth, put in your meat again, give it a warm, and
serve it on fine carved sippits.


  _To stew a Loin or Rack of Mutton, or any Joint otherways._

I.

Chop a Loin into steaks, lay it in a deep dish or stewing pan, and
put to it half a pint of Claret or White-Wine, as much water, some
Salt and pepper, three or four whole Onions, a faggot of sweet Herbs
bound up hard, and some large Mace; cover them close, and stew them
leisurely the space of two hours, turn them now and then, and serve
them on sippets.

II.

Otherways for change, being half boiled, chop some sweet Herbs and
put to them, give them a walm, and serve them on sippets with
scalded Goosberries, Barberries, Grapes, or Lemon.

III.

Otherways for variety, put Raisins, Prunes, Currans, Dates, and
serve them with slic't Lemon and beaten butter.

IV.

Sometimes you may alter the Spice, and put Nutmeg, Cloves, and
Ginger.

V.

Sometimes to the first plain way, put Capers, pickled Cucumbers,
Samphire, _&c._

VI.

Otherways, stew it between two dishes with fair water, and when it
boils, scum it, and put three or four blades of large Mace, gross
Pepper, Salt, and Cloves, and stew them close covered two hours;
then have Parsley picked, and some stripped Time, spinage, sorrel,
savoury, and sweet Marjoram, chopped with some onions, put them to
your meat, and give it a walm, with some grated bread amongst, dish
them on carved sippets, and blow off the fat on the broth, and broth
it: lay Lemon on it, and beaten butter, or stew it thus whole.

Before you put on your Herbs blow off the fat.


  _To boil a Leg of Mutton divers ways._

I.

Stuff a Legg of Mutton with Parsley being finely picked, boil it in
water and salt, and serve it in a fair dish with Parsley, and
verjuyce in sawcers.

II.

Otherways: boil it in water and salt, not stuffed, and being boiled
stuff it with Lemon in bits like square dice, and serve it also with
the peels square, cut round about it make sauce with the Gravy and
beaten butter, with Lemon and grated Nutmeg.

III.

Otherways, boil it in water and salt, being stuffed with parsley,
and make sauce with large mace, gravy, chopped parsley, butter,
vinegar, juice of orange, gooseberries, barberries, or grapes and
sugar: serve it on sippets.

IV. _To boil a Leg of Mutton otherways._

Take a good leg of Mutton, and boil it in water and salt, being
stuffed with sweet herbs chopped with some beef-suet, some salt and
nutmeg.

Then being almost boiled, take up some of the broth into a Pipkin,
and put to it some large mace, a few currans; a handful of French
Capers, and a little sack, the yolks of three or four hard eggs,
minced small, and some lemon cut like square dice; and being finely
boil'd, dish it on carved sippets, broth it, and run it over with
beaten butter, and lemon shred small.

V. _Otherways._

Take a fair leg of mutton, boil it in water and salt, and make sauce
with gravy, some wine vinegar, salt-butter, and strong broth, being
well stewed together with nutmeg.

Then dish up the leg of mutton on fine carved sippets, and pour on
your broth.

Garnish your dish with barberries, capers, and slic't lemon.

Garnish the leg of mutton with the same garnish, and run it over
with beaten butter, slic't lemon, and grated nutmeg.


  _To boil a leg of Veal._

  1. Stuff it with beef-suet, and sweet herbs chopped, nutmeg, salt,
    and boil it in fair water and salt.

Then take some of the broth, and put to some capers, currans, large
mace, a piece of interlarded Bacon, two or three whole Cloves,
pieces of pears, and some artichock-suckers boil'd and put in beaten
butter, boil'd marrow and mace. Then before you dish it up, have
sorrel, sage, parsley, time, sweet marjoram coursely minced, with
two or three cuts of a knife, and bruised with the back of a ladle
on a clean board, put it to your broth to make it green, and give it
a warm or two. Then dish up the leg of veal on fine carved sippets,
pour on the broth, and then your other materials, some Goosberries,
or Barberries, beaten butter and lemon.

  2. _To boil a Leg of Veal otherways._

Stuff it with beef-suet, nutmeg, and salt, boil it in a pipkin, and
when it boils, scum it, and put into it some salt, parsley, and
fennel roots in a bundle close bound up; then being almost boil'd,
take up some of the broth in a pipkin, and put to it some Mace,
Raisins of the sun, gravy; stew them well together, and thicken it
with grated bread strained with hard Eggs: before you dish up your
broth have parsley, time, sweet marjoram stript, marigold flowers,
sorrel, and spinage picked: bruise it with the back of a ladle, give
it a warm and dish up your leg of veal on fine carved sippets: pour
on the broth and run it over with beaten Butter.

  3. _To boil a Leg of Veal otherwise with rice, or a Knuckle._

Boil it in a pipkin, put some salt to it, and scum it; then put to
it some mace and some rice finely picked and washed, some raisins of
the sun and gravy; and being fine and tender boil'd, put in some
saffron and serve it on fine carved sippets, with the rice over all.

  4. Otherways with past cut like small lard, boil it in thin broth
    and saffron.

  5. Otherways in white broth, and with fruit, spinage, sweet herbs
    and gooseberries, _&c._


  _To make all manner of forc't meats, or stuffings for
    any kind of Meats; as Leggs, Breasts, Shoulders, Loins or Racks;
    or for any Poultry or Fowl whatsoever, boil'd, rost, stewed,
    or baked; or boil'd in bags, round like a quaking Pudding
    in a napkin._


  _To force a Leg of Veal in the French Fashion,
    in a Feast for Dinner or Supper._

Take a leg of Veal, and take out the meat, but leave the skin and
knuckle whole together, then mince the meat that came out of the leg
with some beef-suet or lard, and some sweet herbs minced also; then
season it with pepper, nutmeg, ginger, cloves, salt, a clove or two
of garlic, and some three or four yolks of hard eggs whole or in
quarters, pine apple-seed, two or three raw eggs, pistaches,
chesnuts, pieces of artichocks, and fill the leg, sow it up and boil
it in a pipkin with two gallons of fair water, and some white wine,
being scummed and almost boil'd take up some broth into a dish or
pipkin, and put to it some chesnuts, pistaches, pine-apple-seed,
marrow, large mace, and artichocks bottoms, and stew them well
together; then have some fried tost of manchet or roles finely
carv'd. The leg being finely boil'd, dish it on French bread, and
fried tost and sippets round about it, broth it and put on marrow,
and your other materials, with sliced lemon and lemon peel, run it
over with beaten butter, and thicken your broth sometimes with
strained almonds; sometimes yolks of eggs and saffron, or saffron
onely.

You may add sometimes balls of the same meat.


  _Garnish._

For your Garnish you may use Chesnuts, Artichock, pistaches,
pine-apple-seed and yolks of hard eggs in halves or potato's.

Otherwhiles: Quinces in quarters, or pears, pippins gooseberries,
grapes, or barberries.


  _To force a breast of Veal._

Mince some Veal or Mutton with some beef-suet or fat bacon, and some
sweet herbs minced also, and seasoned with some cloves, mace,
nutmeg, pepper, two or three raw eggs and salt: then prick it up,
the breast being filled at the lower end, and stew it between two
dishes with some strong broth, white wine, and large mace, then an
hour after have sweet herbs picked and stripped, time, sorrel,
parsley, sweet Marjoram bruised with the back of a ladle, and put it
into your broth with some beef-marrow, and give it a warm; then dish
up your breast of Veal, on fine sippets finely carved, broth it, and
lay on slic't lemons, marrow, mace and barberries, and run it over
with beaten butter.

If you will have the broth yellow, put saffron into it.


  _To boil a breast of Veal otherwise._

Make a Pudding of grated manchet, minced suet, and minced Veal,
season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, three or four eggs,
cinamon, dates, currans, raisins of the Sun, some grapes, sugar, and
cream, mingle them all together, and fill the breast; prick it up,
and stew it between two dishes, with white wine and strong broth,
mace dates, marrow, and being finely stewed, serve it on sippets,
and run it over with beaten butter, lemon, Barberries, or grapes.

Sometimes thick it with some almond milk, sugar, and cream.


  _To Boil a breast of Veal in another manner._

Joint it well, and perboil it a little, then put it in a stewing pan
or deep dish with some strong broth; and a bundle of sweet herbs
well bound up, some large mace, and some slices of interlarded
bacon, two or three cloves, some capers, samphire, salt, some yolks
of hard eggs, and white-wine; stew all these well together, and
being boil'd and tender, serve it on fine carved sippets, and broth
it. Then have some fried sweetbreads, sausages of veal or pork,
garlick or none, and run all over with beaten butter, lemon, and
fried parsley.

Thus you may boil a Rack or Loin.


  To make several sorts of Puddings.


  1. _Bread Puddings yellow or Green._

Grate four penny loaves, and fearce them through a cullender, put
them in a deep dish, and put to them four eggs, two quarts of cream,
cloves, mace, and some saffron, salt, rose-water, sugar, currans,
a pound of beef-suet minced, and a pound of dates.

If green, juyces of spinage, and all manner of sweet herbs stamped
amongst the spinage, and strain the juyce; sweet herbs chopped very
small, cream, cinamon, nutmeg, salt, and all other things, as is
next before laid: your herbs must be time stripped, savoury, sweet
marjoram, rosemarry, parsley, pennyroyal, dates; in these seven or
eight yolks of eggs.


  _Another Pudding, called Cinamon-Pudding_

Take five penny loaves, and fearce them through a cullender, put
them in a deep dish or tray, and put to them five pints of cream,
cinamon six ounces, suet one pound minced, eggs six yolks, four
whites, sugar, salt, slic't dates, stamped almonds, or none,
rose-water.


  _To make Rice Puddings_

Boil your Rice with Cream, strain it, and put to it two penny loaves
grated, eight yolks of eggs, and three whites, beef suet, one pound
of Sugar, Salt, Rose-water, Nutmeg, Coriander beaten, _&c._


  _Other Rice Puddings._

Steep your rice in milk over night, and next morning drain it, and
boil it with cream, season it with sugar being cold, and eggs,
beef-suet, salt, nutmegs, cloves, mace, currans, dates, &c.


  _To mak Oatmeal puddings, called Isings._

Take a quart of whole oatmeal, being picked, steep it in warm milk
over night, next morning drain it, and boil it in a quart of sweet
cream; and being cold put to it six eggs, of them but three whites,
cloves, mace, saffron, pepper, suet, dates, currans, salt, sugar.
This put in bags, guts, or fowls, as capon, _&c._

If green, good store of herbs chopped small.


  _To make blood Puddings_

Take the blood of a hog, while it is warm, and steep in it a quart
or more of great oatmeal groats, at the end of three days take the
groats out and drain them clean; then put to these groats more then
a quart of the best cream warmed on the fire; then take some mother
of time, spinage, parsley, savory, endive, sweet marjoram, sorrel,
strawberry leaves, succory, of each a few chopped very small and mix
them with the groats, with a little fennel seed finely beaten, some
peper, cloves, mace salt, and some beef-suet, or flakes of the hog
cut small.

Otherways, you may steep your oatmeal in warm mutton broth, or
scalding milk, or boil it in a bag.


  _To make Andolians._

Soak the hogs guts, and turn them, scour them, and steep them in
water a day and a night, then take them and wipe them dry, and turn
the fat side outermost.

Then have pepper, chopped sage, a little cloves and mace, beaten
coriander-seed, & salt; mingle all together, and season the fat side
of the guts, then turn that side inward again, and draw one gut over
another to what bigness you please: thus of a whole belly of a fat
hog. Then boil them in a pot or pan of fair water, with a piece of
interlarded bacon, some spices and salt; tye them fast at both ends,
and make them of what length you please.

Sometimes for variety you may leave out some of the foresaid herbs,
and put pennyroyal, savory, leeks, a good big onion or two,
marjoram, time, rosemary, sage, nutmeg, ginger, pepper, salt, _&c._


  _To make other Blood Puddings._

Steep great oatmeal in eight pints of warm goose blood, sheeps
blood, calves, or lambs, or fawns blood, and drain it, as is
aforesaid, after three days put to it in every pint as before.


  _Other Blood Puddings._

Take blood and strain it, put in three pints of the blood, and two
of cream, three penny manchets grated, and beef-suet cut square like
small dice or hogs flakes, yolks of eight eggs, salt, sweet herbs,
nutmeg, cloves, mace and pepper.

Sometimes for variety, Sugar, Currans, _&c._


  _To make a most rare excellent Marrow Pudding in a dish baked,
    and garnish the Dish brims with Puff past._

Take the marrow of four marrow bones, two pinemolets or french
bread, half a pound of raisins of the Sun, ready boil'd and cold,
cinamon a quarter of an ounce finely beaten, two grated nutmegs,
sugar a quarter of a pound, dates a quarter of a pound, sack half a
pint, rose-water a quarter of a pint, ten eggs, two grains of
ambergreese, and two of musk dissolved: now have a fine clean deep
large dish, then have a slice of french bread, and lay a lay of
sliced bread in the dish, and stew it with cinamon, nutmeg, and
sugar mingled together, and also sprinkle the slices of bread with
sack and rose-water, & then some raisins of the sun, and some sliced
dates and good big peices of marrow; and thus make two or three lays
of the aforesaid ingredients, with four ounces of musk, ambergreece,
and most marrow on the top, then take two quarts of cream, and
strain it with half a quarter of fine sugar, and a little salt,
(about a spoonful) and twelve eggs, six of the whites taken away:
then set the dish into the oven, temperate, and not too hot, and
bake it very fair and white, and fill it at two several times, and
being baked, scrape fine sugar on it, and serve it hot.


  _To make marrow Puddings of Rice and grated Bread._

Steep half a pound of rice in milk all night, then drain it from the
milk, and boil it in a quart of cream; being boild strain it and put
it to half a pound of sugar, beaten nutmeg and mace steeped in rose
water, and put to the foresaid materials eight yolks of eggs, and
five grated manchets, put to it also half a pound of marrow, cut
like dice, and salt; mingle all together, and fill your bag or
napkin, and serve it with beaten butter, being boiled and stuck with
almonds.

If in guts, being boild, tost them before the fire in a silver dish
or tosting pan.


  _To make other Puddings of Turkie or Capon in bags, guts,
    or for any kind of stuffing, or forcing, or in Cauls_

Take a rost Turky, mince it very small, and stamp it with some
almond past, then put some coriander-seed beaten, salt, sugar,
rose-water, yolks of eggs raw, and marrow stamped also with it, and
put some cream, mace, soked in sack and whitewine, rose-water and
sack, strain it into the materials, and make not your stuff to thin,
then fill either gut or napkin, or any fouls boil'd, bak'd or rost,
or legs of veal or mutton, or breasts, or kid, or fawn, whole lambs,
suckers, _&c._


  Sheeps Haggas Puddings.


  _To make a Haggas Pudding in a Sheeps Paunch._

Take good store of Parsley, savory, time, onions, oatmeal groats
chopped together, and mingled with some beef or mutton-suet minced
together, and some cloves, mace, pepper, and salt; fill the paunch,
sow it up, and boil it. Then being boiled, serve it in a dish, and
cut a hole in the top of it, and put in some beaten butter with two
or three yolks of eggs dissolved in the butter or none.

Thus one may do for a Fasting day, and put no suet in it, and put it
in a napkin or bag, and being well boiled, butter it, and dish it in
a dish, and serve it with sippets.


  _A Haggas otherways._

Steep the oatmeal over night in warm milk, next morning boil it in
cream, and being fine and thick boil'd, put beef-suet to it in a
dish or tray, some cloves, mace, nutmeg, salt, and some raisins of
the sun, or none, and an onion, somtimes savory, parsley, and sweet
marjoram, and fill the panch, _&c._


  _Other Haggas Puddings._

Calves panch, calves chaldrons; or muggets being clenged, boil it
tender and mince it very small, put to it grated bread, eight yolks
of eggs, two or three whites, cream, some sweet herbs, spinage,
succory, sorrel, strawberry leaves very small minced; bits of
butter, pepper, cloves, mace, cinnamon, ginger, currans, sugar,
salt, dates, and boil it in a napkin or calves panch, or bake it:
and being boiled, put it in a dish, trim the dish with scraped
sugar, and stick it with slic't Almonds, and run it over with beaten
butter, _&c._


  _To make liver Puddings._

Take a good hogs, calves, or lambs liver, and boil it: being cold,
mince it very small, or grate it, and fearce it through a meal-sieve
or cullender, put to it some grated manchet, two penny loaves, some
three pints of cream, four eggs, cloves, mace, currans, salt, dates,
sugar, cinamon, ginger, nutmegs, one pound of beef-suet minced very
small: being mixt all together, fill a wet napkin, and bind it in
fashion of a ball, and serve it with beaten butter and sugar being
boil'd.


  _Other Liver Puddings._

For variety, sometimes sweet herbs, and sometimes flakes of the hog
in place of beef-suet, fennil-seed, carraway seed, or any other
seed, and keep the order as is abovesaid.


  _To make Puddings of blood after the Italian fashion._

Take three pints of hogs blood, strain it, and put to it half a
pound of grated cheese, a penny manchet grated, sweet herbs chopped
very small, a pound of beef-suet minced small, nutmeg, pepper,
sugar, ginger, cloves, mace, cinamon, sugar, currans, eggs, _&c._


  _To make Puddings of a Heifers Udder._

Take an heifers udder, and boil it; being cold, mince it small, and
put to it a pound of almond paste, some grated manchet, three or
four eggs, a quart of cream, one pound of beef-suet minced small,
sweet herbs chopped small also, currans, cinamon, salt, one pound of
sugar, nutmeg, saffron, yolks of hard eggs in quarters, preserved
pears in form of square dice; bits of marrow; mingle all together,
and put it in a clean napkin dipped in warm liquor, bind it up round
like a ball, and boil it.

Being boil'd dish it in a clean scoured dish, scrape sugar, and run
it over with beaten butter, stick it with slic't almonds, or slic't
dates, canded lemon peel, orange, or citrons, juyce of orange over
all.

Thus also lamb-stones, sweet-breads, turkey, capon, or any poultrey.


  _Forcing for any roots; as mellons, Cucumbers, Colliflowers,
    Cabbidge, Pompions, Gourds, great Onions, Parsnips, Turnips or
    Carrots._

Take a Musk Mellon, take out the seed, cut it round the mellon two
fingers deep, then make a forcing of grated bread, beaten almonds,
rose-water and sugar, some musk-mellon stamped small with it, also
bisket bread beaten to powder, some coriander-seed, canded lemon
minced small, some beaten mace and marrow minced small, beaten
cinamon, yolks of raw eggs, sweet herbs, saffron, and musk a grain;
then fill your rounds of mellons, and put them in a flat bottom'd
dish, or earthen pan, with butter in the bottom, and bake them in a
dish.

Then have sauce made with white-wine and strong broth strained with
beaten almonds, sugar and cinamon; serve them on sippets finely
carved, give this broth a warm, and pour it on your mellons, with
some fine scraped sugar, dry them in the oven, and so serve them.

Or you may do these whole; mellons, cucumbers, lemons or turnips,
and serve them with any boil'd fowl.


  _Other forcing, or Pudding, or stuffing for Birds or any Fowl,
    or any Joint of Meat._

Take veal or mutton, mince it, and put to it some grated bread,
yolks of eggs, cream, currans, dates, sugar, nutmeg, cinamon,
ginger, mace, juyce of Spinage, sweet Herbs, salt and mingle all
together, with some whole marrow amongst. If yellow, use Saffron.


  _Other forcing for Fowls or any Joint of meat._

Mince a leg of mutton or veal and some beef-suet, or venison, with
sweet herbs, grated bread, eggs, nutmeg, pepper, ginger, salt,
dates, currans, raisins, some dry canded oranges, coriander seed,
and a little cream; bake them or boil them, and stew them in white
wine, grapes, marrow, and give them a walm or two, thick it with two
or three yolks of eggs, sugar, verjuyce, and serve these puddings on
sippets, pour on the broth, and strew on sugar and slic't lemon.


  _Other forcing of Veal or Pork, Mutton, Lamb, Venison, Land,
    or Sea Foul._

Mince them with beef-suet or lard, and season them with pepper,
cloves, mace, and some sweet herbs grated, Bolonia sausages, yolks
of eggs, grated cheese, salt, _&c._

Other stuffings or forcings of grated cheese, calves brains, or any
brains, as pork, goat, Kid or Lamb, or any venison, or pigs brains,
with some beaten nutmeg, pepper, salt, ginger, cloves, saffron,
sweet herbs, eggs, Gooseberries, or grapes.

Other forcing of calves udder boiled and cold, and stamped with
almond past, cheese-curds, sugar, cinamon, ginger, mace cream, salt,
raw eggs, and some marrow or butter, _&c._


  _Other Stuffings of Puddings._

Take rice flower, strain it with Goats milk or cream, and the brawn
of a poultry rosted, minced and stamped, boil them to a good
thickness, with some marrow, sugar, rosewater and some salt; and
being cold, fill your poultry, either in cauls of veal or other
Joynts of meat, and bake them or boil them in bags or guts, put in
some nutmeg, almond past, and some beaten mace.


  _Other stuffings of the brawn of a Capon, Chickens, Pigeons,
    or any tender Sea Foul._

Take out the meat, and save the skins whole, leave on the legs and
wings to the skin, and also the necks and heads, and mince the meat
raw with some interlarded bacon, or beef-suet, season it with
cloves, mace, sugar, salt, and sweet herbs chopped small, yolks of
eggs grated, parmisan or none, fill the body, legs, and neck, prick
up the back, and stew them between two dishes with strong broth as
much as will cover them, and put some bottoms of artichocks,
cordons, or boil'd sparagus, goosberries, Barberries, or grapes
being boil'd, put in some grated permisan, large mace, and saffron,
and serve them on fine carved sippets, garnish the dish with roast
turnips, or roast onions, cardons, and mace, _&c._


  _Other forcing of Livers of Poultry, or Kid or Lambs._

Take the Liver raw, and cut it into little bits like dice, and as
much interlarded bacon cut in the same form, some sweet herbs
chopped small amongst; also some raw yolks of eggs, and some beaten
cloves and mace, pepper, and salt, a few prunes or raisins, or no
fruit, but grapes or gooseberries, a little grated permisan, a clove
or two of garlick; and fill your poultry, either boild or rost, _&c._


  _Other forcing for any dainty Foul; as Turkie, Chickens,
    or Pheasants, or the like boil'd or rost._

Take minced veal raw, and bacon or beef-suet minc't with it; being
finely minced, season it with cloves and mace, a few currans salt,
and some boiled bottoms of artichocks cut in form of dice small, and
mingle amongst the forcing, with pine-apple-seeds, pistaches,
chesnuts and some raw eggs, and fill your poultry, _&c._


  _Other fillings or forcings of parboild Veal or Mutton._

Mince the Meat with beef-suet or interlarded Bacon, and some cloves,
mace, pepper, salt, eggs, sugar, and some quartered pears, damsons,
or prunes, and fill your fowls, _&c._


  _Other fillings of raw Capons._

Mince it with fat bacon and grated cheese, or permisan, sweet herbs,
cheese curd, currans, cinamon, ginger, nutmeg, pepper, salt, and
some pieces of artichocks like small dice, sugar, saffron, and some
mushrooms.


  _Otherways._

Grated liver of veal, minced lard, fennel-seed, whole raw eggs,
sugar, sweet herbs, salt, grated cheese, a clove or two of garlick,
cloves, mace, cinamon and ginger, _&c._


  _Otherways._

For a leg of mutton, grated bread, yolks of raw eggs, beef-suet,
salt, nutmeg, sweet herbs, juyce of spinage; cream, cinamon, and
sugar; if yellow, saffron.


  _Other forcing, for Land or Sea fowl boiled or baked,
    or a Leg of Mutton._

Take the meat out of the leg, leave the skin whole, and mince the
meat with beef-suet and sweet herbs; and put to it, being finely
minced, grated bread, dates, currans, raisins, orange minced small,
ginger, pepper, nutmeg, cream, and eggs; being boiled or baked, make
a sauce with marrow, strong broth, white-wine, verjuyce, mace,
sugar, and yolks of eggs, strained with verjuyce; serve it on fine
carved sippets, and slic'd lemon, grapes or gooseberries: and thus
you may do it in cauls of veal, lamb, or kid.


  _Legs of Mutton forc't, either rost or boil'd._

Mince the meat with beef-suet or bacon, sweet herbs, pepper, salt,
cloves and mace, and two or three cloves of garlick, raw eggs, two
or three chesnuts, & work up altogether, fill the leg, and prick it
up, then rost it or boil it: make sauce with the remainder of the
meat, & stew it on the fire with gravy, chesnuts, pistaches, or pine
apple seed, bits of artichocks, pears, grapes, or pippins, and serve
it hot on this sauce, or with gravy that drops from it only, and
stew it between two dishes.


  _Other forcing of Veal._

Mince the veal and cut the lard like dice, and put to it, with some
minced Pennyroyall, sweet marjoram, winter savory, nutmeg, a little
cammomile, pepper, salt, ginger, cinamon, sugar, and work all
together; then fill it into beef guts of some three inches long, and
stew them in a pipkin with claret wine, large mace, capers and
marrow; being finely stewed, serve them on fine carved sippets,
slic'd lemon and barberries, and run them over with beaten butter
and scraped sugar.


  _Other forcing for Veal, Mutton, or Lamb._

Either of these minced with beef-suet, parsley, time, savory,
marigolds, endive and spinage; mince all together, and put some
grated bread, grated nutmeg, currans, five dates, sugar, yolks of
eggs, rose-water, and verjuyce; of this forcing you may make birds,
fishes, beasts, pears, balls or what you will, and stew them, or fry
them, or bake them and serve them on sippets with verjuyce, sugar
and butter, either dinner or supper.


  _Other forcing for breast, Legs, or Loyns of Beef, Mutton,
    Veal, or any Venison, or Fowl, rosted, baked, or stewed._

Mince any meat, and put to it beef-suet or lard, dates, raisins,
grated bread, nutmeg, pepper and salt, and two or three eggs, _&c._


  _Otherways._

Mince some mutton with beef-suet, some orange-peel, grated nutmeg,
grated bread, coriander-seed, pepper, salt, and yolks of eggs,
mingle all together, and fill any breast, or leg, or any Joynt of
sweet, and make sauce with gravy, strong broth, dates, currans,
sugar, salt, lemons, and barberries. _&c._


  _Other forcing for rost or boil'd, or baked Legs of any meat,
    or any other Joint or Fowl._

Mince a Leg of Mutton with beef-suet, season it with cloves, mace,
pepper, salt, nutmeg, rose-water, currans, raisins, carraway-seeds
and eggs; and fill your leg of Mutton, _&c._

Then for sauce for the aforesaid, if baked, bake it in an earthen
pan or deep dish, and being baked, blow away the fat, and serve it
with the gravy.

If rost, save the gravy that drops from it, and put to it slic't
lemon or orange.

If boil'd, put capers, barberries, white-wine, hard eggs minced,
beaten Butter, gravy, verjuyce and sugar, _&c._


  _Other forcing._

Mince a leg of mutton or lamb with beef-suet, and all manner of
sweet herbs minced, cloves, mace, salt, currans, sugar, and fill the
leg with half the meat: than make the rest into little cakes as
broad as a shilling, and put them in a pipkin, with strong mutton
broth, cloves, mace, vinegar, and boil the leg, or bake it, or
rost it.


  _Forcing in the Spanish Fashion in balls._

Mince a leg of mutton with beef suet and some marrow cut like square
dice, put amongst some yolks of eggs, and some salt and nutmeg; make
this stuff as big as a tennis ball, and stew them with strong broth
the space of two hours; turn them and serve them on toasts of fine
manchet, and serve them with the palest of the balls.


  _Other manner of Balls._

Mince a leg of Veal very small, yolks of hard eggs, and the yolks of
seven or eight raw eggs, some salt, make them into balls as big as a
walnut, and stew them in a pipkin with some mutton broth, mace,
cloves, and slic't ginger, stew them an hour, and put some marrow to
them, and serve them on sippets, _&c._


  _Other grand or forc't Dish._

Take hard eggs, and part the yolks and whites in halves, then take
the yolks and mince them, or stamp them in a Mortar, with marchpane
stuff, and sweet herbs chopped very small, and put amongst the eggs
or past, with sugar and cinamon fine beaten, put some currans also
to them, and mingle all together with salt, fill the whites, and set
them by.

Then have preserved oranges canded, and fill them with marchpane
paste and sugar, and set them by also.

Then have the tops of sparagus boil'd, and mixed with butter,
a little sack, and set them by also.

Then have boild chesnuts peeled and pistaches, and set them by also.

Then have marrow steeped first in rose-water, then fried in Butter,
set that by also.

Then have green quodlings slic't, mixt with bisket bread & egg, and
fried in little cakes, and set that by also.

Then have sweet-breads, or lamb-stones, and yolks of hard eggs
fryed, _&c._ and dipped in Butter.

Then have small turtle doves, and pigeon peepers and chicken-peepers
fried, or finely rosted or boiled, and set them by, or any small
birds, and some artichocks, and potato's boil'd and fried in Butter,
and some balls as big as a walnut, or less, made of parmisan, and
dipped in butter, and fried.

Then last of all, put them all in a great charger, the chickens or
fowls in the middle, then lay a lay of sweetbreads, then a lay of
bottoms of artichocks, and the marrow; on them some preserved
oranges.

Then next some hard eggs round that, fried sparagus, yolks of eggs,
chesnuts, and pistaches, then your green quodlings stuffed: the
charger being full, put to them marrow all over the meat, and juyce
of orange, and make a sauce of strained almonds, grapes, and
verjuyce; and being a little stewed in the oven, dry it, _&c._


  The dish.

  _Sweetbreads, Lambstones, Chickens, Marrow, Almonds, Eggs,
  Oranges, Bisket, Sparagus, Artichocks, Musk, Saffron, Butter,
  Potato's, Pistaches, Chesnuts, Verjuyce, Sugar, Flower,
  Parmisan, Cinamon._


  _To force a French Bread called Pine-molet, or three of them._

Take a manchet, and make a hole in the top of it, take out the crum,
and make a composition of the brawn of a capon rost or boil'd; mince
it, and stamp it in a mortar, with marchpane past, cream, yolks of
hard eggs, muskefied bisket bread, the crum of very fine manchet,
sugar, marrow, musk, and some sweet herbs chopped small, beaten
cinamon, saffron, some raw yolks of eggs, and currans: fill the
bread, and boil them in napkins in capon broth, but first stop the
top with the pieces you took off. Then stew or fry some sweetbreads
of veal and forced chickens between two dishes, or Lamb-stones,
fried with some mace, marrow, and grapes, sparagus, or artichocks,
and skirrets, the manchets being well boil'd, and your chickens
finely stewed, serve them in a fine dish, the manchets in the
middle, and the sweetbreads, chickens, and carved sippets round
about the dish; being finely dished, thicken the chicken broth with
strained almonds, creams, sugar, and beaten butter.

Garnish your dish with marrow, pistaches, artichocks, puff paste,
mace, dates, pomegranats, or barberries, and slic't lemon.


  _Another forc't dish._

Take two pound of beef-marrow, and cut it as big as great dice, and
a pound of Dates, cut as big as small Dice; then have a pound of
prunes, and take away the out-side from the stones with your knife,
and a pound of Currans, and put these aforesaid in a Platter, twenty
yolks of eggs, and a pound of sugar, an ounce of cinamon, and mingle
all together.

Then have the yolks of twenty eggs more, strain them with
Rose-water, a little musk and sugar, fry them in two pancakes with a
little sweet butter fine and yellow, and being fried, put one of
them in a fair dish, and lay the former materials on it spread all
over; then take the other, and cut it in long slices as broad as
your little finger, and lay it over the dishes like a lattice
window, set it in the Oven, and bake it a little, then fry it, _&c._
Bake it leisurely.


  _Another forc't fryed Dish._

Make a little past with yolks of eggs, flower, and boiling liquor.

Then take a quarter of a pound of sugar, a pound of marrow, half an
ounce of cinamon, and a little ginger. Then have some yolks of Eggs,
and mash your marrow, and a little Rose-water, musk or amber, and a
few currans or none, with a little suet, and make little pasties,
fry them with clarified butter, and serve them with scraped sugar,
and juyce of orange.


  _Otherways._

Take good fresh water Eels, flay and mince them small with a warden
or two, and season it with pepper, cloves, mace, saffron: then put
currans, dates, and prunes, small minced amongst, and a little
verjuyce, and fry it in little pasties; bake it in the oven, or stew
it in a pan in past of divers forms, or pasties or stars, _&c._


  To make any kind of sausages.


  _First, Bolonia Sausages._

The best way and time of the year is to make them in _September_.

Take four stone of pork, of the legs the leanest, and take away all
the skins, sinews, and fat from it; mince it fine and stamp it: then
add to it three ounces of whole pepper, two ounces of pepper more
grosly cracked or beaten, whole cloves an ounce, nutmegs an ounce
finely beaten, salt, spanish, or peter-salt, an ounce of
coriander-seed finely beaten, or carraway-seed, cinamon an ounce
fine beaten, lard cut an inch long, as big as your little finger,
and clean without rust; mingle all the foresaid together; and fill
beef guts as full as you can possibly, and as the wind gathers in
the gut, prick them with a pin, and shake them well down with your
hands; for if they be not well filled, they will be rusty.

These aforesaid Bolonia Sausages are most excellent of pork only:
but some use buttock beef, with pork, half one and as much of the
other. Beef and pork are very good.

Some do use pork of a weeks powder for this use beforesaid, and no
more salt at all.

Some put a little sack in the beating of these sausages, and put in
place of coriander-seed, carraway-seed.

This is the most excellent way to make Bolonia Sausages, being
carefully filled, and tied fast with a packthred, and smoaked or
smothered three or four days, that will turn them red; then hang
them in some cool cellar or higher room to take the air.


  _Other Sausages._

Sausages of pork with some of the fat of a chine of bacon or pork,
some sage chopped fine and small, salt, and pepper: and fill them
into porkets guts, or hogs, or sheeps guts, or no guts, and let them
dry in the chimney leisurely, _&c._


  _Otherways._

Mince pork with beef-suet, and mince some sage, and put to it some
pepper, salt, cloves, and mace; make it into balls, and keep it for
your use, or roll them into little sausages some four or five inches
long as big as your finger; fry six or seven of them, and serve them
in a dish with vinegar or juyce of orange.

Thus you may do of a leg of veal, and put nothing but salt and suet;
and being fried, serve it with gravy and juyce of orange or butter
and vinegar; and before you fry them flower them. And thus mutton or
any meat.

Or you may add sweet Herbs or Nutmeg: and thus Mutton.


  _Other Sausages._

Mince some Buttock-Beef with Beef suet, beat them well together, and
season it with cloves, mace, pepper, and salt: fill the guts, or fry
it as before; if in guts, boil them and serve them as puddings.


  _Otherways for change._

If without guts, fry them and serve them with gravy, juyce of orange
or vinegar, _&c._


  _To make Links._

Take the raring pieces of pork or hog bacon, or fillets, or legs,
cut the lean into bits as big as great dice square, and the fleak in
the same form, half as much; and season them with good store of
chopped sage chopt very small and fine; and season it also with some
pepper, nutmeg, cloves, and mace also very small beaten, and salt,
and fill porkets guts, or Beef-guts: being well filled, hang them up
and dry them till the salt shine through them; and when you will
spend them, boil them and broil them.


  To make all manner of Hashes.


  _First, of raw Beef._

Mince it very small with some Beef-suet or lard, some sweet herbs,
pepper, salt, some cloves, and mace, blanched chesnuts, or almonds
blanched, and put in whole, some nutmeg, and a whole onion or two,
and stew it finely in a pipkin with some strong broth the space of
two hours, put a little claret to it, and serve it on sippets finely
carved, with some grapes or lemon in it also, or barberries, and
blow off the fat.


  _Otherways._

Stew it in Beef gobbets, and cut some fat and lean together as big
as a good pullets egg, and put them into a pot or pipkin with some
Carrots cut in pieces as big as a walnut, some whole onions, some
parsnips, large mace, faggot of sweet herbs, salt, pepper, cloves,
and as much water and wine as will cover them, and stew it the space
of three hours.


  2. _Beef hashed otherways, of the Buttock._

Cut it into thin slices, and hack them with the back of your knife,
then fry them with sweet butter; and being fried put them in a
pipkin with some claret, strong broth, or gravy, cloves, mace,
pepper, salt, and sweet-butter; being tender stewed the space of an
hour, serve them on fine sippets, with slic't lemon, gooseberries,
barberries, or grapes, and some beaten butter.


  3. _Beef hashed otherways._

Cut some buttock-beef into fine thin slices, and half as many slices
of fine interlarded Bacon, stew it very well and tender, with some
claret and strong Broth, cloves, mace, pepper, and salt; being
tender stewed the space of two hours, serve them on fine carved
sippets, _&c._


  4. _A Hash of Bullocks Cheeks._

Take the flesh from the bones, then with a sharp knife slice them in
thin slices like Scotch collops, and fry them in sweet butter a
little; then put them into a Pipkin with gravy or strong broth and
claret, and salt, chopped sage, and nutmeg, stew them the space of
two hours, or till they be tender, then serve them on fine carved
sippets, _&c._


  _Hashes of Neats Feet, or any Feet; as Calves, Sheeps, Dears,
    Hogs, Lambs, Pigs, Fawns, or the like, many of the ways
    following._

Boil them very tender, and being cold, mince them small, then put
currans to them, beaten cinamon, hard eggs minced, capers, sweet
herbs minced small, cloves, mace, sugar, white-wine, butter, slic't
lemon or orange, slic't almonds, grated bread, saffron, sugar,
gooseberries, barberries or grapes; and being finely stewed down,
serve them on fine carved sippets.


  2. _Neats Feet hashed otherwise._

Cut them in peices, being tender boild, and put to them some chopped
onions, parsly, time butter, mace, pepper, vinegar, salt, and sugar:
being finely stewed serve them on fine carved sippets, barberries,
and sugar; sometimes thicken the broth with yolks of raw eggs and
verjuice, run it over with beaten butter, and sometimes no sugar.


  3. _Hashing otherways of any Feet._

Mince them small, and stew them with white wine, butter, currans,
raisins, marrow, sugar, prunes, dates, cinamon, mace, ginger,
pepper, and serve them on tosts of fried manchet.

Sometimes dissolve the yolks of eggs.


  4. _Neats Feet, or any Feet otherways_

Being tender boil'd and soused, part them and fry them in sweet
butter fine and brown; dish them in a clean dish with some mustard
and sweet Butter, and fry some slic't onions, and lay them all over
the top; run them over with beaten Butter.


  5. _Neats-feet, or other Feet otherways sliced,
    or in pieces stewed._

Take boil'd onions, and put your feet in a pipkin with the onions
aforesaid being sliced, and cloves, mace, white wine, and some
strong broth and salt, being almost stewed or boil'd, put to it some
butter and verjuyce, and sugar, give it a warm or two more, serve it
on fine sippets, and run it over with sweet Butter.


  6. _Neats-feet otherways, or any Feet fricassed, or Trotters._

Being boil'd tender and cold, take out the hair or wool between the
toes, part them in halves, and fry them in butter; being fryed, put
away the Butter, and put to them grated nutmeg, salt, and strong
Broth.

Then being fine and tender, have some yolks of eggs dissolved with
vinegar or verjuyce, some nutmeg in the eggs also, and into the eggs
put a piece of Fresh Butter, and put away the frying: and when you
are ready to dish up your meat, put in the eggs, and give it a toss
or two in the pan, and pour it in a clean dish.


  1. _To hash Neats-tongues, or any Tongues._

Being fresh and tender boil'd, and cold, cut them into thin slices,
fry them in sweet butter, and put to them some strong broth, cloves,
mace, saffron, salt, nutmegs grated, yolks of eggs, grapes,
verjuyce: and the tongue being fine and thick, with a toss or two in
the pan, dish it on fine sippets.

Sometimes you may leave out cloves and mace; and for variety put
beaten cinamon, sugar, and saffron, and make it more brothy.


  2. _To hash a Neats-Tongue otherways._

Slice it into thin slices, no broader than a three pence, and stew
it in a dish or pipkin with some strong broth, a little sliced onion
of the same bigness of the tongue, and some salt, put to some
mushrooms, and nutmeg, or mace, and serve it on fine sippets, being
well stewed; rub the bottom of the dish with a clove or two of
garlick or mince a raw onion very small and put in the bottom of the
dish, and beaten butter run over the tops of your dish of meat, with
lemon cut small.


  3. _To hash a Tongue otherwise, either whole or in slices._

Boil it tender, and blanch it; and being cold, slice it in thin
slices, and put to it boil'd chesnuts or roste, some strong broth,
a bundle of sweet herbs, large mace, white endive, pepper, wine,
a few cloves, some capers, marrow or butter, and some salt; stew it
well together, and serve it on fine carved sippets, garnish it on
the meat, with gooseberries, barberries, or lemon.


  4. _To hash a Tongue otherways._

Being boil'd tender, blanch it, and let it cool, then slice it in
thin slices, and put it in a pipkin with some mace and raisins,
slic't dates, some blanched almonds; pistaches, claret or white
whine, butter, verjuyce, sugar, and strong broth; being well stewed,
strain in six eggs, the yolks being boil'd hard, or raw, give it a
warm, and dish up the tongue on fine sippets.

Garnish the dish with fine sugar, or fine searced manchet, lay lemon
on your meat slic't, run it over with beaten butter, _&c._


  5. _To hash a Neats Tongue otherways._

Being boil'd tender, slice it in thin slices, and put it in a pipkin
with some currans, dates, cinamon, pepper, marrow, whole mace,
verjuyce, eggs, butter, bread, wine, and being finely stewed, serve
it on fine sippets, with beaten butter, sugar, strained eggs,
verjuyce, _&c._


  _6. To stew a Neats Tongue whole._

Take a fresh neats tongue raw, make a hole in the lower end, and
take out some of the meat, mince it with some Bacon or Beef suet,
and some sweet herbs, and put in the yolks of an egg or two, some
nutmeg, salt, and some grated parmisan or fat cheese, pepper, and
ginger; mingle all together, and fill the hole in the tongue, then
rap a caul or skin of mutton about it, and bind it about the end of
the tongue, boil it till it will blanch: and being blanched, wrap
about it the caul of veal with some of the forcing, roast it a
little brown, and put it in a pipkin, and stew it with some claret
and strong broth, cloves, mace, salt, pepper, some strained bread,
or grated manchet, some sweet herbs chopped small, marrow, fried
onions and apples amongst; and being finely stewed down, serve it on
fine carved sippets, with barberries and slic't lemon, and run it
over with beaten Butter. Garnish the dish with grated or searced
manchet.


  _7. To stew a Neats Tongue otherways, whole, or in pieces,
    boiled, blanch it, or not._

Take a tongue and put it a stewing between two dishes being raw, &
fresh, put some strong broth to it and white wine, with some whole
cloves, mace, and pepper whole, some capers, salt, turnips cut like
lard, or carrots, or any roots, and stew all together the space of
two or three hours leisurely, then blanch it, and put some marrow to
it, give it a warm or two, and serve it on sippets finely carved,
and strow on some minced lemon and barberies or grapes, and run all
over with beaten Butter.

Garnish your dish with fine grated manchet finely searced.


  _8. To boil a Tongue otherways._

Salt a tongue twelve hours, or boil it in water & salt till it be
tender, blanch it, and being finely boil'd, dish it in a clean dish,
and stuff it with minced lemon, mince the rind, and strow over all,
and serve it with some of the Gallendines, or some of the Italian
sauces, as you may see in the book of sauces.


  _To boil a Neats Tongue otherways, of three or four days powder._

Boil it in fair water, and serve it on brewice, with boiled turnips
and onions, run it over with beaten Butter, and serve it on fine
carved sippets, some barberries, goosberries, or grapes, and serve
it with some of the sauces, as you may see in the book of all manner
of sauces.


  _To Fricas a Neats Tongue, or any Tongue._

Being tender boil'd, slice it into thin slices, and fry it with
sweet Butter, then put away your Butter, and put some strong broth,
nutmeg, pepper, and sweet herbs chopped small, some grapes or
barberries picked, and some yolks of eggs, or verjuyce, grated
bread, or stamped Almonds and strained.

Somtimes you may add some Saffron.

Thus udders may be dressed in any of the ways of the Neats-Tongues
beforesaid.


  _To hash any Land-Fowl, as Turky, Capon, Pheasant,
    or Partridges, or any Fowls being roasted and cold.
    Roast the Fowls for Hashes._

Take a capon, hash the wings, and slice into thin slices, but leave
the rump and the legs whole; mince the wings into very thin slices,
no bigger then a _three pence_ in breadth, and put it in a pipkin
with a little strong broth, nutmeg, some slic't mushroms, or pickled
mushroms, & an onion very thin slic't no bigger than the _minced
capon_ being well stew'd down with a little butter & gravy, dish it
on fine sippets, & lay the rump or rumps whole on the minced meat,
also the legs whole, and run it over with beaten Butter, slices of
lemon, and lemon peel whole.


  _Collops or hashed Veal._

Take a leg of Veal, and cut it into slices as thin as an half crown
piece, and as broad as your hand, and hack them with the back of a
knife, then lard them with small lard good and thick, and fry them
with sweet butter; being fryed, make sauce with butter, vinegar,
some chopped time amongst, and yolks of eggs dissolved with juice of
oranges; give them a toss or two in the pan, and so put them in a
dish with a little gravy, _&c._

Or you may make other sauce of mutton gravy, juyce of lemon and
grated nutmeg.


  _A Hash of any Tongues, Neats Tongues, Sheeps Tongues,
    or any great or small Tongues._

Being tender boil'd and cold, cut them in thin slices, and fry them
in sweet butter; then put them in a pipkin with a pint of Claret
wine, and some beaten cinamon, ginger, sugar, salt, some capers, or
samphire, and some sweet butter; stir it well down till the liquor
be half wasted, and now and then stir it: being finely and leisurely
stewed, serve it on fine carved sippets, and wring on the juyce of a
lemon, and marrow, _&c._

Or sometimes lard them whole, tost them, and stew them as before,
and put a few carraways, and large mace, sugar, marrow, chestnuts:
serve them on fried tosts, _&c._


  _To make other Hashes of Veal._

Take a fillet of Veal with the udder, rost it; and being rosted, cut
away the frothy flap; and cut it into thin slices; then mince it
very fine with 2 handfuls of french capers, & currans one handful;
and season it with a little beaten nutmeg, ginger, mace, cinamon,
and a handful of sugar, and stew these with a pound of butter,
a quarter of a pint of vinegar, as much caper liquor, a faggot of
sweet herbs, and little salt; Let all these boil softly the space of
two hours, now and then stirring it; being finely stewed, dish it
up, and stick about it fried tost, or stock fritters, _&c._

Or to this foresaid Hash, you may add some yolks of hard eggs minced
among the meat, or minced and mingled, and put whole currans, whole
capers, and some white wine.

Or to this foresaid Hash, you may, being hashed, put nothing but
beaten Butter only with lemon, and the meat cut like square dice,
and serve it with beaten butter and lemon on fine carved sippets.


  _To Hash a Hare._

Cut it in two pieces, and wash off the hairs in water and wine,
strain the liquor, and parboil the quarters; then take them and put
them into a dish with the legs, shoulders, and head whole, and the
chine cut in two or three pieces, and put to it two or three grate
onions whole, and some of the liquor where it was parboil'd: stew it
between two dishes till it be tender, then put to it some pepper,
mace, nutmeg, and serve it on fine carved sippets, and run it over
with beaten butter, lemon, some marrow, and barberries.


  _To hash or boil Rabits divers ways, either in quarters
    or slices cut like small dice, or whole or minced._

Take a rabit being flayed, and wiped clean, cut off the legs,
thighs, wings, and head, and part the chine into four pieces or six;
put all into a dish, and put to it a pint of white wine, as much
fair water, and gross pepper, slic'd ginger, some salt butter,
a little time and other sweet herbs finely minced, and two or three
blades of mace, stew it the space of two hours leisurely; and a
little before you dish it, take the yolks of six new laid eggs and
dissolve them with some grapes, verjuyce, or wine vinegar, give it a
warm or two on the fire, till the broth be somewhat thick, then put
it in a clean dish, with salt about the dish, and serve it hot.


  _A Rabit hashed otherways._

Stew it between two dishes in quarters, as the former, or in peices
as long as your finger, with some strong broth, mace, a bundle of
sweet herbs, and salt; Being well stewed, strain the yolks of two
hard eggs with some of the broth, and put it into the broth where
the Rabit stews, then have some cabbidge lettice boiled in water;
and being boild squeeze away the water, and put them in beaten
Butter, with a few raisins of the Sun boiled in water also by
themselves; or in place of lettice use white endive. Then being
finely stewed, dish up the rabit on fine carved sippets, and lay on
it mace, lettice in quarters, raisins, grapes, lemons, sugar,
gooseberries, or barberries, and broth it with the former Broth.

Thus chickens, or capons, or partridg, and strained almonds in this
Broth for change.

To hash a Rabit otherways, with a forcing in his belly of minced
sweet herbs, yolks of hard eggs, parsley, pepper, and currants, and
fill his belly.


  _To hash Rabits, Chickens, or Pigeon, either in peices;
    or whole, with Turnips._

Boil either the rabits or fowls in water and salt, or strained
oatmeal and salt.

Take turnips, cut them in slices, and after cut them like small lard
an inch long, the quantity of a quart, and put them in a pipkin with
a pound of Butter, three or four spoonfulls of strong Broth, and a
quarter of a pint of wine vinegar, some pepper and ginger, sugar and
salt; and let them stew leisurely with some mace the space of 2
hours being very finely stewed, put them into beaten Butter, beaten
with cream and yolks of eggs, then serve them upon fine thin toasts
of French Bread.

Or otherways, being stewed as aforesaid without eggs, cream, or
butter, serve them as formerly. And these will serve for boil'd
Chickens, or any kind of fowl for garnish.


  _To make a Bisk the best way._

Take a leg of Beef and a Knuckle of veal, boil them in two gallons
of fair water, scum them clean, and put to them some cloves, and
mace, then boil them from two gallons to three quarts of Broth;
being boil'd strain it and put it in a pipkin, when it is cold, take
off the fat and bottom, clear it into another clean pipkin; and keep
it warm till the Bisk be ready.

Boil the Fowl in the liquor of the Marrow-Bones of six peeping
chickens, and six peeping pigeons in a clean pipkin, either in some
Broth, or in water and salt. Boil the marrow by it self in a pipkin
in the same broth with some salt.

Then have pallats, noses, lips, boil'd tender, blancht and cut into
bits as big as sixpence; also some sheeps tongues boil'd, blancht,
larded, fryed, and stewed in gravy, with some chesnuts blanched;
also some cocks combs boil'd and blanched, and some knots of Eggs,
or yolks of hard eggs. Stew all the aforesaid in some rost mutton,
or beef gravy, with some pistaches, large mace, a good big onion or
two, and some salt.

Then have lamb stones blancht and slic't, also sweet-breads of veal,
and sweet-breads of lamb slit, some great oysters parboil'd, and
some cock stones. Fry the foresaid materials in clarified butter,
some fryed spinage, or Alexander leaves, & keep them warm in an
oven, with some fried sausages made of minced bacon, veal, yolks of
eggs, nutmegs, sweet herbs, salt and pistaches; bake it in an oven
in cauls of veal, and being baked and cold, slice it round, fry it,
and keep it warm in the oven with the foresaid fried things.


  _To make little Pies for the Bisk._

Mince a leg of Veal, or a leg of Mutton with some interlarded bacon
raw and seasoned with a little salt, nutmeg, pepper, some sweet
herbs, pistaches, grapes, gooseberries, barberries, and yolks of
hard eggs, in quarters; mingle all together, fill them, and close
them up; and being baked liquor them with gravy, and beaten butter,
or mutton broth. Make the past of a pottle of flower, half a pound
of butter, six yolks of eggs, and boil the liquor and butter
together.


  _To make gravy for the Bisk._

Roast eight pound of buttock beef, and two legs of mutton, being
throughly roasted, press out the gravy, and wash them with some
mutton broth, and when you have done, strain it, and keep it warm in
a clean pipkin for your present use.


  _To dish the Bisk._

Take a great eight pound dish, and a six penny french pinemolet or
bread; chip it and slice it into large slices, and cover all the
bottom of the dish; scald it or steep it well with your strong
broth, and upon that some mutton or beef gravy; then dish up the
fowl on the dish, and round the dish the fried tongues in gravy with
the lips, pallats, pistaches, eggs, noses, chesnuts, and cocks
combs, and run them over the fowls with some of the gravy, and large
mace.

Then again run it over with fried sweetbread, sausage, lamb-stones,
cock-stones, fried spinage, or alexander leaves, then the marrow
over all; next the carved lemons upon the meat, and run it over with
the beaten butter, yolks of eggs, and gravy beat up together till it
is thick; then garnish the dish with the little pies, Dolphins of
puff-paste, chesnuts, boiled and fried oysters, and yolks of hard
eggs.


  _To Boil Chines of Veal._

First, stew them in a stewing pan or between two dishes, with some
strong broth of either veal or mutton, some white wine, and some
sausages made of minced veal or pork, boil up the chines, scum them,
and put in two or three blades of large mace, a few cloves, oyster
or caper liquor with a little salt; and being finely boil'd down put
in some good mutton or beef-gravy; and a quarter of an hour before
you dish them, have all manner of sweet herbs pickt and stript, as
tyme, sweet marjoram, savory, parsley, bruised with the back of a
ladle, and give them two or three walms on the fire in the broth;
then dish the chines in thin slices of fine French bread, broth
them, and lay on them some boiled beef-marrow, boil'd in strong
broth, some slic't lemon, and run all over with a lear made of
beaten butter, the yolk of an egg or two, the juyce of two or three
oranges, and some gravy, _&c._


  _To boil or stew any Joynt of Mutton._

Take a whole loin of mutton being jointed, put it into a long
stewing pan or large dish, in as much fair water as will more than
half cover it, and when it is scum'd cover it; but first put in some
salt, white wine, and carrots cut into dice-work, and when the broth
is half boiled strain it, blow off the fat, and wash away the dregs
from the mutton, wash also the stew-pan or pipkin very clean, and
put in again the broth into the pan or pipkin, with some capers,
large mace, and carrots; being washed, put them in again, and stew
them softly, lay the mutton by in some warm place, or broth, in a
pipkin; then put in some sweet herbs chopped with an onion, and put
it to your broth also, then have colliflowers ready boild in water
and salt, put them into beaten butter with some boil'd marrow: then
the mutton and broth being ready, dissolve two or three yolks of
eggs, with white wine, verjuyce, or sack, and give it a walm or two;
then dish up the meat, and lay on the colliflowers, gooseberries,
capers, marrow, carrots, and grapes or barberries, and run it over
with beaten butter.

For the garnish according to the season of the year, sparagus,
artichocks, parsnips, turnips, hopbuds, coleworts, cabbidge-lettice,
chestnuts, cabbidge-sprouts.

Sometimes for more variety, for thickning of this broth, strained
almonds, with strong mutton broth.


  _To boil a Rack, Chine, or Loin of Mutton a most excellent way,
    either whole or in pieces._

Boil it either in a flat large pipkin or stewing pan, with as much
fair water as will cover the meat, and when it boils scum it, and
put thereto some salt; and being half boiled take up the meat, and
strain the Broth, blow off the fat, and wash the stewing-pan and the
meat from the dregs, then again put in the crag end of the rack of
mutton to make the Broth good, with some mace; then a little before
you take it up, take a handful of picked parsley, chop it very
small, and put it in the Broth, with some whole marigold flowers;
put in the chine again, and give it a walm or two, then dish it on
fine sippets, and broth it, then add thereto raisins of the sun, and
currans ready boil'd and warm, lay them over the chine of mutton,
then garnish the dish with marigold-flowers, mace, lemon, and
barberries.

Other ways for change without fruit.


  _To boil a Chine of Mutton in Barley broth;
    or Chines, Racks, and Knuckles of Veal._

Take a chine of veal or mutton and joynt it, put it in a pipkin with
some strong mutton broth, and when it boils and is scummed, put in
some french barley, being first boiled in fair water, put into the
broth some large mace and some sweet herbs bound up in a bundle,
a little rosemary, tyme, winter-savory, salt, and sweet marjoram,
bind them up very hard; and put in some raisins of the sun, some
good pruens, currans, and marigold-flowers; boil it up to an
indifferent thickness, and serve it on fine sippets; garnish the
dish with fruit and marigold-flowers, mace, lemon, and boil'd
marrow.

Otherways without fruit, put some good mutton gravy, and sometimes
raisins only.


  _To stew a Chine of Mutton or Veal._

Put it in a pipkin with strong broth and white wine; and when it
boils scum it, and put to some oyster-liquor, salt, whole pepper,
a bundle of sweet herbs well bound up, two or three blades of large
mace, a whole onion, with some interlarded bacon cut into dice work,
some chesnuts, and some capers, then have some stewed oysters by
themselves, as you may see in the Book of Oysters. The chines being
ready, garnish the dish with great oysters fried and stewed, mace,
chesnuts, and lemon peel; dish up the chines in a fair dish on fine
sippets; broth it, and garnish the chines with stewed oysters;
chesnuts, mace, slic't lemon and some fried oysters.


  _To make a dish of Steaks, stewed in a Frying pan._

Take them and fry them in sweet butter; being half fried, put out
the butter, & put to them some good strong ale, pepper, salt,
a shred onion, and nutmeg; stew them well together, and dish them on
sippets, serve them and pour on the sauce with some beaten butter,
_&c._


  _To make stewd Broth._

Take a knuckle of veal, a joint of mutton, loin or rack, two
marrow-bones, a capon, and boil them in fair water, scum them when
they boil, and put to them a bundle of sweet herbs bound up hard and
close; then add some large mace, whole cinamon, and some ginger,
bruised and put in a fine clean cloth bound up fast, and a few whole
cloves, some strained manchet, or beaten oatmeal strained and put to
the broth; then have prunes and currans boil'd and strain'd; then
put in some whole raisins, currans, some good damask prunes, and
boil not the fruit too much, about half an hour before you dish your
meat, put into the broth a pint of claret wine, and some sugar; dish
up the meat on fine sippets, broth it, and garnish the dish with
slic't Lemons, prunes, mace, raisins, currans, scraped sugar, and
barberries; garnish the meat in the dish also.


  _Stewed Broth in the new Mode or Fashion._

Take a joynt of mutton, rack, or loin, and boil them in pieces or
whole in fair water, scum them, and being scummed and half boil'd,
take up the mutton, and wash away the dregs from the meat; strain
the broth, and blow away the fat; then put the broth into a clean
pipkin, with a bundle of sweet herbs bound up hard; then put thereto
some large mace, raisins of the sun boil'd and strain'd, with half
as many prunes; also some saffron, a few whole cloves, pepper, salt,
claret wine, and sugar; and being finely stewed together, a little
before you dish it up, put in the meat, and give it a walm or two;
dish it up, and serve it on fine carved sippets.


  _To stew a Loin, Rack, or any Joynt of Mutton otherways._

Chop a loin into steaks, lay it in a deep dish or stewing pan, and
put to it half a pint of claret, and as much water, salt, and
pepper, three or four whole onions, a faggot of sweet herbs bound up
hard, and some large mace, cover them close, and stew them leisurely
the space of two hours, turn them now & then, and serve them on
sippets.

Otherways for change, being half boiled, put to them some sweet
herbs chopped, give them a walm, and serve them on sippets with
scalded gooseberies, barberries, grapes, or lemon.

Sometimes for variety put Raisins, Prunes, Currans, Dates, and serve
them with slic't lemon, beaten butter.

Othertimes you may alter the spices, and put nutmeg, cloves, ginger,
_&c._

Sometimes to the first plain way put capers, pickled cucumbers,
samphire, _&c._


  _Otherwayes._

Stew it between two dishes with fair water, and when it boils, scum
it, and put in three or four blades of large mace, gross pepper,
cloves, and salt; stew them close covered two hours, then have
parsley picked, and some stript, fine spinage, sorrel, savory, and
sweet marjoram chopped with some onions, put them to your meat, and
give it a walm, with some grated bread amongst them; then dish them
on carved sippets, blow off the fat on the broth, and broth it, lay
a lemon on it and beaten butter, and stew it thus whole.


  _To dress or force a Leg of Veal a singular good way,
    in the newest Mode._

Take a leg of veal, take out the meat, and leave the skin and the
shape of the leg whole together, mince the meat that came out of the
leg with some beef-suet or lard, and some sweet herbs minced; then
season it with pepper, nutmeg, ginger, and cloves, all being fine
beaten, with some salt, a clove or two of garlick, three or four
yolks of hard eggs in quarters, pine-apple seed, two or three raw
eggs, also pistaches, chesnuts, & some quarters of boil'd artichocks
bottoms, fill the leg and sowe it up, boil it in a pipkin with two
gallons of fair water and some white wine; being scumm'd and almost
boil'd, take up some broth into a dish or pipkin, and put to it some
chesnuts, pistaches, pine-apple-seed, some large mace, marrow, and
artichocks bottoms boil'd and cut into quarters, stew all the
foresaid well together; then have some fried tost of manchet or
rowls finely carved. The leg being well boil'd, (dainty and tender)
dish it on French bread, fry some toast of it, and sippets round
about it, broth it, and put on it marrow, and your other materials,
a slic't lemon, and lemon peel, and run it over with beaten butter.

Thicken the broth sometimes with almond paste strained with some of
the broth, or for variety, yolks of eggs and saffron strained with
some of the broth, or saffron only. One may add sometimes some of
the minced meat made up into balls, and stewed amongst the broth,
_&c._


  _To boil a Leg or Knuckle of Veal with Rice._

Boil it in a pipkin, put some salt to it, and scum it, then put to
some mace and some rice finely picked and washed, some raisins of
the sun and gravy; being fine and tender boil'd put in some saffron,
and serve on fine carved sippets, with the rice over all.

Otherwayes with paste cut like small lard, and boil it in thin broth
and saffron.

Or otherways in white broth, with fruit, sweet herbs, white wine and
gooseberries.


  _To boil a Breast of Veal._

Jonyt it well and parboil it a little, then put it in a stewing pan
or deep dish with some strong broth and a bundle of sweet herbs well
bound up, some large mace, and some slices of interlarded bacon, two
or three cloves, some capers, samphire, salt, spinage, yolks of hard
eggs, and white wine; stew all these well together, being tender
boil'd, serve it on fine carved sippets, and broth it; then have
some fryed sweetbreads, sausages of veal or pork, garlick or none,
and run all over with beaten butter, lemon, and fryed parsley over
all. Thus you may boil a rack loin of Veal.


  _To boil a Breast of Veal otherways._

Make a pudding of grated manchet, minced suet, and minced veal,
season it with nutmeg, pepper, salt, three or four eggs, cinamon,
dates, currans, raisins of the sun, some grapes, sugar, and cream;
mingle all together, fill the breast, prick it up, and stew it
between two dishes with white wine, strong broth, mace, dates, and
marrow, being finely stewed serve it on sippets, and run it over
with beaten butter, lemon, barberries or grapes.

Sometimes thick it with some almond-milk, sugar, and cream.


  _To force a Breast of Veal._

Mince some veal or mutton with some beef-suet or fat bacon, some
sweet herbs minced, & seasoned with some cloves, mace, nutmeg,
pepper, two or three raw eggs, and salt; then prick it up: the
breast being filled at the lower end stew it between two dishes,
with some strong broth, white wine, and large mace; then an hour
after have sweet herbs pickt and stript, as tyme, sorrel, parsley,
and sweet marjoram, bruised with the back of a ladle, put it into
your broth with some marrow, and give them a warm; then dish up your
breast of veal on sippets finely carved, broth it, and lay on slic't
lemon, marrow, mace and barberries, and run it over with beaten
butter.

If you will have the broth yellow put thereto saffron, _&c._


  _To boil a Leg of Veal._

Stuff it with beef-suet, sweet herbs chopped, nutmeg and salt, and
boil it in fair water and salt; then take some of the broth, and put
thereto some capers, currans, large mace, a piece of interlarded
bacon, two or three whole cloves, pieces of pears, some boil'd
artichocks suckers, some beaten butter, boil'd marrow, and mace;
then before you dish it up, have sorrel, sage, parsley, time, sweet
marjoram, coursly minced with two or three cuts of a knife, and
bruised with the back of a ladle on a clean board; put them into
your broth to make it green, & give it a walm or two, then dish it
up on fine carved sippets, pour on the broth, and then your other
materials, some gooseberries, barberries, beaten butter and lemon.


  _To boil a Leg of Mutton._

Take a fair leg of mutton, boil it in water and salt, make sauce
with gravy, wine vinegar, white wine, salt, butter, nutmeg, and
strong broth; and being well stewed together, dish it up on fine
carved sippets, and pour on your broth.

Garnish your dish with barberries, capers, and slic't lemon, and
garnish the leg of mutton with the same garnish and run it over with
beaten butter, slic't lemon, and grated nutmeg.


  _To boil a Leg of Mutton otherways._

Take a good leg of mutton, and boil it in water and salt, being
stuffed with sweet herbs chopped with beef-suet, some salt and
nutmeg; then being almost boil'd take up some of the broth into a
pipkin, and put to it some large mace, a few currans, a handful of
French capers, a little sack, the yolks of three or four hard eggs
minced small, and some lemon cut like square dice; being finely
boil'd, dish it on carved sippets, broth it and run it over with
beaten batter, and lemon shred small.


  _Otherways._

Stuff a leg of mutton with parsley being finely picked, boil it in
water and salt, and serve it on a fair dish with parsley and
verjuyce in saucers.


  _Otherways._

Boil it in water and salt not stuffed, and being boiled, stuff it
with lemon in bits like square dice, and serve it with the peel cut
square round about it; make sauce with the gravy, beaten butter,
lemon, and grated nutmeg.


  _Otherways._

Boil it in water and salt, being stuffed with parsley, make sauce
for it with large mace, gravy, chopped parsley, butter, vinegar,
juyce of orange, gooseberries, barberries, grapes, and sugar, serve
it on sippets.


  _To boil peeping Chickens, the best and rarest way, alamode._

Take three or four _French_ manchets, & being chipped, cut a round
hole in the top of them, take out the crum, and make a composition
of the brawn of a roast capon, mince it very fine, and stamp it in a
mortar with marchpane paste, the yolks of hard eggs, mukefied bisket
bread, and the crum of the manchet of one of the breads, some sugar
& sweet herbs chopped small, beaten cinamon, cream, marrow, saffron,
yolks of eggs, and some currans; fill the breads, and boil them in a
napkin in some good mutton or capon broath; but first stop the holes
in the tops of the breads, then stew some sweet-breads of veal, and
six peeping chickens between two dishes, or a pipkin with some mace,
then fry some lamb-stones slic't in batter made of flower, cream,
two or three eggs, and salt; put to it some juyce of spinage, then
have some boil'd sparagus, or bottoms of artichocks boil'd and beat
up in beaten butter and gravy. The materials being well boil'd and
stewed up, dish the boil'd breads in a fair dish with the chickens
round about the breads, then the sweetbreads, and round the dish
some fine carved sippets; then lay on the marrow, fried lamb-stones,
and some grapes; then thicken the broth with strained almonds, some
Cream and Sugar, give them a warm, and broth the meat, garnish it
with canded pistaches, artichocks, grapes, mace, some poungarnet,
and slic't lemon.


  _To hash a Shoulder of Mutton._

Take a Shoulder of Mutton, roast it, and save the gravy, slice one
half, and mince the other, and put it into a pipkin with the
shoulder blade, put to it some strong broth of good mutton or
beef-gravy, large mace, some pepper, salt, and a big onion or two,
a faggot of sweet herbs, and a pint of white wine; stew them well
together close covered, and being tender stewed, put away the fat,
and put some oyster-liquor to the meat, and give it a warm: Then
have three pints of great oysters parboil'd in their own liquor, and
bearded; stew them in a pipkin with large mace, two great whole
onions, a little salt, vinegar, butter, some white-wine, pepper, and
stript tyme; the materials being well stewed down, dish up the
shoulder of mutton on a fine clean dish, and pour on the materials
or hashed mutton, then the stewed oysters over all; with slic't
lemon and fine carved sippets round the dish.


  _To hash a Shoulder of Mutton otherways._

Stew it with claret-wine, only adding these few varieties more than
the other; _viz._ two or three anchoves, olives, capers, samphire,
barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, and in all points else as the
former. But then the shoulder being rosted, take off the skin of the
upper side whole, and when the meat is dished, lay on the upper skin
whole, and cox it.


  _To hash a Shoulder of Mutton the French way._

Take a shoulder of mutton, roast it thorowly, and save the gravy;
being well roasted, cut it in fine thin slices into a stewing pan,
or dish; leave the shoulder bones with some meat on them, and hack
them with your knife; then blow off the fat from the gravy you
saved, and put it to your meat with a quarter of a pint of claret
wine, some salt, and a grated nutmeg; stew all the foresaid things
together a quarter of an hour, and serve it in a fine clean dish
with sippets of French bread; then rub the dish bottom with a clove
of garlick, or an onion, as you please; dish up the shoulder bones
first, and then the meat on that; then have a good lemon cut into
dice work, as square as small dice, and peel all together, and strew
it on the meat; then run it over with beaten butter, and gravy of
Mutton.


  _Scotch Collops of Mutton._

Take a leg of mutton, and take out the bone, leave the leg whole,
and cut large collops round the leg as thin as a half-crown piece;
hack them, then salt and broil them on a clear charcoal fire, broil
them up quick, and the blood will rise on the upper side; then take
them up plum off the fire, and turn the gravy into a dish, this
done, broil the other side, but have a care you broil them not too
dry; then make sauce with the gravy, a little claret wine, and
nutmeg; give the collops a turn or two in the gravy, and dish them
one by one, or two, one upon another; then run them over with the
juyce of orange or lemon.


  _Scotch Collops of a Leg or Loin of Mutton otherways._

Bone a leg of mutton, and cut it cross the grain of the meat, slice
it into very thin slices, & hack them with the back of a knife, then
fry them in the best butter you can get, but first salt them a
little before they be fried; or being not too much fried, pour away
the butter, and put to them some mutton broth or gravy only, give
them a walm in the pan, and dish them hot.

Sometimes for change put to them grated nutmeg, gravy, juyce of
orange, and a little claret wine; and being fried as the former,
give it a walm, run it over with beaten butter, and serve it up hot.

Otherways for more variety, add some capers, oysters, and lemon.


  _To make a Hash of Partridges or Capons._

Take twelve partridges and roast them, and being cold mince them
very fine, the brawns or wings, and leave the legs and rumps whole;
then put some strong mutton broth to them, or good mutton gravy,
grated nutmeg, a great onion or two, some pistaches, chesnuts, and
salt; then stew them in a large earthen pipkin or sauce-pan; stew
the rumps and legs by themselves in strong broth in another pipkin;
then have a fine clean dish, and take a _French_ six penny bread,
chip it, and cover the bottom of the dish, and when you go to dish
the Hash steep the bread with some good mutton broth, or good mutton
gravy; then pour the Hash on the steeped bread, lay the legs and the
rumps on the Hash, with some fried oysters, pistaches, chesnuts,
slic't lemon, and lemon-peel, yolks of eggs strained with juyce of
orange and beaten butter beat together, and run over all; garnish
the dish with carved oranges, lemons, fried oysters, chesnuts, and
pistaches. Thus you may hash any kind of Fowl, whether Water or
Land-Fowl.


  _To hash a Hare._

Flay it and draw it, then cut it into pieces, and wash it in claret
wine and water very clean, strain the liquor, and parboil the
quarters; then take them and slice them, and put them into a dish
with the legs, wings, or shoulders and head whole; cut the chine
into two or three pieces, and put to it two or three great onions,
and some of the liquor where it was parboil'd, stew it between two
dishes close covered till it be tender, and put to it some mace,
pepper, and nutmeg; serve it on fine carved sippets, and run it over
with beaten butter, lemon, marrow and barberries.


  _To hash a Rabit._

Take a Rabit being flayed and wiped clean; then cut off the thighs,
legs, wings, and head, and part the chine into four pieces, put all
into a dish or pipkin, and put to it a pint of white wine, and as
much fair water, gross pepper, slic't ginger, salt, tyme, and some
other sweet herbs being finely minced, and two or three blades of
mace; stew it the space of two hours, and a little before you dish
it take the yolks of six new laid eggs, dissolve them with some
grape verjuyce, give it a walm or two on the fire, and serve it up
hot.


  _To stew or hash Rabits otherways._

Stew them between two dishes as the former, in quarter or pieces as
long as your fingar, with some broth, mace, a bundle of sweet herbs,
salt, and a little white wine, being well stewed down, strain the
yolks of two or three hard eggs with some of the broth, and thicken
the broth where the rabit stews; then have some cabbidg-lettice
boil'd in fair water, and being boil'd tender, put them in beaten
butter with a few boiled raisins of the sun; or in place of lettice
you may use white endive: then the rabits being finely stewed, dish
them upon carved sippets, and lay on the garnish of lettice, mace,
raisins of the sun, grapes, slic't lemon or barberries, broth it,
and scrape on sugar. Thus chickens, pigeons, or partridges.


  _To hash Rabits otherwayes._

Make a forcing or stuffing in the belly of the Rabits, with some
sweet herbs, yolks of hard eggs, parsley, sage, currans, pepper and
salt, and boil them as the former.


  _To hash any Land Fowl._

Take a capon, and hash the wings in fine thin slices, leave the
rumps and legs whole, put them into a pipkin with a little strong
broth, nutmeg, some stewed or pickled mushrooms, and an onion very
small slic't, or as the capon is slic't about the bigness of a three
pence; stew it down with a little butter and gravy, and then dish it
on fine sippets, lay the rumps and legs on the meat, and run it over
with beaten butter, beaten with slices of lemon-peel.


  _To boil Woodcocks or Snipes._

Boil them either in strong broth, or in water and salt, and being
boiled, take out the guts, and chop them small with the liver, put
to it some crumbs of grated white-bread, a little of the broth of
the Cock, and some large mace; stew them together with some gravy,
then dissolve the yolks of two eggs with some wine vinegar, and a
little grated nutmeg, and when you are ready to dish it, put the
eggs to it, and stir it among the sauce with a little butter; dish
them on sippets, and run the sauce over them with some beaten butter
and capers, or lemon minced small, barberries, or whole pickled
grapes.

Sometimes with this sauce boil some slic't onions, and currans
boil'd in a broth by it self; when you boil it with onions, rub the
bottom of the dish with garlick.


  _Boil'd Cocks or Larks otherways._

Boil them with the guts in them, in strong broth, or fair water, and
three or four whole onions, large mace, and salt, the cocks being
boil'd, make sauce with some thin slices of manchet or grated bread
in another pipkin, and some of the broth where the fowl or cocks
boil, then put to it some butter, and the guts and liver minced,
then have some yolks of eggs dissolved with some vinegar and some
grated nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients; stir them together,
and dish the fowl on fine sippets; pour on the sauce with some
slic't lemon, grapes, or barberries, and run it over with beaten
butter.


  _To boil any Land Fowl, as Turkey, Bustard, Pheasant, Peacock,
    Partridge, or the like._

Take a Turkey and flay off the skin, leave the legs and rumps whole,
then mince the flesh raw with some beef-suet or lard, season it with
nutmeg, pepper, salt, and some minced sweet herbs, then put to it
some yolks of raw eggs, and mingle all together, with two bottoms of
boil'd artichocks, roasted chesnuts blanched, some marrow, and some
boil'd skirrets or parsnips cut like dice, or some pleasant pears,
and yolks of hard eggs in quarters, some gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries; fill the skin and prick it up in the back, stew it in a
stewing-pan or deep dish, and cover it with another; but first put
some strong broth to it, some marrow artichocks boil'd and
quartered, large mace, white wine, chesnuts, quarters of pears,
salt, grapes, barberries, and some of the meat made up in balls
stewed with the Turkey being finely boil'd or stewed, serve it on
fine carved sippets, broth it, and lay on the garnish with slices of
lemon, and whole lemon-peel, run it over with beaten butter, and
garnish the dish with chesnuts, yolks of hard eggs, and large mace.

For the lears of thickening, yolks of hard eggs strained with some
of the broth, or strained almond past with some of the broth, or
else strained bread and sorrel.

Otherways you may boil the former fowls either bon'd and trust up
with a farsing of some minc'd veal or mutton, and seasoned as the
former in all points, with those materials, or boil it with the
bones in being trust up. A turkey to bake, and break the bones.

Otherways bone the fowl, and fill the body with the foresaid
farsing, or make a pudding of grated bread, minced suet of beef or
veal, seasoned with cloves, mace, pepper, salt, and grapes, fill the
body, and prick up the back, and stew it as is aforesaid.

Or make the pudding of grated bread beef-suet minc'd some currans,
nutmegs, cloves, sugar, sweet herbs, salt, juyce of spinage; if
yellow, saffron, some minced meat, cream, eggs, and barberries: fill
the fowl and stew it in mutton broth & white wine, with the gizzard,
liver, and bones, stew it down well, then have some artichock
bottoms boil'd and quarter'd, some potatoes boil'd and blanch'd, and
some dates quarter'd, and some marrow boil'd in water and salt; for
the garnish some boil'd skirret or pleasant pears. Then make a lear
of almond paste strained with mutton broth, for the thickning of the
former broth.

Otherways simple, being stuffed with parsley, serve it in with
butter, vinegar, and parsley, boil'd and minced; as also bacon
boil'd on it, or about it, in two pieces; and two saucers of green
sauce.

Or otherways for variety, boil your fowl in water and salt, then
take strong broth, and put in a faggot of sweet herbs, mace, marrow,
cucumber slic't, and thin slices of interlarded bacon, and salt, _&c._


  _To boil Capons, Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons,
    Pheasants or Partridges._

Searce them either with the bone or boned, then take off the skin
whole, with the legs, wings, neck, and head on, mince the body with
some bacon or beef suet, season it with nutmeg, pepper, cloves,
beaten ginger, salt, and a few sweet herbs finely minced and mingled
amongst some three or four yolks of eggs, some sugar, whole grapes,
gooseberries, barberries, and pistaches; fill the skins, and prick
them up in the back, then stew them between two dishes, with some
strong broth, white-wine, butter, some large mace, marrow,
gooseberries and sweet herbs, being stewed, serve them on sippets,
with some marrow and slic't lemon; in winter, currans.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken in white Broth._

First boil the Capon in water and salt, then take three pints of
strong broth, and a quart of white-wine, and stew it in a pipkin
with a quarter of a pound of dates, half a pound of fine sugar, four
or five blades of large mace, the marrow of three marrow bones,
a handful of white endive; stew these in a pipkin very leisurely,
that it may but only simmer; then being finely stewed, and the broth
well tasted, strain the yolks of ten eggs with some of the broth.
Before you dish up the capon or chickens, put in the eggs into the
broth, and keep it stirring, that it may not curdle, give it a warm,
and set it from the fire: the fowls being dished up put on the
broth, and garnish the meat with dates, marrow, large mace, endive,
preserved barberries, and oranges, boil'd skirrets, poungarnet, and
kernels. Make a lear of almond paste and grape verjuice.


  _To boil a Capon in the Italian Fashion with Ransoles,
    a very excellent way._

Take a young Capon, draw it and truss it to boil, pick it very
clean, and lay it in fair water, and parboil it a little, then boil
it in strong broth till it be enough, but first prepare your
Ransoles as followeth: Take a good quantity of beet leaves, and boil
them in fair water very tender, and press out the water clean from
them, then take six sweetbreads of veal, boil and mince them very
small and the herbs also, the marrow of four or five marrow-bones,
and the smallest of the marrow keep, and put it to your minced
sweetbreads and herbs, and keep bigger pieces, and boil them in
water by it self, to lay on the Capon, and upon the top of the dish,
then take raisons of the sun ston'd, and mince them small with half
a pound of dates, and a quarter of a pound of pomecitron minced
small, and a pound of Naples-bisket grated, and put all these
together into a great, large dish or charger, with half a pound of
sweet butter, and work it with your hands into a peice of paste, and
season it with a little nutmeg, cinamon, ginger, and salt, and some
parmisan grated and some fine sugar also and mingle them well, then
make a peice of paste of the finest flower, six yolks of raw eggs,
a little saffron beaten small, half a pound of butter and a little
salt, with some fair water hot, (not boiling) and make up the paste,
then drive out a long sheet with a rowling pin as thin as you can
possible, and lay the ingredients in small heaps, round or long on
the paste, then cover them with the paste, and cut them off with a
jag asunder, and make two hundred or more, and boil them in a broad
kettle of strong broth, half full of liquor; and when it boils put
the Ransols in one by one and let them boil a quarter of an hour;
then take up the Capon into a fair large dish, and lay on the
Ransoles, and stew on them grated cheese or parmisan, and
Naples-bisket grated, cinamon and sugar; and thus between every lay
till you have filled the dish, and pour on melted butter with a
little strong broath, then the marrow, pomecitron, lemons slic't,
and serve it up; or you may fry half the Ransoles in clarified
butter, _&c._


  _A rare Fricase._

Take six pigeon and six chicken-peepers, scald and truss them being
drawn clean, head and all on, then set them, and have some
lamb-stones and sweet-breads blanch'd, parboild and slic't, fry most
of the sweet-breads flowred; have also some asparagus ready, cut off
the tops an inch long, the yolk of two hard eggs, pistaches, the
marrow of six marrow-bones, half the marrow fried green, & white
butter, let it be kept warm till it be almost dinner time; then have
a clean frying-pan, and fry the fowl with good sweet butter, being
finely fryed put out the butter, & put to them some roast mutton
gravy, some large fried oysters and some salt; then put in the hard
yolks of eggs, and the rest of the sweet-breads that are not fried,
the pistaches, asparagus, and half the marrow: then stew them well
in the frying-pan with some grated nutmeg, pepper, a clove or two of
garlick if you please, a little white-wine, and let them be well
stew'd. Then have ten yolks of eggs dissolved in a dish with
grape-verjuice or wine-vinegar, and a little beaten mace, and put it
to the frycase, then have a French six penny loaf slic't into a fair
larg dish set on coals, with some good mutton gravy, then give the
frycase two or three warms on the fire, and pour it on the sops in
the dish; garnish it with fried sweet-breads, fried oysters, fried
marrow, pistaches, slic't almonds and the juyce of two or three
oranges.


  _Capons in Pottage in the _French_ Fashion._

Draw and truss the Capons, set them, & fill their bellies with
marrow; then put them in a pipkin with a knuckle of veal, a neck of
mutton, a marrow bone, and some sweet breads of veal, season the
broth with cloves mace, and a little salt, and set it to the fire;
let it boil gently till the capons be enough, but have a care you
boil them not too much; as your capons boil, make ready the bottoms
and tops of eight or ten rowls of _French_ bread, put them dried
into a fair silver dish, wherein you serve the capons; set it on the
fire, and put to the bread two ladle-full of broth wherein the
capons are boil'd, & a ladlefull of mutton gravy; cover the dish and
let it stand till you dish up the capons; if need require, add now
and then a ladle-full of broth and gravy: when you are ready to
serve it, first lay on the marrow-bone, then the capons on each
side; then fill up the dish with gravy of mutton, and wring on the
juyce of a lemon or two; then with a spoon take off all the fat that
swimmeth on the pottage; garnish the capons with the sweetbreads,
and some carved lemon, and serve it hot.


  _To boil a Capon, Pullet, or Chicken._

Boil them in good mutton broth, white mace, a faggot of sweet herbs,
sage, spinage, marigold leaves and flowers, white or green endive,
borrage, bugloss, parsley, and sorrel, and serve it on sippets.


  _To boil Capons or Chickens with Sage and Parsley._

First boil them in water and salt, then boil some parsley, sage, two
or three eggs hard, chop them; then have a few thin slices of fine
manchet, and stew all together, but break not the slices of bread;
stew them with some of the broth wherein the chickens boil, some
large mace, butter, a little white-wine or vinegar, with a few
barberries or grapes; dish up the chickens on the sauce, and run
them over with sweet butter and lemon cut like dice, the peel cut
like small lard, and boil a little peel with the chickens.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken with divers compositions._

Take off the skin whole, but leave on the legs, wings, and head;
mince the body with some beef suet or lard, put to it some sweet
herbs minced, and season it with cloves, mace, pepper, salt, two or
three eggs, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, bits of potato or
mushroms. In the winter with sugar, currans, and prunes, fill the
skin, prick it up, and stew it between two dishes with large mace
and strong broth, peices of artichocks, cardones, or asparagus, and
marrow: being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets, and run it
over with beaten butter, lemon slic't, and scrape on sugar.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken with Cardones, Mushroms, Artichocks,
    or Oysters._

The foresaid Fowls being parboil'd, and cleansed from the grounds,
stew them finely; then take your Cardones being cleansed and peeled
into water, have a skillet of fair water boiling hot, and put them
therein; being tender boil'd, take them up and fry them in chopt
lard or sweet butter, pour away the butter, and put them into a
pipkin, with strong broth, pepper, mace, ginger, verjuyce, and juyce
of orange; stew all together, with some strained almonds, and some
sweet herbs chopped, give them a warm, and serve your capon or
chicken on sippets.

Let them be fearsed, as you may see in the book of fearst meats, and
wrap your fearst fowl in cauls of veal, half roast them, then stew
them in a pipkin with the foresaid Cardones and broth.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken in the _French_ Fashion,
    with Skirrets or _French_ Beans._

Take a capon and boil it in fair water with a little salt, and a
faggot of tyme and rosemary bound up hard, some parsley and
fennil-roots, being picked and finely cleansed, and two or three
blades of large mace; being almost boil'd, put in two whole onions
boil'd and strained with oyster liquor, a little verjuyce, grated
bread, and some beaten pepper, give it a warm or two, and serve the
capon or chicken on fine carved sippets. Garnish it with orange peel
boil'd in strong broth, and some French beans boil'd, and put in
thick butter, or some skirret, cardones, artichocks, slic't lemon,
mace, or orange.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken with sugar Pease._

When the cods be but young, string them and pick off the husks; then
take two or three handfuls, and put them into a pipkin with half a
pound of sweet butter, a quarter of a pint of fair water, gross
pepper, salt, mace, and some sallet oyl: stew them till they be very
tender, and strain to them three or four yolks of eggs, with six
spoonfuls of sack.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken with Colliflowers._

Cut off the buds of your flowers, and boil them in milk with a
little mace till they be very tender; then take the yolks of two
eggs, and strain them with a quarter of a pint of sack; then take as
much thick butter being drawn with a little vinegar and slic't
lemon, brew them together; then take the flowers out of the milk,
put them to the butter and sack, dish up your capon being tender
boil'd upon sippets finely carved, and pour on the sauce, serve it
to the table with a little salt.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken with Sparagus._

Boil your capon or chicken in fair water and some salt, then put in
their bellies a little mace, chopped parsley, and sweet butter;
being boild, serve them on sippets, and put a little of the broth on
them: then have a bundle or two of sparagus boil'd, put in beaten
butter, and serve it on your capon or chicken.


  _To boil a Capon or Chicken with Rice._

Boil the capon in fair water and salt, then take half a pound of
rice, and boil it in milk; being half boil'd, put away the milk, and
boil it in two quarts of cream, put to it a little rose-water and
large mace, or nutmeg, with the foresaid materials. Being almost
boil'd, strain the yolks of six or seven eggs with a little cream,
and stir all together; give them a warm, and dish up the capon or
chicken, then pour on the rice being seasoned with sugar and salt,
and serve it on fine carved sippets. Garnish the dish with scraped
sugar, orange, preserved barberries, slic't lemon, or pomegranate
kernels, as also the Capon or chicken, and marrow on them.


  _Divers Meats boiled with Bacon hot or cold;
    as Calves-head, any Joynt of Veal, lean Venison,
    Rabits, Turkey, Peacock, Capons, Pullets, Pheasants,
    Pewets, Pigeons, Partridges, Ducks, Mallards, or any Sea Fowl._

Take a leg of veal and soak it in fair water, the blood being well
soaked from it, and white, boil it, but first stuff it with parsley
and other sweet herbs chopped small, as also some yolks of hard eggs
minced, stuff it and boil it in water and salt, then boil the bacon
by it self either stuffed or not, as you please; the veal and bacon
being boil'd white, being dished serve them up, and lay the bacon by
the veal with the rinde on in a whole piece, or take off the rinde
and cut it in four, six, or eight thin slices; let your bacon be of
the ribs, and serve it with parsley strowed on it, green sauce in
saucers, or others, as you may see in the Book of Sauces.


  _Cold otherways._

Boil any of the meats, poultry, or birds abovesaid with the ribs of
bacon, when it is boil'd take off the rind being finely kindled from
the rust and filth, slice it into thin slices, and season it with
nutmeg, cinamon, cloves, pepper, and Fennil-seed all finely beaten,
with fine sugar amongst them, sprinkle over all rose vinegar, and
put some of the slices into your boild capon or other fowl, lay some
slices on it, and lay your capon or other fowl on some blank manger
in a clean dish, and serve it cold.


  _To boil Land Fowl, Sea Fowl, Lamb, Kid, or any Heads
    in the _French_ Fashion, with green Pease or Hasters._

Take pease, shell them, and put them all into boiling mutton broth,
with some thin slices of interlarded bacon; being almost boiled, put
in chopped parsley, some anniseeds, and strain some of the pease,
thicken them or not, as you please; then put some pepper, give it a
warm, and serve Kids or Lambs head on sippets, and stick it
otherways with eggs and grated cheese, or some of the pease or
flower strained; sometimes for variety you may use saffron or mint.


_To boil all other small Fowls, as Ruffes, Brewes, Godwits, Knots,
Dotterels, Strenits, Pewits, Ollines, Gravelens, Oxeyes,
Red-shanks_, &c.

Half roast any of these fowls, and stick on one side a few cloves as
they roast, save the gravy, and being half roasted, put them into a
pipkin, with the gravy, some claret wine, as much strong broth as
will cover them, some broild houshold-bread strained, also mace,
cloves pepper, ginger, some fried onions and salt; stew all well
together, and serve them on fine carved sippets; sometimes for
change add capers and samphire.


  _To boil all manner of small Birds, or Land Fowl,
    as Plovers, Quails, Rails, Black-birds, Thrushes,
    Snites, Wheat-ears, Larks, Sparrows, Martins._

Take them and truss them, or cut off the legs & heads, and boil them
in strong broth or water, scum them, and put in large mace,
white-wine, washed currans, dates, marrow, pepper, and salt; being
well stewed, dish them on fine carved sippets, thicken the broth
with strained almonds, rose-water, and sugar, and garnish them with
lemon, barberries, sugar, or grated bread strewed about the dish.
For Leir otherways, strained bread and hard eggs, with verjuyce and
broth.

Sometimes for variety garnish them with potatoes, farsings, or
little balls of farsed manchet.


  _To boil a Swan, Whopper, wilde or tame Goose, Crane,
    Shoveller, Hern, Ducks, Mallard, Bittorn, Widgeons,
    Gulls, or Curlews._

Take a Swan and bone it, leave on the legs and wings, then make a
farsing of some beef-suet or minced lard, some minced mutton or
venison being finely minced with some sweet herbs, beaten nutmeg,
pepper, cloves, and mace; then have some oysters parboil'd in their
own liquor, mingle them amongst the minced meat, with some raw eggs,
and fill the body of the fowl, prick it up close on the back, and
boil it in a stewing-pan or deep dish, then put to the fowl some
strong broth, large mace, white-wine, a few cloves, oyster-liquor,
and some boil'd marrow; stew them all well together: then have
oysters stewed by themselves with an onion or two, mace, pepper,
butter, and a little white-wine. Then have the bottoms of artichocks
ready boild, and put in some beaten butter, and boil'd marrow; dish
up the fowl on fine carved sippets, then broth them, garnish them
with stewed oysters, marrow, artichocks, gooseberries, slic't lemon,
barberries or grapes and large mace; garnish the dish with grated
bread, oysters, mace, lemon and artichocks, and run the fowl over
with beaten butter.

Otherways fill the body with a pudding made of grated bread, yolks
of eggs, sweet herbs minced small, with an onion, and some beef-suet
minced, some beaten cloves, mace, pepper, and salt, some of the
blood of the fowl mixed with it, and a little cream; fill the fowl,
and stew it or boil it as before.


  _To boil any large Water Fowl otherways, a Swan, Whopper,
    wild or tame Geese._

Take a goose and salt it two or three days, then truss it to boil,
cut lard as big as your little finger, and lard the breast; season
the lard with pepper, mace, and salt; then boil it in beef-broth, or
water and salt, put to it pepper grosly beaten, a bundle of
bay-leaves, tyme, and rosemary bound up very well, boil them with
the fowl; then prepare some cabbidge boild tender in water and salt,
squeeze out the water from it, and put it in a pipkin with strong
broth, claret wine, and a good big onion or two; season it with
pepper, mace, and salt, and three or four anchovies dissolved; stew
these together with a ladleful of sweet butter, and a little
vinegar: and when the goose is boil'd enough, and your cabbidge on
sippets, lay on the goose with some cabbidge on the breast, and
serve it up. Thus you may dress any large wild Fowl.


  _To boil all manner of small Sea or Land Fowl._

Boil the fowl in water and salt, then take some of the broth, and
put to it some beefs-udder boild, and slic't into thin slices with
some pistaches blanch'd, some slic't sausages stript out of the
skin, white-wine, sweet, herbs, and large mace; stew these together
till you think it sufficiently boiled, then put to it beet-root cut
into slices, beat it up with butter, and carve up the Fowl, pour the
broth on it, and garnish it with sippets, or what you please.


  _Or thus._

Take and lard them, then half roast them, draw them, and put them in
a pipkin with some strong broth or claret wine, some chesnuts,
a pint of great oysters, taking the breads from them, two or three
onions minced very small, some mace, a little beaten ginger, and a
crust of _French_ bread grated; thicken it, and dish them up on
sops: If no oysters, chesnuts, or artichock bottoms, turnips,
colliflowers, interlarded bacon in thin slices, and sweetbreads,
_&c._


  _Otherways._

Take them and roast them, save the gravy, and being roasted, put
them in a pipkin, with the gravy, some slic't onions, ginger,
cloves, pepper, salt, grated bread, claret wine, currans, capers,
mace, barberries, and sugar, serve them on fine sippets, and run
them over with beaten butter, slic't lemon, and lemon peel;
sometimes for change use stewed oysters or cockles.


  _To boil or dress any Land Fowl, or Birds in the Italian fashion,
    in a Broth called _Brodo-Lardiero_._

Take six Pigeons being finely cleansed, and trust, put them into a
pipkin with a quart of strong broth, or water, and half wine, then
put therein some fine slices of interlarded bacon, when it boils
scum it, and put in nutmeg, mace, ginger, pepper, salt, currans,
sugar, some sack, raisins of the sun, prunes, sage, dryed cherries,
tyme, a little saffron, and dish them on fine carved sippets.


  _To stew Pigeons in the _French_ fashion._

The Pigeons being drawn and trust, make a fearsing or stopping of
some sweet herbs minced, then mince some beef-suet or lard, grated
bread, currans, cloves, mace, pepper, ginger, sugar, & 3 or 4 raw
eggs. The pigeons being larded & half roasted, stuff them with the
foresaid fearsing, and put boil'd cabbidge stuck with a few cloves
round about them; bind up every Pigeon several with packthread, then
put them in a pipkin a boiling with strong mutton broth, three or
four yolks of hard eggs minced small, some large mace, whole cloves,
pepper, salt, and a little white-wine; being boil'd, serve them on
fine carved sippets, and strow on cinamon, ginger, and sugar.


  _Otherways in the _French_ Fashion._

Take Pigeons ready pull'd or scalded, take the flesh out of the
skin, and leave the skin whole with the legs and wings hanging to
it, mince the bodies with some lard or beef suet together very
small, then put to them some sweet herbs finely minced, and season
all with cloves, mace, ginger, pepper, some grated bread or parmisan
grated, and yolks of eggs; fill again the skins, and prick them up
in the back, then put them in a dish with some strong broth, and
sweet herbs chopped, large mace, gooseberries, barberries, or
grapes; then cabbidge-lettice boil'd in water and salt, put to them
butter, and the Pigeons being boil'd, serve them on sippets.


  _To boil Pigeons otherways._

Being trussed, put them in a pipkin, with some strong broth or fair
water, boil and scum them, then put in some mace, a faggot of sweet
herbs, white endive, marigold flowers, and salt; and being finely
boiled, serve them on sippets, and garnish the dish with mace and
white endive flowers.

Otherways you may add Cucumbers in quarters either pickled or fresh,
and some pickled capers; or boil the cucumbers by themselves, and
put them in beaten butter, and sweet herbs chopped small.

Or boil them with capers, samphire, mace, nutmeg, spinage, endive,
and a rack or chine of mutton boil'd with them.

Or else with capers, mace, salt, and sweet herbs in a faggot; then
have some cabbidge or colliflowers boil'd very tender in fair water
and salt, pour away the water, and put them in beaten butter, and
when the fowls be boil'd, serve the cabbidge on them.


  _To boil Pigeons otherwaies._

Take Pigeons being finely cleansed and trust, put them in a pipkin
or skillet clean scowred, with some mutton broth or fair water; set
them a boiling and scum them clean, then put to them large mace, and
well washed currans, some strained bread strained with vinegar and
broth, put it to the Pigeons with some sweet butter and capers; boil
them very white, and being boil'd, serve them on fine carved sippets
in the broth with some sugar; garnish them with lemon, fine sugar,
mace, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, and run them over with
beaten butter; garnish the dish with grated manchet.


  Pottages.


  _Pottage in the _Italian_ Fashion._

Boil green pease with some strong broth, and interlarded bacon cut
into slices; the pease being boiled, put to them some chopped
parsley, pepper, anniseed, and strain some of the pease to thicken
the broth; give it a walm and serve it on sippets, with boil'd
chickens, pigeons, kids, or lambs-heads, mutton, duck, mallard, or
any poultry.

Sometimes for variety you may thicken the broth with eggs.


  _Pottage otherways in the Italian Fashion._

Boil a rack of mutton, a few whole cloves, mace, slic't ginger, all
manner of sweet herbs chopped, and a little salt; being finely
boiled, put in some strained almond-paste, with grape verjuyce,
saffron, grapes, or gooseberries; give them a warm, and serve your
meat on sippets.


  _Pottage of Mutton, Veal, or Beef, in the _English_ Fashion._

Cut a rack of mutton in two pieces, and take a knuckle of veal, and
boil it in a gallon pot or pipkin, with good store of herbs, and a
pint of oatmeal chopped amongst the herbs, as tyme, sweet marjoram,
parsley, chives, salet, succory, marigold-leaves and flowers,
strawberry-leaves, violet-leaves, beets, borage, sorrel, bloodwort,
sage, pennyroyal; and being finely boil'd, serve them on fine carved
sippets with the mutton and veal, _&c._


  _To stew a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters._

Take a shoulder of mutton, and roast it, and being half roasted or
more, take off the upper skin whole, & cut the meat into thin
slices, then stew it with claret, mace, nutmeg, anchovies,
oyster-liquor, salt, capers, olives, samphire, and slices of orange;
leave the shoulder blade with some meat on it, and hack it, save
also the marrow bone whole with some meat on it, and lay it in a
clean dish; the meat being finely stewed, pour it on the bones, and
on that some stewed oysters and large oysters over all, with slic't
lemon and lemon peel.

The skin being first finely breaded, stew the oysters with large
mace, a great onion or two, butter, vinegar, white wine, a bundle of
sweet herbs, and lay on the skin again over all, _&c._


  _To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Onions and Parsley,
    and baste it with Oranges._

Stuff it with parsley and onions, or sweet herbs, nutmeg, and salt,
and in the roasting of it, baste it with the juyce of oranges, save
the gravy and clear away the fat; then stew it up with a slice or
two of orange and an anchovie, without any fat on the gravy, _&c._


  _Other Hashes of Scotch Collops._

Cut a leg of mutton into thin slices as thin as a shilling, cross
the grain of the leg, sprinkle them lightly with salt, and fry them
with sweet butter, serve them with gravy or juice of oranges, and
nutmeg, and run them over with beaten butter, lemon, _&c._


  _Otherways the foresaid Collops._

For variety, sometimes season them with coriander-seed, or stamped
fennil-seed, pepper and salt; sprinkle them with white wine, then
flower'd, fryed, and served with juice of orange, for sauce, with
sirrup of rose-vinegar, or elder vinegar.


  _Other Hashes or Scotch Collop of any Joint of Veal,
    either in Loyn, Leg, Rack or Shoulder._

Cut a leg into thin slices, as you do Scotch collops of mutton, hack
and fry them with small thin slices of interlarded bacon as big as
the slices of veal, fry them with sweet butter; and being finely
fried, dish them up in a fine dish, put from them the butter that
you fried them with, and put to them beaten butter with lemon,
gravy, and juyce of orange.


  _A Hash of a Leg of Mutton in the _French_ fashion._

Parboil a leg of mutton, then take it up, pare off some thin slices
on the upper and under side, or round it, prick the leg through to
let out the gravy on the slices; then bruise some sweet herbs, as
tyme, parsly, marjoram, savory, with the back of a ladle, and put to
it a piece of sweet butter, pepper, verjuyce; and when your mutton
is boild, pour all over the slices herbs and broth on the leg into a
clean dish.


  _Another Hash of Mutton or Lamb, either hot or cold._

Roast a shoulder of mutton, and cut it into slices, put to it
oysters, white wine, raisins of the sun, salt, nutmeg, and strong
broth, (or no raisins) slic't lemon or orange; stew it all together,
and serve it on sippets, and run it over with beaten butter and
lemon, _&c._


  _Another Hash of a Joynt of Mutton or Lamb hot or cold._

Cut it in very thin slices, then put them in a pipkin or dish, and
put to it a pint of claret wine, salt, nutmeg, large mace, an
anchovie or two, stew them well together with a little gravy; and
being finely stewed serve them on carved sippets with some beaten
butter & lemon, _&c._


  _Otherways._

Cut it into thin slices raw, and fry it with a pint of white wine
till it be brown, and put them into a pipkin with slic't lemon,
salt, fried parsley, gravy, nutmeg, and garnish your dish with
nutmeg and lemon.


  _Other Hashes of a Shoulder of Mutton._

Boil it and cut it in thin slices, hack the shoulder-blade, and put
all into a pipkin or deep dish, with some salt, gravy, white-wine,
some strong broth, and a faggot of sweet herbs, oyster-liquor,
caper-liquor, and capers; being stewed down, bruse some parsley, and
put to it some beaten cloves and mace, and serve it on sippets.


  Divers made Dishes or _Capilotado's_.


  _First, a Dish of Chines of Mutton, Veal, Capon, Pigeons,
    or other Fowls._

Boil a pound of rice in mutton broth, put to it some blanched
chesnuts, pine apple-seeds, almonds or pistaches; being boil'd
thick, put to it some marrow or fresh butter, salt, cinamon, and
sugar; then cut your veal into small bits or peices, and break up
the fowl; then have a fair dish, and set it on the embers, and put
some of your rice, and some of the meat, and more of the rice and
sugar, and cinamon, and pepper over all, and some marrow.


  __Capilotado_, in the _Lumbardy_ fashion of a Capon._

Boil rice in mutton broth till it be very thick, and put to it some
salt and sugar.

Then have also some Bolonia Sausages boil'd very tender, minced very
small, or grated, and some grated cheese, sugar, and cinamon mingled
together; then cut up the boil'd or roast capon, and lay it upon a
clean dish with some of the rice, strow on cinamon and sausage,
grated cheese and sugar, and lay on yolks of raw eggs; thus make two
or three layings and more, eggs and some butter or marrow on the top
of all, and set it on the embers, and cover it, or in a warm oven.


  __Capilotado_ of Pigeons or wild Ducks,
    or any Land or Sea Fowls roasted._

Take a pound of almond-paste, and put to it a Capon minc't and
stamped with the almonds, & some crums of manchet, some sack or
white-wine, three pints of strong broth cold, and eight or ten yolks
of raw eggs; strain all the foresaid together, and boil it in a
skillet with some sugar to a pretty thickness, put to it some
cinamon, nutmeg, and a few whole cloves, then have roast Pigeons, or
any small birds roasted, cut them up, and do as is aforesaid, and
strow on sugar and cinamon.


  __Capilotado_ for roast Meats, as Partridges, Pigeons,
    eight or twelve, or any other the like;
    or Sea Fowls, Ducks, or Widgeons._

Take a pound of almonds, a pound of currans, a pound of sugar, half
a pound of muskefied bisket-bread, a pottle of strong broth cold,
half a pint of grape verjuyce, pepper half an ounce, nutmegs as
much, an ounce of cinamon, and a few cloves; all these aforesaid
stamped, strained, and boil'd with the aforesaid liquor, and in all
points as the former, only toasts must be added.


  _Other _Capilotado_ common._

Take two pound of parmisan grated, a minced kidney of veal, a pound
of other fat cheese, ten cloves of garlick boil'd, broth or none,
two capons minced and stamped, rost or boil'd, and put to it ten
yolks of eggs raw, with a pound of sugar: temper the foresaid with
strong broth, and boil all in a broad skillet or brass pan, in the
boiling stir it continually till it be incorporated, and put to it
an ounce of cinamon, a little pepper, half an ounce of cloves, and
as much nutmeg beaten, some saffron; then break up your roast fowls,
roast lamb, kid, or fried veal, make three bottoms, and set it into
a warm oven, till you serve it in, _&c._


  __Capilotado_, or Custard, in the Hungarian fashion,
    in the pot, or baked in an Oven._

Take two quarts of goat or cows milk, or two quarts of cream, and
the whites of five new laid eggs, yolks and all, or ten yolks,
a pound of sugar, half an ounce of cinamon, a little salt, and some
saffron; strain it and bake it in a deep dish; being baked, put on
the juyce of four or five oranges, a little white wine, rose-water,
and beaten ginger, _&c._


  _Capilotado Francois._

Roast a leg of mutton, save the gravy, and mince it small, then
strain a pound of almond paste with some mutton or capon broth cold,
some three pints and a half of grape verjuyce, a pound of sugar,
some cinamon, beaten pepper, and salt; the meat and almonds being
stamp'd and strained, put it a boiling softly, and stir it
continually, till it be well incorporate and thick; then serve it in
a dish with some roast chickens, pigeons, or capons: put the gravy
to it, and strow on sugar, some marrow, cinamon, _&c._

Sometimes you may add some interlarded bacon instead of marrow, some
sweet herbs, and a kidney of veal.

Sometimes eggs, currans, saffron, gooseberries, _&c._


  _Other made Dishes, or little Pasties called in Italian _Tortelleti_._

Take a rost or boil'd capon, and a calves udder, or veal, mince it
and stamp it with some marrow, mint, or sweet marjoram, put a pound
of fat parmisan grated to it, half a pound of sugar, and a quarter
of a pound of currans, some chopped sweet herbs, pepper, saffron,
nutmeg, cinamon, four or five yolks of eggs, and two whites; mingle
all together and make a piece of paste of warm or boiling liquor,
and some rose-water, sugar, butter; make some great and some very
little, rouls or stars, according to the judgment of the Cook; boil
them in broth, milk, or cream. Thus also fish. Serve them with
grated fat cheese or parmisan, sugar, and beaten cinamon on them in
a dish, _&c._


  _Tortelleti, or little Pasties._

Mince some interlarded bacon, some pork or any other meat, with some
calves udder, and put to it a pound of fresh cheese, fat cheese, or
parmisan, a pound of sugar, and some roasted turnips or parsnips,
a quarter of a pound of currans, pepper, cloves, nutmegs, eight
eggs, saffron; mingle all together, and make your pasties like
little fishes, stars, rouls, or like beans or pease, boil them in
flesh broth, and serve them with grated cheese and sugar, and serve
them hot.


  __Tortelleti_, or little Pasties otherwayes, of Beets or Spinage
    chopped very small._

Being washed and wrung dry, fry them in butter, put to them some
sweet herbs chopped small, with some grated parmisan, some cinamon,
cloves, saffron, pepper, currans, raw eggs, and grated bread: Make
your pasties, and boil them in strong broth, cream, milk, or
almond-milk: thus you may do any fish. Serve them with sugar,
cinamon, and grated cheese.


  __Tortelleti_, of green Pease, French Beans,
    or any kind of Pulse green or dry._

Take pease gren or dry, French beans, or garden beans green or dry,
boil them tender, and stamp them; strain them through a strainer,
and put to them some fried onions chopped small, sugar, cinamon,
cloves, pepper, and nutmeg, some grated parmisan, or fat cheese, and
some cheese-curds stamped.

Then make paste, and make little pasties, boil them in broth, or as
beforesaid, and serve them with sugar, cinamon, and grated cheese in
a fine clean dish.


  _To boil a Capon or chicken with Colliflowers
    in the French Fashion._

Cut off the buds of your flowers, and boil them in milk with a
little mace till they be very tender; then take the yolks of 2 eggs,
strain them with a quarter of a pint of sack; then take as much
thick butter, being drawn with a little vinegar and a slic't lemon,
brew them together; then take the flowers out of the milk, and put
them into the butter and sack: then dish up your Capon, being tender
boil'd, upon sippets finely carved, and pour on the sauce, and serve
it to the Table with a little salt.


  _To boil Capons, Chickens, Pigeons, or any Land Fowls
    in the French Fashion._

Either the skin stuffed with minced meat, or boned, & fill the vents
and body; or not boned and trust to boil, fill the bodies with any
of the farsings following made of any minced meat, and seasoned with
pepper, cloves, mace, and salt; then mince some sweet herbs with
bacon and fowl, veal, mutton, or lamb, and mix with it three or four
eggs, mingle all together with grapes, gooseberries, barberries, or
red currans, and sugar, or none, some pine-apple-seed, or pistaches;
fill the fowl, and stew it in a stewing-pan with some strong broth,
as much as will cover them, and a little white wine; being stewed,
serve them in a dish with sippets finely carved, and slic't oranges,
lemons, barberries, gooseberries, sweet herbs chopped, and mace.


  _To boil Partridges, or any of the former Fowls
    stuffed with any the filling aforesaid._

Boil them in a pipkin with strong broth, white-wine, mace, sweet
herbs chopped very fine, and put some salt, and stew them leisurely;
being finely stewed, put some marrow, and strained almonds, with
rosewater to thicken it, serve them on fine carved sippets, and
broth them, garnish the dish with grated bread and pistaches, mace,
and lemon, or grapes.


  _To boil Pigeons, Woodcocks, Snites, Black birds, Thrushes,
    Veldifers, Rails, Quails, Larks, Sparrows, Wheat ears,
    Martins, or any small Land Fowl._


  _Woodcocks or Snites._

Boil them either in strong broth or water and salt, and being
boil'd, take out the guts, and chop them small with the liver, put
to it some crumb of white-bread grated, a little of the broth of the
cock, and some large mace, stew them together with some gravy; then
dissolve the yolks of two eggs with some wine vinegar, and a little
grated nutmeg, and when you are ready to dish it, put the eggs to
it, and stir it amongst the sauce with a little butter, dish them on
sippets, and run the sauce over them with some beaten butter and
capers, lemon minced small, barberries or pickled grapes whole.

Sometimes with this sauce, boil some slic't onions and currans in a
broth by it self: when you boil it not with onions, rub the bottom
of the dish with a clove or two of garlick.


  _Boil Woodcocks or Larks otherways._

Take them with the guts in, and boil them in some strong broth or
fair water, and three or four whole onions, larg mace, and salt; the
cocks being boil'd, make sauce with the some thin slices of manchet,
or grated, in another pipkin, and some of the broth where the fowl
or cocks boil, and put to it some butter, the guts and liver minced,
and then have some yolks of eggs dissolved with some vinegar & some
grated nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients, and stir them
together, and dish the fowl on fine sippets, and pour on the sauce
and some slic't lemon, grapes, or barberries, and run it over with
beaten buter.


_To boil all manner of Sea Fowl, or any wild Fowl, as Swan, Whopper,
Crane, Geese, Shoveler, Hern, Bittorn, Duck, Widgeons, Gulls,
Curlew, Teels, Ruffs,_ &c.

Stuff either the skin with his own meat, being minced with lard or
beef-suet, some sweet herbs, beaten nutmeg, cloves, mace, and
parboil'd oysters; mix all together, fill the skin, and prick it
fast on the back, boil it in a large stewing pan or deep dish, with
some strong broth, claret or white-wine, salt, large mace, two or
three cloves, a bundle of sweet herbs, or none, oyster-liquor and
marrow, stew all well together. Then have stewed oysters by
themselves ready stewed with an onion or two, mace, pepper, butter,
and a little white-wine.

Then have the bottoms of artichocks put in beaten butter, and some
boild marrow ready also; then again dish up the fowl on fine carved
sippets, broth the fowl, & lay on the oysters, artichocks, marrow,
barberries, slic't lemon, gooseberries, or grape; and garnish your
dish with grated manchet strowed, and some oysters, mace, lemon, and
artichocks, and run it over with beaten butter.

Otherways bone it and fill the body with a farsing or stuffing made
of minced mutton with spices, and the same materials as aforesaid.

Otherways, Make a pudding and fill the body, being first boned, and
make the pudding of grated bread, sweet herbs chopped; onions,
minced suet or lard, cloves, mace, pepper, salt, blood, and cream;
mingle all together, as beforesaid in all points.

Or a bread pudding without blood or onions, and put minced meat to
it, fruit, and sugar.

Otherways, boil them in strong broth, claret-wine, mace, cloves,
salt, pepper, saffron, marrow, minced, onions, and thickned with
strained sweet-breads of veal; or hard eggs strained with broth, and
garnished with barberries, lemon, grapes, red currans, or
gooseberries.


_To boil all manner of Sea Fowls, as Swan, Whopper, Geese, Ducks,
Teels._ &c.

Put your fowl being cleansed and trussed into a pipkin fit for it,
and boil it with strong broth or fair spring water, scum it clean,
and put in three or four slic't onions, some large mace, currans,
raisins, some capers, a bundle of sweet herbs, grated or strained
bread, white-wine, two or three cloves, and pepper; being finely
boil'd, slash it on the breast, and dish it on fine carved sippets;
broth it, and lay on slic't lemon and a lemon peel, barberries or
grapes, run it over with beaten butter, sugar, or ginger, and trim
the dish sides with grated bread in place of the beaten ginger.


  _To boil these Fowls otherways._

You may add some oyster liquor, barberries, grapes, gooseberries, or
lemon.

And sometimes prunes, raisins, or currans.

Otherways, half roast any of your fowls, slash them down the breast,
and put them in a pipkin with the breast downward, put to them two
or three slic't onions and carrots cut like lard, some mace, pepper,
and salt, butter, savory, tyme, some strong broth, and some
white-wine; let the broth be half wasted, and stew it very softly;
being finely stewed dish it up, serve it on sippets, and pour on the
broth, _&c._

Otherways boil the fowl and not roast them, boil them in strong
mutton broth, and put the fowl into a pipkin, boil and scum them,
put to it slic't onions, a bunch of sweet herbs, some cloves, mace,
whole pepper, and salt; then slash the breast from end to end 3 or
four slashes, and being boil'd, dish it up on fine carved sippets,
put some sugar to it, and prick a few cloves on the breast of the
fowl, broth it and strow on fine sugar, and grated bread.


  _Otherways._

Put them in a stewing pan with some wine and strong broth, and when
they boil scum them, then put to them some slices of interlarded
bacon, pepper, mace, ginger, cloves, cinamon, sugar, raisins of the
sun, sage flowers, or seeds or leaves of sage; serve them on fine
carved sippets and trim the dish sides with sugar or grated bread.

Or you may make a farsing of any of the foresaid fowls, make it of
grated cheese, and some of their own fat, two or three eggs, nutmeg,
pepper, and ginger, sowe up the vents, boil them with bacon, and
serve them with a sauce made of almond paste, a clove of garlick,
and roasted turnips or green sauce.


  _To boil any old Geese, or any Geese._

Take them being powdered, and fill their bellies with oatmeal, being
steeped first in warm milk or other liquor; then mingle it with some
beef-suet, minced onions, and apples, seasoned with cloves, mace,
some sweet herbs minced, and pepper, fasten the neck and vent, boil
it, and serve it on brewes with colliflowers, cabbidge, turnips, and
barberries, run it over with beaten butter.

Thus the smaller Fowls, as is before specified, or any other.


  _To boil wild Fowl otherways._

Boil your Fowl in strong broth or water, scum it clean, and put some
white-wine to it, currans, large mace, a clove or two, some Parsley
and Onions minced together: then have some stewed turnips cut like
lard, and stewed in a pot or little pipkin with butter, mace,
a clove, white-wine, and sugar; Being finely stewed serve your fowl
on sippets finely carved, broth the fowls, and pour on your Turnips,
run it over with beaten butter, a little cream, yolks of eggs, sack
and sugar. Scraped sugar to trim the dish, or grated bread.


  _Otherways._

Half roast your fowls, save the gravy, and carve the breast jagged;
then put it in a pipkin, and stick here and there a clove, and put
some slic't onions, chopped parsley, slic't ginger, pepper, and
gravy, strained bread, with claret wine, currans, or capers, broth,
mace, barberries, and sugar; being finely boil'd or stewed, serve it
on carved sippets, and run it over with beaten butter, and a lemon
peel.


  _To boil these aforesaid Fowls otherways, with Muscles, Oysters,
    or Cockcles; or fried Wickles in Butter, and after stewed with
    Butter, white Wine, Nutmeg, a slic't Orange, and gravy._

Either boil the Fowl or roast them, boil them by themselves in water
and salt, scum them clean, and put to them mace, sweet herbs, and
onions chopped together, some white-wine, pepper, and sugar, if you
please, and a few cloves stuck in the fowls, some grated or strained
bread with some of the broth, and give it a warm; dish up the fowls
on fine sippets, or French bread, and carve the breast, broth it,
and pour on your shell-fish, run it over with beaten butter, and
slic't lemon or orange.


  _Otherways in the French Fashion._

Half roast the fowls, and put them in a pipkin with the gravy, then
have time, parsley, sage, marjoram, & savory; mince all together
with a handful of raisins of the Sun, put them into the pipkin with
some mutton broth, some sack or white-wine, large mace, cloves,
salt, and sugar.

Then have the other half of the fruit and herbs being minced, beat
them with the white of an egg, and fry it in suet or butter as big
as little figs and they will look green.

Dish up the fowls on sippets, broth it, and serve the fried herbs
with eggs on them and scraped sugar.


  _To boil Goose-Giblets, or the Giblets of any Fowl._

Boil them whole, being finely scalded; boil them in water and salt,
two or three blades of mace, and serve them on sippets finely carved
with beaten butter, lemon, scalded gooseberries, and mace, or
scalded grapes, barberries or slic't lemon.

Or you may for variety use the yolks of two or three eggs, beatten
butter, cream, a little sack, and sugar, for lear.


  _Otherways._

Boil them whole, or in pieces, and boil them in strong broth or fair
water, mace, pepper, and salt, being first finely scummed, put two
or three whole onions, butter, and gooseberries, run it over with
beaten butter, being first dished on sippetts; make a pudding in the
neck, as you may see in the Book of all manner of Puddings and
Farsings, _&c._


  _Otherways._

Boil them with some white-wine, strong broth, mace, slic't ginger,
butter, and salt; then have some stewed turnips or carrots cut like
lard, and the giblets being finely dished on sippets, put on the
stewed turnips, being thickned with eggs, verjuyce, sugar, and
lemon, _&c._


  _To bake Goose Giblets, or of any Fowl, several ways
    for the Garnish._

Take Giblets being finely scalded and cleansed, season them lightly
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and put them into a Pye, being well
joynted, and put to them an onion or two cut in halves, and put some
butter to them, and close them up, and bake them well, and soak them
some three hours.


  _Sauce for green-Geese._

1. Take the juyce of sorrell mixed with scalded goose-berries, and
served on sippets and sugar with beaten butter, _&c._


  _Otherways._

2. Their bellies roasted full of gooseberies, and after mixed with
sugar, butter, verjuyce, and cinamon, and served on sippets.


  _To make a grand Sallet of minced Capon, Veal, roast Mutton,
    Chicken or Neats tongue._

Minced capon or veal, _&c._ dried Tongues in thin slices, lettice
shred small as the tongue, olives, capers, mushrooms, pickled
samphire, broom-buds, lemon or oranges, raisins, almonds, blew figs,
Virginia potato, caparones, or crucifix pease, currans, pickled
oysters, taragon.


  _How to dish it up._

Any of these being thin sliced, as is shown above said, with a
little minced taragon and onion amongst it; then have lettice minced
as small as the meat by it self, olives by themselves, capers by
themselves, samphire by it self, broom-buds by it self, pickled
mushrooms by themselves, or any of the materials abovesaid.

Garnish the dish with oranges and lemons in quarters or slices, oyl
and vinegar beaten together, and poured over all, _&c._


  _To boil all manner of Land Fowl, as followeth._

Turkey, Bustard Peacock, Capon, Pheasant, Pullet, Heath-pouts,
Partridge, Chickens, Woodcocks, Stock-Doves, Turtle-Doves, tame
Pigeons, wild Pigeons, Rails, Quails, Black-Birds, Thrushes,
Veldifers, Snites, Wheatears, Larks, Sparrows, and the like.


  _Sauce for the Land Fowl._

Take boil'd prunes and strain them with the blood of the fowl,
cinamon, ginger, and sugar, boil it to an indifferent thickness and
serve it in saucers, and serve in the dish with the fowl, gravy,
sauce of the same fowl.


  _To boil Pigeons._

Take Pigeons, and when you have farsed and boned them, fry them in
butter or minced lard, and put to them broth, pepper, nutmeg, slic't
ginger, cinamon beaten, coriander seed, raisins of the sun, currans,
vinegar, and serve them with this sauce, being first steep'd in it
four or five hours, and well stewed down.

Or you may add some quince or dried cherries boil'd amongst.

In summer you may use damsins, swet herbs chopped, grapes, bacon in
slices, white-wine.

Thus you may boil any small birds, Larks, Veldifers, Black-birds,
_&c._


  _Pottage in the French Fashion._

Cut a breast of mutton into square bits or pieces, fry them in
butter, & put them in a pipkin with some strong broth, pepper, mace,
beaten ginger, and salt; stew it with half a pound of strained
almonds, some mutton broth, crumbs of manchet, and some verjuyce;
give it a warm, and serve it on sippets.

If you would have it yellow, put in saffron; sometimes for change
white-wine, sack, currans, raisins, and sometimes incorporated with
eggs and grated cheese.

Otherways change the colour green, with juyce of spinage, and put to
it almonds strained.


  _Pottage otherways in the French Fashion of Mutton, Kid, or Veal._

Take beaten oatmeal and strain it with cold water, then the pot
being boiled and scummed, put in your strained oatmeal, and some
whole spinage, lettice, endive, colliflowers, slic't onions, white
cabbidge, and salt; your pottage being almost boil'd, put in some
verjuyce, and give it a warm or two; then serve it on sippets, and
put the herbs on the meat.


  _Pottage in the English Fashion._

Take the best old pease you can get, wash and boil them in fair
water, when they boil scum them, and put in a piece of interlarded
bacon about two pound, put in also a bundle of mint, or other sweet
herbs; boil them not too thick, serve the bacon on sippets in thin
slices, and pour on the broth.


  _Pottage without sight of Herbs._

Mince your herbs and stamp them with your oatmeal, then strain them
through a strainer with some of the broth of the pot, boil them
among your mutton, & some salt; for your herbs take violet leaves,
strawberry leaves, succory, spinage, lang de beef, scallions,
parsley, and marigold flowers, being well boil'd, serve it on
sippets.


  _To make Sausages._

Take the lean of a leg of pork, and four pound of beef-suet, mince
them very fine, and season them with an ounce of pepper, half an
ounce of cloves and mace, a handful of sage minced small, and a
handful of salt; mingle all together, then brake in ten eggs, and
but two whites; mix these eggs with the other meat, and fill the
hogs guts; being filled, tie the ends, and boil them when you use
them.


  _Otherways._

You may make them of mutton, veal, or beef, keeping the order
abovesaid.


  _To make most rare Sausages without skins._

Take a leg of young pork, cut off all the lean, and mince it very
small, but leave none of the strings or skins amongst it; then take
two pound of beef-suet shred small, two handfuls of red sage,
a little pepper, salt, and nutmeg, with a small peice of an onion;
mince them together with the flesh and suet, and being finely
minced, put the yolks of two or three eggs, and mix all together,
make it into a paste, and when you will use it, roul out as many
peices as you please in the form of an ordinary sausage, and fry
them. This paste will keep a fortnight upon occasion.


  _Otherways._

Stamp half the meat and suet, and mince the other half, and season
them as the former.


  _To make Links._

Take the fillet or a leg of pork, and cut it into dice work, with
some of the fleak of the pork cut in the same form, season the meat
with cloves, mace and pepper, a handful of sage fine minced, with a
handful of salt; mingle all together, fill the guts and hang them in
the air, and boil them when you spend them. These Links will serve
to stew with divers kinds of meats.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION II.

  _An hundred and twelve excellent wayes for the dressing of Beef._


  _To boil Oxe-Cheeks._

Take them and bone them, soak them in fair water four or five hours,
then wash out the blood very clean, pair off the ruff of the mouth,
and take out the balls of the eyes; then stuff them with sweet
herbs, hard eggs, and fat, or beef-suet, pepper, and salt; mingle
all together, and stuff them on the inside, prick both the insides
together; then boil them amongst the other beef, and being very
tender boild, serve them on brewis with interlarded bacon and
_Bolonia_ sausages, or boiled links made of pork on the cheeks, cut
the bacon in thin slices, serve them with saucers of mustard, or
with green sauce.


  _To dress Oxe-Cheeks Otherways._

Take out the bones and the balls of the eyes, make the mouth very
clean, soak it, and wash out the blood; then wipe it dry with a
clean cloath, and season it with pepper, salt, and nutmeg; then put
it in a pipkin or earthen pan, with two or three great onions, some
cloves, and mace, cut the jaw bones in pieces, & cut out the teeth,
lay the bones on the top of the meat, then put to it half a pint of
claret wine, and half as much water; close up the pot or pan with a
course piece of paste, and set it a baking in an oven over night for
to serve next day at dinner, serve it on toasts of fine manchet
fried, then have boil'd carrots and lay on it with toasts of manchet
laid round the dish; as also fried greens to garnish it, and run it
over with beaten butter. This way you may also dress a leg of beef.


  _Or thus._

Take them and cleanse them as before, then roast them, and season
them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, save the gravy, and being
roasted put them in a pipkin with some claret wine, large mace,
a clove or two, and some strong broth, stew them till they be very
tender, then put to them some fryed onions, and some prunes, and
serve them on toasts of fried bread, or slices of French bread, and
slices of orange on them, garnish the dish with grated bread.


  _To dress Oxe Cheeks in Stofado, or the Spanish fashion._

Take the cheeks, bone them and cleanse them, then lay them in steep
in claret or white-wine, and wine vinegar, whole cloves, mace,
beaten pepper, salt, slic't nutmeg, slic't ginger, and six or seven
cloves of garlick, steep them the space of five or six hours, and
close them up in an earthen pot or pan, with a piece of paste, and
the same liquor put to it, set it a baking over night for next day
dinner, serve it on toasts of fine manchet fried: then have boil'd
carrots and lay on it, with the toasts of manchet laid round the
dish: garnish it with slic't lemons or oranges, and fried toasts,
and garnish the dish with bay-leaves.


  _To marinate Oxe-Cheeks._

Being boned, roast or stew them very tender in a pipkin with some
claret, slic't nutmegs, pepper, salt, and wine-vinegar; being tender
stewed, take them up, and put to the liquor in a pipkin a quart of
wine-vinegar, and a quart of white-wine, boil it with some bay
leaves, whole pepper, a bundle of rosemary, tyme, sweet marjoram,
savory, sage, and parsley, bind them very hard the streightest
sprigs, boil also in the liquor large mace, cloves, slic't ginger,
slic't nutmegs and salt; then put the cheeks into the barrel, and
put the liquor to them, and some slic't lemons, close up the head
and keep them. Thus you may do four or five heads together, and
serve them hot or cold.


  _Oxe Cheeks in Sallet._

Take oxe cheeks being boned and cleansed, steep them in claret,
white-wine, or wine vinegar all night, the next day season them with
nutmegs, cloves, pepper, mace, and salt, roul them up, boil them
tender in water, vinegar, and salt, then press them, and being cold,
slice them in thin slices, and serve them in a clean dish with oyl
and vinegar.


  _To bake Oxe cheeks in a Pasty or Pie._

Take them being boned and soaked, boil them tender in fair water,
and cleanse them, take out the balls of the eyes, and season them
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then have some beef-suet and some
buttock beef minced and laid for a bed, then lay the cheeks on it,
and a few whole cloves, make your Pastie in good crust; to a gallon
of flower, two pound and a half of butter, five eggs whites and all,
work the butter and eggs up dry into the flower, then put in a
little fair water to make it up into a stiff paste, and work up all
cold.


  _To dress Pallets, Noses, and Lips of any Beast, Steer,
    Oxe, or Calf._

Take the pallats, lips, or noses, and boil them very tender, then
blanch them, and cut them in little square pieces as broad as a
sixpence, or like lard, fry them in sweet butter, and being fryed,
pour away the butter, and put to it some anchovies, grated nutmeg,
mutton gravy, and salt; give it a warm on the fire, and then dish it
in a clean dish with the bottom first rubbed with a clove of
garlick, run it over with beaten butter, juyce of oranges, fried
parsley, or fried marrow in yolks of two eggs, and sage leaves.

Sometimes add yolks of eggs strained, and then it is a fricase.


  _Otherways._

Take the pallets, lips, or noses, and boil them very tender, blanch
them, and cut them two inches long, then take some interlarded bacon
and cut it in the like proportion, season the pallets with salt, and
broil them on paper; being tender broil'd put away the fat, and put
them in a dish being rubbed with a clove of garlick, put some mutton
gravy to them on a chaffing dish of coals, and some juyce of orange,
_&c._


  _To fricase Pallets._

Take beef pallets being tender boil'd and blanched, season them with
beaten cloves, nutmeg, pepper, salt, and some grated bread; then the
pan being ready over the fire, with some good butter fry them brown,
then put them in a dish, put to them good mutton gravy, and dissolve
two or three anchovies in the sauce, a little grated nutmeg, and
some juyce of lemons, and serve them up hot.


  _To stew Pallets, Lips, and Noses._

Take them being tender boild and blanched, put them into a pipkin,
and cut to the bigness of a shilling, put to them some small
cucumbers pickled, raw calves udders, some artichocks, potatoes
boil'd or musk-mellon in square pieces, large mace, two or three
whole cloves, some small links or sausages, sweetbreads of veal,
some larks, or other small birds, as sparrows, or ox-eyes, salt,
butter, strong broth, marrow, white-wine, grapes, barberries, or
gooseberries, yolks of hard eggs, and stew them all together, serve
them on toasts of fine French bread, and slic't lemon; sometimes
thicken the broth with yolks of strained eggs and verjuyce.


  _To marinate Pallets, Noses, and Lips._

Take them being tender boil'd and blancht, fry them in sweet sallet
oyl, or clarified butter, and being fryed make a pickle for them
with whole pepper, large mace, cloves, slic't ginger, slic't nutmeg,
salt and a bundle of sweet herbs, as rosemary, tyme, bay-leaves,
sweet marjoram, savory, parsley, and sage; boil the spices and herbs
in wine vinegar and white-wine, then put them in a barrel with the
pallets, lips and noses, and lemons, close them up for your use, and
serve them in a dish with oyl.


  _To dress Pallets, Lips, and Noses, with Collops
    of Mutton and Bacon._

Take them being boild tender & blanch'd, cut them as broad as a
shilling, as also some thin collops of interlarded bacon, and of a
leg of mutton, finely hack'd with the back of a knife, fry them all
together with some butter, and being finely fried, put out the
butter, and put unto it some gravy, or a little mutton broth, salt,
grated nutmeg, and a dissolved anchove; give it a warm over the fire
and dish it, but rub the dish with a clove of garlick, and then run
it over with butter, juyce of orange; and salt about the dish.


  _To make a Pottage of Beef Pallets._

Take beef pallets that are tender boi'd and blanched, cut each
pallet in two pieces, and set them a stewing between two dishes with
a fine piece of interlarded bacon, a handful of champignions, and
five or six sweet-breads of veal, a ladle full of strong broth, and
as much mutton gravy, an onion or two, two or three cloves, a blade
or two of large mace, and an orange; as the pallets stew make ready
a dish with the bottoms and tops of French bread slic't and steeped
in mutton gravy, and the broth the pallets were stewed in; then you
must have the marrow of two or three beef bones stewed in a little
strong broth by it self in good big gobbets: and when the pallets,
marrow, sweet-breads and the rest are enough, take out the bacon,
onions, and spices, and dish up the aforesaid materials on the dish
of steeped bread, lay the marrow uppermost in pieces, then wring on
the juyce of two or three oranges, and serve it to the table very
hot.


  _To rost a dish of Oxe Pallets with great Oysters, Veal,
    Sweet-breads, Lamb stones, peeping Chickens, Pigeons,
    slices of interlarded Bacon, large Cock-combs,
    and Stones, Marrow, Pistaches, and Artichocks._

Take the oxe pallets and boil them tender, blanch them and cut them
2 inches long, lard one half with smal lard, then have your chickens
& pigeon peepers scalded, drawn, and trust; set them, and lard half
of them; then have the lamb-stones, parboil'd and blanched, as also
the combs, and cock-stones, next have interlarded bacon, and sage;
but first spit the birds on a small bird-spit, and between each
chicken or pigeon put on first a slice of interlarded bacon, and a
sage leaf, then another slice of bacon and a sage leaf, thus do till
all the birds be spitted; thus also the sweet-breads, lamb-stones,
and combs, then the oysters being parboild, lard them with lard very
small, and also a small larding prick, then beat the yolks of two or
3 eggs, and mix them with a little fine grated manchet, salt,
nutmeg, time, and rosemary minced very small, and when they are hot
at the fire baste them often, as also the lambstones and
sweet-breads with the same ingredients; then have the bottoms of
artichocks ready boil'd, quartered, and fried, being first dipped in
butter and kept warm, and marrow dipped in butter and fried, as also
the fowls and other ingredients; then dish the fowl piled up in the
middle upon another roast material round about them in the dish, but
first rub the dish with a clove of garlick: the pallets by
themselves, the sweet-breads by themselves, and the cocks stones,
combs, and lamb-stones by themselves; then the artichocks, fryed
marrow, and pistaches by themselves; then make a sauce with some
claret wine, and gravy, nutmeg, oyster liquor, salt, a slic't or
quartered onion, an anchove or two dissolved, and a little sweet
butter, give it a warm or two, and put to it two or three slices of
an orange, pour on the sauce very hot, and garnish it with slic't
oranges and lemons.

The smallest birds are fittest for this dish of meat, as wheat-ears,
martins, larks, ox-eyes, quails, snites, or rails.


  _Oxe Pallets in Jellies._

Take two pair of neats or calves feet, scald them, and boil them in
a pot with two gallons of water, being first very well boned, and
the bone and fat between the claws taken out, and being well soaked
in divers waters, scum them clean; and boil them down from two
gallons to three quarts; strain the broth, and being cold take off
the top and bottom, and put it into a pipkin with whole cinamon,
ginger, slic't and quartered nutmeg, two or three blades of large
mace, salt, three pints of white-wine, and half a pint of
grape-verjuyce or rose vinegar, two pound and a half of sugar, the
whites of ten eggs well beaten to froth, stir them all together in a
pipkin, being well warmed and the jelly melted, put in the eggs, and
set it over a charcoal-fire kindled before, stew it on that fire
half an hour before you boil it up, and when it is just a boiling
take it off, before you run it let it cool a little, then run it
through your jelly bag once or twice; then the pallets being tender
boild and blanched, cut them into dice-work with some lamb-stones,
veal, sweet-breads, cock-combs, and stones, potatoes, or artichocks
all cut into dice-work, preserved barberries, or calves noses, and
lips, preserved quinces, dryed or green neats tongues, in the same
work, or neats feet, all of these together, or any one of them; boil
them in white-wine or sack, with nutmeg, slic't ginger, coriander,
caraway, or fennil-seed, make several beds, or layes of these
things, and run the jelly over them many times after one is cold,
according as you have sorts of colours of jellies, or else put all
at once; garnish it with preserved oranges, or green citron cut like
lard.


  _To bake Beef-Pallets._

Provide pallets, lips, and noses, boild tender and blanched,
cock-stones, and combs, or lamb stones, and sweet-breads cut into
pieces, scald the stones, combs, and pallets slic't or in pieces as
big as the lamb stones, half a pint of great oysters parboil'd in
their own liquor, quarter'd dates, pistaches a handful, or pine
kernels, a few pickled broom buds, some fine interlarded bacon
slic't in thin slices being also scalded, ten chestnuts roasted &
blanched; season all these together with salt, nutmeg, and a good
quantity of large mace, fill the pie, and put to it good butter,
close it up and bake it, make liquor for it, then beat some butter,
and three or four yolks of eggs with white or claret wine, cut up
the lid, and pour it on the meat, shaking it well together, then lay
on slic't lemon and pickled barberries, _&c._


  _To dress a Neats-Tongue boil'd divers ways._

Take a Neats-tongue of three or four days powdering, being tender
boil'd, serve it on cheat bread for brewis, dish on the tongue in
halves or whole, and serve an udder with it being of the same
powdering and salting, finely blanched, put to them the clear fat of
the beef on the tongue, and white sippets round the dish, run them
over with beaten butter, _&c._


  _Otherways._

For greater service two udders and two tongues finely blanched and
served whole.

Sometimes for variety you may make brewis with some fresh beef or
good mutton broth, with some of the fat of the beef-pot; put it in a
pipkin with some large mace, a handful of parsley and sorrel grosly
chopped, and some pepper, boil them together, and scald the bread,
then lay on the boil'd tongue, mace, and some of the herbs, run it
over with beaten butter, slic't lemon, gooseberries, barberries, or
grapes.

Or for change, put some pared turnips boiling in fair water, & being
tender boil'd, drain the water from them, dish them in a clean dish,
and run them over with beaten butter, dish your tongues and udders
on them, and your colliflowers on the tongues and udders, run them
over with beaten butter; or in place of colliflowers, carrots in
thin quarters, or sometimes on turnips and great boil'd onions, or
butter'd cabbidge and carrots, or parsnips, and carrots buttered.


  _Neats Tongues and a fresh Udder in Stoffado._

Season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then lard them with great
lard, and steep them all night in claret-wine, wine vinegar, slic't
nutmegs and ginger, whole cloves, beaten pepper, and salt; steep
them in an earthen pot or pan, and cover or close them up, bake
them, and serve them on sops of French bread, and the spices over
them with some slic't lemon, and sausages or none.


  _Neats Tongues stewed whole or in halves._

Take them being tender boil'd, and fry them whole or in halves, put
them in a pipkin with some gravy or mutton-broth, large mace, slic't
nutmeg, pepper, claret, a little wine vinegar, butter, and salt;
stew them well together, and being almost stewed, put to the meat
two or three slices of orange, sparagus, skirrets, chesnuts, and
serve them on fine sippets; run them over with beaten butter, slic't
lemon, and boil'd marrow over all.

Sometimes for the broth put some yolks of eggs, beaten with
grape-verjuyce.


  _To stew a Neats Tongue otherwayes._

Make a hole in the but-end of it, and mince it with some fat bacon
or beef-suet, season it with nutmeg, salt, the yolk of a raw egg,
some sweet herbs minced small, & grated parmisan, or none, some
pepper, or ginger, and mingle all together, fill the tongue and wrap
it in a caul of veal, boil it till it will blanch, and being
blancht, wrap about it some of the searsing with a caul of veal;
then put it in a pipkin with some claret and gravy, cloves, salt,
pepper, some grated bread, sweet herbs chopped small, fried onions,
marrow boild in strong broth, and laid over all, some grapes,
gooseberries, slic't orange or lemon, and serve it on sippets, run
it over with beaten butter, and stale grated manchet to garnish the
dish.

Or sometimes in a broth called _Brodo Lardiero_.


  _To hash or stew a Neats tongue divers wayes._

Take a Neats-tongue being tender boil'd and blancht, slice it into
thin slices, as big and as thick as a shilling, fry it in sweet
butter; and being fried, put to it some strong broth, or good
mutton-gravy, some beaten cloves, mace, nutmeg, salt, and saffron;
stew them well together, then have some yolks of eggs dissolved with
grape verjuyce, and put them into the pan, give them a toss or two,
and the gravy and eggs being pretty thick, dish it on fine sippets.

Or make the same, and none of those spices, but only cinamon, sugar,
and saffron.

Sometimes sliced as aforesaid, but in slices no bigger nor thicker
than a three pence, and used in all points as before, but add some
onions fried, with the tongue, some mushrooms, nutmegs, and mace;
and being well stewed, serve it on fine sippets, but first rub the
dish with a clove of garlick, and run all over with beaten butter,
a shred lemon, and a spoonful of fair water.

Sometimes you may add some boil'd chesnuts, sweet herbs, capers,
marrow, and grapes or barberries.

Or stew them with raisins put in a pipkin, with the sliced tongue,
mace, slic't dates, blanched almonds, or pistaches, marrow,
claret-wine, butter, salt, verjuyce, sugar, strong broth, or gravy;
and being well stewed, dissolve the yolks of six eggs with vinegar
or grape verjuyce, and dish it up on fine sippets, slic't lemon, and
beaten butter over all.


  _To marinate a Neats-Tongue either whole or in halves._

Take seven or eight Neats-tongues, or Heifer, Calves, Sheeps, or any
tongues, boil them till they will blanch; and being blanched, lard
them or not lard them, as you please; then put them in a barrel,
then make a pickle of whole pepper, slic't ginger, whole cloves,
slic't nutmegs, and large mace: next have a bundle of sweet herbs,
as tyme, rosemary; bay-leaves, sage-leaves, winter-savory, sweet
marjoram, and parsley; take the streightest sprigs of these herbs
that you can get, and bind them up hard in a bundle every sort by it
self, and all into one; then boil these spices and herbs in as much
wine vinegar and white wine as will fill the vessel where the
tongues are, and put some salt and slic't lemons to them; close them
up being cold, and keep them for your use upon any occasion; serve
them with some of the spices, liquor, sweet herbs, sallet oyl, and
slic't lemon or lemon-peel, Pack them close.


  _To fricase Neats-Tongues._

Being tender boil'd, slice them into thin slices, and fry them with
sweet butter; being fried put away the butter, and put to them some
strong gravy or broth, nutmeg, pepper, salt, some sweet herbs
chopped small, as tyme, savory, sweet marjoram, and parsley; stew
them well together, then dissolve some yolks of eggs with
wine-vinegar or grape-verjuyce, some whole grapes or barberries. For
the thickening use fine grated manchet, or almond-paste strained,
and some times put saffron to it. Thus you may fricase any Udder
being tender boil'd, as is before-said.


  _To dress Neats-Tongues in Brodo Lardiero, or the Italian way._

Boil a Neats-tongue in a pipkin whole, halves, or in gubbings till
it may be blanched, cover it close, and put to it two or three
blades of large mace, with some strong mutton or beef broth, some
sack or white-wine, and some slices of interlarded bacon, scum it
when it boils, and put to it large mace, nutmeg, ginger, pepper,
raisins, two or three whole cloves, currans, prune, sage-leaves,
saffron, and divers cherries; stew it well, and serve it in a fine
clean scoured dish, on slices of French-Bread.


  _To dress Neats-Tongues, as Beefs Noses, Lips, and Pallets._

Take Neats-tongues, being tender boild and blancht, slice them thin,
and fry them in sweet butter, being fried put away the butter, and
put to them anchovies, grated nutmeg, mutton gravy, and salt; give
them a warm over the fire, and serve them in a clean scoured dish:
but first rub the dish with a clove of garlick, and run the meat
over with some beaten butter, juyce of oranges, fried parsley, fried
marrow, yolks of eggs, and sage leaves.


  _To hash a Neats-tongue whole or in slices._

Boil it tender and blanch it, then slice it into thin slices, or
whole, put to it some boil'd or roast chesnuts, some strong broth,
whole cloves, pepper, salt, claret wine, large mace and a bundle of
sweet herbs; stew them all together very leisurely, and being stewed
serve it on fine carved sippets, either with slic't lemon, grapes,
gooseberries, or barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.


  _To dry Neats Tongues._

Take salt beaten very fine, and salt-peter of each alike, rub your
tongues very well with the salts, and cover them all over with it,
and as it wasts, put on more, when they are hard and stiff they are
enough, then roul them in bran, and dry them before a soft fire,
before you boil them, let them lie in pump water one night, and boil
them in pump water.

Otherways powder them with bay-salt, and being well smoakt, hang
them up in a garret or cellar, and let them come no more at the fire
till they be boil'd.


  _To prepare a Neats-tongue or Udder to roast, a Stag, Hind,
    Buck, Doe, Sheep, Hog, Goat, Kid, or Calf._

Boil them tender and blanch them, being cold lard them, or roast
them plain without lard, baste them with butter, and serve them on
gallendine sauce.


  _To roast A Neats Tongue._

Take a Neats-tongue being tender boil'd, blanched, and cold, cut a
hole in the but-end, and mince the meat that you take out, then put
some sweet herbs finely minced to it, with a minced pippin or two,
the yolks of eggs slic't, some minced beef-suet, or minced bacon,
beaten ginger and salt, fill the tongue, and stop the end with a
caul of veal, lard it and roast it; then make sauce with butter,
nutmeg, gravy, and juyce of oranges; garnish the dish with slic't
lemon, lemon peel and barberries.


  _To roast a Neats-Tongue or Udder otherways._

Boil it a little, blanch it, lard it with pretty big lard all the
length of the tongue, as also udders; being first seasoned with
nutmeg, pepper, cinamon, and ginger, then spit and roast them, and
baste them with sweet butter; being rosted, dress them with grated
bread and flower, and some of the spices abovesaid, some sugar, and
serve it with juyce of oranges, sugar, gravy, and slic't lemon
on it.


  _To make minced Pies of a Neats tongue._

Take a fresh Neats-tongue, boil, blanch, and mince it hot or cold,
then mince four pound of beef-suet by it self, mingle them together,
and season them with an ounce of cloves and mace beaten, some salt,
half a preserved orange, and a little lemon-peel minced, with a
quarter of a pound of sugar, four pound of currans, a little
verjuyce, and rose-water, and a quarter of a pint of sack, stir all
together, and fill your Pies.


  _To bake Neats tongues to eat cold, according to these figures._

Take the tongues being tender boil'd and blanched, leave on the fat
of the roots of the tongue, and season them well with nutmeg,
pepper, and salt; but first lard them with pretty big lard, and put
them in the Pie with some whole cloves and some butter, close them
and bake them in fine or course paste, made only of boiling liquor
and flour, and baste the crust with eggs, pack the crust very close
in the filling with the raw beef or mutton.


  _To bake two Neats-tongues in a Pie to eat hot,
    according to these Figures._

Take one of the tongues, and mince it raw, then boil the other very
tender, blanch it, and cut it into pieces as big as a walnut, lard
them with small lard being cold & seasoned; then have another tongue
being raw, take out the meat, and mince it with some beef-suet or
lard: then lay some of the minced tongues in the bottom of the Pie,
and the pieces on it; then make balls of the other meat as big as
the pieces of tongue, with some grated bread, cream, yolks of eggs,
bits of artichocks, nutmeg, salt, pepper, a few sweet herbs, and lay
them in a Pie with some boild artichocks, marrow, grapes, chesnuts
blanch't, slices of interlarded bacon, and butter; close it up &
bake it, then liquor it with verjuyce, gravy, and yolks of eggs.


  _To bake a Neats tongue hot otherways._

Boil a fresh tongue very tender, and blanch it; being cold slice it
into thin slices, and season it lightly with pepper, nutmeg,
cinamon, and ginger finely beaten; then put into the pie half a
pound of currans, lay the meat on, and dates in halves, the marrow
of four bones, large mace, grapes, or barberries, and butter; close
it up and bake it, and being baked, liquor it with white or claret
wine, butter, sugar, and ice it.


  _Otherways._

Boil it very tender, and being blanched and cold, take out some of
the meat at the but-end, mince it with some beef-suet, and season it
with pepper, ginger beaten fine, salt, currans, grated bread, two or
three yolks of eggs, raisins minced, or in place of currans,
a little cream, a little orange minced, also sweet herbs chopped
small: then fill the tongue and season it with the foresaid spices,
wrap it in a caul of veal, and put some thin slices of veal under
the tongue, as also thin slices of interlarded bacon, and on the top
large mace, marrow, and barberries, and butter over all; close it up
and bake it, being baked, liquor it, and ice it with butter, sugar,
white-wine, or grape-verjuyce.

For the paste a pottle of flower, and make it up with boiling
liquor, and half a pound of butter.


  _To roast a Chine, Rib, Loin, Brisket, or Fillet of Beef._

Draw them with parsley, rosemary, tyme, sweet marjoram, sage, winter
savory, or lemon, or plain without any of them, fresh or salt, as
you please; broach it, or spit it, roast it and baste it with
butter; a good chine of beef will ask six hours roasting.

For the sauce take strait tops of rosemary, sage-leaves, picked
parsley, tyme, and sweet marjoram; and strew them in wine vinegar,
and the beef gravy; or otherways with gravy and juyce of oranges and
lemons. Sometimes for change in saucers of vinegar and pepper.


  _To roast a Fillet of Beef._

Take a fillet which is the tenderest part of the beef, and lieth in
the inner part of the surloyn, cut it as big as you can, broach it
on a broach not too big, and be careful not to broach it through the
best of the meat, roast it leisurely, & baste it with sweet butter,
set a dish to save the gravy while it roasts, then prepare sauce for
it of good store of parsley, with a few sweet herbs chopp'd smal,
the yolks of three or four eggs, sometimes gross pepper minced
amongst them with the peel of an orange, and a little onion; boil
these together, and put in a little butter, vinegar, gravy,
a spoonful of strong broth, and put it to the beef.


  _Otherways._

Sprinkle it with rose-vinegar, claret-wine, elder-vinegar, beaten
cloves, nutmeg, pepper, cinamon, ginger, coriander-seed,
fennil-seed, and salt; beat these things fine, and season the fillet
with it, then roast it, and baste it with butter, save the gravy,
and blow off the fat, serve it with juyce of orange or lemon, and a
little elder-vinegar.


  _Or thus._

Powder it one night, then stuff it with parsley, tyme, sweet
marjoram, beets, spinage, and winter-savory, all picked and minced
small, with the yolks of hard eggs mixt amongst some pepper, stuff
it and roast it, save the gravy and stew it with the herbs, gravy,
as also a little onion, claret wine, and the juyce of an orange or
two; serve it hot on this sauce, with slices of orange on it,
lemons, or barberries.


  _To stew a fillet of Beef in the Italian Fashion._

Take a young tender fillet of beef, and take away all the skins and
sinews clean from it, put to it some good white-wine (that is not
too sweet) in a bowl, wash it, and crush it well in the wine, then
strow upon it a little pepper, and a powder called _Tamara_ in
Italian, and as much salt as will season it, mingle them together
very well, and put to it as much white-wine as will cover it, lay a
trencher upon it to keep it down in a close pan with a weight on it,
and let it steep two nights and a day; then take it out and put it
into a pipkin with some good beef-broth, but put none of the pickle
to it, but only beef-broth, and that sweet, not salt; cover it
close, and set it on the embers, then put to it a few whole cloves
and mace, let it stew till it be enough, it will be very tender, and
of an excellent taste; serve it with the same broth as much as will
cover it.

To make this _Tamara_, take two ounces of coriander-seed, an ounce
of anniseed, an ounce of fennel-seed, two ounces of cloves, and an
ounce of cinamon; beat them into a gross powder, with a little
powder of winter-savory, and put them into a viol-glass to keep.


  _To make an excellent Pottage called Skinke._

Take a leg of beef, and chop it into three pieces, then boil it in a
pot with three pottles of spring-water, a few cloves, mace, and
whole pepper: after the pot is scum'd put in a bundle of sweet
morjoram, rosemary, tyme, winter-savory, sage, and parsley bound up
hard, some salt, and two or three great onions whole, then about an
hour before dinner put in three marrow bones and thicken it with
some strained oatmeal, or manchet slic't and steeped with some
gravy, strong broth, or some of the pottage; then a little before
you dish up the Skinke, put into it a little fine powder of saffron,
and give it a warm or two: dish it on large slices of French Bread,
and dish the marrow bones on them in a fine clean large dish; then
have two or three manchets cut into toasts, and being finely
toasted, lay on the knuckle of beef in the middle of the dish, the
marrow bones round about it, and the toasts round about the dish
brim, serve it hot.


  _To stew a Rump, or the fat end of a Brisket of Beef
    in the French Fashion._

Take a Rump of beef, boil it & scum it clean in a stewing pan or
broad mouthed pipkin, cover it close, & let it stew an hour; then
put to it some whole pepper, cloves, mace, and salt, scorch the meat
with your knife to let out the gravy, then put in some claret-wine,
and half a dozen of slic't onions; having boiled, an hour after put
in some capers, or a handfull of broom-buds, and half a dozen of
cabbidge-lettice being first parboil'd in fair water, and quartered,
two or three spoonfuls of wine vinegar, and as much verjuyce, and
let it stew till it be tender; then serve it on sippets of French
bread, and dish it on those sippets; blow the fat clean off the
broth, scum it, and stick it with fryed bread.


  _A Turkish Dish of Meat._

Take an interlarded piece of beef, cut it into thin slices, and put
it into a pot that hath a close cover, or stewing-pan; then put it
into a good quantity of clean picked rice, skin it very well, and
put it into a quantity of whole pepper, two or three whole onions,
and let this boil very well, then take out the onions, and dish it
on sippets, the thicker it is the better.


  _To boil a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock,
    or Fillet of Beef poudered._

Take any of these, and give them in Summer a weeks powdering, in
Winter a fortnight, stuff them or plain; if you stuff them, do it
with all manner of sweet herbs, fat beef minced, and some nutmeg;
serve them on brewis, with roots of cabbidge boil'd in milk, with
beaten butter. _&c._


  _To pickle roast Beef, Chine, Surloin, Rib, Brisket, Flank,
    or Neats-Tongues._

Take any of the foresaid beef, as chine or fore-rib, & stuff it with
penniroyal, or other sweet herbs, or parsley minced small, and some
salt, prick in here & there a few whole cloves, roast it; and then
take claret wine, wine vinegar, whole pepper, rosemary, and bayes,
and tyme, bound up close in a bundle, and boil'd in some
claret-wine, and wine-vinegar, make the pickle, and put some salt to
it; then pack it up close in a barrel that will but just hold it,
put the pickle to it, close it on the head, and keep it for your
use.


  _To stew Beef in gobbets, in the French Fashion._

Take a flank of beef, or any part but the leg, cut it into slices or
gobbits as big as a pullets egg, with some gobbits of fat, and boil
it in a pot or pipkin with some fair spring water, scum it clean,
and put to it an hour after it hath boil'd carrots, parsnips,
turnips, great onions, salt, some cloves, mace, and whole pepper,
cover it close, and stew it till it be very tender; then half an
hour before dinner, put into it some picked tyme, parsley,
winter-savory, sweet marjoram, sorrel and spinage, (being a little
bruised with the back of a ladle) and some claret-wine; then dish it
on fine sippets, and serve it to the table hot, garnish it with
grapes, barberries, or gooseberries, sometimes use spices, the
bottoms of boil'd artichocks put into beaten butter, and grated
nutmeg, garnished with barberries.


  _Stewed Collops of Beef._

Take some of the buttock of beef, and cut it into thin slices cross
the grain of the meat, then hack them and fry them in sweet butter,
and being fryed fine and brown put them in a pipkin with some strong
broth, a little claret wine, and some nutmeg, stew it very tender;
and half an hour before you dish it, put to it some good gravy,
elder-vinegar, and a clove or two; when you serve it, put some juyce
of orange, and three or four slices on it, stew down the gravy
somewhat thick, and put into it when you dish it some beaten butter.


  _Olives of Beef stewed and roast._

Take a buttock of beef, and cut some of it into thin slices as broad
as your hand, then hack them with the back of a knife, lard them
with small lard, and season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then
make a farsing with some sweet herbs, tyme, onions, the yolks of
hard eggs, beef-suet or lard all minced, some salt, barberries,
grapes or gooseberris, season it with the former spices lightly, and
work it up together, then lay it on the slices, and roul them up
round with some caul of veal, beef, or mutton, bake them in a dish
within the oven, or roast them, then put them in a pipkin with some
butter, and saffron, or none; blow off the fat from the gravy, and
put it to them, with some artichocks, potato's, or skirrets
blanched, being first boil'd, a little claret-wine, and serve them
on sippets with some slic't orange, lemon, barberries, grapes or
gooseberries.


  _To Make a Hash of raw Beef._

Mince it very small with some beef-suet or lard, and some sweet
herbs, some beaten cloves and mace, pepper, nutmeg and a whole onion
or two, stew all together in a pipkin, with some blanched chesnuts,
strong broth, and some claret; let it stew softly the space of three
hours, that it may be very tender, then blow off the fat, dish it,
and serve it on sippets, garnish it with barberries, grapes, or
gooseberries.


  _To make a Hash of Beef otherways._

Take some of the buttock, cut it into thin slices, and hack them
with the back of your knife, then fry them with sweet butter, and
being fried put them into a pipkin with some claret, strong broth,
or gravy, cloves, mace, pepper, salt, and sweet butter; being tender
stewed serve them on fine sippets, with slic't lemon, grapes,
barberries, or goosberries, and rub the dish with a clove of
garlick.


  _Otherways._

Cut some buttock-beef into thin slices, and hack it with the back of
a knife, then have some slices of interlarded bacon; stew them
together in a pipkin, with some gravy, claret-wine, and strong
broth, cloves, mace, pepper, and salt; being tender stewed, serve it
on French bread sippets.


  _Otherways._

Being roasted and cold cut it into very fine thin slices, then put
some gravy to it, nutmeg, salt, a little thin slic't onion, and
claret-wine, stew it in a pipkin, and being well stewed dish it and
serve it up, run it over with beaten butter and slic't lemon,
garnish the dish with sippets, _&c._


  _Carbonadoes of Beef, raw, roasted, or toasted._

Take a fat surloin, or the fore-rib, and cut it into steaks half an
inch thick, sprinkle it with salt, and broil it on the embers on a
very temperate fire, and in an hour it will be broild enough; then
serve it with gravy, and onions minced and boil'd in vinegar, and
pepper, or juyce of oranges, nutmeg, and gravy, or vinegar, and
pepper only, or gravy alone.

Or steep the beef in claret wine, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and broil
them as the former, boil up the gravy where it was steeped, and
serve it for sauce with beaten butter.

As thus you may also broil or toast the sweet-breads when they are
new, and serve them with gravy.


  _To Carbonado, broil or toast Beef in the Italian fashion._

Take the ribs, cut them into steaks & hack them, then season them
with pepper, salt, and coriander-seed, being first sprinkled with
rose-vinegar, or elder vinegar, then lay them one upon another in a
dish the space of an hour, and broil or toast them before the fire,
and serve them with the gravy that came from them, or juyce of
orange and the gravy boild together. Thus also you may do heifers'
udders, oxe-cheeks, or neats-tongues, being first tender broild or
roasted.

In this way also you may make Scotch Collops in thin slices, hack
them with your knife, being salted, and fine and softly broil'd
serve them with gravy.


  _Beef fried divers ways, raw or roasted._

1. Cut it in slices half an inch thick, and three fingers broad,
salt it a little, and being hacked with the back of your knife, fry
it in butter with a temperate fire.

2. Cut the other a quarter of an inch thick; and fry it as the
former.

3. Cut the other collop to fry as thick as half a crown, and as long
as a card: hack them and fry them as the former, but fry them not to
hard.

Thus you may fry sweetbreads of the beef.


  _Beef fried otherways, being roasted and cold._

Slice it into good big slices, then fry them in butter, and serve
them with butter and vinegar, garnish them with fried parsley.


  _Sauces for the raw fried Beef._

  1. Beaten butter, with slic't lemon beaten together.

  2. Gravy and butter.

  3. Mustard, butter, and vinegar.

  4. Butter, vinegar, minced capers, and nutmeg.

For the garnish of this fried meat, either parsley, sage, clary,
onions, apples, carrots, parsnips, skirrets, spinage, artichocks,
pears, quinces, slic't oranges, or lemons, or fry them in butter.

Thus you may fry sweet-breads, udders, and tongues in any of the
foresaid ways, with the same sauces and garnish.


  _To bake Beef in Lumps several ways, or Tongues in lumps raw,
    or Heifer Udders raw or boil'd._

Take the buttock, brisket, fillet, or fore-rib, cut it into gobbets
as big as a pullets egg, with some equal gobbets of fat, season them
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and bake them with some butter or
none.

Make the paste with a quarter of a pound of butter, and boiling
liquor, boil the butter in the liquor, make up the paste quick and
pretty stiff for a round Pie.


  _To bake Beef, red-Deer-fashion in Pies or Pasties either Surloin,
    Brisket, Buttock, or Fillet, larded or not._

Take the surloin, bone it, and take off the great sinew that lies on
the back, lard the leanest parts of it with great lard, being
season'd with nutmegs, pepper, and lard three pounds; then have for
the seasoning four ounces of pepper, four ounces of nutmegs, two
ounces of ginger, and a pound of salt, season it and put it into the
Pie: but first lay a bed of good sweet butter, and a bay-leaf or
two, half an ounce of whole cloves, lay on the venison, then put on
all the rest of the seasoning, with a few more cloves, good store of
butter, and a bay-leaf or two, close it up and bake it, it will ask
eight hours soaking, being baked and cold, fill it up with clarified
butter, serve it, and a very good judgment shall not know it from
red Deer. Make the paste either fine or course to bake it hot or
cold; if for hot half the seasoning, and bake it in fine paste.

To this quantity of flesh you may have three gallons of fine flower
heapt measure, and three pound of butter; but the best way to bake
red deer, is to bake it in course paste either in pie or pasty, make
it in rye meal to keep long.

Otherways, you may make it of meal as it comes from the mill, and
make it only of boiling water, and no stuff in it.


  _Otherways to be eaten cold._

Take two stone of buttock beef, lard it with great lard, and season
it with nutmeg, pepper, and the lard, then steep it in a bowl, tray,
or earthen pan, with some wine-vinegar, cloves, mace, pepper, and
two or three bay-leaves: thus let it steep four or five days, and
turn it twice or thrice a day: then take it and season it with
cloves, mace, pepper, nutmeg, and salt; put it into a pot with the
back-side downward, with butter under it, and season it with a good
thick coat of seasoning, and some butter on it, then close it up and
bake it, it will ask six or seven hours baking. Being baked draw it,
and when it is cold pour out the gravy, and boil it again in a
pipkin, and pour it on the venison, then fill up the pot with the
clarified butter, _&c._


  _To make minced Pies of Beef._

Take of the buttock of beef, cleanse it from the skins, and cut it
into small pieces, then take half as much more beef-suet as the
beef, mince them together very small, and season them with pepper,
cloves, mace, nutmeg, and salt; then have half as much fruit as
meat, three pound of raisins, four pound of currans, two pound of
prunes, _&c._ or plain without fruit, but only seasoned with the
same spices.


  _To make a Collar of Beef._

Take the thinnest end of a coast of beef, boil it a little and lay
in pump water, & a little salt three days, shifting it once a day;
the last day put a pint of claret wine to it, and when you take it
out of the water let it lie two or three hours a draining; then cut
it almost to the end in three slices, and bruise a little cochinel
and a very little allum, and mingle it with a very little claret
wine, colour the meat all over with it; then take a douzen of
anchoves, wash and bone them, lay them on the beef, & season it with
cloves, pepper, mace, two handfuls of salt, a little sweet marjoram,
and tyme; & when you make it up, roull the innermost slice first, &
the other two upon it, being very well seasoned every where and bind
it up hard with tape, then put it into a stone pot a little bigger
than the collar, and pour upon it a pint of claret wine, and half a
pint of wine vinegar, a sprig of rosemary, and a few bay-leaves;
bake it very well, and before it be quite cold, take it out of the
pot, and you may keep it dry as long as you please.


  _To bake a Flank of Beef in a Collar._

Take flank of beef, and lay it in pump water four days and nights,
shift it twice a day, then take it out & dry it very well with clean
cloaths, cut it in three layers, and take out the bones and most of
the fat; then take three handfuls of salt, and good store of sage
chopped very small, mingle them, and strew it between the three
layers, and lay them one upon another; then take an ounce of cloves
and mace, and another of nutmegs, beat them very well, and stew it
between the layers of beef, roul it up close together, then take
some packthred and tie it up very hard, put it in a long earthen
pot, which is made of purpose for that use, tie up the top of the
pot with cap paper, and set it in an oven; let it stand eight hours,
when you draw it, and being between hot and cold, bind it up round
in a cloth, tie it fast at both ends with packthred, and hang it up
for your use.

Sometimes for variety you may use slices of bacon btwixt the layers,
and in place of sage sweet herbs, and sometimes cloves of garlick.
Or powder it in saltpeter four or five days, then wash it off, roul
it and use the same spices as abovesaid, and serve it with mustard
and sugar, or Gallendine.


  _To stuff Beef with Parsley to serve cold._

Pick the parsley very fine and short, then mince some suet not to
small, mingle it with the parsley, and make little holes in ranks,
fill them hard and full, and being boiled and cold, slice it into
thin slices, and serve it with vinegar and green parsley.


  _To make Udders either in Pie or Pasty,
    according to these Figures._

Take a young Udder and lard it with great lard, being seasoned with
nutmeg, pepper, cloves, and mace, boil it tender, and being cold
wrap it in a caul of veal, but first season it with the former
spices and salt; put it in the Pie with some slices of veal under
it, season them, and some also on the top, with some slices of lard
and butter; close it up, and being baked, liquor it with clarified
butter. Thus for to eat cold; if hot, liquor it with white-wine,
gravy and butter.


  _To bake a Heifers Udder in the Italian fashion._

The Udder being boil'd tender, and cold, cut it into dice-work like
small dice, and season them with some cloves, mace, cinamon, ginger,
salt, pistaches, or pine-kernels, some dates, and bits of marrow;
season the aforesaid materials lightly and fit, make your Pie not
above an inch high, like a custard, and of custard-paste, prick it,
and dry it in the oven, and put in the abovesaid materials; put to
it also some custard-stuff made of good cream, ten eggs, and but
three whites, sugar, salt, rose-water, and some dissolved musk; bake
it and stick it with slic't dates, canded pistaches, and scrape fine
sugar on it.

Otherways, boil the udder very tender, & being cold slice it into
thin slices, as also some thin slices of parmisan & interlarded
bacon, some sweet herbs chopt small, some currans, cinamon, nutmeg,
sugar, rose-water, and some butter, make three bottoms of the
aforesaid things in a dish, patty-pan, or pie, with a cut cover, and
being baked, scrape sugar on it, or rice it.


  _Otherways to eat hot._

Take an Udder boil'd and cold, slice it into thin slices, and season
it with pepper, cinamon, nutmeg, ginger, and salt, mingle some
currans among the slices and fill the pie; put some dates on the
top, large mace, barberries, or grapes, butter, and the marrow of 2
marrow-bones, close it up and bake it, being baked ice it; but
before you ice it, liquor it with butter, verjuyce and sugar.


  _To stew Calves or Neats Feet._

Boil and blanch them, then part them in halves, and put them into a
pipkin with some strong broth, a little powder of saffron, sweet
butter, pepper, sugar, and some sweet herbs finely minced, let them
stew an hour and serve them with a little grape verjuyce, stewed
among them.

Neats feet being soust serve them cold with mustard.


  _To make a fricase of Neats-Feet._

Take them being boild and blancht, fricase them with some butter,
and being finely fried make a sauce with six yolks of eggs,
dissolved with some wine-vinegar, grated nutmeg, and salt.


  _Otherways._

First bone and prick them clean, then being boiled, blanched, or
cold, cut them into gubbings, and put them in a frying-pan with a
ladle-full of strong broth, a piece of butter, and a little salt;
after they have fried awhile, put to them a little chopt parsley,
green chibbolds, young spear-mint, and tyme, all shred very small,
with a little beaten pepper: being almost fried, make a lear for
them with the yolks of four or five eggs, some mutton gravy,
a little nutmeg, and the juyce of a lemon wrung therein; put this
lear to the neats feet as they fry in the pan, then toss them once
or twice, and so serve them.


  _Neats Feet larded, and roasted on a spit._

Take neats feet being boil'd, cold, and blanched, lard them whole,
and then roast them, being roasted, serve them with venison sauce
made of claret wine, wine-vinegar, and toasts of houshold bread
strained with the wine through a strainer, with some beaten cinamon
and ginger, put it in a dish or pipkin, and boil it on the fire,
with a few whole cloves, stir it with a sprig of rosemary, and make
it not too thick.


  _To make Black Puddings of Beefers Blood._

Take the blood of a beefer when it is warm, put in some salt, and
then strain it, and when it is through cold put in the groats of
oatmeal well pic't, and let it stand soaking all night, then put in
some sweet herbs, pennyroyal, rosemary, tyme, savoury, fennil, or
fennil-seed, pepper, cloves, mace, nutmegs, and some cream or good
new milk; then have four or five eggs well beaten, and put in the
blood with good beef-suet not cut too small; mix all well together
and fill the beefers guts, being first well cleansed, steeped, and
scalded.


  _To dress a Dish of Tripes hot out of the pot or pan._

Being tender boil'd, make a sauce with some beaten butter, gravy,
pepper, mustard, and wine-vinegar, rub a dish with a clove of
garlick, and dish them therein; then run the sauce over them with a
little bruised garlick amongst it, and a little wine vinegar
sprinkled over the meat.


  _To make Bolonia-Sausages._

Take a good leg of pork, and take away all the fat, skins, and
sinews, then mince and stamp it very fine in a wooden or brass
mortar, weigh the meat, and to every five pound thereof take a pound
of good lard cut as small as your little finger about an inch long,
mingle it amongst the meat, and put to it half an ounce of whole
cloves, as much beaten pepper, with the same quantity of nutmegs and
mace finely beaten also, an ounce of whole carraway-seed, salt eight
ounces, cocherel bruised with a little allom beaten and dissolved in
sack, and stamped amongst the meat: then take beefers guts, cut of
the biggest of the small guts, a yard long, and being clean scoured
put them in brine a week or eight days, it strengthens and makes
them tuff to hold filling. The greatest skill is in the filling of
them, for if they be not well filled they will grow rusty; then
being filled put them a smoaking three or four days, and hang them
in the air, in some _Garret_ or in a _Cellar_, for they must not
come any more at the fire; and in a quarter of a year they will be
eatable.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION III.

  _The A-la-mode ways of dressing the Heads of any Beasts._


  _To boil a Bullocks Cheek in the Italian way._

Break the bones and steep the head in fair water, shift it, and
scrape off the slime, let it lie thus in steep about twelve hours,
then boil in fair water with some _Bolonia_ sausage and a piece of
interlarded bacon; the cheeks and the other materials being very
tender boiled, dish it up and serve it with some flowers and greens
on it, and mustard in saucers.


  _To stew Bullocks Cheeks._

Take the Cheeks being well soaked or steeped, spit and half roast
them, save the gravy, and put them into a pipkin with some
claret-wine, gravy, and some strong broth, slic't nutmeg, ginger,
pepper, salt and some minced onions fried; stew it the space of two
hours on a soft fire, and being finely stewed, serve it on carved
sippets.


  _Otherways._

Take out the bones, balls of the eyes, and the ruff of the mouth,
steep it well in fair water and shift it often: being well cleans'd
from the blood and slime, take it out of the water, wipe it dry, and
season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put them in an earthen pot
one upon another, and put to them a pint of claret wine, a few whole
cloves, a little fair water, and two three whole onions; close up
the pot and bake it, it will ask six hours bakeing; being tender
baked, serve it on toasts of fine manchet.


  _Or thus._

Being baked or stewed, you may take out the bones and lay them close
together, pour the liquor to them, and being cold slice them into
slices, and serve them cold with mustard and sugar.


  _To boil a Calves Head._

Take the head, skin, and all unflayed, scald it, and soak it in fair
water a whole night or twelve hours, then take out the brains and
boil them with some sage, parsley, or mint; being boil'd chop them
small together, butter them and serve them in a dish with fine
sippets about them, the head being finely cleansed, boil it in a
clean cloth and close it up together again in the cloth; being
boil'd, lay it one side by another with some fine slices of boil'd
bacon, and lay some fine picked parsley upon it, with some borage or
other flowers.


  _To hash a Calves Head._

Take a calves head well steeped and cleansed from the blood and
slime, boil it tender, then take it up and let it be through cold,
cut it into dice-work, as also the brains in the same form, and some
think slices interlarded bacon being first boil'd put some
gooseberries to them, as also some gravy or juyce of lemon or
orange, and some beaten butter; stew all together, and being finely
stewed, dish it on carved sippets, and run it over with beaten
butter.


  _Otherways._

The head being boil'd and cold, slice is in to thin slices, with
some onions and the brains in the same manner, then stew them in a
pipkin with some gravy or strong mutton, broth, with nutmeg, some
mushrooms, a little white wine and beaten butter; being well stewed
together dish them on fine sippets, and garnish the meat with slic't
lemon or barberries.


  _To souce a Calves Head._

First scald it and bone it, then steep it in fair water the space of
six hour, dry it with a clean cloth, and season it with some salt
and bruised garlick (or none) then roul it up in a collar, bind it
close, and boil it in white wine, water, and salt; being boil'd keep
it in that souce drink, and serve it in the collar, or slice it, and
serve it with oyl, vinegar, and pepper. This dish is very rare, and
to a good judgment scarce discernable.


  _To roast a Calves head._

Take a calves head, cleave it and take out the brains, skins, and
blood about it, then steep them and the head in fair warm water the
space of four or five hours, shift them three or four times and
cleanse the head; then boil the brains, & make a pudding with some
grated bread, brains, some beef-suet minced small, with some minced
veal & sage; season the pudding with some cloves, mace, salt,
ginger, sugar, five yolks of eggs, & saffron; fill the head with
this pudding, then close it up and bind it fast with some
packthread, spit it, and bind on the caul round the head with some
of the pudding round about it, rost it & save the gravy, blow off
the fat, and put to the gravy; for the sauce a little white-wine,
a slic't nutmeg & a piece of sweet butter, the juyce of an orange,
salt, and sugar. Then bread up the head with some grated bread;
beaten cinamon, minced lemon peel, and a little salt.


  _To roast a Calves Head with Oysters._

Split the head as to boil, and take out the brains washing them very
well with the head, cut out the tongue, boil it a little, and blanch
it, let the brains be parbol'd as well as tongue, then mince the
brains and tongue, a little sage, oysters, beef-suet, very small;
being finely minced, mix them together with three or four yolks of
eggs, beaten ginger, pepper, nutmegs, grated bread, salt, and a
little sack, if the brains and eggs make it not moist enough. This
being done parboil the calves head a little in fair water, then take
it up and dry it well in a cloth filling the holes where the brains
and tongue lay with this farsing or pudding; bind it up close
together, and spit it, then stuff it with oysters being first
parboil'd in their own liquor, put them into a dish with minced
tyme, parsley, mace, nutmeg, and pepper beaten very small; mix all
these with a little vinegar, and the white of an egg, roul the
oysters in it, and make little holes in the head, stuff it as full
as you can, put the oysters but half way in, and scuer in them with
sprigs of tyme, roast it and set the dish under it to save the
gravy, wherein let there be oysters, sweet herbs minced, a little
white-wine and slic't nutmeg. When the head is roasted set the dish
wherein the sauce is on the coals to stew a little, then put in a
piece of butter, the juyce of an orange, and salt, beating it up
together: dish the head, and put the sauce to it, and serve it up
hot to the table.


  _To bake a Calves Head in Pye or Pasty to eat hot or cold._

Take a calves head and cleave it, then cleanse it & boil it, and
being almost boil'd, take it up, & take it from the bones as whole
as you can, when it is cold stuff it with sweet herbs, yolks of raw
eggs, both finely minced with some lard or beef-suet, and raw veal;
season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, brake two or three raw eggs
into it; and work it together, and stuff the cheeks: the Pie being
made, season the head with the spices abovesaid, and first lay in
the bottom of the Pie some thin slices of veal, then lay on the
head, and put on it some more seasoning, and coat it well with the
spices, close it up with some butter, and bake it, being baked
liquor it with clarified butter, and fill it up.

If you bake the aforesaid Pie to eat hot, give it but half the
seasoning, and put some butter to it, with grapes, or gooseberries
or barberries; then close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it
with gravy and butter beat up thick together; with the juyce of two
oranges.


  _To make a Calves-foot Pye, or Neats-foot Pie, or Florentine
    in a dish of Puff-Paste; but the other Pye in short paste,
    and the Dish of Puff._

Take two pair of calves feet, and boil them tender & blanch them,
being cold bone them & mince them very small, and season them with
pepper, nutmeg, cinamon, and ginger lightly, and a little salt, and
a pound of currans, a quarter of a pound of dates, slic't, a quarter
of a pound of fine sugar, with a little rose-water verjuyce, & stir
all together in a dish or tray, and lay a little butter in the
bottom of the Pie, & lay on half the meat in the Pie; then have the
marrow of three marrow-bones, and lay that on the meat in the Pie,
and the other half of the meat on the marrow, & stick some dates on
the top of the meat & close up the Pie, & bake it, & being half
bak't liquor it with butter, white-wine, or verjuyce, and ice it,
and set in the oven again till it be iced, and ice it with butter,
rose-water, and sugar.

Or you may bake them in halves with the bones in, and use for change
some grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, with currans or without,
and dates in halves, and large mace.


  _To Stew a Calves-Head._

First boil it in fair water half an hour, then take it up and pluck
it pieces, then put it into a pipkin with great oysters and some of
the broth, which boil'd it, (if you have no stronger) a pint of
white-wine or claret, a quarter of a pound of interlarded bacon,
some blanched chesnuts, the yolks of three or four hard eggs cut
into halves, sweet herbs minced, and a little horseradish-root
scraped, stew all these an hour, then slice the brains (being
parboil'd) and strew a little ginger, salt, and flower, you may put
in some juyce of spinage, and fry them green with butter; then dish
the meat, and lay the fried brains, oysters, chesnuts, half yolks of
eggs, and sippet it, serve it up hot to the table.


  _To hash a Calves Head._

Take a calves-head, boil it tender, and let it be through cold, then
take one half and broil or roast it, do it very white and fair, then
take the other half and slice it into thin slices, fry it with
clarified butter fine and white, then put it in a dish a stewing
with some sweet herbs, as rosemary, tyme, savory, salt, some
white-wine or claret, some good roast mutton gravy, a little pepper
and nutmeg; then take the tongue being ready boil'd, and a boil'd
piece of interlarded bacon, slice it into thin slices, and fry it in
a batter made of flower, eggs, nutmeg, cream, salt, and sweet herbs
chopped small, dip the tongue & bacon into the batter, then fry them
& keep them warm till dinner time, season the brains with nutmegs,
sweet herbs minced small, salt, and the yolks of three or four raw
eggs, mince all together, and fry them in spoonfuls, keep them warm,
then the stewed meat being ready dish it, and lay the broild side of
the head on the stewed side, then garnish the dish with the fried
meats, some slices of oranges, and run it over with beaten butter
and juyce of oranges.


  _To boil A Calves Head._

Take a calves head being cleft and cleansed, and also the brains,
boil the head very white and fine, then boil the brains with some
sage and other sweet herbs, as tyme and sweet marjoram, chop and
boil them in a bag, being boil'd put them out and butter them with
butter, salt, and vinegar, serve them in a little dish by themselves
with fine thin sippits about them.

Then broil the head, or toast it against the fire, being first
salted and scotched with your knife, baste it with butter, being
finely broil'd, bread it with fine manchet and fine flour, brown it
a little and dish it on a sauce of gravy, minced capers; grated
nutmeg, and a little beaten butter.


  _To bake Lamb._

Season Lamb (as you may see in page 209) with nutmegs, pepper, and
salt, as you do veal, (in page ___) or as you do chickens, in pag.
197, & 198. for hot or cold pies.


  _To boil a Lambs Head in white broth._

Take a lambs head, cleave it, and take out the brains, then open the
pipes of the appurtenances, and wash and soak the meat very clean,
set it a boiling in fair water & when it boils scum it, & put in
some large mace, whole cinamon, slic't dates, some marrow, & salt, &
when the heads is boil'd, dish it up on fine carved sippets, & trim
the dish with scraping sugar: then strain six or seven yolks of eggs
with sack or white-wine, and a ladleful of cream, put it into the
broth, and give it a warm on the fire, stir it, and broth the head,
then lay on the head some slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes, dates,
and large mace.


  _To stew a Lambs Head._

Take a lambs head, cleave it, and take out the brains, wash and pick
the head from the slime and filth, and steep it in fair water, shift
it twice in an hour, as also the appurtenances, then set it a
boiling on the fire with some strong broth, and when it boils scum
it, and put in a large mace or two, some capers, quarters of pears,
a little white wine, some gravy, marrow, and some marigold flowers;
being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets, and broth it, lay
on it slic't lemon, and scalded gooseberries or barberries.


  _To boil a Lambs Head otherways._

Make a forcing or pudding of the brains, being boil'd and cold cut
them into bits, then mince a little veal or lamb with some
beef-suet, and put to it some grated bread, nutmeg, pepper, salt,
some sweet herbs minced, small, and three or four raw eggs, work all
together, and fill the head with this pudding, being cleft, steeped,
and after dried in a clean cloth, stew it in a stewing-pan or
between two dishes with some strong broth; then take the remainder
of this forcing or pudding, and make it into balls, put them a
boiling with the head, and add some white-wine, a whole onion, and
some slic't pipins or pears, or square bits like dice, some bits of
artichocks, sage-leaves, large mace, and lettice boil'd and
quartered, and put in beaten butter; being finely stewed, dish it up
on sippets, and put the balls and the other materials on it, broth
it and run it over with beaten butter and lemon.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION IV.

  _The rarest Ways of dressing of all manner of Roast Meats,
    either of Flesh or Fowl, by Sea or land,
    with their Sauces that properly belong to them._


  _Divers ways of breading or dredging of Meats and Fowl._

  1. Grated bread and flower.

  2. Grated bread, and sweet herbs minced, and dried, or beat to
  powder, mixed with the bread.

  3. Lemon in powder, or orange peel mixt with bread and flower,
  minced small or in powder.

  4. Cinamon, bread, flour, sugar made fine or in powder.

  5. Grated bread, Fennil seed, coriander-seed, cinamon, and sugar.

  6. For pigs, grated bread, flour, nutmeg, ginger, pepper, sugar; but
  first baste it with the jucye of lemons, or oranges, and the yolks
  of eggs.

  7. Bread, sugar, and salt mixed together.


  _Divers Bastings for roast Meats._

  1. Fresh butter.

  2. Clarified suet.

  3. Claret wine, with a bundle of sage, rosemary, tyme, and parsley,
  baste the mutton with these herbs and wine.

  4. Water and salt.

  5. Cream and melted butter, thus flay'd pigs commonly.

  6. Yolks of eggs, juyce of oranges and biskets, the meat being
  almost rosted, comfits for some fine large fowls, as a peacock,
  bustard, or turkey.


  _To roast a shoulder of Mutton in a most excellent new way
    with Oysters and other materials._

Take three pints of great oysters and parboil them in their own
liquor, then put away the liquor and wash them with some white-wine,
then dry them with a clean cloth and season them with nutmeg and
salt, then stuff the shoulder, and lard it with some anchoves; being
clean washed spit it, and lay it to the fire, and baste it with
white or claret wine, then take the bottoms of six artichocks, pared
from the leaves and boil'd tender, then take them out of the liquor
and put them into beaten butter, with the marrow of six
marrow-bones, and keep them warm by a fire or in an oven, then put
to them some slic'd nutmeg, salt, the gravy of a leg of roast
mutton, the juyce of two oranges, and some great oysters a pint,
being first parboil'd, and mingle with them a little musk or
ambergreese; then dish up the shoulder of mutton, and have a sauce
made for it of gravy which came from the roast shoulder of mutton
stuffed with oysters, and anchovies, blow off the fat, then put to
the gravy a little white-wine, some oyster liquor, a whole onion,
and some stript tyme, and boil up the sauce, then put it in a fair
dish, and lay the shoulder of mutton on it, and the bottoms of the
artichocks round the dish brims, and put the marrow and the oysters
on the artichoke bottoms, with some slic't lemon on the shoulder of
mutton, and serve it up hot.


  _To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters otherways._

Take great oysters, and being opened, parboil them in their own
liquor, beard them and wash them in some vinegar, then wipe them
dry, and put to them grated nutmeg, pepper, some broom-buds, and two
or three anchoves; being finely cleansed, washed, and cut into
little bits, the yolk of a raw egg or two dissolved, some salt,
a little samphire cut small, and mingle all together, then stuff the
shoulder, roast it, and baste it with sweet butter, and being
roasted make sauce with the gravy, white wine, oyster liquor, and
some oysters, then boil the sauce up and blow off the fat, beat it
up thick with the yolk of an egg or two and serve the shoulder up
hot with the sauce, and some slic't lemon on it.


  _Otherways._

The oysters being opened parboil them in their liquor, beard them
and wipe them dry, being first washed out of their own liquor with
some vinegar, put them in a dish with some time, sweet marjoram,
nutmeg, and lemon-peel all minced very small, but only the oysters
whole, and a little salt, and mingle all together, then make little
holes in the upper side of the mutton, and fill them with this
composition. Roast the shoulder of mutton, and baste it with butter,
set a dish under it to save the gravy that drippeth from it; then
for the sauce take some of the oysters, and a whole onion, stew them
together with some of the oyster-liquor they were parboil'd in, and
the gravy that dripped from the shoulder, (but first blow off the
fat) and boil up all together pretty thick, with the yolk of an egg,
some verjuyce, the slice of an orange; and serve the mutton on it
hot.

Or make sauce with some oysters being first parboil'd in their
liquor, put to them some mutton gravy, oyster-liquor, a whole onion,
a little white-wine, and large mace, boil it up and garnish the dish
with barberries, slic't lemon, large mace and oysters.

Othertimes for change make sauce with capers, great oysters, gravy,
a whole onion, claret-wine, nutmeg, and the juyce of two or three
oranges beaten up thick with some butter and salt.


  _To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters._

Take a shoulder of mutton and rost it, then make sauce with some
gravy, claret-wine, pepper, grated nutmeg, slic't lemon, and
broom-buds, give it a warm or two, then dish the mutton, and put the
sauce to it, and garnish it with barberries, and slic't lemon.


  _To roast a Chine of Mutton either plain or with divers stuffings,
    lardings and sauces._

First lard it with lard, or lemon peel cut like lard, or with
orange-peel, stick here and there a clove, or in place of cloves,
tops of rosemary, tyme, sage, winter-savory or sweet marjoram, baste
it with butter, and make sauce with mutton-gravy, and nutmeg, boil
it up with a little claret and the juyce of an orange, and rub the
dish you put it in with a clove of garlick.

Or make a sauce with pickled or green cucumbers slic't and boil'd in
strong broth or gravy; with some slic't onions, an anchove or two,
and some grated nutmeg, stew them well together, and serve the
mutton with it hot.


  _Divers Sauces for roast Mutton._

  1. Gravy, capers, samphire, and salt, and stew them well together.

  2. Watter, onion, claret-wine, slic't nutmeg and gravy boiled up.

  3. Whole onions stewed in strong broth or gravy, white-wine, pepper,
  pickled capers, mace, and three or four slices of a lemon.

  4. Mince a little roast mutton hot from the spit, and add to it some
  chopped parsley and onions, verjuyce or vinegar, ginger, and pepper;
  stew it very tender in a pipkin, and serve it under any joynt with
  some gravy of mutton.

  5. Onions, oyster-liquor, claret, capers, or broom-buds, gravy,
  nutmeg, and salt boiled together.

  6. Chop't parsley, verjuyce, butter, sugar, and gravy.

  7. Take vinegar, butter, and currans, put them in a pipkin with
  sweet herbs finely minced, the yolks of two hard eggs, and two or
  three slices of the brownest of the leg, mince it also, some
  cinamon, ginger, sugar, and salt.

  8. Pickled capers, and gravy, or gravy, and samphire, cut an inch
  long.

  9. Chopped parsley and vinegar.

  10. Salt, pepper, and juyce of oranges.

  11. Strained prunes, wine, and sugar.

  12. White-wine, gravy, large mace, and butter thickned with two or
  three yolks of eggs.

  _Oyster Sauce._

  13. Oyster-liquor and gravy boil'd together, with eggs and verjuyce
  to thicken it, then juyce of orange, and slices of lemon over all.

  14. Onions chipped with sweet herbs, vinegar, gravy and salt boil'd
  together.


  _To roast Veal divers ways with many excellent farsings,
    Puddings and Sauces, both in the French, Italian,
    and English fashion._

  _To make a Pudding in a Breast of Veal._

Open the lower end with a sharp knife close between the skin and the
ribs, leave hold enough of the flesh on both sides, that you may put
in your hand between the ribs, and the skin; then make a pudding of
grated white bread, two or three yolks of eggs, a little cream,
clean washt currans pick't and dried, rose-water, cloves, and mace
fine beaten, a little saffron, salt, beef-suet minced fine, some
slic't dates and sugar; mingle all together, and stuff the breast
with it, make the pudding pretty stiff, and prick on the sweetbread
wrapped in the caul, spit it and roast it; then make sauce with some
claret-wine, grated nutmeg, vinegar, butter, and two or three slices
of orange, and boil it up, _&c._


  _To roast a Breast of Veal otherways._

Parboil it, and lard it with small lard all over, or the one half
with lard; and the other with lemon-peel, sage-leaves, or any kind
of sweet herbs; spit it and roast it, and baste it with sweet
butter, and being roasted, bread it with grated bread, flower, and
salt; make sauce with gravy, juyce of oranges, and slic't lemons
laid on it.


  _Or thus._

Make stuffing or farsing with a little minced veal, and some tyme
minced, lard, or fat bacon, a few cloves and mace beaten, salt, and
two or three yolks of eggs; mingle them all together, and fill the
breast, scuer it up with a prick or scuer, then make little puddings
of the same stuff you stuffed the breast, and having spitted the
breast, prick upon it those little puddings, as also the
sweetbreads, roast all together, and baste them with good sweet
butter, being finely roasted, make sauce with juyce of oranges and
lemons.


  _To roast a Loyn of Veal._

Spit it and lay it to the fire, baste it with sweet butter, then set
a dish under it with some vinegar, two or three sage-leaves, and two
or three tops of rosemary and tyme; let the gravy drop on them, and
when the veal is finely roasted, give the herbs and gravy a warm or
two on the fire, and serve it under the veal.


  _Another Sauce for a Loin of Veal._

All manner of sweet herbs minced very small, the yolks of two or
three hard eggs minced very small, and boil them together with a few
currans, a little grated bread, beaten cinamon, sugar, and a whole
clove or two, dish the veal on this sauce, with two or three slices
of an orange.


  _To roast Olives on a Leg of Veal._

Cut a leg of veal into thin slices, and hack them with the back of a
knife; then strew on them a little salt, grated nutmeg, sweet herbs
finely minced, and the yolks of some herd eggs minced also, grated
bread, a little beef-suet minced, currans, and sugar, mingle all
together, and strew it on the olives, then roul it up in little
rouls, spit them and roul the caul of veal about them, roast them
and baste them in sweet butter; being roasted, make sauce with some
of the stuffing, verjuyce, the gravy that drops from them, and some
sugar, and serve the olives on it.


  _To roast a Leg or Fillet of Veal._

Take it and stuff it with beef-suet, seasoned with nutmeg, salt, and
the yolks of two or three raw eggs, mix them with suet, stuff it and
roast it; then make sauce with the gravy that dripped from it, blow
off the fat, and give it two or three warms on the fire, and put to
it the juyce of two or three oranges.


  _To roast Veal in pieces._

Take a leg of veal, and cut it into square pieces as big as a hens
egg, season them with pepper, salt, some beaten cloves, and
fennil-seed; then spit them with slices of bacon between every
piece; being spitted, put the caul of the veal about them and roast
them, then make the sauce of the gravy and the juyce of oranges.
Thus you may do of veal sweet-breads, and lamb-stones.


  _To roast Calves Feet._

First boil them tender and blanch them, and being cold lard them
thick with small lard, then spit them on a small spit and roast
them, serve them with a sauce made of vinegar, cinamon, sugar, and
butter.


  _To roast a Calves Head with Oysters._

Take a Calves head and cleave it, take out the brains and wash them
very well with the head, cut out the tongue, and boil, blanch, and
parboil the brains, as also the head and tongue; then mince the
brain and tongue with a little sage, oysters, marrow, or beef-suet
very small, mix with it three or four yolks of eggs, beaten ginger,
pepper, nutmeg, grated bread, salt, and a little sack, this being
done, then take the calves head, and fill it with this composition
where the brains and tongue lay: bind it up close together, spit it,
and stuff it with oysters, compounded with nutmeg, mace, tyme,
graded bread, salt, and pepper: Mix all these with a little vinegar,
and the white of an egg, and roul the oysters in it; stuff the head
with it as full as you can, and roast it thorowly, setting a dish
under it to catch the gravy, wherein let there be oysters, sweet
herbs minced, a little white wine and slic't nutmeg; when the head
is roasted, set the dish wherein the sauce is on the coals to stew a
little, then put in a peice of butter, the juyce of an orange, and
salt, beating it up thick together, dish the head, and put the sauce
to it, and serve it hot to the table.


  _Several Sauces for roast Veal._

  1. Gravy, claret, nutmeg, vinegar, butter, sugar, and oranges.

  2. Juyce of orange, gravy, nutmeg, and slic't lemon on it.

  3. Vinegar and butter.

  4. All manner of sweet herbs chopped small with the yolks of two or
  three eggs, and boil them in vinegar, butter, a few bread crumbs,
  currans, beaten cinamon, sugar, and a whole clove or two, put it
  under the veal, with slices of orange and lemon about the dish.

  5. Claret sauce, of boil'd carrots, and boil'd quinces stamped and
  strained, with lemon, nutmeg, pepper, rose-vinegar, sugar, and
  verjuyce, boil'd to an indifferent height or thickness, with a few
  whole cloves.


  _To roast red Deer._

Take a side, or half hanch, and either lard them with small lard, or
stick them with cloves; but parboil them before you lard them, then
spit and roast them.


  _Sauces for red Deer._

  1. The gravy and sweet herbs chopped small and boil'd together, or
  the gravy only.

  2. The juyce of oranges or lemons, and gravy.

  3. A Gallendine sauce made with strained bread, vinegar, claret
  wine, cinamon, ginger, and sugar; strain it, and being finely beaten
  with the spices boil it up with a few whole cloves and a sprig of
  rosemary.

  4. White bread boil'd in water pretty thick without spices, and put
  to it some butter, vinegar, and sugar.

  If you will stuff or farse any venison, stick them with rosemary,
  tyme, savory, or cloves, or else with all manner of sweet herbs,
  minced with beef-suet, lay the caul over the side or half hanch,
  and so roast it.


  _To roast pork with the Sauces belonging to it._

Take a chine of Pork, draw it with sage on both sides being first
spitted, then roast it; thus you may do of any other Joynt, whether
Chine, Loyn, Rack, Breast, or spare-rib, or Harslet of a bacon hog,
being salted a night of two.


  _Sauces._

  1. Gravy, chopped sage, and onions boil'd together with some pepper.

  2. Mustard, vinegar, and pepper.

  3. Apples pared, quartered, and boil'd in fair water, with some
  sugar and butter.

  4. Gravy, onions, vinegar, and pepper.


  _To roast Pigs divers ways with their different sauces._

  _To roast a Pig with the hair on._

Take a pig and draw out his intrails or guts, liver and lights, draw
him very clean at vent, and wipe him, cut off his feet, truss him,
and prick up the belly close, spit it, and lay it to the fire, but
scorch it not, being a quarter roasted, the skin will rise up in
blisters from the flesh; then with your knife or hands pull off the
skin and hair, and being clean flayed, cut slashes down to the
bones, baste it with butter and cream, being but warm, then bread it
with grated white bread, currans, sugar, and salt mixed together,
and thus apply basting upon dregging, till the body be covered an
inch thick; then the meat being throughly roasted, draw it and serve
it up whole, with sauce made of wine-vinegar, whole cloves, cinamon,
and sugar boiled to a syrrup.


  _Otherways._

You may make a pudding in his belly, with grated bread, and some
sweet herbs minced small, a little beef-suet also minced, two or
three yolks of raw eggs, grated nutmeg, sugar, currans, cream, salt,
pepper, _&c._ Dredge it or bread it with flower, bread, sugar,
cinamon slic't nutmeg.


  _To dress a Pig the French way._

Take and spit it, the Pig being scalded and drawn, and lay it down
to the fire, and when the Pig is through warm, take off the skin,
and cut it off the spit, and divide it into twenty pieces, more or
less, (as you please) then take some white-wine, and some strong
broth, and stew it therein with an onion or two minc't very small,
and some stripped tyme, some pepper, grated nutmeg, and two or three
anchoves, some elder vinegar, a little butter, and some gravy if you
have it; dish it up with the same liquor it was stewed in, with some
French bread in slices under it, with oranges, and lemons upon it.


  _To roast a Pig the plain way._

Scald and draw it, wash it clean, and put some sage in the belly,
prick it up, and spit it, roast it and baste with butter, and salt
it; being roasted fine and crisp, make sauce with chopped sage and
currans well boil'd in vinegar and fair water, then put to them the
gravy of the Pig, a little grated bread, the brains, some
barberries, and sugar, give these a warm or two, and serve the Pig
on this sauce with a little beaten butter.


  _To roast a Pig otherways._

Take a Pig, scald and draw it, then mince some sweet herbs, either
sage or penny-royal, and roul it up in a ball with some butter,
prick it up in the pigs belly and roast him; being roasted, make
sauce with butter, vinegar, the brains, and some barberries.


  _Otherways._

Draw out his bowels, and flay it but only the head-truss the head
looking over his back; and fill his belly with a pudding made of
grated bread, nutmeg, a little minced beef-suet, two or three yolks
of raw eggs, salt, and three or four spoonfuls of good cream, fill
his belly and prick it up, roast it and baste it with yolks of eggs;
being roasted, wring on the juyce of a lemon, and bread it with
grated bread, pepper, nutmeg, salt, and ginger, bread it quick with
the bread and spices.

Then make sauce with vinegar, butter, and the yolks of hard eggs
minced, boil them together with the gravy of the Pig, and serve it
on this sauce.


  _To roast Hares with their several stuffings and sauces._

Take a hare, flay it, set it, and lard it with small lard, stick it
with cloves, and make a pudding in his belly with grated bread,
grated nutmeg, beaten cinamon, salt, currans, eggs, cream, and
sugar; make it good, and stiff, fill the hare and roast it: if you
would have the pudding green, put juyce of spinage, if yellow,
saffron.

  _Sauce._

Beaten cinamon, nutmeg, ginger, pepper, boil'd prunes, and currans
strained, muskefied bisket-bread, beaten into powder, sugar, and
cloves, all boiled up as thick as water-grewel.


  _To roast a Hare with the skin on._

Draw a hare (that is, the bowels out of the body) wipe it clean, and
make a farsing or stuffing of all manner of sweet herbs, as tyme,
winter-savory, sweet Marjoram, and parsley, mince them very small,
and roul them in some butter, make a ball thereof, and put it in the
belly of the hare, prick it up close, and roast it with the skin and
hair on it, baste it with butter, and being almost roasted flay off
the skin, and stick a few cloves on the hare; bread it with fine
grated manchet, flower, and cinamon, bread it good and thick, froth
it up, and dish it on sauce made of grated bread, claret-wine,
wine-vinegar, cinamon, ginger, sugar, and barberries, boil it up to
an indifferency.


  _Several Sauces belonging to Rabits._

  1. Beaten butter, and rub the dish with a clove of garlick.

  2. Sage and parsley minced, roul it in a ball with some butter,
  and fill the belly with this stuffing.

  3. Beaten butter with lemon and pepper.

  4. In the French fashion, onions minced small and fried,
  and mingled with mustard and pepper.

  5. The rabits being roasted, wash the belly with the gravy of
  mutton, and add to it a slice or two of lemon.


  _To roast Woodcocks in the English Fashion._

First pull and draw them, then being washt and trust, roast them,
baste them with butter, and save the gravy, then broil toasts and
butter them; being roasted, bread them with bread and flower, and
serve them in a clean dish on the toast and gravy.


  _Otherways in the French Fashion._

Being new and fresh kil'd that day you use them, pull, truss, & lard
them with a broad piece of lard or bacon pricked over the breast:
being roasted, serve them on broil'd toast, put in verjuyce, or the
juyce of orange with the gravy, and warmed on the fire.

Or being stale, draw them, and put a clove or two in the bellies,
with a piece of bacon.


  _To roast a Hen or Pullet._

Take a Pullet or Hen full of eggs, draw it and roast it; being
roasted break it up, and mince the brauns in thin slices, save the
wings whole, or not mince the brauns, and leave the rump with the
legs whole; stew all in the gravy and a little salt.

Then have a minced lemon, and put it into the gravy, dish the minced
meat in the midst of the dish, and the thighs, wings, and rumps
about it. Garnish the dish, with oranges and lemons quartered, and
serve them up covered.


  _Sauce with Oysters and Bacon._

Take Oysters being parboil'd and clenged from the grunds, mingle
them with pepper, salt, beaten nutmeg, time, and sweet marjoram,
fill the Pullets belly, and roast it, as also two or three ribs of
interlarded bacon, serve it in two pieces into the dish with the
pullet; then make sauce of the gravy, some of the oysters liquor,
oysters and juice of oranges boil'd together, take some of the
oysters out of the pullets belly, and lay on the breast of it, then
put the sauce to it with slices of lemon.


  _Sauce for Hens or Pullets to prepare them to roast._

Take a pullet, or hen, if lean, lard it, if fat, not; or lard either
fat or lean with a piece or slice of bacon over it, and a peice of
interlarded bacon in the belly, seasoned with nutmeg, and pepper,
and stuck with cloves.

Then for the sauce take the yolks of six hard eggs minced small, put
to them white-wine, or wine vinegar, butter, and the gravy of the
hen, juyce of orange, pepper, salt, and if you please add thereto
mustard.


  _Several other Sauces for roast Hens._

  1. Take beer, salt, the yolks of three hard eggs, minced small,
  grated bread, three or four spoonfuls of gravy; and being almost
  boil'd, put in the juyce of two or three oranges, slices of a lemon
  and orange, with lemon-peel shred small.

  2. Beaten butter with juice of lemon or orange, white or claret
  wine.

  3. Gravy and claret wine boil'd with a piece of an onion, nutmeg,
  and salt, serve it with the slices of orange or lemons, or the juyce
  in the sauce.

  4. Or with oyster-liquor, an anchove or two, nutmeg, and gravy, and
  rub the dish with a clove of garlick.

  5. Take the yolks of hard eggs and lemon peel, mince them very
  small, and stew them in white-wine, salt, and the gravy of the fowl.


  _Several Sauces for roast Chickens._

  1. Gravy, and the juyce or slices of orange.

  2. Butter, verjuyce, and gravy of the chicken, or mutton gravy.

  3. Butter and vinegar boil'd together, put to it a little sugar,
  then make thin sops of bread, lay the roast chicken on them, and
  serve them up hot.

  4. Take sorrel, wash and stamp it, then have thin slices of manchet,
  put them in a dish with some vinegar, strained sorrel, sugar, some
  gravy, beaten cinamon, beaten butter, and some slices of orange or
  lemon, and strew thereon some cinamon and sugar.

  5. Take slic't oranges, and put to them a little white wine,
  rose-water, beaten mace, ginger, some sugar, and butter; set them on
  a chafing dish of coals and stew them; then have some slices of
  manchet round the dish finely carved, and lay the chickens being
  roasted on the sauce.

  6. Slic't onions, claret wine, gravy, and salt boil'd up.


  _Sauces for roast Pigeons or Doves._

  1. Gravy and juyce of orange.

  2. Boil'd parsley minced, and put amongst some butter and vinegar
  beaten up thick.

  3. Gravy, claret wine, and an onion stewed together, with a little
  salt.

  4. Vine-leaves roasted with the Pigeons minced and put in
  claret-wine and salt, boil'd together, some butter and gravy.

  5. Sweet butter and juyce of orange beat together, and made thick.

  6. Minced onions boil'd in claret wine almost dry, then put to it
  nutmeg, sugar, gravy of the fowl, and a little pepper.

  7. Or gravy of the Pigeons only.


_Sauces for all manner of roast Land-Fowl, as Turkey, Bustard,
Peacock, Pheasant, Partridge_, &c.

  1. Slic't onions being boil'd, stew them in some water, salt,
  pepper, some grated bread, and the gravy of the fowl.

  2. Take slices of white-bread and boil them in fair water with two
  whole onions, some gravy, half a grated nutmeg, and a little salt;
  strain them together through a strainer, and boil it up as thick as
  water grewel; then add to it the yolks of two eggs dissolved with
  the juyce of two oranges, _&c._

  3. Take thin slices of manchet, a little of the fowl, some sweet
  butter, grated nutmeg, pepper, and salt; stew all together, and
  being stewed, put in a lemon minced with the peel.

  4. Onions slic't and boil'd in fair water, and a little salt, a few
  bread crumbs beaten, pepper, nutmeg, three spoonful of white wine,
  and some lemon-peel finely minced, and boil'd all together: being
  almost boil'd put in the juyce of an orange, beaten butter, and the
  gravy of the fowl.

  5. Stamp small nuts to a paste, with bread, nutmeg, pepper, saffron,
  cloves, juyce of orange, and strong broth, strain and boil them
  together pretty thick.

  6. Quince, prunes, currans, and raisins, boil'd, muskefied bisket
  stamped and strained with white wine, rose vinegar, nutmeg, cinamon,
  cloves, juyce of oranges and sugar, and boil it not too thick.

  7. Boil carrots and quinces, strain them with rose vinegar, and
  verjuyce, sugar, cinamon, pepper, and nutmeg, boil'd with a few
  whole cloves, and a little musk.

  8. Take a manchet, pare off the crust and slice it, then boil it in
  fair water, and being boil'd some what thick put in some white wine,
  wine vinegar, rose, or elder vinegar, some sugar and butter, _&c._

  9. Almond-paste and crumbs of manchet, stamp them together with some
  sugar, ginger, and salt, strain them with grape-verjuyce, and juyce
  of oranges; boil it pretty thick.


  _Sauce for a stubble or fat Goose._

  1. The Goose being scalded, drawn, and trust, put a handful of salt
  in the belly of it, roast it, and make sauce with sowr apples
  slic't, and boil'd in beer all to mash, then put to it sugar and
  beaten butter. Sometime for veriety add barberries and the gravy of
  the fowl.

  2. Roast sowr apples or pippins, strain them, and put to them
  vinegar, sugar, gravy, barberries, grated bread, beaten cinamon,
  mustard, and boil'd onions strained and put to it.


  _Sauces for a young stubble Goose._

Take the liver and gizzard, mince it very small with some beets,
spinage, sweet herbs, sage, salt, and some minced lard; fill the
belly of the goose, and sow up the rump or vent, as also the neck;
roast it, and being roasted, take out the farsing and put it in a
dish, then add to it the gravy of the goose, verjuyce, and pepper,
give it a warm on the fire, and serve it with this sauce in a clean
dish.

The French sauce for a goose is butter, mustard, sugar, vinegar, and
barberries.


  _Sauce for a Duck._

Onions slic't and carrots cut square like dice, boil'd in
white-wine, strong broth, some gravy, minced parsley, savory
chopped, mace, and butter; being well stewed together, it will serve
for divers wild fowls, but most proper for water fowl.


  _Sauces for Duck and Mallard in the French fashion._

  1. Vinegar and sugar boil'd to a syrrup, with two or three cloves,
  and cinamon, or cloves only.

  2. Oyster liquor, gravy of the fowl, whole onions boil'd in it,
  nutmeg, and anchove. If lean, farse and lard them.


  _Sauces for any kind of roast Sea Fowl, as Swan, Whopper,
    Crane, Shoveler, Hern, Bittern, or Geese._

Make a gallendine with some grated bread, beaten cinamon, and
ginger, a quartern of sugar, a quart of claret wine, a pint of wine
vinegar, strain the aforesaid materials and boil them in a skillet
with a few whole cloves; in the boiling stir it with a spring of
rosemary, add a little red sanders, and boil it as thick as water
grewel.


  _Green Sauce for Pork, Goslings, Chickens, Lamb, or Kid._

Stamp sorrel with white-bread and pared pipkins in a stone or wooden
mortar, put sugar to it, and wine vinegar, then strain it thorow a
fine cloth, pretty thick, dish it in saucers, and scrape sugar
on it.


  _Otherways._

Mince sorrel and sage, and stamp them with bread, the yolks of hard
eggs, pepper, salt, and vinegar, but no sugar at all.


  _Or thus._

Juyce of green white, lemon, bread, and sugar.


  _To make divers sorts of Vinegar._

Take good white-wine, and fill a firkin half full, or a lesser
vessel, leave it unstopped, and set it in some hot place in the sun,
or on the leads of a house, or gutter.

If you would desire to make vinegar in haste, put some salt, pepper,
sowr leven mingled together, and a hot steel, stop it up and let the
Sun come hot to it.

If more speedy, put good wine into an earthen pot or pitcher, stop
the mouth with a piece of paste, and put it in a brass pan or pot,
boil it half an hour, and it will grow sowr.

Or not boil it, and put into it a beet root, medlars, services,
mulberries, unripe flowers, a slice of barley bread hot out of the
oven, or the blossoms of services in their season, dry them in the
sun in a glass vessel in the manner, of rose vinegar, fill up the
glass with clear wine vinegar, white or claret wine, and set it in
the sun, or in a chimney by the fire.


  _To make Vinegar of corrupt Wine._

Boil it, and scum it very clean, boil away one third part, then put
it in a vessel, put to it some charnel, stop the vessel close, and
in a short time it will prove good vinegar.


  _To make Vinegar otherways._

Take six gallons of strong ale of the first running, set it abroad
to cool, and being cold put barm to it, and head it very thorowly;
then run it up in a firkin, and lay it in the sun, then take four or
five handfuls of beans, and parch them on a fire-shovel, or pan,
being cut like chesnuts to roast, put them into the vinegar as hot
as you can, and stop the bung-hole with clay; but first put in a
handful of rye leven, then strain a good handful of salt, and put in
also; let it stand in the sun from _May_ to _August_, and then take
it away.


  _Rose Vinegar._

Keep Roses dried, or dried Elder flowers, put them into several
double glasses or stone bottles, write upon them, and set them in
the sun, by the fire, or in a warm oven; when the vinegar is out,
put in more flowers, put out the old, and fill them up with the
vinegar again.


  _Pepper Vinegar._

Put whole pepper in a fine clothe, bind it up and put it in the
vessel or bottle of vinegar the space of eight Days.


  _Vinegar for Digestion and Health._

Take eight drams of Sea-onions, a quart of vinegar, and as much
pepper as onions, mint, and Juniper-berries.


  _To Make strong Wine Vinegar into Balls._

Take bramble berries when they are half ripe, dry them and make them
into powder, with a little strong vinegar, make little balls, and
dry them in the sun, and when you will use them, take wine and heat
it, put in some of the ball or a whole one, and it will be turned
very speedily into strong vinegar.


  _To make Verjuyce._

Take crabs as soon as the kernels turn black, and lay them in a heap
to sweat, then pick them from stalks and rottenness; and then in a
long trough with stamping beetles stamp them to mash, and make a bag
of course hair-cloth as square as the press; fill it with stamped
crabs, and being well pressed, put it up in a clean barrel or
hogs-head.


  _To make Mustard divers ways._

Have good seed, pick it, and wash it in cold water, drain it, and
rub it dry in a cloth very clean; then beat it in a mortar with
strong wine-vinegar; and being fine beaten, strain it and keep it
close covered. Or grind it in a mustard quern, or a bowl with a
cannon bullet.


  _Otherways._

Make it with grape-verjuyce, common-verjuyce, stale beer, ale,
butter, milk, white-wine, claret, or juyce of cherries.


  _Mustard of Dijon, or French Mustard._

The seed being cleansed, stamp it in a mortar, with vinegar and
honey, then take eight ounces of seed, two ounces of cinamon, two of
honey, and vinegar as much as will serve, good mustard not too
thick, and keep it close covered in little oyster-barrels.


  _To make dry Mustard very pleasant in little Loaves or Cakes
    to carry in ones Pocket, or to keep dry for use at any time._

Take two ounces of seamy, half an ounce of cinamon, and beat them in
a mortar very fine with a little vinegar, and honey, make a perfect
paste of it, and make it into little cakes or loaves, dry them in
the sun or in an oven, and when you would use them, dissolve half a
loaf or cake with some vinegar, wine, or verjuyce.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION V.

  _The best way of making all manner of Sallets._


  _To make a grand Sallet of divers Compounds._

Take a cold roast capon and cut it into thin slices square and
small, (or any other roast meat as chicken, mutton, veal, or neats
tongue) mingle with it a little minced taragon and an onion, then
mince lettice as small as the capon, mingle all together, and lay it
in the middle of a clean scoured dish. Then lay capers by
themselves, olives by themselves, samphire by it self, broom buds,
pickled mushrooms, pickled oysters, lemon, orange, raisins, almonds,
blue-figs, Virginia Potato, caperons, crucifix pease, and the like,
more or less, as occasion serves, lay them by themselves in the dish
round the meat in partitions. Then garnish the dish sides with
quarters of oranges, or lemons, or in slices, oyl and vinegar beaten
together, and poured on it over all.

On fish days, a roast, broil'd, or boil'd pike boned, and being
cold, slice it as abovesaid.


  _Another way for a grand Sallet._

Take the buds of all good sallet herbs, capers, dates, raisins,
almonds, currans, figs, orangado. Then first of all lay it in a
large dish, the herbs being finely picked and washed, swing them in
a clean napkin; then lay the other materials round the dish, and
amongst the herbs some of all the aforesaid fruits, some fine sugar,
and on the top slic't lemon, and eggs scarse hard cut in halves, and
laid round the side of the dish, and scrape sugar over all; or you
may lay every fruit in partitions several.


  _Otherways._

Dish first round the centre slic't figs, then currans, capers,
almonds, and raisins together; next beyond that, olives, beets,
cabbidge-lettice, cucumbers, or slic't lemon carved; then oyl and
vinegar beaten together, the beast oyl you can get, and sugar or
none, as you please; garnish the brims of the dish with orangado,
slic't lemon jagged, olives stuck with slic't almonds, sugar or
none.


  _Another grand Sallet._

Take all manner of knots of buds of sallet herbs, buds of pot-herbs,
or any green herbs, as sage, mint, balm, burnet, violet-leaves, red
coleworts streaked of divers fine colours, lettice, any flowers,
blanched almonds, blue figs, raisins of the sun, currans, capers,
olives; then dish the sallet in a heap or pile, being mixed with
some of the fruits, and all finely washed and swung in a napkin,
then about the centre lay first slic't figs, next capers and
currans, then almonds and raisins, next olives, and lastly either
jagged beats, jagged lemons, jagged cucumbers, or cabbidge lettice
in quarters, good oyl and wine vinegar, sugar or none.


  _Otherways._

The youngest and smallest leaves of spinage, the smallest also of
sorrel, well washed currans, and red beets round the centre being
finely carved, oyl and vinegar, and the dish garnished with lemon
and beets.


  _Other Grand Sallets._

Take green purslain and pick it leaf by leaf, wash it and swing it
in a napkin, then being disht in a fair clean dish, and finely piled
up in a heap in the midst of it lay round about the centre of the
sallet pickled capers, currans, and raisins of the sun, washed,
pickled, mingled, and laid round it: about them some carved
cucumbers in slices or halves, and laid round also. Then garnish the
dish brims with borage, or clove jelly-flowers. Or otherways with
jagged cucumber-peels, olives, capers, and raisins of the sun, then
the best sallet-oyl and wine-vinegar.


  _Other Grand Sallets._

All sorts of good herbs, the little leaves of red sage, the smallest
leaves of sorrel, and the leaves of parsley pickt very small, the
youngest and smallest leaves of spinage, some leaves of burnet, the
smallest leaves of lettice, white endive and charvel all finely
pick't and washed, and swung in a strainer or clean napkin, and well
drained from the water; then dish it in a clean scowred dish, and
about the centre capers, currans, olives, lemons carved and slic't,
boil'd beet-roots carved and slic't, and dished round also with good
oyl and vinegar.


  _A good Sallet otherways._

Take corn-sallet, rampons, Alexander-buds, pickled mushrooms, and
make a sallet of them, then lay the corn sallet through the middle
of the dish from side to side, and on the other side rampons, then
Alexander-buds, and in the other four quarter of mushrooms, salt,
over all, and put good oyl and vinegar to it.


  _Other grand Sallet._

Take the tenderest, smallest, and youngest ellicksander-buds, and
small sallet, or young lettice mingled together, being washed and
pickled, with some capers. Pile it or lay it flat in a dish, first
lay about the centre, olives, capers, currans, and about those
carved oranges and lemons, or in a cross partition-ways, and salt,
run oyl and vinegar over all.


  _Otherways._

Boil'd parsnips in quarters laid round the dish, and in the midst
some small sallet, or water cresses finely washed and picked, on the
water-cresses some little small lettice finely picked and washed
also, and some elicksander-buds in halves, and some in quarters, and
between the quarters of the parsnips, some small lettice, some
water-cresses and elicksander-buds, oyl and vinegar, and round the
dish some slices of parsnips.


  _Another grand Sallet._

Take small sallet of all good sallet herbs, then mince some white
cabbidge leaves, or striked cole-worts, mingle them among the small
sallet, or some lilly-flowers slit with a pin; then first lay some
minced cabbidge in a clean scowred dish, and the minced sallet round
about it; then some well washed and picked capers, currans, olives,
or none; then about the rest, a round of boild red beets, oranges,
or lemons carved. For the garnish of the brim of the dish, boild
colliflowers, carved lemons, beets, and capers.


  _Sallet of Scurvy grass._

Being finely pick't short, well soak't in clean water, and swung
dry, dish it round in a fine clean dish, with capers and currans
about it, carved lemon and orange round that, and eggs upon the
centre not boil'd too hard, and parted in halves, then oyl and
vinegar; over all scraping sugar, and trim the brim of the dish.


  _A grand Sallet of Alexander-buds._

Take large Alexander-buds, and boil them in fair water after they be
cleansed and washed, but first let the water boil, then put them in,
and being boil'd, drain them on a dish bottom or in a cullender;
then have boil'd capers and currans, and lay them in the midst of a
clean scowred dish, the buds parted in two with a sharp knife, and
laid round about upright, or one half on one side, and the other
against it on the other side, so also carved lemon, scrape on sugar,
and serve it with good oyl and wine vinegar.


  _Other grand Sallet of Watercresses._

Being finely picked, washed and laid in the middle of a clean dish
with slic't oranges and lemons finely carved one against the other,
in partitions or round the dish, with some Alexander-buds boil'd or
raw, currans, pers, oyl, and vinegar, sugar, or none.


  _A grand Sallet of pickled capers._

Pickled capers and currans basted and boil'd together, disht in the
middle of a clean dish, with red beets boil'd and jagged, and dish't
round the capers and currans, as also jagg'd lemon, and serve it
with oyl and vinegar.


  _To pickle Samphire, Broom-buds, Kitkeys, Crucifix Pease,
    Purslane, or the like._

Take Samphire, and pick the branches from the dead leaves or straws,
then lay it in a pot or barrel, & make a strong brine of white or
bay-salt, in the boiling scum it clean; being boil'd and cold put it
to the samphire, cover it and keep it for all the year, and when you
have any occasion to use it, take and boil it in fair water, but
first let the water boil before you put it in, being boiled and
become green, let it cool, then take it out of the water, and put it
in a little bain or double viol with a broad mouth, put strong wine
vinegar to it, close it up close and keep it.


  _Otherways._

Put samphire in a brass pot that will contain it, and put to it as
much wine-vinegar as water, but no salt; set it over a charcoal-fire,
cover it close, and boil it till it become green, then put it up in a
barrell with wine-vinegar close on the head, and keep it for use.


  _To pickle Cucumbers._

Pickle them with salt, vinegar, whole pepper, dill-seed, some of the
stalks cut, charnell, fair water, and some sicamore-leaves, and
barrel them up close in a barrel.


  _Pickled Quinces the best way._

1. Take quinces not cored nor pared, boil them in fair water not too
tender, and put them in a barrel, fill it up with their liquor, and
close on the head.

2. Pare them and boil them with white-wine, whole cloves, cinamon,
and slic't ginger, barrel them up and keep them.

3. In the juyce of sweet apples, not cored, but wiped, and put up
raw.

4. In white-wine barrel'd up raw.

5. Being pared and cored, boil them up in sweet-wort and sugar, keep
them in a glazed pipkin close covered.

6. Core them and save the cores, cut some of the crab-quinces, and
boil them after the quinces be parboil'd & taken up; then boil the
cores, and some of the crab-quinces in quarters, the liquor being
boild strain it thorow a strainer, put it in a barrel with the
quinces, and close up the barrel.


  _To pickle Lemon._

Boil them in water and salt, and put them up with white-wine.


  _To pickle any kind of Flowers._

Put them into a gally-pot or double glass, with as much sugar as
they weigh, fill them up with wine vinegar; to a pint of vinegar a
pound of sugar, and a pound of flowers; so keep them for sallets or
boild meats in a double glass covered over with a blade and leather.


  _To pickle Capers, Gooseberries, Barberries,
    red and white Currans._

Pick them and put them in the juyce of crab-cherries, grape-verjuyce,
or other verjuyce, and then barel them up.


  _To Candy Flowers for Sallets, as Violets, Cowslips,
    Clove-gilliflowers, Roses, Primroses, Borrage, Bugloss_, &c.

Take weight for weight of sugar candy, or double refined sugar,
being beaten fine, searsed, and put in a silver dish with
rose-water, set them over a charecoal fire, and stir them with a
silver spoon till they be candied, or boil them in a Candy sirrup
height in a dish or skillet, keep them in a dry place for your use,
and when you use them for sallets, put a little wine-vinegar to
them, and dish them.


  _For the compounding and candying the foresaid
    pickled and candied Sallets._

Though they may be served simply of themselves, and are both good
and dainty, yet for better curiosity and the finer ordering of a
table, you may thus use them.

First, if you would set forth a red flower that you know or have
seen, you shall take the pot of preserv'd gilliflowers, and suiting
the colours answerable to the flower, you shall proportion it forth,
and lay the shape of a flower with a purslane stalk, make the stalk
of the flower, and the dimensions of the leaves and branches with
thin slices of cucumbers, make the leaves in true proportion jagged
or otherways, and thus you may set forth some blown some in the bud,
and some half blown, which will be very pretty and curious; if
yellow, set it forth with cowslip or primroses; if blue take violets
or borrage; and thus of any flowers.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION VI.

  _To make all manner of Carbonadoes, either of Flesh or Fowl;
    as also all manner of fried Meats of Flesh, Collops and Eggs,
    with the most exquisite way of making Pancakes, Fritters,
    and Tansies._


  _To carbonado a Chine of Mutton._

Take a Chine of Mutton, salt it, and broil it on the embers, or
toast it against the fire; being finely broil'd, baste it, and bread
it with fine grated manchet, and serve it with gravy only.


  _To carbonado a Shoulder of Mutton._

Take a Shoulder of Mutton, half boil it, scotch it and salt it, save
the gravy, and broil it on a soft fire being finely coloured and
fitted, make sauce with butter, vinegar, pepper, and mustard.


  _To carbonado a Rack of Mutton._

Cut it into steaks, salt and broil them on the embers, and being
finely soaked, dish them and make sauce of good mutton-gravy, beat
up thick with a little juyce of orange, and a piece of butter.


  _To carbonado a Leg of Mutton._

Cut it round cross the bone about half an inch thick, then hack it
with the back of a knife, salt it, and broil it on the embers on a
soft fire the space of an hour; being finely broil'd, serve it with
gravy sauce, and juyce of orange.

Thus you may broil any hanch of venison, and serve it with gravy
only.


  _To broil a chine of Veal._

Cut it in three or four pieces, lard them (or not) with small lard,
season them with salt and broil them on a soft fire with some
branches of sage and rosemary between the gridiron and the chine;
being broil'd, serve it with gravy, beaten butter, and juyce of
lemon or orange.


  _To broil a Leg of Veal._

Cut it into rowls, or round the leg in slices as thick as ones
finger, lard them or not, then broil them softly on embers, and make
sauce with beaten butter, gravy, and juyce of orange.


  _To carbonado a Rack of Pork._

Take a Rack of Pork, take off the skin, and cut it into steaks, then
salt it, and strow on some fennil seeds whole and broil it on a soft
fire, being finely broil'd, serve it on wine-vinegar and pepper.


  _To broil a Flank of Pork._

Flay it and cut it into thin slices, salt it, and broil it on the
embers in a dripping-pan of white paper, and serve it on the paper
with vinegar and pepper.


  _To broil Chines of Pork._

Broil them as you do the rack, but bread them and serve them with
vinegar and pepper, or mustard and vinegar.

Or sometimes apples in slices, boil'd in beer and beaten butter to a
mash.

Or green sauce, cinamon, and sugar.

Otherways, sage and onions minced, with vinegar and pepper boil'd in
strong broth till they be tender.

Or minced onions boil'd in vinegar and pepper.


  _To broil fat Venison._

Take half a hanch, and cut the fattest part into thick slices half
an inch thick; salt and broil them on the warm embers, and being
finely soaked, bread them, and serve them with gravy only.

Thus you may broil a side of venison, or boil a side, fresh in water
and salt, then broil it and dredge it, and serve it with vinegar and
pepper.

Broil the chine raw as you do the half hanch, bread it and serve it
with gravy.


  _To fry Lambs or Kids Stones._

Take the stones, parboil them, then mince them small and fry them in
sweet butter, strain them with some cream, some beaten cinamon,
pepper, and grated cheese being put to it when it is strained, then
fry them, and being fried, serve them with sugar and rose-water.

Thus may you dress calves or lambs brains.


  _To carbonado Land or Water Fowl._

Being roasted, cut them up and sprinkle them with salt, then scoch
and broil them and make sauce with vinegar and butter, or juyce of
orange.


  _To dress a dish of Collops and Egg the best way for service._

Take fine young and well coloured bacon of the ribs, the quantity of
two pound, cut it into thine slices and lay them in a clean dish,
toste them before the fire fine and crisp; then poche the eggs in a
fair scrowred skillet white and fine, dish them on a dish and plate,
and lay on the colops, some upon them, and some round the dish.


  _To broil Bacon on Paper._

Make the fashion of two dripping-pans of two sheets of white paper,
then take two pound of fine interlarded bacon, pare off the top, and
cut the bacon into slices as thin as a card, lay them on the papers,
then put them on a gridiron, and broil them on the embers.


  _To broil Brawn._

Cut a Collar into six or seven slices round the Collar, and lay it
on a plate in the oven, being broil'd serve it with juyce of orange,
pepper, gravy, and beaten butter.


  _To fry Eggs._

Take fifteen eggs and beat them in a dish, then have interlarded
bacon cut into square bits like dice, and fry them with chopped
onions, and put to them cream, nutmeg, cloves, cinamon, pepper, and
sweet herbs chopped small, (or no herbs nor spice) being fried,
serve them on a clean dish, with sugar and juyce of orange.


  _To fry an Egg as round as a Ball._

Take a broad frying posnet, or deep frying pan, and three pints of
clarified butter or sweet suet, heat it as hot as you do for
fritters; then take a stick and stir it till it run round like to a
whirle-pit; then break an egg into the middle of the whirle, and
turn it round with your stick till it be as hard as a soft poached
egg, and the whirling round of the butter or suet will make round as
a ball; then take it up with a slice, and put it in a warm pipkin or
dish, set it a leaning against the fire, so you may do as many as
you please, they will keep half an hour yet be soft; you may serve
them with fried or toasted collops.


  _To make the best Fritters._

Take good mutton-broth being cold, and no fat, mix it with flour and
eggs, some salt, beaten nutmeg and ginger, beat them well together,
then have apples or pippins, pare and core them, and cut them into
dice-work, or square bits, and when you will fry them, put them in
the batter, and fry them in clear clarified suet, or clarified
butter, fry them white and fine, and sugar them.


  _Otherways._

Take a pint of sack, a pint of ale, some ale-yeast or barm, nine
eggs yolks and whites beaten very well, the eggs first, then all
together, then put in some ginger, salt, and fine flour, let it
stand an hour or two, then put in apples, and fry them in beef-suet
clarified, or clarified butter.


  _Other Fritters._

Take a quart of flour, three pints of cold mutton broth, a nutmeg,
a quartern of cinamon, a race of ginger, five eggs, and salt, and
strain the foresaid materials; put to them twenty slic't pippins,
and fry them in six pound of suet.

Sometimes make the batter of cream, eggs, cloves, mace, nutmeg,
saffron, barm, ale, and salt.

Other times flour, grated bread, mace, ginger, pepper, salt, barm,
saffron, milk, sack, or white wine.

Sometimes you may use marrow steeped in musk and rose-water, and
pleasant pears or quinces.

Or use raisins, currans, and apples cut like square dice, and as
small, in quarters or in halves.


  _Fritters in the Italian Fashion._

Take a pound of the best Holland cheese or parmisan grated, a pint
of fine flower, and as much fine bisket bread muskefied beaten to
powder, the yolks of four or five eggs, some saffron and rosewater,
sugar, cloves, mace, and cream, make it into stiff paste, then make
it into balls, and fry them in clarified butter. Or stamp this paste
in a mortar, and make the balls as big as a nutmeg or musket bullet.


  _Otherways in the Italian Fashion._

Take a pound of rice and boil it in a pint of cream, being boil'd
something thick, lay it abroad in a clean dish to cool, then stamp
it in a stone mortar, with a pound of good fat cheese grated, some
musk, and yolks of four or five hard eggs, sugar, and grated manchet
or bisket bread; then make it into balls, the paste being stiff, and
you may colour them with marigold flowers stamped, violets, blue
bottles, carnations or pinks, and make them balls of two or three
colours. If the paste be too tender, work more bread to them and
flour, fry them, and serve them with scraping sugar and juyce of
orange. Garnish these balls with stock fritters.


  _Fritters of Spinage._

Take spinage, pick it and wash it, then set on a skillet of fair
water, and when it boileth put in the spinage, being tender boil'd
put it in a cullender to drain away the liquor; then mince it small
on a fair board, put it in a dish and season it with cinamon,
ginger, grated manchet, fix eggs with the whites and yolks, a little
cream or none, make the stuff pretty thick, and put in some boil'd
currans. Fry it by spoonfuls, and serve it on a dish and plate with
sugar.

Thus also you may make fritters of beets, clary, borrage, bugloss,
or lattice.


  _To make Stock-Fritters or Fritters of Arms._

Strain half a pint of fine flower, with as much water, and make the
batter no thicker, than thin cream; then heat the brass moulds in
clarified butter; being hot wipe them, dip the moulds half way in
the batter and fry them, to garnish any boil'd fish meats or stewed
oysters. View their forms.


  _Other fried Dishes of divers forms, or Stock-Fritters
    in the Italian Fashion._

Take a quart of fine flower, and strain it with some almond milk,
leven, white wine, sugar and saffron; fry it on the foresaid moulds,
or dip clary on it, sage leaves, or branches of rosemary, then fry
them in clarified butter.


  _Little Pasties, Balls, or Toasts fried._

Take a boil'd or raw Pike, mince it and stamp it with some good fat
old cheese grated, season them with cinamon, sugar, boil'd currans,
and yolks of hard eggs, make this stuff into balls, toasts or
pasties, and fry them.


  _Otherways._

Make your paste into little pasties, stars, half moons, scollops,
balls, or suns.


  _Or thus._

Take grated bread, cake, or bisket bread, and fat cheese grated,
almond paste, eggs, cinamon, saffron, and fry them as abovesaid.


  _Otherways Pasties to fry._

Take twenty apples or pippins par'd, coard, and cut into bits like
square dice, stew them in butter, and put to them three ounces of
bisket bread, stamp all together in a stone mortar, with six ounces
of fat cheese grated, six yolks of eggs, cinamon, six ounces of
sugar, make it in little Pasties, or half moons, and fry them.


  _Otherways._

Take a quart of fine flower, wet it with almond milk, sack,
white-wine, rose-water, saffron, and sugar, make thereof a paste
into balls, cakes, or any cut or carved branches, and fry them in
clarified butter, and serve them with fine scraped sugar.


  _To fry Paste out of a Syringe or Butter-squirt._

Take a quart of fine flower, & a litle leven, dissolve it in warm
water, & put to it the flour, with some white wine, salt, saffron,
a quarter of butter, and two ounces of sugar; boil the aforesaid
things in a skillet as thick as a hasty pudding, and in the boiling
stir it continually, being cold beat it in a mortar, fry it in
clarified butter, and run it into the butter through a butter-squirt.


  _To make Pancakes._

Take three pints of cream, a quart of flour, eight eggs, three
nutmegs, a spoonful of salt, and two pound of clarified butter; the
nutmegs being beaten, strain them with the cream, flour and salt,
fry them into pancakes, and serve them with fine sugar.


  _Otherways._

Take three pints of spring-water, a quart of flour, mace, and nutmeg
beaten, six cloves, a spoonful of salt, and six eggs, strain them
and fry them into Pancakes.


  _Or thus._

Make stiff paste of fine flour, rose-water, cream, saffron, yolks of
eggs, salt, and nutmeg, and fry them in clarified butter.


  _Otherways._

Take three pints of cream, a quart of flour, five eggs, salt, three
spoonfuls of ale, a race of ginger, cinamon as much, strain these
materials, then fry and serve them with fine sugar.


  _To make a Tansie the best way._

Take twenty eggs, and take away five whites, strain them with a
quart of good thick sweet cream, and put to it grated nutmeg, a race
of ginger grated, as much cinamon beaten fine, and a penny white
loaf grated also, mix them all together with a little salt, then
stamp some green wheat with some tansie herbs, strain it into the
cream and eggs, and stir all together; then take a clean frying-pan,
and a quarter of a pound of butter, melt it, and put in the tansie,
and stir it continually over the fire with a slice, ladle, or
saucer, chop it, and break it as it thickens, and being well
incorporated put it out of the pan into a dish, and chop it very
fine; then make the frying pan very clean, and put in some more
butter, melt it, and fry it whole or in spoonfuls; being finely
fried on both sides, dish it up, and sprinkle it with rose-vinegar,
grape-verjuyce, elder-vinegar, couslip-vinegar, or the juyce of
three or four oranges, and strew on good store of fine sugar.


  _Otherways._

Take a little tansie, featherfew, parsley, and violets stamp and
strain them with eight or ten eggs and salt, fry them in sweet
butter, and serve them on a plate and dish with some sugar.


  _A Tansie for Lent._

Take tansie and all manner of herbs as before, and beaten almond,
stamp them with the spawn of pike or carp and strain them with the
crumb of a fine manchet, sugar, and rose-water, and fry it in sweet
butter.


  _Toasts of Divers sorts._

  _First, in Butter or Oyl._

Take a cast of fine rouls or round manchet, chip them, and cut them
into toasts, fry them in clarified butter, frying oyl, or sallet
oyl, but before you fry them dip them in fair water, and being
fried, serve them in a clean dish piled one upon another, and sugar
between.


  _Otherways._

Toste them before the fire, and run them over with butter, sugar, or
oyl.


  _Cinamon Toasts._

Cut fine thin toasts, then toast them on a gridiron, and lay them in
ranks in a dish, put to them fine beaten cinamon mixed with sugar
and some claret, warm them over the fire, and serve them hot.


  _French Toasts._

Cut French bread, and toast it in pretty thick toasts on a clean
gridiron, and serve them steeped in claret, sack, or any wine, with
sugar and juyce of orange.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION VII.

  _The most Excellent Ways of making All sorts of Puddings._


  _A boil'd Pudding._

Beat the yolks of three eggs, with rose-water, and half a pint of
cream, warm it with a piece of butter as big as a walnut, and when
it is melted mix the eggs and that together, and season it with
nutmeg, sugar, and salt; then put in as much bread as will make it
as thick as batter, and lay on as much flour as will lie on a
shilling, then take a double cloth, wet it, and flour it, tie it
fast, and put it in the pot; when it is boil'd, serve it up in a
dish with butter, verjuice, and sugar.


  _Otherways._

Take flour, sugar, nutmeg, salt, and water, mix them together with a
spoonful of gum-dragon, being steeped all night in rose-water,
strain it, then put in suet, and boil it in a cloth.


  _To boil a Pudding otherways._

Take a pint of cream or milk, and boil it with a stick of cinamon,
being boil'd let it cool, then put in six eggs, take out three
whites, and beat the eggs before you put them in the milk, then
slice a penny-roul very thin and being slic't beat all together,
then put in some sugar, and flour the cloth; being boil'd for sauce,
put butter, sack, and sugar, beat them up together, and scrape sugar
on it.


  _Other Pudding._

Sift grated bread through a cullender, and mix it with flour, minc't
dates, currans, nutmeg, cinamon, minc't suet, new milk warm, sugar
and eggs, take away some of the whites and work all together, then
take half the pudding for one side, and half for the other side, and
make it round like a loaf, then take butter and put it into the
midst, and the other side aloft on the top, when the liquor boils,
tie it in a fair cloth and boil it, being boil'd, cut it in two, and
so serve it in.


  _To make a Cream Pudding to be boil'd._

Take a quart of cream and boil it with mace, nutmeg and ginger
quartered, put to it eight eggs, and but four whites beaten, a pound
of almonds blanched, beaten, and strained in with the cream,
a little rose-water, sugar, and a spoonful of fine flower; then take
a thick napkin, wet it and rub it with flour, and tie the pudding up
in it: being boil'd make sauce for it with sack, sugar, and butter
beat up thick together with the yolk of an egg, then blanch some
almonds, slice them, and stick the pudding with them very thick, and
scrape sugar on it.


  _To make a green boil'd Pudding of sweet Herbs._

Take and steep a penny white loaf in a quart of cream and only eight
yolks of eggs, some currans, sugar, cloves, beaten mace, dates,
juyce of spinage, saffron, cinamon, nutmeg, sweet marjoram, tyme,
savory, peniroyal minced very small, and some salt, boil it in
beef-suet, marrow, (or none.) These puddings are excellent for
stuffings of roast or boil'd Poultrey, Kid, Lamb, or Turkey, Veal,
or Breasts of Mutton.


  _To make a Pudding in haste._

Take a pint of good Milk or Cream, put thereto a handful of raisins
of the Sun, with as many currans, and a piece of butter, then grate
a manchet and a nutmeg, and put thereto a handful of flour; when the
milk boils, put in the bread, let it boil a quarter of an hour, then
dish it up on beaten butter.


  _To make a Quaking Pudding._

Slice the crumbs of a penny manchet, and infuse it three or four
hours in a pint of scalding hot cream, covering it close, then break
the bread with a spoon very small, and put to it eight eggs, and put
only four whites, beat them together very well, and season it with
sugar, rose-water, and grated nutmeg: if you think it too stiff, put
in some cold cream and beat them well together; then wet the bag or
napkin and flour it, put in the pudding, tie it hard, and boil it
half an hour, then dish it and put to it butter, rose-water, and
sugar, and serve it up to the table.


  _Otherways baked._

Scald the bread with a pint of cream as abovesaid, then put to it a
pound of almonds blanched and beaten small with rose-water in a
stone mortar, or walnuts, and season it with sugar, nutmeg, salt,
the yolks of six eggs, a quarter of a pound of dates slic't and cut
small a handful of currans boil'd and some marrow minced, beat them
all together and bake it.


  _To make a Quaking Pudding either boil'd or baked._

Take a pint of good thick cream, boil it with some large mace, whole
cinamon, and slic't nutmeg, then take six eggs, and but three
whites, beat them well, and grate some stale manchet, the quantity
of a half penny loaf, put it to the eggs with a spoonful of flour,
then season the cream according to your own taste with sugar and
salt; beat all well together, then wet a cloth or butter it, and put
in the pudding when the water boils; an hour will bake it or
boil it.


  _Otherways._

Take a penny white loaf, pare off the crust, and slice the crumb,
steep it in a quart of good thick cream warmed, some beaten nutmeg,
six eggs, whereof but two whites, and some salt. Sometimes you may
use boil'd currans, or boil'd raisins.

If to bake, make it a little stiffer, sometimes add saffron; on
flesh-days use beef-suet, or marrow; (or neither) for a boil'd
pudding butter the napkin being first wetted in water, and bind it
up like a ball, an hour will boil it.


  _To make a Shaking Pudding._

Take a pint of cream and boil it with large mace, slic't nutmeg, and
ginger, put in a few almonds blanched and beaten with rose-water,
strain them all together, then put to it slic't ginger, grated
bread, salt and sugar, flour the napkin or cloth, and put in the
pudding, tie it hard, and put it in boiling water; (as you must do
all puddings) then serve it up verjuyce, butter, and sugar.


  _To make a Hasty-Pudding in a Bag._

Boil a pint of thick cream with a spoonful of flour, season it with
nutmeg, sugar, and salt, wet the cloth and flour it, then pour in
the cream being hot into the cloth, and when it is boil'd butter it
as a hasty pudding. If it be well made, it will be as good as a
Custard.


  _To make a Hasty-Pudding otherways._

Grate a two penny manchet, and mingle it with a quarter of a pint of
flour nutmeg, and salt, a quarter of sugar, and half a pound of
butter; then set it a boiling on the fire in a clean scowred
skillet, a quart, or three pints of good thick cream, and when it
boils put in the foresaid materials, stir them continual, and being
half boil'd, put in six yolks of eggs, stir them together, and when
it is boil'd, serve it in a clean scowred dish, and stick it with
some preserved orange-peel thin sliced, run it over with beaten
butter, and scraping sugar.


  _To make an Almond Pudding._

Blanch and beat a pound of almonds, strain them with a quart of
cream, a grated, penny manchet searsed, four eggs, some sugar,
nutmeg grated, some dates, & salt; boil it, and serve it in a dish
with beaten butter, stick it with some muskedines, or wafers, and
scraping sugar.


  _Otherways._

Take a pound of almond-paste, some grated bisket-bread, cream,
rose-water, yolks of eggs, beaten cinamon, ginger, nutmeg, some
boil'd currans, pistaches, and musk, boil it in a napkin, and serve
it as the former.


  _To make an Almond Pudding in Guts._

Take a pound of blanched almonds, beat them very small, with
rosewater, and a little good new milk or cream with two or three
blades of mace, and some sliced nutmegs; when it is boil'd take the
spice clean from it, then grate a penny loaf and searse it through a
cullender, put it into the cream, and let it stand till it be pretty
cool, then put in the almonds, five or six yolks of eggs, salt,
sugar and good store of marrow or beef-suet finely minced, and fill
the guts.


  _To make a Rice Pudding to bake._

Boil the rice tender in milk, then season it with nutmeg, mace,
rose-water, sugar, yolks of eggs, with half the whites, some grated
bread, and marrow minced with amber-greese, and bake it in a
buttered dish.


  _To make Rice Puddings in guts._

Boil half a pound of rice with three pints of milk, and a little
beaten mace, boil it until the rice be dry, but never stir it, if
you do, you must stir it continually, or else it will burn, pour
your rice into a cullender or strainer, that the moisture may run
clean from it, then put to it six eggs, (put away the whites of
three) half a pound of sugar, a quarter of a pint of rose-water,
a pound of currans, and a pound of beef-suet shred small, season it
with nutmeg, cinamon, and salt, then dry the small guts of a hog,
sheep, or beefer, and being, finely cleansed for the purpose, steep
and fill them, cut the guts a foot long, and fill them three
quarters full, tie both ends together, and put them in boiling
water, a quarter of an hour will boil them.


  _Otherways._

Boil the rice first in water, then in milk, after with salt, in
cream; then take six eggs, grated bread, good store of marrow minced
small, some nutmeg, sugar, and salt; fill the guts and put them into
a pipkin, and boil them in milk and rose-water.


  _Otherways._

Steep it in fair water all night, then boil it in new milk, and
drain out the milk through a cullender, then mince a good quantity
of beef-suet not too small, and put it into the rice in some bowl or
tray, with currans being first boil'd, yolks of eggs, nutmeg,
cinamon, sugar, and barberries, mingle all together; then wash the
second guts, fill them, and boil them.


  _To make a Cinamon Pudding._

Take and steep a penny white loaf in a quart of cream, six yolks of
eggs, and but two whites, dates, half an ounce of beaten cinamon,
and some almond paste. Sometimes add rose-water, salt, and boil'd
currans, either bake or boil it for stuffings.


  _To make a Haggas Pudding._

Take a calves chaldron being well scowred or boiled, mince it being
cold, very fine and small, then take four or five eggs, and leave
out half the whites, thick cream, grated bread, sugar, salt,
currans, rose-water, some beef-suet or marrow, (and if you will)
sweet marjoram, time, parsley, and mix all together; then having a
sheeps maw ready dressed, put it in and boil it a little.


  _Otherways._

Take good store of parsley, tyme, savory, four or five onions, and
sweet marjoram, chop them with some whole oatmeal, then add to them
pepper, and salt, and boil them in a napkin, being boil'd tender,
butter it, and serve it on sippets.


  _To make a Chiveridge Pudding._

Lay the fattest of a hog in fair water and salt to scowr them, then
take the longest and fattest gut, and stuff it with nutmeg, sugar,
ginger, pepper, and slic't dates, cut them and serve them to the
table.


  _To make Leveridge Puddings._

Boil a hogs liver, and let it be thorowly cold, then grate and sift
it through a cullender, put new milk to it and the fleck of a hog
minced small put into the liver, and some grated bread, divide the
meat in two parts, then take store of herbs, mince them fine, and
put the herbs into one part with nutmeg, mace, pepper, anniseed,
rosewater, cream, and eggs, fill them up and boil them. To the other
part or sort put barberries, slic't dates, currans, cream, and eggs.


  _Other Leveridge Puddings._

Boil a hogs liver very dry, and when it is cold grate it and take as
much grated manchet as liver, sift them through a cullender; and
season them with cloves, mace, and cinamon, as much of all the other
spices, half a pound of sugar, a pound and a half of currans, half a
pint of rose-water, three pound of beef suet minced small, eight
eggs and but four whites.


  _A Swan or Goose Pudding._

Strain the swan or goose blood, and steep with it oatmeal or grated
bread in milk or cream, with nutmeg, pepper, sweet herbs minced,
suet, rose-water, minced lemon peels very small and a small quantity
of coriander-seed.

This for a Pudding in a swan or gooses neck.


  _To make a Farsed Pudding._

Mince a leg of mutton with sweet herbs, grated bread, minced dates,
currans, raisins of the sun, a little orangado or preserved lemon
sliced thin, a few coriander-seeds, nutmeg, pepper, and ginger,
mingle all together with some cream, and raw eggs, and work it
together like a pasty, then wrap the meat in a caul of mutton or
veal, and so you may either boil or bake them. If you bake them,
indorse them with yolks of eggs, rose-water, and sugar, and stick
them with little sprigs of rosemary and cinamon.


  _To make a Pudding of Veal._

Mince raw veal very fine, and mingle it with lard cut into the form
of dice, then mince some sweet marjoram, penniroyal, camomile,
winter-savory, nutmeg, ginger, pepper, salt, work all together with
good store of beaten cinamon, sugar, barberries, sliced figs,
blanched almonds, half a pound of beef-suet finely minced, put these
into the guts of a fat mutton or hog well cleansed, and cut an inch
and a half long, set them a boiling in a pipkin of claret wine with
large mace; being almost boil'd, have some boil'd grapes in small
bunches, and barberries in knots, then dish them on French bread
being scalded with the broth of some good mutton gravy, and lay them
on garnish of slic't lemons.


  _To make a Pudding of Wine in guts._

Slice the crumbs, of two manchets, and take half a pint of wine, and
some sugar, the wine must be scalded; then take eight eggs, and beat
them with rose-water, put to them sliced dates, marrow, and nutmeg,
mix all together, and fill the guts to boil.


  _Bread Puddings in guts._

Take cream and boil it with mace, and mix beaten almonds with
rose-water, then take cream, eggs, nutmeg, currans, salt, and
marrow, mix them with as much bread as you think fit, and fill the
guts.


  _To make an Italian Pudding._

Take a fine manchet and cut it in square pieces like dice, then put
to it half a pound of beef-suet minced small, raisins of the sun,
cloves, mace, minced dates, sugar, marrow, rose-water, eggs, and
cream, mingle all these together, put them into a buttered dish, in
less than an hour it will be baked, and when you serve it, scrape
sugar on it.


  _Other Pudding in the Italian Fashion with blood of
    Beast or Fish._

Take half a pound of grated cheese, a penny manchet grated, sweet
herbs chopped very small, cinamon, pepper, salt, nutmeg, cloves,
mace, four eggs, sugar, and currans, bake it in a dish or pie, or
boil it in a napkin, and bind it up in a ball, being boil'd serve it
with beaten butter, sugar, and beaten cinamon.


  _To make a French Pudding._

Take half a pound of raisins of the sun, a penny white loaf pared
and cut into dice-work, half a pound of beef-suet finely minced,
three ounces of sugar, eight slic't dates, a grain of musk, twelve
or sixteen lumps of marrow, salt, half a pint of cream, three eggs
beaten with it, and poured on the pudding, cloves, mace, nutmeg,
salt, and a pome-water, or a pippin or two pared, slic't, and put in
the bottom of the dish before you bake the pudding.


  _To make a French Barley Pudding._

Boil the barley, & put to one quart of barley, a manchet grated,
then beat a pound of almonds, & strain them with cream, then take
eight eggs, & but four whites, & beat them with rose-water, season
it with nutmeg, mace, salt, and marrow, or beef-suet cut small,
mingle all together, then fill the guts and boil them.


  _To make an excellent Pudding._

Take crumbs of white-bread, as much fine flour, the yolks of four
eggs, but one white, and as much good cream as will temper it as
thick as you would make pancake batter, then butter the dish, bake
it, and scrape sugar on it being baked.


  _Puddings of Swines Lights._

Parboil the lights, mince them very small with suet, and mix them
with grated bread, cream, curans, eggs, nutmeg, salt, and
rose-water, and fill the guts.


  _To make an Oatmeal Pudding._

Pick a quart of whole oatmeal, being finly picked and cleansed,
steep it in warm milk all night, next morning drain it, and boil it
in three pints of cream; being boil'd and cold put to it six yolks
of eggs and but three whites, cloves, mace, saffron, salt, dates
slic't, and sugar, boil it in a napkin, and boil it as the
bread-pudding, serve it with beaten butter, and stick it with slic't
dates, and scrape sugar; or you may bake these foresaid materials in
dish, pye, _&c._

Sometimes add to this pudding raisins of the sun, and all manner of
sweet herbs, chopped small, being seasoned as before.


  _Other Oatmeal Pudding._

Take great oatmeal, pick it and scale it in cream being first put in
a dish or bason, season it with nutmeg, cinamon, ginger, pepper, and
currans, bake it in a dish, or boil it in a napkin, being baked or
boiled, serve it with beaten butter, and scraping sugar.


  _Otherways._

Season it with cloves, mace, saffron, salt, and yolks of eggs, and
but five that have whites, and some cream to steep the groats in,
boil it in a napkin, or bake it in a dish or pye.


  _To make Oatmeal Pudding-pies._

Steep oatmeal in warm milk three or four hours, then strain some
blood into it of flesh or fish, mix it with cream, and add to it
suet minced small, sweet herbs chopped fine, as tyme, parsley,
spinage, succory, endive, strawberry leaves, violet leaves, pepper,
cloves mace, fat beef-suet, and four eggs; mingle all together, and
so bake them.


  _To make an Oatmeal Pudding boil'd._

Take the biggest oatmeal, mince what herbs you like best and mix
with it, season it with pepper and salt, tye it strait in a bag, and
when it is boild, butter it and serve it up.


  _Oatmeal Pudding otherwise of fish or flesh blood._

Take a quart of whole oatmeal, steep it in warm milk over night, &
then drain the groats from it, boil them in a quart or three pints
of good cream; then the oatmeal being boil'd and cold, have tyme,
penniroyal, parsley, spinage, savory, endive, marjoram, sorrel,
succory, and strawberry leaves, of each a little quantity, chop them
fine, and put them to the oatmeal, with some fennil-seed, pepper,
cloves, mace, and salt, boil it in a napkin, or bake it in a dish,
pie, or guts.

Sometimes of the former pudding you may leave out some of the herbs,
and add these, penniroyal, savory, leeks, a good big onion, sage,
ginger, nutmeg, pepper, salt, either for fish or flesh days, with
butter or beef-suet, boil'd or baked in a dish, napkin, or pie.


  _To make a baked Pudding._

Take a pint of cream, warm it, and put to it eight dates minced,
four eggs, marrow, rose-water, nutmegs raced and beaten, mace and
salt, butter the dish, and put it in; and if you please, lay puff
paste on it, and scrape sugar on it and in it.


  _To make a baked Pudding otherways._

Take a pint and a half of cream, and a pound of butter; set the same
on fire till the butter be melted, then take three or four eggs,
season it with nutmeg, rose-water, sugar, and salt, make it as thin
as pankake batter, butter the dish, and baste it with a garnish of
paste about it.


  _Otherways._

Take a penny loaf, pare it, slice it, and put it into a quart of
cream with a little rose-water, break it very small, then take four
ounces of almon-paste, and put in eight eggs beaten, the marrow of
three or four marrow bones, three or four pippins slic't thin, or
what way you please; mingle these together with a little
ambergreese, and butter, then dish and bake it.


  _Otherways._

Take a quart of cream, put thereto a pound of beef-suet minced
small, put it into the cream, and season it with nutmeg, cinamon,
and rose-water, put to it eight eggs, and but four whites, and two
grated manchets; mingle them well together, and put them in a
butter'd dish, bake it, and being baked, scrape on sugar, and
serve it.


  _To make black Puddings._

Take half the oatmeal, pick it, and take the blood while it is warm
from the hog, strain it and put it in the oatmeal as soon us you
can, let it stand all night; then take the other part of the
oatmeal, pick it also, and boil it in milk till it be tender, and
all the milk consumed, then put it to the blood and stir it well
together, put in good store of beef or hog suet, and season it with
good pudding herbs, salt, pepper, and fennil-seed, fill not the guts
too full, and boil them.


  _To make black Puddings otherways._

Take the blood of the hog while it is warm, put in some salt, and
when it is thorough cold put in the groats or oatmeal well picked;
let it stand soaking all night, then put in the herbs, which must be
rosemary, tyme, penniroyal, savory, and fennel, make the blood soft
with putting in some good cream until the blood look pale; then beat
four or five eggs, whites and all, and season it with cloves, mace,
pepper, fennil-seed, and put good store of hogs fat or beef-suet to
the stuff, cut not the fat too small.


  _To make black Puddings an excellent way._

After the hogs Umbles are tender boil'd, take some of the lights
with the heart, and all the flesh about them, picking from them all
the sinewy skins, then chop the meat as small as you can, and put to
it a little of the liver very finely searsed, some grated nutmeg,
four or five yolks of eggs, a pint of very good cream, two or three
spoonfuls of sack, sugar, cloves, mace, nutmeg, cinamon,
caraway-seed, a little rose-water, good store of hogs fat, and some
salt: roul it in rouls two hours before you go to fill them in the
guts, and lay the guts in steep in rose-water till you fill them.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION VIII.

  _The rarest Ways of making all manner of Souces and Jellies._


  _To souce a Brawn._

Take a fat brawn of two or three years growth, and bone the sides,
cut off the head close to the ears, and cut five collars of a side,
bone the hinder leg, or else five collars will not be deep enough,
cut the collars an inch deeper in the belly, then on the back; for
when the collars come to boiling, they will shrink more in the belly
than in the back, make the collars very even when you bind them up,
not big at one end, & little at the other, but fill them equally,
and lay them again in a soaking in fair water; before you bind them
up, let them be well watered the space of two days, and twice a day
soak & scrape them in warm water, then cast them in cold fair water,
before you roul them up in collors, put them into white clouts, or
sow them up with white tape.

Or bone him whole, & cut him cross the flitches, make but four or
five collars in all, & boil them in cloths, or bind them up with
white tape, then have your boiler ready, make it boil, and put in
your collars of the biggest bulk first, a quarter of an hour before
the other lessor; boil them at the first putting in the space of an
hour with a quick fire, & keep the boiler continually fil'd up with
warm clean liquor, scum off the fat clean still as it riseth; after
an hour let it boil leisurely, and keep it still filled up to the
brim; being fine and tender boil'd, that you may put a straw thorow
it, draw your fire, and let your brawn rest till the next morning.
Then being between hot and cold, take it into molds of deep hoops,
bind them about with packthred, and being cold, take them out and
put them into souce drink made of boil'd oatmeal ground or beaten,
and bran boil'd in fair water; being cold, strain it thorow a
cullender into the tub or earthen pot, put salt into it, and close
up the vessel close from the air.

Or you may make other souse-drink of whey and salt beaten together,
it will make your brawn look more white and better.


  _To make Pig Brawn_

Take a white or red Pig, for a spotted one is not so handsome, take
a good large fat one, and being scalded and drawn bone it whole, but
first cut off the head and the hinder quarters, (and leave the bone
in the hinder quarters) the rest being boned cut it into 2 collars
overwart both the sides, or bone the wole Pig but only the head:
then wash them in divers-waters, and let it soak in clean water two
hours, the bloud being well soaked out, take them and dry the
collars in a clean cloth, and season them in the inside with minced
lemon-peel and salt, roul them up, & put them into fine clean
clouts, but first make your collars very equal at both ends, round
and even, bind them up at the ends and middle hard & close with
packthred; then let your Pan boil, and put in the collars, boil them
with water and salt, and keep it filled up with warm water as you do
the brawn, scum off the fat very clean, and being tender boil'd put
them in a hoop as deep as the collar, bind it and frame it even,
being cold put it into your souce drink made of whey and salt, or
oatmeal boil'd and strained, then put them in a pipkin or little
barrel, and stop them close from the air.

When you serve it, dish it on a dish and plate, the two collars, two
quarters and head, or make but two collars of the whole Pig.


  _To garnish Brawn or Pig Brawn._

Leach your brawn, and dish it on a plate in a fair clean dish, then
put a rosemary branch on the top being first dipped in the white of
an egg well beaten to froth, or wet in water and sprinkled with
flour, or a sprig of rosemary gilt with gold; the brawn spotted also
with gold and silver leaves, or let your sprig be of a streight
sprig of yew tree, or a streight furz bush, and put about the brawn
stuck round with bay-leaves three ranks round, and spotted with red
and yellow jelly about the dish sides, also the same jelly and some
of the brawn leached, jagged, or cut with tin moulds, and carved
lemons, oranges and barberries, bay-leaves gilt, red beets, pickled
barberries, pickled gooseberries, or pickled grapes.


  _To souce a Pig._

Take a pig being scalded, cut off the head, and part it down the
back, draw it and bone it, then the sides being well cleansed from
the blood, and soaked in several clean waters, take the pig and dry
the sides, season them with nutmeg, ginger, and salt, roul them and
bind them up in clean clouts as the pig brawn aforesaid, then have
as much water as will cover it in a boiling pan two inches over and
two bottles of white-wine over and above; first let the water boil,
then put in the collars with salt, mace, slic't ginger,
parsley-roots and fennil-roots scraped and picked; being half boiled
put in two quarts of white-wine, and when it is boil'd quite, put in
slices of lemon to it, and the whole peel of a lemon.


  _Otherways in Collars._

Season the sides with beaten nutmeg, salt, and ginger, or boil the
sides whole or not bone them; boil also a piece or breast of veal
with them, being well joynted and soaked two hours in fair water,
boil it in half wine and half water, mace, slic't ginger, parsley,
and fennil-roots, being boil'd leave it in this souce, and put some
slic't lemon to it, with the whole pieces: when it is cold serve it
with yellow, red, and white jelly, barberries, slic't lemon, and
lemon-peel.

Or you may make but one collar of both the sides to the hinder
quarters, or bone the two sides, and make but two collars of all,
and save the head only whole, or souce a pig in quarters or halves,
or make of a good large fat pig but one collar only, and the head
whole.

Or souce it with two quarts of white wine to a gallon of water, put
in your wine when your pig is almost boil'd, and put to it four
maces, a few cloves, two races of slic't ginger, salt, a few
bay-leaves, whole pepper, some slices of lemon, and lemon-peel;
before you boil your pig, season the sides or collars with nutmeg,
salt, cloves, and mace.


  _To souce a Pig otherways._

Scald it and cut it in four quarters, bone it, and let it ly in
water a day and a night, then roul it up (like brawn) with sage
leaves, lard in thin slices, & some grated bread mix't with the
juyce of orange, beaten nutmeg, mace, and salt: roul it up in the
quarters of the pig very hard and binde it up with tape, then boil
it with fair water, white-wine, large mace, slic't ginger, a little
lemon-peel, a faggot of sweet herbs, and salt; being boil'd put it
in an earthen pot to cool in the liquor, and souce there two days,
then dish it out on plates, or serve it in collars with mustard and
sugar.


  _Otherways._

Season the sides with cloves, mace, and salt, then roul it in
collars or sides with the bones in it; then take two or 3 gallons of
water, a pottle of white-wine, and when the liquor boils put in the
pig, with mace, cloves, slic't ginger, salt, bay-leaves, and whole
pepper; being half boil'd, put in the wine, _&c._


  _Otherways._

Season the collars with chopped sage, beaten nutmeg, pepper, and
salt.


  _To souce or jelly a Pig in the Spanish fashion._

Take a pig being scalded, boned, and chined down the back, then soak
the collars clean from the blood the space of two hours, dry them in
a clean cloth, and season the sides with pepper, salt, and minced
sage; then have two dryed neats-tongues that are boil'd tender and
cold, that they look fine and red, pare them and slice them from end
to end the thickness of a half crown piece, lay them on the inside
of the seasoned pig, one half of the tongue for one side, and the
other for the other side; then make two collars and bind them up in
fine white clouts, boil them as you do the soust pigs with wine,
water, salt, slic't ginger and mace, keep it dry, or in souce drink
of the pig brawn.

If dry serve it in slices as thick as a trencher cut round the
collar or slices in jelly, and make jelly of the liquor wherein it
was boil'd, adding to it juyce of lemon, ising-glass, spices, sugar
clarified with eggs, and run it through the bag.


  _How to divide a Pig into Collars divers ways,
    either for Pig Brawn, or soust Pig._

1. Cut a large fat Bore-pig into one collar only, bone it whole, and
not chine it, the head only cut off.

2. Take out the hinder-quarters and buttocks with the bones in them,
bone all the rest whole, only the head cut off.

3. Take off the hinder quarters and make two collars, bone all the
rest, only cut off the head & leave it whole.

4. Cut off the head, and chine it through the back, and collar both
sides at length from end to end.

5. Chine it as before with the bones in, and souce it in quarters.


  _To souce a Capon._

Take a good bodied Capon, young, fat, and finely pulled, drawn and
trussed, lay it in soak two or three hours with a knuckle of veal
well joynted, and after set them a boiling in a fine deep brass-pan,
kettle, or large pipkin, in a gallon of fair water; when it boils,
scum it, and put in four or five blades of mace, two or three races
of ginger slic't, four fennil-roots, and four parsley-roots, scraped
and picked, and salt. The Capon being fine and tender boild take it
up, and put it in other warm liquor or broth, then put to your
souced broth a quart of white-wine, and boil it to a jelly; then
take it off, and put it into an earthen pan or large pipkin, put
your capon to it, with two or three slic't lemons, and cover it
close, serve it at your pleasure, and garnish it with slices and
pieces of lemon, barberries, roots, mace, nutmeg, and some of the
jelly.

Some put to this souc't capon, whole pepper, & a faggot of sweet
herbs, but that maketh the broth very black.

In that manner you may souce any Land Fowl.


  _To souce a Breast of Veal, Side of Lamb, or any Joynt
    of Mutton, Kid, Fawn, or Venison._

Bone a breast of veal & soak it well from the blood, then wipe it
dry, and season the side of the breast with beaten nutmeg, ginger,
some sweet herbs minced small, whole coriander-seed, minced
lemon-peel, and salt, and lay some broad slices of sweet lard over
the seasoning, then roul it into a collar, and bind it up in a white
clean cloth, put it into boiling liquor, scum it well, and then put
in slic't ginger, slic't nutmeg, salt, fennil, and parsley-roots,
being almost boild, put in a quart of white-wine, and when it is
quite boild take it off, and put in slices of lemon, the peel of two
lemons whole, and a douzen bay leaves, boil it close covered to make
the veal look white.

Thus you may do a breast of mutton, either roul'd, or with the bones
in, and season them with nutmeg, pepper & salt, roul them, & bake
them in a pot with wine and water, any Sea or Land fowl, being
stuffed or farsed; and filled up with butter afterwards, and served
dry, or lard the Fowls, bone and roul them.


  _To souce a Leg of Veal._

Take a leg of veal, bone it and lard it, but first season the lard
with pepper, cloves, & mace, lard it with great lard as big as your
little finger, season the veal also with the same seasoning & some
salt with it; lard it very thick then have all manner of sweet herbs
minc't and strew'd on it, roul it like a collar of brawn, and boil
it or stew it in the oven in a pipkin, with water, salt, and
white-wine, serve it in a collar cold, whole or in slices, or put
away the liquor, and fill it up with butter, or bake it with butter
in a roul, jelly it, and mix some of the broth with almond milk, and
jellies in slices of two collars, when you serve it.


  _Otherways._

Stuff or farse a leg of veal; with sweet herbs minc't, beef-suet,
pepper, nutmeg, and salt, collar it, and boil or bake it; being
cold, either serve it dry in a collar, or in slices, or in a whole
collar with gallendines of divers sorts, or in thin slices with oyl
and vinegar.

Thus you may dress any meat, venison, or Fowls.


  _To souce Bullocks Cheeks, a Flank, Brisket, or Rand of Beef,_ &c.

Take a bullocks cheek or flank of beef and lay it in peter salt four
days, then roul it as even as you can, that the collar be not bigger
in one place than in another boil it in water and salt, or amongst
other beef, boil it very tender in a cloth as you do brawn, and
being tender boil'd take it up, and put it into a hoop to fashion it
upright and round, then keep it dry, and take it out of the clout,
and serve it whole with mustard and sugar, or some gallendines. If
lean, lard it with groat Lard.


  _To collar a Surloin, Flank, Brisket, Rand, or Fore-Rib of Beef._

Take the flank of beef, take out the sinewy & most of the fat, put
it in pickle with as much water as will cover it, and put a handful
of peter-salt to it, let it steep three days and not sift it, then
take it out and hang it a draining the air, wipe it dry, then have a
good handful of red sage, some tops of rosemary, savory, marjoram,
tyme, but twice as much sage, mince them very small, then take
quarter of an ounce of mace, and half as many cloves with a little
ginger, and half an ounce of pepper, and likewise half an ounce of
peter-salt; mingle them together, then take your beef, splat it, and
lay it even that it may roul up handsomely in a collar; then take
your seasoning of herbs and spices, and strow it all over, roul it
up close, and bind it fast with packthred, put it into an earthen
pipkin or pot, and put a pint of claret wine to it, an onion and two
or three cloves of garlick, close it up with a piece of course
paste, and bake it in a bakers oven, it will ask six hours soaking.


  _To souce a Collar of Veal in the same manner,
    or Venison, Pork, or Mutton._

Take out the bones, and put them in steep in the picle with
peter-salt, as was aforesaid, steep them three days, and hang them
in the air one day, lard them (or not lard them) with good big lard,
and season the lard with nutmeg, pepper, and herbs, as is aforesaid
in the collar of beef, strow it over with the herbs, and spices,
being mingled together, and roul up the collar, bind it fast, and
bake it tender in a pot, being stopped close, and keep it for your
use to serve either in slices or in the whole collar, garnish it
with bays and rosemary.


  _To make a Jelly for any kind of souc't Meats, Dishes,
    or other Works of that nature._

Take six pair of calves feet, scald them and take away the fat
betwixt the claws, & also the long shank-bones, lay them in soak in
fair water 3 or 4 hours, and boil them in two gallons of fair
spring-water, to three quarts of stock; being boild strain it
through a strainer, & when the broth is cold, take it from the
grounds, & divide it into three pipkins for three several colours,
to every pipkin a quart of white-wine, and put saffron in one,
cutchenele in another, and put a race of ginger, two blades of mace,
and a nutmeg to each pipkin, and cinamon to two of the pipkins, the
spices being first slic't, then set your pipkins on the fire, and
melt the jelly; then have a pound and a half of sugar for each
pipkin: but first take your fine sugar being beaten, and put in a
long dish or tray, and put to it whites of eighteen eggs, and beat
them well together with your rouling pin, and divide it into three
parts, put each part equally into the several pipkins, and stir it
well together; the broth being almost cold, then set them on a
charcoal fire and let them stew leisurely, when they begin to boil
over, take them off, let it cool a little, run them through the bags
once or twice and keep it for your use.

For variety sometimes in place of wine, you may use grapes stamped
and strained, wood-sorrel, juyce of lemons, or juyce of oranges.


  _To jelly Hogs or Porkers Feet, Ears, or Snouts._

Take twelve feet, six ears, & six snouts or noses, being finely
scalded, & lay them in soak twenty four hours, shift & scrape them
very white, then boil them in a fair clean scoured brass pot or
pipkin in three gallons of liquor, five quarts of water, three of
wine-vinegar, or verjuyce, and four of white-wine, boil them from
three gallons to four quarts waste, being scum'd, put in an ounce of
pepper whole, an ounce of nutmegs in quarters, an ounce of ginger
slic't, and an ounce of cinamon, boil them together, as is
abovesaid, to four quarts.

Then take up the meat, and let them cool, divide them into dishes, &
run it over with the broth or jelly being a little first setled,
take the clearest, & being cold put juice or orange over all, serve
it with bay-leaves about the dish.


  _To make a Crystal Jelly._

Take three pair of calves feet, and scald off the hair very clean,
knock off the claws, and take out the great bones & fat, & cast them
into fair water, shift them three or four times in a day and a
night, then boil them next morning in a glazed pipkin or clean pot,
with six quarts of fair spring water, boil it and scum it clean,
boil away three quarts or more; then strain it into a clean earthen
pan or bason, & let it be cold: then prepare the dross from the
bottom, and take the fat of the top clean, put it in a large pipkin
of six quarts, and put into it two quarts of old clear white-wine,
the juyce of four lemons, three blades of mace, and two races of
ginger slic't; then melt or dissolve it again into broth, and let it
cool. Then have four pound of hard sugar fine beaten, and mix it
with twelve whites of eggs in a great dish with your rouling pin,
and put it into your pipkin to your jelly, stir it together with a
grain of musk and ambergriese, put it in a fine linnen clout bound
up, and a quarter of a pint of damask rose-water, set it a stewing
on a soft charcoal fire, before it boils put in a little ising
glass, and being boil'd up, take it, and let it cool a little, and
run it.


  _Other Jelly for service of several colours._

Take four pair of calves feet, a knuckle of veal, a good fleshie
capon, and prepare these things as is said in the crystal jelly:
boil them in three gallons of fair water, till six quarts be wasted,
then strain it in an earthen pan, let it cool, and being cold pare
the bottom, and take off the fat on the top also; then dissolve it
again into broth, and divide it into 4 equal parts, put it into four
several pipkins, as will contain five pints a piece each pipkin, put
a little saffron into one of them, into another cutchenele beaten
with allum, into another turnsole, and the other his own natural
white; also to every pipkin a quart of white-wine, and the juyce of
two lemons. Then also to the white jelly one race of ginger pare'd
and slic't & three blades of large mace, to the red jelly 2 nutmegs,
as much in quantity of cinamon as nutmegs, also as much ginger; to
the turnsole put also the same quantity, with a few whole cloves;
then to the amber or yellow color, the same spices and quantity.
Then have eighteen whites of eggs, & beat them with six pound of
double refined sugar, beaten small and stirred together in a great
tray or bason with a rouling pin divide it into four parts in the
four pipkins & stir it to your jelly broth, spice, & wine, being
well mixed together with a little musk & ambergriese. Then have new
bags, wash them first in warm water, and then in cold, wring them
dry, and being ready strung with packthread on sticks, hang them on
a spit by the fire from any dust, and set new earthen pans under
them being well seasoned with boiling liquor.

Then again set on your jelly on a fine charcoal fire, and let it
stew softly the space of almost an hour, then make it boil up a
little, and take it off, being somewhat cold run it through the bag
twice or thrice, or but once if it be very clear; and into the bags
of colors put in a sprig of rosemary, keep it for your use in those
pans, dish it as you see good, or cast it into what mould you
please; as for example these.

  _Scollop shells, Cockle shells, Egg shells, half Lemon,
  or Lemon-peel, Wilks, or Winkle shells, Muscle shells,
  or moulded out of a butter-squirt._

Or serve it on a great dish and plate, one quarter of white, another
of red, another of yellow, the fourth of another colour, & about the
sides of the dish oranges in quarters of jelly, in the middle whole
lemon full of jelly finely carved, or cast out of a wooden or tin
mould, or run into little round glasses four or five in a dish, on
silver trencher plates, or glass trencher plates.


  _The quantities for a quart of Jelly Broth
    for the true making of it._

A quart of white-wine, a pound and a half of sugar, eggs, two
nutmegs, or mace, two races of ginger, as much cinamon, two grains
of musk and ambergriese, calves feet, or a knuckle of veal.

Sometimes for variety, in place of wine, use grape-verjuyce; if
juyce of grapes a quart, juyce of lemons a pint, juyce of oranges a
quart, juyce of wood-sorrel a quart, and juyce of quinces a quart.


  _How to prepare to make a good Stock for Jellies of all sorts,
    and the meats most proper for them, both for service
    and sick-folks; also the quantities belonging
    to a quart of Jellie._

  _For the stock for service._

Two pair of calves feet finely cleansed, the fat and great bones
taken out and parted in halves; being well soaked in fair water
twenty four hours, and often shifted, boil them in a brass pot or
pipkin close covered, in the quantity of a gallon of water, boil
them to three pints, then strain the broth through a clean strong
canvas into an earthen pan or bason; when it is cold take off the
top, and pare off the dregs from the bottom. Put it in a clean well
glazed pipkin of two quarts, with a quart of white-wine, a quarter
of a pint of cinamon-water, as much of ginger-water, & as much of
nutmeg-water, or these spices sliced. Then have two pound of double
refined sugar beaten with eggs, in a deep dish or bason, your jelly
being new melted, put in the eggs with sugar, stir all the foresaid
materials together, and set it astewing on a soft charcoal fire the
space of half an hour or more, being well digested and clear run.

Take out the bone and fat of any meat for jellies, for it doth but
stain the stock, and is the cause that it will never be white nor
very clear.


  _Meats proper for Jelly for service or sick folks._

  1.  Three pair of calves feet.
  2.  Three pair of calves feet, a knuckle of veal,
        and a fine well fleshed capon.
  3.  One pair of calves feet, a well fleshed capon,
        and half a pound of harts-horn of ising-glass.
  4.  An old cock and a knuckle of veal.
  5.  Harts horn jelly only, or with a poultrey.
  6.  Good bodied capons.
  7.  Ising-glass only, or with a cock or capon.
  8.  Jelly of hogs feet, ears, and snouts.
  9.  Sheeps feet, lambs feet, and calves feet.


  _Neats feet for a Jelly for a Neats-Tongue._

Being fresh and tender boil'd and cold, lard it with candied cittern
candied orange, lemon, or quinces, run it over with jelly, and some
preserved barberries or cherries.


  _To make a Jelly as white as snow of Jorden-Almonds._

Take a pound of almonds, steep them in cold water till they will
blanch, which will be in six hours; being blanched into cold water,
beat them with a quart of rose water: then have a decoction of half
a pound of ising-glass, boil'd with a gallon of fair spring-water,
or else half wine, boil it till half be wasted, then let it cool,
strain it, and mingle it with your almonds, and strain with them a
pound of double refined sugar, the juyce of two lemons, and cast it
into egg shells; put saffron to some of it, and make some of it
blue, some of it green, and some yellow; cast some into oranges, and
some into lemon rindes candied: mix part of it with some almond
paste colored; and some with cheese-curds; serve of divers of these
colours on a great dish and plate.


  _To make other white Jelly._

Boil two capons being cleansed, the fat and lungs taken out, truss
them and soak them well in clean water three of four hours; then
boil them in a pipkin, or pot of two gallons or less, put to them a
gallon or five quarts of white wine, scum them, and boil them to a
jelly, next strain the broth from the grounds and blow off the fat
clean; then take a quart of sweet cream, a quart of the jelly broth,
a pound and half of refined sugar, and a quarter of a pint of rose
water, mingle them all together, and give them a warm on the fire
with half an ounce of fine searsed ginger; then set it a cooling,
dish it, or cast it in lemon or orange-peels, or in any fashion of
the other jellies, in moulds or glasses, or turn it into colours;
for sick folks in place of cream use stamped almonds.


  _To make Jellies for sauces, made dishes, and other works._

Take six pair of calves feet, scald them and take away the fat
between the claws, as also the great long shank bones, and lay them
in water four or five hours; then boil them in two gallons of fair
spring water, scum them clean and boil them from two gallons to
three quarts, then strain it through a strong canvas, and let the
broth cool; being cold cleanse it from the grounds, pare off the top
and melt it, then put to it in a good large pipkin, three quarts of
white-wine, three races of ginger slic't, some six blades of mace,
a quarter of an ounce of cinamon, a grain of musk, and eighteen
whites of eggs beaten with four pound of sugar, mingle them with the
rest in the pipkin, and the juyce of three lemons, set all on the
fire, and let it stew leisurely; then have your bag ready washed,
and when your pipkin boils up, run it, _&c._


  _Harts horn Jelly._

Take half a pound of harts-horn, boil it in fair spring water
leisurely, close covered, and in a well glazed pipkin that will
contain a gallon, boil it till a spoonful will stand stiff being
cold, then strain it through a fine thick canvas or fine boultering,
and put it again into another lesser pipkin, with the juyce of eight
or nine good large lemons, a pound and half of double refined sugar,
and boil it again a little while, then put it in a gally pot, or
small glasses, or cast it into moulds, or any fashions of the other
jellies. It is held by the Physicians for a special Cordial.

Or take half a pound of harts-horn grated, and a good capon being
finely cleansed and soaked from the blood, and the fat taken off,
truss it, and boil it in a pot or pipkin with the harts-horn, in
fair spring water, the same things as the former, _&c._


  _To make another excellent Jelly of Harts horn and Ising-glass
    for a Consumption._

Take half a pound of ising-glass, half a pound of harts-horn, half a
pound of slic't dates, a pound of beaten sugar, half a pound of
slic't figs, a pound of slic't prunes half an ounce of cinamon, half
an ounce of ginger, a quarter of an ounce of mace, a quarter of an
ounce of cloves, half an ounce of nutmegs, and a little red sanders,
slice your spices, and also a little stick of liquorish and put in
your cinamon whole.


  _To make a Jelly for weakness in the back._

Take two ounces of harts-horn, and a wine quart of spring-water, put
it into a pipkin, and boil it over a soft fire till it be one half
consumed, then take it off the fire, and let it stand a quarter of
an hour, and strain it through a fine holland cloth, crushing the
harts-horn gently with a spoon: then put to it the juyce of a lemon,
two spoonfulls of red rose-water, half a spoonful of cinamon-water,
four or five ounces of fine sugar, or make it sweet according to the
parties taste; then put it out into little glasses or pipkins, and
let it stand twenty four hours, then you may take of it in the
morning, or at four of the clock in the afternoon, what quantity you
please. To put two or three spoonfuls of it into broth is very good.


  _To make another dish of meat called a Press, for service._

Do in this as you may see in the jelly of the porker, before spoken
of; take the feet, ears, snouts, and cheeks, being finely and tender
boil'd to a jelly with spices, and the same liquor as is said in the
Porker; then take out the bones and make a lay of it like a square
brick, season it with coriander or fennil-seed, and bind it up like
a square brick in a strong canvas with packthred, press it till it
be cold, and serve it in slices with bay-leaves, or run it over with
jellies.


  _To make a Sausage for Jelly._

Boil or roast a capon, mince and stamp it with some almond paste,
then have a fine dried neats-tongue, one that looks fine and red
ready boil'd, cut it into little pieces, square like dice, half an
inch long, and as much of interlarded bacon cut into the same form
ready boil'd and cold, some preserved quinces and barberries, sugar,
and cinamon, mingle all together with some scraped ising-glass
amongst it warm; roul it up in a sausage, knit it up at the ends,
and sow the sides; then let it cool, slice it, and serve it in a
jelly in a dish in thin slices, and run jelly over it, let it cool
and lay on more, that cool, run more, and thus do till the dish be
full; when you serve it, garnish the dish with jelly and preserved
barberries, and run over all with juyce of lemon.


  _To make Leach a most excellent way in the French Fashion._

Take a quart of sweet cream, twelve spoonfuls of rose-water, four
grains of musk dissolved in rose-water, and four or five blades of
large mace boil'd with half a pound of ising-glass, being steeped
and washed clean, and put to it half a pound of sugar, and being
boil'd to a jelly, run it through your jelly bag into a dish, and
being cold slice it into chequer-work, and serve it on a plate or
glasses, and sometimes without sugar in it, _&c._


  _To make the best Almond Leach._

Take an ounce of ising-glass, and lay it two hours in water, shift
it, and boil it in fair water, let it cool; then take two pound of
almonds, lay them in the water till they will blanch, then stamp
them and put to them a pint of milk, strain them, and put in large
mace and slic't ginger, boil them till it taste well of the spice,
then put in your digested ising-glass, sugar, and a little
rose-water, run it through a strainer, and put it into dishes.

Some you may colour with saffron, turnsole, or green wheat, and
blew-bottles for blew.


  _To keep Sparagus all the year._

Parboil them very little, and put them into clarified butter, cover
them with it, the butter being cold, cover them with a leather, and
about a month after refresh the butter, melt it, and put it on them
again, then set them under ground being covered with a leather.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION IX.

  _The best way of making all manner of baked Meats._


  _To make a Bisk or Batalia Pie._

Take six peeping Pigeons, and as many peeping small chickens, truss
them to bake; then have six oxe pallets well boil'd and blancht, and
cut in little pieces; then take six lamb-stones, and as many good
veal sweet-breads cut in halves and parboil'd, twenty cocks-combs
boil'd and blanch'd, the bottoms of four artichocks boiled and
blanched, a quart of great oysters parboil'd and bearded, also the
marrow of four bones seasoned with pepper, nutmeg, mace, and salt;
fill the pye with the meat, and mingle some pistaches amongst it,
cock-stones, knots, or yolks of hard eggs, and some butter, close it
up and bake it (an hour and half will bake it) but before you set it
in the oven, put into it a little fair water: Being baked pour out
the butter, and liquor it with gravy, butter beaten up thick, slic't
lemon, and serve it up.

Or you may bake this bisk in a patty-pan or dish.

Sometimes use sparagus and interlarded bacon.

For the paste of this dish, take three quarts of flour, and three
quarters of a pound of butter, boil the butter in fair water, and
make up the paste hot and quick.

Otherways in the summer time, make the paste of cold butter; to
three quarts of flour take a pound and a half of butter, and work it
dry into the flour, with the yolks of four eggs and one white, then
put a little water to it, and make it up into a stiff paste.


  _To bake Chickens or Pigeons._

Take either six pigeon peepers or six chicken peepers, if big cut
them in quarters, then take three sweet-breads of veal slic't very
thin, three sheeps tongues boil'd tender, blanched and slic't, with
as much veal, as much mutton, six larks, twelve cocks combs, a pint
of great oysters parboild and bearded, calves udder cut in pieces,
and three marrow bones, season these foresaid materials with pepper,
salt, and nutmeg, then fill them in pies of the form as you see, and
put on the top some chesnuts, marrow, large mace, grapes, or
gooseberries; then have a little piece of veal and mince it with as
much marrow, some grated bread, yolks of eggs, minced dates, salt,
nutmeg, and some sweet marjoram, work up all with a little cream,
make it up in little balls or rouls, put them in the pie, and put in
a little mutton-gravy, some artichock bottoms, or the tops of boild
sparagus, and a little butter; close up the pie and bake it, being
baked liquor it with juyce of oranges, one lemon, and some claret
wine, shake it well together, and so serve it.


  _To Make a Chicken Pie otherways._

Take and truss them to bake, then season them lightly with pepper,
salt, and nutmeg; lay them in the pie, and lay on them some dates in
halves, with the marrow of three marrow-bones, some large mace,
a quarter of a pound of eringo roots, some grapes or barberries, and
some butter, close it up, and put it in the oven; being half baked,
liquor it with a pound of good butter; a quarter of a pint of
grape-verjuyce, and a quartern of refined sugar, ice it and serve
it up.

Otherways you may use the giblets, and put in some pistaches, but
keep the former order as aforesaid for change.

Liquor it with caudle made of a pint of white-wine or verjuyce, the
yolks of five or six eggs, suger, and a quarter of a pound of good
sweet butter; fill the pye, and shake this liquor well in it, with
the slices of a lemon. Or you may make the caudle green with the
juyce of spinage; ice these pies, or scrape sugar on them.

Otherways for the liquoring or garnishing of these Pies, for variety
you may put in them boil'd skirrets, bottom of artichocks boil'd, or
boil'd cabbidge lettice.

Sometimes sweet herbs, whole yolks of hard eggs, interlarded bacon
in very thin slices, and a whole onion; being baked, liquor it with
white-wine, butter, and the juyce of two oranges.

Or garnish them with barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, red or
white currans, and some sweet herbs chopped small, boil'd in gravy;
and beat up thick with butter.

Otherways liquor it with white-wine, butter, sugar, some sweet
marjoram, and yolks of eggs strained.

Or bake them with candied lettice stalks, potatoes, boil'd and
blanch'd, marrow, dates, and large mace; being baked cut up the pye,
and lay on the chickens, slic't lemon, then liquor the pye with
white-wine, butter, and sugar, and serve it up hot.

You may bake any of the foresaid in a patty-pan or dish, or bake
them in cold butter paste.


  _To bake Turkey, Chicken, Pea-Chicken, Pheasant-Pouts,
    Heath Pouts, Caponets, or Partridge for to be eaten cold._

Take a turkey-chicken, bone it, and lard it with pretty big lard,
a pound and half will serve, then season it with an ounce of pepper,
an ounce of nutmegs, and two ounces of salt, lay some butter in the
bottom of the pye, then lay on the fowl, and put in it six or eight
whole cloves, then put on all the seasoning with good store of
butter, close it up, and baste it over with eggs, bake it, and being
baked fill it up with clarified butter.

Thus you may bake them for to be eaten hot, giving them but half the
seasoning, and liquor it with gravy and juyce of orange.

Bake this pye in fine paste; for more variety you may make a
stuffing for it as followeth; mince some beef-suet and a little veal
very fine, some sweet herbs, grated nutmeg, pepper, salt, two or
three raw yolks of eggs, some boil'd skirrets or pieces of
artichocks, grapes, or gooseberries, _&c._


  _To bake Pigeons wild or tame, Stock-Doves, Turtle-Doves,
    Quails, Rails, &c. to be eaten cold._

Take six pigeons, pull, truss, and draw them, wash and wipe them
dry, and season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, the quantity of
two ounces of the foresaid spices, and as much of the one as the
other, then lay some butter in the bottom of the pye, lay on the
pigeons, and put all the seasoning on them in the pye, put butter to
it, close it up and bake it, being baked and cold, fill it up with
clarified butter.

Make the paste of a pottle of fine flour, and a quarter of a pound
of butter boil'd in fair water made up quick and stiff.

If you will bake them to be eaten hot, leave out half the seasoning:
Bake them in dish, pie, or patty-pan, and make cold paste of a
pottle of flour, six yolks of raw eggs, and a pound of butter, work
into the flour dry, and being well wrought into it, make it up stiff
with a little fair water.

Being baked to be eaten hot, put it into yolks of hard eggs,
sweet-breads, lamb-stones, sparagus, or bottoms of artichocks,
chesnuts, grapes, or gooseberries.

Sometimes for variety make a lear of butter, verjuyce, sugar, some
sweet marjoram chopped and boil'd up in the liquor, put them in the
pye when you serve it up, and dissolve the yolk of an egg into it;
then cut up the pye or dish, and put on it some slic't lemon, shake
it well together, and serve it up hot.

In this mode or fashion you bake larks, black-birds, thrushes,
veldifers, sparrows, or wheat-ears.


  _To bake all manner of Land Fowl, as Turkey, Bustard, Peacock,
    Crane, &c. to be eaten cold._

Take a turkey and bone it, parboil and lard it thick with great lard
as big as your little finger, then season it with 2 ounces of beaten
pepper, two ounces of beaten nutmeg, and three ounces of salt,
season the fowl, and lay it in a pie fit for it, put first butter in
the bottom, with some ten whole cloves, then lay on the turkey, and
the rest of the seasoning on it, lay on good store of butter, then
close it up and baste it either with saffron water, or three or four
eggs beaten together with their yolks; bake it, and being baked and
cold, liquor it with clarified butter, _&c._


  _To bake all manner of Sea-Fowl, as Swan, Whopper,
    to be eaten cold._

Take a swan, bone, parboil and lard it with great lard, season the
lard with nutmeg and pepper only, then take two ounces of pepper,
three of nutmeg, and four of salt, season the fowl, and lay it in
the pie, with good store of butter, strew a few whole cloves on the
rest of the seasoning, lay on large sheets of lard over it, and good
store of butter; then close it up in rye-paste or meal course
boulted, and made up with boiling liquor, and make it up stiff: or
you may bake them to eat hot, only giving them half the seasoning.

In place of baking any of these fowls in pyes, you may bake them in
earthen pans or pots, for to be preserved cold, they will keep
longer.

In the same manner you may bake all sorts of wild geese, tame geese,
bran geese, muscovia ducks, gulls, shovellers, herns, bitterns,
curlews, heath-cocks, teels, olines, ruffs, brewes, pewits, mewes,
sea-pies, dap chickens, strents, dotterils, knots, gravelins,
oxe-eys, red shanks, _&c._

In baking of these fowls to be eaten hot, for the garnish put in a
big onion, gooseberries, or grapes in the pye, and sometimes capers
or oysters, and liquor it with gravy, claret, and butter.


  _To dress a Turkey in the French mode, to eat cold,
    called a la doode._

Take a turkey and bone it, or not bone it, but boning is the best
way, and lard it with good big lard as big as your little finger and
season it with pepper, cloves, and mace, nutmegs, and put a piece of
interlarded bacon in the belly with some rosemary and bayes, whole
pepper, cloves and mace, and sew it up in a clean cloth, and lay it
in steep all night in white-wine, next morning close it up with a
sheet of course paste in a pan or pipkin, and bake it with the same
liquor it was steept in; it will ask four hours baking, or you may
boil the liquor; then being baked and cold, serve it on a pie-plate,
and stick it with rosemary and bays, and serve it up with mustard
and sugar in saucers, and lay the fowl on a napkin folded square,
and the turkey laid corner-ways.

Thus any large fowl or other meat, as a leg of mutton, and the like.


Meats proper for a stofado may be any large fowl, as,

  _Turkey, Swan, Goose, Bustard, Crane, Whopper, wild Geese,
  Brand Geese, Hearn, Shoveler, or Bittern, and many more; as also
  Venison, Red Deer, Fallow Deer, Legs of Mutton, Breasts of Veal
  boned and larded, Kid or Fawn, Pig, Pork, Neats-tongues, and Udders,
  or any Meat, a Turkey, Lard one pound, Pepper one ounce, Nutmegs,
  Ginger, Mace, Cloves, Wine a quart, Vinegar half a pint, a quart
  of great Oysters, Puddings, Sausages, two Lemons, two Cloves of
  Garlick._


  _A Stofado._

Take two turkeys, & bone them and lard them with great lard as big
as your finger, being first seasoned with pepper, & nutmegs, & being
larded, lay it in steep in an earthen pan or pipkin in a quart of
white-wine, & half as much wine-vinegar, some twenty whole cloves,
half an ounce of mace, an ounce of beaten pepper, three races of
slic't ginger, half a handful of salt, half an ounce of slic't
nutmegs, and a ladleful of good mutton broth, & close up the pot
with a sheet of coarse paste, and bake it; it will ask four hours
baking; then have a fine clean large dish, with a six penny French
bread slic't in large slices, and then lay them in the bottom of a
dish, and steep them with some good strong mutton broth, and the
same broth that it was baked in, and some roast mutton gravy, and
dish the fowl, garnish it with the spices and some sausages, and
some kind of good puddings, and marrow and carved lemons slic't, and
lemon-peels.


  _To bake any kind of Heads, and first of the Oxe or
    Bullocks Cheeks to be eaten hot or cold._

Being first cleansed from the slime and filth, cut them in pieces,
take out the bones, and season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg,
then put them in a pye with a few whole cloves, a little seasoning,
slices of bacon, and butter over all; bake them very tender, and
liquor them with butter and claret wine.

Or boil your chickens, take out the bones and make a pasty with some
minced meat, and a caul of mutton under it, on the top spices and
butter, close it up in good crust, and make your pies according to
these forms.


  _Otherways._

Bone and lard them with lard as big as your little finger seasoned
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and laid into the pye or pasty, with
slices of interlarded bacon, and a clove or two, close it up, and
bake it with some butter; make your pye or pasty of good fine crust
according to these forms. Being baked fill it up with good sweet
butter.


  _Otherways._

You may make a pudding of some grated bread, minced veal, beef-suet,
some minced sweet herbs, a minced onion, eggs, cream, nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, and lay it on the top of your meat in the pye, and
some butter, close it up and bake it.


  _Otherways._

Take a calves head, soak it well and take out the brains, boil the
head and take out the bones, being cold stuff it with sweet herbs
and hard eggs chopped small, minced bacon, and a raw egg or two,
nutmeg, pepper, and salt; and lay in the bottom of the pye minced
veal raw, and bacon; then lay the cheeks on it in the pye, and
slices of bacon on that, then spices, butter, and grapes or lemon,
close it up, bake it, and liquor it with butter only.


  _Otherways._

Boil it and take out the bones, cleanse it, and season it with
pepper, salt, and nutmeg, put some minced veal or suet in the bottom
of the pye, then lay on the cheeks, and on them a pudding made of
minced veal raw and suet, currans, grated bread or parmisan, eggs,
saffron, nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put it on the head in the pye,
with some thin slices of interlarded bacon, thin slices also of veal
and butter, close it up, and make it according to these forms, being
baked, liquor it with butter only.


  _To bake a Calves Chaldron._

Boil it tender, and being cold mince it, and season it with nutmeg,
pepper, cinamon, ginger, salt, caraway seeds, verjuyce, or grapes,
some currans, sugar, rose-water and dates stir them all together and
fill your pye, bake it, and being baked ice it.


  _Minced Pies of Calves Chaldrons, or Muggets._

Boil it tender, and being cold mince it small, then put to it bits
of lard cut like dice, or interlarded bacon, some yolks of hard eggs
cut like dice also, some bits of veal and mutton cut also in the
same bigness, as also lamb, some gooseberries, grapes or barberries,
and season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, fill your pye, and lay
on it some thin slices of interlarded bacon, and butter; close it
up, and bake it, liquor it with white-wine beaten with butter.


  _To bake a Calves Chaldron or Muggets in a Pye or little Pasties,
    or make a Pudding of it, adding two or three Eggs._

Being half boil'd, mince it small, with half a pound of beef-suet,
and season it with beaten cloves and mace, nutmegs, a little onion
and minced lemon peel, and put to it the juyce of an orange, and mix
all together. Then make a piece of puff-paste and bake it in a dish
as other Florentines, and close it up with the other half of the
paste, and being baked put into it the juyce of two or three
oranges, and stir the meat with the orange juyce well together and
serve it, _&c._


  _To bake a Pig to be eaten cold called a Maremaid Pye._

Take a Pig, flay it and quarter it, then bone it, take also a good
Eel flayed, speated, boned, and seasoned with pepper, salt, and
nutmeg, then lay a quarter of your pig in a round pie; and part of
the Eel on that quarter, then lay another quarter on the other and
then more eel, and thus keep the order till your pie be full, then
lay a few whole cloves, slices of bacon, and butter, and close it
up, bake it in good fine paste, being baked and cold, fill it up
with good sweet butter.


  _Otherways._

Scald it, and bone it being first cleansed, dry the sides in a clean
cloth, and season them with beaten nutmeg, pepper, salt, and chopped
sage; then have two neats-tongues dryed, well boild, and cold, slice
them out all the length, as thick as a half crown, and lay a quarter
of your pig in a square or round pie, and slices of the tongue on
it, then another quarter of a pig and more tongue, thus do four
times double; and lay over all slices of bacon, a few cloves,
butter, and a bay-leafe or two; then bake it, and being baked, fill
it up with good sweet butter. Make your paste white of butter and
flower.


  _Otherways._

Take a pig being scalded, flayed, and quartered, season it with
beaten nutmeg, pepper, salt, cloves, and mace, lay it in your pie
with some chopped sweet herbs, hard eggs, currans, (or none) put
your herbs between every lay, with some gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries, and lay on the top slices of interlarded bacon and
butter, close it up, and bake it in good fine crust, being baked,
liquor it with butter, verjuyce, and sugar. If to be eaten cold,
with butter only.


  _Otherways to be eaten hot._

Cut it in pieces, and make a pudding of grated bread, cream, suet,
nutmeg, eggs, and dates, make it into balls, and stick them with
slic't almonds; then lay the pig in the pye, and balls on it, with
dates, potato, large mace, lemon, and butter; being baked liquor it.


  _To bake four Hares in a Pie._

Bone them and lard them with great lard, being first seasoned with
nutmeg, and pepper, then take four ounces of pepper, four ounces of
nutmegs, and eight ounces of salt, mix them together, season them,
and make a round or square pye of course boulted rye and meal; then
the pie being made put some butter in the bottom of it, and lay on
the hares one upon another; then put upon it a few whole cloves,
a sheet of lard over it, and good store of butter, close it up and
bake it, being first basted over with eggs beaten together, or
saffron; when it is baked liquor them with clarified butter.

Or bake them in white paste or pasty, if to be eaten hot, leave out
half the seasoning.


  _To bake three Hares in a Pie to be eaten cold._

Bone three hares, mince them small, and stamp them with the
seasoning of pepper, salt, and nutmeg, then have lard cut as big as
ones little finger, and as long as will reach from side to side of
the pye; then lay butter in the bottom of it, and a lay of meat,
then a lay of lard, and a lay of meat, and thus do five or six
times, lay your lard all one way, but last of all a lay of meat,
a few whole cloves, and slices of bacon over all, and some butter,
close it up and bake it, being baked fill it up with sweet butter,
and stop the vent.

Thus you may bake any venison, beef, mutton, veal, or rabits; if you
bake them in earthen pans they will keep the longest.


  _To bake a Hare with a Pudding in his belly._

For to make this pie you must take as followeth, a gallon of flour,
half an ounce of nutmegs, half an ounce of pepper, salt, capers,
raisins, pears in quarters, prunes, with grapes, lemon, or
gooseberries, and for the liquor a pound of sugar, a pint of claret
or verjuyce, and some large mace.

Thus also you may bake a fawn, kid, lamb, or rabit: Make your
Hare-Pie according to the foregoing form.


  _To make minced Pies of a Hare._

Take a Hare, flay it, and cleanse it, then take the flesh from the
bones, and mince it with the fat bacon, or beef-suet raw, season it
with pepper, mace, nutmeg, cloves, and salt; then mingle all
together with some grapes, gooseberries, or barberries; fill the
pie, close it up and bake it.


  _Otherways._

Mince it with beef-suet, a pound and half of raisins minced, some
currans, cloves, mace, salt, and cinamon, mingle all together, and
fill the pie, bake it and liquor it with claret.


  _To make a Pumpion Pie._

Take a pound of pumpion and slice it, a handful of time, a little
rosemary, and sweet marjoram stripped off the stalks, chop them
small, then take cinamon, nutmeg, pepper, and a few cloves all
beaten, also ten eggs, and beat them, then mix and beat them all
together, with as much sugar as you think fit, then fry them like a
froise, after it is fried, let it stand till it is cold, then fill
your pie after this manner. Take sliced apples sliced thin round
ways, and lay a layer of the froise, and a layer of apples, with
currans betwixt the layers. While your pie is fitted, put in a good
deal of sweet butter before you close it. When the pie is baked,
take six yolks of eggs, some white-wine or verjuyce, and make a
caudle of this, but not too thick, cut up the lid, put it in, and
stir them well together whilst the eggs and pumpion be not
perceived, and so serve it up.


  _To make a Lumber-Pie._

Take some grated bread, and beef-suet cut into bits like great dice,
and some cloves and mace, then some veal or capon minced small with
beef-suet, sweet herbs, salt, sugar, the yolks of six eggs boil'd
hard and cut in quarters, put them to the other ingredients, with
some barberries, some yolks of raw eggs, and a little cream, work up
all together and put it in the cauls of veal like little sausages;
then bake them in a dish, and being half baked, have a pie made and
dried in the oven; put these puddings into it with some butter,
verjuyce, sugar, some dates on them, large mace, grapes, or
barberries, and marrow; being baked, serve it with a cut cover on
it, and scrape sugar on it.


  _Otherways._

Take some minc't meat of chewits of veal, and put to it some three
or four raw eggs, make it into balls, then put them in a pye fitted
for them according to this form, first lay in the balls, then lay on
them some slic't dates, large mace, marrow, and butter; close it up
and bake it, being baked, liquor it with verjuyce, sugar, and
butter, then ice it, and serve it up.


  _To make an Olive Pye._

Take tyme, sweet marjorarm, savory, spinage, parsley, sage, endive,
sorrel, violet leaves, and strawberry leaves, mince them very small
with some yolks of hard eggs, then put to them half a pound of
currans, nutmeg, pepper, cinamon, sugar, and salt, minced raisins,
gooseberries, or barberries, and dates minc'd small, mingle
alltogether, then have slices of a leg of veal, or a leg or mutton,
cut thin and hacked with the back of a knife, lay them on a clean
board and strow on the foresaid materials, roul them up and put them
in a pye; then lay on them some dates, marrow, large mace, and some
butter, close it up and bake it, being baked cut it up, liquor it
with butter, verjuyce, and sugar, put a slic't lemon into it, and
serve it up with scraped sugar.


  _To bake a Loin, Breast, or Rack of Veal or Mutton._

If you bake it with the bones, joynt a loin very well and season it
with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put it in your pye, and put butter to
it, close it up, and bake it in good crust, and liquor it with sweet
butter.

Thus also you may bake the brest, either in pye or pasty, as also
the rack or shoulder, being stuffed with sweet herbs, and fat of
beef minced together and baked either in pye or pasty.

In the summer time you may add to it spinage, gooseberries, grapes,
barberries, or slic't lemon, and in winter, prunes, and currans, or
raisins, and liquor it with butter, sugar, and verjuyce.


  _To make a Steak Pye the best way._

Cut a neck, loyn, or breast into steaks, and season them with
pepper, nutmeg, and salt; then have some few sweet herbs minced
small with an onion, and the yolks of three or four hard eggs minced
also; the pye being made, put in the meat and a few capers, and
strow these ingredients on it, then put in butter, close it up and
bake it three hours moderately, _&c._ Make the pye round and pretty
deep.


  _Otherways._

The meat being prepared as before, season it with nutmeg, ginger,
pepper, a whole onion, and salt; fill the pye, then put in some
large mace, half a pound of currans, and butter, close it up and put
it in the oven; being half baked put in a pint of warmed clearet,
and when you draw it to send it up, cut the lid in pieces, and stick
it in the meat round the pye; or you may leave out onions, and put
in sugar and verjuyce.


  _Otherways._

Take a loyn of mutton, cut it in steaks, and season it with nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, then lay a layer of raisins and prunes in the
bottom of the pye, steaks on them, and then whole cinamon, then more
fruit and steaks, thus do it three times, and on the top put more
fruit, and grapes, or slic't orange, dates, large mace, and butter,
close it up and bake it, being baked, liquor it with butter, white
wine and sugar, ice it, and serve it hot.


  _To bake Steak Pies the French way._

Season the steaks with pepper, nutmeg, and salt lightly, and set
them by; then take a piece of the leanest of a leg of mutton, and
mince it small with some beef suet and a few sweet herbs, as tops of
tyme, penniroyal, young red sage, grated bread, yolks of eggs, sweet
cream, raisins of the sun, _&c._ work all together, and make it into
little balls, and rouls, put them into a deep round pye on the
steaks, then put to them some butter, and sprinkle it with verjuyce,
close it up and bake it, being baked cut it up, then roul sage
leaves in butter, fry them, and stick them in the balls, serve the
pye without a cover, and liquor it with the juyce of two or three
oranges or lemons.


  _Otherways._

Bake these steaks in any of the foresaid-ways in patty-pan or dish,
and make other paste called cold butter paste; take to a gallon of
flower a pound and a half of butter, four or five eggs and but two
whites, work up the butter and eggs into the flour, and being well
wrought, put to it a little fair cold water, and make it up a stiff
paste.


  _To bake a Gammon of Bacon._

Steep it all night in water, scrape it clean, and stuff it with all
manner of sweet herbs, as sage, tyme, parsley, sweet marjoram,
savory, violet-leaves, strawberry leaves, fennil, rose-mary,
penniroyal, _&c._ being cleans'd and chopped small with some yolks
of hard eggs, beaten nutmeg, and pepper, stuff it and boil it, and
being fine and tender boil'd and cold, pare the under side, take off
the skin, and season it with nutmeg and pepper, then lay it in your
pie or pasty with a few whole cloves, and slices of raw bacon over
it, and butter; close it up in pye or pasty of short paste, and
bake it.


  _To bake wild Bore._

Take the leg, season it, and lard it very well with good big lard
seasoned with nutmeg, pepper, and beaten ginger, lay it in a pye of
the form as you see, being seasoned all over with the same spices
and salt, then put a few whole cloves on it, a few bay-leaves, large
slices of lard, and good store of butter, bake it in fine or course
crust, being baked, liquor it with good sweet butter, and stop up
the vent.

If to keep long, bake it in an earthen pan in the abovesaid
seasoning, and being baked fill it up with butter, and you may keep
it a whole year.


  _To bake your wild Bore that comes out of _France_._

Lay it in soak two days, then parboil it, and season it with pepper,
nutmeg, cloves, and ginger; and when it is baked fill it up with
butter.


  _To bake Red Deer._

Take a side of red deer, bone it and season it, then take out the
back sinew and the skin, and lard the fillets or back with great
lard as big as your middle finger; being first seasoned with nutmeg,
and pepper; then take four ounces of pepper, four ounces of nutmeg,
and six ounces of salt, mix them well together, and season the side
of venison; being well slashed with a knife in the inside for to
make the seasoning enter; being seasoned, and a pie made according
to these forms, put in some butter in the bottom of the pye,
a quarter of an ounce of cloves, and a bay-leaf or two, lay on the
flesh, season it, and coat it deep, then put on a few cloves, and
good store of butter, close it up and bake it the space of eight or
nine hours, but first baste the pie with six or seven eggs, beaten
well together; being baked and cold fill it up with good sweet
clarified butter.

Take for a side or half hanch of red deer, half a bushel of rye
meal, being coursly searsed, and make it up very stiff with boiling
water only.

If you bake it to eat hot, give it but half the seasoning, and
liquor it with claret-wine, and good butter.


  _To bake Fallow-Dear to be eaten hot or cold._

Take a side of venison, bone and lard it with great lard as big as
your little finger, and season it with two ounces of pepper, two
ounces of nutmeg, and four ounces of salt; then have a pie made, and
lay some butter in the bottom of it, then lay in the flesh, the
inside downward, coat it thick with seasoning, and put to it on the
top of the meat, with a few cloves, and good store of butter, close
it up and bake it, the pye being first basted with eggs, being baked
and cold, fill it up with clarified butter, and keep it to eat cold.
Make the paste as you do for red deer, course drest through a
boulter, a peck and a pottle of this meal will serve for a side or
half hanch of a buck.


  _To bake a side or half Hanch to be eaten hot._

Take a side of a buck being boned, and the skins taken away, season
it only with two ounces of pepper, and as much salt, or half an
ounce more, lay it on a sheet of fine paste with two pound of
beef-suet, finely minced and beat with a little fair water, and laid
under it, close it up and bake it, and being fine and tender baked,
put to it a good ladle-full of gravy, or good strong mutton broth.


  _To make a Paste for it._

Take a peck of flour by weight, and lay it on the pastery board,
make a hole in the midst of the flour, and put to it five pound of
good fresh butter, the yolks of six eggs and but four whites, work
up the butter and eggs into the flour, and being well wrought
together, put some fair water to it, and make it into a stiff paste.

In this fashion of fallow deer you may bake goat, doe, or a pasty of
venison.


  _To make meer sauce, or a Pickle to keep Venison in
    that is tainted._

Take strong ale and as much vinegar as will make it sharp, boil it
with some bay salt, and make a strong brine, scum it, and let it
stand till it be cold, then put in your vinison twelve hours, press
it, parboil it, and season it, then bake it as before is shown.


  _Other Sauce for tainted Venison._

Take your venison, and boil water, beer, and wine-vinegar together,
and some bay-leaves, tyme, savory, rosemary, and fennil, of each a
handful, when it boils put in your venison, parboil it well and
press it, and season it as aforesaid, bake it for to be eaten cold
or hot, and put some raw minced mutton under it.


  _Otherways to preserve tainted Venison._

Bury it in the ground in a clean cloth a whole night, and it will
take away the corruption, savour, or stink.


  _Other meer Sauces to counterfeit Beef, or Muton
    to give it a Venison colour._

Take small beer and vinegar, and parboil your beef in it, let it
steep all night, then put in some turnsole to it, and being baked,
a good judgment shall not discern it from red or fallow deer.


  _Otherways to counterfeit Ram, Wether, or any Mutton for Venison._

Bloody it in sheeps, Lambs, or Pigs blood, or any good and new
blood, season it as before, and bake it either for hot or cold. In
this fashion you may bake mutton, lamb, or kid.


  _To make Umble-Pies._

Lay minced beef-suet in the bottom of the pie, or slices of
interlarded bacon, and the umbles cut as big as small dice, with
some bacon cut in the same form, and seasoned with nutmeg, pepper,
and salt, fill your pyes with it, and slices of bacon and butter,
close it up and bake it, and liquor it with claret, butter, and
stripped tyme.


  _To make Pies of Sweet-breads or Lamb stones._

Parboil them and blanch them, or raw sweetbreads or stones, part
them in halves, & season them with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, season
them lightly; then put in the bottom of the pie some slices of
interlarded bacon, & some pieces of artichocks or mushrooms, then
sweet-breads or stones, marrow, gooseberries, barberries, grapes, or
slic't lemon, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with
butter only. Or otherwise with butter, white-wine, and sugar, and
sometimes add some yolks of eggs.


  _To make minced Pies or Chewits of a Leg of Veal, Neats-Tongue,
    Turkey, or Capon._

Take to a good leg of veal six pound of beef-suet, then take the leg
of veal, bone it, parboil it, and mince it very fine when it is hot;
mince the suet by it self very fine also, then when they are cold
mingle them together, then season the meat with a pound of sliced
dates, a pound of sugar, an ounce of nutmegs, an ounce of pepper, an
ounce of cinamon, half an ounce of ginger, half a pint of verjuyce,
a pint of rose-water, a preserved orange, or any peel fine minced,
an ounce of caraway-comfits, and six pound of currans; put all these
into a large tray with half a handful of salt, stir them up all
together, and fill your pies, close them up, bake them, and being
baked, ice them with double refined sugar, rose-water, and butter.

Make the paste with a peck of flour, and two pound of butter boil'd
in fair water or liquor, make it up boiling hot.


  _To make minced Pies of Mutton._

Take to a leg of mutton four pound of beef-suet, bone the leg and
cut it raw into small pieces, as also the suet, mince them together
very fine, and being minc't season it with two pound of currans, two
pound of raisins, two pound of prunes, an ounce of caraway seed, an
ounce of nutmegs, an ounce of pepper, an ounce of cloves, and mace,
and six ounces of salt; stir up all together, fill the pies, and
bake them as the former.


  _To make minced Pies of Beef._

Take a stone or eight pound of beef, also eight pound of suet, mince
them very small, and put to them eight ounces of salt, two ounces of
nutmegs, an ounce of pepper, an ounce of cloves and mace, four pound
of currans, and four pound of raisins, stir up all these together,
and fill your pies.


  _Minced in the French fashion, called Pelipate,
    or in English Petits, made of Veal, Pork, or Lamb,
    or any kind of Venison, Beef, Poultrey, or Fowl._

Mince them with lard, and being minced, season them with salt, and a
little nutmeg, mix the meat with some pine-apple-seed, and a few
grapes or gooseberries; fill the pies and bake them, being baked
liquor them with a little gravy.

Sometimes for variety in the Winter time, you may use currans
instead of grapes or gooseberries, and yolks of hard eggs minced
among the meat.


  _Minced Pies in the Italian Fashion._

Parboil a leg of veal, and being cold mince it with beef-suet, and
season it with pepper, salt, and gooseberries; mix with it a little
verjuyce, currans, sugar, and a little saffron in powder.


  _Forms of minced Pyes._

    [Illustration]


  _To make an extraordinary Pie, or a Bride Pye
    of several Compounds, being several distinct Pies
    on one bottom._

Provide cock-stones and combs, or lamb-stones, and sweet-breads of
veal, a little set in hot water and cut to pieces; also two or three
ox-pallats blanch't and slic't, a pint of oysters, slic't dates,
a handful of pine kernels, a little quantity of broom buds, pickled,
some fine interlarded bacon slic't; nine or ten chesnuts rosted and
blancht season them with salt, nutmeg, and some large mace, and
close it up with some butter. For the caudle, beat up some butter,
with three yolks of eggs, some white or claret wine, the juyce of a
lemon or two; cut up the lid, and pour on the lear, shaking it well
together; then lay on the meat, slic't lemon, and pickled
barberries, and cover it again, let these ingredients be put in the
moddle or scollops of the Pye.

Several other Pies belong to the first form, but you must be sure to
make the three fashions proportionably answering one the other; you
may set them on one bottom of paste, which will be more convenient;
or if you set them several you may bake the middle one full of
flour, it being bak't and cold, take out the flour in the bottom, &
put in live birds, or a snake, which will seem strange to the
beholders, which cut up the pie at the Table. This is only for a
Wedding to pass away the time.

Now for the other pies you may fill them with several ingredients,
as in one you may put oysters, being parboild and bearded, season
them with large mace, pepper, some beaten ginger, and salt, season
them lightly and fill the Pie, then lay on marrow & some good
butter, close it up and bake it. Then make a lear for it with white
wine, the oyster liquor, three or four oysters bruised in pieces to
make it stronger, but take out the pieces, and an onion, or rub the
bottom of the dish with a clove of garlick; it being boil'd, put in
a piece of butter, with a lemon, sweet herbs will be good boil'd in
it, bound up fast together, cut up the lid, or make a hole to let
the lear in, _&c._

Another you may make of prawns and cockles, being seasoned as the
first, but no marrow: a few pickled mushrooms, (if you have them) it
being baked, beat up a piece of butter, a little vinegar, a slic't
nutmeg, and the juyce of two or three oranges thick, and pour it
into the Pye.

A third you may make a Bird pie; take young Birds, as larks pull'd
and drawn, and a forced meat to put in the bellies made of grated
bread, sweet herbs minced very small, beef-suet, or marrow minced,
almonds beat with a little cream to keep them from oyling, a little
parmisan (or none) or old cheese; season this meat with nutmeg,
ginger, and salt, then mix them together, with cream and eggs like a
pudding, stuff the larks with it, then season the larks with nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, and lay them in the pie, put in some butter, and
scatter between them pine-kernels, yolks of eggs and sweet herbs,
the herbs and eggs being minced very small; being baked make a lear
with the juyce of oranges and butter beat up thick, and shaken well
together.

For another of the Pies, you may boil artichocks, and take only the
bottoms for the Pie, cut them into quarters or less, and season them
with nutmeg. Thus with several ingredients you may fill your other
Pies.


  _For the outmost Pies they must be Egg-Pies._

Boil twenty eggs and mince them very small, being blanched, with
twice the weight of them of beef-suet fine minced also; then have
half a pound of dates slic't with a pound of raisins, and a pound of
currans well washed and dryed, and half an ounce of cinamon fine
beaten, and a little cloves and mace fine beaten, sugar a quarter of
a pound, a little salt, a quarter of a pint of rose-water, and as
much verjuyce, and stir and mingle all well together, and fill the
pies, and close them, and bake them, they will not be above two
hours a baking, and serve them all seventeen upon one dish, or
plate, and ice them, or scrape sugar on them; every one of these
Pies should have a tuft of paste jagged on the top.


  _To make Custards divers ways._

Take to a quart cream, ten eggs, half a pound of sugar, half a
quarter of an ounce of mace, half as much ginger beaten very fine,
and a spoonful of salt, strain them through a strainer; and the
forms being finely dried in the oven, fill them full on an even
hearth, and bake them fair and white, draw them and dish them on a
dish and plate; then strow on them biskets red and white, stick
muskedines red and white, and scrape thereon double refined sugar.

Make the paste for these custards of a pottle of fine flour, make it
up with boiling liquor, and make it up stiff.


  _To make an Almond Custard._

Take two pound of almonds, blanch and beat them very fine with
rosewater, then strain them with some two quarts of cream, twenty
whites of eggs, and a pound of double refined sugar; make the paste
as beforesaid, and bake it in a mild oven fine and white, garnish it
as before and scrape fine sugar over all.


  _To make a Custard without Eggs._

Take a pound of almonds, blanch and beat them with rose-water into a
fine paste, then put the spawn or row of a Carp or Pike to it, and
beat them well together, with some cloves, mace, and salt, the
spices being first beaten, and some ginger, strain them with some
fair spring water, and put into the strained stuff half a pound of
double refined sugar and a little saffron; when the paste is dried
and ready to fill, put into the bottom of the coffin some slic't
dates, raisins of the sun stoned, and some boiled currans, fill them
and bake them; being baked, scrape sugar on them. Be sure always to
prick your custards or forms before you set them in the oven.

If you have no row or spawn, put rice flour instead hereof.


  _To make an extraordinary good Cake._

Take half a bushel of the best flour you can get very finely
searsed, and lay it upon a large Pastry board, make a hole in the
midst thereof, and put to it three pound of the best butter you can
get; with fourteen pound of currans finely picked and rubbed, three
quarts of good new thick cream warm'd, two pound of fine sugar
beaten, three pints of good new ale, barm or yeast, four ounces of
cinamon fine beaten and searsed, also an ounce of beaten ginger, two
ounces of nutmegs fine beaten and searsed; put in all these
materials together, and work them up into an indifferent stiff
paste, keep it warm till the oven be hot, then make it up and bake
it, being baked an hour and a half ice it, then take four pound of
double refined sugar, beat it, and searse it, and put it in a deep
clean scowred skillet the quantity of a gallon, boil it to a candy
height with a little rose-water, then draw the cake, run it all
over, and set it into the oven, till it be candied.


  _To make a Cake otherways._

Take a gallon of very fine flour and lay it on the pastry board,
then strain three or four eggs with a pint of barm, and put it into
a hole made in the middle of the flour with two nutmegs finely
beaten, an ounce of cinamon, and an ounce of cloves and mace beaten
fine also, half a pound of sugar, and a pint of cream; put these
into the flour with two spoonfuls of salt, and work it up good and
stiff, then take half the paste, and work three pound of currans
well picked & rubbed into it, then take the other part and divide it
into two equal pieces, drive them out as broad as you wold have the
cake, then lay one of the sheets of paste on a sheet of paper, and
upon that the half that hath the currans, and the other part on the
top, close it up round, prick it, and bake it; being baked, ice it
with butter, sugar, and rose water, and set it again into the oven.


  _To make French Bread the best way._

Take a gallon of fine flour, and a pint of good new ale barm or
yeast, and put it to the flour, with the whites of six new laid eggs
well beaten in a dish, and mixt with the barm in the middle of the
flour, also three spoonfuls of fine salt; then warm some milk and
fair water, and put to it, and make it up pretty stiff, being well
wrought and worked up, cover it in a boul or tray with a warm cloth
till your oven be hot; then make it up either in rouls, or fashion
it in little wooden dishes and bake it, being baked in a quick oven,
chip it hot.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION X.

  _To bake all manner of Curneld Fruits in Pyes, Tarts,
    or made Dishes, raw or preserved, as Quinces, Warden,
    Pears, Pippins,_ &c.


  _To bake a Quince Pye._

Take fair Quinces, core and pare them very thin, and put them in a
Pye, then put it in two races of ginger slic't, as much cinamon
broken into bits, and some eight or ten whole cloves, lay them in
the bottom of the Pye, and lay on the Quinces close packed, with as
much fine refined sugar as the Quinces weigh, close it up and bake
it, and being well soaked the space of four or five hours, ice it.


  _Otherways._

Take a gallon of flour, a pound and a half of butter, six eggs,
thirty quinces, three pound of sugar, half an ounce of cinamon, half
an ounce of ginger, half an ounce of cloves, and some rose-water,
make them in a Pye or Tart, and being baked stew on double refined
sugar.


  _Otherways._

Bake these Quinces raw, slic't very thin, with beaten cinamon, and
the same quantity of sugar, as before, either in tart, patty-pan,
dish, or in cold butter-paste, sometimes mix them with wardens,
pears or pipins, and some minced citron.


  _To make a Quince Pye otherways._

Take Quinces and preserve them, being first coared and pared, then
make a sirrup of fine sugar and spring water, take as much as the
quinces weigh, and to every pound of sugar a pint of fair water,
make your sirrup in a preserving pan; being scumm'd and boil'd to
sirrup, put in the quinces, boil them up till they be well coloured,
& being cold, bake them in pyes whole or in halves, in a round tart,
dish, or patty-pan with a cut cover, or in quarters; being baked put
in the same sirrup, but before you bake them, put in more fine
sugar, and leave the sirrups to put in afterwards, then ice it.

Thus you may do of any curnel'd fruits, as wardens, pippins pears,
pearmains, green quodlings, or any good apples, in laid tarts, or
cuts.


  _To make a slic't Tart of Quinces, Wardens, Pears, Pippins,
    in slices raw of divers Compounds._

The foresaid fruits being finely pared, and slic't in very thine
slices; season them with beaten cinamon, and candied citron minced,
candied orange, or both, or raw orange peel, raw lemon peel,
fennil-seed, or caraway-seed or without any of these compounds or
spices, but the fruits alone one amongst the other; put to ten
pippins six quinces, six wardens, eight pears, and two pound of
sugar; close it up, bake it; and ice it as the former tarts.

Thus you may also bake it in patty-pan, or dish, with cold butter
paste.


  _To bake Quinces, Wardens, Pears, Pippins, or any Fruits
    preserved to be baked in pies, Tarts, Patty-pan or Dish._

Preserve any of the foresaid in white-wine & sugar till the sirrup
grow thick, then take the quinces out of it, and lay them to cool in
a dish, then set them into the pye, and prick cloves on the tops
with some cinamon, and good store of refined sugar, close them up
with a cut cover, and being baked, ice it, and fill it up with the
syrrup they were first boiled in.


  _Otherways._

You may bake them in an earthen pot with some claret-wine and sugar,
and keep them for your use.


  _To make a Trotter Pye of Quinces, Wardens, Pears,_ &c.

Take them either severally or all together in quarters, or slic't
raw, if in quarters put some whole ones amongst them, if slic't
beaten spices, and a little butter and sugar; take to twelve quinces
a pound of sugar, and a quarter of a pound of butter, close it up
and bake it, and being bak't cut it up and mash the fruit to pieces,
then put in some cream, and yolks of eggs beaten together, and put
it into the Pye, stir all together, and cut the cover into five or
six pieces like Lozenges, or three square, and scrape on sugar.


  _To make a Pippin Pye._

Take thirty good large pippins, pare them very thin, and make the
Pye, then put in the pippins, thirty cloves, a quarter of an ounce
of whole cinamon, and as much pared and slic't, a quarter of a pound
of orangado, as much of lemon in sucket, and a pound & half of
refined sugar, close it up and bake it, it will ask four hours
baking, then ice it with butter, sugar, and rose-water.


  _To make a Pippin Tart according to this form._

Take fair pippins and pare them, then cut them in quarters, core
them and stew them, in claret-wine, whole cinamon, and slic't
ginger; stew them half an hour, then put them into a dish, and break
them not, when they are cold, lay them one by one into the tart,
then lay on some green cittern minced small, candied orange or
coriander, put on sugar and close it up, bake it, and ice it, then
scrape on sugar and serve it.


  _To make a Pippin Tart, either in Tart, Patty-Pan, or Dish._

Take ten fair pippins, preserve them in white wine, sugar, whole
cinamon, slic't ginger, and eight or ten cloves, being finely
preserved and well coloured, lay them on a cut tart of short paste;
or in place of preserving you may bake them between two dishes in
the oven for the foresaid use.


  _A made Dish of Pippins._

Take pippins, pare and slice them, then boil them in claret-wine in
a pipkin, or between two dishes with some sugar, and beaten cinamon,
when 'tis boiled good and thick, mash it like marmalade, and put in
a dish of puff paste or short paste; acording to this form with a
cut cover, and being baked ice it.


  _To preserve Pippins in slices._

Make pippins and slice them round with the coars or kernels in, as
thick as a half crown piece, and some lemon-peel amongst them in
slices, or else cut like small lard, or orange peel first boil'd and
cut in the same manner; then make the syrup weight for weight, and
being clarified and scummed clean, put in the pipins and boil them
up quick; to a pound of sugar put a pint of fair water, or a pint of
white-wine or claret, and make them of two colours.


  _To make a Warden or a Pear Tart quartered._

Take twenty good wardens, pare them, and cut them in a tart, and put
to them two pound of refined sugar, twenty whole cloves, a quarter
of an ounce of cinamon broke into little bits, and three races of
ginger pared and slic't thin; then close up the tart and bake it, it
will ask five hours baking, then ice it with a quarter of a pound of
double refined sugar, rose-water, and butter.


  _Other Tart of Warden, Quinces, or Pears._

First bake them in a pot, then cut them in quarters, and coar them,
put them in a tart made according to this form, close it up, and
when it is baked, scrape on sugar.


  _To make a Tart of Green Pease._

Take green pease and boil them tender, then pour them out into a
cullender, season them with saffron, salt, and put sugar to them and
some sweet butter, then close it up and bake it almost an hour, then
draw it forth of the oven and ice it, put in a little verjuyce, and
shake them well together, then scrape on sugar, and serve it in.


  _To make a Tart of Hips._

Take hips, cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash
them and season them with sugar, cinamon, and ginger, close the
tart, bake it, ice it, scrape on sugar, and serve it in.


  _To make a Tart of Rice._

Boil the rice in milk or cream, being tender boil'd pour it into a
dish, & season it with nutmeg, ginger, cinamon, pepper, salt, sugar,
and the yolks of six eggs, put it in the tart with some juyce of
orange; close it up and bake it, being baked scrape on sugar, and so
serve it up.


  _To make a tart of Medlers._

Take medlers that are rotten, strain them, and set them on a
chaffing dish of coals, season them with sugar, cinamon, and ginger,
put some yolks of eggs to them, let it boil a little, and lay it in
a cut tart; being baked scrape on sugar.


  _To make a Cherry-Tart._

Take out the stones, and lay the cherries into the tart, with beaten
cinamon, ginger, and sugar, then close it up, bake it, and ice it;
then make a sirrup of muskedine, and damask water, and pour it into
the tart, scrape on sugar, and so serve it.


  _To make a Strawberry-Tart._

Wash the strawberries, and put them into the Tart, season them with
cinamon, ginger, and a little red wine, then put on sugar, bake it
half an hour, ice it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.


  _To make a Taffety-Tart._

First wet the paste with butter and cold water, roul it very thin,
then lay apples in the lays, and between every lay of apples, strew
some fine sugar, and some lemon-peel cut very small, you may also
put some fennil-seed to them; let them bake an hour or more, then
ice them with rose-water, sugar, and butter beaten together, and
wash them over with the same, strew more fine sugar on them, and put
them into the oven again, being enough serve them hot or cold.


  _To make an Almond Tart._

Strain beaten almonds with cream, yolks of eggs, sugar, cinamon, and
ginger, boil it thick, and fill your tart, being baked ice it.


  _To make a Damson Tart._

Boil them in wine, and strain them with cream, sugar, cinamon, and
ginger, boil it thick, and fill your tart.


  _To make a Spinage Tart of three colours, green, yellow,
    and white._

Take two handfuls of young tender spinage, wash it and put it into a
skillet of boiling liquor; being tender boil'd have a quart of cream
boil'd with some whole cinamon, quarterd nutmeg, and a grain of
musk; then strain the cream, twelve yolks of eggs, and the boil'd
spinage into a dish, with some rose-water, a little sack, and some
fine sugar, boil it over a chaffing dish of coals, and stir it that
it curd not, keep it till the tart be dried in the oven, and dish it
in the form of three colours, green, white, and yellow.


  _To make Cream Tarts._

Thicken cream with muskefied bisket bread, and serve it in a dish,
stick wafers round about it, and slices of preserved citron, and in
the middle a preserved orange with biskets, the garnish of the dish
being of puff paste.

Or you may boil quinces, wardens, pares, and pippins in slices or
quarters, and strain them into cream, as also these fruits,
melacattons, necturnes, apricocks, peaches, plumbs, or cherries, and
make your tart of these forms.


  _To make a French Tart._

Take a pound of almonds, blanch and beat them into fine paste in a
stone mortar, with rose-water, then beat the white breast of a cold
roast turkey, being minced, and beat with it a pound of lard minc't,
with the marrow of four bones, and a pound of butter, the juyce of
three lemons, two pounds of hard sugar, being fine beaten, slice a
whole green piece of citron in small slices, a quarter of a pound of
pistaches, and the yolks of eight or ten eggs, mingle all together,
then make a paste for it with cold butter, two or three eggs, and
cold water.


  _To make a Quodling Pie._

Take green quodlings and quodle them, peel them and put them again
into the same water, cover them close, and let them simmer on embers
till they be very green, then take them up and let them drain, pick
out the noses, and leave them on the stalks, then put them in a pie,
and put to them fine sugar, whole cinamon, slic't ginger, a little
musk, and rose-water, close them up with a cut cover, and as soon as
it boils up in the oven, draw it, and ice it with rose-water,
butter, and sugar.

Or you may preserve them and bake them in a dish with paste, tart,
or patty-pan.


  _To make a Dish in the Italian Fashion._

Take pleasant pears, slice them into thin slices, and put to them
half as much sugar as they weigh, then mince some candied citron and
candied orange small, mix it with the pears, and lay them on a
bottom of cold butter paste in a patty-pan with some fine beaten
cinamon, lay on the sugar and close it up, bake it, being baked, ice
it with rose-water, fine sugar, and butter.


  _For the several Colours of Tarts._

If to have them yellow, preserved quinces, apricocks, necturnes, and
melacattons, boil them up in white-wine with sugar, and strain them.

Otherways, strained yolks of eggs and cream.

For green tarts take green quodlings, green preserved apricocks,
green preserved plums, green grapes, and green gooseberries.

For red tarts, quinces, pippins, cherries, rasberries, barberries,
red currans, red gooseberries, damsins.

For black tarts, prunes, and many other berries preserved.

For white tarts, whites of eggs and cream.

Of all manner of tart-stuff strained, that carries his colour black,
as prunes, damsons, _&c._ For lard of set Tarts dishes, or
patty-pans.


  _Tart stuff of damsons._

Take a postle of damsons and good ripe apples, being pared and cut
into quarters, put them into an earthen pot with a little whole
cinamon, slic't ginger, and sugar, bake them and being cold strain
them with some rose-water, and boil the stuff thick, _&c._


  _Other Tart stuff that carries its colour black._

Take three pound of prunes, and eight fair pippins par'd and cor'd,
stew them together with some claret wine, some whole cinamon, slic't
ginger, a sprig of rosemary, sugar, and a clove or two, being well
stew'd and cold, strain them with rose-water, and sugar.


  _To make other black Tart Stuff._

Take twelve pound of prunes, and sixteen pound of raisins, wash them
clean, and stew them in a pot with water, boil them till they be
very tender, and then strain them through a course strainer; season
it with beaten ginger and sugar, and give it a warm on the fire.


  _Yellow Tart Stuff._

Take twelve yolks of eggs, beat them with a quart of cream, and bake
them in a soft oven; being baked strain them with some fine sugar,
rose-water, musk, ambergriese, and a little sack, or in place of
baking, boil the cream and eggs.


  _White Tart-Stuff._

Make the white tart stuff with cream, in all points as the yellow,
and the same seasoning.


  _Green Tart-Stuff._

Take spinage boil'd, green peese, green apricocks, green plums
quodled, peaches quodled, green necturnes quodled, gooseberries
quodled, green sorrel, and the juyce of green wheat.


  _To bake Apricocks green._

Take young green apricocks, so tender that you may thrust a pin
through the stone, scald them and scrape the out side, of putting
them in water as you peel them till your tart be ready, then dry
them and fill the tart with them, and lay on good store of fine
sugar, close it up and bake it, ice it, scrape on sugar, and serve
it up.


  _To bake Mellacattons._

Take and wipe them clean, and put them in a pie made scollop ways,
or in some other pretty work, fill the pie, and put them in whole
with weight for weight in refined sugar, close it up and bake it,
being baked ice it.

Sometimes for change you may add to them some chips or bits of whole
cinamon, a few whole cloves, and slic't ginger.


  _To preserve Apricocks, or any Plums green._

Take apricocks when they are so young and green, that you may put a
needle through stone and all, but all other plums may be taken
green, and at the highest growth, then put them in indifferent hot
water to break them, & let them stand close cover'd in that hot
water till a thin skin will come off with scraping, all this while
they will look yellow; then put them into another skillet of hot
water, and let them stand covered until they turn to a perfect
green, then take them out, weigh them, take their weight in sugar
and something more, and so preserve them. Clarifie the sugar with
the white of an egg, and some water.


  _To preserve Apricocks being ripe._

Stone them, then weigh them with sugar, and take weight for weight,
pare them and strow on the sugar, let them stand till the moisture
of the apricocks hath wet the sugar, and stand in a sirrup: then set
them on a soft fire, not suffering them to boil, till your sugar be
all melted; then boil them a pretty space for half an hour, still
stirring them in the sirrup, then set them by two hours, and boil
them again till your sirrup be thick, and your apricocks look clear,
boil up the sirrup higher, then take it off, and being cold put in
the apricocks into a gally-pot or glass, close them up with a clean
paper, and leather over all.


  _To preserve Peaches after the Venetian way._

Take twenty young peaches, part them in two, and take out the
stones, then take as much sugar as they weigh, and some rose-water,
put in the peaches, and make a sirrup that it may stand and stick to
your fingers, let them boil softly a while, then lay them in a dish,
and let them stand in the same two or three days, then set your
sirrup on the fire, let it boil up, and then put in the peaches, and
so preserve them.


  _To preserve Mellacattons._

Stone them and parboil them in water, then peel off the outward skin
of them, they will boil as long as a piece of beef, and therefore
you need not fear the breaking of them; when they are boil'd tender
make sirrup of them as you do of any other fruit, and keep them all
the year.


  _To preserve Cherries._

Take a pound of the smallest cherries, but let them be well
coloured, boil them tender in a pint of fair water, then strain the
liquor from the cherries and take two pound of other fair cherries,
stone them, and put them in your preserving-pan, with a laying of
cherries and a laying of sugar, then pour the sirrup of the other
strained cherries over them, and let them boil as fast as maybe with
a blazing fire, that the sirrup may boil over them; when you see
that the sirrup is of a good colour, something thick, and begins to
jelly, set them a cooling, and being cold pot them; and so keep them
all the year.


  _To preserve Damsins._

Take damsins that are large and well coloured, (but not throw ripe,
for then they will break) pick them clean and wipe them one by one;
then weigh them, and to every pound of damsins you must take a pound
of Barbary sugar, white & good, dissolved in half a pint or more of
fair water; boil it almost to the height of a sirrup, and then put
in the damsins, keeping them with a continual scuming and stirring,
so let them boil on a gentle fire till they be enough, then take
them off and keep them all the year.


  _To preserve Grapes as green as Grass._

Take grapes very green, stone them and cut them into little bunches,
then take the like quantity of refin'd sugar finely beaten, & strew
a row of sugar in your preserving pan, and a lay of grapes upon it,
then strow on some more sugar upon them, put to them four or five
spoonfuls of fair water, and boil them up as fast as you can.


  _To preserve Barberries._

Take barberries very fair and well coloured, pick out the stones,
weigh them, and to every ounce of barberries take three ounce of
hard sugar, half an ounce of pulp of barberries, and an ounce of red
rose-water to dissolve the sugar; boil it to a sirrup, then put in
the barberries and let them boil a quarter of an our, then take them
up, and being cool pot them, and they will keep their colour all the
year. Thus you may preserve red currans, _&c._


  _To preserve Gooseberries green._

Take some of the largest gooseberries that are called Gascoyn
gooseberries, set a pan of water on the fire, and when it is
lukewarm put in the berries, and cover them close, keep them warm
half an hour; then have another posnet of warm water, put them into
that, in like sort quoddle them three times over in hot water till
they look green; then pour them into a sieve, let all the water run
from them, and put them to as much clarified sugar as will cover
them, let them simmer leisurely close covered, then your
gooseberries will look as green as leek blades, let them stand
simmering in that sirrup for an hour, then take them off the fire,
and let the sirrup stand till it be cold, then warm them once or
twice, take them up, and let the sirrup boil by it self, pot them,
and keep them.


  _To preserve Rasberries._

Take fair ripe rasberries, (but not over ripe) pick them from the
stalk, then take weight for weight of double refined sugar, and the
juyce of rasberries; to a pound of rasberries take a quarter of a
pint of raspass juyce, and as much of fair water, boil up the sugar
and liquor, and make the sirrup, scum it, and put in the raspass,
stir them into the sirrup, and boil them not too much; being
preserved take them up, and boil the sirrup by it self, not too
long, it will keep the colour; being cold, pot them and keep them.
Thus you may also preserve strawberries.


  _The time to preserve Green Fruits._

Gooseberries must be taken about _Whitsuntide_, as you see them in
bigness, the long gooseberry will be sooner than the red; the white
wheat plum, which is ever ripe in Wheat harvest, must be taken in
the midst of _July_, the pear plum in the midst of _August_, the
peach and pippin about _Bartholomew-tide_, or a little before; the
grape in the first week of _September_. Note that to all your green
fruits in general that you will preserve in sirup, you must take to
every pound of fruit, a pound and two ounces of sugar, and a grain
of musk; your plum, pippin and peach will have three quarters of an
hour boiling, or rather more, and that very softly, keep the fruit
as whole as you can; your grapes and gooseberries must boil half an
hour something fast and they will be the fuller. Note also, that to
all your Conserves you take the full weight of sugar, then take two
skillets of water, and when they are scalding hot put the fruits
first into one of them and when that grows cold put them in the
other, changing them till they be about to peel, then peel them, and
afterwards settle them in the same water till they look green, then
take them and put them into sugar sirrup, and so let them gently
boil till they come to a jelly; let them stand therein a quarter of
an hour, then put them into a pot and keep them.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XI.

  _To make all manner of made Dishes, with or without Paste._


  _To make a Paste for a Pie._

Take to a gallon of flour a pound of butter, boil it in fair water,
and make the paste up quick.


  _To make cool Butter Paste for Patty-Pans or Pasties._

Take to every peck of flour five pound of butter, the whites of six
eggs, and work it well together with cold spring water; you must
bestow a great deal of pains, and but little water, or you put out
the millers eyes. This paste is good only for patty-pan and pasty.

Sometimes for this paste put in but eight yolks of eggs, and but two
whites, and six pound of butter.


  _To make Paste for thin bak'd Meats._

The paste for your thin and standing bak'd meats must be made with
boiling water, then put to every peck of flour two pound of butter,
but let your butter boil first in your liquor.


  _To make Custard Paste._

Let it be only boiling water and flour without butter, or put sugar
to it, which will add to the stiffness of it, & thus likewise all
pastes for Cuts and Orangado Tarts, or such like.


  _Paste for made-Dishes in the Summer._

Take to a gallon of flour three pound of butter, eight yolks of
eggs, and a pint of cream or almond milk, work up the butter and
eggs dry into the flour, then put cream to it, and make it pretty
stiff.


  _Paste Royal for made Dishes._

Take to a gallon of flour a pound of sugar, a quart of almond milk,
a pound and half of butter, and a little saffron, work up all cold
together], with some beaten cinamon, two or three eggs, rose-water,
and a grain of ambergriese and musk.


  _Otherways._

Take a pottle of flour, half a pound of butter, six yolks of eggs,
a pint of cream, a quarter of a pound of sugar, and some fine beaten
cinamon, and work up all cold.


  _Otherways._

Take to a pottle of flour four eggs, a pound and a half of butter,
and work them up dry in the flour, then make up the paste with a
pint of white-wine, rose-water, and sugar.


  _To make Paste for Lent for made Dishes._

Take a quart of flour, make it up with almond-milk, half a pound of
butter, and some saffron.


  _To make Puff-Paste divers ways._


  _The First Way._

Take a pottle of flour, mix it with cold water, half a pound of
butter, and the whites of five eggs; mix them together very well and
stiff, then roul it out very thin, and put flour under it and over
it, then take near a pound of butter, and lay it in bits all over,
double it in five or six doubles, this being done roul it out the
second time, and serve it as at the first, then roul it out and cut
it into what form, or for what use you please; you need not fear the
curle, for it will divide it as often as you double it, which ten or
twelve times is enough for any use.


  _The second way._

Take a quart of flour, and a pound and a half of butter, work the
half pound of butter dry into the flour, then put three or four eggs
to it, and as much cold water as will make it leith paste, work it
in a piece of a foot long, then strew a little flour on the table,
take it by the end, and beat it till it stretch to be long, then put
the ends together, and beat it again, and so do five or six times,
then work it up round, and roul it up broad; then beat your pound of
butter with a rouling pin that it may be little, take little bits
thereof, and stick it all over the paste, fold up your paste close,
and coast it down with your rouling pin, roul it out again, and so
do five or six times, then use it as you will.


  _The third way._

Break two eggs into three pints of flour, make it with cold water
and roul it out pretty thick and square, then take so much butter as
paste, lay it in ranks, and divide your butter in five pieces, that
you may lay it on at five several times, roul your paste very broad,
and stick one part of the butter in little pieces all over your
paste, then throw a handful of flour slightly on, fold up your paste
and beat it with a rowling-pin, so roul it out again, thus do five
times, and make it up.


  _The fourth way._

Take to a quart of flour four whites and but two yolks of eggs, and
make it up with as much cream as will make it up pretty stiff paste,
then roul it out, and beat three quarters of a pound of butter of
equal hardness of the paste, lay it on the paste in little bits at
ten several times; drive out your paste always one way; and being
made, use it as you will.


  _The fifth way._

Work up a quart of flour with half a pound of butter, three whites
of eggs, and some fair spring water, make it a pretty stiff paste,
and drive it out, then beat half a pound of more butter of equal
hardness of the paste, and lay it on the paste in little bits at
three several times, roul it out, and use it for what use you
please.

Drive the paste out every time very thin.


  _A made Dish or Florentine of any kind of Tongue
    in Dish, Pye, or Patty-pan._

Take a fresh neats tongue, boil it tender and blanch it, being cold,
cut it into little square bits as big as a nutmeg, and lard it with
very small lard, then have another tongue raw, take off the skin,
and mince it with beef-suet, then lay on one half of it in the dish
or patty pan upon a sheet of paste; then lay on the tongue being
larded and finely seasoned with nutmeg, pepper, and salt; and with
the other minced tongue put grated bread to it, some yolks of raw
eggs, some sweet herbs minced small, and made up into balls as big
as a walnut, lay them on the other tongue, with some chesnuts,
marrow, large mace, some grapes, gooseberries or barberries, some
slices of interlarded bacon and butter, close it up and bake it,
being baked liquor it with grape-verjuyce, beaten butter, and the
yolks of three or four eggs strained with the verjuyce.


  _A made Dish of Tongues otherways._

Take neats-tongues or smaller tongues, boil them tender, and slice
them thin, then season them with nutmeg, pepper, beaten cinamon;
salt, and some ginger, season them lightly, and lay them in a dish
on a bottom or sheet of paste mingled with some currans, marrow,
large mace, dates, slic't lemon, grapes, barberries, or gooseberries
and butter, close up the dish, and being almost baked, liquor it
with white wine, butter, and sugar, and ice it.


  _Made Dish in Paste of two Rabits, with sweet liquor._

Take the rabits, flay them, draw them and cut them into small pieces
as big as a walnut, then wash and dry them with a clean cloth, and
season them with pepper, nutmeg, and salt; lay them on a bottom of
paste, also lay on them dates, preserved lettice stalks, marrow,
large mace, grapes, and slic't orange or lemon, put butter to it,
close it up and bake it, being baked, liquor it with sugar,
white-wine and butter; or in place of wine, grape-verjuyce, and
strained yolks of raw eggs.

In winter bake them with currans, prunes, skirrets, raisins of the
sun, _&c._


  _A made Dish of Florentine, or a Partridge or Capon._

Being roasted and minced very small with as much beef-marrow, put to
it two ounces of orangado minced small with as much green citron
minced also, season the meat with a little beaten cloves, mace,
nutmeg, salt, and sugar, mix all together, and bake it in puff
paste; when it is baked, open it, and put in half a grain of musk or
ambergriese, dissolved with a little rose-water, and the juyce of
oranges, stir all together amongst the meat, cover it again, and
serve it to the table.


  _To make a Florentine, or Dish, without Paste, or on Paste._

Take a leg of mutton or veal, shave it into thin slices, and mingle
it with some sweet herbs, as sweet marjoram, tyme, savory, parsley,
and rosemary, being minced very small, a clove of garlick, some
beaten nutmeg, pepper, a minced onion, some grated manchet, and
three or four yolks of raw eggs, mix all together with a little
salt, some thin slices of interlarded bacon, and some oster-liquor,
lay the meat round the dish on a sheet of paste, or in the dish
without paste, bake it, and being baked, stick bay leaves round the
dish.


  _To bake Potatoes, Artichocks in a Dish, Pye, or Patty-pan
    either in Paste, or little Pasties._

Take any of these roots, and boil them in fair water, but put them
not in till the water boils, being tender boil'd, blanch them, and
season them with nutmeg, pepper, cinamon, and salt, season them
lightly, then lay on a sheet of paste in a dish, and lay on some
bits of butter, then lay on the potatoes round the dish, also some
eringo roots, and dates in halves, beef marrow, large mace, slic't
lemon, and some butter, close it up with another sheet of paste,
bake it, and being baked, liquor it with grape-verjuyce, butter and
sugar, and ice it with rose-water and sugar.


  _To make a made Dish of Spinage in Paste baked._

Take some young spinage, and put it in boiling hot fair water,
having boil'd two or three walms, drain it from the water, chop it
very small, and put it in a dish with some beaten cinamon, salt,
sugar, a few slic't dates, a grain of musk dissolved in rose-water,
some yolks of hard eggs chopped small, some currans and butter; stew
these foresaid materials on a chaffing dish of coals, then have a
dish of short paste on it, and put this composition upon it, either
with a cut, a close cover, or none; bake it, and being baked, ice it
with some fine sugar, water, and butter.


  _Other made Dish of Spinage in Paste baked._

Boil spinage as beforesaid, being tender boil'd, drain it in a
cullender, chop it small, and strain it with half a pound of
almond-paste, three or four yolks of eggs, half a grain of musk,
three or four spoonfuls of cream, a quartern of fine sugar, and a
little salt; then bake it on a sheet of paste on a dish without a
cover, in a very soft oven, being fine and green baked, stick it
with preserved barberries, or strow on red and white biskets, or red
and white muskedines, and scrape on fine sugar.


  _A made Dish of Spinage otherways._

Take a pound of fat and well relished cheese, and a pound of cheese
curds, stamp them in a mortar with some sugar, then put in a pint of
juyce of spinage, a pint of cream, ten eggs, cinamon, pepper,
nutmeg, and cloves, make your dish without a cover, according to
this form, being baked ice it.


  _To make a made Dish of Barberries._

Take a good quantity of them and boil them with claret-wine,
rose-water and sugar, being boil'd very thick, strain them, and put
them on a bottom of puff paste in a dish, or short fine paste made
of sugar, fine flour, cold butter, and cold water, and a cut cover
of the same paste, bake it and ice it, and cast bisket on it, but
before you lay on the iced cover, stick it with raw barberries in
the pulp or stuff.


  _To make a Peasecod Dish, in a Puff Paste._

Take a pound of almonds, and a quarter of a pound of sugar, beat the
almonds finely to a paste with some rose-water, then beat the sugar
amongst them, mingle some sweet butter with it, and make this stuff
up in puff paste like peasecods, bake them upon papers, and being
baked, ice it with rose-water, butter, and fine sugar.

In this fashion you may make peasecod stuff of preserved quinces,
pippins, pears, or preserved plums in puff paste.


  _Make Dishes of Frogs in the Italian Fashion._

Take the thighs and fry them in clarified butter, then have slices
of salt Eels watered, flay'd, bon'd, boil'd, and cold, slice them in
thin slices, and season both with pepper, nutmeg, and ginger, lay
butter on your paste, and lay a rank of frog, and a rank of Eel,
some currans, gooseberries or grapes, raisins, pine-apple seeds,
juyce of orange, sugar, and butter; thus do three times, close up
your dish, and being baked ice it.

Make your paste of almond milk, flour, butter, yolks of eggs, and
sugar.

In the foresaid dish you may add fryed onions, yolks of hard eggs,
cheese-curds, almond-paste, or grated cheese.


  _To make a made Dish of Marrow._

Take the marrow of two or three marrow-bones, cut it into pieces
like great square dice, and put to it a penny manchet grated fine,
some slic't dates, half a quartern of currans, a little cream,
rosted wardens, pippins or quinces slic't, and two or three yolks of
raw eggs, season them with cinamon, ginger, and sugar, and mingle
all together.


  _A made Dish of Rice in Puff Paste._

Boil your rice in fair water very tender, scum it, and being boil'd
put it in a dish, then put to it butter, sugar, nutmeg, salt,
rose-water, and the yolks of six or eight eggs, put it in a dish, of
puff paste, close it up and bake it, being baked, ice it, and caste
on red and white biskets, and scraping sugar.

Sometimes for change you may add boil'd currans and beaten cinamon,
and leave out nutmeg.


  _Otherways of Almond-Paste, and boiled Rice._

Mix all together with some cream, rose-water, sugar, cinamon, yolks
of eggs, salt, some boil'd currans, and butter; close it up and bake
it in puff-paste, ice it, and cast on red and white biskets and
scrape on sugar.


  _Otherways a Made Dish of Rice and Paste._

Wash the rice clean, and boil it in cream till it be somewhat thick,
then put it out into a dish, and put to it some sugar, butter, six
or eight yolks of eggs, beaten cinamon, slic't dates, currans,
rose-water, and salt, mix all together, and bake it in puff paste or
short paste, being baked ice it, and cast biskets on it.


  _To make a made Dish of Rice, Flour, and Cream._

Take half a pound of rice, dust and pick it clean, then wash it, dry
it, lay it abroad in a dish as thin as you can or dry it in a
temperate oven, being well dried, rub it, and beat it in a mortar
till it be as fine as flour; then take a pint of good thick cream,
the whites of three new laid eggs, well beaten together, and a
little rose-water, set it on a soft fire, and boil it till it be
very thick, then put it in a platter and let it stand till it be
cold, then slice it out like leach, cast some bisket upon it, and so
serve it.


  _To make a made Dish of Rice, Prunes, and Raisins._

Take a pound of prunes, and as many raisins of the sun, pick and
wash them, then boil them with water and wine, of each a like
quantity; when you first set them on the fire, put rice flour to
them, being tender boil'd strain them with half a pound of sugar,
and some rose-water, then stir the stuff till it be thick like
leach, put it in a little earthen pan, being cold slice it, dish it,
and cast red and white bisket on it.


  _To make a made Dish of Blanchmanger._

Take a pint of cream, the whites of six new laid eggs, and some
sugar; set them over a soft fire in a skillet and stir it
continually till it be good and thick, then strain it, and being
cold, dish it on a puff-paste bottom with a cut cover, and cast
biskets on it.


  _A made Dish of Custard stuff, called an Artichock Dish._

Boil custard stuff in a clean scowred skillet, stir it continually,
till it be something thick, then put it in a clean strainer, and let
it drain in a dish, strain it with a little musk or ambergriese,
then bake a star of puff paste on a paper, being baked take it off
the paper, and put it in a dish for your stuff, then have lozenges
also ready baked of puff paste, stick it round with them, and scrape
on fine sugar.


  _A made Dish of Butter and eggs._

Take the yolks of twenty four eggs, and strain them with cinamon,
sugar, and salt; then put melted butter to them, some fine minced
pippins, and minced citron, put it on your dish of paste, and put
slices of citron round about it, bar it with puff paste, and the
bottom also, or short paste in the bottom.


  _To make a made dish of Curds._

Take some tender curds, wring the wehy from them very well, then put
to them two raw eggs, currans, sweet butter, rose-water, cinamon,
sugar, and mingle all together, then make a fine paste with flour,
yolks of egs, rose-water, & other water, sugar, saffron, and butter,
wrought up cold, bake it either in this paste or in puff-paste,
being baked ice it with rose-water, sugar, and butter.


_To make a Paste of Violets, Cowslips, Burrage, Bugloss, Rosemary
Flowers,_ &c.

Take any of these flowers, pick the best of them, and stamp them in
a stone mortar, then take double refined sugar, and boil it to a
candy height with as much rosewater as will melt it, stir it
continually in the boiling, and being boiled thick, cast it into
lumps upon a pye plate, when it is cold, box them, and keep them all
the year in a stove.


  _To make the Portugal Tarts for banquetting._

Take a pound of marchpane paste being finely beaten, and put into it
a grain of musk, six spoonfuls of rose-water, and the weight of a
groat of Orris Powder, boil all on a chaffing dish of coals till it
be something stiff; then take the whites of two eggs, beaten to
froth, put them into it, and boil it again a little, let it stand
till it be cold, mould it, and roul it out thin; then take a pound
more of almond-paste unboil'd, and put to it four ounces of
caraway-seed, a grain of musk, and three drops of oyl of lemons,
roul the paste into small rouls as big as walnuts, and lay these
balls into the first made paste, flat them down like puffs with your
thumbs a little like figs and bake them upon marchpane wafers.


  _To make Marchpane._

Take two pounds of almonds blanch't and beaten in a stone mortar,
till they begin to come to a fine paste, then take a pound of sifted
sugar, put it in the mortar with the almonds, and make it into a
perfect paste, putting to it now and then in the beating of it a
spoonful of rose-water, to keep it from oyling; when you have beat
it to a puff paste, drive it out as big as a charger, and set an
edge about it as you do upon a quodling tart, and a bottom of wafers
under it, thus bake it in an oven or baking pan; when you see it is
white, hard, and dry, take it out, and ice it with rose-water and
sugar being made as thick as butter for fritters, to spread it on
with a wing feather, and put it into the oven again; when you see it
rise high, then take it out and garnish it with some pretty conceits
made of the same stuff, slick long comfets upright on it, and so
serve it.


  _To make Collops like Bacon of Marchpane._

Take some of your Marchpane paste and work it with red sanders till
it be red, then roul a broad sheet of white marchpane paste, and a
sheet of red paste, three of white, and four of red, lay them one
upon another, dry it, cut it overthwart, and it will look like
collops of bacon.


  _To make Almond Bread._

Take almonds, and lay them in water all night, blanch them and slice
them, take to every pound of almonds a pound of fine sugar finely
beat, & mingle them together, then beat the whites of 3 eggs to a
high froth, & mix it well with the almonds & sugar; then have some
plates and strew some flour on them, lay wafers on them and almonds
with edges upwards, lay them as round as you can, and scrape a
little sugar on them when they are ready to set in the oven, which
must not be so hot as to colour white paper; being a little baked
take them out, set them on a plate, then put them in again, and keep
them in a stove.


  _To make Almond Bisket._

Take the whites of four new laid eggs and two yolks, beat them
together very well for an hour, then have in readiness a quarter of
a pound of the best almonds blanched in cold water, beat them very
small with rosewater to keep them from oiling, then have a pound of
the best loaf sugar finely beaten, beat it in the eggs a while, then
put in the almonds, and five or six spoonfuls of fine flour, so bake
them on paper, plates, or wafers; then have a little fine sugar in a
piece of tiffany, dust them over as they go into the oven, and bake
them as you do bisket.


  _To make Almond-Cakes._

Take a pound of almonds, blanch them and beat them very small in a
little rose-water where some musk hath been steeped, put a pound of
sugar to them fine beaten, and four yolks of eggs, but first beat
the sugar and the eggs well together, then put them to the almonds
and rose-water, and lay the cakes on wafers by half spoonfuls, set
them into an oven after manchet is baked.


  _To make Almond-Cakes otherways._

Take a pound of the best Jordan almonds, blanch them in cold water
as you do marchpane, being blanched wipe them dry in a clean cloth,
& cut away all the rotten from them, then pound them in a
stone-motar, & sometimes in the beating put in a spoonful of
rose-water wherein you must steep some musk; when they are beaten
small mix the almonds with a pound of refined sugar beaten and
searsed; then put the stuff on a chafing-dish of coals in a made
dish, keep it stirring, and beat the whites of seven eggs all to
froth, put it into the stuff and mix it very well together, drop it
on a white paper, put it on plates, and bake them in an oven; but
they must not be coloured.


  _To make white Ambergriese Cakes._

Take the purest refined sugar that can be got, beat it and searse
it; then have six new laid eggs, and beat them into a froth, take
the froth as it riseth, and drop it into the sugar by little and
little, grinding it still round in a marble mortar and pestle, till
it be throughly moistened, and wrought thin enough to drop on
plates; then put in some ambergriese, a little civet, and some
anniseeds well picked, then take your pie plates, wipe them, butter
them, and drop the stuff on them with a spoon in form of round
cakes, put them into a very mild oven and when you see them be hard
and rise a little, take them out and keep them for use.


  _To make Sugar-Cakes or Jambals._

Take two pound of flour, dry it, and season it very fine, then take
a pound of loaf sugar, beat it very fine, and searse it, mingle your
flour and sugar very well; then take a pound and a half of sweet
butter, wash out the salt and break it into bits into the flour and
sugar, then take the yolks of four new laid eggs, four or five
spoonfuls of sack, and four spoonfuls of cream, beat all these
together, put them into the flour, and work it up into paste, make
them into what fashion you please, lay them upon papers or plates,
and put them into the oven; be careful of them, for a very little
thing bakes them.


  _To make Jemelloes._

Take a pound of fine sugar, being finely beat, and the yolks of four
new laid eggs, and a grain of musk, a thimble full of caraway seed
searsed, a little gum dragon steeped in rose-water, and six
spoonfuls of fine flour beat all these in a thin paste a little
stiffer then butter, then run it through a butter-squirt of two or
three ells long bigger then a wheat straw, and let them dry upon
sheets of paper a quarter of an hour, then tie them in knots or what
pretty fashion you please, and when they be dry, boil them in
rose-water and sugar; it is an excellent sort of banqueting.


  _To make Jambals._

Take a pint of fine wheat flour, the yolks of three or four new laid
eggs, three or four spoonfuls of sweet cream, a few anniseeds, and
some cold butter, make it into paste, and roul it into long rouls,
as big as a little arrow, make them into divers knots, then boil
them in fair water like simnels; bake them, and being baked, box
them and keep them in a stove. Thus you may use them, and keep them
all the year.


  _To make Sugar Plate._

Take double refined sugar, sift it very small through a fine searse,
then take the white of an egg, gum dragon, and rose-water, wet it,
and beat it in a mortar till you are able to mould it, but wet it
not to much at the first. If you will colour it, and the colour be
of a watry substance, put it in with the rose-water, if a powder,
mix it with your sugar before you wet it; when you have beat it in
the mortar, and that it is all wet, and your colour well mixt in
every place, then mould it and make it into what form you please.


  _To make Muskedines called Rising Comfits or Vissing Comfits._

Take half a pound of refined sugar, being beaten and searsed, put
into it two grains of musk, a grain of civet, two grains of
ambergriese, and a thimble full of white orris powder, beat all
these with gum-dragon steeped in rose-water; then roul it as thin as
you can, and cut it into little lozenges with your iging-iron, and
stow them in some warm oven or stove, then box them and keep them
all the year.


  _To make Craknels._

Take half a pound of fine flour dryed and searsed, and as much fine
sugar searsed, mingled with a spoonfull of coriander-seed bruised,
and two ounces of butter rubbed amongst the flour and sugar, wet it
with the yolks of two eggs, half a spoonful of white rose-water, and
two spoonfuls of cream, or as much as will wet it, work the paste
till it be soft and limber to roul and work, then roul it very thin,
and cut them round by little plats, lay them upon buttered papers,
and when they go into the oven, prick them, and wash the tops with
the yolk of an egg, beaten and made thin with rose-water or fair
water; they will give with keeping, therfore before they are eaten
they must be dried in a warm oven to make them crisp.


  _To make Mackeroons._

Take a pound of the finest sugar, and a pound of the best
Jordan-almonds, steep them in cold water, blanch them and pick out
the spots: then beat them to a perfect paste in a stone mortar, in
the beating of them put rose-water to them to keep them from oyling,
being finely beat, put them in a dish with the sugar, and set them
over a chafing-dish of coals, stir it till it will come clean from
the bottom of the dish, then put in two grains of musk, and three of
ambergriese.


  _To make the Italian Chips._

Take some paste of flowers, beat them to fine powder, and searse or
sift them; then take some gum-dragon steeped in rose-water, beat it
to a perfect paste in a marble mortar, then roul it thin, and lay
one colour upon another in a long roul, roul them very thin, then
cut them overthwart, and they will look of divers pretty colours
like marble.


  _To make Bisket Bread._

Take a pound of sugar searsed very fine, a pound of flour well
dryed, twelve eggs and but six whites, a handful of caraway-seed,
and a little salt; beat all these together the space of an hour,
then your oven being hot, put them into plates or tin things, butter
them and wipe them, a spoonful into a plate is enough, so set them
into the oven, and make it as hot as to bake them for manchet.


  _To make Bisquite du Roy._

Take a pound of fine searsed sugar, a pound of fine flour, and six
eggs, beat them very well, then put them all into a stone mortar,
and pound them for the space of an hour and a half, let it not stand
still, for then it will be heavy, and when you have beaten it so
long a time, put in halfe an ounce of anniseed; then butter over
some pie plates, and drop the stuff on the plate as fast as two or
three can with spoons, shape them round as near as you can, and set
them into an oven as hot as for manchet, but the less they are
coloured the better.


  _Bisquite du Roy otherways._

Take to a pound of flour a pound of sugar, and twelve new laid eggs,
beat them in a deep dish, then put to them two grains of musk
dissolved, rose-water, anniseed, and coriander-seed, beat them the
space of an hour with a wooden spatter; then the oven being ready,
have white tin molds butter'd, and fill them with this Bisquite,
strow double refined sugar in them, and bake them when they rise out
of the moulds, draw them and put them on a great pasty-plate or
pye-plate, and dry them in a stove, and put them in a square lattin
box, and lay white papers betwixt every range or rank, have a
padlock to it, and set it over a warm oven, so keep them, and thus
for any kind of bisket, mackeroons, marchpane, sugar plates, or
pasties, set them in a temperate place where they may not give with
every change of weather, and thus you may keep them very long.


  _To make Shell Bread._

Take a quarter of a pound of rice flour, a quarter of a pound of
fine flour, the yolks of four new laid eggs, and a little
rose-water, and a grain of musk; make these into a perfect paste,
then roul it very thin and bake it in great muscle-shells, but first
roast the shells in butter melted where they be baked, boil them in
melted sugar as you boil a simmel, then lay them on the bottom of a
wooden sieve, and they will eat as crisp as a wafer.


  _ To make Bean Bread._

Take two pound of blanched almonds and slice them, take to them two
pound of double refined sugar finely beaten and searsed, five whites
of eggs beaten to froth, a little musk steeped to rose-water and
some anniseeds, mingle them all together in a dish, and bake them on
pewter-plates buttered, then afterwards dry them and them.


  _To make Ginger-Bread._

Take a pound of Jordan Almonds, and a penny manchet grated and
sifted and mingled among the almond paste very fine beaten, an ounce
of slic't ginger, two thimble fuls of liquoras and anniseed in
powder finely searsed, beat all in a mortar together, with two or
three spoonfuls of rose-water, beat them to a perfect paste with
half a pound of sugar, mould it, and roul it thin, then print it and
dry it in a stove, and guild it if you please.

Thus you may make gingerbread of sugar plate, putting sugar to it as
abovesaid.


  _To make Ipocras._

Take to a gallon of wine, three ounces of cinamon, two ounces of
slic't ginger, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, an ounce of mace,
twenty corns of pepper, an ounce of nutmegs, three pound of sugar,
and two quarts of cream.


  _Otherways._

Take to a pottle of wine, an ounce of cinamon, an ounce of ginger,
an ounce of nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, seven corns of
pepper, a handful of rosemary-flowers, and two pound of sugar.


  _To make excellent Mead much commended._

Take to every quart of honey a gallon of fair spring water, boil it
well with nutmeg and ginger bruised a little, in the boiling scum it
well, and being boil'd set it a cooling in severall vessels that it
may stand thin, then the next day put it in the vessel, and let it
stand a week or two, then draw it in bottles.

If it be to drink in a short time you may work it as beer, but it
will not keep long.

Or take to every gallon of water, a quart of honey, a quarter of an
ounce of mace, as much ginger and cinnamon, and half as much cloves,
bruise them, and use them as abovesaid.


  _Otherways._

Take five quarts and a pint of water, warm it, and put to it a quart
of honey, and to every gallon of liquor one lemon, and a quarter of
an ounce of nutmegs; it must boil till the scum rise black, and if
you will have it quickly ready to drink, squeeze into it a lemon
when you tun it, and tun it cold.


  _To make Metheglin._

Take all sorts of herbs that are good and wholesome as balm, mint,
rosemary, fennil, angelica, wild time, hysop, burnet, agrimony, and
such other field herbs, half a handful of each, boil and strain
them, and let the liquor stand till the next day, being setled take
two gallons and a half of honey, let it boil an hour, and in the
boiling scum it very clean, set it a cooling as you do beer, and
when it is cold, take very good barm and put it into the bottom of
the tub, by a little & a little as to beer, keeping back the thick
setling that lieth in the bottom of the vessel that it is cooled in;
when it is all put together cover it with a cloth and let it work
very near three days, then when you mean to put it up, skim off all
the barm clean, and put it up into a vessel, but you must not stop
the vessel very close in three or four days, but let it have some
vent to work; when it is close stopped you must look often to it,
and have a peg on the top to give it vent, when you heare it make a
noise as it will do, or else it will break the vessel.

Sometimes make a bag and put in good store of slic't ginger, some
cloves and cinamon, boil'd or not.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XII.

  _To make all manner of Creams, Sack-Possets, Sillabubs,
    Blamangers, White-Pots, Fools, Wassels,_ &c.


  _To make Apple Cream._

Take twelve pippins, pare and slice, or quarter them, put them into
a skillet with some claret wine, and a race of ginger sliced thin,
a little lemon-peel cut small, and some sugar; let all these stew
together till they be soft, then take them off the fire and put them
in a dish, and when they be cold take a quart of cream boil'd with a
little nutmeg, and put in of the apple stuff to make it of what
thickness you please, and so serve it up.


  _To make Codling Cream._

Take twenty fair codlings being peeld and codled tender and green,
put them in a clean silver-dish, filled half full of rose-water, and
half a pound of sugar, boil all this liquor together till half be
consumed, and keep it stirring till it be ready, then fill up the
dish with good thick and sweet cream, stir it till it be well
mingled, and when it hath boil'd round about the dish, take it off,
sweeten it with fine sugar, and serve it cold.


  _Otherways._

Codle forty fair codlings green and tender, then peel and core them,
and beat them in a mortar, strain them with a quart of cream, and
mix them well together in a dish with fine sugar, sack, musk, and
rose-water. Thus you may do with any fruit you please.


  _To boil Cream with Codlings._

Boil a quart of cream with mace, sugar, two yolks of eggs, two
spoonfulls of rose water, and a grain of ambergriese, put it into
the cream, and set them over the fire till they be ready to boil,
then set them to cool, stirring it till it be cold; then take a
quart of green codling stuff strained, put it into a silver dish,
and mingle it with cream.


  _To make Quince-Cream._

Take and boil them in fair water, but first let the water boil, then
put them in and being tender boil'd take them up and peel them,
strain them and mingle it with fine sugar, then take some very good
and sweet cream, mix all together and make it of a fit thickness, or
boil the cream with a stick of cinamon, and let it stand till it be
cold before you put it to the quinces. Thus you may do wardens or
pears.


  _To make Plum Cream._

Take any kind of Plums, Apricocks, or the like, and put them in a
dish with some sugar, white-wine, sack, claret, or rose-water, close
them up with a piece of paste between two dishes; being baked and
cold, put to them cream boil'd with eggs, or without, or raw, and
scrape on sugar, _&c._


  _To make Gooseberry Cream._

Codle them green, and boil them up with sugar, being preserved put
them into the cream strain'd as whole, scrape sugar on them, and so
serve them cold in boil'd or raw cream. Thus you may do
strawberries, raspas, or red currans, put in raw cream whole, or
serve them with wine and sugar in a dish without cream.


  _To make Snow Cream._

Take a quart of cream, six whites of eggs, a quartern of rose-water,
a quarter of a pound of double refined sugar, beat them together in
a deep bason or a boul dish, then have a fine silver dish with a
penny manchet, the bottom and upper crust being taken away, & made
fast with paste to the bottom of the dish, and a streight sprig of
rosemary set in the middle of it; then beat the cream and eggs
together, and as it froatheth take it off with a spoon and lay it on
the bread and rosemary till you have fill'd the dish. You may beat
amongst it some musk and ambergriese dissolv'd, and gild it if you
please.


  _To make Snow Cream otherways._

Boil a quart of cream with a stick of cinamon, and thicken it with
rice flour, the yolks of two or three eggs, a little rose-water,
sugar, and salt, give it a walm, and put it in a dish, lay clouted
cream on it, and fill it up with whip cream or cream that cometh out
of the top of a churn when the butter is come, disht out of a squirt
or some other fine way, scrape on sugar, sprinkle it with rosewater,
and stick some pine-apple-seeds on it.


  _Otherways._

Take three pints of cream, and the whites of seven eggs, strain them
together, with a little rosewater and as much sugar as will sweeten
it; then take a stick of a foot long, and split it in four quarters,
beat the cream with it, or else with a whisk, and when the snow
riseth, put it in a cullender with a spoon, that the thin may run
from it, when you have snow enough, boil the rest with cinamon,
ginger, and cloves, seeth it till it be thick, then strain it and
when it is cold, put it in a clean dish, and lay your snow upon it.


  _To make Snow Cream otherways with Almonds._

Take a quart of good sweet cream, and a quarter of a pound of almond
paste fine beaten with rose-water, and strained with half a pint of
white-wine, put some orange-peel to it, a slic't nutmeg, and three
sprigs of rosemary, let it stand two or three hours in steep; then
put some double refined sugar to it, and strain it into a bason,
beat it till it froth and bubble, and as the froth riseth, take it
off with a spoon, and lay it in the dish you serve it up in.


  _To make a Jelly of Almonds as white as Snow._

Take a pound of almonds, steep them in cold water six hours, and
blanch them into cold water, then make a decoction of half a pound
of ising-glass, with two quarts of white wine and the juyce of two
lemons, boil it till half be wasted, then let it cool and strain it,
mingle it with the almonds, and strain them with a pound of double
refined sugar, & the juyce of two lemons, turn it into colours, red,
white, or yellow, and put it into egg shells, or orange peels, and
serve them on a pye plate upon a dish.


  _To Make Almond Cream._

Take half a pound of almond paste beaten with ros-water, and strain
it with a quart of cream, put it in a skillet with a stick of
cinamon and boil it, stir it continually, and when it is boiled
thick, put sugar to it, and serve it up cold.


  _To make Almond Cream otherways._

Take thick almond milk made with fair spring-water, and boil it a
little then take it from the fire, and put to a little salt and
vinegar, cast it into a clean strainer and hang it upon a pin over a
dish, then being finely drained, take it down and put it in a dish,
put to it some fine beaten sugar, and a little sack, muskedine, or
white wine, dish it on a silver dish, and strow on red Biskets.


  _Otherways._

Take a quart of cream, boil it over night, then in the morning have
half a pound of almonds blanched and fine beaten, strain them with
the cream, and put to it a quarter of a pound of double refined
sugar, a little rose-water, a little fine ginger and cinamon finely
searsed, and mixed all together, dish it in a clean silver dish with
fine carved sippets round about it.


  _To make Almond Cheese._

Take almonds being beaten as fine as marchpane paste, then have a
sack-posset with cream and sack, mingle the curd of the posset with
almond paste, and set it on a chafing-dish of coals, put some double
refined sugar to it and some rose-water; then fashion it on a
pye-plate like a fresh cheese, put it in a dish, put a little cream
to it, scrape sugar, on it, and being cold serve it up.


  _To make an excellent Cream._

Take a quart of cream, and set it a boiling, with a large mace or
two, whilst it is boiling cut some thin sippets, and lay them in a
very fine clean dish, then have seven or eight yolks of eggs
strained with rose-water, put some sugar to them, then take the
cream from the fire, put in the eggs, and stir all together, then
pour it on the slices of fine manchet, and being cold scrape on
sugar, and so serve it.


  _To make Cream otherways._

Take a quart of cream, and boil it with four or five large maces,
and a stick of whole cinamon; when it hath boiled a little while,
have seven or eight yolks of eggs dissolved with a little cream,
take the cream from the fire and put in the eggs, stir them well
into the boiled cream, and put it in a clean dish, take out the
spices, and when it is cold stick it with those maces and cinamon.
Thus you may do with the whites of the eggs with cream.


  _To make cast Cream._

Take a quart of cream, a pint of new milk, and the whites of six
eggs, strain them together and boil it, in the boiling stir it
continnally till it be thick, then put to it some verjuyce, and put
it into a strainer, hang it on a nail or pin to drain the whey from
it, then strain it, put some sugar to it and rose-water; drain it in
a fair dish, and strow on some preserved pine-kernels, or candied
pistaches. In this fashion you may do it of the yolks of eggs.


  _To make Clouted Cream._

Take three galons of new milk, and set it on the fire in a clean
scowred brass pan or kettle till it boils, then make a hole in the
middle of the milk, & take three pints of good cream and put into
the hole as it boileth, boil it together half an hour, then divide
it into four milk pans, and let it cool two days, if the weather be
not too hot, then take it up with a slice or scummer, put it in a
dish, and sprinkle it with rose-water, lay one clod upon another,
and scrape on sugar.


  _To make clouted Cream otherways extraordinary._

Take four gallons of new milk from the cow, set it over the fire in
clean scowred pan or kettle to scald ready to boil, strain it
through a clean strainer and put it into several pans to cool, then
take the cream some six hours after, and put it in the dish you mean
to serve it in, season it with rose-water, sugar, and musk, put some
raw cream to it, and some snow cream on that.


  _To make clouted Cream otherways._

Take a gallon of new milk from the cow, two quarts of cream and
twelve spoonfuls of rose-water, put these together in a large
milk-pan, and set it upon a fire of charcoal well kindled, (you must
be sure the fire be not too hot) and let it stand a day and a night,
then take it off and dish it with a slice or scummer, let no milk be
in it, and being disht and cut in fine little pieces, scrape sugar
on it.


  _To make a very good Cream._

When you churn butter, take out half a pint of cream just as it
begins to turn to butter, (that is, when it is a little frothy) then
boil a quart of good thick and new cream, season it with sugar and a
little rose-water, when it is quite cold, mingle it very well with
that you take out of the churn, and so dish it.


  _To make a Sack Cream._

Take a quart of cream, and set it on the fire, when it is boiled,
drop in six or eight drops of sack, and stir it well to keep it from
curdling, then season it with sugar and strong water.


  _To make Cabbidge Cream._

Set six quarts of new milk on the fire, and when it boils empty it
into ten or twelve earthen pans or bowls as fast as you can without
frothing, set them where they may come, and when they are a little
cold, gather the cream that is on the top with your hand, rumpling
it together, and lay it on a plate, when you have laid three or four
layers on one another, wet a feather in rose-water and musk and
stroke over it, then searse a little grated nutmeg, and fine sugar,
(and if you please, beat some musk and ambergriese in it) and lay
three or four lays more on as before; thus do till you have off all
the cream in the bowls, then put all the milk to boil again, and
when it boils set it as you did before in bowls, and so use it in
like manner; it will yield four or five times seething, which you
must use as before, that it may lye round and high like a cabbige;
or let one of the first bowls stand because the cream may be thick
and most crumpled, take that up last to lay on uppermost, and when
you serve it up searse or scrape sugar on it; this must be made over
night for dinner, or in the morning for supper.


  _To make Stone Cream._

Take a quart of cream, two or three blades of large mace, two or
three little sticks of cinamon, and six spoonfulls of rosewater,
season it sweet with sugar, and boil it till it taste well of the
spice, then dish it, and stir it till it be as cold as milk from the
cow, then put in a little runnet and stir it together, let it stand
and cool, and serve it to the table.


  _To make Whipt Cream._

Take a whisk or a rod and beat it up thick in a bowl or large bason,
till it be as thick as the cream that comes off the top of a churn,
then lay fine linning clouts on saucers being wet, lay on the cream,
and let it rest two or three hours, then turn them into a fine
silver dish, put raw cream to them, and scrape on sugar.


  _To make Rice Cream._

Take a quart of cream, two handfuls of rice flour, and a quarter of
a pound of sugar, mingle the flour and sugar very well together, and
put it in the cream; then beat the yolk of an egg with a little
rose-water, put it to the cream and stir them all together, set it
over a quick fire, keeping it continually stirring till it be as
thick as pap.


  _To make another rare Cream._

Take a pound of almond paste fine beaten with rose-water, mingle it
with a quart of cream, six eggs, a little sack, half a pound of
sugar, and some beaten nutmeg; strain them and put them in a clean
scowred skillet, and set it on a soft fire, stir it continually, and
being well incorporated, dish it, and serve it with juyce of orange,
sugar, and stick it full of canded pistaches.


  _To make a white Leach of Cream._

Take a quart of cream, twelve spoonfuls of rose-water, two grains of
musk, two drops of oyl of mace, or two large maces, boil them with
half a pound of sugar, and half a pound of the whitest ising-glass;
being first steeped and washed clean, then run it through your
jelly-bag, into a dish; when it is cold slice it into chequer-work,
and serve it on a plate. This is the best way to make leach.


  _To make other Leach with Almonds._

Take two ounces of ising-glass, lay it two hours in fair water; then
boil it in clear spring water, and being well digested set it to
cool; then have a pound of almonds beaten very fine with rose-water,
strain them with a pint of new milk, and put in some mace and slic't
ginger, boil them till it taste well of the spices, then put into it
the digested ising-glass, some sugar, and a little rose-water, give
it a warm over the fire, and run it through a strainer into dishes,
and slice it into dishes.


  _To make a Cream Tart in the Italian fashion to eat cold._

Take twenty yolks of eggs, and two quarts of cream, strain it with a
little salt, saffron, rose-water, juyce of orange, a little
white-wine, and a pound of fine sugar, then bake it in a deep dish
with some fine cinamon, and some canded pistaches stuck on it, and
when it is baked, white muskedines.

Thus you may do with the whites of the eggs, and put in no spices.


  _To make Piramedis Cream._

Take a quart of water, and six ounces of harts-horn, put it into a
bottle with gum-dragon, and gum-araback, of each as much as a
walnut; put them all into the bottle, which must be so big as will
hold a pint more, for if it be full it will break, stop it very
close with a cork, and tye a cloth over it, put the bottle in the
beef-pot, or boil it in a pot with water, let it boil three hours,
then take as much cream as there is jelly, and half a pound of
almonds well beaten with rose-water, mingle the cream and the
almonds together, strain it, then put the jelly when it is cold into
a silver bason, and the cream to it, sweeten it as you please, and
put in two or three grains of musk and ambergriese, set it over the
fire, and stir it continually till be seathing hot, but let it not
boil; then put it in an old fashioned drinking glass, and let it
stand till it be cold, when you will use it, put the glass in some
warm water, and whelm it in a dish, then take pistaches boil'd in
white-wine and sugar, stick it all over, and serve it in with cream.


  _French Barley Cream._

Take a porringer full of French perle barley, boil it in eight or
nine several waters very tender, then put it in a quart of cream,
with some large mace, and whole cinamon, boil it about a quarter of
an hour; then have two pound of almonds blanched and beaten fine
with rose-water, put to them some sugar, and strain the almonds with
some cold cream, then put all over the fire, and stir it till it be
half cold, then put to it two spoonfuls of sack or white-wine, and a
little salt, and serve it in a dish cold.


  _To make Cheesecakes._

Let your paste be very good, either puff-paste or cold butter-paste,
with sugar mixed with it, then the whey being dried very well from
the cheese-curds which must be made of new milk or butter, beat them
in a mortar or tray, with a quarter of a pound of butter to every
pottle of curds, a good quantity of rose-water, three grains of
ambergriese or musk prepared, the crums of a small manchet rubbed
through a cullender, the yolks of ten eggs, a grated nutmeg,
a little salt, and good store of sugar, mix all these well together
with a little cream, but do not make them too soft; instead of bread
you may take almonds which are much better; bake them in a quick
oven, and let them not stand too long in, least they should be to
dry.


  _To make Cheesecakes otherways._

Make the crust of milk & butter boil'd together, put it into the
flour & make it up pretty stiff, to a pottle of fine flour, take
half a pound of butter; then take a fresh cheese made of morning
milk, and a pint of cream, put it to the new milk, and set the
cheese with some runnet, when it is come, put it in a cheese-cloth
and press it from the whey, stamp in the curds a grated fine small
manchet, some cloves and mace, a pound and a half of well washed and
pick't currans, the yolks of eight eggs, some rose-water, salt, half
a pound of refined white sugar, and a nutmeg or two; work all these
materials well together with a quarter of a pound of good sweet
butter, and some cream, but make it not too soft, and make your
cheesecakes according to these formes.


  _To make Cheesecakes otherways._

Make the paste of a pottle of flour, half a pound of butter, as much
ale barm as two egg shells will hold, and a little saffron made into
fine powder, and put into the flour, melt the butter in milk, and
make up the paste; then take the curds of a gallon of new milk
cheese, and a pint of cream, drain the whey very well from it, pound
it in a mortar, then mix it with half a pound of sugar, and a pound
of well washed and picked currans, a grated nutmeg, some fine beaten
cinamon, salt, rose-water, a little saffron made into fine powder,
and some eight yolks of eggs, work it up very stiff with some butter
and a little cream.


  _Otherways._

Take six quarts of new milk, run it pretty cold, and when it is
tender come, drain from it the whey, and hang it up in a strainer,
press the whey from it, and beat it in a mortar till it be like
butter, then strain it through a strainer, and mingle it with a
pound of butter with your hand; then beat a pound of almonds with
rose-water till they be as fine as the curds; put to them the yolks
of twenty eggs, a quart of cream, two grated nutmegs, and a pound
and a half of sugar, when the coffins are ready to be set into the
oven, then mingle them together, and let them bake half an hour; the
paste must be made of milk and butter warmed together, dry the
coffins as you do for a custard, make the paste very stiff, and make
them into works.


  _To make Cheesecakes without Milk._

Take twelve eggs, take away six whites, and beat them very well,
then take a quart of cream, and boil it with mace, take it off the
fire, put in the eggs, and stir them well together, then set it on
the fire again, and let it boil till it curds; then set it off, and
put to it a good quantity of sugar, some grated nutmeg, and beaten
mace; then dissolve musk & ambergriese in rose-water, three or four
spoonfuls of grated bread, with half a pound of almonds beat small,
a little cream, and some currans; then make the paste for them of
flour, sugar, cream, and butter, bake them in a mild oven; a quarter
of an hour will bake them.


  _Cheesecakes otherways._

For the paste take a pottle of flour, half a pound of butter and the
white of an egg, work it well into the flour with the butter, then
put a little cold water to it, and work it up stiff; then take a
pottle of cream, half a pound of sugar, and a pound of currans
boil'd before you put them in, a whole nutmeg grated, and a little
pepper fine beaten, boil these gently, and stir it continually with
twenty eggs well beaten amongst the cream, being boil'd and cold,
fill the cheesecakes.


  _To make Cheesecakes otherways._

Take eighteen eggs, and beat them very well, beat some flour amongst
them to make them pretty thick; then have a pottle of cream and boil
it, being boiled put in your eggs, flour, and half a pound of
butter, some cinamon, salt, boil'd currans, and sugar, set them over
the fire, and boil it pretty thick, being cold fill them and bake
them, make the crust as beforesaid.


  _To make Cheesecakes in the Italian Fashion._

Take four pound of good fat Holland cheese, and six pound of good
fresh cheese curd of a morning milk cheese or better, beat them in a
stone or Wooden mortar, then put sugar to them, & two pound of well
washed currans, twelve eggs, whites & all, being first well beaten,
a pound of sugar, some cream, half an ounce of cinamon, a quarter of
an ounce of mace, and a little saffron, mix them well together, &
fill your talmouse or cheesecakes pasty-ways in good cold
butter-paste; sometimes use beaten almonds amongst it, and some
pistaches whole; being baked, ice them with yolks of eggs,
rose-water, and sugar, cast on red and white biskets, and serve them
up hot.


  _Cheesecakes in the Italian fashion otherways._

Take a pound of pistaches stamped with two pound of morning-milk
cheese-curd fresh made, three ounces of elder flowers, ten eggs,
a pound of sugar, a pound of butter, and a pottle of flour, strain
these in a course strainer, and put them in short or puff past.


  _To make Cheesecakes otherways._

Take a good morning milk cheese, or better, of some eight pound
weight, stamp it in a mortar, and beat a pound of butter amongst it,
and a pound of sugar, then mix with it beaten mace, two pound of
currans well picked and washed, a penny manchet grated, or a pound
of almonds blanched and beaten with fine rose-water, and some salt;
then boil some cream, and thicken it with six or eight yolks of
eggs, mixed with the other things, work them well together, and fill
the cheesecakes, make the curd not too soft, and make the paste of
cold butter and water according to these forms.


  _To make a Triffel._

Take a quart of the best and thickest cream, set it on the fire in a
clean skillet, and put to it whole mace, cinamon, and sugar, boil it
well in the cream before you put in the sugar; then your cream being
well boiled, pour it into a fine silver piece or dish, and take out
the spices, let it cool till it be no more than blood-warm, then put
in a spoonful of good runnet, and set it well together being cold
scrape sugar on it, and trim the dish sides finely.


  _To make fresh Cheese and Cream._

Take a pottle of milk as it comes from the cow, and a pint of cream,
put to it a spoonful of runnet, and let it stand two hours, then
stir it up and put it in a fine cloth, let the whey drain from it,
and put the curd into a bowl-dish, or bason; then put to it the yolk
of an egg, a spoonful of rose-water, some salt, sugar, and a little
nutmeg finely beaten, put it to the cheese in the cheese-fat on a
fine cloth, then scrape on sugar, and serve it on a plate in a dish.

Thus you may make fresh cheese and cream in the _French_ fashion
called _Jonches_, or rush cheese, being put in a mould of rushes
tyed at both ends, and being dished put cream to it.


  _To make a Posset._

Take the yolks of twenty eggs, then have a pottle of good thick
sweet cream, boil it with good store of whole cinamon, and stir it
continually on a good fire, then strain the eggs with a little raw
cream; when the cream is well boiled and tasteth of the spice, take
it off the fire, put in the eggs, and stir them well in the cream,
being pretty thick, have some sack in a posset pot or deep silver
bason, half a pound of double refined sugar, and some fine grated
nutmeg, warm it in the bason and pour in the cream and eggs, the
cinamon being taken out, pour it as high as you can hold the
skillet, let it spatter in the bason to make it froth, it will make
a most excellent posset, then have loaf-sugar fine beaten, and strow
on it good store.

To the curd you may add some fine grated manchet, some claret or
white-wine, or ale only.


  _To make a Posset otherways._

Take two quarts of new cream, a quarter of an ounce of whole
cinamon, and two nutmegs quartered, boil it till it taste well of
the spice, and keep it always stirring, or it will burn to, then
take the yolks of fourteen or fifteen eggs beaten well together with
a little cold cream, put them to the cream on the fire, and stir it
till it begin to boil, then take it off and sweeten it with sugar,
and stir it on till it be pretty cool; then take a pint and a
quarter of sack, sweeten that also and set it on the fire till it be
ready to boil, then put it in a fine clean scowred bason, or posset
pot, and pour the cream into it, elevating your hand to make it
froth, which is the grace of your posset; if you put it through a
tunnel or cullender, it is held the more exquisite way.


  _To make Sack Posset otherways._

Take two quarts of good cream, and a quarter of a pound of the best
almonds stamp't with some rose-water or cream, strain them with the
cream, and boil with it amber and musk; then take a pint of sack in
a bason, and set it on a chaffing dish till it be bloud warm; then
take the yolks of twelve eggs with 4 whites, beat them very well
together, and so put the eggs into the sack, make it good and hot,
then stir all together in the bason, set the cream cool a little
before you put it into the sack, and stir all together on the coals,
till it be as thick as you would have it, then take some amber and
musk, grind it small with sugar, and strew it on the top of the
posset, it will give it a most delicate and pleasant taste.


  _Sack Posset otherways._

Take eight eggs, whites and yolks, beat them well together, and
strain them into a quart of cream, season them with nutmeg and
sugar, and put to them a pint of sack, stir them all together, and
put it into your bason, set it in the oven no hotter then for a
custard, and let it stand two hours.


  _To make a Sack Posset without Milk or Cream._

Take eighteen eggs, whites and all, take out the cock-treads, and
beat them very well, then take a pint of sack, and a quart of ale
boil'd scum it, and put into it three quarters of a pound of sugar,
and half a nutmeg, let it boil a little together, then take it off
the fire stirring the eggs still, put into them two or three
ladlefuls of drink, then mingle all together, set it on the fire,
and keep it stirring till you find it thick, and serve it up.


  _Other Posset._

Take a quart of cream, and a quarter of nutmeg in it, set it on the
fire, and let it boil a little, as it is boling take a pot or bason
that you may make the posset in, and put in three spoonfuls of sack,
and some eight spoonfuls of ale, sweeten it with sugar, then set it
on the coals to warm a little while; being warmed, take it off and
let it stand till it be almost cold, then put it into the pot or
bason, stir it a little, and let it stand to simmer over the fire an
hour or more, the longer the better.


  _An excellent Syllabub._

Fill your Sillabub pot half full with sider, and good store of
sugar, and a little nutmeg, stir it well together, and put in as
much cream by two or three spoonfuls at a time, as hard as you can,
as though you milkt it in; then stir it together very softly once
about, and let it stand two hours before you eat it, for the
standing makes it curd.


  _To make White Pots according to these Forms._

Take a quart of good thick cream, boil it with three or four blades
of large mace, and some whole cinamon, then take the whites of four
eggs, and beat them very well, when the cream boils up, put them in,
and take them off the fire keeping them stirring a little while, &
put in some sugar; then take five or six pippins, pare, and slice
them, then put in a pint of claret wine, some raisins of the sun,
some sugar, beaten cinamon, and beaten ginger; boil the pippins to
pap, then cut some sippets very thin and dry them before the fire;
when the apples and cream are boil'd & cold, take half the sippets &
lay them in a dish, lay half the apples on them, then lay on the
rest of the sippets and apples as you did before, then pour on the
rest of the cream and bake it in the oven as a custard, and serve it
with scraping sugar.

Bake these in paste, in dish or pan, or make the paste as you will
do for a custard, make it three inches high in the foregoing forms.


  _Otherways to make a White Pot._

Take a quart of sweet cream and boil it, then put to it two ounces
of picked rice, some beaten mace, ginger, cinamon, and sugar, let
these steep in it till it be cold, and strain into it eight yolks of
eggs and but two whites, then put in two ounces of clean washed and
picked currans, and some salt, stir all well together, and bake it
in paste, earthen pan, dish, or deep bason; being baked, trim it
with some sugar, and comfits of orange, cinamon, or white biskets.


  _To make a Wassel._

Take muskedine or ale, and set it on the fire to warm, then boil a
quart of cream and two or three whole cloves, then have the yolks of
three or four eggs dissolved with a little cream; the cream being
well boiled with the spices, put in the eggs and stir them well
together, then have sops or sippets of fine manchet or french bread,
put them in a bason, and pour in the warm wine, with some sugar and
thick cream on that; stick it with blanched almonds and cast on
cinamon, ginger, and sugar, or wafers, sugar plate, or comfits.


  _To make a Norfolk Fool._

Take a quart of good thick sweet cream, and set it a boiling in a
clean scoured skillet, with some large mace and whole cinamon; then
having boil'd a warm or two take the yolks of five or six eggs
dissolved and put to it, being taken from the fire, then take out
the cinamon and mace; the cream being pretty thick, slice a fine
manchet into thin slices, as much as will cover the bottom of the
dish, pour on the cream on them, and more bread, some two or three
times till the dish be full, then trim the dish side with fine
carved sippets, and stick it with slic't dates, scrape on sugar, and
cast on red and white biskets.


  _To make Pap._

Take milk and flour, strain them, and set it over the fire till it
boil, being boil'd, take it off and let it cool; then take the yolks
of eggs, strain them, and put it in the milk with some salt, set it
again on the embers, and stir it till it be thick, and stew
leisurely, then put it in a clean scowred dish, and serve it for
pottage, or in paste, add to it sugar and rose-water.


  _To make Blamanger according to these Forms._

Take a capon being boil'd or rosted & mince it small then have a
pound of blanched almonds beaten to a paste, and beat the minced
capon amongst it, with some rose-water, mingle it with some cream,
ten whites of eggs, and grated manchet, strain all the foresaid
things with some salt, sugar, and a little musk, boil them in a pan
or broad skillet clean scowred as thick as pap, in the boiling stir
it continually, being boil'd strain it again, and serve it in paste
in the foregoing forms, or made dishes with paste royal.

To make your paste for the forms, take to a quart of flour a quarter
of a pound of butter, and the yolks of four eggs, boil your butter
in fair water, and put the yolks of the eight eggs on one side of
your dish, make up your paste quick, not too dry, and make it stiff.


  _Otherways._

Take to a quart of fine flour a quarter of a pound of butter,
a quarter of a pound of sugar, a little saffron, rose-water,
a little beaten cinamon, and the yolk of an egg or two, work up all
cold together with a little almond milk.


  _Blamanger otherways._

Take a boil'd or rost capon, and being cold take off the skin, mince
it and beat it in a mortar, with some almond paste, then mix it with
some capon broth, and crumbs of manchet, strained together with some
rose-water, salt, and sugar; boil it to a good thickness, then put
it into the paste of the former forms, of an inch high, or in dishes
with paste royal, the paste being first baked.

In this manner you may make Blamanger of a Pike.


  _Otherways._

Boil or rost a capon, mince it, and stamp it with almond paste, &
strain it either with capon broth, cream, goats-milk, or other milk,
strain them with some rice flour, sugar, and rosewater, boil it in a
pan like pap, with a little musk, and stir it continually in the
boiling, then put in the forms of paste as aforesaid.

Sometimes use for change pine-apple-seeds and currans, other times
put in dates, cinamon, saffron, figs, and raisins being minced
together, put them in as it boils with a little sack.


  _To make Blamanger otherways._

Take half a pound of fine searsed rice flour, and put to it a quart
of morning milk, strain them through a strainer into a broad
skillet; and set it on a soft fire, stir it with a broad stick, and
when it is a little thick take it from the fire, then put in a
quartern of rose-water, set it to the fire again, and stir it well,
in the stirring beat it with the stick from the one side of the pan
to the other, and when it is as thick as pap, take it from the fire,
and put it in a fair platter, when it is cold lay three slices in a
dish, and scrape on sugar.


  _Blamanger otherways._

Take a capon or a pike and boil it in fair water very tender, then
take the pulp of either of them and chop it small, then take a pound
of blanched almonds beat to a paste, beat the pulp and the almonds
together, and put to them a quart of cream, the whites of ten eggs,
and the crumbs of a fine manchet, mingle all together, and strain
them with some sugar and salt, put them in a clean broad stew pan
and set them over the fire, stir it and boil it thick; being boiled
put it into a platter till it be cold, strain it again with a little
rose-water, and serve it with sugar.


  _Otherways._

Blanch some almonds & beat them very fine to a paste with the boil'd
pulp of a pike or capon, & crums of fine manchet, strain all
together with sugar, and boil it to the thickness of an apple moise,
then let it cool, strain it again with a little rose-water, and so
serve it.


  _To make Blamanger in the Italian fashion._

Boil a Capon in water and salt very tender, or all to mash, then
beat Almonds, and strain them with your Capon-Broth, rice flour,
sugar, and rose-water; boil it like pap, and serve it in this form;
sometimes in place of Broth use Cream.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XIII.

  or,

  The First Section for dressing of _FISH_.

  _Shewing divers ways, and the most excellent,
    for Dressing of Carps, either Boiled, Stewed, Broiled,
    Roasted, or Baked,_ &c.


  _To Boil a Carp in Corbolion._

Take as much wine as water, and a good handful of salt, when it
boils, draw the carp and put it in the liquor, boil it with a
continual quick fire, and being boiled, dish it up in a very clean
dish with sippets round about it, and slic't lemon, make the sauce
of sweet butter, beaten up with slic't lemon and grated nutmeg,
garnish the dish with beaten ginger.


  _To boil a Carp the best way to be eaten hot._

Take a special male carp of eighteen inches, draw it, wash out the
blood, and lay it in a tray, then put to it some wine-vinegar and
salt, put the milt to it, the gall being taken from it; then have
three quarts of white wine or claret, a quart of white wine vinegar,
& five pints of fair water, or as much as will cover it; put the
wine, water and vinegar, in a fair scowred pan or kettle, with a
handful of salt, a quarter of an ounce of large mace, half a
quartern of whole cloves, three slic'd nutmegs, six races of ginger
pared and sliced, a quarter of an ounce of pepper, four or five
great onions whole or sliced; then make a faggot of sweet herbs, of
the tops of streight sprigs, of rosemary, seven or eight bay-leaves,
6 tops of sweet marjoram, as much of the streight tops of time,
winter-savory, and parsley; being well bound up, put them into the
kettle with the spices, and some orange and lemon-peels; make them
boil apace before you put in the carp, and boil it up quick with a
strong fire; being finely boil'd and crisp, dish it in a large clean
scowred dish, lay on the herbs and spice on the carp, with slic't
lemons and lemon-peels, put some of the broth to it, and run it over
with beaten butter, put fine carved sippets round about it, and
garnish the dish with fine searsed manchet.

Or you may make sauce for it only with butter beat up thick, with
slices of lemon, some of the carp liquor, and an anchove or two, and
garnish the dish with beatten ginger.

Or take three or four anchoves and dissolve them in some white-wine,
put them in a pipkin with some slic't horse-raddish, gross pepper,
some of the carp liquor, and some stewed oyster liquor, or stewed
oysters, large mace, and a whole onion or two; the sauce being well
stewed, dissolve the yolks of three or four eggs with some of the
sauce, and give it a warm or two, pour it on the carp with some
beaten butter, the stewed oysters and slic't lemon, barberries, or
grapes.


  _Otherways._

Dissolve three or four anchoves, with a little grated bread and
nutmeg, and give it a warm in some of the broth the carp was boiled
in, beat it up thick with some butter, and a clove of garlick, or
pour it on the carp.

Or make sauce with beaten butter, grape-verjuyce, white wine, slic't
lemon, juyce of oranges, juyce of sorrel, or white-wine vinegar.


  _Or thus._

Take white or claret wine, put it in a pipkin with some pared or
sliced ginger, large mace, dates quartered, a pint of great oysters
with the liquor, a little vinegar and salt, boil these a quarter of
an hour, then mince a handful of parsley, and some sweet herbs, boil
it as much longer till half be consumed, then beat up the sauce with
half a pound of butter and a slic't lemon, and pour it on the carp.

Sometimes for the foresaid carp use grapes, barberries,
gooseberries, and horse-raddish, _&c._


  _To make a Bisque of Carps._

Take twelve handsome male carps, and one larger than the rest, take
out all the milts, and flea the twelve small carps, cut off their
heads, take out their tongues, and take the fish from the bones,
then take twelve large oysters and three or four yolks of hard eggs
minc'd together, season it with cloves, mace, and salt, make thereof
a stiff searse, add thereto the yolks of four or five eggs to bind,
and fashion it into balls or rolls as you please, lay them into a
deep dish or earthen pan, and put thereto twenty or thirty great
oysters, two or three anchoves, the milts & tongues of the twelve
carps, half a pound of fresh butter, the liquor of the oysters, the
juyce of a lemon or two, a little white wine, some of the corbolion
wherein the great carp is boil'd, & a whole onion, so set them a
stewing on a soft fire, and make a soop therewith. For the great
carp you must scald, draw him, and lay him for half an hour with
other carps heads in a deep pan, with as much white wine vinegar as
will cover and serve to boil him & the other heads in, then put
therein pepper, whole mace, a race of ginger, slic't nutmeg, salt,
sweet herbs, an onion or two slic't, & a lemon; when you have boiled
the carps pour the liquor with the spices into the kettle where you
boil him, when it boils put in the carp, and let it not boil too
fast for breaking, after the carp hath boil'd a while put in the
heads, and being boil'd, take off the liquor and let the carps and
the heads keep warm in the kettle till you go to dish them. When you
dress the bisk take a large silver dish, set it on the fire, lay
therein slices of French bread, and steep it with a ladle full of
the corbolion, then take up the great carp and lay him in the midst
of the dish, range the twelve heads about the carp, then lay the
fearse of the carp, lay that into the oysters, milts, and tongues,
and pour on the liquor wherein the fearse was boil'd, wring in the
juyce of a lemon and two oranges, and serve it very hot to the
table.


  _To make a Bisk with Carps and other several Fishes._

Make the corbolion for the Bisk of some Jacks or small Carps boil'd
in half white-wine and fair spring-water; some cloves, salt, and
mace, boil it down to jelly, strain it, and keep it warm for to
scald the bisk; then take four carps, four tenches, four perches,
two pikes, two eels flayed and drawn; the carps being scalded,
drawn, and cut into quarters, the tenches scalded and left whole,
also the pearches and the pikes all finely scalded, cleansed, and
cut into twelve pieces, three of each side, then put them into a
large stewing-pan with three quarts of claret-wine, an ounce of
large mace, a quarter of an ounce of cloves, half an ounce of
pepper, a quarter of an ounce of ginger pared & slic't, sweet herbs
chopped small, as stripped time, savory, sweet marjoram, parsley,
rosemary, three or four bay-leaves, salt, chesnuts, pistaches, five
or six great onions, and stew all together on a quick fire.

Then stew a pottle of oysters the greatest you can get, parboil them
in their own liquor, cleanse them from the dregs, and wash them in
warm water from the grounds and shells, put them into a pipkin with
three or four great onions peeled, then take large mace, and a
little of their own liquor, or a little wine vinegar, or white wine.

Next take twelve flounders being drawn and cleansed from the guts,
fry them in clarified butter with a hundred of large smelts, being
fryed stew them in a stew-pan with claret-wine, grated nutmeg,
slic't orange, butter, and salt.

Then have a hundred of prawns, boiled, picked, and buttered, or
fryed.

Next, bottoms of artichocks, boiled, blanched, and put in beaten
butter, grated nutmeg, salt, white-wine, skirrets, and sparagus in
the foresaid sauce.

Then mince a pike and an eel, cleanse them, and season them with
cloves, mace, pepper, salt, some sweet herbs minct, some pistaches,
barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, some grated manchet, and yolks
of raw eggs, mingle all the foresaid things together, and make it
into balls, or farse some cabbidge lettice, and bake the balls in an
oven, being baked stick the balls with pine-apple seeds, and
pistaches, as also the lettice.

Then all the foresaid things being made ready, have a large clean
scowred dish, with large sops of French bread lay the carps upon
them, and between them some tench, pearch, pike, and eels, & the
stewed oysteres all over the other fish, then the fried flounders &
smelts over the oysters, then the balls & lettice stuck with
pistaches, the artichocks, skirrets, sparagus, butter prawns, yolks
of hard eggs, large mace, fryed smelts, grapes, slic't lemon,
oranges, red beets or pomegranats, broth it with the leer that was
made for it, and run it over with beaten butter.


  _The best way to stew a Carp._

Dress the carp and take out the milt, put it in a dish with then
carp, and take out the gall, then save the blood, and scotch the
carp on the back with your knife; if the carp be eighteen inches,
take a quart of claret or white wine, four or five blades of large
mace, 10 cloves, two good races of ginger slic't, two slic't
nutmegs, and a few sweet herbs, as the tops of sweet marjoram, time,
savory, and parsley chopped very small, four great onions whole,
three or four bay-leaves, and some salt; stew them all together in a
stew-pan or clean scowred kettle with the wine, when the pan boils
put in the carp with a quarter of a pound of good sweet butter, boil
it on a quick fire of charcoal, and being well stew'd down, dish it
in a clean large dish, pour the sauce on it with the spices, lay on
slic't lemon and lemon-peel, or barberries, grapes, or gooseberries,
and run it over with beaten butter, garnish the dish with dryed
manchet grated and searsed, and carved sippets laid round the dish.

In feasts the carps being scal'd, garnish the body with stewed
oysters, some fryed in white batter, some in green made with the
juyce of spinage: sometimes in place of sippets use fritters of
arms, somtimes horse-raddish, and rub the dish with a clove or two
of garlick.

For more variety, in the order abovesaid, sometimes dissolve an
anchove or two, with some of the broth it was stewed in, and the
yolks of two eggs dissolved with some verjuyce, wine, or juyce of
orange; sometimes add some capers, and hard eggs chopped, as also
sweet herbs, _&c._


  _To stew a Carp in the French fashion._

Take a Carp, split it down the back alive, & put it in boiling
liquor, then take a good large dish or stew-pan that will contain
the carp; put in as much claret wine as will cover it, and wash off
the blood, take out the carp, and put into the wine in the dish
three or four slic't onions, three or four blades of large mace,
gross pepper, and salt; when the stew-pan boils put in the carp and
cover it close, being well stewed down, dish it up in a clean
scowred dish with fine carved sippets round about it, pour the
liquor it was boiled in on it, with the spices, onions, slic't
lemon, and lemon-peel, run it over with beaten butter, and garnish
the dish with dryed grated bread.


  _Another most excellent way to stew a Carp._

Take a carp and scale it, being well cleansed and dried with a clean
cloth, then split it and fry it in clarified butter, being finely
fryed put it in a deep dish with two or three spoonfuls of claret
wine, grated nutmeg, a blade or two of large mace, salt, three or
four slices of an orange, and some sweet butter, set it on a chafing
dish of coals, cover it close, and stew it up quick, then turn it,
and being very well stew'd, dish it on fine carv'd sippets, run it
over with the sauce it was stewed in, the spices, beaten butter, and
the slices of a fresh orange, and garnish the dish with dry manchet
grated and searsed.

In this way you may stew any good fish, as soles, lobsters, prawns,
oysters, or cockles.


  _Otherways._

Take a carp and scale it, scrape off the slime with a knife and wipe
it clean with a dry cloth; then draw it, and wash the blood out with
some claret wine into the pipkin where you stew it, cut it into
quarters, halves, or whole, and put it into a broad mouthed pipkin
or earthen-pan, put to it as much wine as water, a bundle of sweet
herbs, some raisins of the sun, currans, large mace, cloves, whole
cinamon, slic't ginger, salt, and some prunes boiled and strained,
put in also some strained bread or flour, and stew them all
together; being stewed, dish the carp in a clean scowred dish on
fine carved sippets, pour the broth on the carp, and garnish it with
the fruit, spices, some slic't lemon, barberries, or grapes, some
orangado or preserved barberries, and scrape on sugar.


  _Otherways._

Do it as before, save only no currans, put prunes strained, beaten
pepper, and some saffron.


  _To stew a Carp seven several ways._

1. Take a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it with a
dry cloth, and give it a cut or two cross the back, then put it a
boiling whole, parted down the back in halves, or quarters, put it
in a broad mouthed pipkin with some claret or white-wine, some
wine-vinegar, and good fresh fish broth or some fair water, three or
four blades of large mace, some slic't onions fryed, currans, and
some good butter; cover up the pipkin, and being finely stewed, put
in some almond-milk, and some sweet herbs finely minced, or some
grated manchet, and being well stewed, serve it up on fine carved
sippets, broth it, and garnish the dish with some barberries or
grapes, and the dish with some stale manchet grated and sears'd,
being first dryed.

2. For the foresaid broth, yolks of hard eggs strained with some
steeped manchet, some of the broth it is stewed in, and a little
saffron.

3. For variety of garnish, carrots in dice-work, some raisins, large
mace, a few prunes, and marigold flowers, boil'd in the foresaid
broth.

4. Or leave out carrots and fruit, and put samphire and capers, and
thicken it with French barley tender boil'd.

5. Or no fruit, but keep the order aforesaid, only adding sweet
marjoram, stripped tyme, parsley, and savory, bruise them with the
back of a ladle, and put them into the broth.

6. Otherways, stewed oysters to garnish the carp, and some boil'd
bottoms of artichocks, put them to the stewed oysters or skirrets
being boil'd, grapes, barberries, and the broth thickned with yolks
of eggs strained with some sack, white wine, or caper liquor.

7. Boil it as before, without fruit, and add to it capers, carrots
in dice-work, mace, faggot of sweet herbs, slic't onions chopp'd
with parsley, and boil'd in the broth then have boil'd colliffowers,
turnips, parsnips, sparagus, or chesnuts in place of carrots, and
the leire strained with yolks of eggs and white wine.


  _To make French Herb Pottage for Fasting Days._

Take half a handful of lettice, as much of spinage, half as much of
Bugloss and Borrage, two handfuls of sorrel, a little parsley, sage,
a good handful of purslain, half a pound of butter, some pepper and
salt, and sometimes, some cucumbers.


  _Other Broth or Pottage of a Carp._

Take a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wash it, and wipe
it with a clean cloth, then draw it, and put it in a broad mouthed
pipkin that will contain it, put to it a pint of good white or
claret wine, and as much good fresh fish broth as will cover it, or
as much fair water, with the blood of the carp, four or five blades
of large mace, a little beaten pepper, some slic't onions, a clove
or two, some sweet herbs chopped, a handful of capers, and some
salt, stew all together, the carp being well stewed, put in some
almond paste, with some white-wine, give it a warm or two with some
stewed oyster-liquor, & serve it on French bread in a fair scowr'd
dish, pour on the liquor, and garnish it with dryed grated manchet.


  _To dress a Carp in Stoffado._

Take a carp alive, scale it, and lard it with a good salt eel, steep
it in claret or white-wine, in an earthen pan, and put to it some
wine-vinegar, whole cloves, large mace, gross pepper, slic't ginger,
and four or five cloves of garlick, then have an earthen pan that
will contain it, or a large pipkin, put to it some sweet herbs,
three or four sprigs of rosemary, as many of time and sweet
marjoram, two or three bay-leaves and parsley, put the liquor to it
into the pan or pipkin wherein you will stew it, and paste on the
cover, stew it in the oven, in an hour it will be baked, then serve
it hot for dinner or supper, serve it on fine carved sippets of
French bread, and the spices on it, with herbs, slic't lemon and
lemon peel; and run it over with beaten butter.


  _To hash a Carp._

Take a carp, scale, and scrape off the slime with your knife, wipe
it with a dry cloth, bone it, and mince it with a fresh water eel
being flayed and boned; season it with beaten cloves, mace, salt,
pepper, and some sweet herbs, as tyme, parsley, and some sweet
marjoram minced very small, stew it in a broad mouthed pipkin, with
some claret wine, gooseberries, or grapes, and some blanched
chesnuts; being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets about it,
and run it over with beaten butter, garnish the dish with fine
grated manchet searsed, and some fryed oysters in butter, cockles,
or prawns.

Sometimes for variety, use pistaches, pine-apple-seeds, or some
blanch't almonds stew'd amongst the hash, or asparagus, or artichock
boil'd & cut as big as chesnuts, & garnish the dish with scraped
horse-radish, and rub the bottom of the dish in which you serve the
meat, with a clove or two of garlick. Sometimes mingle it with some
stewed oysters, or put to it some oyster-liquor.


  _To marinate a Carp to be eaten hot or cold._

Take a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it clean with
a dry cloth, and split it down the back, flour it, and fry it in
sweet sallet oyl, or good clarified butter; being fine and crisp
fryed, lay it in a deep dish or earthen pan, then have some white or
claret wine, or wine-vinegar, put it in a broad mouthed pipkin with
all manner of sweet herbs bound up in a bundle, as rosemary, tyme,
sweet marjoram, parsley, winter-savory, bay-leaves, sorrel, and
sage, as much of one as the other, put it into the pipkin with the
wine, with some large mace, slic't ginger, gross pepper, slic't
nutmeg, whole cloves, and salt, with as much wine and vinegar as
will cover the dish, then boil the spices and wine with some salt a
little while, pour it on the fish hot, and presently cover it close
to keep in the spirits of the liquor, herbs, and spices for an hours
space; then have slic't lemons, lemon-peels, orange and orange
peels, lay them over the fish in the pan, and cover it up close;
when you serve them hot lay on the spices and herbs all about it,
with the slic't lemons, oranges, and their peels, and run it over
with sweet sallet oyl, (or none) but some of the liquor it is
soust in.

Or marinate the carp or carps without sweet herbs for hot or cold,
only bay-leaves, in all points else as is abovesaid; thus you may
marinate soles, or any other fish, whether sea or fresh-water fish.

Or barrel it, pack it close, and it will keep as long as sturgeon,
and as good.


  _To broil or toast a Carp divers ways, either in sweet Butter
    or Sallet Oyl._

Take a carp alive, draw it, and wash out the blood in the body with
claret wine into a dish, put to it some wine vinegar and oyl, then
scrape off the slime, & wipe it dry both outside & inside, lay it in
the dish with vinegar, wine, oyl, salt, and the streight sprigs of
rosemary and parsley, let it steep there the space of an hour or
two, then broil it on a clean scowred gridiron, (or toast it before
the fire) broil it on a soft fire, and turn it often; being finely
broil'd, serve it on a clean scowred dish, with the oyl, wine, and
vinegar, being stew'd on the coals, put it to the fish, the rosemary
and parsley round the dish, and some about the fish, or with beaten
butter and vinegar, or butter and verjuyce, or juyce of oranges
beaten with the butter, or juyce of lemons, garnish the fish with
slices of orange, lemon, and branches of rosemary; boil the milt or
spawn by it self and lay it in the dish with the Carp.

Or make sauce otherways with beaten butter, oyster liquor, the blood
of the carp, grated nutmeg, juyce of orange, white-wine, or wine
vinegar boil'd together, crumbs of bread, and the yolk of an egg
boiled up pretty thick, and run it over the fish.


  _To broil a Carp in Staffado._

Take a live carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, wipe it clean
with a dry cloth, and draw it, wash out the blood, and steep it in
claret, white-wine, wine-vinegar, large mace, whole cloves, two or
three cloves of garlick, some slic't ginger, gross pepper, and salt;
steep it in this composition in a dish or tray the space of two
hours, then broil it on a clean scoured gridiron on a soft fire, &
baste it with some sweet sallet oyl, sprigs of rosemary, time,
parsley, sweet marjoram, and two or three bay-leaves, being finely
broil'd; serve it with the sauce it was steeped in, boil'd up on the
fire with a little oyster-liquor, the spices on it, and herbs round
about it on the dish, run it over with sauce, either with sweet
sallet oyl, or good beaten butter, and broil the milt or spawn by it
self.


  _To roast a Carp._

Take a live carp, draw and wash it, and take away the gall, and
milt, or spawn; then make a pudding with some grated manchet, some
almond-paste, cream, currans, grated nutmeg, raw yolks of eggs,
sugar, caraway-seed candied, or any peel, some lemon and salt, make
a stiff pudding and put it through the gills into the belly of the
carp, neither scale it, nor fill it too full; then spit it, and
roust it in the oven upon two or three sticks cross a brass dish,
turn it and let the gravy drop into the dish; being finely roasted,
make sauce with the gravy, butter, juyce of orange or lemon, some
sugar, and cinamon, beat up the sauce thick with the butter, and
dish the carp, put the sauce over it with slices of lemon.


  _Otherways._

Scale it, and lard it with salt eel, pepper, and nutmeg, then make a
pudding of some minced eel, roach, or dace, some sweet herbs, grated
bread, cloves, mace, nutmeg, pepper, salt, yolks of eggs, pistaches,
chesnuts, and the milt of the carp parboil'd and cut into dice-work,
as also some fresh eel, and mingle it amongst the pudding or farse.


  _Sauces for Roast Carp._

  1. Gravy and oyster liquor, beat it up thick with sweet butter,
  claret wine, nutmeg, slices of orange, and some capers, and
  give it a warm or two.

  2. Beaten butter with slices of orange, and lemon, or the juyce of
  them only.

  3. Butter, claret-wine, grated nutmeg, selt, slices of orange,
  a little wine-vinegar and the gravy.

  4. A little white-wine, gravy of the carp, an anchove or two
  dissolved in it, some grated nutmeg, and a little grated manchet,
  beat them up thick with some sweet butter, and the yolk of an egg
  or two, dish the carp, and pour the sauce on it.


  _To make a Carp Pye a most excellent way._

Take carp, scale it and scrape off the slime, wipe it with a dry
clean cloth, and split it down the back, then cut it in quarters or
six pieces, three of each, and take out the milt or spawn, as also
the gall; season it with nutmeg, pepper, salt, and beaten ginger,
lay some butter in the pye bottom, then the carp upon it, and upon
the carp two or three bay-leaves, four or five blades of large mace,
four or five whole cloves, some blanched chesnuts, slices of orange,
and some sweet butter, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor
it with beaten butter, the blood of the carp, and a little claret
wine.

For variety, in place of chesnuts, use pine apple-seeds, or bottoms
of artichocks, gooseberries, grapes, or barberries. Sometimes bake
great oysters with the carp, and a great onion or two; sometimes
sweet herbs chopped, or sparagus boiled.

Or bake it in a dish as you do the pye.

To make paste for the pie, take two quarts and a pint of fine flour,
four or five yolks of raw eggs, and half a pound of sweet butter,
boil the butter till it be melted, and make the paste with it.


  _Paste for a Florentine of Carps made in a dish or patty-pan._

Take a pottle of fine flour, three quarters of a pound of butter,
and six yolks of eggs, and work up the butter, eggs, and flour, dry
them, then put to it as much fair spring water cold as will make it
up into paste.


  _To bake a Carp otherways to be eaten hot._

Take a carp, scale it alive, and scrape off the slime, draw it, and
take away the gall and guts, scotch it, and season it with nutmeg,
pepper, and salt lightly, lay it into the pye, and put the milt into
the belly, then lay on slic't dates in halves, large mace, orange,
or slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, raisins of the
sun, and butter; close it up and bake it, being almost baked liquor
it with verjuyce, butter, sugar, claret or white-wine, and ice it.

Sometimes make a pudding in the carps belly, make it of grated
bread, pepper, nutmegs, yolks of eggs, sweet herbs, currans, sugar,
gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, orangado, dates, capers,
pistaches, raisins, and some minced fresh eel.

Or bake it in a dish or patty pan in cold butter paste.


  _To bake a Carp with Oysters._

Scale a carp, scrape off the slime, and bone it; then cut it into
large dice-work, as also the milt being parboil'd; then have some
great oysters, parboil'd, mingle them with the bits of carp, and
season them together with beaten pepper, salt, nutmeg, cloves, mace,
grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, blanched chesnuts, and
pistaches, season them lightly, then put in the bottom of the pie a
good big onion or two whole, fill the pye, and lay upon it some
large mace and butter, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor
it with white wine, and sweet butter, or beaten butter only.


  _To make minced Pies of Carps and Eels._

Take a carp being cleansed, bone it, and also a good fat fresh water
eel, mince them together, and season them with pepper, nutmeg,
cinamon, ginger, and salt, put to them some currans, caraway-seed,
minced orange-peel, and the yolks of six or seven hard eggs minced
also, slic't dates, and sugar; then lay some butter in the bottom of
the pyes, and fill them, close them up, bake them, and ice them.


  _To bake a Carp minced with an Eel in the French Fashion,
    called Peti Petes._

Take a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, then roast it with
a flayed eel, and being rosted draw them from the fire, and let them
cool, then cut them into little pieces like great dice, one half of
them, & the other half minced small and seasoned with nutmeg,
pepper, salt, gooseberries, barberries, or grapes, and some bottoms
of artichocks boil'd and cut as the carp: season all the foresaid
materials and mingle all together, then put some butter in the
bottom of the pye, lay on the meat and butter on the top, close it
up, and bake it, being baked liquor it with gravy, and the juyce of
oranges, butter, and grated nutmeg.

Sometimes liquor it with verjuyce and the yolks of eggs strained,
sugar, and butter.

Or with currans, white wine, and butter boil'd together, some sweet
herbs chopped small, and saffron.


  _To bake a Carp according to these Forms to be eaten hot._

Take a carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, bone it and cut it
into dice-work, the milt being parboil'd, cut it into the same form,
then have some great oysters parboild and cut into the same form
also; put to it some grapes, goosberries, or barberries, the bottoms
of artichocks boil the yolks of hard egs in quarters, boild,
sparagus cut an inch long, and some pistaches, season all the
foresaid things together with pepper, nutmegs, and salt, fill the
pyes, close them up, and bake them, being baked, liquor them with
butter, white-wine, and some blood of the carp, boil them together,
or beaten butter, with juyce of oranges.


  _To bake a Carp with Eels to be eaten cold._

Take four large carps, scale them & wipe off the slime clean, bone
them, and cut each side into two pieces of every carp, then have
four large fresh water eels, fat ones, boned, flayed, and cut in as
many pieces as the carps, season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt;
then have a pye ready, either round or square, put butter in the
bottom of it, then lay a lay of eel, and a lay of carp upon that,
and thus do till you have ended; then lay on some large mace and
whole cloves on the top, some sliced nutmeg, sliced ginger, and
butter, close it up and bake it, being baked and cold, fill it up
with clarified butter.


  _Otherways._

Take eight carps, scale and bone them, scrape and wash off the
slime, wipe them dry, and mince them very fine, then have four good
fresh water eels, flay and bone them, and cut them into lard as big
as your finger, then have pepper, cloves, mace, and ginger severally
beaten and mingled with some salt, season the fish and also the
eels, cut into lard; then make a pye according to this form, lay
some butter in the bottom of the pye, then a lay of carp upon the
butter, so fill it, close it up and bake it.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XIV.

  or,

  The Second Section of FISH.

  _Shewing the most Excellent Ways of Dressing of Pikes._


  _To boil a Pike._

Wash him very clean, then truss him either round whole, with his
tail in his mouth, and his back scotched, or splatted and trust
round like a hart, with his tail in his mouth, or in three pieces, &
divide the middle piece into two pieces; then boil it in water,
salt, and vinegar, put it not in till the liquor boils, & let it
boil very fast at first to make it crisp, but afterwards softly; for
the sauce put in a pipkin a pint of white wine, slic't ginger, mace,
dates quartered, a pint of great oysters with the liquor, a little
vinegar and salt, boil them a quarter of an hour; then mince a few
sweet herbs & parsley, stew them till half the liquor be consumed;
then the pike being boiled dish it, and garnish the dish with grated
dry manchet fine searsed, or ginger fine beaten, then beat up the
sauce, with half a pound of butter, minced lemon, or orange, put it
on the pike, and sippet it with cuts of puff-paste or lozenges, some
fried greens, and some yellow butter. Dish it according to these
forms.


  _To boil a Pike otherways._

Take a male pike alive, splat him in halves, take out his milt and
civet, and take away the gall, cut the sides into three pieces of a
side, lay them in a large dish or tray, and put upon them half a
pint of white wine vinegar, and half a handful of bay-salt beaten
fine; then have a clean scowred pan set over the fire with as much
rhenish or white-wine as will cover the pike, so set it on the fire
with some salt, two slic't nutmegs, two races of ginger slic't, two
good big onions slic't, five or six cloves of garlik, two or three
tops of sweet marjoram, three or four streight sprigs of rosemary
bound up in a bundle close, and the peel of half a lemon; let these
boil with a quick fire, then put in the pike with the vinegar, and
boil it up quick; whilest the pike is boiling, take a quarter of a
pound of anchoves, wash and bone them, then mince them and put them
in a pipkin with a quarter of a pound of butter, and 3 or four
spoonfuls of the liquor the pike was boiled in; the pike being
boiled dish it, & lay the ginger, nutmegs, and herbs upon it, run it
over with the sauce, and cast dried searsed manchet on it.

This foresaid liquor is far better to boil another pike, by renewing
the liquor with a little wine.


  _To boil a Pike and Eel together._

Take a quart of white-wine, a pint and a half of white wine vinegar,
two quarts of water, almost a pint of salt, a handful of rosemary
and tyme, let your liquor boil before you put in your fish, the
herbs, a little large mace, and some twenty corns of whole pepper.


  _To boil a Pike otherways._

Boil it in water, salt, and wine vinegar, two parts water, and one
vinegar, being drawn, set on the liquor to boil, cleanse the civet,
and truss him round, scotch his back, and when the liquor boils, put
in the fish and boil it up quick; then make sauce with some
white-wine vinegar, mace, whole pepper, a good handful of cockles
broiled or boiled out of the shells and washed with vinegar,
a faggot of sweet herbs, the liver stamped and put to it, and horse
raddish scraped or slic't, boil all the foresaid together, dish the
pike on sippets, and beat up the sauce with some good sweet butter
and minced lemon, make the sauce pretty thick, and garnish it as you
please.


  _Otherways._

Take as much white-wine and water as will cover it, of each a like
quantity, and a pint of vinegar, put to this liquor half an ounce of
large mace, two lemon-peels, a quarter of an ounce of whole cloves,
three slic't nutmegs, four races of ginger slic't, some six great
onions slic't, a bundle of six or seven sprigs or tops of rosemary,
as much of time, winter-savory, and sweet marjoram bound up hard in
a faggot, put into the liquor also a good handful of salt, and when
it boils, put in the fish being cleansed and trussed, and boil it up
quick.

Being boiled, make the sauce with some of the broth where the pike
was boiled, and put it in a dish with two or three anchoves being
cleansed and minced, a little white wine, some grated nutmeg, and
some fine grated manchet, stew it on a chafing dish, and beat it up
thick with some sweet butter, and the yolk of an egg or two
dissolved with some vinegar, give it a warm, and put to it three or
four slices of lemon.

Then dish the pike, drain the liquor from it upon a chafing-dish of
coals, pour on the sauce, and garnish the fish with slic't lemons,
and the spices, herbs, and boil'd onions, run it over with beaten
butter, and lay on some barberries or grapes.

Sometimes for change you may put some horse-raddish scraped, or the
juyce of it.


  _To boil a Pike in White Broth._

Cut your pike in three pieces, then boil it in water, salt, and
sweet herbs, put in the fish when the liquor boils; then take the
yolks of six eggs, beat them with a little sack, sugar, melted
butter, and some of the pike broth then put it on some embers to
keep warm, stir it sometimes lest it curdle; then take up your pike,
put the head and tail together in a clean dish, cleave the other
piece in two, and take out the back-bone, put the one piece on one
side, and the other piece on the other side, but blanch all, pour
the broth on it, and garnish the fish with sippets, strow on fine
ginger or sugar, wipe the edge of the dish round, and serve it.


  _To Boil a Pike in the French Fashion, a-la-Sauces d'Almaigne,
    or in the German Fashion._

Take a pike, draw him, dress the rivet, and cut him in three pieces,
boil him in as much wine as water, & some lemon-peel, with the
liquor boils put in the fish with a good handful of salt, and boil
him up quick.

Then have a sauce made of beaten butter, water, the slices of two or
three lemons, the yolks of two or three eggs, and some grated
nutmeg; the pike being boiled dish it on fine sippets, and stick it
with some fried bread run it over with the sauce, some barberries or
lemon, and garnish the dish with some pared and slic't ginger,
barberries, and lemon peel.


  _To boil a Pike in the City Fashion._

Take a live male pike, draw him and slit the rivet, wash him clean
from the blood, and lay him in a dish or tray, then put some salt
and vinegar to it, (or no vinegar; but only salt); then set on a
kettle with some water & salt, & when it boils put in the pike, boil
it softly, and being boiled, take it off the fire, and put a little
butter into the kettle to it, then make a sauce with beaten butter,
the juyce of a lemon or two, grape verjuyce or wine-vinegar, dish up
the pike on fine carved sippets, and pour on the sauce, garnish the
fish with scalded parsley, large mace barberries, slic't lemon, and
lemon-peel, and garnish the dish with the same.


  _To stew a Pike in the French Fashion._

Take a pike, splat it down the back alive, and let the liquor boil
before you put it in, then take a large deep dish or stewing pan
that will contain the pike, put as much claret-wine as will cover
it, & wash off the blood take out the pike, and put to the wine in
the dish three or four slic't onions, four blades of large mace,
gross pepper, & salt; when it boils put in the pike, cover it close,
& being stewed down, dish it up in a clean scowred dish with carved
sippets round abound it, pour on the broth it was stewed in all over
it, with the spices and onions, and put some slic't lemon over all,
with some lemon-peel; run it over with beaten butter, and garnish
the dish with dry grated manchet. Thus you may also stew it with the
scales on or off.

Sometimes for change use horse-raddish.


  _To stew a Pike otherways in the City Fashion._

Take a pike, splat it, and lay it in a dish, when the blood is clean
washed out, put to it as much white-wine as will cover it, and set
it a stewing; when it boils put in the fish, scum it, and put to it
some large mace, whole cinamon, and some salt, being finely stewed
dish it on sippets finely carved.

Then thicken the broth with two or three egg yolks, some thick
cream, sugar, and beaten butter, give it a warm and pour it on the
pike, with some boil'd currans, and boil'd prunes laid all over it,
as also mace, cinamon, some knots of barberries, and slic't lemon,
garnish the dish with the same garnish, and scrape on fine sugar.

In this way you may do Carp, Bream, Barbel, Chevin, Rochet, Gurnet,
Conger, Tench, Pearch, Bace, or Mullet.


  _To hash a Pike._

Scale and bone it, then mince it with a good fresh eel, being also
boned and flayed, put to it some sweet herbs fine stripped and
minced small, beaten nutmeg, mace, ginger, pepper, and salt; stew it
in a dish with a little white wine and sweet butter, being well
stewed, serve it on fine carved sippets, and lay on some great
stewed oysters, some fryed in batter, some green with juyce of
spinage, other yellow with saffron, garnish the dish with them, and
run it over with beaten butter.


  _To souce a Pike._

Draw and wash it clean from the blood and slime, then boil it in
water and salt, when the liquor boils put it to it, and boil it
leisurely simmering, season it pretty savory of the salt, boil it
not too much, nor in more water then will but just cover it.

If you intend to keep it long, put as much white-wine as water, of
both as much as will cover the fish, some wine vinegar, slic't
ginger, large mace, cloves, and some salt; when it boils put in the
fish, spices, and some lemon-peel, boil it up quick but not too
much; then take it up into a tray, and boil down the liquor to a
jelly, lay some slic't lemon on it, pour on the liquor, and cover it
up close; when you serve it in jelly, dish and melt some of the
jelly, and run it all over, garnish it with bunches of barberries
and slic't lemon.

Or being soust and not jellied, serve it with fennil and parsley.

When you serve it, you may lay round the dish divers Small Fishes,
as Tench, Pearch, Gurnet, Chevin, Roach, Smelts, and run them over
with jelly.


  _To souce and jelly Pike, Eeel, Tench, Salmon, Conger,_ &c.

Scale the foresaid fishes, being scal'd, cleansed and boned, season
them with nutmeg and salt, or no spices at all, roul them up and
bind them like brawn, being first rouled in a clean white cloth
close bound up round it, boil them in water, white-wine, and salt,
but first let the pan or vessel boil, put it in and scum it, then
put in some large mace and slic't ginger. If you will only souce
them boil them not down so much; if to jelly them, put to them some
ising-glass, and serve them in collars whole standing in the jelly.


  _Otherways to souce and jelly the foresaid Fishes._

Make jelly of three tenches, three perches, and two carps, scale
them, wash out the blood, and soak them in fair water three or four
hours, leave no fat on them, then put them in a large pipkin with as
much fair spring water as will cover them, or as many pints as pound
of fish, put to it some ising-glass, and boil it close covered till
two parts and a half be wasted; then take it off and strain it, let
it cool, and being cold take off the fat on the top, pare the
bottom, and put the jelly into three pipkins, put three quarts of
white-wine to them, and a pound and a half of double refined sugar
into each pipkin; then to make one red put a quarter of an ounce of
whole cinamon, two races of ginger, two nutmegs, two or three
cloves, and a little piece of turnsole dry'd, the dust rubbed out
and steep'd in some claret-wine, put some of the wine into the
jelly.

To make another yellow, put a little saffron-water, nutmeg, as much
cinamon as to the red jelly, and a race of ginger sliced.

To the white put three blades of large mace, a race of ginger
slic't, then set the jelly on the fire till it be melted, then have
fiveteen whites of eggs beaten, and four pound and a half of refined
sugar, beat amongst the eggs, being first beaten to fine powder;
then divide the sugar and eggs equally into the three foresaid
pipkins, stir it amongst the sugar very well, set them on the fire
to stew, but not to boil up till you are ready to run it; let each
pipkin cool a little before you run it, put a rosemary branch in
each bag, and wet the top of your bags, wring them before you run
them, and being run, put some into orange rinds, some into scollop
shells, or lemon rindes in halves, some into egg shells or muscle
shells, or in moulds for Jellies. Or you may make four colours, and
mix some of the jelly with almonds-milk.

You may dish the foresaid jellies on a pie-plate on a great dish in
four quarters, and in the middle a lemon finely carved or cut into
branches, hung with jellies, and orange peels, and almond jellies
round about; then lay on a quarter of the white jelly on one quarter
of the plate, another of red, and another of amber-jelly, the other
whiter on another quarter, and about the outside of the plate of all
the colours one by another in the rindes of oranges and lemons, and
for the quarters, four scollop shells of four several colours, and
dish it as the former.


  _Pike Jelly otherways._

Take a good large pike, draw it, wash out the blood, and cut it in
pieces, then boil it in a gallon or 6 quarts of fair spring water,
with half a pound of ising-glass close covered, being first clean
scum'd, boil it on a soft fire till half be wasted; then strain the
stock or broth into a clean bason or earthen pan, and being cold
pare the bottom and top from the fat and dregs, put it in a pipkin
and set it over the fire, melt it, and put it to the juyce of eight
or nine lemons, a quart of white-wine, a race of ginger pared and
slic't, three or four blades of large mace, as much whole cinamon,
and a grain of musk and ambergriese tied up in a fine clean clout,
then beat fifteen whites of eggs, and put to them in a bason four
pound of double refined sugar first beaten to fine powder, stir it
with the eggs with a rouling pin, and then put it among the jelly in
the pipkin, stir them well together, and set it a stewing on a soft
charcoal fire, let it stew there, but not boil up but one warm at
least, let it stew an hour, then take it off and let it cool a
little, run it through your jelly-bag, put a sprig of rosemary in
the bottom of the bag, and being run, cast it into moulds. Amongst
some of it put some almond milk or make it in other colours as
aforesaid.


  _To make White Jelly of two Pikes._

Take two good handsome pikes, scale and draw them, and wash them
clean from the blood, then put to them six quarts of good
white-wine, and an ounce of ising-glass, boil them in a good large
pipkin to a jelly, being clean scummed, then strain it and blow off
the fat.

Then take a quart of sweet cream, a quart of the jelly, a pound and
a half of double refined sugar fine beaten, and a quarter of a pint
of rose-water, put all together in a clean bason, and give them a
warm on the fire, with half an ounce of fine searsed ginger, then
set it a cooling, dish it into dice-work, or cast it into moulds and
some other coloured Jellies. Or in place of cream put in
almond-milk.


  _To roast a Pike._

Take a pike, scour off the slime, and take out the entrails, lard
the back with pickled herrings, (you must have a sharp bodkin to
make the holes to lard it) then take some great oysters and
claret-wine, season the oysters with pepper and nutmeg, stuff the
belly with oysters, and intermix the stuffing with rosemary, tyme,
winter savory, sweet marjoram, a little onion, and garlick, sow
these in the belly of the pike; then prepare two sticks about the
breadth of a lath, (these two sticks and the spit must be as broad
as the pike being tied on the spit) tie the pike on winding
packthred about it, tye also along the side of the pike which is not
defended by the spit and the laths, rosemary, and bays, baste the
pike with butter and claret wine with some anchoves dissolved in it;
when the pike is wasted or roasted, take it off, rip up the belly,
and take out the whole herbs quite away, boil up the gravy, dish the
pike, put the wine to it, and some beaten butter.


  _To fry Pikes._

Draw them, wash off the slime and the blood clean, wipe them dry
with a clean cloth, flour them, and fry them in clarifi'd butter,
being fried crisp and stiff, make sauce with beaten butter, slic't
lemon, nutmeg, and salt, beaten up thick with a little fried
parsley.

Or with beaten butter, nutmeg, a little claret, salt, and slic't
orange.

Otherways, oyster-liquor, a little claret, beaten butter, slic't
orange, and nutmeg, rub the dish with a clove of garlick, give the
sauce a warm, and garnish the fish with slic't lemon or orange and
barberries. Small pikes are best to fry.


  _To fry a Pike otherways._

The pike being scalded and splatted, hack the white or inside with a
knife, and it will be ribbed, then fry it brown and crisp in
clarified butter, being fried, take it up, drain all the butter from
it, and wipe the pan clean, then put it again into the pan with
claret, slic't ginger, nutmeg, an anchove, salt, and saffron beat,
fry it till it half be consumed, then put in a piece of butter,
shake it well together with a minced lemon or slic't orange, and
dish it, garnish it with lemon, and rub the dish with a clove of
garlick.


  _To broil a Pike._

Take a pike, draw it & scale it, broil it whole, splat it or scotch
it with your knife, wash out the blood clean, and lay it on a clean
cloth, salt it, and heat the gridiron very hot, broil it on a soft
fire, baste it with butter, and turn it often; being finely broil'd,
serve it in a dish with beaten butter, and wine-vinegar, or juyce of
lemons or oranges, and garnish the fish with slices of oranges or
lemons, and bunches of rosemary.


  _Otherways._

Take a pike, as abovesaid, being drawn, wash it clean, dry it, and
put it in a dish with some good sallet oyl, wine vinegar, and salt,
there let it steep the space of half an hour, then broil it on a
soft fire, turn it and baste it often with some fine streight sprigs
of rosemary, parsley, and tyme, baste it out of the dish where the
oyl and vinegar is; then the pike being finely broil'd, dish it in a
clean dish, put the same basting to it being warmed on the coals,
lay the herbs round the dish, with some orange or lemon slices.


  _To broil Mackarel or Horn kegg._

Draw the Mackarel at the gills, and wash them, then dry them, and
salt and broil them with mints, and green fennil on a soft fire, and
baste them with butter, or oyl and vinegar, and being finely
broil'd, serve them with beaten butter and vinegar, or oyl and
vinegar, with rosemary, time, and parsley; or other sauce, beaten
butter, and slices of lemon or orange.


  _To broil Herrings, Pilchards, or Sprats._

Gill them, wash and dry them, salt and baste them with butter, broil
them on a soft fire, and being broi'ld serve them with beaten
butter, mustard, and pepper, or beaten butter and lemon; other
sauce, take the heads and bruise them in a dish with beer and salt,
put the clearest to the herrings.


  _To bake Pikes._

Bake your pikes as you do carp, as you may see in the foregoing
Section, only remember that small pikes are best to bake.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XV.

  or

  The Third Section for dressing of FISH.

  _The most excellent ways of Dressing Salmon, Bace, or Mullet._


  _To Calver Salmon to be eaten hot or cold._

Chine it, and cut each side into two or three peices according to
the bigness, wipe it clean from the blood and not wash it; then have
as much wine and water as you imagine will cover it, make the liquor
boil, and put in a good handful of salt; when the liquor boils put
in the salmon, and boil it up quick with a quart of white-wine
vinegar, keep up the fire stiff to the last, and being througly
boil'd, which will be in the space of half an hour or less, then
take it off the fire and let it cool, take it up into broad bottomed
earthen pans, and being quite cold, which will be in a day, a night,
or twelve hours, then put in the liquor to it, and so keep it.

Some will boil in the liquor some rosemary bound up in a bundle
hard, two or three cloves, two races of slic't ginger, three or four
blades of large mace, and a lemon peel. Others will boil it in beer
only.

Or you may serve it being hot, and dish it on sippets in a clean
scowred dish; dish it round the dish or in pieces and garnish it
with slic't ginger, large mace, a clove or two, gooseberries,
grapes, barberries, slic't lemon, fryed parsley, ellicksaders, sage,
or spinage fried.

To make sauce for the foresaid salmon, beat some butter up thick
with a little fair water, put 2 or three yolks of eggs dissolved
into it, with a little of the liquor, grated nutmeg, and some slic't
lemon, pour it on the salmon, and garnish the dish with fine searsed
manchet, barberries, slic't lemon, and some spices, and fryed greens
as aforesaid.


  _To stew a small Salmon, Salmon Peal, or Trout._

Take a salmon, draw it, scotch the back, and boil it whole in a
stew-pan with white-wine, (or in pieces) put to it also some whole
cloves, large mace, slic't ginger, a bay-leaf or two, a bundle of
sweet herbs well and hard bound up, some whole pepper, salt, some
butter, and vinegar, and an orange in halves; stew all together, and
being well stewed, dish them in a clean scowred dish with carved
sippets, lay on the spices and slic't lemon, and run it over with
beaten butter, and some of the gravy it was stewed in; garnish the
dish with some fine searsed manchet or searsed ginger.


  _Otherways a most excellent way to stew Salmon._

Take a rand or jole of salmon, fry it whole raw, and being fryed,
stew it in a dish on a chaffing dish of coals, with some
claret-wine, large mace, slic't nutmeg, salt, wine-vinegar, slic't
orange, and some sweet butter; being stewed and the sauce thick,
dish it on sippets, lay the spices on it, and some slices of
oranges, garnish the dish with some stale manchet finely searsed and
strewed over all.


  _To pickle Salmon to keep all the year._

Take a Salmon, cut it in six round pieces, then broil it in
white-wine, vinegar, and a little water, three parts wine and
vinegar, and one of water; let the liquor boil before you put in the
salmon, and boil it a quarter of an hour; then take it out of the
liquor, drain it very well, and take rosemary sprigs, bay-leaves,
cloves, mace, and gross pepper, a good quantity of each, boil them
in two quarts of white-wine, and two quarts of white-wine vinegar,
boil it well, then take the salmon being quite cold, and rub it with
pepper, and salt, pack it in a vessel that will but just contain it,
lay a layer of salmon and a layer of spice that is boil'd in the
liquor; but let the liquor and spice be very cold before you put it
to it; the salmon being close packed put in the liquor, and once in
half a year, or as it grows dry, put some white-wine or sack to it,
it will keep above a year; put some lemon-peel into the pickle, let
the salmon be new taken if possible.


  _An excellent way to dress Salmon, or other Fish._

Take a piece of fresh salmon, wash it clean in a little
wine-vinegar, and let it lye a little in it in a broad pipkin with a
cover, put to it six spoonfuls of water, four of vinegar, as much of
white-wine, some salt, a bundle of sweet herbs, a few whole cloves,
a little large mace, and a little stick of cinamon, close up the
pipkin with paste, and set it in a kettle of seething water, there
let it stew three hours; thus you may do carps, trouts, or eels, and
alter the taste at your pleasure.


  _To hash Salmon._

Take salmon and set it in warm water, take off the skin, and mince a
jole, rand, or tail with some fresh eel; being finely minced season
it with beaten cloves, mace, salt, pepper, and some sweet herbs;
stew it in a broad mouthed pipkin with some claret wine,
gooseberries, barberries, or grapes, and some blanched chesnuts;
being finely stewed serve it on sippets about it, and run it over
with beaten butter, garnish the dish with stale grated manchet
searsed, some fryed oysters in batter, cockles, or prawns; sometimes
for variety use pistaches, asparagus boil'd and cut an inch long, or
boil'd artichocks, and cut as big as a chesnut, some stewed oysters,
or oyster-liquor, and some horse-raddish scraped, or some of the
juyce; and rub the bottom of the dish wherein you serve it with a
clove of garlick.


  _To dress Salmon in Stoffado._

Take a whole rand or jole, scale it, and put it in an earthen
stew-pan, put to it some claret, or white-wine, some wine-vinegar,
a few whole cloves, large mace, gross pepper, a little slic't
ginger, salt, and four or five cloves of garlick, then have three or
four streight sprigs of rosemary as much of time, and sweet
marjoram, two or 3 bay leaves and parsley bound up into a bundle
hard, and a quarter of a pound of good sweet butter, close up the
earthen pot with course paste, bake it in an oven, & serve it on
sippets of French bread, with some of the liquor and spices on it,
run it over with beaten butter and barberries, lay some of the herbs
on it, slic't lemon and lemon-peel.


  _To marinate Salmon to be eaten hot or cold._

Take a Salmon, cut it into joles and rands, & fry them in good sweet
sallet oyl or clarified butter, then set them by in a charger, and
have some white or claret-wine, & wine vinegar as much as will cover
it, put the wine & vinegar into a pipkin with all maner of sweet
herbs bound up in a bundle as rosemary, time, sweet marjoram, parsly
winter-savory, bay-leaves, sorrel, and sage, as much of one as the
other, large mace, slic't ginger, gross pepper, slic't nutmeg, whole
cloves, and salt; being well boil'd together, pour it on the fish,
spices and all, being cold, then lay on slic't lemons, and
lemon-peel, and cover it up close; so keep it for present spending,
and serve it hot or cold with the same liquor it is soust in, with
the spices, herbs, and lemons on it.

If to keep long, pack it up in a vessel that will but just hold it,
put to it no lemons nor herbs, only bay-leaves; if it be well
packed, it will keep as long as sturgeon, but then it must not be
splatted, but cut round ways through chine and all.


  _To boil Salmon in stewed Broth._

Take a jole, chine, or rand, put it in a stew-pan or large pipkin
with as much claret wine and water as will cover it, some raisins of
the sun, prunes, currans, large mace, cloves, whole cinamon, slic't
ginger, and salt, set it a stewing over a soft fire, and when it
boils put in some thickning of strain'd bread, or flour, strain'd
with some prunes being finely stewed, dish it up on sippets in a
clean scowred dish, put a little sugar in the broth, the fruit on
and some slic't lemon.


  _To fry Salmon._

Take a jole, rand, or chine, or cut it round through chine and all
half an inch thick, or in square pieces fry it in clarified butter;
being stiff & crisp fryed, make sauce with two or three spoonfuls of
claret-wine, some sweet butter, grated nutmeg, some slices of
orange, wine-vinegar, and some oyster-liquor; stew them all
together, and dish the salmon, pour on the sauce, and lay on some
fresh slices of oranges and fryed parsley, ellicksander, sage-leaves
fryed in batter, pippins sliced and fryed, or clary fryed in butter,
or yolks of eggs, and quarters of oranges and lemons round the dish
sides, with some fryed greens in halves or quarters.


  _To roast a Salmon according to this Form._

Take a salmon, draw it at the gills, and put in some sweet herbs in
his belly whole; the salmon being scalded and the slime wip't off,
lard it with pickled herrings, or a fat salt eel, fill his belly
with some great oysters stewed, and some nutmeg; let the herbs be
tyme, rosemary, winter savory, sweet marjoram, a little onion and
garlick, put them in the belly of the salmon, baste it with butter,
and set it in an oven in a latten dripping-pan, lay it on sticks and
baste it with butter, draw it, turn it, and put some claret wine in
the pan under it, let the gravy drip into it, baste it out of the
pan with rosemary and bayes, and put some anchoves into the wine
also, with some pepper and nutmeg; then take the gravy and clear off
the fat, boil it up, and beat it thick with butter; then put the
fish in a large dish, pour the sauce on it, and rip up his belly,
take out some of the oysters, and put them in the sauce, and take
away the herbs.


  _Otherways._

Take a rand or jole, cut it into four pieces, and season it with a
little nutmeg and salt, stick a few cloves, and put it on a small
spit, put between it some bay-leaves, and stick it with little
sprigs of rosemary, roast it and baste it with butter, save the
gravy, with some wine-vinegar, sweet butter, and some slices of
orange; the meat being rosted, dish it, and pour on the sauce.


  _To broil or toast Salmon._

Take a whole salmon, a jole, rand, chine, or slices cut round it the
thickness of an inch, steep these in wine-vinegar, good sweet sallet
oyl and salt, broil them on a soft fire, and baste them with the
same sauce they were steeped in, with some streight sprigs of
rosemary, sweet marjoram, tyme, and parsley: the fish being broil'd,
boil up the gravy and oyster-liquor, dish up the fish, pour on the
sauce, and lay the herbs about it.


  _To broil or roast a Salmon in Stoffado._

Take a jole, rand, or chine, and steep it in claret-wine,
wine-vinegar, white-wine, large mace, whole cloves, two or three
cloves of garlick, slic't ginger, gross pepper and salt; being
steeped about two hours, broil it on a soft fire, and baste it with
butter, or very good sallet oyl, sprigs of rosemary, tyme, parsley,
sweet marjoram, and some two or three bay-leaves, being broiled,
serve it with the sauce it was steeped in, with a little
oyster-liquor put to it, dish the fish, warm the sauce it was stewed
in, and pour it on the fish either in butter or oyl, lay the spices
and herbs about it; and in this way you may roast it, cut the jole,
or rand in six pieces if it be large, and spit it with bayes and
rosemary between, and save the gravy for sauce.


  _Sauces for roast or boil'd Salmon._

Take the gravy of the salmon, or oyster liquor, beat it up thick
with beaten butter, claret wine, nutmeg, and some slices of orange.

Otherways, with gravy of the salmon, butter, juyce of orange or
lemon, sugar, and cinamon, beat up the sauce with the butter pretty
thick, dish up the salmon, pour on the sauce, and lay it on slices
of lemon.

Or beaten butter, with slices of orange or lemon, or the juyce of
them, or grape verjuyce and nutmeg.

Otherways, the gravy of the salmon, two or three anchoves dissolved
in it, grated nutmeg, and grated bread beat up thick with butter,
the yolk of an egg and slices of oranges, or the juyce of it.


  _To bake Salmon._

Take a salmon being new, scale it, draw it, and wipe it dry, scrape
out the blood from the back-bone, scotch it on the back and side,
then season it with pepper, nutmeg, and salt; the pie being made,
put butter in the bottom of it, a few whole cloves, and some of the
seasoning, lay on the salmon, and put some whole cloves on it, some
slic't nutmeg, and butter, close it up and baste it over with eggs,
or saffron water, being baked fill it up with clarified butter.

Or you may flay the salmon, and season as aforesaid with the same
spices, and not scotch it but lay on the skin again, and lard it
with Eels.

For the past only boiling liquor, with three gallons of fine or
course flour made up very stiff.


  _To make minced Pies of Salmon._

Mince a rand of fresh salmon very small, with a good fresh water eel
being flayed and boned; then mince, some violet leaves, sorrel,
strawberry-leaves, parsley, sage, savory, marjoram, and time, mingle
all together with the meat currans, cinamon, nutmeg, pepper, salt,
sugar, caraways; rose-water, white-wine, and some minced orangado,
put some butter in the bottom of the pies, fill them, and being
baked ice them, and scrape on sugar; Make them according to these
forms.


  _To make Chewits of Salmon._

Mince a rand of salmon with a good fresh water eel, being boned,
flayed, and seasoned with pepper, salt, nutmeg cinamon, beaten
ginger, caraway-seed, rose-water, butter, verjuyce, sugar, and
orange-peel minced mingle all together with some slic't dates, and
currans, put butter in the bottom, fill the pies, close them up,
bake them, and ice them.


  _To make a Lumber Pye of Salmon._

Mince a rand, jole, or tail with a good fat fresh eel seasoned in
all points as beforesaid, put five or six yolks of eggs to it with
one or two whites, make it into balls or rouls, with some hard eggs
in quarters, put some butter in the pye, lay on the rouls, and on
them large mace, dates in halves, slic't lemon, grapes, or
barberries, & butter, close it up, bake it, and ice it; being baked,
cut up the cover, fry some sage-leaves in batter, in clarified
butter, and stick them in the rouls, cut the cover, and lay it on
the plate about the pie, or mingle it with an eel cut into dice
work, liquor it with verjuyce, sugar, and butter.


  _To boil Bace, Mullet, Gurnet, Rochet, Wivers,_ &c.

Take a mullet, draw it, wash it, and boil it in fair water and salt,
with the scales on, either splatted or whole, but first let the
liquor boil, being finely boiled, dish it upon a clean scowred dish,
put carved sippets round about it, and lay the white side uppermost,
garnish it with slic't lemon, large mace, lemon-peel, and
barberries, then make a lear or sauce with beaten butter, a little
water, slices of lemon, juyce of grapes or orange, strained with the
yolks of two or three eggs.


  _To souce Mullets or Bace._

Draw them & boil them with the scales, but first wash them clean, &
lay them in a dish with some salt, cast upon them some slic't
ginger, & large mace, put some wine vinegar to them, and two or
three cloves; then set on the fire a kettle with as much wine as
water, when the pan boils put in the fish and some salt; boil it
with a soft fire, & being finely boiled and whole, take them up with
a false bottom and 2 wires all together. If you will jelly them,
boil down the liquor to a jelly with a piece of ising-glass; being
boil'd to a jelly, pour it on the fish, spices and all into an
earthen flat bottomed pan, cover it up close, and when you dish the
fish, serve it with some of the jelly on it, garnish the dish with
slic't ginger and mace, and serve with it in saucers wine vinegar,
minc't fennil and slic't ginger; garnish the dish with green fennil
and flowers, and parsley on the fish.


  _To marinate Mullets or Bace._

Scale the mullets, draw them, and scrape off the slime, wash & dry
them with a clean cloth, flour them and fry them in the best sallet
oyl you can get, fry them in a frying pan or in a preserving pan,
but first before you put in the fish to fry, make the oyl very hot,
fry them not too much, but crisp and stiff; being clear, white, and
fine fryed, lay them by in an earthen pan or charger till they be
all fry'd, lay them in a large flat bottom'd pan that they may lie
by one another, and upon one another at length, and pack them close;
then make pickle for them with as much wine vinegar as will cover
them the breadth of a finger, boil in it a pipkin with salt,
bay-leaves, sprigs or tops of rosemary, sweet marjoram, time,
savory, and parsley, a quarter of a handful of each, and whole
pepper; give these things a warm or two on the fire, pour it on the
fish, and cover it close hot; then slice 3 or 4 lemons being par'd,
save the peels, and put them to the fish, strow the slices of lemon
over the fish with the peels, and keep them close covered for your
use. If this fish were barrel'd up, it would keep as long as
sturgeon, put half wine vinegar, and half white-wine, the liquor not
boil'd, nor no herbs in the liquor, but fry'd bay-leaves, slic't
nutmegs, whole cloves, large mace, whole pepper, and slic't ginger;
pack the fishes close, and once a month turn the head of the vessel
downward; will keep half a year without barrelling.

Marinate these fishes following as the mullet; _viz_, Bace, Soals,
Plaice, Flounders, Dabs, Pike, Carp, Bream, Pearch, Tench, Wivers,
Trouts, Smelts, Gudgeons, Mackarel, Turbut, Holly-bur, Gurnet,
Roachet, Conger, Oysters, Scollops, Cockles, Lobsters, Prawns,
Crawfish, Muscles, Snails, Mushrooms, Welks, Frogs.


  _To marinate Bace, Mullet, Gurnet, or Rochet otherways._

Take a gallon of vinegar, a quart of fair water, a good handful of
bay-leaves, as much of rosemary, and a quarter of a pound of pepper
beaten, put these together, and let them boil softly, season it with
a little salt, then fry your fish in special good sallet oyl, being
well clarifi'd, the fish being fryed put them in an earthen vessel
or barrel, lay the bay-leaves, and rosemary between every layer of
the fish, and pour the broth upon it, when it is cold close up the
vessel; thus you may use it to serve hot or cold, and when you dish
it to serve, garnish it with slic't lemon, the peel and barberries.


  _To broil Mullet, Bace, or Bream._

Take a mullet; draw it, and wash it clean, broil it with the scales
on, or without scales, and lay it in a dish with some good sallet
oyl, wine vinegar, salt, some sprigs of rosemary, time, and parsley,
then heat the gridiron, and lay on the fish, broil it on a soft
fire, on the embers, and baste it with the sauce it was steep'd in,
being broiled serve it in a clean warm dish with the sauce it was
steeped in, the herbs on it, and about the dish, cast on salt, and
so serve it with slices of orange, lemon, or barberries.

Or broil it in butter and vinegar with herbs as above-said, and make
sauce with beaten butter and vinegar.

Or beaten butter and juyce of lemon and orange.

Sometimes for change, with grape verjuyce, juyce of sorrel, beaten
butter and the herbs.


  _To fry Mullets._

Scale, draw, and scotch them, wash them clean, wipe them dry and
flour them, fry them in clarified butter, and being fried, put them
in a dish, put to them some claret wine, slic't ginger, grated
nutmeg, an anchove, salt, and some sweet butter beat up thick, give
the fish a warm with a minced lemon, and dish it, but first rub the
dish with a clove of garlick.

The least Mullets are the best to fry.


  _To bake a Mullet or Bace._

Scale, garbidge, wash and dry the Mullet very well, then lard it
with a salt eel, season it, and make a pudding for it with grated
bread, sweet herbs, and some fresh eel minced, put also the yolks of
hard eggs, an anchove wash'd & minc'd very small, some nutmeg, &
salt, fill the belly or not fill it at all, but cut it into quarters
or three of a side, and season them with nutmeg, ginger, and pepper,
lay them in your pie, and make balls and lay them upon the pieces of
Mullet, then put on some capers, prawns, or cockles, yolks of eggs
minced, butter, large mace, and barberries, close it up, and being
bak'd cut up the lid, and stick it full of cuts of paste, lozenges,
or other pretty garnish, fill it up with beaten butter, and garnish
it with slic't lemon.

Or you may bake it in a patty pan with better paste than that which
is made for pyes.

This is a very good way for tench or bream.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XVI.

  or,

  The fourth Section for dressing of FISH.

  _Shewing the exactest ways of dressing Turbut, Plaice,
    Flounders, and Lampry._


  _To boil Turbut to eat hot._

Draw and wash them clean, then boil them in white wine and water, as
much of the one as of the other with some large mace, a few cloves,
salt, slic't ginger, a bundle of time and rosemary fast bound up;
when the pan boils put in the fish, scum it as it boils, and being
half boil'd, put in some lemon-peel; being through boiled, serve it
in this broth, with the spices, herbs, and slic't lemon on it; or
dish it on sippets with the foresaid garnish, and serve it with
beaten butter.


  _Turbut otherways calvered._

Draw the turbut, wash it clean, and boil it in half wine and half
water, salt, and vinegar; when the pan boils put in the fish, with
some slic't onions, large mace, a clove or two, some slic't ginger,
whole pepper, and a bundle of sweet herbs, as time, rosemary, and a
bay-leaf or two; scotch the fish on the white side very thick
overthwart only one way, before you put it a boiling; being half
boiled, put in some lemon or orange peel; and being through boil'd,
serve it with the spices, herbs, some of the liquor, onions, and
slic't lemon.

Or serve it with beaten butter, slic't lemon, herbs, spices, onions
and barberries. Thus also you may dress holyburt.


  _To boil Turbut or Holyburt otherways._

Boil it in fair water and salt, being drawn and washed clean, when
the pan boils put in the fish and scum it; being well boil'd dish
it, and pour on it some stew'd oysters and slic't lemon; run it over
with beaten butter beat up thick with juyce of oranges, pour it over
all, then cut sippets, and stick it with fryed bread.


  _Otherways._

Serve them with beaten butter, vinegar, and barberries, and sippets
about the dish.


  _To souce Turbut or Holyburt otherways._

Take and draw the fish, wash it clean from the blood and slime, and
when the pan boils put in the fish in fair water and salt, boil it
very leisurely, scum it, and season it pretty savory of the salt,
boil it well with no more water then will cover it. If you intend to
keep it long, boil it in as much water as white-wine, some wine
vinegar, slic't ginger, large mace, two or three cloves, and some
lemon-peel; being boil'd and cold, put in a slic't lemon or two,
take up the fish, and keep it in an earthen pan close covered, boil
these fishes in no more liquor than will cover them, boil them on a
soft fire simering.


  _To stew Turbut or Holyburt._

Take it and cut it in slices, then fry it, and being half fryed put
it in a stew-pan or deep dish, then put to it some claret, grated
nutmeg, three or four slices of an orange, a little wine-vinegar,
and sweet butter, stew it well, dish it, and run it over with beaten
butter, slic't lemon or orange, and orange or lemon-peel.


  _To fry Turburt or Hollyburt._

Cut the fish into thin slices, hack it with the knife, and it will
be ribbid, then fry it almost brown with butter, take it up,
draining all the butter from it, then the pan being clean, put it in
again with claret, slic't ginger, nutmeg, anchove, salt, and saffron
beat, fry it till it be half consumed, then put in a piece of
butter, shaking it well together with a minced lemon, and rub the
dish with a clove of garlick.

To hash turbut, make a farc't meat of it, to rost or broil it, use
in all points as you do sturgeon, and marinate it as you do carp.


  _The best way to calver Flounders._

Take them alive, draw and scotch them very thick on the white side,
then have a pan of white-wine and wine vinegar over the fire with
all manner of spices, as large mace, salt, cloves, slic't ginger,
some great onions slic't, the tops of rosemary, time, sweet
marjoram, pick'd parsley, and winter savory, when the pan boils put
in the flounders, and no more liquor than will cover them; cover the
pan close, and boil them up quick, serve them hot or cold with
slic't lemon, the spices and herbs on them and lemon peel.

Broil flounders as you do bace and mullet, souce them as pike,
marinate, and dress them in stoffado as carp, and bake them as
oysters.


  _To boil Plaice hot to butter._

Draw them, and wash them clean, then boil them in fair water and
salt, when the pan boils put them in being very new, boil them up
quick with a lemon-peel; dish them upon fine sippets round about
them, slic't lemon on them, the peel and some barberries, beat up
some butter very thick with some juyce of lemon and nutmeg grated,
and run it over them hot.


  _Otherways._

Boil them in white-wine vinegar, large mace, a clove or two, and
slic't ginger; being boil'd serve them in beaten butter, with the
juyce of sorrel, strained bread, slic't lemon, barberries, grapes,
or gooseberries.


  _To stew Plaice._

Take and draw them, wash them clean, and put them in a dish,
stew-pan or pipkin, with some claret or white wine, butter, some
sweet herbs, nutmeg, pepper, an onion and salt; being finely stewed,
serve them with beaten butter on carved sippets, and slic't lemon.


  _Otherways._

Draw, wash, and scotch them, then fry them not too much; being
fried, put them in a dish or stew-pan, put to them some claret wine,
grated nutmeg, wine vinegar, butter, pepper, and salt, stew them
together with some slices of orange.


  _To bake a Lampry._

Draw it, and split the back on the inside from the mouth to the end
of the tail, take out the string in the back, flay her and truss her
round, parboil it and season it with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put
some butter in the bottom of the pie, and lay on the lampry with two
or three good big onions, a few whole cloves and butter, close it up
and baste it over with yolks of eggs, and beer or saffron water,
bake it, and being baked, fill it up with clarified butter, stop it
up with butter in the vent hole, and put in some claret wine, but
that will not keep long.


  _To bake a Lampry otherways with an Eel._

Flay it, splat it, and take out the garbidg, then have a good fat
eel, flay it, draw it, and bone it, wipe them dry from the slime,
and season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, cut them in equal
pieces as may conveniently lye in a square or round pye, lay butter
in the bottom, and three or four good whole onions, then lay a layer
of eels over the butter, and on that lay a lampry, then another of
eel, thus do till the pye be full, and on the top of all put some
whole cloves and butter, close it up and bake it being basted over
with saffron water, yolks of eggs, and beer, and being baked and
cold, fill it up with beaten butter. Make your pies according to
these forms.


  _To bake a Lampry in the Italian Fashion to eat hot._

Flay it, and season it with nutmeg, pepper, salt, cinamon, and
ginger, fill the pie either with Lampry cut in pieces or whole, put
to it raisins, currans, prunes, dryed cherries, dates, and butter,
close it up, and bake it, being baked liquor it with strained
almonds, grape verjuyce, sugar, sweet herbs chop't and boil'd all
together, serve it with juyce of orange, white wine, cinamon, and
the blood of the lampry, and ice it, thus you may also do lampurns
baked for hot.


  _To bake a Lampry otherways in Patty-pan or dish._

Take a lampry, roast it in pieces, being drawn and flayed, baste it
with butter, and being roasted and cold, put it into a dish with
paste or puff paste; put butter to it, being first seasoned with
pepper, nutmeg, cinamon, ginger, and salt, seasoned lightly, some
sweet herbs chopped, grated bisket bread, currans, dates, or slic't
lemon, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with butter,
white-wine, or sack, and sugar.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XVII.

  or,

  The Fifth Section of FISH.

  _Shewing the best way to Dress Eels, Conger, Lump, and Soals._


  _To boil Eels to be eaten hot._

Draw them, flay them, and wipe them clean, then put them in a posnet
or stew-pan, cut them three inches long, and put to them some
white-wine, white-wine vinegar, a little fair water, salt, large
mace, and a good big onion stew the foresaid together with a little
butter; being finely stewed and tender, dish them on carved sippets,
or on slices of French bread, and serve them with boil'd currans
boil'd by themselves, slic't lemon, barberries, and scrape on sugar.

  _Otherways._

Draw and flay them, cut them into pieces, and boil them in a little
fair water, white-wine, an anchove, some oyster-liquor, large mace,
two or three cloves bruised, salt, spinage, sorrel, and parsley
grosly minced with a little onion and pepper, dish them upon fine
carved sippets; then broth them with a little of that broth, and
beat up a lear with some good butter, the yolk of an egg or two, and
the rinde and slices of a lemon.


  _To stew Eels._

Flay them, cut them into pieces, and put them into a skillet with
butter, verjuyce, and fair water as much as will cover them, some
large mace, pepper, a quarter of a pound of currans, two or three
onions, three or four spoonfuls of yeast, and a bundle of sweet
herbs, stew all these together till the fish be very tender, then
dish them, and put to the broth a quarter of a pound of butter,
a little salt, and sugar, pour it on the fish, sippet it, and serve
it hot.


  _To stew Eels in an Oven._

Cut them in pieces, being drawn and flayed, then season them with
pepper, salt, and a few sweet herbs chopped small, put them into an
earthen pot, and set them up on end, put to them four or five cloves
of garlick, and two or three spoonfulls of fair water, bake them,
and serve them on sippets.


  _To stew Eels otherways to be eaten hot._

Draw the eels, flay them, and cut them into pieces three inches
long, then put them into a broad mouthed pipkin with as much
white-wine and water as will cover them put to them some stripped
tyme, sweet marjoram, savory, picked parsley, and large mace, stew
them well together and serve them on fine sippets, stick bay-leaves
round the dish garnish the meat with slic't lemon, and the dish with
fine grated manchet.


  _To stew whole Eels to be eaten hot._

Take three good eels, draw, flay them, and truss them round, (or in
pieces,) then have a quart of white-wine, three half pints of
wine-vinegar, a quart of water, some salt, and a handful of rosemary
and tyme bound up hard, when the liquor boils put in the eels with
some whole pepper, and large mace; being boil'd, serve them with
some of the broth, beat up thick with some good butter and slic't
lemon, dish them on sippets with some grapes, barberries, or
gooseberries.


  _Otherways._

Take three good eels, draw, flay, and scotch them with your knife,
truss them round, or cut them in pieces, and fry them in clarified
butter, then stew them between two dishes, put to them some two or
three spoonfuls of claret or white-wine, some sweet butter, two or
three slices of an orange, some salt, and slic't nutmeg; stew all
well together, dish them, pour on the sauce, and run it over with
beaten butter, and slices of fresh orange, and put fine sippets
round the dish.


  _To dress Eels in Stoffado._

Take two good eels, draw, flay them, and cut them in pieces three
inches long, put to them half as much claret wine as will cover
them, or white-wine, wine-vinegar, or elder-vinegar, some whole
cloves, large mace, gross pepper, slic't ginger, salt, four or five
cloves of garlick, being put into a pipkin that will contain it, put
to them also three or four sprigs of sweet herbs, as rosemary, tyme,
or sweet marjoram; 2 or 3 bay leaves, and some parsley; cover up the
pipkin, and paste the cover, then stew it in an oven, in one hour it
will be baked, serve it hot for dinner or supper on fine sippets of
French bread, and the spices upon it, the herbs, slic't lemon, and
lemon-peel, and run it over with beaten butter.


  _To souce Eels in Collars._

Take a good large silver eel, flay it (or not) take out the back
bone, and wash and wipe away the blood with a dry cloth, then season
it with beaten nutmeg and salt, cut off the head and roul in the
tail; being seasoned in the in side, bind it up in a fine white
cloth close and streight; then have a large skillet or pipkin, put
in it some fair water and white wine, of each a like quantity, and
some salt, when it boils put in the eel; being boil'd tender take it
up, and let it cool, when it is almost cold keep it in sauce for
your use in a pipkin close covered, and when you will serve it take
it out of the cloth, pare it, and dish it in a clean dish or plate,
with a sprig of rosemary in the middle of the Collar: Garnish the
dish with jelly, barberries and lemon.

If you will have it jelly, put in a piece of ising-glass after the
eel is taken up, and boil the liquor down to a jelly.


  _To jelly Eels otherways._

Flay an eel, and cut it into rouls, wash it clean from the blood,
and boil it in a dish with some white-wine, and white-wine vinegar,
as much water as wine and vinegar, and no more of the liquor than
will just cover it; being tender boil'd with a little salt, take it
up and boil down the liquor with a piece of ising-glass, a blade of
mace, a little juyce of orange and sugar; then the eel being dished,
run the clearest of the jelly over it.


  _To souce Eels otherways in Collars._

Take two fair eels, flay them, and part them down the back, take out
the back-bone, then take tyme, parsley, & sweet marjoram, mince them
small, and mingle them with nutmeg, ginger, pepper, and salt; then
strow it on the inside of the eels, then roul them up like a collar
of brawn, and put them in a clean cloth, bind the ends of the cloth,
and boil them tender with vinegar, white-wine, salt, and water, but
let the liquor boil before you put in the Eels.


  _To souce Eels otherways in a Collar or Roll._

Take a large great eel, and scowr it with a handful of salt, then
split it down the back, take out the back bone and the guts, wipe
out the blood clean, and season the eel with pepper, nutmeg, salt,
and some sweet herbs minced and strowed upon it, roul it up, and
bind it up close with packthred like a collar of brawn, boil it in
water, salt, vinegar, and two or three blades of mace, boil it half
an hour; and being boil'd, put to it a slic't lemon, and keep it in
the same liquor; when you serve it, serve it in a collar or cut it
out in round slices, lay six or seven in a dish, and garnish it in
the dish with parsley and barberries, or serve with it vinegar in
saucers.


  _To souce Eels otherways cut in pieces, or whole._

Take two or three great eels, scowr them in salt, draw them and wash
them clean, cut them in equal pieces three inches long, and scotch
them cross on both sides, put them in a dish with wine-vinegar, and
salt; then have a kettle over the fire with fair water and a bundle
of sweet herbs 2 or three great onions, and some large mace; when
the kettle boils put in the eels, wine, vinegar, and salt; being
finely boil'd and tender, drain them from the liquor and when they
are cold take some of the broth and a pint of white wine, boil it up
with some saffron beaten to powder, or it will not colour the wine;
then take out the spices of the liquor where it was boiled and put
it in the last broth made for it, leave out the onions and herbs of
the first broth, and keep it in the last.


  _To make a Hash of Eels._

Take a good large eel or two, flay, draw, and wash them, bone and
mince them, then season them with cloves and mace, mix with them
some good large oysters, a whole onion, salt, a little white-wine,
and an anchove, stew them upon a soft fire, and serve them on fine
carved sippets, garnish them with some slic't orange and run them
over with beaten butter thickned with the yolk of an egg or two,
some grated nutmeg, and juyce of orange.


  _To make a Spitch-Cock, or broil'd Eels._

Take a good large eel, splat it down the back, and joynt the
back-bone; being drawn, and the blood washed out, leave on the skin,
and cut it in four pieces equally, salt them, and bast them with
butter, or oyl and vinegar; broil them on a soft fire, and being
finely broil'd, serve them in a clean dish, with beaten butter and
juyce of lemon, or beaten butter, and vinegar, with sprigs of
rosemary round about them.


  _To broil salt Eels._

Take a salt eel and boil it tender, being flayed and trust round
with scuers, boil it tender on a soft fire, then broil it brown, and
serve it in a clean dish with two or three great onions boil'd whole
and tender, and then broil'd brown; serve them on the eel with oyl
and mustard in saucers.


  _To roast an Eel._

Cut it three inches long, being first flayed and drawn, split it,
put it on a small spit, & roast it, set a dish under it to save the
gravy, and roast it fine and brown, then make sauce with the gravy,
a little vinegar, salt, pepper, a clove or two, and a little grated
parmisan, or old _English_ cheese, or a little botargo grated; the
eel being roasted, blow the fat off the gravy, and put to it a piece
of sweet butter, shaking it well together with some salt, put it in
a clean dish, lay the eel on it, and some slices of oranges.


  _To roast Eels otherways._

Take a good large silver eel, draw it, and flay it in pieces of four
inches long, spit it on a small spit with some bay-leaves, or large
sage leaves between each piece spit it cross ways, and roast it;
being roasted, serve it with beaten butter, beaten with juyce of
oranges, lemons, or elder vinegar, and beaten nutmeg, or serve it
with venison sauce, and dredge it with beaten caraway-seed, cinamon,
flour, or grated bread.


  _To bake Eels in Pye, Dish or Patty-pan._

Take good fresh water eels, draw, and flay them, cut them in pieces,
and season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, lay them in a pye
with some prunes, currans, grapes, gooseberries, or barberries,
large mace, slic't dates and butter, close it up and bake it, being
baked, liquor it with white-wine, sugar, and butter, and ice it.

If you bake it in a dish in paste, bake it in cold butter paste,
rost the eel, & let it be cold, season it with nutmeg pepper,
ginger, cinamon, and salt, put butter on the paste, and lay on the
eel with a few sweet herbs chopped, and grated bisket-bread, grapes,
currans, dates, large mace, and butter, close it up and bake it,
liquor it, and ice it.


  _Otherways._

Take good fresh water eels; flay and draw them, season them with
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, being cut in pieces, lay them in the pie,
and put to them some two or three onions in quaters, some butter,
large mace, grapes, barberries or gooseberries, close them up and
bake them; being baked liquor them with beaten butter, beat up thick
with the yolks of two eggs, and slices of an orange.

Sometimes you may bake them with a minced onion, some raisins of the
sun, and season them with some ginger, pepper, and salt.


  _To bake Eels otherways._

Take half a douzen good eels, flay them and take out the bones,
mince them and season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, lay some
butter in the pye, and lay a lay of Eel, and a lay of watred salt
Eel, cut into great lard as big as your finger, lay a lay of it, and
another of minced eel, thus lay six or seven lays, and on the top
lay on some whole cloves, slic't nutmeg, butter, and some slices of
salt eel, close it up and bake it, being baked fill it up with some
clarified butter, and close the vent. Make your pye round according
to this form.


  _To bake Eels with Tenches in a round or square Pie to eat cold._

Take four good large eels, flayed and boned, and six good large
tenches, scale, splat, and bone them, cut off the heads and fins, as
also of the eels; cut both eels, and tenches a handful long, &
season them with pepper, salt and nutmeg; then lay some butter in
the bottom of the pie, lay a lay of eels, and then a lay of tench,
thus do five or six layings, lay on the top large mace, & whole
cloves and on that butter, close it up and bake it; being baked and
cold, fill it up with clarified butter.

Or you may bake them whole, and lay them round in the pye, being
flayed, boned, and seasoned as the former, bake them as you do a
lampry, with two or three onions in the middle.


  _To make minced Pies of an Eel._

Take a fresh eel, flay it and cut off the fish from the bone, mince
it small, and pare two or three wardens or pears, mince of them as
much as of the eel, or oysters, temper and season them together with
ginger, pepper, cloves, mace, salt, a little sanders, some currans,
raisins, prunes, dates, verjuyce, butter, and rose-water.


  _Minced Eel Pyes otherways._

Take a good fresh water eel flay, draw, and parboil it, then mince
the fish being taken from the bones, mince also some pippins,
wardens, figs, some great raisins of the sun, season them with
cloves, mace, pepper, salt, sugar, saffron, prunes, currans, dates
on the top, whole raisins, and butter, make pies according to these
forms; fill them, close them up and bake them, being baked, liquor
them with grape verjuyce, slic't lemon, butter, sugar, and
white-wine.


  _Other minced Eel Pyes._

Take 2 or three good large eels, being cleans'd, mince them & season
them with cloves, mace, pepper, nutmeg, salt, and a good big onion
in the bottom of your pye, some sweet herbs chopped, and onions, put
some goosberries and butter to it, and fill your pie, close it up
and bake it, being baked, liquor it with butter and verjuyce, or
strong fish broth, butter, and saffron.


  _Otherways._

Mince some wardens or pears, figs, raisins, prunes, and season them
as abovesaid with some spices, but no onions nor herbs, put to them
goosberries, saffron, slic't dates, sugar, verjuyce, rose-water, and
butter; then make pyes according to these forms, fill them and bake
them, being baked, liquor them with white batter, white-wine and
sugar, and ice them.


  _To boil Conger to be eaten hot._

Take a piece of conger being scalded and wash'd from the blood and
slime, lay it in vinegar & salt, with a slice or two of lemon, and
some large mace, slic't ginger, and two or three cloves, then set
some liquor a boiling in a pan or kettle, as much wine and water as
will cover it when the liquor boils put in the fish, with the
spices, and salt, and when it is boil'd put in the lemon, and serve
the fish on fine carved sippets; then make a lear or sauce with
beaten butter, beat with juyce of oranges or lemons, serve it with
slic't lemon on it, slic't ginger and barberries; and garnish it
with the same.


  _To stew Conger._

Take a piece of conger, and cut it into pieces as big as a hens egg,
put them in a stew-pan or two deep dishes with some large mace,
salt, pepper, slic't nutmeg, some white-wine, wine vinegar, as much
water, butter, and slic't ginger, stew these well together, and
serve them on sippets with slic't orange, lemon, and barberries, and
run them over with beaten butter.


  _To marinate Conger._

Scald and draw it, cut it into pieces, and fry it in the best sallet
oyl you can get; being fried put it in a little barrel that will
contain it; then have some fryed bay-leaves, large mace, slic't
ginger, and a few whole cloves, lay these between the fish, put to
it white-wine, vinegar, and salt, close up the head, and keep it for
your use.


  _To souce Conger._

Take a good fat conger, draw it at two several, vents or holes,
being first scalded and the fins shaved off, cut it into three or
four pieces, then have a pan of fair water, and make it boil, put in
the fish, with a good quantity of salt, and let it boil very softly
half an hour: being tender boil'd, set it by for your use for
present spending; but to keep it long, boil it with as much wine as
water, and a quart of white-wine vinegar.


  _To souce Conger in Collars like Brawn._

Take the fore part of a conger from the gills, splat it, and take
out the bone, being first flayed and scalded, then have a good large
eel or two, flay'd also and boned, seasoned in the inside with
minced nutmeg, mace, and salt, seasoned and cold with the eel in the
inside, bind it up hard in a clean cloth, boil it in fair water,
white-wine and salt.


  _To roast Conger._

Take a good fat conger, draw it, wash it, and scrape off the slime,
cut off the fins, and spit it like an S. draw it with rosemary and
time, put some beaten nutmeg in his belly, salt, some stripped time,
and some great oysters parboil'd, roast it with the skin on, and
save the gravy for the sauce, boil'd up with a little claret-wine,
beaten butter, wine vinegar, and an anchove or two, the fat blown
off, and beat up thick with some sweet butter, two or three slices
of an orange, and elder vinegar.

Or roast it in short pieces, and spit it with bay-leaves between,
stuck with rosemary. Or make venison sauce, and instead of roasting
it on a spit, roast it in an oven.


  _To broil Conger._

Take a good fat conger being scalded and cut into pieces; salt them,
and broil them raw; or you may broil them being first boiled and
basted with butter, or steeped in oyl and vinegar, broil them raw,
and serve them with the same sauce you steeped them in, bast them
with rosemary, time, and parsley, and serve them with the sprigs of
those herbs about them, either in beaten butter, vinegar, or oyl and
vinegar, and the foresaid herbs: or broil the pieces splatted like a
spitch-cock of an eel, with the skin on it.


  _To fry Conger._

Being scalded, and the fins shaved off, splat it, cut it into rouls
round the conger, flour it, and fry it in clarified butter crisp,
sauce it with butter beaten with vinegar, juyce of orange or lemon,
and serve it with fryed parsley, fryed ellicksanders, or clary in
butter.


  _To bake Conger in Pasty proportion._

[Illustration]


  _In Pye Proportion._

Bake it any way of the sturgeon, as you may see in the next Section,
to be eaten either hot or cold, and make your pies according to
these forms.


  _To stew a Lump._

Take it either flayed (or not) and boil it, being splated in a dish
with some white-wine, a large mace or two, salt, and a whole onion,
stew them well together, and dish them on fine sippets, run it over
with some beaten butter, beat up with two or three slices of an
orange, and some of the gravy of the fish, run it over the lump, and
garnish the meat with slic't lemon, grapes, barberries, or
gooseberries.


  _To bake a Lump._

Take a lump, and cut it into pieces, skin and all, or flay it, and
part it in two pieces of a side, season it with nutmeg, pepper, and
salt, and lay it in the pye, lay on it a bay-leaf or two, three or
four blades of large mace, the slices of an orange, gooseberries,
grapes, barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it, being baked
liquor it with beaten butter.

Thus you make bake it in a dish, pye, or patty-pan.


  _To boil Soals._

Draw and flay them, then boil them in vinegar, salt, white-wine and
mace, but let the liquor boil before you put them in; being finely
boil'd, take them up and dish them in a clean dish on fine carved
sippets, garnish the fish with large mace, slic't lemon,
gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and beat up some butter thick
with juyce of oranges, white-wine, or grape verjuyce and run it over
the fish. Sometimes you may put some stew'd oysters on them.


  _Otherways._

Take the soals, flay and draw them, and scotch one side with your
knife, lay them in a dish, & pour on them some vinegar and salt, let
them lie in it half an hour, in the mean time set on the fire some
water, white-wine, six cloves of garlick, and a faggot of sweet
herbs; then put the fish into the boiling liquor, and the vinegar
and salt where they were in steep; being boiled, take them up and
drain them very well, then beat up sweet butter very thick, and mix
with it some anchoves minced small, and dissolved in the butter,
pour it on the fish being dished, and strow on a little grated
nutmeg, and minced orange mixt in the butter.


  _To stew Soals._

Being flayed and scotched, draw them and half fry them, then take
some claret wine, and put to it some salt, grated ginger, and a
little garlick, boil this sauce in a dish, when it boils put the
soals therein, and when they are sufficiently stewed upon their
backs, lay the two halves open on the one side and on the other;
then lay anchoves finely washed and boned all along, and on the
anchoves slices of butter, then turn the two sides over again, and
let them stew till they be ready to be eaten, then take them out of
the sauce, and lay them on a clean dish, pour some of the liquor
wherein they were stewed upon them, and squeeze on an orange.


  _Otherways._

Draw, flay, and scotch them, then flour them and half fry them in
clarified butter, put them in a clean pewter dish, and put to them
three or four spoonfuls of claret wine, two of wine vinegar, two
ounces of sweet butter, two or three slices of an orange, a little
grated nutmeg, and a little salt; stew them together close covered,
and being well stewed dish them up in a clean dish, lay some sliced
lemon on them, and some beaten butter, with juyce of oranges.


  _To dress Soals otherways._

Take a pair of Soals, lard them with water'd salt Salmon, then lay
them on a pye-plate, and cut your lard all of an equall length, on
each side lear it but short; then flour the Soals, and fry them in
the best ale you can get; when they are fryed lay them on a warm
dish, and put to them anchove sauce made of some of the gravy in the
pan, and two or three anchoves, grated nutmeg, a little oyl or
butter, and an onion sliced small, give it a warm, and pour it on
them with some juyce, and two or three slices of orange.


  _To souce Soals._

Take them very new, and scotch them on the upper or white side very
thick, not too deep, then have white-wine, wine vinegar, cloves,
mace, sliced ginger, and salt, set it over the fire to boil in a
kettle fit for it; then take parsley, tyme, sage, rosemary, sweet
marjoram, and winter savory, the tops of all these herbs picked, in
little branches, and some great onions sliced, when it boils put in
all the foresaid materials with no more liquor than will just cover
them, cover them close in boiling, and boil them very quick, being
cold dish them in a fair dish, and serve them with sliced lemon, and
lemon-peels about them and on them.


  _Otherways._

Draw them and wash them clean, then have a pint of fair water with
as much white-wine, some wine vinegar & salt; when the pan or kettle
boils, put in the soals with a clove or two, slic't ginger, and some
large mace; being boil'd and cold, serve them with the spices, some
of the gravy they were boil'd in, slic't lemon, and lemon-peel.


  _To jelly Soals._

Take three tenches, 2 carps, and four pearches, scale them and wash
out the blood clean, then take out all the fat, and to every pound
of fish take a pint of fair spring-water or more, set the fish a
boiling in a clean pipkin or pot, and when it boils scum it, and put
in some ising-glass, boil it till one fourth part be wasted, then
take it off and strain it through a strong canvas cloth, set it to
cool, and being cold, divide it into three or four several pipkins,
as much in the one as in the other, take off the bottom and the top,
and to every quart of broth put a quart of white-wine, a pound and a
half of refined sugar, two nutmegs, 2 races of ginger, 2 pieces of
whole cinamon, a grain of musk, and 8 whites of eggs, stir them
together with a rowling-pin, and equally divide it into the several
pipkins amongst the jellies, set them a stewing upon a soft charcoal
fire, when it boils up, run it through the jelly-bags, and pour it
upon the soals.


  _To roast Soals._

Draw them, flay off the black skin, and dry them with a clean cloth,
season them lightly with nutmeg, salt, and some sweet herbs chopped
small, put them in a dish with some claret-wine and two or three
anchoves the space of half an hour, being first larded with small
lard of a good fresh eel, then spit them, roast them and set the
wine under them, baste them with butter, and being roasted, dish
them round the dish; then boil up the gravy under them with three or
four slices of an orange, pour on the sauce, and lay on some slices
of lemon.

Marinate, broil, fry and bake Soals according as you do Carps, as
you may see in the thirteenth Section.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XVIII.

  or,

  The Sixth Section of FISH.

  _The A-la-mode ways of Dressing and Ordering of Sturgeon._


  _To boil Sturgeon to serve hot._

Take a rand, wash off the blood, and lay it in vinegar and salt,
with the slice of a lemon, some large mace, slic't ginger, and two
or three cloves, then set on a pan of fair water, put in some salt,
and when it boils put in the fish, with a pint of white-wine, a pint
of wine vinegar, and the foresaid spices, but not the lemon; being
finely boil'd, dish it on sippets, and sauce it with beaten butter,
and juyce of orange beaten together, or juyce of lemon, large mace,
slic't ginger, and barberries, and garnish the dish with the same.


  _Otherways._

Take a rand and cut it in square pieces as big as a hens egg, stew
them in a broad mouthed pipkin with two or three good big onions,
fome large mace, two or three cloves, pepper, salt, some slic't
nutmeg, a bay-leaf or two some white-wine and water, butter, and a
race of slic't ginger, stew them well together, and serve them on
sippets of French bread, run them over with beaten butter, slic't
lemon and barberries, and garnish the dish with the same.


  _Sturgeon buttered._

Boil a rand, tail, or jole in water and salt, boil it tender, and
serve it with beaten butter and slic't lemon.


  _To make a hot Hash of Sturgeon._

Take a rand, wash it out of the blood, and take off the scales, and
skin, mince the meat very small, and season it with beaten mace,
pepper, salt, and some sweet herbs minced small, stew all in an
earthen pipkin with two or three big whole onions, butter, and
white-wine; being finely stewed, serve it on sippets with beaten
butter, minced lemon, and boil'd chesnuts.


  _To make a cold Hash of Sturgeon._

Take a rand of sturgeon being fresh and new, bake it whole in an
earthen pan dry, and close it up with a piece of course paste; being
baked and cold slice it into little slices as small as a three
pence, and dish them in a fine clean dish, lay them round the bottom
of it, and strow on them pepper, salt, a minced onion, a minced
lemon, oyl, vinegar, and barberries.


  _To marinate a whole Sturgeon in rands and joles._

Take a sturgeon fresh taken, cut it in joles and rands, wash off the
blood, and wipe the pieces dry from the blood and slime, flour them,
& fry them in a large kettle in four gallons of rape oyl clarified,
being fryed fine and crisp, put it into great chargers, frayes, or
bowls; then have 2 firkins, and being cold, pack it in them as you
do boil'd sturgeon that is kept in pickle, then make the sauce or
pickle of 2 gallons of white-wine, and three gallons of white-wine
vinegar; put to them six good handfuls of salt, 3 in each vessel,
a quarter of a pound large mace, six ounces of whole pepper, and
three ounces of slic't ginger, close it up in good sound vessels,
and when you serve it, serve it in some of its own pickle, the
spices on it, and slic't lemon.


  _To make a farc't meat of Sturgeon._

Mince it raw with a good fat eel, and being fine minced, season it
with cloves, mace, pepper, and salt, mince some sweet herbs and put
to it, and make your farcings in the forms of balls, pears, stars,
or dolphins; if you please stuff carrots or turnips with it.


  _To dress a whole Sturgeon in Stoffado cut into
    Rands and Joles to eat hot or cold._

Take a sturgeon, draw it, and part it in two halves from the tail to
the head, cut it into rands and joles a foot long or more, then wash
off the blood and slime, and steep it in wine-vinegar, and
white-wine, as much as will cover it, or less, put to it eight
ounces of slic't ginger, six ounces of large mace, four ounces of
whole cloves, half a pound of whole pepper, salt, and a pound of
slic't nutmegs, let these steep in the foresaid liquor six hours,
then put them into broad earthen pans flat bottom'd, and bake them
with this liquor and spices, cover them with paper, it will ask four
or five hours baking; being baked serve them in a large dish in
joles or rands, with large slices of French bread in the bottom of
the dish, steep them well with the foresaid broth they were baked
in, some of the spices on them, some slic't lemon, barberries,
grapes, or gooseberries, and lemon peel, with some of the same
broth, beaten butter, juyce of lemons and oranges, and the yolks of
eggs beat up thick.

If to eat cold, barrel it up close with this liquor and spices, fill
it up with white-wine or sack; and head it up close, it will keep a
year very well, when you serve it, serve it with slic't lemon, and
bay-leaves about it.


  _To souce Sturgeon to keep all the year._

Take a Sturgeon, draw it, and part it down the back in equal sides
and rands, put it in a tub into water and salt, and wash it from the
blood and slime, bind it up with tape or packthred, and boil it in a
vessel that will contain it, in water, vinegar, and salt, boil it
not too tender; being finely boil'd take it up, and being pretty
cold, lay it on a clean flasket or tray till it be through cold,
then pack it up close.


  _To souce Sturgeon in two good strong sweet Firkins._

If the Sturgeon be nine foot in length, 2 firkins will serve it, the
vessels being very well filled and packed close, put into it eight
handfuls of salt, six gallons of white wine, and four gallons of
white wine vinegar, close on the heads strong and sure, and once a
month turn it on the other end.


  _To broil Sturgeon, or toast it against the fire._

Broil or toast a rand or jole of sturgeon that comes new out of the
sea or river, (or any piece) and either broil it in a whole rand, or
slices an inch thick, salt them, and steep them in oyl-olive and
wine vinegar, broil them on a soft fire, and baste them with the
sauce it was steeped in, with branches of rosemary, tyme, and
parsley; being finely broiled, serve it in a clean dish with some of
the sauce it was basted with, and some of the branches of rosemary;
or baste it with butter, and serve it with butter and vinegar, being
either beaten with slic't lemon, or juyce of oranges.


  _Otherways._

Broil it on white paper, either with butter or sallet oyl, if you
broil it in oyl, being broil'd, put to it on the paper some oyl,
vinegar, pepper, and branches or slices of orange. If broil'd in
butter, some beaten butter, with lemon, claret, and nutmeg.


  _To fry Sturgeon._

Take a rand of fresh sturgeon, and cut it into slices of half an
inch thick, hack it, and being fried, it will look as if it were
ribbed, fry it brown with clarified butter; then take it up, make
the pan clean, and put it in again with some claret wine, an
anchove, salt, and beaten saffron; fry it till half be consumed, and
then put in a piece of butter, some grated nutmeg, grated ginger,
and some minced lemon; garnish the dish with lemon, dish it, and run
jelly first rubbed with a clove of garlick.


  _To jelly Sturgeon._

Season a whole rand with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, bake it dry in an
earthen pan, and being baked and cold, slice it into thin slices,
dish it in a clean dish, the dish being on it.


  _To roast Sturgeon._

Take a rand of fresh sturgeon, wipe it very dry, and cut it in
pieces as big as a goose-egg, season them with nutmeg, pepper, and
salt, and stick each piece with two or 3 cloves, draw them with
rosemary, & spit them thorow the skin, and put some bay-leaves or
sage-leaves between every piece; baste them with butter, and being
roasted serve them on the gravy that droppeth from them, beaten
butter, juyce of orange or vinegar, and grated nutmeg, serve also
with it venison sauce in saucers.


  _To make Olines of Sturgeon stewed or roasted._

Take spinage, red sage, parsley, tyme, rosemary, sweet marjoram, and
winter-savory, wash and chop them very small, and mingle them with
some currans, grated bread, yolks of hard eggs chopped small, some
beaten mace, nutmeg, cinamon and salt; then have a rand of fresh
sturgeon, cut in thin broad pieces, & hackt with the back of a
chopping knife laid on a smooth pie-plate, strow on the minced herbs
with the other materials, and roul them up in a roul, stew them in a
dish in the oven, with a little white-wine or wine-vinegar, some of
the farcing under them, and some sugar; being baked, make a lear
with some of the gravy, and slices of oranges and lemons.


  _To make Olines of Sturgeon otherways._

Take a rand of sturgeon being new, cut it in fine thin slices, &
hack them with the back of a knife, then make a compound of minced
herbs, as tyme, savory, sweet marjoram, violet-leaves, strawberry
leaves, spinage, mints, sorrel, endive and sage; mince these herbs
very fine with a few scallions, some yolks of hard eggs, currans,
cinamon, nutmegs, sugar, rosewater, and salt, mingle all together,
and strow on the compound herbs on the hacked olines, roul them up,
and make pies according to these forms, put butter in the bottom of
them, and lay the olines on it; being full, lay on some raisins,
prunes, large mace, dates, slic't lemon, some gooseberries, grapes,
or barberries, and butter, close them up and bake them, being baked,
liquor them with butter, white-wine, and sugar, ice them, and serve
them up hot.


  _To bake Sturgeon in Joles and Rands dry in Earthen Pans,
    and being baked and cold, pickled and barreld up,
    to serve hot or cold._

Take a sturgeon fresh and new, part him down from head to tail, and
cut it into rands and joles, cast it into fair water and salt, wash
off the slime and blood, and put it into broad earthen pans, being
first stuffed with penniroyal, or other sweet herbs; stick it with
cloves and rosemary, and bake it in pans dry, (or a little
white-wine to save the pans from breaking) then take white or claret
wine and make a pickle, half as much wine vinegar, some whole
pepper, large mace, slic't nutmegs, and six or seven handfuls of
salt; being baked and cold, pack and barrel it up close, and fill it
up with this pickle raw, head it up close, and when you serve it,
serve it with some of the liquor and slic't lemon.


  _To bake Sturgeon Pies to eat cold._

Take a fresh jole of sturgeon, scale it, and wash off the slime,
wipe it dry, and lard it with a good salt eel, seasoned with nutmeg,
and pepper, cut the lard as big as your finger, and being well
larded, season the jole or rand with the foresaid spices and salt,
lay it in a square pie in fine or course paste, and put some whole
cloves on it, some slic't nutmeg, slic't ginger, and good store of
butter, close it up, and bake it, being baked fill it up with
clarified butter.


  _To bake Sturgeon otherways with Salmon._

Take a rand of sturgeon, cut it into large thick slices, & 2 rands
of fresh salmon in thick slices as broad as the sturgeon, season it
with the same seasoning as the former, with spices and butter, close
it up and bake it; being baked, fill it up with clarified butter.
Make your sturgeon pyes or pasties according to these forms.


  _To make a Sturgeon Pye to eat cold otherways._

Take a rand of sturgeon, flay it and wipe it with a dry cloth, and
not wash it, cut it into large slices; then have carps, tenches, or
a good large eel flayed and boned, your tenches and carps scaled,
boned, and wiped dry, season your sturgeon and the other fishes with
pepper, nutmeg, and salt, put butter in the bottom of the pie, and
lay a lay of sturgeon, and on that a lay of carps, then a lay of
sturgeon, and a lay of eels, next a lay of sturgeon, and a lay of
tench, and a lay of sturgeon above that; lay on it some slic't
ginger, slic't nutmeg, and some whole cloves, put on butter, close
it up, and bake it, being baked liquor it with clarified butter. Or
bake it in pots as you do venison, and it will keep long.


  _Otherways._

Take a rand of sturgeon, flay it, and mince it very fine, season it
with pepper, cloves, mace, and salt; then have a good fresh fat eel
or 2 flayed and boned, cut it into lard as big as your finger, and
lay some in the bottom of the pye, some butter on it, and some of
the minced meat or sturgeon, and so lard and meat till you have
filled the pye, lay over all some slices of sturgeon, sliced nutmeg,
sliced ginger, and butter, close it up and bake it, being baked fill
it up with clarified butter. If to eat hot, give it but half the
seasoning, and make your pyes according to these forms.


  _To bake sturgeon Pies to be eaten hot._

Flay off the scales and skin of a rand, cut it in pieces as big as a
walnut, & season it lightly with pepper, nutmeg, and salt; lay
butter in the bottom of the pye, put in the sturgeon, and put to it
a good big onion or two whole, some large mace, whole cloves, slic't
ginger, some large oysters, slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it, being bak'd, fill
it up with beaten butter, beaten with white-wine or claret, and
juyce or slices of lemon or orange.

To this pye in Winter, you may use prunes, raisins, or currans, and
liquor it with butter, verjuyce, and sugar, and in Summer, pease
boil'd and put in the pye, being baked, and leave out fruit.


  _Otherways._

Cut a rand of sturgeon into pieces as big as a hens egg, cleanse it,
and season them with pepper, salt, ginger, and nutmeg, then make a
pye and lay some butter in the bottom of it, then the pieces of
sturgeon, and two or three bay-leaves, some large mace, three or
four whole cloves, some blanched chesnuts, gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries, and butter, close it up and bake it, and being baked,
liquor it with beaten butter, and the blood of the sturgeon boil'd
together with a little claret-wine.


  _To bake Sturgeon Pyes in dice work to be eaten hot._

Take a pound of sturgeon, a pound of a fresh fat eel, a pound of
carp, a pound of turbut, a pound of mullet, scaled, cleans'd, and
bon'd, a tench, and a lobster, cut all the fishes into the form of
dice, and mingle with them a quart of prawns, season them all
together with pepper, nutmeg & salt, mingle some cockles among them,
boil'd artichocks, fresh salmon, and asparagus all cut into
dice-work. Then make pyes according to these forms, lay butter in
the bottom of them, then the meat being well mingled together, next
lay on some gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, slic't oranges or
lemons, and put butter on it, with yolks of hard eggs and pistaches,
close it up and bake it, and being baked liquor it with good sweet
butter, white-wine, or juyce of oranges.


  _To make minced Pyes of Sturgeon._

Flay a rand of it, and mince it with a good fresh water eel, being
flay'd and bon'd, then mince some sweet herbs with an onion, season
it with cloves, mace, pepper, nutmeg and salt, mingle amongst it
some grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, and fill the pye, having
first put some butter in the bottom of it, lay on the meat, and more
butter on the top, close it up, bake it, and serve it up hot.


  _Otherways._

Mince a rand of fresh sturgeon, or the fattest part of it very
small, then mince a little spinage, violet leaves, strawberry
leaves, sorrel, parsley, sage, savory, marjoram, and time, mingle
them with the meat, some grated manchet, currans, nutmeg, salt,
cinamon, cream, eggs, sugar, and butter, fill the pye, close it up,
and bake it, being baked ice it.


  _Minced Pyes of Sturgeon otherways._

Flay a rand of sturgeon, and lard it with a good fat salt eel, roast
it in pieces, and save the gravy, being roasted mince it small, but
save some to cut into dice-work, also some of the eels in the same
form, mingle it amongst the rest with some beaten pepper, salt,
nutmeg, some gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, put butter in the
bottom of the pye, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it
with gravy, juyce of orange, nutmeg, and butter.

Sometimes add to it currans, sweet herbs, and saffron, and liquor it
with verjuyce, sugar, butter, and yolks of eggs.


  _To make Chewits of Sturgeon, according to these Forms._

Mince a rand of sturgeon the fattest part, and season it with
pepper, salt, nutmeg, cinamon, ginger, caraway-seed, rose-water,
butter, sugar, and orange peel minced, mingle all together with some
slic't dates, and currans, and fill your pyes.


  _To make a Lumber Pye of Sturgeon._

Mince a rand of sturgeon with some of the fattest of the belly, or a
good fat fresh eel, being minced, season it with pepper, nutmeg,
salt, cinamon, ginger, caraways, slic't dates, four or eight raw
eggs, and the yolks of six hard eggs in quarters, mingle all
together, and make them into balls or rolls, fill the pye, and lay
on them some slic't dates, large mace, slic't lemon, grapes,
gooseberries, or barberries, and butter, close it up, and bake it,
being bak'd liquor it with butter, white-wine, and sugar.

Or only add some grated bread, some of the meat cut into dice-work,
& some rose-water, bak'd in all points as the former, being baked
cut up the cover, and stick it with balls, with fryed sage-leaves in
batter; liquor it as aforesaid, and lay on it a cut cover, scrape on
sugar.


  _To make an Olive Pye of Sturgeon in the Italian fashion._

Make slices of sturgeon, hack them, and lard them with salt salmon,
or salt eel, then make a composition of some of the sturgeon cut
into dice-work, some fresh eel, dry'd cherries, prunes taken from
the stones, grapes, some mushrooms & oysters; season the foresaid
things all together in a dish or tray, with some pepper, nutmeg, and
salt, roul them in the slices of the hacked sturgeon with the larded
side outmost, lay them in the pye with the butter under them; being
filled lay on it some oysters, blanched chesnuts, mushrooms,
cockles, pine-apple-seeds, grapes, gooseberries, and more butter,
close it up, bake it, and then liquor it with butter, verjuyce, and
sugar, serve it up hot.


  _To bake Sturgeon to be eaten hot with divers farcings
    or stuffings._

Take a rand and cut it into small pieces as big as a walnut, mince
it with fresh eel, some sweet herbs, a few green onions, pennyroyal,
grated bread, nutmeg, pepper, and salt, currans, gooseberries, and
eggs; mingle all together, and make it into balls, fill the pye with
the whole meat and the balls, and lay on them some large mace,
barberries, chesnuts, yolks of hard eggs, and butter; fill the pye,
and bake it, being baked, liquor it with butter and grape-verjuyce.

Or mince some sturgeon, grated parmisan, or good Holland cheese,
mince the sturgeon, and fresh eel together, being fine minced put
some currans to it, nutmeg, pepper, and cloves beaten, some sweet
herbs minced small, some salt, saffron, and raw yolks of eggs.


  _Other stuffings or Puddings._

Grated bread, nutmeg, pepper, sweet herbs minced very fine, four or
five yolks of hard eggs minced very small, two or three raw eggs,
cream, currans, grapes, barberries and sugar, mix them all together,
and lay them on the Sturgeon in the pye, close it up and bake it,
and liquor it with butter, white-wine, sugar, the yolk of an egg,
and then ice it.


  _To make an Olio of Sturgeon with other Fishes._

Take some sturgeon and mince it with a fresh eel, put to it some
sweet herbs minc't small, some grated bread, yolks of eggs, salt,
nutmeg, pepper, some gooseberries, grapes or barberries, and make it
into little balls or rolls. Then have fresh fish scal'd, washed,
dryed, and parted into equal pieces, season them with pepper,
nutmeg, salt, and set them by; then make ready shell-fish, and
season them as the other fishes lightly with the same spices. Then
make ready roots, as potatoes, skirrets, artichocks and chesnuts,
boil them, cleanse them, and season them with the former spices.
Next have yolks of hard eggs, large mace, barberries, grapes, or
gooseberries, and butter, make your pye, and put butter in the
bottom of it, mix them all together, and fill the pye, then put in
two or three bay-leaves, and a few whole cloves, mix the minced
balls among the other meat and roots; then lay on the top some large
mace, potatoes, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, chesnuts,
pistaches and butter, close it up and bake it, fill it up with
beaten butter, beaten with the juyce of oranges, dish and cut up the
cover, and put all over it slic't lemons, and sometimes to the lear
the yolk of an egg or two.


  _To make minced Herring Pies._

Take salt herrings being watered, crush them between your hands, and
you shall loose the fish from the skin, take off the skin whole, and
lay them in a dish; then have a pound of almond paste ready, mince
the herrings, and stamp them with the almond paste, two of the milts
or rows, five or six dates, some grated manchet, sugar, sack,
rose-water, and saffron, make the composition somewhat stiff, and
fill the skins, put butter in the bottom of your pye, lay on the
herring, and on them dates, gooseberries, currans, barberries, and
butter, close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with butter,
verjuyce, and sugar.

Make minced pyes of any meat, as you may see in page 232, in the
dishes of minced pyes you may use those forms for any kind of minced
pies, either of flesh, fish, or fowl, which I have particularized in
some places of my Book.


  _Otherways._

Bone them, and mince them being finely cleansed with 2 or three
pleasant pears, raisins of the sun, some currans, dates, sugar,
cinamon, ginger, nutmeg, pepper, and butter, mingle all together,
fill your pies, and being baked, liquor them with verjuyce, claret,
or white-wine.


  _To make minced Pies of Ling, Stock-fish, Harberdine,_ &c.

Being boil'd take it from the skin and bones, and mince it with some
pippins, season it with nutmeg, cinamon, ginger, pepper,
caraway-seed, currans, minced raisins, rose-water, minced
lemon-peel, sugar, slic't dates, white-wine, verjuyce, and butter,
fill your pyes, bake them, and ice them.


  _Otherways._

Mince them with yolks of hard eggs, mince also all manner of good
pot-herbs, mix them together, and season them with the seasoning
aforesaid, then liquor it with butter, verjuyce, sugar, and beaten
cinamon, and then ice them; making them according to these forms.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XIX.

  or,

  The Seventh Section of FISH.

  _Shewing the exactest Ways of Dressing all manner of Shell-Fish._


  _To stew oysters in the French Way._

Take oysters, open them and parboil them in their own liquor, the
quantity of three pints or a pottle; being parboil'd, wash them in
warm water clean from the dregs, beard them and put them in a pipkin
with a little white wine, & some of the liquor they were parboil'd
in, a whole onion, some salt, and pepper, and stew them till they be
half done; then put them and their liquor into a frying-pan, fry
them a pretty while, put to them a good piece of sweet butter, and
fry them a therein so much longer, then have ten or twelve yolks of
eggs dissolved with some vinegar, wherein you must put in some
minced parsley, and some grated nutmeg, put these ingredients into
the oysters, shake them in the frying-pan a warm or two, and serve
them up.


  _To stew Oysters otherways._

Take a pottle of large great oysters, parboil them in their own
liquor, then wash them in warm water from the dregs, & put them in a
pipkin with a good big onion or two, and five or six blades of large
mace, a little whole pepper, a slic't nutmeg, a quarter of a pint of
white wine, as much wine-vinegar, a quarter of a pound of sweet
butter, and a little salt, stew them finely together on a soft fire
the space of half an hour, then dish them on sippets of French
bread, slic't lemon on them, and barberries, run them over with
beaten butter, and garnish the dish with dryed manchet grated and
searsed.


  _To stew Oysters otherways._

Take a pottle of large great oysters, parboil them in their own
liquor, then wash them in warm water, wipe them dry, and pull away
the fins, flour them and fry them in clarifi'd butter fine and
white, then take them up, and put them in a large dish with some
white or claret wine, a little vinegar, a quarter of a pound of
sweet butter, some grated nutmeg, large mace, salt, and two or three
slices of an orange, stew them two or three warms, then serve them
in a large clean scowred dish, pour the sauce on them, and run them
over with beaten butter, slic't lemon or orange, and sippets round
the dish.


  _Otherways._

Take a pottle of great oysters, and stew them in their own liquor;
then take them up, wash them in warm water, take off the fins, and
put them in a pipkin with some of their own liquor, a pint of
white-wine, a little wine vinegar, six large maces, 2 or three whole
onions, a race of ginger slic't, a whole nutmeg slic't, twelve whole
pepper corns, salt, a quarter of a pound of sweet butter, and a
little faggot of sweet herbs; stew all these together very well,
then drain them through a cullender, and dish them on fine carved
sippets; then take some of the liquor they were stewed in; beat it
up thick with a minced lemon, and half a pound of butter, pour it on
the oysters being dished, and garnish the dish and the oysters with
grapes, grated bread, slic't lemon, and barberries.


  _Or thus._

Boil great oysters in their shells brown, and dry, but burn them
not, then take them out and put them in a pipkin with some good
sweet butter, the juice of two or three oranges, a little pepper,
and grated nutmeg, give them a warm, and dish them in a fair scowred
dish with carved sippets, and garnish it with dryed, grated, searsed
fine manchet.


  _To make Oyster Pottage._

Take some boil'd pease, strain them and put them in a pipkin with
some capers, some sweet herbs finely chopped, some salt, and butter;
then have some great oysters fryed with sweet herbs, and grosly
chopped, put them to the strained pease, stew them together, serve
them on a clean scowred dish on fine carved fippets, and garnish the
dish with grated bread.


  _Otherways._

Take a quart of great oysters, parboil them in their own liquor, and
stew them in a pipkin with some capers, large mace, a faggot of
sweet herbs, salt, and butter, being finely stewed, serve them on
slices of dryed _French_ bread, round the oysters slic't lemon, and
on the pottage boil'd spinage, minced, and buttered, but first pour
on the broth.


  _To make a Hash of Oysters._

Take three quarts of great oysters, parboil them, and save their
liquor, then mince 2 quarts of them very fine, and put them a
stewing in a pipkin with a half pint of white wine, a good big onion
or two, some large mace, a grated nutmeg, some chesnuts, and
pistaches, and three or 4 spoonfuls of wine-vinegar, a quarter of a
pound of good sweet butter, some oyster liquor, pepper, salt, and a
faggot of sweet herbs; stew the foresaid together upon a soft fire
the space of half an hour, then take the other oysters, and season
them with pepper, salt and nutmeg, fry them in batter made of fine
flour, egg, salt, and cream, make one half of it green with juyce of
spinage, and sweet herbs chopped small, dip them in these batters,
and fry them in clarified butter, being fried keep them warm in an
oven; then have a fine clean large dish, lay slices of French bread
all over the bottom of the dish, scald and steep the bread with some
gravy of the hash, or oyster-liquor, & white wine boil'd together;
dish the hash all over the slices of bread, lay on that the fryed
oysters, chesnuts, and pistaches; then beat up a lear or sauce of
butter, juyce of lemon or oranges, five or six, a little white-wine,
the yolks of 3 or 4 eggs, and pour on this sauce over the hash with
some slic't lemon, and lemon-peel; garnish the dish with grated
bread, being dryed and searsed, some pistaches, chesnuts, carved
lemons, & fryed oysters.

Sometimes you may use mushrooms boild in water, salt, sweet
herbs--large mace, cloves, bayleaves, two or three cloves of
garlick, then take them up, dip them in batter & fry them brown,
make sauce for them with claret, and the juyce of two or three
oranges, salt, butter, the juyce of horse-raddish roots beaten and
strained, grated nutmeg, and pepper, beat them up thick with the
yolks of two or three eggs, do this sauce in a frying-pan, shake
them well together, and pour it on the hash with the mushrooms.


  _To marinate great oysters to be eaten hot._

Take three quarts of great oysters ready opened, parboil them in
their own liquor, then take them out and wash them in warm water,
wipe them dry and flour them, fry them crisp in a frying-pan with
three pints of sweet sallet oyl, put them in a dish, and set them
before the fire, or in a warm oven; then make sauce with white wine;
wine-vinegar, four or five blades of large mace, two or three slic't
nutmegs, two races of slic't ginger, some twenty cloves, twice as
much of whole pepper, and some salt; boil all the foresaid spices in
a pipkin, with a quart of white wine, a pint of wine vinegar,
rosemary, tyme, winter savory, sweet marjoram, bay leaves, sage, and
parlsey, the tops of all these herbs about an inch long; then take
three or four good lemons, slic't dish up the oysters in a clean
scowred dish, pour on the broth, herbs, and spices on them, lay on
the slic't lemons, and run it over with some of the oyl they were
fried in, and serve them up hot. Or fry them in clarified butter.


  _Oysters in Stoffado._

Parboil a pottle or three quarts of great Oysters, save the liquor
and wash the oysters in warm water, then after steep them in
white-wine, wine-vinegar, slic't nutmeg, large mace, whole pepper,
salt, and cloves; give them a warm on the fire, set them off and let
them steep two or three hours; then take them out, wipe them dry,
dip them in batter made of fine flour, yolks of eggs, some cream and
salt, fry them, and being fryed keep them warm, then take some of
the spices liquor, some of the oysters-liquor, and some butter, beat
these things up thick with the slices of an orange or two, and two
or three yolks of eggs; then dish the fryed oysters in a fine clean
dish on a chafing-dish of coals, run on the sauce over them with the
spices, slic't orange, and barberries, and garnish the dish with
searsed manchet.


  _To Jelly Oysters._

Take ten flounders, two small pikes or plaice, and 4 ounces of ising
glass; being finely cleansed, boil them in a pipkin in a pottle of
fair spring-water, and a pottle of white-wine, with some large mace,
and slic't ginger; boil them to a jelly, and strain it through a
strainer into a bason or deep dish; being cold pare off the top and
bottom and put it in a pipkin, with the juyce of six or seven great
lemons to a pottle of this broth, three pound of fine sugar beaten
in a dish with the whites of twelve eggs rubbed all together with a
rouling-pin, and put amongst the jelly, being melted, but not too
hot, set the pipkin on a soft fire to stew, put in it a grain of
musk, and as much ambergriece well rubbed, let it stew half an hour
on the embers, then broil it up, and let it run through your
jelly-bag; then stew the oysters in white wine, oyster-liquor, juyce
of orange, mace, slic't nutmeg, whole pepper, some salt, and sugar;
dish them in a fine clean dish with some preserved barberries, large
mace, or pomegranat kernels, and run the jelly over them in the
dish, garnish the dish with carved lemons, large mace, and preserved
barberries.


  _To pickle Oysters._

Take eight quarts of oysters, and parboil them in their own liquor,
then take them out, wash them in warm water and wipe them dry, then
take the liquor they were parboil'd in, and clear it from the
grounds into a large pipkin or skillet, put to it a pottle of good
white-wine, a quart of wine vinegar, some large mace, whole pepper,
and a good quantity of salt, set it over the fire, boil it
leisurely, scum it clean, and being well boil'd put the liquor into
eight barrels of a quart a piece, being cold, put in the oyster, and
close up the head.


  _Otherways._

Take eight quarts of the fairest oysters that can be gotten, fresh
and new, at the full of the Moon, parboil them in their own liquor,
then wipe them dry with a clean cloth, clear the liquor from the
dregs, and put the oysters in a well season'd barrel that will but
just hold them, then boil the oyster liquor with a quart of
white-wine, a pint of wine-vinegar, eight or ten blades of large
mace, an ounce of whole pepper, four ounces of white salt, four
races of slic't ginger, and twenty cloves, boil these ingredients
four or five warms, and being cold, put them to the oysters, close
up the barrel, and keep it for your use.

When you serve them, serve them in a fine clean dish with bay-leaves
round about them, barberries, slic't lemon, and slic't orange.


  _To souce Oysters to serve hot or cold._

Take a gallon of great oysters ready opened, parboil them in their
own liquor, and being well parboil'd, put them into a cullender, and
save the liquor; then wash the oysters in warm water from the
grounds & grit, set them by, and make a pickle for them with a pint
of white-wine, & half a pint of wine vinegar, put it in a pipkin
with some large mace, slic't nutmegs, slic't ginger, whole pepper,
three or four cloves, and some salt, give it four or five warms and
put in the oysters into the warm pickle with two slic't lemons, and
lemon-peels; cover the pipkin close to keep in the spirits, spices,
and liquor.


  _To roast Oysters._

Strain the liquor from the oysters, wash them very clean and give
them a scald in boiling liquor or water; then cut small lard of a
fat salt eel, & lard them with a very small larding-prick, spit them
on a small spit for that service; then beat two or three yolks of
eggs with a little grated bread, or nutmeg, salt, and a little
rosemary & tyme minced very small; when the oysters are hot at the
fire, baste them continually with these ingredients, laying them
pretty warm at the fire. For the sauce boil a little white-wine,
oyster-liquor, a sprig of tyme, grated bread, and salt, beat it up
thick with butter, and rub the dish with a clove of garlick.


  _To roast Oysters otherways._

Take two quarts of large great oysters, and parboil them in there
own liquor, then take them out, wash them from the dregs, and wipe
them dry on a clean cloth; then haue slices of a fat salt eel, as
thick as a half crown peice, season the oysters with nutmeg, and
salt, spit them on a fine small wooden spit for that purpose, spit
first a sage leafe, then a slice of eel, and then an oyster, thus do
till they be all spitted, and bind them to another spit with
packthread, baste them with yolks of eggs, grated bread and stripped
time, and lay them to a warm fire with here and there a clove in
them; being finely roasted make sauce with the gravy, that drops
from them, blow off the fat, and put to it some claret wine, the
juyce of an orange, grated nutmeg, and a little butter, beat it up
thick together with some of the oyster-liquor, and serve them on
this sauce with slices of orange.


  _Otherways._

Take the greatest oysters you can get, being opened parboil them in
their own liquor, save the liquor, & wash the oysters in some water,
wipe them dry, & being cold lard them with eight or ten lardons
through each oyster, the lard being first seasoned with cloves,
pepper, & nutmeg, beaten very small; being larded, spit them upon
two wooden scuers, bind them to an iron spit and rost them, baste
them with anchove sauce made of some of the oyster-liquor, let them
drip in it, and being enough bread them with the crust of a roul
grated, then dish them, blow the fat off the gravy, put it to the
oysters, and wring on them the juyce of a lemon.


  _To broil Oysters._

Take great oysters and set them on a gridiron with the heads
downwards, put them up an end, and broil them dry, brown, and hard,
then put two or three of them in a shell with some melted butter,
set them on the gridiron till they be finely stewed, then dish them
on a plate, and fill them up with good butter only melted, or beaten
with juyce of orange, pepper them lightly, and serve them up hot.


  _To broil Oysters otherways upon paper._

Broil them on a gridiron as before, then take them out of the shells
into a dish, and chuse out the fairest, then have a sheet of white
paper made like a dripping pan, set it on the gridiron, and run it
over with clarified butter, lay on some sage leaves, some fine thin
slices of a fat fresh eel, being parboil'd, and some oysters, stew
them on the hot embers, and being finely broil'd, serve them on a
dish and a plate in the paper they are boil'd in, and put to them
beaten butter, juyce of orange, and slices of lemon.


  _To broil large Oysters otherways._

Take a pottle of great oysters opened & parboil them in there own
liquor, being done, pour them in to a cullender, and save the
liquor, then wash the oysters in warm water from the grounds, wipe
them with a clean cloth, beard them, and put them in a pipkin, put
to them large mace, two great onions, some butter, some of their own
liquor, some white-wine, wine vinegar, and salt; stew them together
very well, then set some of the largest shells, on a gridiron, put 2
or 3 in a shell, with some of the liquor out of the pipkin, broil
them on a soft fire, and being broil'd, set them on a dish and
plate, and fill them up with beaten butter.

Sometimes you may bread them in the broiling.


  _To fry Oysters._

Take two quarts of great Oysters being parboil'd in their own
liquor, and washed in warm water, bread them, dry them, and flour
them, fry them in clarified butter crisp and white, then have
butter'd prawns or shrimps, butter'd with cream and sweet butter,
lay them in the bottom of a clean dish, and lay the fryed oysters
round about them, run them over with beaten butter, juyce of
oranges, bay-leaves stuck round the Oysters, and slices of oranges
or lemons.


  _Otherways._

Strain the liquor from the oysters, wash them, and parboil them in a
kettle, then dry them and roul them in flour, or make a batter with
eggs, flour, a little cream, and salt, roul them in it, and fry them
in butter. For the sauce, boil the juyce of two or three oranges,
some of their own liquor, a slic't nutmeg, and claret; being boil'd
a little, put in a piece of butter, beating it up thick, then warm
the dish, rub it with a clove of garlick, dish the oysters, and
garnish them with slices of orange.


  _To bake Oysters._

Parboil your oysters in their own liquor, then take them out and
wash them in warm water from the dregs dry them and season them with
pepper, nutmeg, yolks of hard eggs, and salt; the pye being made,
put a few currans in the bottom, and lay on the oysters, with some
slic't dates in halves, some large mace, slic't lemon, barberries
and butter, close it up and bake it, then liquor it with white-wine,
sugar, and butter; or in place of white-wine, use verjuyce.

[Illustration: _The Forms of Oyster Pyes._]


  _To bake Oysters otherways._

Season them with pepper, salt, and nutmegs, the same quantity as
beforesaid, and the same quantity oysters, two or three whole
onions, neither currans nor sugar, but add to it in all respects
else; as slic't nutmeg on them, large mace, hard eggs in halves,
barberries, and butter, liquor it with beaten nutmeg, white-wine,
and juyce of oranges.

Otherways, for change, in the seasoning put to them chopped tyme,
hard eggs, some anchoves, and the foresaid spices.

Or bake them in Florentines, or patty-pans, and give them the same
seasoning as you do the pies.

Or take large oysters, broil them dry and brown in the shells, and
season them with former spices, bottoms of boil'd artichocks,
pickled mushrooms, and no onions, but all things else as the former,
liquor them with beaten butter, juyce of orange, and some claret
wine.


  _Otherways._

Being parboil'd in their own liquor, season them with a little salt,
sweet herbs minced small one spoonful, fill the pie, and put into it
three or four blades of large mace, a slic't lemon, and on flesh
days a good handful of marrow rouled in yolks of eggs and butter,
close it up and bake it, make liquor for it with two nutmegs grated,
a little pepper, butter, verjuyce, and sugar.


  _To make an Oyster Pye otherways._

Take a pottle of oysters, being parboil'd in their own liquor, beard
and dry them, then season them with large mace, whole pepper,
a little beaten ginger, salt, butter, and marrow, then close it up
and bake it, and being baked, make a lear with white wine the oyster
liquor, and one onion, or rub the ladle with garlick you beat it up
with all; it being boil'd, put in a pound of butter, with a minced
lemon, a faggot of sweet herbs, and being boil'd put in the liquor.


  _To make minced Pies or Chewits of Oysters._

Take three quarts of great oysters ready opened and parboil'd in
their own liquor, then wash them in warm water from the dregs, dry
them and mince them very fine, season them lightly with nutmeg,
pepper, salt, cloves, mace, cinamon, caraway-seed, some minced,
rasins of the sun, slic't dates, sugar, currans, and half a pint of
white wine, mingle all together, and put butter in the bottoms of
the pies, fill them up and bake them.


  _To bake Oysters otherways._

Season them with pepper, salt, nutmeg, and sweet herbs strowed on
them in the pie, large mace, barberries, butter, and a whole onion
or two, for liquor a little white wine, and wine-vinegar, beat it up
thick with butter, and liquor the pie, cut it up, and lay on a
slic't lemon, let not the lemon boil in it, and serve it hot.


  _Otherways._

Season them as before with pepper, nutmeg, and salt, being bearded,
but first fry them in clarified butter, then take them up and season
them, lay them in the pie being cold, put butter to them and large
mace, close it up and bake it; then make liquor with a little claret
wine and juyce of oranges, beat it thick with butter, and a little
wine vinegar, liquor the pie, lay on some slices of orange, and set
it again into the oven a little while.


  _To bake Oysters otherways._

Take great oysters, beard them, and season them with grated nutmeg,
salt, and some sweet herbs minc'd small, lay them in the pye with a
small quantity of the sweet herbs strowed on them, some twenty whole
corns of pepper, slic't ginger, a whole onion or two, large mace,
and some butter, close it up and bake it, and make liquor with
white-wine, some of their own liquor, and a minced lemon, and beat
it up thick.


  _Otherways._

Broil great oysters dry in the shells, then take them out, and
season them with great nutmeg, pepper, and salt, lay them in the
pye, and strow on them the yolks of two hard eggs minced, some
stripp'd tyme, some capers, large mace, and butter; close it up, and
make liquor with claret wine, wine vinegar, butter, and juyce of
oranges, and beat it up thick, and liquor the pye, set it again into
the oven a little while, and serve it hot.


  _To make a made Dish of Oysters and other Compounds._

Take oysters, cockles, prawns, craw-fish, and shrimps, being finely
cleans'd from the grit, season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt,
next have chesnuts roasted, and blanch't, skerrets boil'd, blanched
and seasoned; then have a dish or patty-pan ready with a sheet of
cool butter paste, lay some butter on it, then the fishes, and on
them the skirrets, chesnuts, pistaches, slic't lemon, large mace,
barberries, and butter; close it up and bake it, and being baked,
fill it up with beaten butter, beat with juyce of oranges, and some
white-wine, or beaten butter with a little wine-vinegar, verjuyce,
or juyce of green grapes, or a little good fresh fish broth, cut it
up and liquor it, lay on the cover or cut it into four or five
pieces, lay it round the dish, and serve it hot.


  _To make cool Butter-Paste for this Dish._

Take to every peck of flour five pound of butter, and the whites of
six eggs, work it well together dry, then put cold water to it; this
paste is good only for patty-pans and pasties.


  _To make Paste for Oyster-Pies._

The paste for thin bak't meats must be made with boiling liquor, put
to every peck of flour two pound of butter, but let the butter boil
in the liquor first.


  _To fry Mushrooms._

Blanch them & wash them clean if they be large, quarter them, and
boil them with water, salt, vinegar, sweet herbs, large mace,
cloves, bay-leaves, and two or three cloves of garlick, then take
them up, dry them, dip them in batter and fry them in clarifi'd
butter till they be brown, make sauce for them with claret-wine, the
juice of two or three oranges, salt, butter, the juyce of
horse-raddish roots beaten and strained, slic't nutmeg, and pepper;
put these into a frying pan with the yolks of two or 3 eggs
dissolved with some mutton gravy, beat and shake them well together
in the pan that they curdle not; then dish the mushrooms on a dish,
being first rubbed with a clove of garlick, and garnish it with
oranges, and lemons.


  _To dress Mushrooms in the Italian Fashion._

Take mushrooms, peel & wash them, and boil them in a skillet with
water and salt, but first let the liquor boil with sweet herbs,
parsley, and a crust of bread, being boil'd, drain them from the
water, and fry them in sweet sallet oyl; being fried serve them in a
dish with oyl, vinegar, pepper, and fryed parsley. Or fry them in
clarified butter.


  _To stew Mushrooms._

Peel them, and put them in a clean dish, strow salt on them, and put
an onion to them, some sweet herbs, large mace, pepper, butter,
salt, and two or three cloves, being tender stewed on a soft fire,
put to them some grated bread, and a little white wine, stew them a
little more and dish them (but first rub the dish with a clove of
garlick) sippet them, lay slic't orange on them, and run them over
with beaten butter.


  _To stew Mushrooms otherways._

Take them fresh gathered, and cut off the end of the stalk, and as
you peel them put them in a dish with white wine; after they have
laid half an hour, drain them from the wine, and put them between 2
silver dishes, and set them on a soft fire without any liquor, &
when they have stewed a while pour away the liquor that comes from
them; then put your mushrooms into another clean dish with a sprig
of time, a whole onion, 4 or five corns of whole pepper, two or
three cloves, a piece of an orange, a little salt, and a piece of
good butter, & some pure gravy of mutton, cover them, and set them
on a gentle fire, so let them stew softly till they be enough and
very tender; when you dish them, blow off the fat from them, and
take out the time, spice, and orange from them, then wring in the
juyce of a lemon, and a little nutmeg among the mushrooms, toss them
two or three times, and put them in a clean dish, and serve them hot
to the table.


  _To dress Champignions in fricase, or Mushrooms,
    which is all one thing; they are called also Fungi,
    commonly in English Toad Stools._

Dress your Champignions, as in the foregoing Chapter, and being
stewed put away the liquor, put them into a frying-pan with a piece
of butter, some tyme, sweet marjoram, and a piece of an onion minced
all together very fine, with a little salt also and beaten pepper,
and fry them, and being finely fried, make a lear or sauce with
three or four eggs dissolved with some claret-wine, and the juyce of
two or three oranges, grated nutmeg, and the gravy of a leg of
mutton, and shake them together in a pan with two or three tosses,
dish them, and garnish the dish with orange and lemon, and rub the
dish first with a clove of garlick, or none.


  _To broil Mushrooms._

Take the biggest and the reddest, peel them, and season them with
some sweet herbs, pepper, and salt, broil them on a dripping-pan of
paper, and fill it full, put some oyl into it, and lay it on a
gridiron, boil it on a soft fire, turn them often, and serve them
with oyl and vinegar.

Or broil them with butter, and serve them with beaten butter, and
juyce of orange.


  _To stew Cockles being taken out of the shells._

Wash them well with vinegar, broil or broth them before you take
them out of the shells, then put them in a dish with a little
claret, vinegar, a handful of capers, mace, pepper, a little grated
bread, minced tyme, salt, and the yolks of two or three hard eggs
minced, stew all together till you think them enough; then put in a
good piece of butter, shake them well together, heat the dish, rub
it with a clove of garlick, and put two or three toasts of white
bread in the bottom, laying the meat on them. Craw-fish, prawns, or
shrimps, are excellent good the same way being taken out of their
shells, and make variety of garnish with the shells.


  _To stew Cockles otherways._

Stew them with claret wine, capers, rose or elder vinegar, wine
vinegar, large mace, gross pepper, grated bread, minced tyme, the
yolks of hard eggs minced, and butter: stew them well together. Thus
you may stew scollops, but leave out capers.


  _To stew Scollops._

Boil them very well in white wine, fair water, and salt, take them
out of the shells, and stew them with some of the liquor elder
vinegar, two or three cloves, some large mace, and some sweet herbs
chopped small; being well stewed together, dish four or five of them
in scollop shells and beaten butter, with the juyce of two or three
oranges.


  _To stew Muscles._

Wash them clean, and boil them in water, or beer and salt; then take
them out of the shells, and beard them from gravel and stones, fry
them in clarified butter, and being fryed put away some of the
butter, and put to them a sauce made of some of their own liquor,
some sweet herbs chopped, a little white-wine, nutmeg, three or four
yolks of eggs dissolved in wine vinegar, salt, and some sliced
orange; give these materials a warm or two in the frying-pan, make
the sauce pretty thick, and dish them in the scollop shells.


  _To fry Muscles._

Take as much water as will cover them, set it a boiling, and when it
boils put in the muscles, being clean washed, put some salt to them,
and being boil'd take them out of the shells, and beard them from
the stones, moss, and gravel, wash them in warm water, wipe them
dry, flour them and fry them crisp, serve them with beaten butter,
juyce of orange, and fryed parsley, or fryed sage dipped in batter,
fryed ellicksander leaves, and slic't orange.


  _To make a Muscle Pye._

Take a peck of muscles, wash them clean, and set them a boiling in a
kettle of fair water, (but first let the water boil) then put them
into it, give them a warm, and as soon as they are opened, take them
out of the shells, stone them, and mince them with some sweet herbs,
some leeks, pepper, and nutmeg; mince six hard eggs and put to them,
put some butter in the pye, close it up and bake it, being baked
liquor it with some butter, white wine, and slices of orange.


  _To stew Prawns, Shrimps, or Craw-Fish._

Being boil'd and picked, stew them in white wine, sweet butter,
nutmeg, and salt, dish them in scollop shells, and run them over
with beaten butter, and juyce of orange or lemon.

Otherways, stew them in butter and cream, and serve them in scollop
shells.


  _To stew Lobsters._

Take claret-wine vinegar, nutmeg, salt, and butter, stew them down
some what dry, and dish them in a scollop-shell, run them over with
butter and slic't lemon.

Otherways, cut it into dice-work, and warm it with white-wine and
butter, put it in a pipkin with claret wine or grape verjuyce, and
grated manchet, and fill the scollop-shells.


  _Otherways._

Being boil'd, take out the meat, break it small, but break the
shells as little as you can, then put the meat into a pipkin with
claret-wine, wine-vinegar, slic't nutmeg, a little salt, and some
butter; stew all these together softly an hour, being stewed almost
dry, put to it a little more butter, and stir it well together; then
lay very thin toasts in a clean dish, and lay the meat on them. Or
you may put the meat in the shells, and garnish the dish about with
the legs, and lay the body or barrel over the meat with some sliced
lemon, and rare coloured flowers being in summer, or pickled in
winter. Crabs are good the same way, only add to them the juyce of
two or three oranges, a little pepper, and grated bread.


  _To stew Lobsters otherways._

Take the meat out of the shells, slice it, and fry it in clarified
butter, (the Lobsters being first boil'd and cold), then put the
meat in a pipkin with some claret wine, some good sweet butter,
grated nutmeg, salt, and 2 or three slices of an orange; let it stew
leisurely half an hour, and dish it up on fine carved sippets in a
clean dish, with sliced orange on it, and the juyce of another, and
run it over with beaten butter.


  _To hash Lobsters._

Take them out of the shells, mince them small, and put them in a
pipkin with some claret wine, salt, sweet butter, grated nutmeg,
slic't oranges, & some pistaches; being finely stewed, serve them on
sippets, dish them, and run them over with beaten butter, slic't
oranges, some cuts of paste, or lozenges of puff-paste.


  _To boil Lobsters to eat cold the common way._

Take them alive or dead, lay them in cold water to make the claws
tuff, and keep them from breaking off; then have a kettle over the
fire with fair water, put in it as much bay-salt, as will make it a
good strong brine, when it boils scum it, and put in the Lobsters,
let them boil leisurely the space of half an hour or more according
to the bigness of them, being well boil'd take them up, wash them,
and then wipe them with beer and butter; and keep them for your use.


  _To keep Lobsters a quarter of a year very good._

Take them being boil'd as aforesaid, wrap them in course rags having
been steeped in brine, and bury them in a cellar in some sea-sand
pretty deep.


  _To farce a Lobster._

Take a lobster being half boil'd, take the meat out of the shells,
and mince it small with a good fresh eel, season it with cloves &
mace beaten, some sweet herbs minced small and mingled amongst the
meat, yolks of eggs, gooseberries, grapes, or barberries, and
sometimes boil'd artichocks cut into dice-work, or boil'd aspragus,
and some almond-paste mingled with the rest, fill the lobster
shells, claws, tail, and body, and bake it in a blote oven, make
sauce with the gravy and whitewine, and beat up the sauce or lear
with good sweet butter, a grated nutmeg, juyce of oranges, and an
anchove, and rub the dish with a clove of garlick.

To this farcing you may sometime add almond paste currans, sugar,
gooseberries, and make balls to lay about the lobsters, or serve it
with venison sauce.


  _To marinate Lobsters._

Take lobsters out of the shells being half boil'd, then take the
tails and lard them with a salt eel (or not lard them) part the
tails into two halves the longest way, and fry them in sweet sallet
oyl, or clarified butter; being finely fryed, put them into a dish
or pipkin, and set them by; then make sauce with white wine, and
white wine vinegar, four or five blades of large mace, three or four
slic't nutmegs, two races of ginger slic't, some ten or twelve
cloves twice as much of whole pepper, and salt, boil them altogether
with rosemary, tyme, winter-savory, sweet marjoram, bay-leaves,
sage, and parsley, the tops of all these herbs about an inch long;
then take three or four lemons and slice them, dish up the lobsters
on a clean dish, and pour the broth, herbs and spices on the fish,
lay on the lemons, run it over with some of the oyl or butter they
were fryed in, and serve them up hot.


  _To broil Lobsters._

Being boil'd lay them on a gridiron, or toast them against the fire,
and baste them with vinegar and butter, or butter only, broil them
leisurely, and being broil'd serve them with butter and vinegar beat
up thick with slic't lemon and nutmeg.


  _Otherways._

Broil them, the tail being parted in two halves long ways, also the
claws cracked and broil'd; broil the barrel whole being salted,
baste it with sweet herbs, as tyme, rosemary, parsley, and savory,
being broil'd dish it, and serve it with butter and vinegar.


  _To broil Lobsters on paper._

Slice the tails round, and also the claws in long slices, then
butter a dripping-pan made of the paper, lay it on a gridiron, and
put some slices of lobster seasoned with nutmeg and salt, and slices
of a fresh eel, some sageleaves, tops of rosemary, two or three
cloves, and sometimes some bay-leaves or sweet herbs chopped; broil
them on the embers, and being finely broil'd serve them on a dish
and a plate in the same dripping-pan, put to them beaten butter,
juyce of oranges, and slices of lemon.


  _To roast Lobsters._

Take a lobster and spit it raw on a small spit, bind the claws and
tail with packthred, baste it with butter, vinegar, and sprigs of
rosemary, and salt it in the roasting.


  _Otherways._

Half boil them, take them out of the shells, and lard them with
small lard made of a salt eel, lard the claws and tails, and spit
the meat on a small spit, with some slices of the eel, and sage or
bay leaves between, stick in the fish here and there a clove or two,
and some sprigs of rosemary; roast the barrel of the lobsters whole,
and baste them with sweet butter, make sauce with claret wine, the
gravy of the lobsters, juyce of oranges, an anchove or two, and
sweet butter beat up thick with the core of a lemon, and grated
nutmeg.


  _Otherways._

Half boil them, and take the meat out of the tail, and claws as
whole as can be, & stick it with cloves and tops of rosemary; then
spit the barrels of the lobsters by themselves, the tails and claws
by themselves, and between them a sage or bay-leaf; baste them with
sweet butter, and dredg them with grated bread, yolks of eggs, and
some grated nutmeg. Then make sauce with claret wine, vinegar,
pepper, the gravy of the meat, some salt, slices of oranges, grated
nutmeg, and some beaten butter; then dish the barrels of the
lobsters round the dish, the claws and tails in the middle, and put
to it the sauce.


  _Otherways._

Make a farcing in the barrels of the lobsters with the meat in them,
some almond-paste, nutmeg, tyme, sweet marjoram, yolks of raw eggs,
salt, and some pistaches, and serve them with venison sauce.


  _To fry Lobsters._

Being boil'd take the meat out of the shells, and slice it long
ways, flour it, and fry it in clarified butter, fine, white, and
crisp; or in place of flouring it in batter, with eggs, flour, salt,
and cream, roul them in it and fry them, being fryed make a sauce
with the juyce of oranges, claret wine, and grated nutmeg, beaten up
thick with some good sweet butter, then warm the dish and rub it
with a clove of garlick, dish the lobsters, garnish it with slices
of oranges or lemons, and pour on the sauce.


  _To bake Lobsters to be eaten hot._

Being boil'd and cold, take the meat out of the shells, and season
it lightly with nutmeg, pepper, salt, cinamon, and ginger; then lay
it in a pye made according to the following form, and lay on it some
dates in halves, large mace, slic't lemons, barberries, yolks of
hard eggs and butter, close it up and bake it, and being baked
liquor it with white-wine, butter, and sugar, and ice it. On flesh
days put marrow to it.


  _Otherways._

Take the meat out of the shells being boil'd and cold, and lard it
with a salt eel or salt salmon, seasoning it with beaten nutmeg,
pepper, and salt; then make the pye, put some butter in the bottom,
and lay on it some slices of a fresh eel, and on that a layer of
lobsters, put to it a few whole cloves, and thus make two or three
layers, last of all slices of fresh eel, some whole cloves and
butter, close up the pye, and being baked, fill it up with clarified
butter.

If you bake it these ways to eat hot, season it lightly, and put in
some large mace; liquor it with claret wine, beaten butter, and
slices of orange.


  _Otherways._

Take four lobsters being boil'd, and some good fat conger raw, cut
some of it into square pieces as broad as your hand, then take the
meat of the lobsters, and slice the tails in two halves or two
pieces long wayes, as also the claws, season both with pepper,
nutmeg and salt then make the pie, put butter in the bottom, lay on
the slices, of conger, and then a layer of lobsters; thus do three
or four times till the pie be full, then lay on a few whole cloves,
and some butter; close it up and bake it, being baked liquor it with
butter and white-wine, or only clarified butter. Make your pyes
according to these forms.

If to eat hot season it lightly, and being baked liquor it with
butter, white-wine, slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes, or
barberries.


  _To pickle Lobsters._

Boil them in vinegar, white-wine, and salt, being boiled take them
up and lay them by, then have some bay-leaves, rosemary tops,
winter-savory, tyme, large mace, and whole pepper: boil these
foresaid materials all together in the liquor with the lobsters, and
some whole cloves; being boil'd, barrel them up in a vessel that
will but just contain them, and pack them close, pour the liquor to
them, herbs spices, and some lemon peels, close up the head of the
kegg or firkin; and keep them for your use; when you serve them,
serve them with spices, herbs, peels, and some of the liquor or
pickle.


  _To jelly Lobsters, Craw-fish, or Prawns._

Take a tench being new, draw out the garnish at the gills, and cut
out all the gills, it will boil the whiter, then set on as much
clear water aswil conveniently boil it, season it with salt,
wine-vinegar, five or six bay-leaves large mace, three or four whole
cloves, and a faggot of sweet herbs bound up hard together: so soon
as this preparative boils, put in the tench being clean wiped, do
not scale it, being boil'd take it up and wash off all the loose
scales, then strain the liquor through a jelly-bag, and put to it a
piece of ising-glass being first washed and steeped for the purpose,
boil it very cleanly, and run it through a jelly-bag; then having
the fish taken out of the shells, lay them in a large clean dish,
lay the lobsters in slices, and the craw fish and prawns whole, and
run this jelly over them. You may make this jelly of divers colours,
as you may see in the Section of Jellies, page 202.

Garnish the dish of Jellies with lemon-peels cut in branches, long
slices as you fancy, barberries, and fine coloured flowers.

Or lard the lobsters with salt eel, or stick it with candied
oranges, green citterns, or preserved barberries, and make the jelly
sweet.


  _To stew Crabs._

Being boil'd take the meat out of the bodies or barrels, and save
the great claws, and the small legs whole to garnish the dish,
strain the meat with some claret wine, grated bread, wine-vinegar,
nutmeg, a little salt, and a piece of butter; stew them together an
hour on a soft fire in a pipkin, and being stewed almost dry, put in
some beaten butter with juyce of oranges beaten up thick; then dish
the shells being washed and finely cleansed, the claws and little
legs round about them, put the meat into the shells, and so serve
them.

Sometimes you may use yolks of eggs strained with butter.


  _To stew Crabs otherways._

Being boil'd take the meat out of the shells, and put it in a pipkin
with some claret wine, and wine vinegar, minced tyme, pepper, grated
bread, salt, the yolks of two or three hard eggs strained or minced
very small, some sweet butter, capers, and some large mace; stew it
finely, rub the shells with a clove or two of garlick, and dish them
as is shown before.


  _Otherways._

Take the meat out of the bodies, and put it in a pipkin with some
cinamon, wine vinegar, butter, and beaten ginger, stew them and
serve them as the former, dished with the legs about them.

Sometimes you may add sugar to them, parboil'd grapes, gooseberries,
or barberries, and in place of vinegar, juyce of oranges, and run
them over with beaten butter.


  _To butter Crabs._

The Crabs being boil'd, take the meat out of the bodies, and strain
it with the yolks of three or four hard eggs, beaten cinamon, sugar,
claret-wine, and wine-vinegar, stew the meat in a pipkin with some
good sweet butter the space of a quarter of an hour, and serve them
as the former.


  _Otherways._

Being boil'd, take the meat out of the shells, as also out of the
great claws, cut it into dice-work, & put both the meats into a
pipkin, together with some white wine, juyce of oranges, nutmeg, and
some slices of oranges, stew it two or three warms on the fire, and
the shells being finely cleansed and dried, put the meat into them,
and lay the legs round about them in a clean dish.


  _To make a Hash of Crabs._

Take two crabs being boil'd, take out the meat of the claws, and cut
it into dice-work, mix it with the meat of the body, then have some
pine-apple seed, and some pistaches or artichock-bottoms, boil'd,
blanched, and cut into dice-work, or some asparagus boil'd and cut
half an inch long; stew all these together with some claret wine,
vinegar, grated nutmeg, salt, sweet butter, and the slices of an
orange; being finely stewed, dish it on sippets, cuts, or lozenges
of puff paste, and garnish it with fritters of arms, slic't lemon
carved, barberries, grapes, or gooseberries, and run it over with
beaten butter, and yolks of eggs beaten up thick together.


  _To farce a Crab._

Take a boil'd crab, take the meat out of the shell, and mince the
claws with a good fresh eel, season it with cloves, mace, some sweet
herbs chopped, and salt, mingle all together with some yolks of
eggs, some grapes, gooseberries, or barberres, and sometimes boil'd
artichocks in dice-work, or boil'd asparagus, some almond-paste, the
meat of the body of the crab, and some grated bread, fill the shells
with this compound, & make some into balls, bake them in a dish with
some butter and white wine in a soft oven; being baked, serve them
in a clean dish with a sauce made of beaten butter, large mace,
scalded grapes, gooseberries, or barberries, or some slic't orange
or lemon and some yolks of raw eggs dissolved with some white-wine
or claret, and beat up thick with butter; brew it well together,
pour it on the fish, and lay on some slic't lemon, stick the balls
with some pistaches, slic't almonds, pine-apple-seed, or some pretty
cuts in paste.


  _To broil Crabs in Oyl or Butter._

Take Crabs being boil'd in water and salt, steep them in oyl and
vinegar, and broil them on a gridiron on a soft fire of embers, in
the broiling baste them with some rosemary branches, and being
broil'd serve them with the sauces they were boil'd with, oyl and
vinegar, or beaten butter, vinegar, and the rosemary branches they
were basted with.


  _To fry Crabs._

Take the meat out of the great claws being first boiled, flour and
fry them, and take the meat out of the body strain half of it for
sauce, and the other half to fry, and mix it with grated bread,
almond paste, nutmeg, salt, and yolks of eggs, fry it in clarified
butter, being first dipped in batter, put in a spoonful at a time;
then make sauce with wine-vinegar, butter, or juyce of orange, and
grated nutmeg, beat up the butter thick, and put some of the meat
that was strained into the sauce, warm it and put it in a clean
dish, lay the meat on the sauce, slices of orange over all, and run
it over with beaten butter, fryed parsley, round the dish brim, and
the little legs round the meat.


  _Otherways._

Being boil'd and cold, take the meat out of the claws, flour and fry
them, then take the meat out of the body, butter it with butter
vinegar, and pepper, and put it in a clean dish, put the fryed crab
round about it, and run it over with beaten butter, juyce and slices
of orange, and lay on it sage leaves fryed in batter, or fryed
parsley.


  _To bake Crabs in Pye, Dish, or Patty pan._

Take four or five crabs being boil'd, take the meat out of the shell
and claws as whole as you can, season it with nutmeg and salt
lightly; then strain the meat that came out of the body, shells,
with a little claret-wine, some cinamon, ginger, juyce of orange and
butter, make the pie, dish, or patty pan, lay butter in the bottom,
then the meat of the claws, some pistaches, asparagus, some bottoms
of artichocks, yolks of hard eggs, large mace, grapes, gooseberries
or barberries, dates of slic't orange, and butter, close it up and
bake it, being baked, liquor it with the meat out of the body.


  _Otherways._

Mince them with a tench or fresh eel, and season it with sweet herbs
minced small, beaten nutmeg, pepper, and salt, lightly season, and
mingle the meat that was in the bodies of the crabs with the other
seasoned fishes; mingle also with this foresaid meat some boil'd or
roasted chesnuts, or artichocks, asparagus boil'd and cut an inch
long, pistaches, or pine-apple-seed, and grapes, gooseberries or
barberries, fill the pie, dish, or patty-pan, close it up and bake
it, being baked, liquor it with juyce of oranges, some claret wine,
good butter beat up thick, and the yolks of two or three eggs; fill
up the pie, lay slices of an orange on it and stick in some lozenges
of puff-paste, or branches of short paste.


  _To make minced Pies of a Crab._

Being boil'd, mince the legs, and strain the meat in the body with
two or three yolks of eggs, mince also some sweet herbs and put to
it some almond-paste or grated bread, a minced onion, some fat eel
cut like little dice, or some fat belly of salmon; mingle it all
together, and put it in a pie made according to this form, season it
with nutmeg, pepper, salt, currans, and barberries, grapes, or
gooseberries, mingle also some butter, and fill your pie, bake it,
and being baked, liquor it with beaten butter and white wine. Or
with butter, sugar, cinamon, sweet herbs chopped, and verjuyce.


  _To dress Tortoise._

Cast off the head, feet, and tail, and boil it in water, wine, and
salt, being boil'd, pull the shell asunder, and pick the meat from
the skins, and the gall from the liver, save the eggswhole if a
female, and stew the eggs, meat and liver in a dish with some grated
nutmeg, a little sweet herbs minced small, and some sweet butter,
stew it up, and serve it on fine sippets, cover the meat with the
upper shell of the tortoise, and slices or juyce of orange.

Or stew them in a pipkin with some butter, whitewine some of the
broth, a whole onion or two, tyme, parsley, winter savory, and
rosemary minc't, being finely stewed serve them on sippets, or put
them in the shells, being cleansed; or make a fricase in a
frying-pan with 3 or four yolks of eggs and some of the shells
amongst them, and dress them as aforesaid.


  _To dress Snails._

Take shell snails, and having water boil'd, put them in, then pick
them out of the shells with a great pin into a bason, cast salt to
them, scour the slime from them, and after wash them in two or three
waters; being clean scowred, dry them with a clean cloth; then have
rosemary, tyme, parsley, winter-savory, and pepper very small, put
them into a deep bason or pipkin, put to them some salt, and good
sallet oyl, mingle all together, then have the shells finely
cleansed, fill them, and set them on a gridiron, broil them upon the
embers softly, and being broil'd, dish four or five dozen in a dish,
fill them up with oyl, and serve them hot.


  _To stew Snails._

Being well scowred and cleansed as aforesaid, put to them some
claret wine and vinegar, a handful of capers, mace, pepper, grated
bread, a little minced tyme, salt, and the yolks of two or 3 hard
eggs minced; let all these stew together till you think it be
enough, then put in a good piece of butter, shaking it together,
heat the dish, and rub it with a clove of garlick, put them on fine
sippets of French bread, pour on the snails, and some barberries, or
slic't lemons.


  _Otherways._

Being cleansed, fry them in oyl or clarified butter, with some
slices of a fresh eel, and some fried sage leaves; stew them in a
pipkin with some white-wine, butter, and pepper, and serve them on
sippets with beaten butter, and juyce of oranges.


  _Otherways._

Being finely boil'd and cleansed, fry them in clarified butter;
being fryed take them up, and put them in a pipkin, put to them some
sweet butter chopped parsley, white or claret wine, some grated
nutmeg, slices of orange, and a little salt; stew them well
together, serve them on sippets; and then run them over with beaten
butter, and slices of oranges.


  _To fry Snails._

Take shell snails in _January_, _February_, or, _March_, when they
be closed up, boil them in a skillet of boiling water, and when they
be tender boil'd, take them out of the shell with a pin, cleanse
them from the slime, flour them, and fry them; being fryed, serve
them in a clean dish, with butter, vinegar, fryed parsley, fryed
onions, or ellicksander leaves fryed, or served with beaten butter,
and juyce of orange, or oyl, vinegar, and slic't lemon.


  _Otherways._

Fry them in oyl and butter, being finely cleansed, and serve them
with butter, vinegar, and pepper, or oyl, vinegar, and pepper.


  _To make a Hash of Snails._

Being boil'd and cleansed, mince them small, put them in a pipkin
with some sweet herbs minced, the yolks of hard eggs, some whole
capers, nutmeg, pepper, salt, some pistaches, and butter, or oyl;
being stewed the space of half an hour on a soft fire; then have
some fried toasts of French bread, lay some in the bottom, and some
round the meat in the dish.


  _To dress Snails in a Pottage._

Wash them very well in many waters, then put them in an earthen pan,
or a wide dish, put as much water as will cover them, and set your
dish on some caols; when they boil take them out of the shells, and
scowr them with water and salt three or four times, then put them in
a pipkin with water and salt, and let them boil a little, then take
them out of the water, and put them in a dish with some excellent
sallet oyl; when the oyl boils put in three or four slic't onions,
and fry them, put the snails to them, and stew them well together,
then put the oyl snails and onions all together in a pipkin of a fit
size for them, and put as much warm water to them as will make a
pottage, with some salt, and so let them stew three or four hours,
then mince tyme, parsley, pennyroyal, and the like herbs; when they
are minced, beat them to green sauce in a mortar, put in some crumbs
of bread soakt with that broth or pottage, some saffron and beaten
cloves; put all in to the snails, and give them a warm or 2, and
when you serve them up, squeeze in the juyce of a lemon, put in a
little vinegar, and a clove of garlick amongst the herbs, and beat
them in it; serve them up in a dish with sippets in the bottom
of it.

This pottage is very nourishing, and excellent good against a
Consumption.


  _To bake Snails._

Being boil'd and scowred, season them with nutmeg, pepper, and salt,
put them into a pie with some marrow, large mace, a raw chicken cut
in pieces, some little bits of lard and bacon, the bones out, sweet
herbs chopped, slic't lemon, or orange and butter; being full, close
it up and bake it, and liquor it with butter and white-wine.


  _To bake Frogs._

Being flayed, take the hind legs, cut off the feet, and season them
with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, put them in a pye with some sweet
herbs chopped small, large mace, slic't lemon, gooseberries, grapes,
or barberries, pieces of skirrets, artichocks, potatoes, or
parsnips, and marrow; close it up and bake it; being baked, liquor
it with butter, and juyce of orange, or grape-verjuyce.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XX.

  _To make all manner of Pottages for Fish-Days._


  _French Barley Pottage._

Cleanse the barley from dust, and put it in boiling milk, being
boil'd down, put in large mace, cream, sugar, and a little salt,
boil it pretty thick, then serve it in a dish, scrape sugar on it,
and trim the dish sides.


  _Otherways._

Boil it in fair water, scum it, and being almost boil'd, put to it
some saffron, or disolved yolks of eggs.


  _To make Gruel Pottage the best way for service._

Pick your oatmeal, and boil it whole on a stewing fire; being tender
boil'd, strain it through a strainer, then put it into a clean
pipkin with fair boiling water, make it pretty thick of the strained
oatmeal, and put to it some picked raisins of the sun well washed,
some large mace, salt, and a little bundle of sweet herbs, with a
little rose-water and saffron; set it a stewing on a fire of
charcoal, boil it with sugar till the fruit be well allom'd, then
put to it butter and the yolks of three or four eggs strained.


  _Otherways._

Good herbs and oatmel chopped, put them into boiling liquor in a
pipkin, pot, or skillet, with some salt, and being boil'd put to it
butter.


  _Otherways._

With a bundle of sweet herbs and oatmeal chopped, some onions and
salt, seasoned as before with butter.


  _To make Furmety._

Take wheat and wet it, then beat it in a sack with a wash beetle,
being finely hulled and cleansed from the dust and hulls, boil it
over night, and let it soak on a soft fire all night; then next
morning take as much as will serve the turn, put it in a pipkin,
pan, or skillet, and put it a boiling in cream or milk, with mace,
salt, whole cinamon, and saffron, or yolks of eggs, boil it thick
and serve it in a clean scowred dish, scrape on sugar, and trim the
dish.


  _To make Rice Pottage._

Pick the rice and dust it clean, then wash it, and boil it in water
or milk; being boil'd down, put to it some cream, large mace, whole
cinamon, salt, and sugar; boil it on a soft stewing fire, and serve
it in a fair deep dish, or a standing silver piece.


  _Otherways._

Boil'd rice strained with almond milk, and seasoned as the former.


  _Milk Pottage._

Boil whole oatmel, being cleanly picked, boil it in a pipkin or pot,
but first let the water boil; being well boil'd and tender, put in
milk or cream, with salt, and fresh butter, _&c._


  _Ellicksander Pottage._

Chop ellicksanders and oatmeal together, being picked and washed,
then set on a pipkin with fair water, and when it boils, put in your
herbs, oatmeal, and salt, boil it on a soft fire, and make it not
too thick, being almost boil'd put in some butter.


  _Pease Pottage._

Take green pease being shelled and cleansed, put them in a pipkin of
fair boiling water; when they be boil'd and tender, take and strain
some of them, and thicken the rest, put to them a bundle of sweet
herbs, or sweet herbs chopped, salt, and butter; being through
boil'd dish them, and serve them in a deep clean dish with salt and
sippets about them.


  _Otherways._

Put them into a pipkin or skillet of boiling milk or cream, put to
them two or three sprigs of mint, and salt; being fine and tender
boil'd, thick them with a little milk and flour.


  _Dry or old Pease Pottage._

Take the choicest pease, (that some call seed way pease) commonly
they be a little worm eaten, (those are the best boiling pease) pick
and wash them, and put them in boiling liquor in a pot or pipkin;
being tender boil'd take out some of them, strain them, and set them
by for your use; then season the rest with salt, a bundle of mint
and butter, let them stew leisurely, and put to them some pepper.


  _Strained Pease Pottage._

Take the former strained pease-pottage, put to them salt, large
mace, a bundle of sweet herbs, and some pickled capers; stew them
well together, then serve them in a deep dish clean scowred, with
thin slices of bread in the bottom, and graced manchet to
garnish it.


  _An excellent stewed Broth for Fish-Day._

Set a boiling some fair water in a pipkin, then strain some oatmeal
and put to it, with large mace, whole cinamon, salt, a bundle of
sweet herbs, some strained and whole prunes, and some raisins of the
sun; being well stewed on a soft fire, and pretty thick, put in some
claret-wine and sugar, serve it in a clear scowred deep dish or
standing piece, and scrape on sugar.


  _Onion Pottage._

Fry good store of slic't onions, then have a pipkin of boiling
liquor over the fire, when the liquor boils put in the fryed onions,
butter and all, with pepper and salt; being well stewed together,
serve it on sops of French bread or pine-molet.


  _Almond Pottage._

Take a pound of almond-paste, and strain it with some new milk; then
have a pottle of cream boiling in a pipkin or skillet, put in the
milk; and almonds with some mace, salt, and sugar; serve it in a
clean dish on sippets of French bread, and scrape on sugar.


  _Otherways._

Strain them with fair water, and boil them with mace, salt, and
sugar, (or none) add two or three yolks of eggs dissolved, or
saffron; and serve it as before.


  _Almond Caudle._

Strain half a pound of almonds being blanched and stamped, strain
them with a pint of good ale, then boil it with slices of fine
manchet, large mace, and sugar; being almost boil'd put in three or
four spoonfuls of sack.


  _Oatmeal Caudle._

Boil ale, scum it, and put in strained oatmeal, mace, sugar, and
diced bread, boil it well, and put in two or three spoonfuls of
sack, white-wine or claret.


  _Egg Caudle._

Boil ale or beer, scum it, and put to it two or three blades of
large mace, some sliced manchet and sugar; then dissolve four or
five yolks of eggs with some sack, claret or white-wine, and put it
into the rest with a little grated nutmeg; give it a warm, and
serve it.


  _Sugar, or Honey Sops._

Boil beer or ale, scum it, and put to it slices of fine manchet,
large mace, sugar, or honey; sometimes currans, and boil all well
together.


  _To make an Alebury._

Boil beer or ale, scum it, and put in some mace, and a bottom of a
manchet, boil it well, then put in some sugar.


  _Buttered Beer._

Take beer or ale and boil it, then scum it, and put to it some
liquorish and anniseeds, boil them well together; then have in a
clean flaggon or quart pot some yolks of eggs well beaten with some
of the foresaid beer, and some good butter; strain your butter'd
beer, put it in the flaggon, and brew it with the butter and eggs.


  _Buttered Beer or Ale otherways._

Boil beer or ale and scum it, then have six eggs, whites and all,
and beat them in a flaggon or quart pot with the shells, some
butter, sugar, and nutmeg, put them together, and being well brewed,
drink it when you go to bed.


  _Otherways._

Take three pints of beer or ale, put five yolks of eggs to it,
strain them together, and set it in a pewter pot to the fire, put to
it half a pound of sugar, a penniworth of beaten nutmeg, as much
beaten cloves, half an ounce of beaten ginger, and bread it.


  _Panado's._

Boil fair water in a skillet, put to it grated bread or cakes, good
store of currans, mace and whole cinamon: being almost boil'd and
indifferent thick, put in some sack or white wine, sugar, some
strained yolks of eggs.

Otherways with slic't bread, water, currans, and mace, and being
well boil'd, put to it some sugar, white-wine, and butter.


_To make a Compound Posset of Sack, Claret, White-Wine, Ale, Beer,
or Juyce of Oranges,_ &c.

Take twenty yolks of eggs with a little cream, strain them, and set
them by; then have a clean scowred skillet, and put into it a pottle
of good sweet cream, and a good quantity of whole cinamon, set it a
boiling on a soft charcoal fire, and stir it continually; the cream
having a good taste of the cinamon, put in the strained eggs and
cream into your skillet, stir them together, and give them a warm,
then have some sack in a deep bason or posset-pot, good store of
fine sugar, and some sliced nutmeg; the sack and sugar being warm,
take out the cinamon, and pour your eggs and cream very high in to
the bason, that it may spatter in it, then strow on loaf sugar.


  _To make a Posset simple._

Boil your milk in a clean scowred skillet, and when it boils take it
off, and warm in the pot, bowl, or bason some sack, claret, beer,
ale, or juyce of orange; pour it into the drink, but let not your
milk be too hot, for it will make the curd hard, then sugar it.


  _Otherways._

Beat a good quantity of sorrel, and strain it with any of the
foresaid liquors, or simply of it self, then boil some milk in a
clean scowred skillet, being boil'd, take it off and let it cool,
then put it to your drink, but not too hot, for it will make the
curd tuff.


  _Possets of Herbs otherways._

Take a fair scowred skillet, put in some milk into it, and some
rosemary, the rosemary being well boil'd in it, take it out and have
some ale or beer in a pot, put to it the milk and sugar, (or none.)

Thus of tyme, carduus, cammomile, mint, or marigold flowers.


  _To make French Puffs._

Take spinage, tyme, parsley, endive, savory and marjoram, chop or
mince them small; then have twenty eggs beaten with the herbs, that
the eggs may be green, some nutmeg, ginger, cinamon, and salt; then
cut a lemon in slices, and dip it in batter, fry it, and put a
spoonful on every slice of lemon, fry it finely in clarified butter,
and being fryed, strow on sack, or claret, and sugar.


  _Soops or butter'd Meats of Spinage._

Take fine young spinage, pick and wash it clean; then have a skillet
or pan of fair liquor on the fire, and when it boils, put in the
spinage, give it a warm or two, and take it out into a cullender,
let it drain, then mince it small, and put it in a pipkin with some
slic't dates, butter, white-wine, beaten cinamon, salt, sugar, and
some boil'd currans; stew them well together, and dish them on
sippets finely carved, and about it hard eggs in halves or quarters,
not too hard boil'd, and scrape on sugar.


  _Soops of Carrots._

Being boil'd, cleanse, stamp, and season them in all points as
before; thus also potatoes, skirrets, parsnips, turnips, Virginia
artichocks, onions, or beets, or fry any of the foresaid roots being
boil'd and cleansed, or peeled, and floured, and serve them with
beaten butter and sugar.


  _Soops of Artichocks, Potatoes, Skirrets, or Parsnips._

Being boil'd and cleansed, put to them yolks of hard eggs, dates,
mace, cinamon, butter, sugar, white-wine, salt, slic't lemon, grapes
gooseberries, or barberries; stew them together whole, and being
finely stewed, serve them on carved sippets in a clean scowred dish,
and run it over with beaten butter and scraped sugar.


  _To butter Onions._

Being peeled, put them into boiling liquor, and when they are
boil'd, drain them in a cullender, and butter them whole with some
boil'd currans, butter, sugar, and beaten cinamon, serve them on
fine sippets, scrape on sugar, and run them over with beaten butter.


  _Otherways._

Take apples and onions, mince the onions and slice the apples, put
them in a pot, but more apples, than onions, and bake them with
houshold bread, close up the pot with paste or paper; when you use
them, butter them with butter, sugar, and boil'd currans, serve them
on sippets, and scrape on sugar and cinamon.


  _Buttered Sparagus._

Take two hundred of sparagus, scrape the roots clean and wash them,
then take the heads of an hundred and lay them even, bind them hard
up into a bundle, and so likewise of the other hundred; then have a
large skillet of fair water, when it boils put them in, and boil
them up quick with some salt; being boil'd drain them, and serve
them with beaten butter and salt about the dish, or butter and
vinegar.


  _Buttered Colliflowers._

Have a skillet of fair water, and when it boils put in the whole
tops of the colliflowers, the root being cut away, put some salt to
it; and being fine and tender boiled dish it whole in a dish, with
carved sippets round about it, and serve it with beaten butter and
water, or juyce of orange and lemon.


  _Otherways._

Put them into boiling milk, boil them tender, and put to them a
little mace and salt; being finely boil'd, serve them on carved
sippets, the yolk of an egg or two, some boil'd raisins of the sun,
beaten butter, and sugar.


  _To butter Quinces._

Roast or boil them, then strain them with sugar and cinamon, put
some butter to them, warm them together, and serve them on fine
carved sippets.


  _To butter Rice._

Pick the rice and sift it, and when the liquor boils, put it in and
scum it, boil it not too much, then drain it, butter it, and serve
it on fine carved sippets, and scraping sugar only, or sugar and
cinamon.

Butter wheat, and French barley, as you do rice, but hull your wheat
and barley, wet the wheat and beat it in a sack with a wash-beetle,
fan it, and being clean hulled, boil it all night on a soft fire
very tender.


  _To butter Gourds, Pumpions, Cucumbers or Muskmelons._

Cut them into pieces, and pare and cleanse them; then have a boiling
pan of water, and when it boils put in the pumpions, _&c._ with some
salt, being boil'd, drain them well from the water, butter them, and
serve them on sippets with pepper.


  _Otherways._

Bake them in an oven, and take out the seed at the top, fill them
with onions, slic't apples, butter, and salt, butter them, and serve
them on sippets.


  _Otherways._

Fry them in slices, being cleans'd & peel'd, either floured or in
batter; being fried, serve them with beaten butter, and vinegar, or
beaten butter and juyce of orange, or butter beaten with a little
water, and served in a clean dish with fryed parsley, elliksanders,
apples, slic't onions fryed, or sweet herbs.


  _To make buttered Loaves._

Season a pottle of flour with cloves, mace, and pepper, half a pound
of sweet butter melted, and half a pint of ale-yeast or barm mix't
with warm milk from the cow and three or four eggs to temper all
together, make it as soft as manchet paste, and make it up into
little manchets as big as an egg, cut and prick them, and put them
on a paper, bake them like manchet, with the oven open, they will
ask an hours baking; being baked melt in a great dish a pound of
sweet butter, and put rose-water in it, draw your loaves, and pare
away the crust then slit them in three toasts, and put them in
melted butter, turn them over and over in the butter, then take a
warm dish, and put in the bottom pieces, and strow on sugar in a
good thickness, then put in the middle pieces, and sugar them
likewise, then set on the tops and scrape on sugar, and serve five
or six in a dish. If you be not ready to send them in, set them in
the oven again, and cover them with a paper to keep them from
drying.


  _To boil French Beans or Lupins._

First take away the tops of the cods and the strings, then have a
pan or skillet of fair water boiling on the fire, when it boils put
them in with some salt, and boil them up quick; being boil'd serve
them with beaten butter in a fair scowred dish, and salt about it.


  _To boil Garden Beans._

Being shelled and cleansed, put them into boiling liquor with some
salt, boil them up quick, and being boiled drain away the liquor and
butter them, dish them in a dish like a cross, and serve them with
pepper and salt on the dish side.

Thus also green pease, haslers, broom-buds, or any kind of pulse.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XXI.

  _The exactest Ways for the Dressing of Eggs._


  _To make Omlets divers Ways._

  _The First Way._

Break six, eight, or ten eggs more or less, beat them together in a
dish, and put salt to them; then put some butter a melting in a
frying pan, and fry it more or less, according to your discretion,
only on one side or bottom.

You may sometimes make it green with juyce of spinage and sorrel
beat with the eggs, or serve it with green sauce, a little vinegar
and sugar boil'd together, and served up on a dish with the Omlet.


  _The Second Way._

Take twelve eggs, and put to them some grated white bread finely
searsed, parsley minced very small, some sugar beaten fine, and fry
it well on both sides.


  _The Third Way._

Fry toasts of manchet, and put the eggs to them being beaten and
seasoned with salt, and some fryed; pour the butter and fryed
parsley over all.


  _The Fourth Way._

Take three or four pippins, cut them in round slices, and fry them
with a quarter of a pound of butter, when the apples are fryed, pour
on them six or seven eggs beaten with a little salt, and being
finely fryed, dish it on a plate-dish, or dish, and strow on sugar.


  _The Fifth Way._

Mix with the eggs pine-kernels, currans, and pieces of preserved
lemons, being fried, roul it up like a pudding, and sprinkle it with
rose-water, cinamon water, and strow on fine sugar.


  _The Sixth Way._

Beat the eggs, and put to them a little cream, a little grated
bread, a little preserved lemon-peel minced or grated very small,
and use it as the former.


  _The Seventh Way._

Take a quarter of a pound of interlarded bacon, take it from the
rinde, cut it into dice-work, fry it, and being fried, put in some
seven or eight beaten eggs with some salt, fry them, and serve them
with some grape-verjuyce.


  _The Eighth Way._

With minced bacon among the eggs fried and beaten together, or with
thin slices of interlarded bacon, and fryed slices of bread.


  _The Ninth way._

Made with eggs and a little cream.


  _The Tenth Way._

Mince herbs small, as lettice, bugloss, or borrage, sorrel, and
mallows, put currans to them, salt, and nutmeg, beat all these
amongst the herbs, and fry them with sweet butter, and serve it with
cinamon and sugar, or fried parsley only; put the eggs to it in the
pan.


  _The Eleventh Way._

Mince some parsley very small being short and fine picked, beat it
amongst the eggs, and fry it. Or fry the parsley being grosly cut,
beat the eggs, and pour it on.


  _The Twelfth Way._

Mince leeks very small, beat them with the eggs and some salt, and
fry them.


  _The Thirteenth Way._

Take endive that is very white, cut it grosly, fry it with nutmeg,
and put the eggs to it, or boil it being fried, and serve it with
sugar.


  _The Fourteenth Way._

Slice cheese very thin, beat it with the eggs, and a little salt,
then melt some butter in the pan, and fry it.


  _The Fifteenth Way._

Take six or eight eggs, beat them with salt, and make a stuffing,
with some pine kernels, currans, sweet herbs, some minced fresh
fish, or some of the milts of carps that have been fried or boiled
in good liquor, and some mushrooms half boiled and sliced; mingle
all together with some yolks or whites of eggs raw, and fill up
great cucumbers therewith being cored, fill them up with the
foresaid farsing, pare them, and bake them in a dish, or stew them
between two deep basons or deep dishes; put some butter to them,
some strong broth of fish, or fair water, some verjuyce or vinegar,
and some grated nutmeg, and serve them on a dish with sippets.


  _The Sixteenth Way, according to the Turkish Mode._

Take the flesh of a hinder part of a hare, or any other venison and
mince it small with a little fat bacon, some pistaches or pine-apple
kernels, almonds, Spanish or hazle nuts peeled, Spanish chesnuts or
French chesnuts roasted and peeled, or some crusts of bread cut in
slices, and rosted like unto chesnuts; season this minced stuff with
salt, spices, and some sweet herbs; if the flesh be raw, add
thereunto butter and marrow, or good sweet suet minced small and
melted in a skillet, pour it into the seasoned meat that is minced,
and fry it, then melt some butter in a skillet or pan, and make an
omlet thereof; when it is half fried, put to the minced meat, and
take the omlet out of the frying-pan with a skimmer, break it not,
and put it in a dish that the minced meat may appear uppermost, put
some gravy on the minced meat, and some grated nutmeg, stick some
sippets of fryed manchet on it, and slices of lemon. Roast meat is
the best for this purpose.


  _The Seventeenth Way._

Take the kidneys of a loin of veal after it hath been well roasted,
mince it together with its fat, and season it with salt, spices, and
some time, or other sweet herbs, add thereunto some fried bread,
some boil'd mushrooms or some pistaches, make an omlet, and being
half fried, put the minced meat on it.

Fry them well together, and serve it up with some grated nutmeg and
sugar.


  _The Eighteenth Way._

Take a carp or some other fish, bone it very well, and add to it
some milts of carps, season them with pepper and salt, or with other
spices; add some mushrooms, and mince them all together, put to them
some apple-kernels, some currans, and preserved lemons in pieces
shred very small: fry them in a frying-pan or tart-pan, with some
butter, and being fryed make an omlet. Being half fried, put the
fried fish on it, and dish them on a plate, rowl it round, cut it at
both ends, and spread them abroad, grate some sugar on it, and
sprinkle on rose-water.


  _The Nineteenth Way._

Mince all kind of sweet herbs, and the yolks of hard eggs together,
some currans, and some mushrooms half boil'd, being all minced cover
them over, fry them as the former, and strow sugar and cinamon
on it.


  _The Twentieth Way._

Take young and tender sparagus, break or cut them in small pieces,
and half fry them brown in butter, put into them eggs beaten with
salt, and thus make your omlet.

Or boil them in water and salt, then fry them in sweet butter, put
the eggs to them, and make an omlet, dish it, and put a drop or two
of vinegar, or verjuyce on it.

Sometimes take mushrooms, being stewed make an omlet, and sprinkle
it with the broth of the mushrooms, and grated nutmeg.


  _The one and Twentieth Way._

Slice some apples and onions, fry them, but not too much, and beat
some six or eight eggs with some salt, put them to the apples and
onions, and make an omlet, being fried, make sauce with vinegar or
grape-verjuyce, butter, sugar, and mustard.

  _To dress hard Eggs divers ways._

  _The First Way._

Put some butter into a dish, with some vinegar or verjuyce, and
salt; the butter being melted, put in two or three yolks of hard
eggs, dissolve them on the butter and verjuice for the sauce; then
have hard eggs, part them in halves or quarters, lay them in the
sauce, and grate some nutmeg over them, or the crust of white-bread.


  _The Second Way._

Fry some parsley, some minced leeks, and young onions, when you have
fried them pour them into a dish, season them with salt and pepper,
and put to them hard eggs cut in halves, put some mustard to them,
and dish the eggs, mix the sauce well together, and pour it hot on
the eggs.


  _The Third Way._

The eggs being boil'd hard, cut them in two, or fry them in butter
with flour and milk or wine; being fried, put them in a dish, put to
them salt, vinegar, and juyce of lemon, make a sweet sauce for it
with some sugar, juyce of lemon, and beaten cinamon.


  _The Fourth Way._

Cut hard eggs in twain, and season them with a white sauce made in a
frying-pan with the yolks of raw eggs; verjuyce and white-wine
dissolved together, and some salt, a few spices, and some sweet
herbs, and pour this sauce over the eggs.


  _The Fifth Way in the Portugal Fashion._

Fry some parsley small minced, some onions or leeks in fresh butter,
being half fried, put into them hard eggs cut into rounds, a handful
of mushrooms well picked, washed and slic't, and salt, fry all
together, and being almost fried, put some vinegar to them, dish
them, and grate nutmeg on them, sippet them, and on the sippets
slic't lemons.


  _The Sixth Way._

Take sweet herbs, as purslain, lettice, borrage, sorrel, parsley,
chervil & tyme, being well picked and washed mince them very small,
and season them with cloves, pepper, salt, minced mushrooms, and
some grated cheese, put to them some grated nutmeg, crusts of
manchet, some currans, pine-kernels, and yolks of hard eggs in
quarters, mingle all together, fill the whites, and stew them in a
dish, strow over the stuff being fryed with some butter, pour the
fried farce over the whites being dished, and grate some nutmeg, and
crusts of manchet.

Or fry sorrel, and put it over the eggs.


  _To butter a Dish of Eggs._

Take twenty eggs more or less, whites and yolks as you please, break
them into a silver dish, with some salt, and set them on a quick
charcoal fire, stir them with a silver spoon, and being finely
buttered put to them the juyce of three or four oranges, sugar,
grated nutmeg, and sometimes beaten cinamon, being thus drest,
strain them at the first, or afterward being buttered.


  _To make a Bisk of Eggs._

Take a good big dish, lay a lay of slices of cheese between two lays
of toasted cheat bread, put on them some clear mutton broth, green
or dry pease broth, or any other clear pottage that is seasoned with
butter and salt, cast on some chopped parsley grosly minced, and
upon that some poached eggs.

Or dress this dish whole or in pieces, lay between some carps, milts
fried, boil'd, or stewed, as you do oysters, stewed and fried
gudgeons, smelts, or oysters, some fried and stewed capers,
mushrooms, and such like junkets.

Sometimes you may use currans, boil'd or stewed prunes, and put to
the foresaid mixture, with some whole cloves, nutmegs, mace, ginger,
some white-wine, verjuyce, or green sauce, some grated nutmeg over
all, and some carved lemon.


  _Eggs in Moon shine._

Break them in a dish upon some butter and oyl melted or cold, strow
on them a little salt, and set them on a chafing dish of coals make
not the yolks too hard, and in the doing cover them, and make a
sauce for them of an onion cut into round slices, and fried in sweet
oyl or butter, then put to them verjuyce, grated nutmeg, a little
salt, and so serve them.


  _Eggs in Moon shine otherways._

Take the best oyl you can get, and set it over the fire on a silver
dish, being very hot, break in the eggs, and before the yolks of the
eggs do become very hard, take them up and dish them in a clean
dish; then make the sauce of fryed onions in round slices, fryed in
oyl or sweet butter, salt, and some grated nutmeg.


  _Otherways._

Make a sirrup of rose-water, sugar, sack, or white-wine, make it in
a dish and break the yolks of the eggs as whole as you can, put them
in the boiling sirrup with some ambergriece, turn them and keep them
one from the other, make them hard, and serve them in a little dish
with sugar and cinamon.


  _Otherways._

Take a quarter of a pound of good fresh butter, balm it on the
bottom of a fine clean dish, then break some eight or ten eggs upon
it, sprinkle them with a little salt, and set them on a soft fire
till the whites and yolks be pretty clear and stiff, but not too
hard, serve them hot, and put on them the juyce of oranges and
lemons.

Or before you break them put to the butter sprigs of rosemary, juyce
of orange, and sugar; being baked on the embers, serve them with
sugar and beaten cinamon, and in place of orange, verjuyce.


  _Eggs otherways._

Fry them whole in clarified butter with sprigs of rosemary under,
fry them not too hard, and serve them with fried parsley on them,
vinegar, butter, and pepper.


  _To dress Eggs in the Spanish Fashion, called, wivos me quidos._

Take twenty eggs fresh and new and strain them with a quarter of a
pint of sack, claret, or white-wine, a quarter of sugar, some grated
nutmeg, and salt; beat them together with the juyce of an orange,
and put to them a little musk (or none) set them over the fire, and
stir them continually till they be a little thick, (but not too
much) serve them with scraping sugar being put in a clean warm dish,
on fine toasts of manchet soaked in juyce of orange and sugar, or in
claret, sugar, or white-wine, and shake the eggs with orange,
comfits, or muskedines red and white.


  _To dress Eggs in the Portugal Fashion._

Strain the yolks of twenty eggs, and beat them very well in a dish,
put to them some musk and rose-water made of fine sugar, boil'd
thick in a clean skillet, put in the eggs, and stew them on a soft
fire; being finely stewed, dish them on a French plate in a clean
dish, scrape on sugar, and trim the dish with your finger.


  _Otherways._

Take twenty yolks of eggs, or as many whites, put them severally
into two dishes, take out the cocks tread, and beat them severally
the space of an hour; then have a sirrup made in two several
skillets, with half a pound a piece of double refined sugar, and a
little musk and ambergriece bound up close in a fine rag, set them a
stewing on a soft fire till they be enough on both sides, then dish
them on a silver plate, and shake them with preserved pistaches,
muskedines white and red, and green citron slic't.

Put into the whites the juyce of spinage to make them green.


  _To dress Eggs called in French _A-la-Hugenotte_,
    or, the Protestant-way._

Break twenty eggs, beat them together, and put to them the pure
gravy of a leg of mutton or the gravy of roast beef, stir and beat
them well together over a chafing-dish of coals with a little salt,
add to them also juyce of orange and lemon, or grape verjuyce; then
put in some mushrooms well boil'd and seasoned. Observe as soon as
your eggs are well mixed with the gravy and the other ingredients,
then take them off from the fire, keeping them covered a while, then
serve them with some grated nutmeg over them.

Sometimes to make them the more pleasing and toothsome, strow some
powdered ambergriece, and fine loaf sugar scraped into them, and so
serve them.


  _To dress Eggs in Fashion of a Tansie._

Take twenty yolks of eggs, and strain them on flesh days with about
half a pint of gravy, on fish days with cream and milk, and salt,
and four mackerooms small grated, as much bisket, some rose-water,
a little sack or claret, and a quarter of a pound of sugar, put
these things to them with a piece of butter as big as a walnut, and
set them on a chafing-dish with some preserved citron or lemon
grated, or cut into small pieces or little bits and some pounded
pistaches; being well buttered dish it on a plate, and brown it with
a hot fire-shovel, strow on fine sugar, and stick it with preserved
lemon-peel in thin slices.


  _Eggs and almonds._

Take twenty eggs and strain them with half a pound of almond-paste,
and almost half a pint of sack, sugar, nutmeg, and rose-water, set
them on the fire, and when they be enough, dish them on a hot dish
without toast, stick them with blanched and slic't almond, and
wafers, scrape on fine sugar, and trim the dish with your finger.


  _To broil Eggs._

Take an oven peel, heat it red hot, and blow off the dust, break the
eggs on it, and put them into a hot oven, or brown them on the top
with a red hot fire shovel; being finely broil'd, put them into a
clean dish, with some gravy, a little grated nutmeg, and elder
vinegar; or pepper, vinegar, juyce of orange, and grated nutmeg on
them.


  _To dress poached Eggs._

Take a dozen of new laid eggs, and the meat of 4 or five partridges
or any roast poultrey, mince it as small as you can, and season it
with a few beaten cloves, mace, and nutmeg, put them into a silver
dish with a ladle full or 2 of pure mutton gravy, and 2 or three
anchoves dissolved, then set it a stewing on a chafing dish of
coals; being half stewed, as it boils put in the eggs one by one,
and as you break them, put by most of the whites, and with one end
of your egg shell put in the yolks round in order amongst the meat,
let them stew till the eggs be enough, then put in a little grated
nutmeg, and the juice of a couple of oranges, put not in the seeds,
wipe the dish, and garnish it with four or five whole onions boiled
and broil'd.


  _Otherways._

The eggs being poached, put them into a dish, strow salt on them,
and grate on cheese which will give them a good relish.


  _Otherways._

Being poached and dished, strow on them a little salt, scrape on
sugar, and sprinkle them with rose-water, verjuyce, juyce of lemon,
or orange, a little cinamon water, or fine beaten cinamon.


  _Otherways to poach Eggs._

Take as many as you please, break them into a dish and put to them
some sweet butter, being melted, some salt, sugar, and a little
grated nutmeg, give them a cullet in the dish, &c.


  _Otherways._

Poach them, and put green sauce to them, let them stand a while upon
the fire, then season them with salt, and a little grated nutmeg.

Or make a sauce with beaten butter, and juyce of grapes mixt with
ipocras, pour it on the eggs, and scrape on sugar.


  _Otherways._

Poach them either in water, milk, wine, sack, or clear verjuyce, and
serve them with vinegar in saucers.

Or make broth for them, and serve them on fine carved sippets, make
the broth with washed currans, large mace, fair water, butter, white
wine, and sugar, vinegar, juyce of orange, and whole cinamon; being
dished run them over with beaten butter, the slices of an orange,
and fine scraped sugar.

Or make sauce with beaten almonds, strained with verjuyce, sugar
beaten, butter, and large mace, boiled and dished as the former.

Or almond milk and sugar.


  _A grand farc't Dish of Eggs._

Take twenty hard eggs, being blanched, part them in halves long
ways, take out the yolks and save the whites, mince the yolks, or
stamp them amongst some march pane paste, a few sweet herbs chopt
small, & mingled amongst sugar, cinamon, and some currans well
washed, fill again the whites with this farcing, and set them by.

Then have candied oranges or lemons, filled with march-pane paste,
and sugar, and set them by also.

Then have the tops of boil'd sparagus, mix them with a batter made
of flour, salt, and fair water, & set them by.

Next boil'd chesnuts and pistaches, and set them by.

Then have skirrets boil'd, peeled, and laid in batter.

Then have prawns boil'd and picked, and set by in batter also,
oysters parboil'd and cockles, eels cut in pieces being flayed, and
yolks of hard eggs.

Next have green quodling stuff, mixt with bisket bread and eggs, fry
them in little cakes, and set them by also.

Then have artichocks and potatoes ready to fry in batter, being
boil'd and cleansed also.

Then have balls of parmisan, as big as a walnut, made up and dipped
in batter, and some balls of almond paste.

These aforesaid being finely fryed in clarified butter, and
muskefied, mix them in a great charger one amongst another, and make
a sauce of strained grape verjuyce, or white-wine, yolks of eggs,
cream, beaten butter, cinamon and sugar, set them in an oven to
warm; the sauce being boil'd up, pour it over all, and set it again
in the oven, ice it with fine sugar, and so serve it.


  _Otherways._

Boil ten eggs hard, and part them in halves long ways, take out the
yolks, mince them, and put to them some sweet herbs minc'd small,
some boil'd currans, salt, sugar, cinamon, the yolks of two or three
raw eggs, and some almond paste, (or none) mix all together, and
fill again the whites, then lay them in a dish on some butter with
the yolks downwards, or in a patty-pan, bake them, and make sauce of
verjuyce & sugar, strained with the yolk of an egg and cinamon, give
it a walm, and put to it some beaten butter; being dished, serve
them with fine carved sippets, slic't orange, and sugar.


  _To make a great compound Egg, as big as twenty Eggs._

Take twenty eggs, part the whites from the yolks, and strain the
whites by them selves, and the yolks by themselves; then have two
bladders, boil the yolks in one bladder, fast bound up as round as a
ball, being boil'd hard, put it in another bladder, and the whites
round about it, bind it up round like the former, and being boil'd
it will be a perfect egg. This serves for grand sallets.

Or you may add to these yolks of eggs, musk, and ambergriece,
candied pistaches, grated bisket-bread, and sugar, and to the
whites, almond-paste, musk, juyce of oranges, and beaten ginger, and
serve it with butter, almond milk, sugar, and juyce of oranges.


  _To butter Eggs upon toasts._

Take twenty eggs, beat them in a dish with some salt and put butter
to them; then have two large rouls or fine manchets, cut them into
toasts, & toast them against the fire with a pound of fine sweet
butter; being finely buttered, lay the toasts in a fair clean
scowred dish, put the eggs on the toasts, and garnish the dish with
pepper and salt. Otherways, half boil them in the shells, then
butter them, and serve them on toasts, or toasts about them.

To these eggs sometimes use musk and ambergriece, and no pepper.


  _Otherways._

Take twenty eggs, and strain them whites and all with a little salt;
then have a skillet with a pound of clarified butter, warm on the
fire, then fry a good thick toast of fine manchet as round as the
skillet, and an inch thick, the toast being finely fryed, put the
eggs on it into the skillet, to fry on the manchet, but not too
hard; being finely fried put it on a trencher-plate with the eggs
uppermost, and salt about the dish.


  _An excellent way to butter Eggs._

Take twenty yolks of new laid or fresh eggs, put them into a dish
with as many spoonfuls of jelly, or mutton gravy without fat, put to
it a quarter of a pound of sugar, 2 ounces of preserved lemon-peel
either grated or cut into thin slices or very little bits, with some
salt, and four spoonfuls of rose-water, stir them together on the
coals, and being butter'd dish them, put some musk on them with some
fine sugar; you may as well eat these eggs cold as hot, with a
little cinamon-water, or without.


  _Otherways._

Dress them with claret, white-wine, sack, or juyce of oranges,
nutmeg, fine sugar, & a little salt, beat them well together in a
fine clean dish, with carved sippets, and candied pistaches stuck in
them.


  _Eggs buttered in the Polonian fashion._

Take twelve eggs, and beat them in a dish, then have steeped bread
in gravy or broth, beat them together in a mortar, with some salt,
and put it to the eggs, then put a little preserv'd lemon peel into
it, either small shred or cut into slices, put some butter into it,
butter them as the former, and serve them on fine sippets.

Or with cream, eggs, salt, preserved lemon-peels grated or in
slices.

Or grated cheese in buttered eggs and salt.


  _Otherways._

Boil herbs, as spinage, sage, sweet marjoram, and endive, butter the
eggs amongst them with some salt, and grated nutmeg.

Or dress them with sugar, orange juyce, salt, beaten cinamon, and
grated nutmeg, strain the eggs with the juyce of oranges, and let
the juyce serve instead of butter; being well soaked, put some more
juyce over them and sugar.


  _To make minced Pies of Eggs according to these forms._

Boil them hard, then mince them and mix them with cinamon, raw
currans, carraway-seed, sugar, and dates, minced lemon peel,
verjuyce, rose-water, butter, and salt; fill your pie or pies, close
them, and bake them, being baked, liquor them with white-wine,
butter, and sugar, and ice them.


  _Eggs or Quelque shose._

Break forty eggs, and beat them together with some salt, fry them at
four times, half, or but of one side; before you take them out of
the pan, make a composition or compound of hard eggs, and sweet
herbs minced, some boil'd currans, beaten cinamon, almond-paste,
sugar, and juyce of orange, strow all over these omlets, roul them
up like a wafer, and so of the rest, put them in a dish with some
white-wine, sugar, and juyce of lemon; then warm and ice them in an
oven, with beaten butter and fine sugar.


  _Otherways._

Set on a skillet, either full of milk, wine, water, verjuyce, or
sack, make the liquor boil, then have twenty eggs beaten together
with salt, and some sweet herbs chopped, run them through a
cullender into the boiling liquor, or put them in by spoonfuls or
all together; being not too hard boil'd, take them up and dish them
with beaten butter, juice of orange, lemon, or grape-verjuyce, and
beaten butter.


  _Blanch Manchet in a frying-Pan._

Take six eggs, a quart of cream, a penny manchet grated, nutmeg
grated, two spoonfuls of rose-water, and 2 ounces of sugar, beat it
up like a pudding, and fry it as you fry a tansie; being fryed turn
it out on a plate, quarter it, and put on the juyce of an orange and
sugar.


  _Quelque shose otherways._

Take ten eggs, and beat them in a dish with a penny manchet grated,
a pint of cream, some beaten cloves mace, boil'd currans, some
rose-water, salt, and sugar; beat all together, and fry it either in
a whole form of a tansie, or by spoonfuls in little cakes, being
finely fried, serve them on a plate with juyce of orange and
scraping sugar.


  _Other Fricase or Quelque shose._

Take twenty eggs, and strain them with a quart of cream, some
nutmeg, salt, rose-water, and a little sugar, then have sweet butter
in a clean frying-pan, and put in some pieces of pippins cut as
thick as a half crown piece round the apple being cored; when they
are finely fried, put in half the eggs, fry them a little, and then
pour on the rest or other half, fry it at two times, stir the last,
dish the first on a plate, and put the other on it with juyce of
orange and sugar.


  _Other Fricase of Eggs._

Beat a dozen of eggs with cream, sugar, nutmeg, mace, and
rose-water, then have two or three pippins or other good apples, cut
in round slices through core and all, put them in a frying-pan, and
fry them with sweet butter; when they be enough, take them up and
fry half the eggs and cream in other fresh butter, stir it like a
tansie, and being enough put it out into a dish, put in the other
half of the eggs and cream, lay the apples round the pan, and the
other eggs fried before, uppermost; being finely fried, dish it on a
plate, and put to it the juyce of an orange and sugar.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XXII.

  _The best Ways for the Dressing of Artichocks._


  _To stew Artichocks._

The artichocks being boil'd, take out the core, and take off all the
leaves, cut the bottoms into quarters splitting them in the middle;
then have a flat stewing-pan or dish with manchet toasts in it, lay
the artichocks on them, then the marrow of two bones, five or six
large maces, half a pound of preserved plumbs, with the sirrup,
verjuyce, and sugar; if the sirrup do not make them sweet enough,
let all these stew together 2 hours, if you stew them in a dish,
serve them up in it, not stirring them, only laying on some
preserves which are fresh, as barberries, and such like, sippet it,
and serve it up.

Instead of preserved, if you have none, stew ordinary plumbs which
will be cheaper, and do nigh as well.


  _To fry Artichocks._

Boil and sever all from the bottoms, then slice them in the midst,
quarter them, dip them in batter, and fry them in butter. For the
sauce take verjuyce, butter, and sugar, with the juyce of an orange,
lay marrow on them, garnish them with oranges, and serve them up.


  _To fry young Artichocks otherways._

Take young artichocks or suckets, pare off all the outside as you
pare an apple, and boil them tender, then take them up, and split
them through the midst, do not take out the core, but lay the split
side downward on a dry cloth to drain out the water; then mix a
little flour with two or three yolks of eggs, beaten ginger, nutmeg
& verjuyce, make it into batter and roul them well in it, then get
some clarified butter, make it hot and fry them in it till they be
brown. Make sauce with yolks of eggs, verjuyce or white-wine,
cinamon, ginger, sugar, and a good piece of butter, keep it stirring
upon the fire till it be thick, then dish them on white-bread
toasts, put the caudle on them, and serve them up.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XXIII.

  _Shewing the best way of making Diet for the Sick._


  _To make a Broth for a Sick body._

Take a leg of veal, and set it a boiling in a gallon of fair water,
scum it clean, and when you have so done put in three quarters of a
pound of currans, half a pound of prunes, a handful of borrage, as
much mint, and as much harts-tongue; let them seeth together till
all the strength be sodden out of the flesh, then strain it as clean
as you can. If you think the party be in any heat, put in violet
leaves and succory.


  _To stew a Cock against a Consumption._

Cut him in six pieces, and wash him clean, then take prunes,
currans, dates, raisins, sugar, three or four leaves of gold,
cinamon, ginger, nutmeg, and some maiden hair, cut very small; put
all these foresaid things into a flaggon with a pint of muskadine,
and boil them in a great brass pot of half a bushel; stop the mouth
of the flaggon with a piece of paste, and let it boil the space of
twelve hours; being well stewed, strain the liquor, and give it to
the party to drink cold, two or three spoonfuls in the morning
fasting, and it shall help him. _This is an approved Medicine._


  _Otherways._

Take a good fleshy cock, draw him and cut him to pieces, wash away
the blood clean, and take away the lights that lie at his back, wash
it in white-wine, and no water, then put the pieces in a flaggon,
and put to it two or three blades of large mace, a leaf of gold,
ambergriece, some dates, and raisins of the Sun; close up the
flaggon with a piece of paste, and set it in a pot a boiling six
hours; keep the pot filled up continually, with hot water; being
boil'd strain it, and when it is cold give of it to the weak party
the bigness of a hazelnut.


  _Stewed Pullets against a Consumption._

Take two pullets being finely cleansed, cut them to pieces, and put
them in a narrow mouthed pitcher pot well glazed, stop the mouth of
it with a piece of paste and set it a boiling in a good deep brass
pot or vessel of water, boil it eight hours, keep it continually
boiling, and still filled up with warm water; being well stewed,
strain it, and blow off the fat; when you give it to the party, give
it warm with the yolk of an egg, dissolved with the juyce of an
orange.


  _To distill a Pig good against a Consumption._

Take a pig, flay it and cast away the guts; then take the liver,
lungs, and all the entrails, and wipe all with a clean cloth; then
put it into a Still with a pound of dates, the stones taken out, and
sliced into thin slices, a pound of sugar, and an ounce of large
mace. If the party be hot in the stomach, then take these cool
herbs, as violet leaves, strawberry leaves, and half a handful of
bugloss, still them with a soft fire as you do roses, and let the
party take of it every morning and evening in any drink or broth he
pleases.

You may sometimes add raisins and cloves.


  _To make Broth good against a Consumption._

Take a cock and a knuckle of veal, being well soaked from the blood,
boil them in an earthen pipkin of five quarts, with raisins of the
sun, a few prunes, succory, lang de-beef roots, fennil roots,
parsley, a little anniseed, a pint of white-wine, hyssop, violet
leaves, strawberry-leaves, bind all the foresaid roots, and herbs,
a little quantity of each in a bundle, boil it leisurely, scum it,
and when it is boil'd strain it through a strainer of strong canvas,
when you use it, drink it as often as you please blood-warm.

Sometimes in the broth, or of any of the meats aforesaid, use mace,
raisins of the sun, a little balm, endive, fennel and parsley roots.

Sometimes sorrel, violet leaves, spinage, endive, succory, sage,
a little hyssop, raisins of the sun, prunes, a little saffron, and
the yolk of an egg, strained with verjuyce or white-wine.


  _Otherways._

Fennil-roots, colts foot, agrimony, betony, large mace, white sander
slic't in thin slices the weight of six pence, made with a chicken
and a crust of manchet, take it morning and evening.


  _Otherways._

Violet leaves, wild tansie, succory-roots, large mace, raisins, and
damask prunes boil'd with a chicken and a crust of bread.

Sometimes broth made of a chop of mutton, veal, or chicken, French
barley, raisins, currans, capers, succory root, parsley roots,
fennil-roots, balm, borrage, bugloss, endive, tamarisk, harts-horn,
ivory, yellow sanders, and fumitory, put to these all (or some) in a
moderate quantity.

Otherways, a sprig of rosemary, violet-leaves, tyme, mace, succory,
raisins, and a crust of bread.


  _To make a Paste for a Consumption._

Take the brawn of a roasted capon, the brawn of two partridges, two
rails, two quails, and twelve sparrows all roasted; take the brawns
from the bones, and beat them in a stone mortar with two ounces, of
the pith of roast veal, a quarter of a pound of pistaches, half a
dram of ambergriece, a grain of musk, and a pound of white
sugar-candy beaten fine; beat all these in a mortar to a perfect
paste, now and then putting in a spoonful of goats milk, also two or
three grains of bezoar; when you have beaten all to a perfect paste,
make it into little round cakes, and bake them on a sheet of white
paper.


  _To make a Jelly for a Consumption of the Lungs._

Take half a pound of ising glass, as much harts-horn, an ounce of
cinamon, an ounce of nutmegs, a few cloves, a pound of sugar,
a stick of liquoras, four blades of large mace, a pound of prunes,
an ounce of ginger, a little red sanders, and as much rubarb as will
lie on a six pence, boil the foresaid in a gallon of water, and a
pint of claret till a pint be wasted or boil'd away, boil them on a
soft fire close covered, and slice all your spices very thin.


  _ An excellent Water for a Consumption._

Take a pint of new milk, and a pint of good red wine, the yolks of
twenty four new laid eggs raw, and dissolved in the foresaid
liquors; then have as much fine slic't manchet as will drink up all
this liquor, put it into a fair rose-still with a soft fire, and
being distilled, take this water in all drinks and pottages the sick
party shall eat, or the quantity of a spoonful at a draught in beer,
in one month it will recover any Consumption.


  _Other drink for a Consumption._

Take a gallon of running water of ale measure, put to it an ounce of
cinamon, an ounce of cloves, an ounce of mace, and a dram of
acter-roots, boil this liquor till it come to three quarts, and let
the party daily drink of it till he mends.


  _To make an excellent Broth or Drink for a Sick Body._

Take a good fleshy capon, take the flesh from the bones, or chop it
in pieces very small, and not wash it; then put them in a rose still
with slics of lemon-peel, wood-sorrel, or other herbs according to
the _Physitians_ direction; being distilled, give it to the weak
party to drink.

Or soak them in malmsey and some capon broth before you distill
them.


  _To make a strong Broth for a Sick Party._

Roast a leg of mutton, save the gravy, and being roasted prick it,
and press out the gravy with a wooden press; put all the gravy into
a silver porrenger or piece, with the juyce of an orange and sugar,
warm it on the coals, and give it the weak party.

Thus you may do a roast or boil'd capon, partridge, pheasant, or
chicken, take the flesh from the bones, and stamp it in a stone or
wooden mortar, with some crumbs of fine manchet, strained with capon
broth, or without bread, and put the yolk of an egg, juyce of
orange, lemon, or grape verjuyce and sugar.


  _To make China Broth._

Take an ounce of China thin slic't, put it in a pipkin of fair
water, with a little veal or chicken, stopped close in pipkin, let
it stand 4 and twenty hours on the embers but not boil; then put to
it colts foot, scabious-maiden-hair, violet leaves half a handful,
candied eringo, and 2 or 3 marsh mallows, boil them on a soft fire
till the third part be wasted, then put in a crust of manchet,
a little mace, a few raisins of the sun stoned, and let it boil a
while longer. Take of this broth every morning half a pint for a
month, then leave it a month, & use it again.


  _China Broth otherways._

Take 2 ounces of China root thin sliced, and half an ounce of long
pepper bruised; then take of balm, tyme, sage, marjoram, nepe, and
smalk, of each two slices, clary, a hanful of cowslips, a pint of
cowslip water, and 3 blades of mace; put all into a new and well
glazed pipkin of 4 quarts, & as much fair water as will fill the
pipkin, close it up with paste and let it on the embers to warm, but
not to boil; let it stand thus soaking 4 and twenty hours; then take
it off, and put to it a good big cock chickens, calves foot,
a knuckle of mutton, and a little salt; stew all with a gentle fire
to a pottle, scum it very clean & being boil'd strain the clearest
from the dregs & drink of it every morning half a pint blood-warm.


  _To make Almond Milk against a hot Disease._

Boil half a pound of French barley in 3 several waters, keep the
last water to make your milk of, then stamp half a pound of almonds
with a little of the same water to keep them from oyling; being
finely beaten, strain it whith the rest of the barley water, put
some hard sugar to it, boil it a little, and give it the party warm.


  _An excellent Restorative for a weak back._

Take clary, dates, the pith of an oxe, and chop them together, put
some cream to them, eggs, grated bread, and a little white saunders,
temper them all well together fry them, and eat it in the morning
fasting.

Otherways, take the leaves of clary and nepe, fry them with yolks of
eggs, and eat them to break fast.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION XXIV.

  _Excellent Ways for Feeding of Poultrey._


  _To feed Chickens._

If you will have fat crammed chickens, coop them up when the dam
hath forsaken them, the best cramming for them is wheat-meal and
milk made into dough the crams steeped in milk, and so thrust down
their throats; but in any case let the crams be small and well wet,
for fear you choak them. Fourteen days will feed a chicken
sufficiently.


  _To feed Capons._

Either at the barn doors with scraps of corn and chavings of pulse,
or else in pens in the house, by cramming them, which is the most
dainty. The best way to cram a capon (setting all strange inventions
apart) is to take barley meal, reasonably sifted, and mixing it with
new milk, make it into good stiff dough; than make it into long
crams thickest in the middle, & small at both ends, then wetting
them in luke-warm milk, giue the capon a full gorge thereof three
times a day morning noon, and night, and he will in a fortnight or
three weeks be as fat as any man need to eat.


  _The ordering of Goslings._

After they are hatched you shall keep them in the house ten or
twelve days, and feed them with curds, scalded chippins, or barley
meal in milk knodden and broken, also ground malt is exceeding good,
or any bran that is scalded in water, milk, or tappings of drink.
After they have got a little strength, you may let them go abroad
with a keeper five or six hours in a day, and let the dam at her
leisure entice them into the water; then bring them in, and put them
up, and thus order them till they be able to defend themselves from
vermine. After a gosling is a month or six weeks old you may put it
up to feed for a green goose, & it will be perfectly fed in another
month following; and to feed them, there is no better meat then skeg
oats boil'd, and given plenty thereof thrice a day, morning, noon,
and night, with good store of milk, or milk and water mixt together
to drink.


  _For fatting of elder Geese._

For elder geese which are five or six months old, having been in the
stubble fields after harvest, and got into good flesh, you shall
then choose out such geese as you would feed, and put them in
several Pens which are close and dark, and there feed them thrice a
day with good store of oats, or spelted beans, and give them to
drink water and barly meal mixt together, which must evermore stand
before them. This will in three weeks feed a goose so fat as is
needfull.


  _The fatting of Ducklings._

You may make them fat in three weeks giving them any kind of pulse
or grain, and good store of water.


  _Fatting of Swans and Cygnets._

For Swans and their feeding, where they build their nests, you shall
suffer them to remain undisturbed, and it will be sufficient because
they can better order themselves in that business than any man.

Feed your Cygnets in all sorts as you feed your Geese, and they will
be through fat in seven or eight weeks. If you will have them sooner
fat, you shall feed them in some pond hedged, or placed in for that
purpose.


  _Of fatting Turkies._

For the fatting of turkies sodden barley is excellent, or sodden
oats for the first fortnight, and then for another fortnight cram
them in all sorts as you cram your capon, and they will be fat
beyond measure. Now for their infirmities, when they are at liberty,
they are so good _Physitians_ for themselves, that they will never
trouble their owners; but being coopt up you must cure them as you
do pullets. Their eggs are exceeding wholesome to eat, and restore
nature decayed wonderfully.

Having a little dry ground where they may sit and prune themselves,
place two troughs, one full of barley and water, and the other full
of old dried malt wherein they may feed at their pleasure. Thus
doing, they will be fat in less than a month: but you must turn his
walks daily.


  _Of nourishing and fatting Herns, Puets, Gulls, and Bitterns._

Herns are nourished for two causes, either for Noblemens sports, to
make trains for the entering their hawks, or else to furnish the
table at great feasts; the manner of bringing them up with the least
charge, is to take them out of their nests before they can flie, and
put them into a large high barn, where there is many high cross
beams for them to pearch on; then to have on the flour divers square
boards with rings in them, and between every board which should be
two yards square, to place round shallow tubs full of water, then to
the boards you shall tye great gobbits of dogs flesh, cut from the
bones, according to the number which you feed, and be sure to keep
the house sweet, and shift the water often, only the house must be
made so, that it may rain in now and then, in which the hern will
take much delight; but if you feed her for the dish, then you shall
feed them with livers, and the entrals of beasts, and such like cut
in great gobbits.


  _To feed Codwits, Knots, Gray-Plovers, or Curlews._

Take fine chilter-wheat, and give them water thrice a day, morning,
noon, and night; which will be very effectual; but if you intend to
have them extraordinary crammed fowl, then you shall take the finest
drest wheat-meal, and mixing it with milk, make it into paste, and
ever as you knead it, sprinkle into the grains of small
chilter-wheat, till the paste be fully mixt therewith; then make
little small crams thereof, and dipping them in water, give to every
fowl according to his bigness, and let his gorge be well filled: do
thus as oft as you shall find their gorges empty, and in one
fortnight they will be fed beyond measure, and with these crams you
may feed any fowl of what kind or nature soever.


  _Otherways._

Feed them with good wheat and water, give them thrice a day,
morning, noon, and night; if you will have them very fat & crammed
fowl, take fine wheat meal & mix it with milk, & make it into paste,
and as you knead it, put in some corns of wheat sprinkled in amongst
the paste till the paste be fully mixt therewith; then make little
small crams thereof, and dipping them in water, give to every fowl
according to his bigness, and that his gorge be well filled: do thus
as oft as you shall find their gorges empty, and in one fortnight
they will be fed very fat; with these crams you may feed any fowl of
what kind or nature soever.


  _To feed Black-Birds Thrushes, Felfares,
    or any small Birds whatsoever._

Being taken old and wild, it is good to have some of their kinds
tame to mix among them, and then putting them into great cages of
three or four yards square, to have divers troughs placed therein,
some filled with haws, some with hemp seed, and some with water,
that the tame teaching the wild to eat, and the wild finding such
change and alteration of food, they will in twelve or fourteen days
grow exceeding fat, and fit for the kitchen.


  _To feed Olines._

Put them into a fine room where they may have air, give them water,
and feed them with white bread boiled in good milk, and in one week
or ten days they will be extraordinary fat.


  _To feed Pewets._

Feed them in a place where they may have the air, set them good
store of water, and feed them with sheeps lungs cut small into
little bits, give it them on boards, and sometimes feed them with
shrimps where they are near the sea, and in one fortnight they will
be fat if they be followed with meat. Then two or three days before
you spend them give them cheese curd to purge them.


  _The feedings of Pheasant, Partridge, Quails, and Wheat Ears._

Feed them with good wheat and water, this given them thrice a day,
morning noon, and night, will do it very effectually; but if you
intend to have them extraordinary crammed fowl, then take the finest
drest wheatmeal, mix it with milk, and make into paste, ever as you
knead it, sprinkle in the grains of corns of wheat, till the paste
be full mixt there with; then make little small crams, dip them in
water, and give to every fowl according to his bigness, that his
gorge be well filled; do thus as often as you shall find his gorge
empty, and in one fortnight they will be fed beyond measure. Thus
you may feed turtle Doves.


FINIS.


The Table.

  [Transcriber's Note:
  Alphabetization in the Table is unchanged.]


  A.

  _Andolians._                                       page 22
  _Almond Pudding_                                       181
  _Almond Leach_                                         209
  _Almond Custard_                                       237
  _Almond Tart_                                          241
  _Almond Bread, Biskets and Cakes_                      269
  _Almond cream_                                         280
  _Almond cheese_                                        281
  _Almond caudle_                                        423
  _Apricocks baked_                                      251
  _Apricocks preserved_                                 Ibid.
  _Ambergriece cakes_                                    270
  _Apple cream_                                          277
  _Aleberry_                                             423
  _Artichocks baked_                                     261
  _Artichocks stewed_                                    448
  _Artichocks fryed_                                448, 449


  B.

  _Barley Broth_                                          13
  _Broth stewed_                                      14, 15
  _Bisk divers ways_                          5, 6, 7, 8, 47
  _Bisk or Batalia Pye_                                  211
  _Beef fillet roasted_                                  113
  _Beef roasted to pickle_                               116
  _Beef collops stewed_                                  117
  _Beef carbonado'd_                                     119
  _Beef baked red deer fashion_                          121
  _Beef minced Pyes_                                     122
  _Bullocks cheeks souced_                               199
  _Boar wild baked_                                      299
  _Brawn broil'd_                                        169
  _Brawn boil'd_                                        Ibid.
  _Brawn souc't_                                         192
  _Brawn of Pig_                                         193
  _Brawn garnisht_                                       194
  _Breading of meats and fowls_                          136
  _Bacon gammon baked_                                   227
  _Bread the French fashion_                             239
  _Biscket bread_                                        273
  _Bisquite du Roy_                                     Ibid.
  _Bean bread_                                           274
  _Beer buttered_                                        432
  _Barberries preserved_                                 254
  _Blamanger_                                       297, 298
  _Blanch manchet in a frying pan_                       446


  C.

  _Calves head boil'd_                                   129
  _Calves head souced_                                   130
  _Calves head roasted_                                 Ibid.
  _Calves head hashed_                                   133
  _Calves head broil'd_                                  134
  _Calves head baked_                                    131
  _Calves foot pye_                                      132
  _Calves head roasted with Oysters_                131, 143
  _Calves feet roasted_                                  134
  _Calves chaldron baked_                                219
  _Capons in pottage_                                     67
  _Capons souc't_                                        197
  _Calves chaldron in minced Pyes._                      220
  _Capons boil'd_                                 64, 67, 85
  _Capons fillings raw_                                   30
  _Cocks boil'd_                                          62
  _Cock stewed against a Consumption_                    450
  _Chicken pye_                                     212, 213
  _Chickens peeping boil'd_                               57
  _Chickens how to feed them_                            456
  _China broth_                                     454, 455
  _Capilotadoes or Made Dishes_                            5
  _Collops and eggs_                                     169
  _Collops like bacon of Marchpane._                     268
  _Cucumbers pickled_                                    163
  _Colliflowers buttered_                                427
  _Custards how to make them_                            257
  _Custards without eggs_                               Ibid.
  _Cheescakes how to make them_                     287, 288
  _Cheescakes without Milk_                              298
  _Cheesecakes in the Italian fashion_              290, 291
  _Cream and fresh Cheese_                               292
  _Codling cream_                                        177
  _Cast cream_                                           282
  _Clouted Cream_                                       Ibid.
  _Cabbidge cream_                                       284
  _Cream tart_                                           248
  _Cherry tart_                                          246
  _Cherries preserved_                                   253
  _Cake a very good one_                                 238
  _Cracknéls,_                                           272
  _Carp boil'd in carbolion_                             301
  _Carp bisk_                                            303
  _Carp stewed_                                          305
  _Carp stewed the French way_                      306, 307
  _Carp broth_                                           309
  _Carp in stoffado_                                     301
  _Carp hashed_                                         Ibid.
  _Carp marinated_                                       311
  _Carp broil'd_                                         312
  _Carp roasted_                                         313
  _Carp Pye_                                             314
  _Carp pie minc't with eels_                            316
  _Carp baked the French way_                           Ibid.
  _Conger boil'd_                                        359
  _Conger stewed_                                        360
  _Conger marinated_                                    Ibid.
  _Conger souc't_                                       Ibid.
  _Conger roasted_                                       361
  _Conger broil'd_                                      Ibid.
  _Conger fryed_                                         362
  _Conger baked_                                        Ibid.
  _Cockles stewed_                                  399, 400
  _Crabs stewed_                                         410
  _Crabs buttered_                                      Ibid.
  _Crabs hashed_                                         411
  _Crabs farced_                                        Ibid.
  _Crabs boil'd_                                         412
  _Crabs fryed_                                         Ibid.
  _Crabs baked_                                          413
  _Crab minced Pyes_                                     414


  D.

  _Deer red roasted_                                     144
  _Deer red baked_                                       228
  _Deer fallow baked_                                    229
  _Dish in the Italian way_                              249
  _Damsin tart_                                          247
  _Damsins preserved_                                    253
  _Ducklings how to fat them_                            457


  E.

  _Entre de table, a French dish_                          9
  _Eggs fryed_                                           169
  _Eggs fryed as round as a ball_                       Ibid.
  _Egg caudle_                                           433
  _Eggs dressed hard_                                    435
  _Eggs buttered_                                        436
  _Egg bisk_                                            Ibid.
  _Eggs in Moon shine_                                   437
  _Eggs in the Spanish fashion,
      call'd, Wivos qme uidos_                           438
  _Eggs in the Portugal fashion_                        Ibid.
  _Eggs a-la-Hugenotte_                                  439
  _Eggs in fashion of a Tansie_                         Ibid.
  _Eggs and Almonds_                                     440
  _Eggs broil'd_                                        Ibid.
  _Eggs poached_                                    440, 441
  _Eggs, grand farced dish_                              442
  _Eggs compounded as big as twenty Eggs_                443
  _Eggs buttered on toasts_                             Ibid.
  _Eggs buttered in the Polonian way_                    445
  _Egg minced pyes_                                     Ibid.
  _Eggs or Quelque shose_                                446
  _Eggs fricase_                                         447
  _Eels boil'd_                                          350
  _Eels stewed_                                          351
  _Eels in Stoffado_                                     352
  _Eels souced or jellied_                               353
  _Eels hashed_                                          355
  _Eels broiled_                                        Ibid.
  _Eels roasted_                                    355, 356
  _Eels baked_                                      356, 357
  _Eel minced Pies._                                     358


  F.

  _Fritters how to make them_                            170
  _Fritters in the Italian fasion_                       171
  _Fritters of arms_                                     172
  _Fried dishes of divers forms_                        Ibid.
  _Fried pasties, balls, or tosts_                       ib.
  _French tart_                                          248
  _French Barley Cream_                                  287
  _Florentine of tongues_                                259
  _Florentine of Partridg or capon_                      260
  _Florentine without paste_                             261
  _Flounders calvered_                                   346
  _Frogs baked_                                          418
  _Furmety._                                             420
  _Fowl hashed_                                           43
  _Fowl farced_                                       30, 31
  _Farcing in the Spanish Fashion_                        32
  _Farcing French bread, called Pinemolet_                34
  _Fricase a rare one_                                    67
  _Flowers pickled_                                      164
  _Flowers candied_                                     Ibid.


  G.

  _Grapes and Gooseberries pickled_                      164
  _Grapes preserved_                                     253
  _Gooseberries preserved_                               254
  _Gooseberry Cream_                                     279
  _Ginger bread_                                         275
  _Geese boil'd_                                          89
  _Goose giblets boil'd_                                  91
  _Goslings how to order them_                           457
  _Geese old ones to fat them_                           ib.


  H.

  _Hashes all manner of ways_                 38, 39, 40, 41
  _Hashes of Scotch collops_                              79
  _Hare hashed_                                       45, 60
  _Hares roasted_                                        147
  _Hares four baked in a pie_                            222
  _Hares three in a pye_                                Ibid.
  _Hare baked with a pudding in his belly_               223
  _Hens roasted_                                         149
  _Hip tart_                                             245
  _Herring minced Pies_                                  381
  _Haberdine pyes_                                      Ibid.
  _Hogs feet jellied_                                    201
  _Herns to nourish and fat them_                        458


  I.

  _Jelly crystal_                                        202
  _ Jelly of several colours_                           Ibid.
  _Jelly as white as snow_                               205
  _Jellies for souces_                                   206
  _Jelly of harts-horn_                                  207
  _Jelly for a consumption_                             Ibid.
  _Jelly for a consumption of the Lungs_                 453
  _Jelly for weakness in the back_                       208
  _Jumballs_                                             271
  _Italian chips_                                        273
  _Ipocras_                                              275


  L.

  _Lambs head boil'd_                                    135
  _Lambs head in white broth_                            134
  _Lambs stones fryed_                                   168
  _Land or Sea fowl boiled_                   72, 73, 74, 75
  _Leach with Almonds_                                   285
  _Lamprey how to bake_                        347, 348, 349
  _Links how to make_                                     96
  _Lemons pickled_                                       164
  _Loaves buttered_                                      428
  _Lump baked_                                           363
  _Ling pyes_                                            381
  _Lobsters stewed_                                      401
  _Lobsters hashed_                                      402
  _Lobsters baked_                                       403
  _Lobsters farced_                                     Ibid.
  _Lobsters marinated_                                   404
  _Lobsters broil'd_                                    Ibid.
  _Lobsters roasted_                                     405
  _Lobsters fryed_                                       406
  _Lobsters baked_                                      Ibid.
  _Lobsters pickled_                                     408
  _Lobsters jellied_                                    Ibid.


  M.

  _Marrow pyes_                                      3, 4, 5
  _Marrow puddings_                                   23, 24
  _Maremaid pye_                                    220, 221
  _Made dish of tongues_                                 270
  _Made dish of Spinage_                                 262
  _Made dish of barberries_                              263
  _Made dish of Frogs_                                   264
  _Made dish of marrow_                                 Ibid.
  _Made dish of rice_                                   Ibid.
  _Made dish of Blanchmanger_                            266
  _Made dish of butter and eggs_                         266
  _Made dish of curds_                                  Ibid.
  _Made dish of Oysters_                                 396
  _Marchpane_                                            267
  _Mead_                                                 275
  _Metheglin_                                            276
  _Mackeroons_                                           272
  _Melacatoons baked_                                    251
  _Melacatoons preserved_                                252
  _Medlar tart_                                          246
  _Minced pies of Veal, Mutton Beef,_ &c.                232
  _Minced pyes in the French fashion_                    233
  _Minced pies in the Italian fashion_                  Ibid.
  _Mutton Legs farced_                                    30
  _Mutton shoulder hashed_                                58
  _Mutton shoulder roasted_                         137, 138
  _Mutton or Veal stewed_                                 15
  _Mutton shoulder stewed_                                78
  _Mutton or veal stewed_                             51, 52
  _Mutton chines boil'd_                              11, 12
  _Mutton carbonadoed_                                   166
  _Mutton boil'd_                                     49, 50
  _Mustard how to make it_                               156
  _Mustard of Dijon_                                    Ibid.
  _Mustard in cakes_                                     157
  _Musquedines_                                          271
  _Mullet souc't_                                        340
  _Mullet marinated_                                     341
  _Mullet broil'd_                                       342
  _Mullet fryed_                                         343
  _Mullet baked_                                        Ibid.
  _Mushrooms fryed_                                      397
  _Mushrooms in the italian fashion_                    Ibid.
  _Mushrooms stewed_                                     398
  _Mushrooms broil'd_                                    399
  _Muskles stewed_                                       400
  _Muskles fryed_                                        401
  _Muskle Pyes_                                         Ibid.


  N.

  _Neats tongue boil'd_                               42, 43
  _Neats tongue in stoffado_                             106
  _Neats tongues stewed_                                Ibid.
  _Neats tongue in Brodo lardiero_                       109
  _Neats tongue roasted_                                 110
  _Neats tongue hashed_                               40, 41
  _Neats tongue bak't_                              111, 112
  _Neats feet larded and roasted_
  _Norfolk fool._


  O.

  _Olio Podrida_                                           1
  _Olines of Beef_                                       118
  _Olines of a Leg of Veal_                              142
  _Oline pye_                                            225
  _Olines how to feed them_                              460
  _Oatmeal Caudle_                                       423
  _Omlets of Eggs_                                  430, 431
  _Onions buttered_                                      426
  _Oysters stewed the french way_                        383
  _Oysters stewed otherways_                             384
  _Oyster pottage_                                       385
  _Oysters hashed_                                      Ibid.
  _Oysters marinated_                                    386
  _Oysters in stoffado_                                  387
  _Oysters jellied_                                      388
  _Oysters pickled_                                     Ibid.
  _Oysters souc't_                                       389
  _Oysters roasted_                                      390
  _Oysters broil'd_                                      391
  _Oysters fryed_                                        392
  _Oysters baked_                                        393
  _Oyster mince pies_                                    395
  _Oxe cheeks boil'd_                                     97
  _Oxe cheeks in stoffado_                                98
  _Oxe cheeks baked_                                     218


  P.

  _Partridge hashed_                                      60
  _Partridge how to feed them_                           461
  _Paste how to make it_                                 256
  _Paste royal_                                          257
  _Paste for made dishes in Lent_                       Ibid.
  _Puff-paste_                                      257, 258
  _Paste of Violets, Cowslips_, &c.                      267
  _Paste for a Consumption_                              453
  _Pallets of Oxe how to dress them_                     100
  _Pallit pottage_                                       102
  _Pallets rosted_                                      Ibid.
  _Pallets in Jellies_                                   103
  _Pallets bak't_                                        104
  _Pancakes_                                             174
  _Panadoes_                                             424
  _Pap_                                                  297
  _Pease tarts_                                          245
  _Pease cod dish in Puff paste_                         263
  _Pease pottage_                                        421
  _Peaches preserved_                                    252
  _Pewets to nourish them_                               458
  _Pheasants how to feed them_                           461
  _Pheasant baked_                                       214
  _Pinemolet_                                              9
  _Pie extraordinary, or a bride pye_                    234
  _Pie of pippins_                                       242
  _Pippins preserved_                                    244
  _Pig roasted with hair on_                             145
  _Pig roasted otherways_                                146
  _Pig souc't_                                           194
  _Pig jellied_                                          196
  _Pig distilled against a Consumption_                  451
  _Pigeons boil'd_                                    76, 93
  _Pigeons baked_                                        214
  _Pike boil'd_                                     319, 320
  _Pike stewed_                                          323
  _Pike hashed_                                          324
  _Pike souc't_                                          325
  _Pike jellied_                                    326, 327
  _Pike roasted_                                         328
  _Pike fried_                                           329
  _Pike boil'd_                                         Ibid.
  _Pike bak't_                                           330
  _Plumb cream_                                          278
  _Plaice boil'd or stewed_                              346
  _Plovers how to feed them_                             459
  _Pork boil'd_                                     167, 168
  _Pork roasted_                                         145
  _Pottages_                                          77, 78
  _Pottage in the french fashion_                         94
  _Pottage without any sight of herbs_                  Ibid.
  _Pottage called skink_                                 115
  _Pottage of ellicksanders_                             421
  _Pottage of onions_                                    422
  _Pottage of almonds_                                  Ibid.
  _Pottage of grewel_                                    419
  _Pottage of rice_                                      420
  _Pottage of milk_                                     Ibid.
  _Potatoes baked_                                       261
  _Portugal tarts for banquettings_                      267
  _Posset how to make it_                                292
  _Posset of Sack_                                       293
  _Posset compounded_                                    424
  _Posset simple_                                        425
  _Posset of herbs_                                     Ibid.
  _Puffs the French way_                                Ibid.
  _Prawns stewed_                                        401
  _Preserved green fruits_                               255
  _Pudding of several sorts_                      21, 22, 23
  _Pudding of Turkey or Capon_                            24
  _Puddings of Liver_                                     26
  _Puddings of heifers udder_                            ib.
  _Puddings black_                                  126, 190
  _Pudding in a breast of Veal_                     140, 185
  _Pudding boil'd_                                       177
  _Pudding of cream_                                     178
  _Pudding of sweet herbs_                              Ibid.
  _Pudding in hast_                                      179
  _Pudding quaking_                                     Ibid.
  _Pudding shaking_                                      180
  _Pudding of rice_                                      182
  _Pudding of cinamon_                                   183
  _Pudding haggas_                                   25, 183
  _Pudding cheveridge_                                  Ibid.
  _Pudding liveridge_                                     84
  _Pudding of swan or goose_                             Ib.
  _Pudding of wine in guts_                              185
  _Pudding in the Italian Fashion_                       186
  _Pudding the French way_                               Ib.
  _Pudding of swine lights_                              187
  _Pudding of oatmeal_                                  Ibid.
  _Pudding pyes of oatmeal_                              188
  _Pudding baked_                                        189
  _Puddings white_                                       191
  _Pullets stewed against a Consumption_                 451
  _Pyramides cream_                                      286


  Q.

  _Quinces pickled_                                      163
  _Quince Pyes_                                          240
  _Quince tarts_                                         241
  _Quince cream_                                         278
  _Quinces buttered_                                     427
  _Quodling pye_                                         249
  _Quails how to feed them_                              461


  R.

  _Rasberies preserv'd_                                  254
  _Rabbits hashed_                                    48, 54
  _Restorative for a weak back_                          455
  _Rice tart_                                            245
  _Rice cream_                                           285
  _Rice buttered_                                        428
  _Roots farced_                                          27


  S.

  _Sauce for green geese_                                 92
  _Sauce for Land fowl_                              93, 151
  _Sauce for roast mutton_                               139
  _Sauce for roast veal_                                 144
  _Sauce for red deer_                                  Ibid.
  _Sauce for Rabbits_                                    148
  _Sauce for Hens_                                  149, 150
  _Sauce for Chickens_                                   150
  _Sauce for Pidgeons_                                   151
  _Sauce for a Goose_                                    152
  _Sauce for a Duck_                                     153
  _Sauce for a Sea Fowl_                                Ibid.
  _Sauce for roast Salmon_                               338
  _Sausages_                                      36, 37, 95
  _Sausages Bolonia_                                     127
  _Sausage for jelly_                                    208
  _Sallet grand of minc't fowl_                           92
  _Sallet grand of divers compound_            158, 159, 160
  _Sallet of scurvy grass_                               161
  _Sallet of elixander buds_                             262
  _Scoch collops of mutton_                               59
  _Salmon calvered_                                      331
  _Salmon stewed_                                        332
  _Salmon pickled_                                       333
  _Salmon hashed_                                       Ibid.
  _Salmon marinated_                                     334
  _Salmon in stoffado_                                  Ibid.
  _Salmon fryed_                                         335
  _Salmon roasted_                                       339
  _Salmon broil'd or roasted in stoffado._               337
  _Salmon baked_                                         338
  _Salmon, chewits, or minced pyes_                      339
  _Salmon Lumber pye_                                    340
  _Sack cream_                                           283
  _Stone cream_                                          284
  _Snow cream_                                           279
  _Scollops stewed_                                      400
  _Sea fowl bak'd_                                       215
  _Silabub an excellent way_                             295
  _Shell bread_                                          274
  _Snails stewed_                                        415
  _Snails fryed_                                         216
  _Snails hashed_                                       Ibid.
  _Snails in pottage_                                    417
  _Snaile back'd_                                        418
  _Snites boil'd_                                         62
  _Soals boil'd_                                         363
  _Soals stewed_                                         364
  _Soals souc'd_                                         365
  _Soals jellied_                                       Ibid.
  _Soals roasted_                                        366
  _Soops of spinage_                                     246
  _Soops of carrots_                                    Ibid.
  _Soops of artichocks_                                 Ibid.
  _Souce veal lamb, or mutton_                           198
  _Sparagus to keep all the year_                        210
  _Sparagus buttered_                                    427
  _Spinage tart_                                         247
  _Steak pye_                                            226
  _Steak pyes the french way_                            227
  _Strawberry tart_                                      246
  _Sturgeon boil'd_                                      367
  _Sturgeon buttered_                                    368
  _Sturgeon hashed_                                     Ibid.
  _Sturgeon marinated_                                  Ibid.
  _Sturgeon farced_                                      369
  _Sturgeon whole in stoffado_                            ib
  _Sturgeon souc't_                                      370
  _Sturgeon broil'd_                                    Ibid.
  _Sturgeon fryed_                                       371
  _Sturgeon roasted_                                    Ibid.
  _Sturgeon olines of it_                                372
  _Sturgeon baked_                             373, 374, 375
  _Sturgeon minc't pies_                            376, 377
  _Sturgeon lumber pie_                                  378
  _Sturgeon baked with farcings_                        Ibid.
  _Sturgeon olio_                                        389
  _Sugar plate_                                          271
  _Swans how to fat them_                                458
  _Sweet-bread pies_                                     231


  T.

  _Tansey how to make_                                   174
  _Taffety tart_                                         246
  _Tart stuff of several colours_              249, 250, 251
  _Tortelleti, or little pasties_                     83, 84
  _Tosts how to make them_                               175
  _Toasts cinamon_                                       176
  _Toasts the _French_ way_                            Ibid.
  _Tortoise how to dress it_                             414
  _Tripes how to dress them_                             127
  _Trotter pie_                                          242
  _Triffel how to make it_                               292
  _Turkish dish of meat_                                 116
  _Turkey baked_                                         214
  _Turkies how to fat them_                              458
  _Turbut boil'd_                                        345
  _Turbut souc't_                                       Ibid.
  _Turbut stewed or fryed_                               346


  V.

  _Veal breast farced_                                    20
  _Veal breast boil'd_                                  Ibid.
  _Veal breast roasted_                                  141
  _Veal breast, loin, or rack baked_                     225
  _Veal leg boil'd_                                   17, 18
  _Veal leg farced_                                       19
  _Veal chines boil'd_                                    10
  _Veal loin roasted_                                    141
  _Veal broil'd_                                         167
  _Veal hashed_                                           44
  _Veal farced_                                   28, 29, 31
  _Venison broil'd_                                      168
  _Venison tainted how to preserve it_              230, 231
  _Udders baked_                                         124
  _Verjuyce how to make it_                              156
  _Vinegar to make it_                                   154
  _Rose Vinegar_                                         155
  _Pepper Vinegar_                                      Ibid.
  _Umble pies_                                           231


  W.

  _Warden tarts_                                         245
  _Water for a Consumption_                              453
  _Wossel to make it_                                    296
  _Wheat-ears how to feed them_                          461
  _Whip cream_                                           284
  _Wheat leach of cream_                                 285
  _White-pot to make it_                                 295
  _Woodcocks boil'd_                                  62, 86
  _Woodcocks roasted_                                    148


  _FINIS._


  _Books Printed for _Obadiah Blagrave_
  at the _Black Bear_ in St. _Pauls_ Church-Yard._


Doctor _Gell's_ Remains; being sundry pious and learned Notes and
Observations on the whole New Testament Opening and Explaining all the
Difficulties therein; wherein our Saviour Jesus Christ is yesterday, to
day, and the same for ever. Illustrated by that Learned and Judicious
Man Dr. _Robert Gell_ Rector of _Mary Aldermary_, _London_, in Folio.

Christian Religions Appeal from the groundless prejudice of the
Scepticks to the Bar of common Reason; Wherein is proved that the
Apostles did not delude the World. 2. Nor were themselves deluded.
3. Scripture matters of Faith have the best evidence. 4. The Divinity of
Scripture is as demonstrable as the being of a Deity. By _John Smith_
Rector of St. _Mary_ in _Colchester_, in Folio.

An Exposition on the Ten Commandments and the Lords Prayer. By Mr.
_Edward Elton_, in 4[o].

Saint _Clemont_ the Blessed Apostle St. _Paul_'s Fellow Labourer in the
Gospel, his Epistle to the _Corinthians_. Translated out of the Greek,
in 4[o].

A Sermon Preached before the King at _Windsor_ Castle. By _Richard
Meggot_, D.D. in 4[o].

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honourble the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of _London_, _January_ the _30th_. 1674. By _Richard
Meggot_, D.D. in 4[o].

A Sermon Preached to the Artillery Company at St. _May Le Bow_, _Sept._
13. 1676. By _Richard Meggot, D.D._ in 4[o].

The Case of _Joram_; a Sermon Preached before the House of Peers in the
Abby-Church at _Westminster_, _Jan._ 30. 1674. By _Seth Ward_ Lord
Bishop of _Sarum_.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of _George_ Lord General _Monk_. By
_Seth Ward_ Lord Bishop of _Sarum_, in 4[o].

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of that faithful Servant of Christ Dr.
_Robert Breton_, Pastor of _Debtford_ in the Conty of _Kent_, on
_March_. 24. 36. By _Rich. Parr_, D.D. of _Camberwell_ in the County of
_Surrey_, in 4[o].

Weighty Reasons for tender and Consciencious Protestants to be in Union
and Communion with the Church of _England_, and not to forsake the
publick Assemblies, as the only means to prevent the Growth of Popery;
in severol Sermons on 1 _Cor._ 1. 10. _That ye all speak the same
things, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joyned together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment_,
on _Heb._ 10. 25. not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together,
as the manner of some is; in 8[o] large.

The _Psalms_ of King _David_ paraphrased, and turned into English Verse,
according to the common Meetre, as they are usually Sung in parish
Churches, by _Miles Smith_; in 8[o] large.

The Evangelical Communicant in the Eucharistical Sacrament, or a
Treatise declaring who is fit to receive the Supper of the Lord, by
_Philip Goodwin_; in 8[o].

A Treatise of the Sabbath-day, shewing how it should be sanctified by
all persons, by _Philip Goodwin_, M.A.

A Fountain of Tears, empying it self into three Rivulets, _viz._ Of
Compunction, Compassion, Devotion; or Sobs of Nature sanctified by
Grace. Languaged in several Soliloquies and prayers upon various
Subjects, for the benefit of all that are in Affliction, and
particularly for these present times, by _John Featley_, Chaplain to His
Majesty.

A Course of Catechising, or the Marrow of all Authors as have Writ or
Commented on the Church Catechism; in 8[o].

A more shorter Explanation of the Church Catechism, fitted for the
meanest capacity in 8[o] price 2 _d._ by Dr. _Combar_.

The Life and Death of that Reverend Divine Dr. _Fuller_, Author of the
Book called the holy War and State; in 8[o].

_Fons Lachrymarum_, or a Fountain of Tears; from whence doth flow
_Englands_ complaint, _Jeremiah_'s Lamentations, paraphrased with Divine
meditations, by _John Quarles_; in 8[o].

_Gregory_ Father _Grey-beard_ with his Vizard pull'd off, or News from
the Cabal, in some Reflections upon a late Book, entituled, _The
Rehearsal Transprosed after the fashion it now obtains_; in a Letter to
Mr _Roger L'Estrange_; in 8[o].

Grounds and occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy with the severall
Answers to _Hobbs_.

A good Companion, or a Meditation upon Death, by _William Winstandly_;
in 12[o]s.

Select Thoughts, or Choice Helps for a Pious Spirit, a Century of Divine
Breathings for a Ravished Soul, beholding the excellency of her Lord
Jesus: To which is added the Breathings of the Devout Soul, by _Jos.
Hall_ Bishop of _Norwich_; in 12[o].

The Remedies of Discontent, or a Treatise of Contentation; very fit for
these present times; by _Jos. Hall_ Bishop of _Norwich_; 12[o].


The admired piece of Physiognomy and Chyromancy, Mataposcopacy, the
Symmetrical proportions and Signal Moles of the Body fully and
accurately explained, with their Natural predictive significations both
to Men and Women, being delightful and profitable; with the Subject of
Dreams made plain: Whereunto is added the Art of Memory, by _Richard
Saunders_; in _folio_: Illustrated with Cuts and Figures.

The Sphere of _Marcus Manelius_ made an English Poem; with Learned
Annotations, and a long Appendix: reciting the Names of Ancient and
Modern Astronomers; with some thing memorable of them: Illustrated with
Copper-Cuts. By _Edward Sherborne_ Esq, in _Folio_.

Observations upon Military and Political Affairs: Written by the most
Honourable _George_ Duke of _Albemarle_; in _Folio_: Published by
Authority.

Modern Fortification, or the Elements of Military Architecture,
practised and designed by the latest and most experienced Engineers of
this last Age, _Italian_, _French_, _Dutch_ and _English_; and the
manner of Defending and Besieging Forts and Places; with the use of a
Joynt Ruler or Sector, for the speedy description of any Fortification;
by Sir _Jonas Moore_ Knight, Master Surveyor.

A General Treatise of Artillery or Great Ordnance: Writ in _Italian_ by
_Tomaso Morety_ of _Brescia_, Engineer; first to the Emperor, and now to
the most serene Republick of _Venice_, translated into English, with
Notes thereupon; and some addition out of _French_ for Sea-Gunners. By
Sir _Jonas Moore_ Knight: With an Appendix of Artificial Fire-works of
War and Delight; by Sir _Abraham Dager_ Knight, Engineer: Illustrated
with divers Cuts.

A Mathematical Compendium, or Useful Practices in Arithmetick, Geometry
and Astronomy, Geography and Navigation, Embatteling and Quartering of
Armies, Fortifications and Gunnery, Gauging and Dialling; explaining the
Loyerthius with new Judices, Napers, Rhodes or Bones, making of
Movements, and the Application of Pendulums: With the projection of the
Sphere for an Universal Dial. By Sir _Jonas Moore_ Knight.

The Works of that most excellent Philosopher and Astronomer Sir _George
Wharton_ Baronet: giving an account of all Fasts and Festivals,
Observations in keeping Easter; _Apotelesina_, or the Nativity of the
World of the _Epochæ_ and _Eræ_ used by Chronologers: A Discourse of
Years, Months, and days of years; of Eclipses and Effects of the Crises
in Diseases: With an excellent discourse of the names, _Genus_,
_Species_, efficient and final causes of all Comets; how Astrology may
be restored from _Morinus_; in 8[o] large, _cum multis aliis_.

The Practical Gauger, being a plain and easie method of Gauging all
sorts of Brewing Vesses; whereunto is added a short _Synopsis_ of the
Laws of Excise: The third Edition, with Addittions: By _John Mayne_.

A Table for purchasers of Estates, either Lands or Houses; by _William
Leybourne_.

_Blagrave_'s introduction to Astrology, in Three parts; containing the
use of an _Ephemerides_, and how to erect a Figure of Heaven to any time
proposed; also the signification of the Houses, Planets, Signs and
Aspects; the explanation of all useful terms of Art: With plain and
familiar Instructions for the Resolution of all manner of Questions, and
exemplified in every particular thereof by Figures set and judged. The
Second treateth of Elections, shewing their Use and Application as they
are constituted on the Twelve Celestial Houses, whereby you are enabled
to choose such times as are proper and conducible to the perfection of
any matter or business whatsoever. The third comprehendeth an absolute
remedy for rectifying and judging Nativities; the signification and
portance of Directions: with new and experienced Rules touching
Revolutions and Transits, by _Jo. Blagrave_, of _Reading_ Gent. _Student
in Astrology and Physick_; in 8[o] large.

_Blagrave_'s Astrological Practice of Physick; discovering the true way
to Cure all kinds of Diseases and Infirmities which are naturally
incident to the Body of Man; in 8[o] large.

_Gadbury_'s _Ephemerides_ for thirty years, twenty whereof is yet to
come and unexpired; in 4[o].

Philosophy delineated, consisting of divers Answers upon several Heads
in Philosophy, first drawn up for the satisfaction of some Friends, now
exposed to publick View and Examination; by _William Marshall_ Merch.
_London_; in 8[o] large.

The Natural History of Nitre, or a Philosophical Discourse of the
Nature, Generation, place and Artificial Extraction of Nitre, with its
Virtues and Uses, by _William Clerke_ M. _Doctorum Londinensis_.

The Sea-mans Tutor, explaining Geometry, Cosmography and Trigonometry,
with requisite Tables of Longitude and Latitude of Sea-ports, Travers
Tables, Tables of Easting and Westing, meridian miles, Declinations,
Amplitudes, refractions, use of the Compass, Kalender, measure of the
Earth Globe, use of Instruments, Charts, differences of Sailing,
estimation of a Ship-way by the Log, and Log-Line Currents. Composed for
the use of the Mathematical School in Christs Hospital _London_, his
Majesties _Charles_ II. his Royal Foundation. By _Peter Perkins_ Master
of that School.

Platform for Builders and a guide for purchasers by Mr. _Leyborne_.

Mr. _Nich. Culpeppers_ last Legacy, left and bequeathed to his dearest
Wife for the publick good, being the choicest and most profitable of
those secrets, which while he lived were locked up in his Breast, and
resolved never to publish them till after his death, containing sundry
admirable experiments in Physick and Chyrurgery. The fifth Edition, with
the Addition of a new Tract of the Anatomy of the Reins and Bladder, in
8[o]. Large.

Mr. _Nich. Culpeppers_ Judgment of Diseases, called _Symoteca Uranica_;
also a Treatise of Urine. A Work useful for all that study Physick, in
8[o]. Large.

Mr. _Nich. Culpepper_'s School of Physick, or the experimental Practise
of the whole Art, wherein are contained all inward Diseases from the
Head to the Foot, with their proper and effectual Cures. Such dyet set
down as ought to be observed in sickness and in health, in 8[o]. Large.

The Compleat Midwifes practice Enlarged, in the most weighty and high
concernment of the birth of man, containing a perfect Directory or Rules
for Midwives and Nurses; as also a Guide for Women in their Conception,
Bearing and Nursing of Children from the experience of our English,
_viz._ Sir _Theodoret Mayrn_, Dr. _Chamberlain_, Mr. _Nich. Culpepper_,
with the Instructions of the Queen of _Frances_ Midwife to her Daughter
in 8[o]. Large. Illustrated with several Cuts of Brass.

_Blagraves_ suppliment or enlargement to Mr. _Nich. Culpeppers_ English
Physitian, containing a description of the form, place and time,
Celestial Government of all such Plants as grow in _England_, and are
omitted in his Book called the English Physitian, Printed in the same
Volume, so as it may be bound with the English Physitian, in 8[o].
Large.

_De Succo pancreatico_, or a Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the
nature and office of the Panecratick Juyce or Sweet-Bread in men,
shewing its generation in the Body, what Diseases arise by its
Visitation; together with the Causes and Cures of Agues and intermitting
Fevers, hitherto so difficult and uncertain, with several other things
worthy of Note. Written by that famous Physitian _D. Reg. de Graff_.
Illustrated with divers Cuts in Brass; in 8[o]. Large.

Great _Venus_ unmaskt, being a full discovery of the French Pox or
Venereal Evil. By _Gidion Harvey_ M.D. in 8[o]. Large.

The Anatomy of Consumptions, the Nature and Causes, Subject, Progress,
Change, Signs, Prognostications, Preservations and several methods in
Curing Consumptions, Coughs and Spitting of Blood; together with a
Discourse of the Plague. By _Gidian Harvey_, in 8[o]. Large.

Elenchus of Opinions concerning the Small Pox; by _Tobias Whitaker_
Physitian to his Majesty; together with problemical questions concerning
the Cure of the French Pox; in 12[o].

_Praxis Catholica_, or the Country-mans universal Remedy, wherein is
plainly set down the nature of all Diseases with their Remedies;
in 8[o].

The Queens Closet opened, incomparable secrets in Physick and
Chyrurgery, Preserving, Conserving and Canding; which was presented unto
the Queen by the most experienced persons of their times; in 12[o].
Large.

The Gentlemans Jockie and approved Farrier; instructing in the Nature,
Causes, and Cures of all Diseases incident to Horses, with an exact
method of Breeding, Buying, Dieting, and other ways of ordering all
sorts of Horses; in 8[o]. Large.

The Country mans Treasure, shewing the Nature, Cause and Cure of all
Diseases incident to Cattel, _viz._ Oxen, Cows and Calves, Sheep, Hogs
and Dogs, with proper means to prevent their common Diseases and
Distempers being very useful receits, as they have been practised by the
long experience of forty years; by _James Lambert_, in 8[o]. Large.

Syncfoyle Improved, a discourse shewing the utility and benefit which
_England_ hath and may receive by the Grass called Syncfoyle, and
answering all objections urged against it; in 4[o].


Pharamond that famed Romance, being the History of _France_, in twelve
Parts; by the Author of _Cleopatra_ and _Cassandra_; _Folio_.

_Parthenissa_ that famed Romance.

A short History of the late English Rebellion; by _M. Needham_, in 4[o].

The Ingenious Satyr against Hypocrites; in 4[o].

Wits Interpreter, the English _Parnassus_, or a sure guide to those
admirable accomplishments that compleat the English Gentry, in the most
acceptable qualifications of Discourse or Writting; in which briefly the
whole mystery of those pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and Love are
made easie, in divers tracts; in 8[o]. Large.

Mysteries of Love and Eloquence, or the Art of Wooing and Complementing,
as they are managed in the _Spring-Garden_, _Hide-Park_, and other
places; in 8[o]. Large.

The maiden-head lost by Moon-light, or the Adventure of the Meadow; by
_Joseph Kepple_, in 4[o].

_Vercingerixa_, a new Droll; composed on occasion of the pretended
_German Princess_, in 4[o].

_Meronides_, or _Virgils_ Traverstry, being a new Paraphrase upon the
fifth and sixth Book of _Virgils Æneas_ in _Burlesque_ verse; by the
Author of the Satyr against Hypocrites.

The Poems of Sir _Austin Corkin_, together with his Plays; collected in
one Volume, in 8[o].

_Gerania_, a new Discovery of a little sort of People called _Pigmies_
with a lively discription of their stature, habit manners, buildings,
Knowledge and Government; by _Joshua Barns_, of _Emmanuel_ Colledge in
_Cambridge_, in 8[o].

The Woman is as good as the Man, or the equality of both Sexes Written
originally in _French_, and translated in to English.

The Memoirs of Madam _Mary Carlton_, commonly called the _German
Princess_; being a Narrative of her Life and Death, interwoven with many
strange and pleasant passages, from the time of her Birth to her
Execution; in 8[o].

_Cleaveland's_ Genuine Poems, Orations, Epistles, purged from many false
and spurious ones which had usurped his name. To which is added many
never before printed or published, according to the Author's own Copies;
with a Narrative of his Life, in 8[o]. large.

Newly Reprinted the exquisite Letters of _Mr. Robart Loveday_, the late
admired Translater of the three first Volumes, of _Cleopatra_, published
by his Brother _Mr. Anthony Loveday_, in 8[o]. large.

_Troades_, a Translation out of _Seneca_; in 8[o].

_Wallographea_, or the _Britain_ described, being a Relation of a
pleasant Journey into _Wales_; wherein are set down several remarkable
passages that occurred in the way thither; and also many choice
observables, and notable commemorations concerning the state and
condition, the nature and humour, Actions, Manners and Customs of that
Country and People, in 8[o].

Wit and Drollery, Jovial poems, corrected and amended with new
Additions; in 8[o] large.

_Adaga Scholica_, or a Collection of _Scotch Proverbs_ and _Proverbial
phrases_, in 12[o]. very useful and delightful.

A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, shewing the Nature and Measures
of Crown Lands, Assessments, Customs, Poll-monies, Lotteries,
Benevolence, Penalty Monopolies, Offices, Tythes, Raising of Coines,
Hearth-money, Excise, and with several intersperst Discourses and
Digressions concerning Wars, the Church Universities, Rents, and
Purchases, Usury and Exchange, Banks and Lumbards, Registers for
Conveyances, Buyers, Insurances, Exportation of Money and Wool, Free
Ports Coynes Housing Liberty of Conscience; by Sir _William Pette_
Knight, in 4[o].

_England_ described through the several Counties and Shires thereof,
briefly handled; some things also premised to set forth the Glory of
this Nation, by _Edward Leigh_, Esq;

_Englands_ Worthies, Select Lives of the most eminent persons from
_Constantine_ down to this present year 1684. by _William Winstandly_
Gent. in 8[o] large.

The Glories and Triumphs of his Majesty King _Charles_ the Second, being
a Collection of all Letters, Speeches, and all other choice passages of
State since his Majesties return from _Breda_, till after his
Coronation, in 8[o] large.

The _Portugal_ History, describing the said Country, with the Customs
and Uses among them, in 8[o] large.

A New Survey of the Turkish Government compleated, with divers Cuts,
being an exact and absolute discovery of what is worthy of knowledge, or
any way satisfactory to Curiosity in that mighty Nation, in 8[o] large.

The Antiquity of _China_, or an Historical Essay, endeavouring a
probability, that the Language of the Empire of _China_, is the
primitive Language spoken through the whole world before the Confusion
of _Babel_; wherein the Customs and Manners of _Chineans_ are presented,
and Ancient and Modern Authors consulted with. Illustrated with a large
Map of the Country, in 8[o] large.

An Impartial Description of _Surynham_ upon the Continent of _Guiana_ in
_America_; with a History of several strange Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
Serpents, Insects and Customs of that Colony, in 4[o].

_Ethecæ Christianæ_, or the School of Wisdom. It was dedicated to the
Duke of _Monmouth_ in his younger years, in 12[o].

The Life and Actions of the late renowned Prelate and Souldier
_Christopher Bernard Van Gale_ Bishop of _Munster_, in 8[o].

The Conveyancers Light, or the Compleat Clerk and Scriveners Guide,
being an exact draught of all Precedents and Assurances now in use,
likewise the Forms of all Bills, Answers and Pleadings in Chancery, as
they were penned by divers Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great
Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern, in 4[o] large.

The Privileges and Practices of Parliaments in _England_, Collected out
of the Common Law of this Land, in 4[o].

A Letter from _Oxford_ concerning the approaching Parliament then
called, 1681. in vindication of the King, the Church, and Universities,
4[o].

_Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva_, in 13 Sections; containing several
Catalogues of the numbers and dates of all Bundles of Original Writs of
Summons and Elections that are now in the Tower of _London_, in 4[o].

The new World of Words, or a general English Dictionary, containing the
proper signification and Etymologies of Words, derived from other
Languages, _viz._ Hebrew, Arabick, Syriack, Greek, Latin, Italian,
French, Spanish, British, Dutch, Saxon, useful for the advancement of
our English Tongue; together with the definition of all those terms that
conduce to the understanding of the Arts and Sciences, _viz._ Theology,
Philosophy, Logick, Rhetorick, Grammar, Ethic, Law, Magick, Chyrurgery,
Anatomy, Chymistry, Botanicks, Arithmetick, Geometry, Astronomy,
Astrology, Physiognomy, Chyromancy, Navigation, Fortification, Dyaling;
_cum multis aliis_, in fol.

_Cocker's_ new Copy-Book, or _Englands_ Pen-man, being all the curious
Hands engraved on 28 Brass plates, in folio.

_Sir Robert Stapleton's_ Translation of Juvenals Satyr, with Annotations
thereon, in folio.

The Rudiments of the Latine Tongue, by a method of Vocabulary and
Grammar; the former comprising the Primitives, whether Noun or Verb,
ranked in their several Cases; the latter teaching the forms of
Declension and Conjugation, with all possible plainness: To which is
added the Hermonicon, _viz._ A Table of those Latin words, which their
sound and signification being meerly resembled by, the English are the
sooner learned thereby, for the use of Merchant Taylors School, in 8[o]
large.

_Indiculis Universalis_, or the whole Universe in Epitomie, wherein the
names of almost all the works of Nature, of all Arts and Sciences, and
their most necessary terms are in English, Latin and French methodically
digested, in 8[o] large.

_Farnaby's_ Notes on _Juvinal_ and _Persius_ in 12[o].

_Clavis Grammatica_, or the ready way to the Latin Tongue, containing
most plain demonstrations for the regular Translating of English into
Latin, with instructions how to construe and parse Authors, fitted for
such as would attain to the Latin Tongue, by _I. B._ Schoolmaster.

The English Orator, or Rhetorical Descents by way of declamation upon
some notable Themes, both Historical and Philosophical, in 8[o].


ADVERTISEMENT.

_There is sold by the said _Obadiah Blagrave_, a Water of such an
excellent Nature and Operation for preservation of the Eyes, that the
Eye being but washed therewith once or twice a day, it not only takes
away all hot Rhumes and Inflamations, but also preserveth the Eye after
a most wonderful manner; a Secret which was used by a most Learned
Bishop: By the help of which Water he could read without the use of
spectacles at 90 years of Age. A Bottle of which will cost but 1 s._


FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


Errors and Inconsistencies Noted by Transcriber


Unchanged Text

  Many compound words occur in up to three forms: with hyphen; as two
  separate words; and as a single unhyphenated word. Hyphens at line
  break were retained unless the word was consistently hyphenless
  elsewhere. Missing spaces between words were supplied when
  unambiguous.

Recurring Usages and Variant Spellings

  beatten; Dear [for Deer]; galon; oatmel; somtimes
    [These spellings are rare but each occurs at least once.]
  Boyled
    [The spelling with "y" occurs _only_ in the header for Section I.
    Both "boil'd" and "boiled" are used in the body text.]
  lay a lay of ...
    [The word "layer" also occurs, but "lay" is more common.]
  Olive, Oline
    [The word "Olive"--the meat preparation, not the fruit--was written
    "Oline" everywhere in the Index, and occasionally in the body text.
    The unrelated "Olines" are birds.]
  Rabit
    [Note that the word is consistently spelled with one "b" _except_
    in the Index.]
  Snite
    [Probably a variant of "Snipe", but in some books it is understood
    as a different bird.]
  roast, toast
    [Both words can be applied to meats.]
  give it a walm
    [The word "walm" is always used in this construction. It appears to
    mean "bring to a boil". Some occurrences of "warm" may be errors
    for "walm".]

Body Text

  Pistaches, PineApple seed, or Almonds
    [Capitalization unchanged; "white-Wine" is similar.]
  currans, pers, oyl, and vinegar
    [Element "pers" is at line-beginning; missing syllable may be
    "pep-" or "ca-".]
  mingle alltogether, then have slices of a leg of veal
    [Elsewhere, text has "all together" or, rarely, "altogether".]
  then afterwards dry them and them.
    [Missing word could not be deduced.]
  To make black Puddings an excellent way.
    [Index reference has "Puddings white"; see recipe.]
  giue the capon a full gorge thereof
    [Archaic use of letter "u" unchanged.]
  Wivos me quidos [see note on Index]

Index

  The order of entries in the Index was unchanged.

  Eggs in the Spanish fashion, call'd, Wivos qme uidos
    [The Index is clearly wrong, but the body text "me quidos" may also
    be garbled. "Wivos" is "Huevos"; the rest could not be deduced.]
  Puddings white  [see note on body text "black Puddings"]
  Wheat leach of cream  [body text has "white"]


Catchwords

  In several places, text at the beginning of a page was corrected from
  the catchword on the previous page:

  Take a goose being roasted, and
    ["take a goose"; catchword is capitalized "Take"]
  take off the rind being finely kindled
    ["be-//finely kindled"; catchword is "ing"]
  Parsley and Onions minced together
    ["min-//together"; catchword is "-ced"]
  must not be so hot as to colour white paper
    ["to//lour white paper"; catchword is "colour"]


Typographical Errors

  then lay your pinions on each side contrary  [you pinions]
  9 Bolonia sausages, and anchoves  [an/Choves at line break]
  Then have ten sweet breads, and ten pallets fried  [aud]
  Then again have some boil'd Marrow and twelve  [boild'd]
  Other Rice Puddings.  [Rich]
  Other forcing of calves udder boiled and cold  [calves uddder]
  _First, of raw Beef._  [Beeef]
  then have boil'd carrots  [carrrots]
  and being cold take off  ["b" printed upside-down]
  lay on the kunckle of beef  [kunckle]
  Thus also you may do hiefers' udders  [uddders]
  Beef fried otherways, being roasted and cold.  [otheways]
  To bake a Flank of Beef in a Collar.  [Lo bake]
  toasts of houshold bread  [houshhold]
    [the spelling "household" does not occur]
  slice it in to thin slices  [slice is in to]
    ["in to" is less common than "into", but does occur]
  with grapes, or gooseberries or barberries  [barbeeries]
  with nutmegs, pepper, and salt  [papper]
  6. Chop't parsley, verjuyce, butter, sugar, and gravy.  [buttter]
  beaten cinamon, sugar, and a whole clove or two  [aud a whole]
  Cut a leg of veal into thin slices  [slies]
  give it two or three warms on the fire  [two or the warms]
  setting a dish under it to catch the gravy  [seetting]
  a little beef-suet also minced  [litlte]
  _To Make strong Wine Vinegar into Balls._  [stong]
  Take crabs as soon as the kernels turn black  [Make crabs]
  6. Core them and save the cores  [5. Core]
  put it in a barrel with the quinces  [barrrel]
  To make Pancakes.  [maka]
  serve them with fine sugar.  [fina]
    [These two errors are in the same recipe.]
  Boil the rice tender in milk  [race]
    [The word "race" occurs often, but only as a measure of ginger.]
  yolks of eggs, rose-water, and sugar  [ann sugar]
  5. Chine it as before with the bones in  [3. Chine]
  (or not lard them)  [or uot]
  the herbs, and spices, being mingled together
    [text has "and spices,/ing mingled" at line break]
  three of wine-vinegar, or verjuyce  [verjyce]
  and some preserved barberries or cherries.  [chreries]
  and a quarter of a pint of rose water  [a pine of]
  bake it in a dish as other Florentines  [Floren-tines]
    [mid-line hyphen probably inherited from an earlier edition with
    different line breaks]
  then fill your pie after this manner  [mnnner]
  some barberries, some yolks of raw eggs  [yolks af]
  Make the paste with a peck of flour  [hf flour]
  four or five spoonfuls of fair water  [four our or five]
  work up all cold together  [togther]
  cut it into little square bits as big as a nutmeg  [litttle]
  White-Pots, Fools, Wassels  [Wasssls]
  Thus you may do wardens or pears  [thus yon]
  turn it into colours, red, white, or yellow  [colous]
  (and if you please, beat some musk and ambergriese in it)  [musst]
    ["musk and ambergriese" occurs several times]
  mix all these well together with a little cream  [litlle]
  Take a quart of good thick sweet cream  ["T" printed upside down]
  stir it and boil it thick  ["i" in first "it" printed upside down]
  Boil a Capon in water and salt very tender  [Copon]
  Take as much wine as water  [muck]
  and wash them in warm water from the grounds  [aad]
  take out the gall, then save the blood  [the save]
  serve it on French bread in a fair scowr'd dish
    [words "it" and "a" reversed]
  To bake a Carp otherways to be eaten hot.  [to be heaten]
  two or three anchoves being cleansed and minced  [beina cleansed]
  alter the taste at your pleasure  [at you pleasure]
  better paste than that which is made for pyes  ["that" for "than"]
  Take as much water as will cover them  [ar much]
  stew them together an hour on a soft fire  [au hour]
  lay the meat on the sauce  [sance]
  put into them hard eggs cut into rounds  [hards eggs]
  boil the yolks in one bladder  [in on bladder]
  drink of it every morning half a pint blood-warm  [mornig]
  Excellent Ways for Feeding of Poultrey.  [Exce!lent]
    [This line is printed in italics. The character is unambiguously
    an exclamation mark, not a defective "l".]

  [Index]
  _Eggs fryed as round as a ball_  Ibid  [Iid]
  O.  [N.]

  [Advertising]
  very fit for these present times  [persent]
  containing several Catalogues  [Catalognes]


Missing or Duplicated Words

  let the other ends lie cut in the dish  [the the dish]
  at the end of three days take the groats out  [the the end]
  pour on the sauce with some slic't lemon  [the the sauce]
  and half a dozen of slic't onions  [half a a dozen]
  tie up the top of the pot  [the the top]
  then take the tongue being ready boil'd  [being being]
  as you do veal, (in page ___)
    [page number and closing parenthesis missing; reference may be to
    page 225 "_To bake a Loin, Breast, or Rack of Veal or Mutton._"]
  then mince the brain and tongue with a little sage  [brain tongue]
  either in slices or in the whole collar  [in in the whole]
  and serve it up with scraped sugar  [serve it serve it]
  half an ounce of ginger  [an an ounce]
  or boil the cream with a stick of cinamon  [of of cinamon]
  set it over the fire in clean scowred pan  [the the fire]
  a quarter of a pound of good sweet butter  [of of good]
  and pour the cream into it  [the the cream]
  boil it to the thickness of an apple moise  [to to the]
  and being cold take off the fat on the top  [take take off]
  put the clearest to the herrings  [the the clearest]
  alter the taste at your pleasure  [the the taste]
  then set on the tops and scrape on sugar  [the the tops]
  balls of parmisan, as big as a walnut  [as big a walnut]
  [Index]
  _Neats feet larded and roasted_  [page reference missing]
  _Norfolk fool._  [page reference missing]
    [These two entries are consecutive.]
  [Advertising]
  with the Subject of Dreams made plain  [of of Dreams]


Longer Duplication, text as printed with line breaks as shown:

    To make paste for the pie, take two quarts and a
  pint of fine flour, four or five yolks of raw eggs, and half
  a pound of fine flour, four or five yolks of raw eggs, and
  half a pound of sweet butter,


Punctuation

  Errors in punctuation were silently corrected. In the Index, "Ibid"
  was regularized to "Ibid."