We have before us a little volume by Mr. Willich, the able Actuary of the
University Life Assurance Society, entitled _Popular Tables arranged in a
new Form, giving Information at Sight for ascertaining, according to the
Carlisle Table of Mortality, the Value of Lifehold, Leasehold, and Church
Property, Renewal Fines, &c., the Public Funds, Annual Average Price and
Interest on Consols from 1731 to 1851; also various interesting and useful
Tables, equally adapted to the Office and the Library Table_. Ample as is
this title-page, it really gives but an imperfect notion of the varied
contents of this useful library and writing-desk companion. For instance,
Table VIII. of the Miscellaneous Tables gives the average price of Consols,
with the average rate of interest, from 1731 to 1851; but this not only
shows when Consols were highest and when lowest, but also what
Administration was then in power, and the chief events of each year. We
give this as one instance of the vast amount of curious information here
combined; and we would point out to historical and geographical students
the notices of Chinese Chronology in the preface, and the Tables of Ancient
and Modern Itinerary Measures, as parts of the work especially deserving of
their attention. In short, Mr. Willich's _Popular Tables_ form one of those
useful volumes in which masses of scattered information are concentrated in
such a way as to render the book indispensable to all who have once tested
its utility.

_Mormonism, its History, Doctrines, and Practices_, by the Rev. W. Sparrow
Simpson, is a small pamphlet containing the substance of two lectures on
this pestilent heresy, delivered by the author before the Kennington Branch
of the Church of England Young Men's Society, and is worth the attention of
those who wish to know something of this now wide-spread mania.

_On the Custom of Borough-English in the County of Sussex_, by George R.
Corner, Esq. This well-considered paper on a very curious custom owes its
origin, we believe, to a Query in our columns. We wish all questions
agitated in "N. & Q." were as well illustrated as this has been by the
learning and ingenuity of Mr. Corner.

_A Narrative of Practical Experiments proving to Demonstration the
Discovery of Water, Coals, and Minerals in the Earth by means of the
Dowsing Fork or Divining Rod, &c., collected, reported, and edited_ by
Francis Phippen. A curious little pamphlet on a _fact_ in Natural
Philosophy, which we believe no philosopher can either understand or
account for.

SERIALS RECEIVED.--_Murray's Railway Reading: History as a Condition of
Social Progress_, by Samuel Lucas. An able lecture on an interesting
subject.--_The Traveller's Library_, No. 46.: _Twenty Years in the
Philippines_, by De la Gironière. One of the best numbers of this valuable
series.--_Cyclopædia Bibliographica_, Part XI., August. This eleventh Part
of Mr. Darling's useful Catalogue extends from James Ibbetson to Bernard
Lamy.--_Archæologia Cambrensis, New Series, No. XV._: containing, among
other papers of interest to the inhabitants of the principality, one on the
arms of Owen Glendwr, by the accomplished antiquary to whom our readers
were indebted for a paper on the same subject in our own columns.

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

  SOWERBY'S ENGLISH BOTANY, with or without Supplementary Volumes.
  DUGDALE'S ENGLAND AND WALES, Vol. VIII. London, L. Tallis.
  LINGARD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. Second Edition, 1823, 9th and following
      Volumes, in Boards.
  LONG'S HISTORY OF JAMAICA.
  LIFE OF THE REV. ISAAC MILLES. 1721.
  SIR THOMAS HERBERT'S THRENODIA CAROLINA: or, Last Days of Charles I. Old
      Edition, and that of 1813 by Nicol.
  SIR THOMAS HERBERT'S TRAVELS IN ASIA AND AFRICA. Folio.
  LETTERS OF THE HERBERT FAMILY.
  BISHOP MOSLEY'S VINDICATION. 4to. 1683.
  LIFE OF ADMIRAL BLAKE, written by a Gentleman bred in his Family. London.
      12mo. With Portrait by Fourdrinier.
  OSWALDI CROLLII OPERA. Genevæ, 1635. 12mo.
  UNHEARD-OF CURIOSITIES, translated by Chilmead. London, 1650. 12mo.
  BEAUMONT'S PSYCHE. Second Edition. Camb. 1702. fol.
  MEMOIRS OF THE ROSE, by Mr. John Holland. 1 Vol. 12mo. 1824.
  LITERARY GAZETTE, 1834 to 1845.
  ATHENÆUM, commencement to 1835.
  A NARRATIVE OF THE HOLY LIFE AND HAPPY DEATH OF MR. JOHN ANGIER. London,
      1685.
  MOORE'S MELODIES. 15th Edition.
  WOOD'S ATHENÆ OXONIENSES (ed. Bliss). 4 vols. 4to. 1813-20.
  THE COMPLAYNTS OF SCOTLAND. 8vo. Edited by Leyden. 1804.
  SHAKSPEARE'S PLAYS. Vol. V. of Johnson and Steevens's edition, in 15
      vols. 8vo. 1739.

*** _Correspondents sending Lists of Books Wanted are requested to send
their names._

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices to Correspondents.

MR. G. FURRIAN_'s offer is declined with thanks_.

E. W., _who inquires respecting the letters_ N _and_ M _in the Book of
Common Prayer, is referred to_ Vol. i., p. 415.; Vol. ii., p. 61.; Vol.
iii., pp. 323. 437.

T. _and other Correspondents who have written on the subject of Collodion
are informed that we shall next week publish a farther communication from_
DR. DIAMOND _upon this point_.

ADDENDUM.--Vol. viii., p. 104., add to end of Query on Fragments in
Athenæus, "D'Israeli's _Cur. Lit._, Bailey's _Fragmenta Comicorum_."

_A few complete sets of_ "NOTES AND QUERIES," Vols. i. to vii., _price
Three Guineas and a Half, may now be had; for which early application is
desirable_.

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them to
their Subscribers on the Saturday_.

{139}

       *       *       *       *       *


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY,

3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

Founded A.D. 1842.

_Directors._

  H. E. Bicknell, Esq.
  T. S. Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
  G. H. Drew, Esq.
  W. Evans, Esq.
  W. Freeman, Esq.
  F. Fuller, Esq.
  J. H. Goodhart, Esq.
  T. Grissell, Esq.
  J. Hunt, Esq.
  J. A. Lethbridge, Esq.
  E. Lucas, Esq.
  J. Lys Seager, Esq.
  J. B. White, Esq.
  J. Carter Wood, Esq.

_Trustees._

W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.; George Drew, Esq.; T. Grissell, Esq.

_Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

_Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through temporary
difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given upon application to
suspend the payment at interest, according to the conditions detailed on
the Prospectus.

Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100l., with a Share in
three-fourths of the Profits:--

  Age      _£  s.  d._
   17       1  14   4
   22       1  18   8
   27       2   4   5
   32       2  10   8
   37       2  18   6
   42       3   8   2

ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

Now ready, price 10s. 6d., Second Edition, with material additions,
INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION: being a TREATISE on BENEFIT BUILDING
SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of Land Investment, exemplified in
the Cases of Freehold Land Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a
Mathematical Appendix on Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR
SCRATCHLEY, M.A., Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3.
Parliament Street, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

