Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 103.


September 10, 1892.


WHY I DON'T WRITE PLAYS.

(_FROM THE COMMON-PLACE BOOK OF A NOVELIST._)

Because it is so much pleasanter to read one's work than to hear it on
the Stage.

Because Publishers are far more amiable to deal with than
Actor-Managers.

Because "behind the scenes" is such a disappointing place--except in
Novels.

Because why waste three weeks on writing a Play, when it takes only
three years to compose a Novel?

Because Critics who send articles to Magazines inviting one to
contribute to the Stage, have no right to dictate to us.

Because a fairly successful Novel means five hundred pounds, and a
fairly successful Play yields as many thousands--why be influenced by
mercenary motives?

Because all Novelists hire their pens in advance for years, and have
no time left for outside labour.

And last, and (perhaps) not least, Why don't I send in a Play? Because
I _have_ tried to write _one_, and find I can't quite manage it!

       *       *       *       *       *

According to recent accounts, the attitude of the Salvation Army in
Canada may be fairly described as "Revolting."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EQUIVOCAL.

_Rising Young Physician_ (_who cured so many Patients in last year's
Epidemic_). "NOT MUCH CHANCE OF MORE INFLUENZA IN ENGLAND _THIS_
WINTER, I FANCY!"

_His Wife._ "LET US HOPE FOR THE BEST, DEAREST!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

A DIARY OF THE DEAD SEASON.

(_SUGGESTED BY THE CONTENTS BILLS._)

_Monday._--First appearance of "the Epidemic." Good bold line with
reference to Russia. Not of sufficient importance to head the Bill,
but still distinctly taking.

_Tuesday._--Quite a feature. Centre of the Bill with sub-lines of
"Horrible Disclosures," and "Painful Scenes." Becoming a boom. To be
further developed to-morrow.

_Wednesday._--Bill all "Epidemic." Even Cricket sacrificed to make
room for it. "News from Abroad." "Horrors at Hamburg." No idea it
would turn out so well. A perfect treasure-trove at this quiet season
of the year!

_Thursday._--Nothing but "Epidemic"--"Arrival in
England"--"Precautions Everywhere." Let the boom go! It feeds itself!
Nearly as good as a foreign war!

_Friday._--Still "the Epidemic," but requires strengthening.
"Spreading in the Provinces," but still, not like it was. Falling
flat.

_Saturday._--A good sensational Murder! The very thing for the
Contents Bills. Exit "the Epidemic," until again wanted.

       *       *       *       *       *

SONGS OF SOCIETY;

I.--INTRODUCTORY. TO MY LYRE.

    ["Smoothly written _vers de Société_, where a _boudoir_
    decorum is, or ought always to be, preserved; where sentiment
    never surges into passion, and where humour never overflows
    into boisterous merriment."--_Frederick Locker's Preface to
    "Lyra Elegantiarum."_]

[Illustration]

  Dear Lyre, your duty now you know!
  If one would sing with grace and glow
          Songs of Society,
  One must not dream of fire, or length,
  Or vivid touch, or virile strength,
          Or great variety.

  Among the Muses of Mayfair
  A Bacchanal with unbound hair,
          And loosened girdle,
  Would be as purely out of place
  As Atalanta in a race
          O'er hedge or hurdle:

  Our Muse, dear Lyra, must be trim,
  Must not indulge in vagrant whim,
          Of voice or vesture.
  Boudoir decorum will allow
  No gleaming eye, no glowing brow,
          No ardent gesture.

  Society, which is our theme,
  Is like a well-conducted stream
          Which calmly ripples.
  We sing the World where no one feels
  Too pungently, or hates, or steals,
          Or loves, or tipples.

  And should you hint that down below
  The subtle siren all men know
          Is hiding _her_ face,
  Our answer is: "That may be true,
  But boudoir bards have nought to do
          Save with the surface."

  And therefore, though Society feel
  The Proletariat's heavy heel
          Its kibe approaching,
  Some luxuries yet are left to sing,
  The Opera-Box, the Row, the Ring,
          And Golf, and Coaching.

  Not e'en the Socialistic scare
  The dandyish and the debonair
          Has quite demolished;
  Whilst Privilege hath still a purse,
  There's yet a chance for flowing verse,
          And periods polished.

  If IBSEN, BELLAMY, and GEORGE,
  Raise not the boudoir critic's gorge
          Beyond all bearing,
  Light lyrics may she not endure,
  On social ills above her cure,
          Below her caring?

  Muse, with Society we may toy
  Without impassioned grief or joy,
          Or boisterous merriment;
  May sing of Sorrow with a smile;
  At least, it may be worth our while
          To try the experiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUITE THE TREBLE GLOUCESTER CHEESE!--The Three Quires' Festival this
week. Do the Three Quires appear in the Cathedral? If so, as each
quire means twenty-four sheets, there'll he quite a "Surplice Stock."

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTRIBUTION BY OUR OWN "MULEY HASSAN."--_Puzzle_--To find "three
Single Gentlemen rolled into one?" _Answer_--Sir EUAN SMITH.
_Explanation_--Sir, You, an' SMITH. [_Exit_ MULEY HASSAN _going to
Bray._

       *       *       *       *       *

Why ought a Quack's attendance on a patient to be gratis?--Because he
is No-Fee-sician.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "LA-BOUCHE-RE(-NARD) ET LES RAISINS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A MERE PREJUDICE.

_Tourist._ "I SEE YOU EMPLOY A GOOD MANY WOMEN ABOUT HERE, FARMER."

_Farmer._ "HAVE TO DO, HARVEST-TIME, SIR; BUT FOR MYSELF I MUCH PREFER
MANUAL LABOUR!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

MORE REASONS FOR STOPPING IN TOWN.

_Commodore Buncombe._ Because I know those infernal Tentonners, and
---- Chartreuse jaune only makes me worse.

_William Sikes._ Because of the gross incompetence of my Counsel,
and the ridiculous adverse prepossessions of the Jury at my recent
appearance in public at the C.C.C.

_McStinger._ Because there's bonny braw air on the braes of Hampstead,
and it costs but a bawbee to get intil it.

_Fitz-Fluke._ Because, since that awkward affair at the Roulette Club,
my country invitations haven't come in.

_Capel Courtney._ Because those beastly bucket-shops have collared all
our business.

_Bumpshus, M.P._ Because the Lords of the Treasury (shabby crew
of place-hunters) declined to adopt my suggestion, and to place a
trooper, thoroughly well found, victualled, and overhauled, at the
disposal of any Members of the Lower House whose profound sense of
duty, and of the importance of the Imperial Federation idea, impelled
them to take a six-months' trip round the world at the nation's
expense.

_Theodore John Hook Straight._ Because of the old trouble--"got a
complaint in the chest."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PHILLIPOPOLIS.

_Toper Major_ (_over their third bottle of a Grand Vin_). I shay,
ol' f'ler, neksh year thinksh'll go see ex'bishun at Ph-Phipp--at
Philup-popple--

_Toper Minor._ I know, ol'f'ler. You mean Philipoppoppo--poppo--

_Toper Major._ Thatsh it--shame place. Have 'nother bo'l!

[_They drink._]

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE SPEECH OF MONKEYS."--Professor R.L. GARNER, who is a great
hand at "getting his Monkey up" (he was naturally a bit annoyed at
being, quite recently, accidentally prevented from giving his Monkey
lecture), is about to commence operations by adapting the old song
of "_Let us be Happy Together_" to Monkey Language, when it will
re-appear as "_Let us be Apey Together_." It will be first given at
Monkey Island on Thames.

       *       *       *       *       *

CRICKETERS WHO OUGHT TO BE GOOD HANDS AT PLAYING A TIE.--"The Eleven
of Notts."

       *       *       *       *       *

UN-BROCKEN VOWS.

Walpurgis Brocken Night at Crystal Palace last Thursday--Grand!
Jupiter Pluvius suspended buckets, and celestial water-works rested
awhile to make way for Terrestrial Fire-works. "Todgers's can do it
when it likes," as all Martin-Chuzzlewiters know, and BROCK can do it
too when _he_ likes. _À propos_ of DICKENS' quotation above, it is
on record that _Mr. Pickwick_ was once addressed as "Old Fireworks."
Where? When? and How? _Mr. Pickwick_, we are led to infer by the
commentary thereon, somewhat objected to the term, unless our
Pickwickian memory fail us--which is not improbable--but Mr. BROCK
would appropriate it to himself with pleasure, and be "'proud o' the
title' as the Living Skeleton said." Despite wind and weather, and
_contretemps_ generally, BROCK has never brocken faith with the
public. "_Facta non verba_" is his motto: and "_Facta_" means (here)
Fire-works.

       *       *       *       *       *

"GREAT BRITAIN AND THE GILBERT ISLANDS."--Captain DAVIS of H.M. Screw
Cruiser _Royalist_, on May 27, formally annexed "The Gilbert Islands."
Where was SULLIVAN? Or is it that Sir ARTHUR, having been annexed as a
Knight, was unable to interfere? Will D'OYLY CARTE explain?

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MENAGERIE RACE.

    SCENE--_The terrace in front of Hauberk Hall, which the_
    LARKSPURS _have taken for the Summer_. TIME--_An August
    afternoon. Miss STELLA LARKSPUR--a young lady with great
    energy and a talent for organisation--has insisted upon all
    the Guests taking part in a Menagerie Race._

_The Rev. Ninian Headnote, the Local Curate_ (_to Mr. PLUMLEY
DUFF--after uneasily regarding Miss STELLA, as she shakes up some
pieces of folded paper in a hat_). Can you give me any idea of the
precise nature of this amusement--er--nothing resembling a gambling
transaction, I suppose?--or I really--

_Mr. Plumley Duff_. Well, I'm given to understand that we shall each
be expected to take an animal of some sort, and drive it along with a
string tied to its leg. Sounds childish--to _me_.

_The Curate_ (_relieved_). Oh, exactly, I see. Most entertaining,
I'm sure! (_He coos._) What wonderful ingenuity one sees in devising
ever-fresh pastimes, do we not? Indeed, yes!

_Miss Stella_. There, I've shuffled all the animals now. (_Presenting
the hat_.) Mr. HEADNOTE, will you draw first?

_The Curate_. Oh, really. Am I to take one of these? Charmed! (_He
draws._) Now I wonder what my fate--(_Opening the paper_.) The Monkey!
(_His face falls._) _Is_ there a Monkey here? _Dear_ me, how _very_
interesting!

_Dick Gatling_ (_of H.M. Gunboat "Weasel"_). Brought him over my
last cruise from Colombo. No end of a jolly little beast--bites like
the--like _blazes_, you know!

_Miss Stella_ (_to her Cousin_). Now, DICK, I won't have you taking
away poor Jacko's character like that. He's only bitten BINNS--and,
well, there _was_ the gardener's boy--but I'm sure he _teased_ him.
_You_ won't tease him, will you, Mr. HEADNOTE?

_The Curate_. I--I shouldn't dream of it, Miss STELLA,--on the
contrary, I--(_To himself._) Was it quite discreet to let myself
be drawn into this? Shall I not risk lowering my office by publicly
associating myself with a--a Monkey? I feel certain the Vicar would
disapprove strongly.

_Dick_ (_to Colonel KEMPTON_). Drawn _your_ animal yet, Sir?

_The Colonel_ (_heatedly_). Yes, I have--and I wish I'd kept out of
this infernal tomfoolery. Why the mischief don't they leave a man in
peace and quietness on a hot afternoon like this? Here am I, routed
out of a comfortable seat to go and drive a confounded White Rabbit,
Sir! Idiotic, _I_ call it!

_The Curate_. Pardon me, Colonel KEMPTON; but if you object to the
Rabbit, I would not at all mind undertaking it myself--and you could
take my Monkey--

_The Colonel_. Thanks--but I won't deprive you. A Rabbit is quite
responsibility enough for me!

_The Curate_ (_to himself, disappointed_). He's afraid of a poor
harmless Monkey--and he an Army man, too! But I _don't_ see why _I_--

_Miss Gussie Grissell_. Oh, Mr. HEADNOTE, _isn't_ it ridiculous!
They've given me a Kitten! It makes me feel too absurdly young!

_The Curate_ (_eagerly_). If you would prefer a--a more appropriate
animal, there's a Monkey, which I am sure--(_To himself, as Miss
G. turns away indignantly_). This Monkey doesn't seem very
popular--there must be _someone_ here who--I'll try the American
Lady--they are generally eccentric. (_To Mrs. HEBER K. BANGS._) I hope
Fortune has been kind to you, Mrs. BANGS?

_Mrs. Bangs_. Well, I don't know; there _are_ quadrupeds that can trot
faster over the measured mile than a Tortoise, and that's _my_ animal.

_The Curate_ (_with sympathy_). Dear me! That is a trial, indeed, for
you! But if you would prefer something rather more exciting, I should
be most happy, I'm sure, to exchange my Monkey--

_Dick Gatling_ (_bustling up_). Hallo, what's that? No, no, Mrs.
BANGS--be true to your Tortoise. I tell you he's going to romp
in--Æsop's tip, don't you know? I've backed you to win or a place. I
say, what do you think _I_'ve drawn--the Mutton! Just my luck!

_The Curate_. DICK, just come this way a moment--I've a proposition
to make; it's occurred to me that the Monkey would feel more--more at
home with you, and, in short, I--

_Mr. Plumley Duff_ (_plaintively, to Miss CYNTHIA CHAFFERS_). I
shouldn't have minded any other animal--but to be paired off with a
Goose!

_Miss Chaffers_ (_consolingly_). You're better off than _I_ am, at all
events--I've got a Puppy!

_Mr. Duff_. Have you? (_After a pause--sentimentally_.) Happy Puppy!

_Miss C._ He'll be anything but a happy Puppy if he doesn't win.

_Mr. Duff_. Oh, but he's sure to. I know I would, if _I_ was your
Puppy!

_Miss C._ I'm not so sure of that. Don't they lodge objections, or
something, for boring?

_Mr. Fanshawe_. Can anybody inform me whether I'm expected to go and
catch my Peacock? Because I'll be hanged if--

_The Curate_. Oh, Miss STELLA, it's all right--Mr. GATLING thinks
that it would be better if he undertook the Monkey himself; so we've
arranged to--

_Miss Stella_. Oh, nonsense, DICK! I can't have you taking advantage
of Mr. HEADNOTE's good-nature like that. What's the use of drawing
lots at all if you don't keep to them? Of _course_ Mr. HEADNOTE will
keep the Monkey.

    [_The unfortunate Curate accepts his lot with Christian
    resignation_.

_Dick_. Well, _that's_ settled--but I say, STELLA, where's my Mutton's
moorings--and what's to be the course?

_Stella_. The course is straight up the Avenue from the Lodge to the
House, and I've told them to get all the beasts down there ready for
us; so we'd better go at once.

THE START.

_The Competitors_. STELLA, my dear, _mustn't_ Miss GRISSELL tell her
kitten not to claw my Tortoise's head every time he pokes his poor
nose out? It isn't fair, and it's damping all his enthusiasm!... Now,
Colonel KEMPTON, it isn't the Puppy's fault--you _know_ your Rabbit
began it!... Hi, STELLA, hold on a bit, my Mutton wants to lie down.
Mayn't I kick it up!... DUFF, old chap, your Goose is dragging her
anchor again, back her engines a bit, or there'll be a foul.... Miss
STELLA, I--I really _don't_ think this Monkey is quite well--his teeth
are chattering in such a _very_.... All right, _padre_, only his nasty
temper--jerk the beggar's chain. More than _that_!

