After the dance begins Hasjelti passes down the north side and joins
Hostjoghon at the east end of the dancers, Hasjelti keeping to the north
side of Hostjoghon. Three of the men, representing women, were dressed
in Navajo squaw dresses and three of them in Tusayan squaw dresses; they
held their arms horizontally to the elbow and the lower arm vertically,
and, keeping their feet close together, raised themselves simultaneously
on their toes. The dance was begun in single file, the men raising only
their right feet to any height and balancing on the left. After a minute
or two the line broke, the women passing over to the north side and the
men to the south side; almost instantaneously, however, they grouped
into a promiscuous crowd, women carrying a pine twig in each hand and
the men a gourd rattle in the right hand and a pine twig in the left.
The men's bodies were painted white and were nude, excepting the silk
scarfs and mountain lion and other skins worn around the loins. Just
before the stamping of the feet in the beginning of the dance, a rattle
was shaken by all the male dancers, which was the signal for a peculiar
back motion of the right arm and body and one which preceded the actual
dancing. The six males lean their bodies to the right side extending the
right hand backward, and then bringing it forward in a circular under
sweep around to the mouth with a hoot. They then turn and face the east,
and bending their bodies toward the south perform the same motion as
before, when they turn to the west and repeat it in that direction. At
the same time the leader and follower repeat their peculiar performance
with the fawn skin and wands to the east and west. Dancing promiscuously
for a few moments to song and rattle, the men representing women singing
in feminine tones, they form again in two lines, the women as before on
the north side. The man at the west end of the male line and the woman
at the same end of the female line, meeting each other midway between
the lines she passes her right arm through the arm of her partner, his
arm being bent to receive it; they pass between the line and are met a
short distance from the other end of the line by Hasjelti and
Hostjoghon, who dance up to meet them, the movement resembling closely
the old-fashioned Virginia reel. The couple then dance backward between
the lines to their starting point, then down again, when they separate,
the man taking his place in the rear of the male line and the woman hers
in the rear of the female line. This couple starting down the second
time, the man and woman immediately next in line lock arms and pass down
in the same manner, Hasjelti and Hostjoghon scarcely waiting for the
first couple to separate before dancing up to meet the second couple;
the remaining couples following in like order until the first couple
find themselves in their former position at the head of the line. Now a
group dance is indulged in for a minute or two when lines are again
formed, and a second figure exactly like the first is danced. This
figure was again repeated without variation, after which the men and
women fell into single file, and, led by Hasjelti and followed by
Hostjoghon, left the dancing ground. They did not go to the green,
however, but moved off a short distance to rest for a moment and
returned. Upon each return the invalid passed down the line on the north
side sprinkling each dancer with meal, Hasjelti and Hostjoghon
performing with the fawn skin and wands. This dance of four figures was
repeated twelve times, each time the dancers resting but a moment. After
the twelve dances the dancers passed to the green room, where they were
relieved by a second set of men. The second series of dances were
exactly like the first. There were twenty-one dances, four figures in
each dance, and each time the dancers appeared they were sprinkled with
meal by the invalid, while Hasjelti and Hostjoghon performed their
antics with fawn skin and wands. The third series embraced all the
dances exactly like the above. The fourth series embraced nineteen
dances. The only variation in this was that the leaders were often more
clownish in their performances, and upon several occasions only four men
representing women appeared. In this case two men danced together. Some
of the dancers dropped out from weariness, which caused diminution in
some of the sets. The last dance closed at the first light of day. The
song-priest had preceded the last dancers to the green room and awaited
their arrival to obtain the masks, which were his special property.


MYTHS OF THE NAVAJO.


CREATION OF THE SUN.

The first three worlds were neither good nor healthful. They moved all
the time and made the people dizzy. Upon ascending into this world the
Navajo found only darkness and they said "We must have light."

In the Ute Mountain lived two women, Ahsonnutli, the turquoise
hermaphrodite, and Yolaikaiason, the white-shell woman. These two women
were sent for by the Navajo, who told them they wished light. The Navajo
had already partially separated light into its several colors. Next to
the floor was white indicating dawn, upon the white blue was spread for
morning, and on the blue yellow for sunset, and next was black
representing night. They had prayed long and continuously over these,
but their prayers had availed nothing. The two women on arriving told
the people to have patience and their prayers would eventually be
answered.

Night had a familiar, who was always at his ear. This person said, "Send
for the youth at the great falls." Night sent as his messenger a
shooting star. The youth soon appeared and said, "Ahsonnutli, the
ahstjeohltoi (hermaphrodite), has white beads in her right breast and
turquoise in her left. We will tell her to lay them on darkness and see
what she can do with her prayers." This she did.[6] The youth from the
great falls said to Ahsonnutli, "You have carried the white-shell beads
and turquoise a long time; you should know what to say." Then with a
crystal dipped in pollen she marked eyes and mouth on the turquoise and
on the white-shell beads, and forming a circle around these with the
crystal she produced a slight light from the white-shell bead and a
greater light from the turquoise, but the light was insufficient.

  [Footnote 6: The old priest relating this myth now produced a pouch
  containing corn pollen and a crystal, which he dipped in the pollen
  and said, "Now we must all eat of this pollen and place some on our
  heads, for we are to talk about it."]

Twelve men lived at each of the cardinal points. The forty-eight men
were sent for. After their arrival Ahsonnutli sang a song, the men
sitting opposite to her; yet even with their presence the song failed to
secure the needed light. Two eagle plumes were placed upon each cheek of
the turquoise and two on the cheeks of the white-shell beads and one at
each of the cardinal points. The twelve men of the east placed twelve
turquoises at the east of the faces. The twelve men of the south placed
twelve white-shell beads at the south. The twelve men of the west placed
twelve turquoises at the west. Those of the north placed twelve
white-shell beads at that point. Then with the crystal dipped in corn
pollen they made a circle embracing the whole. The wish still remained
unrealized. Then Ahsonnutli held the crystal over the turquoise face,
whereupon it lighted into a blaze. The people retreated far back on
account of the great heat, which continued increasing. The men from the
four points found the heat so intense that they arose, but they could
hardly stand, as the heavens were so close to them. They looked up and
saw two rainbows, one across the other from east to west, and from north
to south. The heads and feet of the rainbows almost touched the men's
heads. The men tried to raise the great light, but each time they
failed. Finally a man and woman appeared, whence they knew not. The
man's name was Atseatsine and the woman's name was Atseatsan. They were
asked "How can this sun be got up." They replied, "We know; we heard the
people down here trying to raise it, and this is why we came."
"Chanteen" (sun's rays), exclaimed the man, "I have the chanteen; I have
a crystal from which I can light the chanteen, and I have the rainbow;
with these three I can raise the sun." The people said, "Go ahead and
raise it." When he had elevated the sun a short distance it tipped a
little and burned vegetation and scorched the people, for it was still
too near. Then the people said to Atseatsine and Atseatsan, "Raise the
sun higher," and they continued to elevate it, and yet it continued to
burn everything. They were then called upon to "lift it higher still, as
high as possible," but after at certain height was reached their power
failed; it would go no farther.

The couple then made four poles, two of turquoise and two of white-shell
beads, and each was put under the sun, and with these poles the twelve
men at each of the cardinal points raised it. They could not get it high
enough to prevent the people and grass from burning. The people then
said, "Let us stretch the world;" so the twelve men at each point
expanded the world. The sun continued to rise as the world expanded, and
began to shine with less heat, but when it reached the meridian the heat
became great and the people suffered much. They crawled everywhere to
find shade. Then the voice of Darkness went four times around the world
telling the men at the cardinal points to go on expanding the world.
"I want all this trouble stopped," said Darkness; "the people are
suffering and all is burning; you must continue stretching." And the men
blew and stretched, and after a time they saw the sun rise beautifully,
and when the sun again reached the meridian it was only tropical. It was
then just right, and as far as the eye could reach the earth was
encircled first with the white dawn of day, then with the blue of early
morning, and all things were perfect. And Ahsonnutli commanded the
twelve men to go to the east, south, west, and north, to hold up the
heavens (Yiyanitsinni, the holders up of the heavens), which office they
are supposed to perform to this day.


HASJELTI AND HOSTJOGHON.

Hasjelti and Hostjoghon were the children of Ahsonnutli, the turquoise,
and Yolaikaiason (white-shell woman, wife of the sun). Ahsonnutli placed
an ear of white corn and Yolaikaiason an ear of yellow corn on the
mountain where the fogs meet. The corn conceived, the white corn giving
birth to Hasjelti and the yellow corn to Hostjoghon. These two became
the great song-makers of the world. They gave to the mountain of their
nativity (Henry Mountain in Utah) two songs and two prayers; they then
went to Sierra Blanca (Colorado) and made two songs and prayers and
dressed the mountain in clothing of white shell with two eagle plumes
placed upright upon the head. From here they visited San Mateo Mountain
(New Mexico) and gave to it two songs and prayers, and dressed it in
turquoise, even to the leggings and moccasins, and placed two eagle
plumes on the head. Hence they went to San Francisco Mountain (Arizona)
and made two songs and prayers and dressed that mountain in abalone
shells with two eagle plumes upon the head. They then visited Ute
Mountain and gave to it two songs and prayers and dressed it in black
beads. This mountain also had two eagle plumes on its head. They then
returned to the mountain of their nativity to meditate, "We two have
made all these songs."

Upon inquiring of their mothers how they came into existence, and being
informed, they said, "Well, let our number be increased; we can not get
along with only two of us." The woman placed more yellow and white corn
on the mountain and children were conceived as before. A sufficient
number were born so that two brothers were placed on each of the four
mountains, and to these genii of the mountains the clouds come first.
All the brothers consulted together as to what they should live upon and
they concluded to make game, and so all game was created.

Navajo prayers for rain and snow are addressed to Hasjelti and
Hostjoghon. These gods stand upon the mountain tops and call the clouds
to gather around them. Hasjelti is the mediator between the Navajo and
the sun. He prays to the sun, "Father, give me the light of your mind,
that my mind may be strong; give me some of your strength, that my arm
may be strong, and give me your rays that corn and other vegetation may
grow." It is to this deity that the most important prayers of the Navajo
are addressed. The lesser deities have shorter prayers and less valuable
offerings made to them. Hasjelti communicates with the Navajo through
the feathered kingdom, and for this reason the choicest feathers and
plumes are placed in the cigarettes and attached to the prayer sticks
offered to him.


THE FLOATING LOGS.

A man sat thinking, "Let me see; my songs are too short; I want more
songs; where shall I go to find them?" Hasjelti appeared and, perceiving
his thoughts, said, "I know where you can go to get more songs." "Well,
I much want to get more, and I will follow you." When they reached a
certain point in a box canyon in the Big Colorado River they found four
gods (the Hostjobokon) at work hewing logs of cottonwood. Hasjelti said,
"This will not do; cottonwood becomes water-soaked; you must use pine
instead of cottonwood." The Hostjobokon then began boring the pine with
flint, when Hasjelti said, "That is slow work," and he commanded the
whirlwind to hollow the log. A Jerusalem cross was formed with one solid
log and a hollow one. The song-hunter entered the hollow log and
Hasjelti closed the end with a cloud, that the water of the river might
not enter when the logs were launched upon the great waters. The
Hostjobokon, accompanied by their wives, rode upon the logs, a couple
sitting on the end of each cross arm. These were accompanied by
Hasjelti, Hostjoghon, and two Naaskiddi, who walked on the banks to ward
the logs off from the shore. Hasjelti carried a squirrel skin filled
with tobacco from which to supply the gods on their journey. Hostjoghon
carried a staff ornamented with eagle and turkey plumes and a gaming
ring with two humming birds tied to it with white cotton cord. The two
Naaskiddi carried staffs of lightning.[7] After floating a long distance
down the river they came to waters that had a shore on one side only,
and they landed. Here they found people like themselves. These people,
on learning of the song-hunter's wish, gave to him many songs and they
painted pictures on a cotton blanket and said, "These pictures must go
with the songs. If we give this blanket to you you will lose it. We will
give you white earth and black coals which you will grind together to
make black paint, and we will give you white sand, yellow sand, and red
sand, and for the blue paint you will take white sand and black coals
with a very little red and yellow sand. These together will give you
blue.[8]"

  [Footnote 7: The Naaskiddi are hunchbacks; they have clouds upon
  their backs, in which seeds of all vegetation are held.]

  [Footnote 8: The Navajo will not use real blue coloring in their sand
  painting, but adhere strictly to the instructions of the gods. They
  do, however, use a bit of vermilion, when it can be obtained, to
  heighten the red coloring in the pouches.]

The song-hunter remained with these people until the corn was ripe.
There he learned to eat corn and he carried some back with him to the
Navajo, who had not seen corn before, and he taught them how to raise it
and how to eat it.

As the logs would not float upstream the song-hunter was conveyed by
four sunbeams, one attached to each end of the cross-logs, to the box
canyon whence he emerged. Upon his return he separated the logs, placing
an end of the solid log into the hollow end of the other and planted
this great pole in the river, whereto this day it is to be seen by those
so venturesome as to visit this point.

The old song priest who related this myth to me regretted that so few of
his people now visited the sacred spot.

"When I was young," he said, "many went there to pray and make
offerings."


NAIYENESGONY AND TOBAIDISCHINNI.

This world was destroyed five times. The first time by a whirlwind; the
second, by immense hail stones; the third, by smallpox, when each
pustule covered a whole cheek; the fourth, all was destroyed by
coughing; the fifth time Naiyenesgony and Tobaidischinni went over the
earth slaying all enemies.

These two boys were born at Tohatkle (where the waters are mated), near
Ute Mountain, in Utah; they were the children of Ahsonnutli. Ahsonnutli
and Yolaikaiason (the white-shell woman) were the creators of shells.
Ahsonnutli had a beard under her right arm and Yolaikaiason had a small
ball of flesh under her left arm from which they made all shells. The
eyes of Naiyenesgony and Tobaidischinni were shells placed on their
faces by Ahsonnutli; the shells immediately becoming brilliant the boys
could look upon all things and see any distance without their eyes
becoming weary. A stick colored black was placed to the forehead of
Naiyenesgony and one colored blue to that of Tobaidischinni. When
Naiyenesgony shook his head the stick remained firm on the forehead, but
he felt something in the palm of his hand, which proved to be three
kinds of seeds, and he said, "We must go by this." When Tobaidischinni
shook his head the stick dropped off the forehead and they thought a
long time and said, "We must go by this." This is why the deer sheds his
horns. In ceremonials the breath is drawn from sticks which are made to
represent the originals; the sticks are also held to wounds as a
curative.

These two boys grew from infancy to manhood in four days and on the
fourth day they made bows and arrows; on the fifth day they began using
them. Although they were the children of Ahsonnutli they did not know
her as their mother, but supposed her to be their aunt. Frequently they
inquired of her where they could find their father. She always told them
to stop their inquiries, for they had no father. Finally they said to
her, "We know we have a father and we intend to go and look for him."
She again denied that they had a father, but they were determined and
they journeyed far to the east and came to the house of the sun. The
house was of white shell, and the wife of the sun (Yolaikaiason) was
also of white shell. The wife inquired of the youths where they were
from, and, said she, "What do you want here?" They replied, "We came to
hunt our father." When the sun returned to his home in the evening he
discovered the youths as soon as he entered his house and he asked,
"Where are those two boys from?" The wife replied, "You say you never do
anything wrong when you travel; these two boys call you father and I
know they are your children." The wife was very angry. The sun sent the
boys off a distance and threw a great roll of black clouds at them
intending to kill them, but they were not injured, and they returned to
the house. He then pushed them against a sharp stone knife, but they
slipped by uninjured. Four times they were thrust against the knife, but
without injury. The sun finding his attempts unsuccessful said, "It is
so, you are my sons." The sun then ordered Hasjelti and Toneennili
(these two were special attendants upon the sun) to build a sweat house
and put the boys in, that they might die from the heat. Toneennili made
an excavation inside of the sweat house, put the boys into the hole, and
placed a rock over the hole and built a fire over the rock. When the
rock became very hot the sun ordered Toneennili to sprinkle it four
times with water, being careful to keep the entrance to the sweat house
closely covered. After a time he uncovered the entrance and removing the
rock the sun commanded the boys to come out. He did not expect to be
obeyed, as he thought and hoped the boys were dead, but they came out
unharmed. The sun then said, "You are indeed my own children; I have
tried in vain to destroy you." The boys wished to return to the woman
whom they supposed to be their aunt. Before departing the sun asked them
what they wished; they said, "We want bows and arrows, knives, and good
leggings. There are people around the world eating our people (the
Navajo). Some of these people are great giants and some are as small as
flies; we wish to kill them with lightning." The sun gave the youths
clothing that was invulnerable, and he gave them lightning with which to
destroy all enemies, and a great stone knife. They then went over the
world. Naiyenesgony killed with the lightning arrows and Tobaidischinni
scalped with his knife. After all enemies had been destroyed
Naiyenesgony and Tobaidischinni said to the Navajo, "Now we will leave
you and return to our home in the Ute Mountains, where the waters are
mated, but before leaving you we will give to you the ten songs and
prayers that will bring health and good fortune to your people.
Tobaidischinni is the parent of all waters."


THE BROTHERS.

The Tolchini (a Navajo clan) lived at Wind Mountain. One of the brothers
became crazy and he went off a long way, and on his return brought with
him a pine bough; a second time he returned with corn, and from each
trip he brought something new and had a story to tell about it. His
brothers would not believe him, and said, "He is crazy; he does not know
what he is talking about." The brothers, however, became very jealous of
him, and constantly taunted him with being a crazy liar. The Tolchini
left the Wind Mountain and went to a rocky foothill east of San Mateo
Mountain. They had nothing to eat but a kind of seed grass. The eldest
brother said, "Let us go hunt," and told the crazy brother not to leave
the camp. But after five days and nights and no word coming from the
brothers he determined to follow them and help them, bring home the
game; he thought they had killed more deer than they could carry. After
a day's travel he camped near a canyon, selecting a cavelike place in
which to sleep, for he was tired and thirsty. There was much snow, but
no water, so he made a fire and heated a rock and made a hole in the
ground, and placing the rock in the cavity put in some snow, which
melted and furnished him a draft to quench his thirst. Just then he
heard a tumult over his head like people passing and he went out to see
who made the noise, and he discovered many crows crossing back and forth
over the canyon. This was the home of the crow. There were other
feathered people also (the chaparral cock was among them). He saw also
many fires which had been made by the crows on either side of the
canyon. Two other crows arrived and stood near him and he listened hard
to hear all that was being said. These two crows cried out, "Somebody
says, somebody says." The youth did not know what to make of this. Then,
a crow from the opposite side of the canyon called, "What is the matter;
tell us, tell us; what is wrong?" The two first criers then said, "Two
of us got killed; we met two men who told us. They said the two men, who
were all the time traveling around (referring to the two brothers of the
crazy youth), killed twelve deer and a party of our people went to the
deer after they were killed. Two of us who went after the blood of the
deer were shot." The crows on the other side of the canyon, called,
"Which men got killed?" The first crier replied, "The chaparral cock,
who sat on the horn of the deer, and the crow, who sat on its backbone."
The other called out, "We are not surprised that they were killed; that
is what we tell you all the time. If you will go after the dead deer you
must expect to be killed." "We will not think of them longer; they are
dead and gone. We are talking of things of long ago." The younger
brother sat quietly below and listened to everything that was being
said.

After a time the crows on the other side of the canyon made a great
noise and began to dance. They had many songs at that time. The youth
could not see what they were doing, but he listened all the time. After
the dance began a great fire was made, and then he could see black
objects moving, but he could not distinguish any people. He recognized
the voice of Hasjelti. Though the youth was crazy, he remembered
everything in his heart. He even remembered the words of the songs that
continued all the night; he remembered every word of every song. He said
to himself, "I will listen until daylight." These people did not remain
on one side of the canyon where the first fires were built, but they
crossed and recrossed in their dance and had fires on both sides of the
canyon. They danced back and forth until daylight (on the ninth night of
the Hasjelti Dailjis was a repetition of this dance), when all the crows
and the other birds flew away to the west. All that he saw after they
left was the fires and smoke. The crazy youth then started off in a run
to his brothers' camp to tell what he had seen and heard. His brothers
were up early and saw the boy approaching. They said, "I bet he will
have lots of stories to tell. He will say he saw something no one ever
saw, or somebody jumped on him." And the brother-in-law who was with
them said, "Let him alone; when he comes into camp he will tell us all,
and I believe these things do happen, for he could not make up these
things all the time."

The camp was surrounded by piñon brush and a large fire burned in the
center of the inclosure; there was much meat roasting over the fire. As
soon as the youth reached the camp he raked over the coals and said,
"I feel cold." The brother-in-law replied, "It is cold. When people camp
together they tell stories to one another in the mornings; we have told
ours and we must now hear yours." The youth related his experiences of
the past night. He said, "Where I stopped last night was the worst camp
I ever had." The brothers kept their backs to the youth and pretended
not to pay any attention, but the brother-in-law listened and questioned
him. He continued, "I never heard such a noise." The brothers then
remarked, "I thought he would say something like that" (they were
jealous of this crazy brother, he saw so much they could not see). The
brother-in-law was inclined to believe the youth's story and asked what
kind of people made the noise. "I do not know. They were strange people
to me, but I do know they danced all night back and forth across the
canyon, and I know my brothers killed twelve deer, and afterwards killed
two of their people who went for the blood of the deer. I heard them
say, 'That is what must be expected if you will go to such places you
must expect to be killed.'" The elder brother began thinking and without
turning toward the youth asked, "How many deer did you say were killed?"
and he answered "twelve." Then the older brother said, "Well, sir, you
have told me many stories and I never believed you, but this story I do
believe. What is the matter with you that you know all these things? How
do you know these things and find out these things?" The youth replied,
"I do not know how, but all these things come to my mind and my eyes."
The elder brother said, "I will now give more thought to you and study
how you find out all about these things. We have a lot of meat and we
did not know how to get it home; now that you have come let us return;
you shall carry the meat." When halfway home they were about to descend
a mesa, and when on the edge they sat down to rest; then they saw far
down the mesa four mountain sheep, and the brothers commanded the youth
to kill one for them. They said, "Our meat is dry; your legs are fresh,
so you will kill the sheep." The youth succeeded in heading off the
sheep by hiding in a bush (_Bigelovia Douglasii_[9]) sometimes called
sage brush but it is not the true sage brush. The sheep came directly
toward him; he aimed his arrow at them, but before he could pull the bow
his arm stiffened and became dead and the sheep passed by. All the sheep
passed him, but he again headed them off by hiding in the stalks of a
large yucca.[10] The sheep passed within five steps of him, and again
when the time to pull the bow came his arm stiffened. The crow people
were watching him all the time. He again followed the sheep and got
ahead of them and hid behind a birch tree in bloom; he had his bow
ready, but as the sheep approached him they became gods. The first one
was Hasjelti, the second was Hostjoghon, the third was Naaskiddi, the
fourth one was Hadatchishi. At this strange metamorphosis the youth was
greatly alarmed, he dropped his bow and fell to the ground senseless.
Hasjelti stood at the east side of the youth, Hostjoghon to the south,
Naaskiddi to the west, and Hadatchishi to the north of him. Each had a
rattle, which was used to accompany the songs for the recovery of the
youth. They also traced with their rattle in the sand this emblem
[Illustration], meaning a figure of a man, and drew parallel lines at
the head and feet with the rattle. When this was done the youth
recovered and the gods had again assumed the form of sheep. They asked
the youth why he had tried to shoot them. "You see you are one of us,"
they said. The youth had become transformed into a sheep. "There is to
be a dance far off to the north beyond Ute Mountain; we want you to go
with us to the dance. We will dress you like ourselves and teach you to
dance; we will then go over the world." The brothers who watched from
the mesa top wondered what the trouble could be. They could not see the
gods. They saw the youth lying on the ground and said, "We must go and
see what is the matter." On reaching the place they found that their
young brother had gone. They saw where he had lain and where the people
had worked over him. They began crying and said, "For a long time we
would not believe him, and now he has gone off with the sheep." They
made many efforts to head off the sheep, but without success, and they
cried all the more, saying, as they returned to the mesa, "Our brother
told us the truth and we would not believe him; had we believed him he
would not have gone off with the sheep; perhaps some day we will see
him."

  [Footnote 9: The _Bigelovia Douglasii_ is made into rings and used
  in the ceremonial Hasjelti Dailjis with direct reference to this
  occurrence.]

  [Footnote 10: Ceremonial rings are also made of the Spanish bayonet
  (yucca).]

At the dance the sheep found seven others like themselves. This made
their number twelve. The seven joined the others in their journey around
the world. All people let them see their dances and learn their songs.
Then all the number excepting the youth talked together and they said,
"There is no use keeping him with us longer (referring to the youth); he
has learned everything; he may as well go now and tell his people and
have them do as we do." The youth was instructed to have twelve in the
dance, six gods and six goddesses, with Hasjelti to lead them. He was
told to have his people make masks to represent them. It would not do to
have twelve Naaskiddi represented among the Navajo, for they would not
believe it and there would be trouble. They could not learn all of their
songs. The youth returned to his brothers, carrying with him all songs,
all medicine, and clothing.


THE OLD MAN AND WOMAN OF THE FIRST WORLD.

In the lower world four gods were created by Etseastin and Etseasun.
These gods were so annoyed by ants that they said, "Let us go to the
four points of the world." A spring was found at each of the cardinal
points, and each god took possession of a spring, which he jealously
guarded.

Etseastin and Etseasun were jealous because they had no water and they
needed some to produce nourishment. The old man finally obtained a
little water from each of the gods and planted it, and from it he raised
a spring such as the gods had. From this spring came corn and other
vegetation. Etseastin and Etseasun sat on opposite sides of the spring
facing each other, and sang and prayed and talked to somebody about
themselves, and thus they originated worship. One day the old man saw
some kind of fruit in the middle of the spring. He tried to reach it but
he could not, and asked the spider woman (a member of his family) to get
it for him. She spun a web across the water and by its use procured the
fruit, which proved to be a large white shell, quite as large as a
Tusayan basket. The following day Etseastin discovered another kind of
fruit in the spring which the spider woman also brought him; this fruit
was the turquoise. The third day still another kind of fruit was
discovered by him and obtained by the spider woman; this was the abalone
shell. The fourth day produced the black stone bead, which was also
procured.

After ascending into the upper world Etseastin visited the four corners
to see what he could find. (They had brought a bit of everything from
the lower world with them). From the east he brought eagle feathers;
from the south feathers from the bluejay; in the west he found hawk
feathers, and in the north speckled night bird (whippoorwill) feathers.
Etseastin and Etseasun carried these to a spring, placing them toward
the cardinal points. The eagle plumes were laid to the east and near by
them white corn and white shell; the blue feathers were laid to the
south with blue corn and turquoise; the hawk feathers were laid to the
west with yellow corn and abalone shell; and to the north were laid the
whippoorwill feathers with black beads and corn of all the several
colors. The old man and woman sang and prayed as they had done at the
spring in the lower world. They prayed to the east, and the white wolf
was created; to the south, and the otter appeared; to the west, and the
mountain lion came; and to the north, the beaver. Etseastin made these
animals rulers over the several points from which they came.

When the white of daylight met the yellow of sunset in mid-heavens they
embraced, and white gave birth to the coyote; yellow to the yellow fox.
Blue of the south and black of the north similarly met, giving birth,
blue to blue fox and north to badger.

Blue and yellow foxes were given to the Pueblos; coyote and badger
remain with the Navajo; but Great Wolf is ruler over them all. Great
Wolf was the chief who counseled separation of the sexes.


Errors and Anomalies for "Ceremonial of Hasjelti Dailjis":

turquois : turquoise
  _the spelling without final "e" is standard for Bureau of Ethnology
  publications; in this article the forms are used interchangeably_

Bunches of pine boughs, which during the forenoon had been made into
wreaths by joining pieces together with yucca in this fashion were
[Illustration], laid across each end of the rug.
  _probably an error for "in this fashion [Illustration], were laid"_


       *       *       *       *       *

INDEX.
                                                            Page.
  A.

  Acoma, arrival of the Asanyumu at                           30
    direction of kivas of                                    116
    kiva trap-doors at                                       207
  Adobe, use in Tusayan                                   54, 78
    use in Zuñi attributed to foreign influence              139
    necessity for protecting against rain                    156
    used in Spanish churches                                 224
  Adobe balls used in garden walls                           146
  Adobe bricks, In Hawikut church                             81
    use modern in Zuñi                                       138
  Adobe mortar, in Tâaaiyalana structures                     90
    Cibola and Tusayan use of, compared                      137
  Adobe walls on stone foundation at Moenkopi                 78
  Áikoka. See Acoma                                           30
  Aiyáhokwi, the descendants of the Asa at Zuñi               30
  Alleyway, Hawikuh                                           81
  Altar, conformity of, to direction of kiva                 116
  Andiron, Shumopavi                                         176
  Annular doorway                                       192, 193
  Apache, inroads upon Tusayan by the                 25, 26, 35
    exposure of southern Cibola to the                        96
  Appropriations and expenditures for 1886-'87             XXXVI
  Architectural nomenclature                            220, 223
  Architecture, comparison of constructional details
      of Tusayan and Cibola                              100-223
    adaption to defense                                 226, 227
    adaption to environment                   225, 226, 227, 228
  Art, textile and fictile,
      degree of Pueblo advancement in                        227
  Arts of Cibola and Tusayan closely related                 224
  Asa, migrations of the                                  30, 31
    language of the                                           37
    houses of, Hano                                           61
  Asanyumu. See Asa.
  Awatubi, survey of                                          14
    Spanish mission established at                            22
    when and by whom built                                    29
    settlement of the Asa at                                  30
    attacked by the Walpi                                     34
    description of ruins of                               49, 50
    possession of sheep by the                                50
    clay tubes used as roof drains at                        155
    fragments of passage wall at                             181
  Aztecs, ruined structures attributed to the                225


  B.

  Badger people leave Walpi                                   31
  Baho, use of, in kiva consecratory
      ceremonies                               119-120, 129, 130
  Balcony, notched and terraced                              187
  Banded masonry                                             145
  Bandelier, A. F., description of chimney                   173
    explorations of                                          197
    on ancient stone inclosures                              216
  Bat house, description of ruin of                           52
  Bátni, the first pueblo of the Snake people of Tusayan      18
  Bedsteads not used by Pueblos                              214
  Beams, Tusayan kivas, taken from Spanish church
      at Shumopavi                                            76
    for supporting upper walls                               144
    modern finish of                                         149
    construction of steps upon                               162
    for supporting passageway wall                           181
    Chaco pueblos, how squared                               184
  Bear people, settlement in Tusayan of the               20, 26
    removal to Walpi of the                               21, 27
    movements of                                  27, 30, 31, 38
  Bear-skin-rope people,
      settlement in Tusayan of the                        26, 27
  Benches or ledges of masonry, Zuñi rooms                   110
    Tusayan kivas                                  121, 123, 125
    Mashongnavi mungkiva                                     127
    around rooms of pueblo houses                            213
  Bigelovia Douglasii (sage brush) used as thatch
      to Navajo sweat-house                                  239
    used to produce smoke in sweat house                240, 244
  Biloxi Indians, linguistic researches among                 XX
  Bins for storage in Tusayan rooms                109, 209, 210
  Blankets formerly used to cover doorways    182, 188, 189, 194
  Blue Jay people, settlement in Tusayan of the           26, 27
  Bond stones used in pueblo walls                      144, 198
  Boss, or andiron, Shumopavi                                176
  Bourke, Capt. J. G., Pueblo vases, etc., presented by      XXV
  Boundary line, Hano and Sichumovi                           36
  Boundary mark, Shumopavi and Oraibi                         28
  Boxes for plumes                                           210
  Bricks of adobe modern in Zuñi                             138
  Brothers (The), Navajo myth                            280-284
  Brush, use of, in roof construction                        150
  Brush shelters                                         217-219
  Burial custom of K'iakima natives                           86
  Burial inclosures at K'iakima                              147
  Burial place of Zuñi                                       148
  Burrowing Owl people, settlement in Tusayan of the          26
  Bushotter, Geo., work of                                  XXIX
  Buttress, formerly of Halona, existing in Zuñi          88, 89
  Buttress projections, Zuñi                                 111
    Tusayan rooms                                       109, 110
    girders supported by                                     144
    chimney supported by                                172, 173
    support of passageway roofs by                           181


  C.

  Cages for eagles at Zuñi                                   214
  Canyon de Chelly, proposed study of ruins of                14
    Tusayan, tradition concerning villages of                 19
    early occupancy of, by the Bear people at Tusayan         20
    occupied by the Asa                                       30
    use of whitewash in cliff houses of                  74, 145
    circular kivas of                                   117, 133
    finish of roofs of houses of                        150, 151
    doorway described and figured                            190
    cliff dwellings of                                       217
  Casa Blanca, traces of whitewashing at                     145
  Castañeda's account of Cibolan milling                211, 212
  Cattle introduced into Tusayan                              22
  Cave lodges occupied in historic times                     225
  Cave used by inhabitants of Kwaituki                        57
  Ceiling plan of Shupaulovi kiva                  123, 125, 126
  Ceilings, retention of original appearance
      of rooms through nonrenovation of                       89
  Cellars not used in Tusayan and Cibola                     143
  Ceremonial chamber. See Kiva.
  Ceremonial paraphernalia of Tusayan
      taken by the Navajo                                     50
  Ceremonies connected with Tusayan house-building  100-104, 168
  Ceremonies accompanying kiva construction             115, 118
  Ceremonies performed at placing of Zuñi ladders            160
  Chaco ruins, character of                               14, 70
    compared with Kin-tiel                                    92
    finish of masonry of                                140, 226
    upper story partitions of, supported by beams            144
    finish of woodwork of                               149, 184
    symmetry of arrangement of outer openings of             195
    loop-holes in walls of                                   198
  Chairs, lack of in Pueblo houses                           212
  Chair of modern form in Zuñi                               213
  Chalowe, description of                                     83
  Chants in Navajo ceremonial                           245, 246
  Charred roof timbers of Tusayan kiva                       120
  Children, initiation of, in Navajo ceremonial         266, 267
  Chimney. See Fireplace.
  Chimney-hoods, how constructed                         169-175
  Chimneys, traces of in K'iakima                             85
    remains of, at Matsaki                                    86
    Tusayan                                                  102
    Zuñi                                                     111
    described and figured                                167-180
  Chukubi pueblo, built by the Squash people                  25
    description                                           58, 59
    fragments of passage wall at                             181
  Church, Shumopavi, established by Spanish monks         75, 76
    Hawikuh                                              81, 138
    Ketchipauan, remains of                               81, 82
    in court of Zuñi                                98, 138, 148
    See Mission.
  Churches established in Zuñi and Tusayan                   224
  Cibola, ruins and inhabited villages of                  80-99
    architecture of compared with that of Tusayan        100-223
    See Zuñi.
  Circular doorway of Kin-tiel described                     192
  Circular kivas, antiquity of                               116
    traditional references to                                135
    absent in Cibolan pueblos                                224
  Circular room at Oraibi Wash                             54-55
  Circular rooms at Kin-tiel                                  93
  Circular wall of kiva near Sikyatki                        117
  Clay surface of pueblo roofs                               151
  Clay tubes used as roof drains                             155
  Cliff dwellings, Moen-kopi                                  54
    use of whitewash in                                       74
    absence of chimneys in                                   168
    developed from temporary shelters                        217
    occupied in historic times                               225
  Climatic conditions, effect of,
      upon pueblo architecture                          140, 227
  Clustering of Tâaaiyalana ruins                          89-90
  Cochití claimed to be a former Tewa pueblo                  37
  Comecrudo Indians, linguistic researches among             XXI
  Communal village, development of pueblo architecture
      from conical lodge to                                  226
  Consecration of kivas                                      129
  Contours represented on plans, interval of                  45
  Cooking, pueblo method of                                  164
  Cooking pits and ovens described              162-166, 176-177
  Cooking stones of Tusayan, flames of                       104
  Copings of walls described                             151-152
  Coping of hatchways                                        203
  Coping. See Roof-coping.
  Cords, used for suspending chimney                         170
  Corner stones of Tusayan kivas                             119
  Corrals, Payupki                                            59
    Sichumovi                                              62-63
    Hawikuh                                                   81
    Ketchipauan                                               81
    modern, at K'iakima                                       85
    how constructed                                          146
    described in detail                                  214-217
  Cotton cultivated by the Tusayan                            33
  Courts, Mishiptonga                                         52
    Kwaituki                                                  56
  Courts, Chukubi                                             59
    Sichumovi                                                 62
    Walpi                                                     63
    Mashongnavi                                               68
    Shupaulovi                                                71
    Shumopavi                                                 74
    Hawikuh                                                   81
    Ketchipauan                                               81
    Matsaki                                                   86
    Tâaaiyalana                                               90
    Kin-tiel                                                  92
    Pescado                                                   95
    Zuñi                                                      98
  Covered way, how developed                                  76
  Covered passages and gateways described                180-182
  Coyote people, settlement in Tusayan of the                 26
  Coyote kiva, direction of the                              116
  Crossbars used in fastening wooden doors                   183
  Crosspieces of ladders                                     159
  Crows, Navajo myth concerning                              281
  Cruzate, visit to Awatubi of                                49
  Culture of pueblo tribes, degree of                        227
  Curtin, Jeremiah, work of                            XXI, XXIX
  Curtis, Wm. E., pottery, etc.,
      from Peru presented by                                XXVI
  Cushing, Frank H., work of                           XXIV, XXV
    identifies K'iakima as scene of death of Estevanico       86
    excavations at Halona                                88, 193
    opinion concerning western wall of Halona                 89
    opinion concerning distribution of Tâaaiyalana ruins   89-90
    on the former occupancy of Kin-tiel                       92
    Halona identified as one of the Seven Cities of Cibola    97
    on Zuñi tradition concerning stone-close                 192


  D.

  Dais of kivas                                    121, 122, 123
  Dance, in the ceremony of Hasjelti Dailjis             273-275
  Dance ceremony in kiva consecration                        130
  Dance rock, Tusayan, reference to snake dance of            65
  Débris, how indicated in plans of ruins                     45
    an indication of original height of walls                 90
  Decoration, house openings                             145-146
    Kiva roof timbers                                   119, 120
    ladder crosspieces                                       159
    roof beams                                          123, 124
    wall of Mashongnavi house                                146
    wooden chair                                             213
    Zuñi window sashes                                       196
  Deer horns used as pegs in Zuñi                            111
  Deerskins, for sweat houses and masks in Navajo
      ceremonial must be from smothered animals              242
    over the entrance of a Navajo sweat-house,
      signification of                                       242
  Defense, wall for, at Bat House                             52
    a motive for selection of dwelling site                   56
    architecture relied upon for                              58
    method of, of Payupki                                 59, 60
    not a factor in selection of Mashongnavi site             67
    features of, at Ojo Caliente                              69
    wall for, at Pueblo Bonito                                70
    features of, at Tusayan and Zuñi compared                 76
    sites chosen for, inconvenient to sources
      of subsistence                                          77
    use of Ketchipauan church for, by natives                 82
    the motive of occupation of Tâaaiyalana mesa              90
    provision for, at Kin-tiel                            92, 93
    provisions for, in Ketchipauan church                     96
    motive for, dying out in Zuñi                          96-97
    efficiency of, at Zuñi                                    97
    not a motive in selection of site of Zuñi                 97
    gateways arranged for                               180, 182
    loopholes for                                            198
    adaptation of architecture to                            225
  Doors to ground floor rooms of Zuñi                        143
  Doors of various lands described                       183-194
  Doorway, Walpi kiva, closed with cottonwood slab            64
    Kin-tiel                                                  93
    position of, in Tusayan                                  103
    stepped form in Tusayan                                  109
    how sealed against intrusion                             110
    window and chimney in one                                121
    annular                                                  193
  Doorways, closed with masonry               183, 187, 188, 189
    why made small                                           197
  Dorsey, J. Owen, work of                           XXVIII-XXIX
  Drainage of roof, relations of certain roof
      openings to                                        203-204
  Drains of roofs described                              153-156
  Drains. See roof drains.


  E.

  Eagle cages of Zuñi                                        214
  Eagle people, migration legend of the                       28
  Earth used in pueblo roof construction                     150
  Eaves, lack of, in Tusayan houses                          102
  Echo Cave fireplace described                              168
  Emmert, J. W., work of                                     XIX
  Entrances, uniformity of direction of,
      in Zuñi kivas                                          116
  Environment, adaptation of architecture to  225, 226, 227, 228
  Eskimo, work on                                  XXVII, XXVIII
  Estevanico's death, at K'iakima                             86
  Esthetle, the first ones, Navajo ceremonial      264, 271, 272
    song of                                                  272
    prayer to                                                272
  Estufa. See Kiva.
  Etseastin and Etseasun, Navajo myth                    284-285
  Expenditures of Bureau of Ethnology for 1886-'87         XXXVI


  F.

  Families occupying Oraibi                              105-108
  Farming outlook, Matsaki used as                            86
    near Kin-tiel                                             93
  Farming pueblos, Cibola                                     14
    Moen-kopi                                                 77
    Nutria                                                94, 95
    Pescado                                                95-96
    Ojo Caliente                                              96
    Zuñi                                                     198
  Fastenings of doors                                        186
  Feathers, use of, in house-building ceremonies        101, 102
  Feather wand or baho used in
      kiva-building ceremonials               119, 120, 129, 130
  Fences of corrals and gardens                         215, 217
  Fetiches, where placed during kiva ceremonial              122
    Tusayan kivas                                       130, 131
  Field work                                        XVIII, XXIII
  Financial statement                                      XXXVI
  Fire gens, Tebugkihu constructed by the                     57
  Fire-house or Tebugkihu, Tusayan         20, 57, 100, 142, 224
  Fire people of Tusayan,
      migration of the                                        20
  Fireplaces                    102, 109, 121, 125, 163, 167-180
  Floor, Mashongnavi house                                   109
    stone flags, Tusayan kiva                                121
    sandstone slabs, Shupaulovi kiva                         123
  Floors in pueblo buildings,
      various kinds described                  121, 135, 148-151
  Folk-tale of the Zuñi, describing stone-close              193
  Food sacrifices in Tusayan house building             101, 102
  Foods used during Navajo medicine ceremonial          236, 257
  Fortress houses the highest type of
      Pueblo construction                                     77
  Fowke, Gerard, work of                                XX, XXIV
  Frames of trap-doors, method of making                     206
  Framing of windows, method of                          196-198
  Fuel, how stored in Tusayan                                103
  Fuel used in kivas                                         121
  Fuel of kivas, where stored                                124
  Furniture of the Pueblos described                     208-214


  G.

  Gaming ring of Navajo ceremonial                           238
  Gardens and corrals of the Pueblos                     214-217
  Gardens and garden walls                               215-217
  Garden walls, how constructed                              146
  Gateway at Awatubi                                          49
  Gateway jambs at Kin-tiel, finish of                       181
  Gateways, probable existence in Kin-tiel of                 93
  Gateways and covered passages described                180-182
  Gateways of corrals                                        214
  Gatschet, A. S., work of                       XX, XXI, XXVIII
  Genesis myth of the Tusayan                                 16
  Gentes of Tusayan, grouping of houses by                    24
    land apportionment by                                     29
    list of traditionary                                      38
    localization of                                      104-108
  Georgia, archeologic work in                               XIX
  Girders supporting upper walls                             144
    Tusayan houses supported by piers                        151
  Glass used in modern Pueblo windows                        193
  Glazing of Pueblo windows                             196, 197
  Goat kiva of Walpi, height of                              119
  Gourd used as roof drain                              154, 155
  Grass, use of, in roof construction                        150
  Graves, probable existence of, in Kin-tiel                  93
  Gravestones at K'iakima                            85, 86, 147
  Greasewood, the ordinary kiva fuel                         121
  Grinding stones. See Metate; Milling.
  Ground plan, Mashongnavi room                              108
    Shupaulovi kiva                                          125
  Ground plans of Zuñi and Tusayan compared                   76
    of mesa villages influenced by prevailing winds          182
  Guyave or piki oven                                   173, 175
  Gyarzobi or Paroguet kiva, roof timbers of                 120
  Gypsum used as whitewash                           73, 74, 172


  H.

  Hairdressing among the Tusayan                              37
  Halona, description of                                  88, 89
    remains of the nucleus of Zuñi                        97, 98
    walls of the nucleus of modern Zuñi                      138
    stone-close at, described                                193
  "Halving" of timbers in kiva trap-frames                   206
  Hampassawan, description of                              83-85
  Hand-holds cut in faces of cliffs                          191
  Hand-holds in frames of trap-doors                         192
  Hano, Asa group occupy site of                              30
    description of                                        61, 62
    direction of kivas of                                    115
    kiva, ownership of                                       134
    kivas, list of                                           136
    rude transom over roof beam in                           187
    sealed openings in                                       199
  Hano people, length of time spent in Tusayan by the         35
    received by the Tusayan                                   36
    trouble between the Walpi and                             37
  Hanomuh, the inhabitants of Hano                            17
    definition of                                             36
  Hano traditions regarding settlement in Tusayan             35
  Harvest time, how determined in Zuñi                       148
  Hasjelti and Hostjoghon, mythical history of               277
  Hasjelti Dailjis and Navajo sand painting,
      notice of paper by James Stevenson on          XXXIV-XXXVI
    paper by James Stevenson on                          229-285
  Hatchways to pueblo houses             110, 120, 121, 124, 127
  Hawikuh, description of                                 80, 81
  Hawikuh church, durability of masonry of                   138
  Hemenway Southwestern Archeological Expedition,
      excavations at Halona                                  193
  Henshaw, Henry W., work of                              XXVIII
  Hewitt, John N. B., work of                             XXVIII
  High-house people, a Navajo clan                            30
  Hinged sashes not in use in Zuñi                           196
  Hinges of Pueblo doors                                     184
  Hodge, F. Webb, on stone-close of Halona                   193
  Hoffman, W. J., work of                        XXI-XXIII, XXIX
  Holmes, William H., work                             XXV, XXVI
    on ruins of the San Juan                                 147
  Homólobi, the early home of the Sun and Water peoples       29
    legend of Water people concerning                         31
  Hopituh, the native name of the Tusayan                     17
  Hopituh marriage within phratries and gentes                24
  Horn House, description of ruin of                      50, 51
  Horn people migration legend                                18
    early settlement in Tusayan of the                        19
  House-building rites of Tusayan                        100-104
  House clusters in Zuñi, arrangement of                      98
  Hungo Pavie, finish of roofs in                            150


  I.

  Indian synonymy, work on                                XXVIII
  Interior arrangement of pueblos                        108-111
  Interior of Zuñi house described                           110
  Irrigation of gardens near Walpi                           217


  J.

  Jackson, W. H., on ruins of the San Juan                   147
    photographs of pueblo ruins by                           147
    describes fireplace of Echo Cave                         168
  Jar of large size used for storage                         210
  Jars used in chimney construction                          180
  Jeditoh group of ruins                                  52, 53
  Jemez oven-opening described                               165


  K.

  Kaékibi, an ancient pueblo                                  30
  Kaiwáika. See Laguna                                        30
  Kápung. See Santa Clara                                     37
  Katchina kiva of Oraibi                                    135
  Katchina people depart from Oraibi for eastern
      Tusayan villages                                    26, 27
  Katchinkihu, occurrence of,
      in ruined kiva near Sikyatki                           117
    described                                           121, 123
    Shupaulovi kiva                                          126
    Mashongnavi mungkiva                                     127
  Kentucky, archeologic work in                               XX
  Ketchipauan church built of stone                          224
  Ketchipauan, description of                              81-83
  Kiáini. See High-house people                               30
  K'iakima, description of                                85, 86
    upright stone slabs at                                   147
  Kikoli rooms occupied in winter                  103, 104, 131
  Kin-tiel, description of                                 91-94
    compared with Nutria                                      94
    compared with Pescado                                     96
    plan of, prearranged                                     100
    compared with Oraibi                                     114
    occurrence of upright stone slab at                  147-148
    beams of ruins of                                        149
    upper room of, paved with stone                          151
    fireplace in room of                                163, 168
    defensive gateway at                                     181
    finish of gateway jambs at                               181
    circular doorway at, described                      192, 193
    openings at, of uniform height                           194
    site of                                                  224
  Kisákobi, description of pueblo of                          21
  Kishoni, or uncovered shade                            217-218
  "Kisi" construction                                    217-219
  Kitdauwi--the house song of Tusayan                    118-119
  Kiva, study of construction of                              14
    remains of, at Payupki                                    60
    Mashongnavi                                               66
    of Moen-kopi                                              78
    origin of the name                                       111
    ancient form of                                     116, 117
    native explanation of position of                        118
    duties of mungwi, or chief of the                        133
    ownership of                                         133-134
    motive for building                                  134-135
    significance of structural plan of                       135
    measurements of                                          136
    hatchways of                                201-202, 205-207
    openings of, at Acoma                                    207
    See Mungkiva.
  Kivas, excavated, at Awatubi                                50
    Hano                                                      61
    Sichumovi                                                 62
    Walpi                                             63, 64, 65
    Shupaulovi                                                72
    Shumopavi                                                 74
    Kin-tiel and Cibola compared                              93
    Zuñi, where located during Spanish occupancy              99
    in Tusayan                                           111-137
    typical plans of                                     118-129
    dimensions of                                       118, 136
    of, measurements of                                 118, 136
    annually repaired by women                               129
    uses of                                                  130
    nomenclature of                                 130, 223-223
    Tusayan, list of                                         136
    nonuse of chimneys in                                    178
    Zuñi, stone window-frames of                             197
    circular, absent in Cibolan pueblos                      224
  Kótite. See Cochití.
  Kwaituki, description of ruin of                         56-57
  Kwálakwai, Hano tradition related by                        35
  Kwetcap tutwi, the second pueblo of the snake people
      of Tusayan                                              18


  L.

  Ladders, arrangement in Tusayan kiva                       121
    withdrawal of rungs to prevent use of                    113
    significance of position of, in kivas                    135
    described                                            156-162
    second-story terrace of Tusayan
      reached principally by                                 182
    openings for, in roofs                                   205
  Laguna, arrival of the Asanyumu at                          30
  Lalénkobáki, a female society of Tusayan                   134
  Land apportionment by gentes in Tusayan                     29
  Language of the Asa and Hano of Tusayan                     37
  Languages of Tusayan, tradition regarding difference in     36
  Las Animas ruins, trap-door frames in                      206
  Latches of doors                                       186-187
  Latch strings used on Zuñi doors                           183
  Lathing or wattling of kiva walls                          126
  Ledges of masonry in kivas                                 121
  Ledges or benches around rooms                             213
  Lenbaki, society of Tusayan                                 18
  Light, method of introducing, in inner rooms               207
  Lighting, method of, in crowded portions of Zuñi            99
  Lintels of old windows embedded in masonry                 200
  Lizard people move from Walpi                           31, 38
  Lock and key of wood, how made                             187
  Logs (the floating), Navajo myth                           278
  Loom appurtenances                                         212
  Loom posts of kivas                               128-129, 132
  Loophole-like openings in pueblo buildings            127, 198
  Louisiana, linguistic work in                               XX


  M.

  Macomb, J. N., earthenware from North Carolina
      presented by                                          XXVI
  Mallery, Garrick, work of                               XXVIII
  Mamzrántiki, an Oraibi society of women                    134
  Mandan ladder described and figured                        158
  Maricopa, myth of the Water people of Tusayan
      concerning the                                          32
  Marriage of the Hopituh within phratries and gentes         24
  Mashongnavi, origin of name of                              26
    settlement of Paroquet and Katchina peoples in            27
    settlement of the Water people at                         32
    description of ruins of                                   48
    age of masonry at                                         66
    description of                                         66-70
    ground plan of room of                                   108
    direction of kivas of                                    115
    description of dais of kiva at                           122
    list of kivas at                                         136
    wall decoration at                                       146
    notched ladder of                                    157-158
    pi-gummi ovens at                                    163-164
    shrines of                                               167
    chimney hoods of                                     170-171
    second-story fireplace at                                174
    doorway with transom at                                  190
    corrals of rude stonework at                             214
    See Old Mashongnavi.
  Masks representing various Navajo gods,
      Indian uses of                               248, 249, 253
  Masonry, ancient, at Nutria                                 94
    Ojo Caliente carelessly constructed                       96
    exterior, of kivas                                       114
  Masonry of Pueblo Bonito, skill shown in                   195
  Mat close for kiva hatchways                          127, 128
  Matsaki, description of                                     86
    sun symbol at                                            148
  Meal, sacred, preparation of                               256
    votive, used in pueblo house-building                    101
  Mealing trough. See Milling.
  Medicine cigarette, in Navajo ceremonial, preparation of   258
    disposition of, after use                                259
  Medicine lodge, Navajo, construction of                    237
  Medicine tubes in Navajo ceremonial              241, 244, 246,
                                              250, 257, 258, 264
  Medicine water used in Navajo ceremonial         255, 263, 269
  Metate used as roof-drain                             154, 155
  Metates, or grinding stones,
      how arranged in pueblo houses           109, 110, 210, 211
  Mexico, linguistic work in                             XX, XXI
  Middleton, James D., work of                          XX, XXIV
  Migration, effect of, upon pueblo architecture              15
  Migration of the Tusayan                                    17
  Migration of Tusayan Water people                       31, 32
  Migration of the Horn people                            18, 19
  Migration of the Bear people of Tusayan                     20
  Migration of the Asanyumu of Tusayan                        30
  Milling troughs of Pueblo households             109, 210, 212
  Mindeleff, Cosmos, work of                         XXVI, XXVII
    acknowledgments to                                    14, 15
    on traditional history of Tusayan                      16-41
  Mindeleff, Victor, work of                           XXVI, XXX
    notice of paper on pueblo architecture by               XXIV
    paper on pueblo architecture                           3-228
  Mishiptonga, description of ruin of                      52-53
  Mission buildings of Shumopavi                       27, 75-76
  Mission house at Walpi, timbers of,
      used in Walpi kiva                                     119
  Missions of Tusayan                                     22, 49
  Mississippi, archeologic work in                           XIX
  Moen-kopi surveyed and studied                              14
    description of ruins of                                53-54
    description of village of                                 77
  Mole people, settlement in Tusayan of the                   27
  Montezuma Canyon ruins, use of large stone blocks in       147
  Monument marking boundary of Oraibi and Shumopavi           28
  Mooney, James, work of                                  XXVIII
  Morgan, L. H., Mandan ladder described by                  158
    on trap-door frames in Las Animas ruins                  205
  Mormon and Pueblo building compared                        148
  Mormons, effect of the, upon development of Moen-kopi       77
    establishment of woolen mill at Moen-kopi by the          78
    fort built by, at Moen-kopi                              184
    lock and key contrivance of                              187
  Mortar of adobe mud                                        137
  Mortars used in Pueblo households                          212
  Mortised door in Zuñi house                            110,186
  Mummy cave, Arizona, ruin in                                64
    finish of roofs in ruins of                              150
  Mungkiva, Mashongnavi                                      127
    of Shupaulovi                                       113, 122
    Tusayan                                                  134


  N.

  Naiyenesgony and Tobaidischinni, mythical history of   279-280
  Nambé, Tewa pueblo                                          37
  Navajo, Asa of Tusayan live among                           30
    huts of, closed with blankets                            189
    method of sheep-herding compared with Pueblo             214
    paper on Hasjelti Dailjis ceremonial
      and sand painting of                               229-285
  Nelson, E. W., work of                                   XXVII
    graves unearthed by                                       86
    collection of stone-closes by                            193
  New York, archeologic work in                              XIX
    ethnologic work in                                       XXI
  Niches, use of, in kivas                              121, 122
  Niches formed in old window openings         110, 200, 208-209
  Nomenclature of Tusayan structural details             220-223
  North Carolina, work in                               XXI-XXII
  Notched logs used as ladders                           157-158
  Númi. See Nambé.
  Nutria, compared with Kin-tiel                              91
    description of                                         91-95
  Nuvayauma, old Mashongnavi tradition related by          47-48
  Nuvwatikyuobi kiva                                         120


  O.

  Oak mound kiva, Tusayan, decadence of membership of        135
  Office work                                         XXIII-XXIX
  Ohio, archeologic work in                              XIX, XX
  Ohke. See San Juan.
  Ojo Caliente, a modern village                       54, 96-97
    chinked walls of                                         142
  Old man and woman of the first world, Navajo myth      284-285
  Old Mashongnavi, tradition concerning occupation of      47-48
  Openings, splayed, in Ketchipauan church                    82
    walls of Tâaaiyalana structures                           90
    Kin-tiel walls                                        92, 93
    oblique Zuñi                                     98, 207-208
    to kivas                                             113-114
    in wall of Zuñi kiva                                     114
    in lee walls                                             182
  Openings of Pueblo houses banded with whitewash        145-146
  Oraibi, retirement of Sikyátki inhabitants to               24
    departure of Ketchina and Paroquet peoples from           27
    settlement by the Bears of                                27
    traditions regarding first settlement of                  27
    settlement of the Water people at                         33
    affray between the Walpi and                              35
    description of                                         76-77
    families occupying                                   105-108
    direction of kivas of                                115-116
    rare use of plastering on outer walls of                 144
    notched ladders described and figured                157-158
    stone steps at, figured                                  161
    corral walls at, laid without mortar                     147
    distribution of gentes of                            104-105
    kiva for women                                           134
    list of kivas of                                         137
    kiva, hatchway of                                        201
    corrals at, large size of                                214
  Oraibi-Shumopavi boundary stone                             28
  Oraibi wash, ruins on the                                54-56
  Orientation of kivas                                   115-116
  Ovens at Pescado                                            95
    upon roofs                                               151
    various kinds described                              162-166
    in Zuñi                                              164-165
  Oven-shaped structures described and figured               167
  Oven-surface imbedded with pottery scales                  139


  P.

  Paintings on kiva walls                                    131
  Palát Kivabi, the pristine habitat of the Squash
      and Sun people of Tusayan                           25, 29
  Palmer, Dr. E., Mexican clay vessels presented by         XXVI
  Paneled doors in modern pueblos                        184-186
  Parallelogramic form of Tusayan buildings              102-118
  Paroquet people, settlement in Shumopavi of the             37
  Partitions in Ketchipauan church                            82
  Partitions of upper story supported by beams               144
  Passageways, Shupaulovi                                     72
    Shumopavi                                                 74
    rarity of, at Oraibi                                      76
    description of                                       180-182
  Paving Shupaulovi kiva                                     126
  Paving stones of kiva floor, how finished                  125
  Payupki, tradition concerning pueblo of                     40
    migration legend                                          40
    description of                                         59-60
    finish of masonry of                                     143
    fragments of passage wall at                             181
  Peaches planted by the Asa people                           30
  Pegs, deer horns used as, in Zuñi                          111
  Pegs for suspending kiva fuel                              121
  Peña Blanca formerly inhabited by the Hano                  35
  Peñasco Blanco, occurrence of upright stone slab at        148
    method of roof construction at                           150
  Pescado compared with Kin-tiel                              91
    description of                                         95-96
    corral walls at, how constructed                         147
    outside steps at                                         160
    ovens at, described and figured                      165-166
    fragment of stone close in steps of                      193
    stone inclosure in court of                              214
  Pennsylvania, work in                               XXII-XXIII
  Pestles or crushers used with Pueblo mortars               212
  Petroglyph, or sun-symbol at Matsaki                        86
    Ketchipauan church                                        82
    legend of the Tusayan concerning                          32
  Phratries, Tusayan                                      24, 38
  Pictograph on Oraibi-Shumopavi boundary monument            28
  Piers of masonry for supporting girders                    151
  Piers. See Buttresses.
  Pi-gummi ovens of Mashongnavi                              163
  Piki or guyave oven                                    173-175
  Piki stone, process of making                              175
  Pilling, J. C., work of                                   XXIV
  Pima, myth of the Water people of Tusayan concerning the    32
    opinion of the, as to ancient stone inclosures           216
  Pinawa, description of                                  86, 88
  Pine invariably used for kiva ladders                      135
  Pine boughs, application for removing disease
      in Navajo ceremonials                             247, 250
    disposition of, after ceremony                      248, 251
  Pink clay used in house decorations                        146
  Pits for cooking                                           163
  Plan of villages, traditional mention of                   104
  Plans and descriptions, Tusayan ruins                    45-60
    inhabited villages                                     61-79
    Cibolan ruins                                             80
    Zuñi villages                                          94-99
  Plan of pueblo houses not usually prearranged          100-162
  Planting time, how determined in Zuñi                      148
  Plaster, frequent renewal of, at Shumopavi                  73
  Plastering, renovation of rooms by frequent                 89
    on outer walls in Ojo Caliente                            96
    custom formerly observed in                              102
    on floor in Mashongnavi                                  109
    kiva walls                                               115
    Shupaulovi kiva, condition of                        124-125
    Shupaulovi kiva                                          126
    on walls                                                 140
    on masonry                                               144
    chimney hoods                                       169, 172
    side hole of door for fastening                      183-184
  Platform in floor of Tusayan kiva                          121
  Platform at head of steps                              161-162
  Plaza. See Court.
  Plume boxes                                                210
  Plume stick, baho, or feather wand, used in
      Kiva consecratory ceremonials            119-120, 129, 130
  Plume-stick shrines at Mashongnavi                         167
  Pojoaque, a Tewa pueblo                                     37
  Pokwádi. See Pojoaque                                       37
  Polaka, Hano tradition given by                             35
  Poles for suspension of blankets, etc.      110, 189, 208, 214
  Ponobi kiva of Oraibi, wall lathing of                     126
  Population, enlargement of pueblos necessitated
      by increase of                                          70
  Porch posts                                             81, 82
  Posówe, a former Tewa pueblo                                37
  Posts of porch, remains of, at Hawikuh and Ketchipauan  81, 82
  Posts sunk in floor forming part of loom                   212
  Pots used in chimney construction                      179-180
  Pottery fragments, Horn House ruin                          51
    Kwaituki                                                  57
    ruin on Oraibi wash                                       55
    used in mud-plastered walls                              139
  Pottery of Payupki, character of                            60
  Poultry house of Sichumovi                                 167
  Powell, J. W., work of                                   XXIII
  Prayer, on offering medicine tubes to Navajo gods          244
    to the Esthetle                                          272
  Prayer plume, or baho, used in kiva
      consecratory ceremonials                119, 120, 129, 130
  Prayer sticks, how prepared for
      Navajo ceremonial                             242-243, 264
  Props used for fastening wooden doors                      183
  Publication during year                                  XVIII
  Pueblo architecture,
      notice of Mr. Victor Mindeleff's paper on       XXX, XXXIV
    study of, by Victor Mindeleff                          8-228
  Pueblo Bonito, additions to                                 70
    the largest yet examined                                  92
    finish of roof of                                        150
    stairway described                                       160
    symmetry of arrangement of outer openings of             195
    skill shown in masonry of                                195
  Pueblo buildings,
      mode of additions to              70, 97, 98, 102, 148-149
  Pueblo construction in Tusayan
      and Cibola, details of                             137-223
  Pueblo Grande. See Kin-tiel.
  Pueblo models constructed                                XXVII
  Pueblo openings, carelessness in placing                   196
  Pueblo remains, area occupied by                            13
  Pueblo revolt of 1680                                       89
  Pueblos of Tusayan and Cibola compared                      80
  Pueblos, inhabited                                61-79, 94-99
  Pyramidal form of pueblo house rows                         61


  R.

  Rabbit-skin robes used to cover doorways              182, 194
  Racks for suspending clothes                          208, 214
  Rawhide thong used in pueblo construction
      to fasten lock                               186, 187, 214
  Rectangular kivas, antiquity of                            116
  Rectangular rooms, how developed                           226
  Rectangular type of architecture                            72
  Reeds, sacred, for Navajo ceremonial, preparation of  242, 243
  Reeds used for kiva lathing                                126
  Repair of houses infrequent in Tusayan                      73
  Reservoirs, pueblo                           82-83, 91, 92, 97
  Reservoir site as affecting selection
      of dwelling site                                     51-52
  Revolt of the Pueblos in 1680                               23
  Reynolds, H. L., work of                                  XXIV
  Rites and methods of Tusayan kiva building             118-137
  Rites of house-building at Tusayan                     100-104
  Rito de los Frijoles, chimney of, described                173
  Roof construction, pueblo buildings                   120, 149
  Roof-coping of Tusayan houses                              102
  Roof-drains, pueblo buildings                     102, 153-156
  Roof-openings, pueblo buildings                 61, 63, 77, 98,
                                               169, 178, 201-208
  Roofs, pueblo buildings                  63, 102, 119, 148-151
  Roof timbers of kivas                                      119
  Rogan, J. P., work of                                      XIX
  Rooms, arrangement of, into rows in Tusayan                 49
    confused arrangement of, in Walpi                         63
    Tâaaiyalana ruins, arrangement of                         90
    circular, at Kin-tiel                                     93
    Tusayan, smaller than in Zuñi                            108
    names of, in Tusayan                                     223
  Rows of houses forming Shumopavi                            74
  Royce, Chas. O., work of                                   XXV
  Ruins, method of survey of                                  45
  Ruins, Tusayan                                           45-60
    between Horn House and Bat House                          51
    Oraibi wash                                            54-56
    Cibola                                                    80
    Tâaaiyalana                                               89
  Rungs of ladders, how attached                        158, 159


  S.

  Sacrifices of food in Tusayan house-building          101, 102
  Sandals of yucca found in Canyon de Chelly                 133
  Sand bed used in Navajo ceremonial to absorb disease  250, 251
  Sand painting, Navajo ceremonial,
      learned by the Navajos from the Pueblos                236
    colors used in                                           237
    manner of laying on colors                           239-248
    disposition of sand after ceremony             241, 261, 264
    description of                       260, 261, 262, 264, 265
  Sandstone used in pueblo construction,
      how quarried                                           225
  San Felipe, return of Payupki to                            41
  San Juan, a Tewa pueblo                                     37
  Santa Clara doubtfully identified with Kápung               37
  Santo Domingo, settlement of the Asanyumu                   30
  Sash of rude construction
      in window openings                                     196
  Sealing of doorways of pueblo buildings  110, 183-184, 198-201
  Seats of stone in Tusayan kivas                            132
  Selenite used in pueblo windows                       196, 197
  Semisubterranean kivas of Tusayan                          113
  Seven cities of Cibola. See Cibola.
  Sheep, introduced into Tusayan                              22
    possessed by the Awatubi                                  50
    introduction of, among the Pueblos                       214
    mountain, Navajo myth concerning                     282-284
  Shitáimu pueblo                                     28, 48, 49
  Shelters in pueblo fields                     60, 198, 217-219
  Shelves, pueblo buildings                        109, 173, 209
  Shrine, Matsaki                                             86
    court of Shupaulovi                                       71
    court of Shumopavi                                        75
    Tâaaiyalana                                               90
  Shrines, pueblo                                   72, 148, 167
  Shumopavi, Spanish mission established at                   22
    by whom built                                             27
    removal of portion of Bear people from                    27
    description of                                         73-76
    kivas of                                       113, 114, 137
    primitive andiron at                                     176
    piki stone at                                            176
    fireplace and chimney of                            176, 177
    ground cooking-pit of                                    178
  Shumopavi-Oraibi boundary stone                             28
  Shumopavi people, removal of, to mesa site                  23
  Shupaulovi, settlement of Paroquet and Ketchina peoples in  27
    when established                                          29
    settlement of Bear people at                              30
    settlement of the water people at                         32
    description of                                         71-73
    mungkiva of, described                                   113
    direction of kivas of                                    115
    description of dais of kiva of                           123
    ground and ceiling plans of kiva of                      125
    list of kivas of                                         136
    description of chimney-hood at                      171, 172
    passageway at, described                                 181
  Sichumovi, settled by peoples from Walpi                    31
    derivation of term                                        38
    description of                                        62, 63
    direction of kivas of                                    115
    ownership of kiva of                                     134
    list of kivas of                                         136
    poultry-house of                                         167
    fireplace and mantel of                                  173
    piki stone at                                            175
  Sikyatki, ruin of                                       20, 21
    pueblo of                                                 24
    ancient kiva near                                        117
  Sikyátki people dispute with the Walpi                      24
    slaughtered by the Walpi                                  25
  Sills of doors                                   110, 186, 194
  Sióki. See Zuñi                                             30
  Sipapuh, Tusayan kivas                      117, 121, 122, 123,
                                              126, 130, 131, 135
  Sites of pueblo buildings,
      why selected                      63, 66, 90, 97, 112, 223
  Slabs of stone in pueblo architecture                      147
  Slavery among the Tusayan                                   41
  Smallpox prevalent in Tusayan                          38, 134
  Smoke escape through roof-opening
      and transoms                            189, 204, 206, 207
  Snake dance, relation of dance-rock to                      65
  Snake people, the first occupants of the Tusayan region     17
    construction of modern Walpi by the                       23
  Snow, use of, as water supply by the Zuñi                   91
  Spaniards, early visit of, to Tusayan                   21, 22
  Spanish authority, effect of,
      upon purity of Zuñi kiva type                          112
  Spanish beams in Tusayan kivas         119, 123, 124, 125, 126
  Spanish churches at pueblos, Hawikuk               81, 82, 138
  Spanish influence in Zuñi and Tusayan  169, 180, 196, 213, 224
  Spanish missions established in Tusayan                     22
  Spider people, settlement in Tusayan of the                 27
  Spider woman, the, Navajo myth                             284
  Splash-stones described and figured                   155, 156
  Splayed openings in Ketchipauan church                      82
  Squash people, settlement in Tusayan of the                 25
  Stakes used in construction of stone walls                 147
  Stearns, J. B., relics from Chiriqui presented by         XXVI
  Stephen, A. M., material on traditional history
      of Tusayan collected by                              16-41
    opinion on Walpi architectural features                   72
    acknowledgments to                                       100
    on distribution of Oraibi gentes                    104, 105
    on orientation of Tusayan kivas                          115
    discovery of ancient kiva type near Sikyatki             117
    typical kiva measurements by                             122
    on wattling or lathing of kiva walls  126
    on significance of structural plan of kiva               135
    collection of primitive andirons or bosses by            176
  Steps and ladders described                            156-162
  Steps cut in faces of cliffs                               191
  Steps or foot-holes of Walpi trail                          65
  Steps to kivas                                             114
  Stevenson, James, notice of paper on
      Hasjelti Dailjis and Navajo sand painting by   XXXIV-XXXVI
    paper on ceremonial of Hasjelti Dailjis
      and mythical sand-painting of                      229-285
  Sticks, painted, bundles of, used in Navajo
      medicine ceremonial                               252, 254
  Stone, size, character, and finish of,
      in pueblo ruins                            55, 58, 60, 138
    means of obtaining, in Zuñi                              139
    effect of use of, in chimney hoods                       172
    corrals                                                  214
    flags used to floor Tusayan kiva                         121
    inclosures in Southern Arizona                           216
    roof drains, curious forms of                            154
    shelters, possible remains of, at Payupki                 60
    slabs formerly used to close doorways                    188
  Stone-close anciently used                            192, 193
  Stone wedges used in pueblo wall finish               140, 142
  Stonework, Shumopavi                                        75
    at Oraibi                                                144
    Mormon and Pueblos compared                              148
  Stone steps, Pescado                                        95
    Tusayan                                                  157
  Stools used by the Pueblos                            212, 213
  Storage facilities of pueblo dwellings        57, 62, 103, 109,
                                              143, 144, 182, 209
  Straw adobe made by Spaniards                         138, 224
  Structural features of kivas similar                       129
  Subterranean character of kivas               63, 72, 112, 113
  Suds of yucca used in Navajo
      medicine ceremonial                          251, 257, 258
  Sullivan, Jeremiah, Payupki tradition obtained by           40
  Sun, Navajo myth concerning creation of               275, 277
  Sunflower stalks used in chimney construction              170
  Sun people of Tusayan                                       29
  Supplies, how taken to Walpi mesa                           65
  Survey of Tusayan and Cibola, methods of                 44-45
  Sweat-houses in Navajo ceremonial, description of          239
  Synonymy of Indian tribes, work on                      XXVIII


  T.

  Tâaaiyalana, relation of K'iakima to                        85
    stone inclosures at base of                               85
    description of ruins of                                89-91
    flight of Zuñis to, during Pueblo revolt                  89
    mesa of, temporarily occupied                            223
  Tables not used in Pueblo houses                      212, 214
  Talla Hogan. See Awatubi                                 49-50
  Taos formerly partly inhabited by the Tewa                  37
  Tceewáge. See Peña Blanca.
  Tcosobi or Jay kiva, roof timbers of                       120
  Tebowúki, an early pueblo of the fire people of Tusayan     20
  Tebugkihu or fire-house, description of                     57
    fragments of passage-wall at                             181
  Tennessee, archeologic work in                             XIX
  Terraced doorways                                      190-191
  Terraced gardens                                           217
  Terraced roofs of Tusayan, names of                        104
  Terrace cooking-pits and fireplaces                    174-177
  Terrace rooms, half open, not seen in ancient pueblos      187
  Terraces, Sichumovi form of                                 62
    Oraibi, formed by natural causes                          76
    Zuñi                                             97, 98, 144
    ancient pueblos, how reached                             156
    Tusayan names of                                         223
  Tesuque, a Tewa pueblo                                      37
  Tetsógi. See Tesuque.
  Tewa conflict with the Ute                                  36
  Tewa, language of the                                       37
  Tewa. See Hano.
  Texas, linguistic work in                                   XX
  Thomas, Cyrus, work of                              XIX, XXIII
  Timbers for roof, kind used in kiva-building                19
  Time for planting and harvesting, how determined in Zuñi   148
  Tiponi of Tusayan explained                                131
  Tlaskaltec Indians, linguistic researches among            XXI
  Toneennili, the water-sprinkler, song addressed to,
      in Navajo ceremonial                                   259
  Topography, houses of Walpi constructed to conform to       64
    of Shupaulovi                                             71
  Tradition, historical value of                              15
  Tradition, Tusayan                                       16-41
    Hano                                                      35
    regarding Hano and Tusayan languages                      36
    concerning Payupki pueblo                                 40
    concerning occupancy of Old Mashongnavi                47-48
    of foundation of Walpi                                    63
    concerning circular kivas                                135
    Zuñi concerning stone-close                           92-193
    concerning early occupancy of former pueblos
      by existing tribes                                     225
  Traditionary gentes of Tusayan, list of                     38
  Trails, Walpi                                           65, 66
    Tâaaiyalana                                               89
  Transoms over pueblo doorways                          187-189
  Transportation to Walpi mesa, Indian method                 66
  Trapdoors, Sichumovi                                        63
    kivas, no means of fastening                             113
    frames furnished with hand-holds                         192
  Tunika Indians, linguistic work among                      XXI
  Tupubi defined                                             176
  Túpkabi. See Canyon de Chelly.
  Turner, Lucien M., work of                              XXVIII
  Tusayan, survey of                                          15
    traditional history of                                 16-41
    ruins and inhabited villages of                        42-79
    house-building rites                                 100-104
    houses of, owned by women                                101
    kivas in                                             111-137
    list of kivas of                                         136
    order of settlement of, by various peoples                29
  Tusayan and Cibola architecture, study of,
      by Victor Mindeleff                                  3-228
    compared by constructional details                   100-223
    details of                                           137-223
  Tusayan. See Hopituh.
  Tuscarora-English dictionary, work on                   XXVIII
  Tuwahlki, or watch-house                                   217
  Tuwii. See Santo Domingo                                    30
  Twigs, use of, in roof construction                        150

  U.

  Ute, conflict with, by the Tewa of Hano                     36
    inroads of, upon Tusayan                          25, 26, 35


  V.

  Vargas, Don Diego, visit to Tusayan of                      35
  Virginia, work in                                         XXII
  Vocabulary of Tusayan architectural terms              220-223


  W.

  Walls, how indicated on plans of ruins                      45
    defensive, at Bat House                                   52
    construction of, in Moen-kopi ruins                       53
    curved, instances of                                      54
    showing precision of workmanship                          54
    dimensions in Tâaaiyalana mesa                            90
    original height of, indicated by débris                   90
    thickness of, in modern Tusayan                          102
    paintings on, in Tusayan kiva                            131
    pueblo, mode of construction of                      137-148
    copings of                                     139, 151, 152
    strength of                                              144
    weakness of, in Zuñi                                     182
    of gardens                                               215
  Walpi, settlement of Bear people at                     21, 27
    Spanish mission established at                            22
    construction of, by the Snake people                      23
    dispute of, with the Sikyatki                             24
    settlement of the Asa at                              30, 31
    abandoned by Bear, Lizard, Asa, and Badger peoples        31
    description of                                         63-66
    court-surrounded kiva of                                 114
    kivas of                                            119, 136
    upper story partitions of, supported by beams            144
    use of large stone blocks in garden walls of              47
    cooking pit at                                      176, 177
    south passageway of, described                           181
  Walpi people, attack of Awatubi by the                      34
    affray between the Oraibi and                             35
    trouble between the Hano and                              37
    various pueblos formerly occupied by the              46, 47
  Warp-sticks, mode of supporting                            133
  Water, method of carrying, at Walpi                         65
  Water family, last to settle at Tusayan                     29
    migration legend of                                       31
  Water jars used in chimney construction                    180
  Water supply, Cibola                                        80
    Ketchipauan                                           82, 83
    Tâaaiyalana dwellings                                 90, 91
    Kin-tiel                                                  92
    Zuñi                                                      97
  Water vessels, forms of                                    109
  Wattling or lathing of kiva walls                          126
  Weaving appliances                                         212
  Wejegi pueblo, loop-holes in                               198
  Well or reservoir of Zuñi                                   97
  West Virginia, archeologic work in                          XX
  Whitewash on outer walls of Shumopavi                    73-74
    on Mashongnavi room                                      109
    how made and applied in Zuñi                             145
    on house walls                                           145
    used for coating doors                                   186
  Wíksrun people, settlement in Tusayan of the                27
  Willow wands used in roof construction                     150
  Window, doorway and chimney in one                         121
  Windows of various kinds described                    194, 201
  Wings constructed in court of Pueblo Bonito                 70
  Women, house owners at Tusayan                             101
    work of, in Tusayan house-building                  101, 102
    roof-building performed by                               102
    work of, in kiva-building                                129
    when admitted to kivas                                   134
    societies of, and kivas for, in Tusayan                  134
  Wood, kinds of, used in Tusayan construction               102
  Wood rack of pueblos described                             103
  Wood-working, how performed                                184
  Wooden doors not found in pre-Columbian ruins              184
  Wooden features of pueblo windows                          196
  Woolen mill established by Mormons at Moen-kopi             78
  Workshop, use of the kiva, as a                       129, 133


  Y.

  Yebitchai, meaning of the term                        235, 236
  Yeso used for interior whitewash                            74
  Yucca, use of, in lathing                                  127
  Yucca fiber sandals from Canyon de Chelly                  133


  Z.

  Zenichi, Navajo gods                                       265
  Zuñi, survey of pueblo of                                   14
    arrival of the Asanyumu at                                30
    portion of site of, formerly occupied by Halona           88
    tradition as to occupancy of Kin-tiel by the              92
    plans and descriptions of villages of                  94-99
    description of pueblo of                               97-99
    See Cibola.


Errata for Index:

Defense ... features of, at Ojo Caliente
  _text reads "Ojo Calient"_
Defense ... use of Ketchipauan church for
  _text reads "Kelchipauan"_
Kótite
  _printed between entries "Katchinkihu" and "Ketchipauan"_
Migration of the Asanyumu of Tusayan
  _text reads "Asanynmu"_
Númi
  _printed before entry "Notched logs"_
Parallelogramic form of Tusayan buildings
  _spelling unchanged_
Stevenson, James ... Navajo sand painting
  _text reads "sands painting"
Stonework ... Oraibi
  _text reads "Oraib"_
Tâaaiyalana, relation of K'iakima to
  _text reads "Tâaaialana"_
Tusayan, order of settlement of
  _printed between entries "Terraces" and "Tesuque"_
  _(note that last sub-entry under "Terraces" is "Tusayan names of")_