  Hunferþ maleode                 _Hunferd_ loquebatur
  Ecglafes bearn                  _Ecglavi_ filius,
  Þe æt fotum sæt                 Qui ad pedes sedit
  Frean Scyldinga                 Domini Scyldingorum,
  On band beadu                   Emeritus stipendiis
  Rune wæs him                    Momordit eum
  Beowulfes siþ modges            _Beowulfi_ itinere elati
  Mere faran                      Maria sulcando
  Micel æfþunca                   Magna indignatio,
  For þon þe he ne uþe     10     Propterea quod ille nesciret
  Þæt ænig oþer man               Ullum alium virum
  Æfre mærþa                      Magis celebrem
  Þon ma middangardes             In mundo
  Gehedde under heofenum          Nominari sub coelo
  Þon he sylfa eart               Quam se ipsum.
  Þu se Beowulf                   Tu sis _Beowulfus_,
  Se þe wiþ breccan               Qui ob prædas
  Wunne on sidne sæ               Ceris per latum æquor
  Ymb sund flite                  Et maria pugnas.
  Þær git for wlence       20     Ibi vos ob divitias
  Wada cunnedon                   Vada explorastis,
  And for dol gilpe               Et ob falsam gloriam
  On deop wæter                   Profundas æquas.
  Aldrum neþdon                   Annis subacto
  Ne mic ænig mon                 Non mihi aliquis
  Ne leof ne laþ                  Amicus aut hostis
  Belean mighte.                  Objicere potest,
  Sorh fullne siþ                 Illacrimabiles expeditiones.
  Þa git on sund reon.            Ubi vos per æquora ruistis,
  Þa git ea gor stream     30     Ibi fluctus sanguinis rivis
  Earmum þehton                   Miseri texistis.
  Mæton mere stræta               Metiti estis maris strata:
  Mundum brugdon                  Castella terruistis:
  Glidon ofer garsecg             Fluitavistis trans æquora.
  Geofon yþum                     Salis undæ
  Weol wintris wylm               Fervuerunt nimborum æstu.
  Git on wæteris æht              Vos in aquarum vadis
  Seofon night swuncon            Septem noctibus afflicti fuistis.
  He þe at sunde                  Ille cum sundum
  Oferflat hæfde          40      Transvolasset,
  Mare mægen                      Magis intensæ vires
  Þa hine on morgen tid           Illum tempore matutino
  On heaþo Ræmis                  In altam Ræmis
  Holm up æt baer                 Insulam advexere.
  Þonon he gesohte                Deinde petiit
  Swæsne.                         Dulcem,
  Leof his leodum                 Charam suo populo
  Lond Brondinga                  Terram Brondingorum.
  Freoþo burh fægere.             Libertate urbem conspicuam
  Þaer he folc ahte       50      Ibi populo possessam
  Burh and beagas                 Urbem et opes
  Beot eal wiþ                    Correpsit. Omne contra
  Þe sunu Beanstanes              Tibi filius _Beansteni_
  Sode gelæste.                   Vere persolvit.


_Criticism of the Text._

In order to show how corrupt the text is, I append a collation of the
above passage with the MS. It may be added that the lines are among the
simplest in the poem, and call for no emendation. In passages that
present any real difficulty, Thorkelin is, if possible, even more at
fault.

  Line 1, _for_ maleode _read_ maþelode.
       4, _insert period after_ Scyldinga.
       9, _insert period after_ æfþunca.
      13, _for_ middangardes _read_ middangeardes.
      15, _for_ þon _read_ þon{ne}.
      17, _for_ breccan _read_ brecan (i.e. Brecan).
      25, _for_ mic _read_ inc.
      27, _for_ mighte _read_ mihte.
      37, _for_ wæteris _read_ wæteres.
      38, _for_ night _read_ niht.
      40, _insert period after_ oferflat.
      43, _for_ heaþo Ræmis _read_ heaþoræmes (i.e. Heaþor[-æ]mas).
      46, _for_ Swæsne _read_ swæsne · [[rune]] · (i.e. [-e]ðel).
      54, _for_ sode _read_ soðe.

In the composition of his text Thorkelin made all the errors known to
scribes and editors. He misread words and letters of the MS., although
he had two transcripts. He dropped letters, combinations of letters, and
even whole words. He joined words that had no relation to each other;
he broke words into two or even three parts; he ignored compounds. He
produced many forms the like of which cannot be found in Old English.
One further example of his great carelessness may be given. The first
line of the poem, which is written in large capitals in the MS.:--

  Hwæt we Gardena....

Thorkelin perversely transcribed:--

  Hwæt wegar Dena....

and for this combination of syllables he chose the translation:--

  Quomodo Danorum.

There is, of course, no such word as 'wegar' in Old English.

Of the necessity of punctuation Thorkelin seems to have been serenely
unconscious; he did not even follow the guides afforded by the MS. Had
he done so, he would have saved himself many humiliating errors. For
example, in the text given above, to have noticed the periods mentioned
in the collation would have been to avoid two glaring instances of
'running-in.'


_Criticism of the Translation._

But, in spite of the wretched text, it remained for the translation to
discover the depths of Thorkelin's ignorance. It will be seen by reading
the extract given from the translation that he did not even perceive
that two men were swimming in the sea. It is to be remembered, too, that
his error of the 'piratical expedition' is carried on for sixty
lines--certainly a triumph of ingenuity. It is useless to attempt a
classification of the errors in this version. In the words of Kemble:--

  'Nothing but malevolence could cavil at the trivial errors which
  the very best scholars are daily found to commit, but the case is
  widely different when those errors are so numerous as totally to
  destroy the value of a work. I am therefore most reluctantly
  compelled to state that not five lines of Thorkelin's edition can
  be found in succession in which some gross fault, either in the
  transcription or translation, does not betray the editor's utter
  ignorance of the Anglo-Saxon language.' --Edition of 1835,
  Introd., p. xxix.


_Reception of Thorkelin's Edition._

The book was of value only in that it brought Beowulf to the attention
of scholars. The edition was used by Turner, Grundtvig, and Conybeare.
I have found the following notices of the book, which will show how it
was received by the scholarly world.

  TURNER. On collating the Doctor's printed text with the MS. I have
  commonly found an inaccuracy of copying in every page.--Fifth
  edition, p. 289, footnote.

  KEMBLE, see supra.

  THORPE. (The work of the learned Icelander exhibits) 'a text
  formed according to his ideas of Anglo-Saxon, and accompanied by
  his Latin translation, both the one and the other standing equally
  in need of an Oedipus.' --Edition of 1855, Preface, xiv.

  See also Grundtvig's criticism in _Beowulfs Beorh_, pp. xvii ff.

    [Footnote 1: Supra, p. 7.]  [[Preliminary Remarks]]

    [Footnote 2: See also Grundtvig's edition of the text of
    _Beowulf_, p. xvi.]

    [Footnote 3: See _Beowulfs Beorh_, p. xviii.]

    [Footnote 4: See supra, p. 11.]  [[Turner's Account...]]

    [Footnote 5: See Thorkelin, p. 257.]

    [Footnote 6: Ibid., p. 259.]

    [Footnote 7: See Thorkelin, p. 40.]


GRUNDTVIG'S TRANSLATION


*Bjowulf's Draape. Et Gothisk Helte-digt fra forrige Aar-tusinde af
Angel-Saxisk paa Danske Riim ved Nic. Fred. Sev. Grundtvig, Præst.
Kjøbenhavn, 1820[1]. 8vo, pp. lxxiv, 325.

Bjovulvs-Draapen, et Høinordisk Heltedigt, fra Anguls-Tungen fordansket
af Nik. Fred. Sev. Grundtvig. Anden forbedrede Udgave. Kiøbenhavn. Karl
Schønbergs Forlag. 1865. 8vo, pp. xvi, 224.

First Danish Translation. Ballad Measures.


_Grundtvig._

Nicolas Frederic Severin Grundtvig (1783-1872) was especially noted as a
student of Old Germanic literature. He began his career in 1806 by his
studies on the _Edda_. This was followed by a book on Northern Mythology
(1810), and by various creative works in verse and prose, the subjects
of which were usually drawn from old Danish history. An account of his
labors on the _Beowulf_ will be found in the following section. His
interest in Old English literature continued through his long life, and
he was well and favorably known among the scholars of his day.


_Circumstances of Publication._

In _Beowulfs Beorh_ (Copenhagen, 1861), Grundtvig tells the story of his
early translation of the poem. He had always had a passionate interest
in Danish antiquities, and was much excited upon the appearance of
Thorkelin's text[2]. At that time, however, he knew no Old English, and
his friend Rask, the famous scholar in Germanic philology, being absent
from Denmark, he resolved to do what he could with the poem himself. He
began by committing the entire poem to memory. In this way he detected
many of the outlines which had been obscured by Thorkelin. The results
of this study he published in the _Copenhagen Sketch-Book_ (_Kjøbenhavns
Skilderie_), 1815. When Thorkelin saw the studies he was furious, and
pronounced the discoveries mere fabrications.

But Rask, upon his return, thought differently, and proposed to
Grundtvig that they edit the poem together. They began the work, but
when they reached line 925 the edition was interrupted by Rask's journey
into Russia and Asia. With the help of Rask's _Anglo-Saxon Grammar_
(Stockholm, 1817), Grundtvig proceeded with his translation. By the
munificence of Bülow, who had also given assistance to Thorkelin,
Grundtvig was relieved of the expense of publication.


_Progress of the Interpretation of the Poem._

Grundtvig was the first to understand the story of _Beowulf_. With no
other materials than Thorkelin's edition of the text and his own
knowledge of Germanic mythology, he discovered the sea-burial of King
Scyld, the swimming-match, and the Finn episode. He identified Breca,
Hnæf, Hengest, King Hrethel, and other characters whose names Thorkelin
had filched from them.


_Text Used._

Rask borrowed the original transcripts which Thorkelin had brought from
the British Museum, and copied and corrected them. This was the basis of
Grundtvig's translation.


_Differences between the First and Second Editions._

The principal difference is in the introduction; but of the nature and
extent of changes in the second edition I can give no notion. All my
information respecting the first volume is derived from transcripts of
certain parts of it sent me from the British Museum. These copies do not
reveal any differences between the two translations.


_Aim of the Volume, and Nature of the Translation._

We begin by quoting the author's words:--

  'I have studied the poem as if I were going to translate it word
  for word ... but I will not and have not translated it in that
  way, and I will venture to maintain that my translation is a
  faithful one, historically faithful, inasmuch as I have never
  wilfully altered or interpolated anything, and poetically faithful
  inasmuch as I have tried with all my might vividly to express what
  I saw in the poem.... Whoever understands both languages and
  possesses a poetical sense will see what I mean, and whoever is
  deficient in knowledge or sense, or both, may stick to his own
  view, if he will only let me stick to mine, which may be weak
  enough, but is not so utterly devoid of style and poetry as little
  pettifoggers in the intellectual world maintain because they can
  see very well that my method is not theirs. "I have," said Cicero,
  "translated Demosthenes, not as a grammarian but as an orator, and
  therefore have striven not so much to convince as to persuade my
  readers of the truth of his words": methinks I need no other
  defence as regards connoisseurs and just judges, and if I am much
  mistaken in this opinion, then my work is absolutely
  indefensible[3].' --Pages xxxiv, xxxv.

In the introduction to his text of 1861, Grundtvig speaks of his theory
of translation, saying that he gave, as it were, new clothes, new money,
and new language to the poor old Seven Sleepers, so that they could
associate freely with moderns. He believed that it was necessary to put
the poem into a form that would seem natural and attractive to the
readers of the day. In so doing he departed from the letter of the law,
and rewrote the poem according to his own ideas.

In the second edition the author states that he hopes the poem will
prove acceptable as a reading-book for schools. Its value as a text-book
in patriotism is also alluded to.


EXTRACT.

  SJETTE SANG.

  Trætten med Hunferd Drost og Trøsten derover.

  Nu _Hunferd_ tog til Orde[4],
  Og _Egglavs_ Søn var han,
  Men Klammeri han gjorde
  Med Tale sin paa Stand.
  Han var en fornem Herre,
  Han sad ved Thronens Fod,
  Men avindsyg desværre,
  Han var ei Bjovulv god;
  En Torn var ham i Øiet
  Den Ædlings Herrefærd,
  Som havde Bølgen pløiet
  Og Ære høstet der;
  Thi Hunferd taalte ikke,
  Med Næsen høit i Sky,
  At Nogen vilde stikke
  Ham selv i Roes og Ry.

    'Er du,' see det var Skosen,
  'Den Bjovulv Mudderpram,
  Som dykked efter Rosen
  Og drev i Land med Skam,
  Som kæppedes med _Brække_
  Og holdt sig ei for brav,
  Dengang I, som to Giække,
  Omflød paa vildne Hav!
  I vilde med jer Svømmen
  Paa Vandet giøre Blæst,
  Men drev dog kun med Strømmen,
  Alt som I kunde bedst;
  For aldrig Det ei keise
  Jeg vilde slig en Klik,
  Som for den Vendereise
  I paa jert Rygte sik.
  Paa Landet var I friske,
  Men Vand kan slukke Ild,
  I svømmed som to Fiske,
  Ia, snart som døde Sild;
  Da sagtnedes Stoheien,
  Der Storm og Bølge strid
  Ier viste Vinterveien
  Alt i en Uges Tid.
  Dog, om end Narre begge,
  Kom du dog værst deran,
  Thi fra dig svømmed Brække
  Og blev din Overmand;
  Du artig blev tilbage,
  Der han en Morgenstund
  Opskvulpedes saa fage
  Paa høie Romøs Grund,
  Hvorfra sin Kaas han satte
  Til _Brondingernas_ Land,
  Med Borge der og Skatte
  Han var en holden Mand;
  Der havde han sit Rige,
  Og deiligt var hans Slot,
  Han elsket var tillige
  Af hver sin Undersaat.
  Saa _Bjansteens_ Søn udførte
  Alt hvad han trued med;
  Men da du, som vi hørte,
  Kom der saa galt afsted,
  Saa tør jeg nok formode,
  Om end du giør dig kry,
  Det giør slet ingen Gode,
  Du brænder dig paany;
  Ia, vil en Nat du vove
  At bie Grændel her,
  Da tør derfor jeg love,
  Dig times en Ufærd.'


_Criticism of the Translation._

The poem departs so far from the text of _Beowulf_ that any discussion
of its accuracy would be out of place. As has been shown by the section
on the nature of the translation, the author had no intention of being
true to the letter of the text. Grundtvig's scholarship has been
discussed above.

