  The flower Itself is of a golden hue,
  The leaves inclining to a darker blue;
  The leaves shoot thick about the root, and grow
  Into a bush, and shade the turf below.

_Addison_.

Dryden falls into the same error:--

  A flower there is that grows in meadow ground,
  Aurelius called, and easy to be found;
  For from one root the rising stem bestows
  A wood of leaves and violet purple boughs.
  The flower itself is glorious to behold,
  And shines on altars like refulgent gold.

 _Mag. Nat. History_

       *       *       *       *       *


RIVAL SINGERS.


In 1726-7, there was a sharp warfare in London between two opera singers,
La Faustina and La Cuzzoni, and their partizans. It went so far that young
ladies dressed themselves _a la Faustina_ and _a la Cuzzoni_. We need not
wonder, therefore, at the hair _à la Sontag_ in our days, or gentleman's
whiskers _à la Jocko_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHARKS.


In a recent voyage from Bombay to the Persian Gulf, an Arab sailor of a
crew, who was the stoutest and strongest man in the ship on leaving Bombay,
pined away by disease, and was committed to the deep by his Arab comrades
on board, with greater feeling and solemnity than is usual among Indian
sailors, and with the accustomed ceremonies and prayers of the Mohamedan
religion. The smell of the dead body attracted several sharks round the
ship, one of which, eight feet in length, was harpooned and hauled on
board.--_Oriental Herald_.

       *       *       *       *       *


JONAH'S "WHALE."


At a late meeting of the Wernerian Society at Edinburgh, the Rev. Dr. Scot
read a paper on the great fish that swallowed up Jonah, showing that it
could not be a whale, as often supposed, but was probably a white shark.

       *       *       *       *       *


MUSHROOMS.


The large horse-mushroom, except for catsup, should be very cautiously
eaten. In wet seasons, or if produced on wet ground, it is very
deleterious, if used in any great quantity.--_Mag. Nat. Hist._

       *       *       *       *       *


USEFUL KNOWLEDGE.


The sweat of the brow is not favourable to the operations of the brain;
and the leisure which follows the daily labour of the peasant and
manufacturer, will, even if no other demands are made upon it, afford but
little scope for the over acquisition of knowledge. Long will it be ere
the English husbandman renounces for study the pleasures of his weekly
holiday, and long may it be ere the Scottish peasant be withdrawn by a
thirst for knowledge from the duties of his Sabbath, and from the simple
rights of his morning and evening sacrifice.--_Foreign Rev_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. CANNING.


A beautiful medal in memory of this celebrated statesman, has lately been
struck at Paris, under the direction of M. Girard.

       *       *       *       *       *


NATURE AND ART.


It is curious enough that people decorate their chimney-pieces with
imitations of beautiful fruits, while they seem to think nothing at all of
the originals hanging upon the trees, with all the elegant accompaniments
of flourishing branches, buds, and leaves--_Cobbet's English Gardener._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE KING OF PRUSSIA


Lives in comparative retirement, in a small palace fitted up with the
greatest simplicity, and his bed is really not better than that usually
allotted to a domestic in England. His study is quite that of an official
man of business. He has a large map of his own dominions; and in each town
where troops are stationed he fixes a common pin, and on the head of the
pin is a small bit of card, on which are written the names of the
regiments, their numbers, and commanding officers, in the town. He thus,
at any moment, can see the disposition of his immense army, which is very
essential to such a government as Prussia, it being a mild despotic
military system. He has a most excellent modern map of the Turkish
provinces in Europe, and upon this is marked out every thing that can
interest a military man. A number of pins, with green heads, point out the
positions of the Russian army; and in the same manner, with
red-and-white-headed pins, he distinguishes the stations of the different
kinds of troops of the Turkish host.--_Literary Gazette_.


THE OPERA OF "OTELLO."


Othello is altogether unsuited to the lyrical drama, and supposing the
contrary, Rossini, of all composers, was the most unfit to treat such a
subject in music. The catastrophe in the English tragedy is necessary; we
see it from the beginning as through a long and gloomy vista. We weep, or
shudder, we draw a long sigh of despair, and feel that it could not have
been otherwise. But in the opera, Othello is a ruffian, without excuse for
his crime. We have suddenly a beautiful woman running distracted about the
stage to a symphony--and a very noisy symphony--of violins, and butchered
before our eyes to an allegro movement.--_Foreign Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRENCH NOVELS.


When last in Paris we were curious to know wherefore M. Jouy had written
such exceptionable and abominable stuff as his last novel; and the
gentleman to whom we addressed ourselves, answered, in a light lively vein;
"Oh! M. Jouy has a name, and the booksellers pay well; and as they are
very stupid, and depend on names for the sale of their books, he wrote
down the first matter that came into his head."--_Foreign Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *


AMBER.


Polangen, the frontier town of Russia, is famous for its trade in amber.
This substance is found by the inhabitants on the coast, between Polangen
and Pillau, either loosely on the shore, on which it has been thrown by
the strong north and westerly winds, or in small hillocks of sand near the
sea, where it is found in regular strata. The quantity found yearly in
this manner, and on this small extent of coast, besides what little is
sometimes discovered in beds of pit coal in the interior of the country,
is said to amount to from 150 to 200 tons, yielding a revenue to the
government of Prussia of about 100,000 francs. As amber is much less in
vogue in Western Europe than in former times, the best pieces, which are
very transparent, and frequently weigh as much as three ounces, are sent
to Turkey and Persia, for the heads of their expensive pipes and hookahs.
Very few trinkets are now sold for ornaments to ladies' dresses; and the
great bulk of amber annually found is converted into a species of scented
spirits and oil, which are much esteemed for the composition of delicate
varnish. In the rough state, amber is sold by the ton, and forms an object
of export trade from Memel and Konigsberg.--_Granville's Travels in
Russia_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The head of the late Dr. Gall has been taken off agreeably to his wishes,
and dissected and dried for the benefit of science.

       *       *       *       *       *


MUSICAL TALENT.


All the principal Italian composers were _in flower_ about the age of
twenty-five. There is scarcely an instance of a musician producing his
_chef-d'oeuvre_ after the age of thirty. Rossini was not twenty when he
composed his _Tancredi_, and his _Italiana in Algieri_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most important principle perhaps in life is to have a pursuit--a
useful one if possible, and at all events an innocent one. The unripe
fruit tree of knowledge is, I believe, always bitter or sour; and
scepticism and discontent--sickness of the mind--are often the results of
devouring it.--_Sir Humphry Davy_.

       *       *       *       *       *


COFFIN OF KING DUNCAN.

