917. =Que tantas persecuciones=, etc. Supply some introductory
interrogative expression like "Can it be" or "Do you believe."

922. =De Amadís, en Beltenebros.= _Amadís de Gaula_ is the title of an old
romance of uncertain authorship. The oldest text of which we have record
was in Spanish or Portuguese prose, and the most interesting part of it
is attributed to the Portuguese, Joham de Lobeira. The incident referred
to by Lope occurred in the early years of the career of Amadís, hero of
the story. After a youth filled with adventure, he meets and falls in
love with Oriana, daughter of Lisuarte, king of Great Britain, who
returns his affection. A short time afterwards Amadís is freed from a
perilous situation by a young girl named Briolania, who herself is
suffering captivity. He then promises to return and deliver her. Having
been successful in a number of other adventures, he sets out, with the
tearful consent of Oriana, to rescue Briolania. After his departure on
this mission, Oriana is erroneously informed that Amadís loves
Briolania; mad with anger and despair, she sends him a letter saying
that all is ended between them. Amadís, having avenged Briolania's
wrongs, receives Oriana's letter and, overcome by grief, retires to a
hermitage on a rock in the sea, where he receives the name of
Beltenebros, which Southey translates as the "Fair Forlorn." Afterwards
Oriana, undeceived, seeks a reconciliation with Amadís, and their
happiness is at length realized. Amadís has remained the type of the
constant lover who comes into the possession of the object of his
affections only after adventures and difficulties without number.

951. =Valencia= is an important seaport town on the Mediterranean with a
population of about 160,000. The city is picturesquely situated on the
banks of the Guadalaviar in the midst of a luxuriant tropical nature.
Valencia was formerly the capital of a kingdom of the same name and has
played an important rôle in Spanish history since the time when the
Romans occupied the peninsula. During the Moorish occupation it was a
worthy rival of Seville, with which it is here mentioned. The gardens of
Valencia have always been justly celebrated for their beauty, and Lope
well knew this, for during his exile in Valencia he himself had a
garden in which, as he tells us in several of his works, he passed many
pleasant hours.

954. =Vera de Plasencia= is a small town northwest of Zaragoza, situated
in the desolate Llano de Plasencia. Lope must have sojourned there at
some time or have had more than a passing interest in the place, for in
his _Epístola á D. Michael de Solis_ he writes:

Si fuera por la Vera de Plasencia
Á buscar primavera al jardín mío,
Hallara tu Leonor en competencia.

_Obras Sueltas_, vol. I, p. 268.

960. =Pues lo digo=, etc. In the Valencia edition Martin says:

Quando lo digo lo sé.
Tres puntos del que los vé
Que no son puntos de vara:
Puntos, que puedo decir,
Según en su condición,
Que tres en un punto son:
Ver, desear, y morir.

The sense of the passage seems to turn on the words _punto_ and _cara_.
A _punto_ or "point" is one twelfth of the antiquated French line and
one one hundred and forty-fourth of an inch. By a comparison of the two
editions it is clear that there is a play on this word. _Cara_ is
probably a typographical error for _vara_, but it may be used here in a
related sense to the archaic _á primera cara_, which was the equivalent
of _á primera vista_. Therefore the sense of ll. 961-2 is: "That is the
size that one would take of that foot with a measure," or "That is the
size that one would take by a glimpse of that foot."

971. =De escarpines presumí=, etc. The consonance of _escarpines_ is with
_jazmines_, but the contrast is with _chapines_ above. The _chapín_ was
a heavy low shoe or sandal better suited to the use of servants, while
the _escarpín_ was an elegant thin-soled, shoe or slipper, and often
with cloth top as the following verse seems to indicate. Here the sense
is not very apparent and may involve some colloquialism of the time. The
passage may be freely translated: "I thought you were speaking of
_escarpines_, since the distinction depends only upon (the height of)
the cotton (top)."

973. =paragambas.= An obsolete or colloquial word made up of the
preposition _para_, or possibly of a form of the verb _parar_, "parry
off, protect," and the obsolete substantive _gamba_, the equivalent of
_pierna_. It was evidently applied to some covering of the leg, as a
gaiter or boot. In the Valencia edition it appears as two words, _para
gambas_.

974. =á cierta dama= depends upon _pregunté_.

975. =cañafístolas==_cañafístulas_. The word seems to have the idea of
something indicated but not named, and here may have the sense of
"ridiculous adornments." It is still used colloquially as the
approximate equivalent of the English "thingumajig" or "thingumbob."
That the author intends it to have something of its true meaning,
"purgative," is indicated by the next few lines of the text.

1009. =fialle=, see v. 95 and note.

1038. =azules enojos=, _dark clouds_. Lit. "blue wrath."

1042. =á cuantos los miran=. _Los_ refers to _ojos_ mentioned above. The
period at the end of the line must be a typographical error, for the
sense seems to favor a comma. The two subordinate clauses introduced by
_si_ and connected by y do not require as much separation as is afforded
by a period.

1052. =Como quedó concertado.= Note the repetition of line 1000. Lope is
given to repetitions in his works, but this is perhaps the only verse in
the play which he has unconsciously repeated.

1062. =inglés á Cádiz.= "Año de 1625." (Note by Hartzenbusch.) The
incident referred to is the irrational attack upon Cadiz by the English
fleet under Sir Edward Cecil in October, 1625. The English were
ignominiously defeated and the Spanish encouraged to continue an unequal
struggle.

1066. =tusón dorado.= The name of a celebrated order of knighthood founded
in 1429 by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy and the Netherlands. It
originally consisted of thirty-one knights and was self-perpetuating,
but Philip II absorbed the nominating power. In 1713 Charles VI moved
the order to Vienna, but this action was contested by the Spanish and
the dispute was settled by dividing the order between the two countries.

1067. =Con débil caña=, etc. "En la edición antigua de la comedia: _Con
débil caña, con freno herrado._" (Note by Hartzenbusch.)

1068. =Marte... Cupido=, _Mars_, the god of war, _Cupid_, the god of love.

1076. =Sembrando.= "En la _Corona trágica_ se lee _sembrando_; en la
edición antigua de la comedia, _tendidas_."(Note by Hartzenbusch.) The
sonnet is found also in the _Obras Sueltas_, vol. IV, p. 500, under the
title, _Á la Venida de los Ingleses á Cádiz_. Hartzenbusch speaks of it
as though it appeared in the _Corona trágica_, but his note is
misleading, for it really is found in a collection of _Poesías varias_
in the volume stated which begins with the _Corona trágica_.

1086. =Mas qué os=, etc. More exact punctuation would place the initial
interrogation after _mas_ and before _qué_.

