 The
exquisite sharpness of outline produced by the chisel is wanting, and there
is (in consequence of the impossibility of undercutting) an absence of that
effect of light and shade which is the characteristic of the mediæval
carvings. The greatest shock is, however, experienced on an examination of
the interior. What at first sight appear to be highly elaborated oaken
bench-ends and seats are only painted earthenware. In point of fact, it is
a POT CHURCH. A similar and larger {28} structure by the same architect,
and in the same material, has been erected near Platt Hall, in the parish
of Manchester.

J.H.P. LERESCHE.

The church at Lever Bridge, near Darcy Lever Hall, on the line of railway
between Normanton and Bolton, was built about seven years since. The
architect is Edward Sharpe, Esq., of Lancaster. The material of the entire
structure, including the internal fittings, is terra cotta, from the
Ladyshore works in the neighbourhood, where a model of the church, in the
same material, is in preparation for the Exhibition of 1851.

G.I.F.

_Lines attributed to Henry Viscount Palmerston_ (Vol. i., p. 382.).--Having
been absent for some time, I have not been able to see whether any one has
answered a Query I put, viz:--

    "Who was the author of those lines beginning with--

  'Stranger! whoe'er thou art that views this tomb,' etc.

which Porson translated into Greek Iambics, beginning with--

  [Greek: Ô xeine, touton hostis eisoras taphon] etc."

A friend, who was senior medallist in his time at Cambridge, tells me that
tradition said that the lines were set by the Rev. R. Collier, Hebrew
Professor and Examiner at Trinity College; and that it is supposed that
Collier found them in some magazine of the day.

With reference to the imposition supposed to be set Porson (Vol. ii., p.
71.), and shown by C. at p. 106. to be by Joshua Barnes, I question whether
any imposition were ever set him: for I have heard Mr. Summers (Porson's
first instructor) observe, that he was a well-conducted man during the
whole of his undergraduateship; others have reported the same of him.

A.B.

_Defender of the Faith_ (Vol. ii., pp. 442. 481.).--In _Collectanea
Topographica et Genealogica_, vol. vi. p. 321., is an indenture of lease

    "maide the xxijth daye of Januarye, in the second yeare of the reagne
    of King Henry the seaventhe, by the graice of God Kinge of England,
    _defendoure of the faithe_," etc.

The lessor, Christopher Ratlife, of Hewick, died before 10 Henry VII., and
the editor of the above work says, "It is impossible to account for the
peculiarity in the date of this deed."

Bishop Burnet cites Spelman as asserting that several of the kings of
England before Henry VIII. had borne the title of "Defender of the Faith."
A correspondent of the _Gentleman's Magazine_ (N.S. xvi. 357.) conjectures
that the name of Spelman had been inadvertently substituted for the name of
Selden; though he justly remarks, that Selden by no means countenances the
assertion of the bishop.

C.H. COOPER.

Cambridge.

_Farquharson on Auroræ_ (Vol. ii., p. 441.).--Your correspondant L.
inquires about Mr. Farquharson, _shepherd_ or _minister_ of Alford. Whether
the word translated _shepherd_ be _pasteur_ or not, I cannot say, as I have
not either of the works he alludes to; but certain it is that the Rev. Mr.
Farquharson, _minister_ of Alford, only recently deceased, was well known
as a meteorological observer; and it is to him, doubtless, that Professor
Koenitz refers.

The "other Protestant minister, Mr. James Paull, at Tullynessle," now Dr.
Paull, is still in life.

S.P.

"_Old Rowley_" (Vol. ii., pp. 27. 74.).--Charles II. was called "Old
Rowley," after Rowley, a famous horse at Newmarket; who, like the king, was
the sire of stock much better looking than himself.

A. HOLT WHITE.

_Tale of a Tub_ (Vol. i., p.326.).--Your correspondant J.O.W.H. may find
some curious remarks on this subject in Sir James Mackintosh's _Life of Sir
Thomas More_. I cannot give a precise reference; but as the book is small,
the passages may be easily found.

H.G.T.

_Painting by C. Bega_ (Vol. ii., p. 494.).--The translation of the lines
is, I believe,

    "We Sing certainly what is new, and have still a prize." "A Cracknel is
    our gain, but the ditty must first (come) out."

In modern Dutch most probably,

    "Wÿ singen vast wat nienw, en hebben nog een buit. Een Krakeling is
    onze winst maar het Liedker moet eerst uit."

I should think there is a lake somewhere in the picture, and the lines are
probably part of an old Dutch song. As to the painter C. Bega, I have at
hand a Catalogue of the Munich Gallery, and find there "Cornelius Bega,
geb. 1620, gest. 1664." His picture is described as "Eine Rauch- und
Trinkgesellschaft belustiget sich mit Tanz in einer Schenke." In a
Catalogue of the Louvre, I have the following description:

    "Bega, Corneille ou Cornille, né à Harlem en 1620, mort de la peste
    dans la même ville en 1664; élève d'Adrien Van Ostade."

His picture is

    "Intérieur d'un ménage rustique. Un homme et une femme sont assis près
    d'une table."

His subjects appear to be generally of the character of the painting
possessed by your correspondent.

J.H.L.

_Herstmonceux_ (Vol. ii., p. 478.).--Question 4. In the Privy Seal writs of
Henry V. frequent mention is made of "nostre maison de Bethleem," a
Monastery at Shene, so called because it was dedicated to "Jesus of
Bethlehem." It was for forty monks of the Cistercian order.

{29} Question 5. In the _Battle of Agincourt_, by Sir H. Nicolas, Sir Rover
Fyene's name is given amongst the retinue of Henry V. He was accompanied by
eight men-at-arms and twenty-four archers. Sir Roger "Ffynys," accompanied
by ten of his men-at-arms and forty archers, also followed Henry (in the
suite of Lord Willoughby d'Eresby) in his second continental expedition.
(_Gesta Henrici Quinti._)

B.W.

_Leicester's Commonwealth_ (Vol. ii., p. 92).--See _Gentleman's Magazine_,
December, 1845, for many remarks upon this work.

J.R.

_Midwives Licensed_ (Vol. ii., p. 408.).--I find the following question
among the articles of inquiry issued by Fleetwood, Bp. of St. Asaph, in the
year 1710.

    "Do any in your parish practise physic chyrurgery, or _undertake the
    office of a midwife without license_?"

E.H.A.

_Volusenus_ (Vol. ii, p. 311).--Boswell, writing to Johnson from Edinburgh,
Jan. 8. 1778, asks:

    "Did you ever look at a book written by Wilson, a Scotchman, under the
    Latin name of Volusenus, according to the custom of literary men at a
    certain period? It is entitled _De Animi Tranquillitate_."

E.H.A.

    [Mr. Croker, in a note on this passage, tells us that the author,
    Florence Wilson, born at Elgin, died near Lyons, in 1547, and wrote two
    or three other works of no note.--ED.]

_Martin Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 392.).--CLERICUS asks for information
touching the family of Martin, "in or near Wivenhoe, Essex." There is a
large house in the village, said to have been the seat of Matthew Martin,
Esq., member for Colchester in the second parliaments of George I. and II.
He died in 1749. He had been a commander in the service of the East India
Company. Only one party of the name now lives in the neighbourhood, but
whether he is of the family or not I cannot say. He is described as "Edward
Martin, Master, Royal Navy."

A.A.

_Swords used in Dress_ (Vol. i. 415.; vol. ii. 110. 213. 388.).--Might it
not have happened that swords went out of fashion after the middle of the
last century, and were revived towards its close? In old prints from 1700
to 1720, they appear to have been universally worn; later they are not so
general. In 1776-90, they appear again. My grandmother (born in 1760) well
remembers her brother, of nearly her own age, wearing a sword, say about
1780. Some of Fielding's heroes wore "hangers."

A.A.

_Clerical Costume_ (Vol. ii., pp. 22. 189.).--The use of scarlet cloth is
popularly recommended in Berks and in Devon as a cure for the rheumatism.
It should be wrapped round the "ailing" limb.

H.G.T.

_Tristan d'Acunha_ (Vol. ii., p. 358.).--The latest and best description of
this isle is to be found in _A Narrative of a Nine Months' Residence in New
Zealand, together with a Journal of a Residence in Tristan d'Acunha_. By A.
Earle. Longmans, 1832.

GOMER.

_Swearing by Swans_ (Vol. ii., pp. 392. 451.).--Though I can give no reason
why the birds of Juno should have been invoked as witnesses to an oath, the
Query about them has suggested to me what may perhaps appear rather an
irrelevant little note.

Cooper, in his _Raven's Nest_, makes Mr. Aristobulus Brag use the
provincialism "_I swanny_;" "by which," observes the author, "I suppose he
meant--_I swear!_" Of course, this has nothing to do with swearing by
swans, more than sounding like it; argument of sound being very different
from sound argument. Mr. Cooper does not seem to have given a thought to
the analysis of the phrase, which is no oath, merely an innocent
asseveration. "I's-a-warrant-ye" (perhaps when resolved to its
ungrammatical elements, "I is a warranty to ye") proceeds through
"I's-a-warnd-ye," "I's-warn-ye" (all English provincialisms,) to its remote
transatlantic ultimatum of debasement in "_I swanny_."

G.J. CAYLEY.

_Mildew in Books_ (Vol. ii., p. 103).--In reply to B., who inquires for a
prevention for _mildew in books_, I send the following receipt, which I
have copied from a book containing many others:--"Take a feather dipt in
spirits of wine, and lightly wash over the backs and covers. To prevent
mould, put a little into writing ink."

Another to take _mildew out of linen_.--"Mix powdered starch and soft soap
with half the quantity of bay salt; mix it with vinegar, and lay it on both
sides with a painter's brush. Then let it lie in the open air till the
spots are out."

J.R.

"_Swinging Tureen_," (Vol. i., pp. 246. 307. 406.).--

    "Next crowne the bowle full
    With gentle lamb's-wooll
  Adde sugar, nutmeg, and ginger,
    With store of ale too;
    And thus must ye doe
  To make the wassaile a _swinger_."

  Herrick, cited in Ellis' _Brand_, ed. 1849, vol. i. p. 26.

By the way, is not the "lanycoll" (so called, I presume, from the froth
like wool (_lana_) at the neck (_collum_) of the vessel), mentioned in the
old ballad of "King Edward and the Shepherd" (Hartshorne's _Met. Tales_, p.
54.), the same beverage as "lamb's-wool?"

H.G.T.

_Totness Church_ (Vol. ii., pp. 376. 452.).--My thanks are due to your
correspondent S.S.S. for kindly furnishing information as to the singular
arched passage mentioned in a former note, which drew my attention as a
casual visitor, and which {30} certainly appears to be the "iter
processionale" referred to in the will of William Ryder. Any information as
to the subject of the good woman's tradition would be very acceptable.
Perhaps S.S.S. will allow me, in return for his satisfactory explanation of
the "dark passage" in question, to over a very luminous passage in
confirmation of his view of Goldsmith's.

H.G.T.

_Lights on the Altar_ (Vol. ii., p. 495.).--In the 42nd canon of those
enacted under King Edgar (Thorpe's _Ancient Laws and Institutes of
England_, vol. ii. pp. 252-3.) we find:--

    "Let there be always burning lights in the church when mass is
    singing."

And in the 14th of the canons of Ælfric (pp. 348-9. of the same volume):--

    "Acoluthus he is called, who bears the candle or taper in God's
    ministries when the Gospel is read, or when the housel is hallowed at
    the altar: not to dispel, as it were, the dim darkness, but, with that
    light, to announce bliss, in honour of Christ who is our light."

C.W.G.

_Time when Herodotus wrote_ (Vol. ii., p. 405.).--The passage quoted by
your correspondent A.W.H. affords, I think, a reasonable argument to prove
that Herodotus did not commence his work until an advanced age; most
probably between the ages of seventy and seventy-seven years. Moreover,
there are various other reasons to justify the same conclusion; all which
A.W.H. will find stated in Dr. Smith's _Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Biography and Mythology_, vol. ii. I believe A.W.H. is correct in his
supposition that the passage has not been noticed before.

T.H. KERSLEY, A.B.

King William's College.

_Adur_ (Vol. ii., p. 108.).--The connexion of the Welsh _ydwr_ with the
Greek [Greek: hydor] is remarkable. Can any of your readers tell me whether
there be not an older Welsh word for _water_? There are, I know, two sets
of Welsh numerals, of which the later contains many Greek words, but the
older are entirely different. Is not _cader_ akin to [Greek: kathedra], and
_glas_ to [Greek: glaukos]?

J.W.H.

_The Word "Alarm"_ (Vol. ii., pp. 151. 183.).--I send you an instance of
the accurate use of the word "alarm" which may be interesting. In an
account of the attempt made on the 29th of Oct. 1795, to assassinate Geo.
III., the Earl of Onslow (as cited in Maunder's _Universal Biog._ p. 321.)
uses the following expression:--

    "His Majesty showed, and, I am persuaded, felt, no alarm; much less did
    he fear."

Is not this a good instance of the true difference of meaning in these two
words, which are now loosely used as if strictly synonymous?

H.G.T.

_The Conquest_ (Vol. ii., p 440).--W.L. is informed that I have before me
several old parchment documents or title-deeds, in which the words "post
conquestum" are used merely to express (as part of their dates) the year
after the accession of those kings respectively in whose reigns those
documents were made.

P.H.F.

_Land Holland_ (Vol. ii., p. 267. 345.).--J.B.C. does not say in what part
of England he finds this term used. Holland, in Lincolnshire, is by Ingulph
called _Hoiland_, a name which has been thought to mean _hedgeland_, in
allusion to the sea-walls or hedges by which it was preserved from
inundation. Other etymologies have also been proposed. (See Gough's
_Camden_, "Lincolnshire.") In Norfolk, however, the term _olland_ is used,
Forby tells us, for "arable land which has been laid down in grass more
than two years, q.d. _old-land_." In a Norfolk paper of few months since,
in an advertisement of a ploughing match, I observe a prize is offered "To
the ploughman, with good character, who shall plough a certain quantity of
_olland_ within the least time, in the best manner."

C.W.G.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

The Camden Society have just issued to the members a highly important
volume, Walter Mapes _De Nugis Curialium_. The best idea of the interesting
character of this work may be formed from the manner in which it is
described by its editor, Mr. Thomas Wright, who speaks of it as "the book
in which this remarkable man seems to have amused himself with putting down
his own sentiments on the passing events of the day, along with the popular
gossip of the courtiers with whom he mixed;" and as being "one mass of
contemporary anecdote, romance, and popular legend, interesting equally by
its curiosity and by its novelty." There can be little doubt that the work
will be welcomed, not only by the members of the Camden Society, but by all
students of our early history and all lovers of our Folk Lore.

Though we do not generally notice the publication of works of fiction, the
handsome manner in which, in the third volume of his _Bertha, a Romance of
the Dark Ages_, Mr. MacCabe has thought right to speak of the information
which he obtained, during the progress of his work, through the medium of
NOTES AND QUERIES, induces us to make an exception in favour of his highly
interesting story. At the same time, that very acknowledgment almost
forbids our speaking in such high terms as we otherwise should of the power
with which Mr. MacCabe has worked up this striking narrative, which take
its name from Bertha, the wife of the profligate Henry IV. of Germany; and
of which the main incidents turn on Henry's deposition of the Pope, and his
consequent excommunication by the inflexible Gregory the Seventh. But we
the less regret this necessity of speaking thus moderately, since it must
be obvious that when an accomplished scholar like the {31} author of the
_Catholic History of England_, to whom old chronicles are as household
words, chooses to weave their most striking passages into a romance, his
work will be of a very different stamp from that of the ordinary novelist,
who has hunted over the same chronicles for the mere purpose of finding
startling incidents. The one will present his readers, as Mr. MacCabe has
done, with a picture uniform in style and consistent in colouring, while
the other will at best only exhibit a few brilliant scenes, which, like the
views in a magic lanthorn, will owe as much of their brilliancy to the
darkness with which they are contrasted as to the skill of the artist.

Messrs. Sotheby and Co. will sell, on Wednesday next and three following
days, the valuable Collection of Coins and Medals of the Rev. Dr. Neligan,
of Cork; and on the following Monday that gentleman's highly interesting
Antiquities, Illuminated MSS., Ancient Glass, Bronzes, Etruscan and Roman
Pottery, Silver Ring Money, &c.

To those who have never studied what Voltaire maliciously designated "the
science of fools with long memories," but yet occasionally wish to know the
families which have borne certain mottoes, the new edition of _The Book of
Mottoes_ will be a very acceptable source of information.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

ANDRAN'S PROPORTIONS OF THE HUMAN BODY. Folio. 1683.

SANDCART'S ACADEMIA HOMOGRAPHIA.

SHAKSPEARE. 10 Vols. By JOHNSON. 1768. Vol. VII.

HUME'S ENGLAND. 1786. Vol. III.

FOXES AND FIREBRANDS. 12mo.

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_To meet the wishes of many friends, and to avoid the inconvenience arising
from the diversity of prices in our Monthly Parts, we propose in future to
publish a fifth, or Supplementary Number, every Month in which these are
only four Saturdays. By this arrangement our Monthly Parts will be of the
uniform price of One shilling and Three pence, with the exception of those
for January and July, which will include the Index of the preceding
half-year at the price of One shilling and Ninepence each. Thus the yearly
subscription to _NOTES AND QUERIES_, either in unstamped Weekly Numbers or
Monthly Parts, will be _SIXTEEN SHILLINGS_. The subscription for the
Stamped Edition, with which Gentlemen may be supplied regularly by giving
their Orders direct to the Publisher, _MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street_
(accompanied by a Post Office Order), is One pound and Fourpence for a
twelve-month, or Ten shillings and Two pence for six months_.

WILLIAM C. PENNY _is referred for an account of the National Anthem to
Clarke's_ "History of God Save the King."

W.G. _will find all the information he requires respecting the twelve
labours of Hercules in Dr. Smith's_ New Classical Dictionary.

W. ANDERSON. _Dr. Mavor published a work under the title of_ The British
Plutarch.

