My stay in Tours gave me some opportunity of seeing this ancient city.
Tours lies in the heart of the Loire Valley, which is the garden of
France. It is 145 miles southwest of Paris by rail and is on the left
bank of the Loire River. It is an exceedingly old city and has an
interesting history. There are numerous castles and chateaux in the
vicinity, which in peace times are visited annually by thousands of
tourists. It contains a number of ancient buildings of interest. In
normal times it is no doubt one of the most interesting cities in
France.

The hospital in which I was treated was a very large one, in fact, it
was a great institution of many buildings. It contained forty-five
wards of fifty cots each. It covered a large area and had every
comfort for the men, such as a motion picture house, library, reading
room, etc.

After I had been there about five weeks and had regained much of my
physical strength, the authorities in charge began to classify the
boys, either for further duty, or for shipment home. All were anxious
to be put in class D, which meant the United States--God's country.
Nobody wanted class A, which meant further duty with the army of
occupation, and another year at least in Europe. It seemed very much
like a lottery, as the boys who were able to do so, walked up and
received their classification. I was exceedingly happy when I was
given class D, which meant that nothing would stop me from seeing
"home and mother."

After being classified, we were notified to make ourselves ready for a
trip to the coast. Although we were not told that we were going home,
we knew that the good old U. S. A. was our ultimate destination. So I
received a pass and made my last visit to the business district of
Tours for the purpose of purchasing some souvenirs of France for the
women folks at home. The men I had already remembered with rings, made
during my convalescing days at the hospital out of French two-franc
pieces. I might add that ring making was a favorite occupation of the
patients and we spent many pleasant moments working them out sitting
on our cots, while a group of interested buddies would sit around and
watch and comment.

I found it no easy matter to make my purchases. In the first place,
the French merchants, knowing that many of the American boys had money
to spend, asked about four prices for everything, and, secondly, the
French methods of doing business are quite different from our own. But
by spending practically the entire day, by attempting Hebraic methods
in purchasing, and by pretending that I had only a few francs to
spend, I managed to spend about $25 in buying the few things that I
wanted to bring home.

I was then ready to leave, whenever Uncle Sam was willing to take me.


CHAPTER IX.

Home Again


On the morning of December 11th a number of the boys at the hospital
at Tours received orders to prepare for a trip to the coast. This was
the most welcome news that we could have heard and we hastily got our
personal belongings together. It was about 10 o'clock when we were
placed in ambulances and taken from the hospital. We were driven to
the railroad station about a mile distant, and there assigned to
quarters in an American hospital train.

