    "On Sunday was interred, in the burial-ground of St.
    Martin's-in-the-Fields, the remains of Hugh Hewson, who died at the age
    of 85. The deceased was a man of no mean celebrity. He had passed more
    than forty years in the parish of St. Martin's, and kept a
    hair-dresser's shop, being no less a personage than the identical _Hugh
    Strap_, whom Dr. Smollett rendered so conspicuously interesting in his
    life and adventures of Roderick Random. The deceased was a very
    intelligent man, and took delight in recounting the scenes of his early
    life. He spoke with pleasure of the time he passed in the service of
    the Doctor; and it was his pride, as well as boast, to say, that he had
    been educated at the same seminary with so learned and distinguished a
    character. His shop was hung round with Latin quotations, and he would
    frequently point out to his acquaintance the several scenes in Roderick
    Random, pertaining to himself, which had their foundation, not in the
    Doctor's inventive fancy, but in truth and reality. The Doctor's
    meeting with him at a barber's shop at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, the
    subsequent mistake at the Inn, their arrival together in London, and
    the assistance they experienced from _Strap's_ friend were all of that
    description. The deceased, to the last, obtained a comfortable
    subsistence by his industry, and of late years had been paid a weekly
    salary by the inhabitants of the Adelphi, for keeping the entrances to
    Villiers-walk, and securing the promenade from the intrusion of
    strangers."

JOHN FRANCIS.

_Rodolph Gualter_ (Vol. iii., p. 8.).--From letters to and from Rodolph
Gualter (in _Zurich_, and _Original Letters, Parker Society_) little can be
gathered; thus much have I gleaned, that though mention is oftentimes made
of Scotland, yet not sufficient to identify Gualter as being a native of
that country; yet it should be observed that he dedicated his Homilies on
the Galatians to the King of Scotland, _Zurich Letters_ (second series)
cxviii., see also, cxxix., cxxx. These remarks may tend perchance to put
J. C. R. on the right track for obtaining true information.

N. E. R. (a Subscriber.)

_Burning the Hill_ (Vol. ii., pp. 441. 498.).--The provision for _burning
out_ a delinquent miner, contained in the Mendip mine laws, called Lord
C. J. Choke's laws, first appeared in print in 1687; at least I can find no
earlier notice of them in any _book_; but as the usages sanctioned by them
are incidentally mentioned in proceedings in the Exchequer in 21 and 22
Elizabeth, they are no doubt of early date. Article 6. certainly has a very
sanguinary aspect; but as the thief, whose hut and tools are to be burnt,
is himself to be "_banished_ from his occupation before the miners for
ever," it cannot be intended that he should be himself burnt also. If any
instance of the exercise of a {124} custom or law so clearly illegal had
ever occurred within recent times, we should have assuredly found some
record of it in the annals of criminal justice, as the executioner would
infallibly have been hanged. The regulations are probably an attempt by
some private hand to embody the local customs of the district, so far as
regards lead mining; and they contain the substance of the usual customs
prevalent in most metallic regions, where mines have been worked _ab
antiquo_. The first report of the Dean Forest Commission, 1839, f. 12.,
adverts to a similar practice among the coal and iron miners in that
forest. It seems to be an instance of the _Droit des arsins_, or right of
arson, formerly claimed and exercised to a considerable extent, and with
great solemnity, in Picardy, Flanders, and other places; but I know of no
instance in which this wild species of metallifodine justice has been
claimed to apply to anything but the culprit's local habitation and tools
of trade. I need not add that the custom, even with this limitation, would
now be treated by the courts as a vulgar error, and handed over to the
exclusive jurisdiction of the legal antiquaries and collectors of the Juris
amoenitates.

E. SMIRKE.

"_Fronte capillata_," &c. (vol. iii., pp. 8. 43.).--The couplet is much
older than G. A. S. seems to think. The author is Dionysius
Cato,--"Catoun," as Chaucer calls him--in his book, _Distichorum de
Moribus_, lib. ii. D. xxvi.:

 "Rem tibi quam nosces aptam, dimittere noli:
  Fronte capillata, post est Occasio calva."
      _Corp. Poet. Lat._, Frankfurt, 1832, p. 1195.

The history of this Dionysius Cato is unknown; and it has been hotly
disputed whether he were a Heathen or Christian; but he is _at least_ as
old as the fourth century of the Christian era, being mentioned by
Vindicianus, chief physician in ordinary to the emperor, in a letter to
Valentinian I., A.D. 365. In the illustrations of _The Baptistery_, Parker,
Oxford, 1842, which are re-engraved from the originals in the _Via Vitæ
Eternæ_, designed by Boetius a Bolswert, the figure of "Occasion" is always
drawn with the hair hanging loose in front, according to the distich.

E. A. D.

_Time when Herodotus wrote_ (vol. ii., p. 405.; Vol. iii., p. 30.)--The
passage in Herodotus (i. 5.) is certainly curious, and had escaped my
notice, until pointed out by your correspondent. I am unable at present to
refer to Smith's _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology_;
but I doubt whether the reading of the poem or title, in Aristotle's
_Rhetoric_ (II. 9. § 1.), has received much attention. In my forthcoming
translation of the "Pseudo-Herodotean Life of Homer" prefixed to the
_Odysseia_ (Bohn's _Classical Library_), note 1., I have thus given it:--

    "This is the exposition of the historical researches of Herodotus of
    _Thurium_," &c.

Now Aristotle makes no remark on the passage as being unusual, and it
therefore inclines me to think that, at the time of that philosopher and
critic, both editions were in use.

The date of the building of Thurium is B.C. 444, and Herodotus was there at
its foundation, being then about forty years of age. Most likely he had
published a smaller edition of this book before that time, bearing the
original date from Halicarnassus, which he revised, _enlarged_, corrected,
and _partly re-wrote_ at Thurium. I think this would not be difficult to
prove; and I would add that this retouching would be found more apparent at
the beginning of the volume than elsewhere. This may be easily accounted
for by the feeling that modern as well as ancient authors have, viz., that
of laziness and inertness; revising the first 100 pages carefully, but
decreasing from that point. But to return: Later editors, I conceive,
erased the word Thurium used by Herodotus, who was piqued and vexed at his
native city, and substituted, or restored, Halicarnassus; not, however,
changing the text.

A learned friend of mine wished for the bibliographical history of the
classics. I told him then, as I tell the readers of the "NOTES AND QUERIES"
now, "Search for that history in the pages of the classics themselves;
extend to them the critical spirit that is applied to our own Chaucer,
Shakspeare, and Milton, and your trouble will not be in vain. The history
of any book (that is the general history of the gradual development of its
ideas) is written in its own pages." In truth, the prose classics deserve
as much attention as the poems of Homer.

KENNETH R. H. MACKENZIE.

January 20. 1851.

_Herstmonceux Castle_ (Vol. ii., p. 477.).--E. V. asks for an explanation
of certain entries in the Fine Rolls, A.D. 1199 and 1205, which I can, in
part, supply. The first is a fine for having seisin of the lands of the
deceased mother of the two suitors, William de Warburton and Ingelram de
Monceaux. As they claim as joint-heirs or parceners, the land must have
been subject to partibility, and therefore of socage tenure. If the land
was not in Kent, the entry is a proof that the exclusive right of
primogeniture was not then universally established, as we know it was not
in the reign of Henry II. See _Glanville_, lib. vii. cap. 3.

The next entry records the fine paid for suing out a writ _de rationabili
parte_ against (_versus_) one of the above coheirs. The demandant is either
the same coheir named above, viz. Ingelram, altered by a clerical error
into Waleram,--such errors being of common occurrence, sometimes from
oscitancy, and sometimes because the clerk had to guess at the extended
form of a contracted name,--or he is a descendant and heir of Ingelram,
{125} claiming the share of his ancestor. I incline to adopt the former
explanation of the two here suggested. The form of writ is in the Register
of Writs, and corresponds exactly with the abridged note of it in the Fine
Roll. The "esnecia," mentioned in the last entry (not extracted by E. V.),
is the majorat or senior heir's perquisite of the capital mansion. E. V.
will pardon me for saying, that his translation of the passages is a little
deficient in exactness. As to E. V.'s query 4., does he think it worth
while to go further in search of a reason for calling the bedroom floor of
Herstmonceux Castle by the name of _Bethlem_, when the early spelling and
common and constant pronunciation of the word supply so plausible an
explanation? I myself knew, in my earliest days, a house where that
department was constantly so nicknamed. But there certainly _may_ be a more
recondite origin of the name; and something may depend on the date at which
he finds it first applied.

E. SMIRKE.

_Camden and Curwen Families_ (Vol. iii., p. 89.).--Camden's mother was
Elizabeth, daughter of Gyles Curwen, of Poulton Hall, in the county of
Lancaster. In the "visitation" of Lancashire made in 1613, it is stated
that this Gyles Curwen was "descended from Curwen of Workenton in co.
Cumberland;" but the descent is not given, and I presume it rests merely on
tradition.

LLEWELLYN.

_Joan Sanderson, or the Cushion Dance_ (Vol. ii., p. 517.).--Your
correspondent MAC asks for the "correct date" of the _Cushion Dance_.
Searching out the history and origin of an old custom or ballad is like
endeavouring to ascertain the source and flight of December's snow. I am
afraid MAC will not obtain what he now wishes for.

The _earliest_ mention, that I have noticed, of this popular old dance
occurs in Heywood's play, _A Woman kill'd with Kindness_, 1600. Nicholas,
one of the characters, says:

    "I have, ere now, deserved a cushion: call for the _Cushion Dance_."

The musical notes are preserved in _The English Dancing Master_, 1686; in
_The Harmonicon_, a musical journal; in Davies Gilbert's _Christmas Carols_
(2nd edition); and in Chappell's _National English Melodies_. In the
first-named work it is called "Joan Sanderson, or the Cushion Dance, an old
Round Dance."

In a curious collection of old songs and tunes, _Neder-Landtsche
Gedenck-clank door Adrianum Valerium_, printed at Haerlem in 1626, is
preserved a tune called "Sweet Margaret," which, upon examination, proves
to be the same as the _Cushion Dance_. This favourite dance was well known
in Holland in the early part of the seventeenth century, and an interesting
engraving of it may be seen in the _Emblems_ of John de Brunnes, printed at
Amsterdam in 1624.

The last-named work (a copy of the edition of 1661 of which is now before
me) is exceedingly curious to the lovers of our popular sports and
pastimes. The engravings are by William Pass, C. Blon, &c., and among them
are representations of Kiss in the Ring, the game of Forfeits, rolling
Snow-balls, the Interior of a Barber's Shop, with citherns and lutes
hanging against the wall, for the use of the customers, &c.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

_North Sides of Churchyards_ (Vol. ii., p. 93.).--In an appendix to our
registers I find the following entry, where I conceive the _backside_ means
the northside. Though now the whole of our churchyard is so full that we
have much difficulty in finding any new ground, what we do find, however,
is on the north side.

    "1750, Oct. 23. One Mary Davies, of Pentrobin, single woman, though
    excommunicated with the _Greater Excommunication_, was on this day,
    _within night_, on account of some particular circumstances alleged by
    neighbours of credit in her favour (as to her resolving to come and
    reconcile herself, and do penance if she recovered), indulged by being
    interred on the _backside_ the church, but no service or tolling
    allowed."

From this I conclude that _here_ at least there was no part of the
churchyard left unconsecrated for the burial of persons excommunicate, as
one of your correspondents suggests; or burial in such place would have
been no indulgence, as evidently it was regarded in this case. It would be
interesting to ascertain from accredited instances _how late_ this power of
excommunication has been _exercised_, and thereby how long it has really
been in abeyance. I expect the period would not be found so great as is
generally imagined.

WALDEGRAVE BREWSTER.

_Antiquitas Sæculi Juventus Mundi_ (Vol. ii., p. 466.).--Dugald Stewart, in
his Dissertation prefixed to the _Encyclopædia Britannica_, ed. 7., p. 30.,
points out two passages of writers anterior to Lord Bacon, in which this
thought occurs. The first is in his namesake, Roger Bacon, who died in
1292:

    "Quanto juniores tanto perspicaciores, quia juniores posteriores
    successione temporum ingrediuntor labores priorum."--_Opus Majus_, p.
    9. ed. Jebb.

The _Opus Majus_ of Roger Bacon was not, however, printed until the last
century, and could not have been known to Lord Bacon unless he had read it
in manuscript.

The second is from Ludovicus Vives, _De Caus. Corrupt. Art._, lib. i., of
which Mr. Stewart gives the following version:--

    "The similitude which many have fancied between the superiority of the
    moderns to the ancients, and the elevation of a dwarf on the back of a
    giant, is {126} altogether false and puerile. Neither were they giants,
    nor are we dwarfs, but all of us men of the same standard; and _we_,
    the taller of the two, by adding their height to our own. Provided
    always that we do not yield to them in study, attention, vigilance, and
    love of truth; for if these qualities be wanting, so far from mounting
    on the giant's shoulders, we throw away the advantages of our own just
    stature, by remaining prostrate on the ground."

Ludovicus Vives, the eminent Spanish writer, died in 1540, and therefore
preceded the active period of Lord Bacon's mind by about half a century.

Mr. Stewart likewise cites the following sentences of Seneca, which,
however, can hardly be said to contain the germ of this thought:--

    "Veniet tempus quo ista quæ nunc latent, in lucem dies extrahet, et
    longioris ævi diligentia.... Veniet tempus, quo posteri nostri tam
    aperta nos nescisse mirabuntur."--_Quæst. Nat._ viii. 25.

L.

_Umbrella_ (Vol. i., p. 414.; Vol. ii., pp. 25. 93. 126. 346. 491. 523.;
Vol. iii., p. 37.).--Although I conceive that ample proof has been given in
your columns that umbrellas were generally known at an earlier period than
had been commonly supposed, yet the following additional facts may not
perhaps be unacceptable to your readers.

In Bailey's _Dictionary_, vol. i. (8th edit. 1737), are these articles:--

    "PARASOL, a sort of small canopy or umbrella, to keep off the rain."

    "UMBELLA, _a little shadow_; an umbrella, bon-grace, skreen-fan, &c.,
    which women bear in their hands to shade them."

    "UMBELLIFORUS _Plants_ [among _botanists_]. Plants which have round
    tufts, or small stalks standing upon greater; or have their tops
    branched and spread like a lady's _umbrella_."

    "UMBRELLO [_Ombrelle_, F.; _Ombrella_, Ital. of _Umbrella_, or
    _Umbrecula_, L.], a sort of skreen that is held over the head for
    preserving from the sun or rain; also a wooden frame covered with cloth
    or stuff, to keep off the sun from a window."

In Bailey's _Dictionary_, vol. ii. (3rd edit. 1737), is the following:--

    "UMBELLATED [_Umbellatus_, L.]; bossed. In _botan. writ._ is said of
    flowers when many of them grow together, disposed somewhat like an
    _umbrella_. The make is a sort of broad, roundish surface of the whole,
    &c. &c."

Horace Walpole (_Memoirs of the Reign of George II._, vol. iii. p. 153.),
narrating the punishment of Dr. Shebbeare for a libel, 5th December, 1758,
says,--

    "The man stood in the pillory, having a footman holding an umbrella to
    keep off the rain."

In Burrow's _Reports_ (vol. ii. p. 792.), is an account of the proceedings
in the Court of King's Bench against Arthur Beardmore, under-sheriff of
Middlesex, for contempt of court in remitting part of the sentence on Dr.
Shebbeare. The affidavits produced by the Attorney-General stated--

    "That the defendant only stood _upon the_ platform of the pillory,
    unconfined, and at his ease, attended by a _servant_ in _livery_ (which
    servant and livery were hired for this occasion only) holding an
    umbrella over his head, all the time:"

and Mr. Justice Dennison, in pronouncing sentence on Beardmore, did not
omit to allude to the umbrella.

C. H. COOPER.

Cambridge, January 25. 1851.

_Form of Prayer at the Healing_ (Vol. iii., p. 42.).--A copy of this
service of an earlier date than those mentioned is before me. It was
printed in folio at the Hague, 1650; and is appended to "a Form of Prayer
used in King Charles II.'s Chappel upon _Tuesdays_, in the times of his
trouble and distress." Charles I. was executed on that day of the week.

J. H. M.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

"Thoughts take up no room," saith Jeremy Collier, in a curious passage
which Mr. Elmes has adopted as the motto of a pretty little volume, which
he has just put forth under the following characteristic title: _Horæ
Vacivæ, a Thought-book of the Wise Spirits of all Ages and all Countries,
fit for all Men and all Hours_. The work appears to have furnished a source
of occupation to its editor when partially recovering from a deprivation of
sight. It is well described by him as a "Spicilegium of golden thoughts of
wise spirits, who, though dead, yet speak;" and being printed in
Whittingham's quaintest style, and suitably bound, this Thought-book is as
externally tempting as it is intrinsically valuable.

_The Calendar of the Anglican Church Illustrated, with Brief Accounts of
the Saints who have Churches dedicated in their Names, or whose Images are
most frequently met with in England; the Early Christian and Mediæval
Symbols; and an Index of Emblems_, is sufficiently described in its
title-page. The editor very properly explains that the work is of an
archæological, not of a theological character--and as such it is certainly
one which English archæologists and ecclesiologists have long wanted. The
editor, while judiciously availing himself of the labours of Alt, Radowitz,
Didron, and other foreign writers, has not spared his own, having, with the
view to one portion of it, compiled a list of all the churches in England,
with the saints after whom they were named. This is sufficient to show that
the work is one of research, and consequently of value; that value being
materially increased by the numerous woodcuts admirably engraved by Mr. O.
Jewitt, with which it is illustrated.

_Books Received._--_Helena, The Physician's Orphan_. The third number of
Mrs. Clarke's interesting series of tales, entitled, _The Girlhood of
Shakspeare's Heroines_. {127} _Every-day Wonders, or Facts in Physiology
which all should know:_ a very successful endeavour to present a few of the
truths of that science which treats of the structure of the human body, and
of the adaptation of the external world to it in such a form as that they
be readily apprehended. Great pains have been taken that the information
imparted should be accurate; and it is made more intelligible by means of
some admirable woodcuts.

_Catalogues Received._--John Miller's (43. Chandos Street) No. 18. of
Catalogues of Books Old and New; J. Russell Smith's (4. Old Compton Street)
Catalogue Part II. of an Extensive Collection of Choice, Useful, and
Curious Books.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

RECHERCHES HISTORIQUES SUR LES CONGRÉGATIONS HOSPITALIERS DES FRÈRES
PONTIFES. A. GRÉGOIRE. Paris, 1818, 8vo. 72 pp.

SEPULCHRAL MEMORIALS OF A MARKET TOWN, by DAWSON TURNER. Yarmouth, 1848.

STEPHEN'S CENTRAL AMERICA, 2 vols. 8vo. plates.

WHARTONI ANGLIA SACRA. The best edition.

NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GR. Ex recensione Greisbach, cum var. lect. 4 vols. 4to.
Leipsic, 1806 or 1803. Engraved Frontispiece.

LARDNER ON THE TRINITY.

GOODRIDGE, JOHN, THE PHOENIX; or, Reasons for believing that the Comet, &c.
London, 1781, 8vo.

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices to Correspondents.

_We have many articles in type which we are compelled, by want of space, to
postpone until next week, when the publication of our double number will
enable us to insert many interesting communications which are only waiting
for room._

REPLIES RECEIVED. _St. Pancras--Daresbury--Plafery--Touching for the
Evil--Munchausen--Cold Harbour--Landwade Church--Bacon and Fagan--Soul's
Dark Cottage--Fine by Degrees--Simon Bache--Away let nought--Mythology of
the Stars--Adur--Burying in Church Walls--Sir Clowdesley Shovel--Lynch
Law--Cardinal's Monument--Inns of Court--True
Blue--Averia--Dragons--Brandon the Juggler--Words are Men's
Daughters--Sonnet by Milton--Dryden's Essay upon Satire--Ring Dials--Sir
Hilary--Arthur Massinger--Cranmer's Descendants--Post Conquestum--Prince of
Wales' Feathers--Verbum Græcum--Visions of Hell--Musical Plagiarism--Lady
Bingham--Cockade--Saint Paul's Clock--By and by--Aristophanes on the Modern
Stage._

LITURGICUS, _who writes on the subject of the letters_ M. _and_ N. _in the
Catechism and Marriage Service, is referred to our First Volume, pp._ 415.
_and_ 468.

F. M. B. Hicks' Hall _was so called from its builder, Sir Baptist Hicks,
afterwards Viscount Camden; and the name of the_ Old Bailey, _says Stow,
"is likely to have arisen of some Count of old time there kept."--See
Cunningham's_ Handbook of London.

K. R. H. M. _received_.

E. T. (Liverpool). _We propose to issue a volume similar to our first and
second, at the termination of every half-year._

E. S. T. T. _For origin of_

 "Tempora mutantur," &c.,

_see our First Volume, pp._ 234. 419.

GEORGE PETIT. _The book called_ Elegantiæ Latinæ, _published under the name
of the learned Joh. Meursius, was written by Chorier of Grenoble. Meursius
had no share in it_.

H. A. R. _Much information concerning the general and social condition of
Lunatics before 1828 will be found in Reports of Committees of House of
Commons of 1815, 1816, and 1827, and of the House of Lords of 1828._

A. C. P. _The explanation furnished is one about which there can be no
doubt, but for obvious reasons we do not insert it._

