

Undine.

Well, I promise. But it's very hard to remember promises, when you
want to do a thing very much.

Mrs. Denham.

Yes; but you must learn to be trustworthy. Now run away. (_Exit
Undine._)

The child hates me, I know. I suppose I must expect nothing but
dislike and contempt. She is her father's child. I wish I had died
long ago. (_Crosses_ R, _and sits by table._)

(_A pause, then re-enter Denham._)

Denham.

Well, Blanche is gone.

Mrs. Denham.

(_listlessly_) Indeed!

Denham.

(_seating himself_) To the advanced moralist, I know I am an object
of contempt. I can't help that.

Mrs. Denham.

(_rising_) If you have come here to insult me with sneering
speeches, I will go. (_Crosses_ C _up stage._)

Denham.

Let us leave this tone of falsetto, Constance, and speak seriously
to each other. I have come to you for help in this crisis of our
lives. Sit down. (_Gives her a chair._)

Mrs. Denham.

(_sitting_) To me! That is very magnanimous.

Denham.

No. You are the only friend I have.

Mrs. Denham.

Well?

Denham.

You bid me desert the nest?

Mrs. Denham.

Since it is cold.

Denham.

Is it so cold?

Mrs. Denham.

Need you ask? (_Shivers._) If you do not quit it, I will.

Denham.

I have no doubt you will do what you think right. The question is,
what _is_ right? (_Rises, and looks at her._)

Mrs. Denham.

(_looking away from him_) You have always held yourself aloof from
me. All my love has been powerless to gain an entrance into your
heart. Now it is too late. I give up the useless struggle.

(_Crosses_ L, _and sits in armchair crouching over fire._)

Denham.

(_passionately_) Held myself aloof! Good God! is that my fault? You
want something that you can neither excite nor reciprocate. (_With a
sudden change of manner._) No--it was my own dulness of heart. My
poor Constance! This has been a revelation for us both. But you
don't know how I have tried to conform to your ideals--to spare you
in every possible way.

Mrs. Denham.

(_bitterly_) Yes, you have been very patient, very forbearing, no
doubt. It is better to kill a woman than to tolerate her.

Denham.

You did not always think so. You wanted love in the form of an
unselfish intellectual friendship. Well, I have tried to love you
unselfishly, God knows! It is an impossible basis for marriage.
However, we _are_ married. May we not at least be friends? (_Comes
and stands by her chair._) Do you think marriage exists for the sake
of ideal love? What about Undine?

Mrs. Denham.

I presume you will provide for your daughter?

Denham.

Is she not yours too?

Mrs. Denham.

She loves you; she does not love me. I suppose I don't deserve it. I
know you think I have been a bad wife, a bad mother. I am better out
of your way. (_Weeps._)

Denham.

This is morbid. Oh, if I could have cured you! Constance! (_He
caresses her hair._)

Mrs. Denham.

Don't touch me! It is an insult.

Denham.

(_sighing_) I suppose I have lost the right of comforting you.
(_Crosses_ R.)

Mrs. Denham.

I don't want your pity. (_Rises._)

Denham.

Perhaps I want yours.

Mrs. Denham.

(_indignantly_) Suppose _you_ had caught _me_ in a low intrigue, and
I had dared to speak to you as you have spoken to me--without so
much as a word that implied sorrow or repentance, what would you say
to me?

Denham.

I would ask your forgiveness humbly enough if that were of any use.
It isn't, I know. Sins that are instinctive, not of malice, lie too
deep for forgiveness.

Mrs. Denham.

A fine aphorism, no doubt. How does it apply?

Denham.

You can't forgive insults that were not intended, and a "low
intrigue" which was only a mad, selfish leap for life. Let us part
then, if you please. We missed our moment for passion long ago, if
that is what you want.

Mrs. Denham.

My want aches deeper. Well, you love another woman. Go to her. Let
her make you happy if she can.

Denham.

Why should I go to her? I love her as a dream; let me keep her as a
dream. Why should I spoil her life as I have spoiled yours?

Mrs. Denham.

You could not spoil her life as you have spoiled mine, if you love
her.

Denham.

(_half to himself as he comes down stage_ R) It is a
magnificent temptation. To give one's passion its full reckless
swing, to feel the blood bounding in one's veins--

Mrs. Denham.

Why not? And leave the woman to pay.

Denham.

(_with a reckless bitterness_) Yes, that's the devil of it. You have
put me out of conceit with love. Your chamber of horrors haunts my
imagination. If a woman could give us all she promises, we should be
like gods. But she can't. Why should we worry about it? Why ask for
cakes and ale, when sermons and soda-water are so much better for
us?

Mrs. Denham.

You never loved me. Your cakes and ale are no concern of mine.
(_Crosses to table. Knock at door._) Come in!

(_Enter Jane, showing in Miss Macfarlane._)

Jane.

Miss Macfarlane!

(_Exit._)

Miss Macfarlane.

Well, my dear, how are you all? Eh! but what's the matter now? (_She
looks from one to the other._) Mrs. Tremaine, I suppose?

Denham.

Mrs. Tremaine has gone away--back to the desert, as she says.

Miss Macfarlane.

And high time for her, too. Upon my word, I should like to give that
fascinating person a bit of my mind.

Denham.

And me too, I am sure.

Miss Macfarlane.

Well, as you ask me, Mr. Denham, I think your conduct in bringing
that woman into the house, and carrying on a flirtation with her
under your wife's eyes, was simply abominable. It was an insult to
Constance. Did ye ever consider that? It was not the conduct of a
gentleman!

Denham.

No, a gentleman should throw a decent veil of secrecy over
his--flirtations. But, you see, if I had done that, I should have
been a hypocrite; now I'm only a brute.

Miss Macfarlane.

Oh, my dear boy, don't be a brute, and then you needn't be a
hypocrite. There's the way out of that.

Denham.

It is a narrow way.

Miss Macfarlane.

If ye can't have good morals, at least have good manners. (_Crosses
L._)

Denham.

Oh, good manners are becoming obsolete. They are too much trouble
for this Bohemian age. Ladies and gentlemen went out with gold
snuffboxes and hooped petticoats; we are trying to be men and women
now, frankly and brutally.

Miss Macfarlane.

Eh! and I suppose ye thought ye were learning to be a man by playing
at Adam and Eve with Mrs. Tremaine?

Denham.

(_crosses_ R) We drifted, we drifted.

Miss Macfarlane.

A man has no _right_ to _drift_, Mr. Denham. Ye have to look before
ye, and pick your steps in this world; at any rate, when other
people are hurt by your slips. An irresponsible animal isn't a man.

Denham.

I wish we had a Court of Love, Miss Macfarlane, with you for
President. But, if you'll excuse me, I shall leave you with
Constance now. I know she would like to speak to you.

(_Exit._)

Miss Macfarlane.

Well, my dear, what is it? You see I claim the privilege of an old
friend.

Mrs. Denham.

I can bear my burden alone, Miss Macfarlane. (_Crosses_ C.)

Miss Macfarlane.

Of course you can, my dear. But there's no harm in a little honest
sympathy.

Mrs. Denham.

(_sobbing and embracing her_) Oh, I beg your pardon! But I am so
miserable, so miserable!

Miss Macfarlane.

There, there--that's right. (_Leads Mrs. Denham to sofa._) And now
you can tell me or not, just as you like.

Mrs. Denham.

What is there to tell? It is all over--that is all. (_She sits down,
weeping._)

Miss Macfarlane.

But what's all over? We sometimes think things are all over, when
they're only beginning. A thunderstorm's not the Day of Judgment. It
clears the air.

Mrs. Denham.

This _is_ the Day of Judgment for me. I am weighed in the balance
and found wanting. I wish I were dead.

Miss Macfarlane.

