_Price of Tea in China_.--Bohea, which cannot be purchased in China at
less than _eight-pence half-penny_, may be obtained at Antwerp for
7-3/4_d_.; in France for 6-1/2_d_.; and at Hamburg for 5_d_.! Congou, of
which the Canton price is from 11_d_. to 1_s_. per lb., may be bought in
France at 10-1/2_d_., and at Hamburg from 8-1/4_d_. to 10-1/4_d_.! Canton
price for Hyson, 1_s_. 9-3/4_d_.; French price 1_s_. 8-1/2_d_. Young Hyson
costs in Canton about 1_s_. 8-1/2_d_. per lb., and _only one half that sum
at Hamburg!!_ The Chinese cannot afford to sell Twankay at less than 11_d_.
per lb.; but the American speculators enable the good people of Hamburg to
drink it at _seven-pence farthing!_ Souchong, a good quality tea, sells at
Hamburg for _five-pence_ per lb., which is the _same price_ as the vilest
Bohea costs in the Hamburg market, and is only _one-half the price of
Bohea_ in Canton.

_Cost of a pound of Seven Shilling Tea_.--Take a pound of Congou for
instance, according to the evidence of Mr. Mills, a tea broker, before the
House of Lords:

  One pound of good Congou,
  _put up_ at the East India
  Company's sales at --------------- 1  8
  Buyers purposely and for
  their own advantage raise it ----- 0  9
                                     ----

         Purchasing price by the Brokers --- 2  5
  Duty levied by the Crown ----------------- 2  5
  Retailer's profit, brokerage, &c. -------- 2  2
                                             ----
                              Shop price     7  0

Thus it will be seen, the tea that the Company offers for sale to the
consumer at 1_s_. 8_d_., or at the utmost say 2_s_., is enhanced to 7_s_.
before it finds its way to the drinker's breakfast table.

_Coffee-Shops_.--There are 3,000 coffee shops in London, in which are
daily consumed 2,000 lbs. of tea and 15,000 lbs. of coffee. The
consumption of _coffee_ in these establishments has increased as
follows:--In 1829, 1,978,600 lbs. In 1830, 2,251,300 lbs. In 1831,
2,899,870. Of tea the increase has only been, during the same periods,
239,700 lbs.--249,400 lbs.--263,000 lbs.


    [3] A celebrated Hungarian, named Cosmös de Körös, has lately
        discovered in a Thibetian monastery, where he has been engaged
        translating an Encyclopaedia, that _lithography_ and _movable
        wooden types_ were known to the Chinese many centuries ago.

    [4] A Chinese who leaves his country is considered as a traitor,
        and is punished with death if he ever return to it.

    [5] The grand maxim of Confucius is, "to despise foreign
        commodities."

    [6] The Chinese use this stimulant as we do wine and spirits, and
        with perhaps, less deleterious consequences to their health,
        and less evil results to their morals.

    [7] About 7,000,000 of which, or bars or moulds of silver to that
        amount, are sent to India, the Chinese being unable to make
        sufficient return in merchandise. This remittance is of
        material assistance in helping to provide funds on the spot
        for the purchase of tea.

    [8] A late No. of the _Canton Register_, mentions a fact, which is
        one instance out of many, of the desire to be independent of
        foreigners; it is as follows:--"Prussian blue, an article
        which was formerly brought in _considerable quantities from
        England_, is now _totally shut out_ from the list of imports,
        in consequence of its mode of manufacture being _acquired by a
        Chinaman in London_; and from timely improvement it has been
        brought to that perfection which renders the _consumers
        independent of foreign supply!"_

    [9] The port dues on a vessel of 1,000 or of 100 tons are _alike!_

