"Yes, Rob, always!  She always did; but you--you didn't trust her,"
replied Peggy, with a firmness which ended in a sob.  "You took for
granted--"

"Peggy, I didn't!" cried Rob earnestly.  "Don't think so poorly of me.
I know to what you refer--that afternoon in the library--and now I can
explain all that has troubled you.  I had a talk with Hector after you
left, and we discovered that we both wanted the same thing.  He thought
he had the first claim, and that it was my duty to stand aside until he
had had his chance, and I agreed that he was right.  Not because he was
the older!  I would not have acknowledged such a plea in this matter,
but because he had so much more to offer you.  Compared to myself he is
a rich man, and you would have been better off with him.  I promised to
stand aside and put no obstacle in his way, and having given a promise I
tried to keep it unselfishly, and to show you that I cared for your
happiness before my own by remaining friendly and pleasant."

Peggy's grimace of disfavour was an eloquent comment.  "I hated your
pleasantness!" she said tersely.  "I hated your friendship!  I wanted
you to be furious, and rage, and storm, and demand an explanation.  You
made me very wretched with your `pleasantness,' I can tell you that!"

"Not half so wretched as I made myself.  I wouldn't live through the
last month again for any inducement you could offer; but you are not
altogether free from blame yourself, for you have no idea what a little
poker of dignity you have been to me all the time.  Only to-day, when
you asked my help, my own little Peggy came back, and then in the train
Hector gave me a hint of what had happened.  Poor old fellow, it's rough
on him, but I can't pity him as I ought, for I am so outrageously happy!
Partners, Mariquita!  We are going to be partners all our lives.  It
seems too good to be true!  I shall have to give up all thought of
journeys to unknown lands; but, thank goodness! work seems to open out
more and more at home, and we will be as happy as sandboys in a little
home near your parents, working together and helping one another as we
can do so well."

"We will!  We will!  You shall supply the facts, and I will write them
up.  You do write such commonplace English, dear--not one bit
picturesque!  Wait until I have worked up your articles for you; you
won't know them, they will be so altered!"

"I believe you there!" said Rob demurely; but Peggy was launched on the
stream of eloquence, and oblivious of sarcasm.

"Oh, oh!  It will be lovely!" she cried.  "We will have the dearest
little house, with a study for you, and a study for me, and a garden,
and a pony cart, and a conservatory, and immaculate servants who do
everything they should do, and never need looking after.  And we will
trot about together, and work and play, and do everything just exactly
as we like, and have no one to order us about.  Think of it!  We shall
be master and mistress--no one can interfere--no one can find fault.  If
I forget all about dinner some fine day, there won't be a soul who will
have the right to blame me, or fly into a temper."

"Oh, won't there just!  Don't make any mistake about that!" cried Rob.
"If you forget your duties, you will have me to reckon with, and I am
not too amiable when I'm hungry.  It will be my business to help you to
overcome your failings, just as it will be yours to help me with mine."

"You haven't got any," said Peggy quickly.  "At least--I mean, yes, you
have--lots--but I like them.  They will keep mine company.  No,
seriously, Rob, I'll try to be good.  I made up my mind to-day that if
you came back safe, I would try with all my strength to be a better
girl, and overcome my careless ways.  And now I have more reason than
before to persevere.  I'll begin at once, and try so hard that by the
time we are married I shall be quite a staid, responsible housewife."

"Humph!" said Rob in ungrateful fashion.  "Don't try too hard.  I don't
want my Peggy altered out of recognition.  There are thousands of staid,
responsible housewives in existence, but Peggy Savilles are rare.  I
prefer her of the two."

"And yet you want to be rid of her!  Poor, dear, little thing!  If you
get your way, she won't be in existence much longer.  How can you make
up your mind to be so cruel?"

"I shall love Peggy Darcy better," said Rob firmly, and at that Peggy
gave a gulp and relapsed into silence.  Peggy _Darcy_!  The name brought
with it a dozen thrilling reflections.  Rosalind's sister, Hector's
sister, daughter to Lady Darcy, and the dear, kind old lord, and, oh,
most wonderful of all, Rob's wife!  His partner for ever, in the truest
sense of the word!  The sound of that eloquent word had thrilled through
Rob also, and silenced the word on his lips.  His clasp tightened on
Peggy's fingers, and they walked hand in hand through the fields
together, in a blissful trance of happiness which has no need for
speech.

When the vicarage gates were reached the carriage was already in sight;
but Peggy hung back, and Rob called a passing direction to the coachman
to stop on his way back after leaving Mellicent at the door.  Neither he
nor Peggy felt inclined to encounter even the oldest of friends in the
first flush of their happiness, but they stood together watching the
scene which greeted the return of the travellers, and rejoicing in the
ease of mind which they had been instrumental in securing.

The door opened, and the light of the lamps streamed out into the
darkness.  They saw the figure of the Vicar standing upon the threshold,
and that of his wife by his side: they saw Esther and Mellicent run up
the steps, and the mother's arms stretched wide to receive them; then
the door shut once more, and the light died out.  The moonlight seemed
cold and wan after that bright ray, but not so cold as it had been
before, for some of the atmosphere of love and kindness for which that
home was famous seemed to have escaped through the open door, and warmed
the hearts of those who looked on.

"If we can make a home like that, Peg, we shall never be poor, however
little money we may have to spend.  We shall have found the greatest
treasure the world can give," said Rob softly; and "Amen!" sighed Peggy
Saville beneath her breath.

THE END.