

"You'll have to shut up shop 'fore long," said one customer to Miles, a
rumseller, "if the temperance folks can have their own way."

"I guess they won't have their way," replied Miles. "Very few people
will sell their liberty out so cheap. I don't apprehend that it will
make much difference with my business, whether they have a temperance
society or not."

"You haven't heard how swimmingly the young folks went on the other
night, I reckon."

"Yes I have; and that was one of Nat's movements. He's dead set against
drinking, they say, but he is welcome to all he can make out of this."

"He better be minding his own business, and not meddle with other
people's affairs. They say he studies more than he works now; but if he
had been compelled to work on at his trade, it would turn out better for
him and all concerned."

"Nat is a smart feller," said the rumseller; "but he'll have to be a
good deal smarter before he can get many people to say they'll never
drink."

"That's certain," responded the customer. "There is no use in trying to
do what can't be done. But boys are getting to know more than their
fathers in these ere times. I 'spose there are some folks who would like
to tell us what we shall eat and wear, and what we shan't."

"I wonder if Jim Cole joined the society?" inquired the rumseller.

"Jim! no! you wouldn't ketch him to make such a dunce of himself. He
believes in using a little when he wants it, and that's my doctrine."

"Jim is steady as a deacon natrally," continued the vender, "and I
didn't know but he might be influenced by Nat to join."

"He didn't; for he told _me_ that he shouldn't sign away his liberty for
anybody, and he said that he told Nat, and the other fellers, that they
would drink wine at the first party they went to."

"He was wrong there, I'm thinking," answered the rumseller; "for Nat is
independent, and he don't back out of any thing he undertakes. He'll be
the last one to give it up."

"Doesn't Jim patronize you sometimes?"

"Yes; he occasionally drops in, and takes a little; but Jim doesn't
favor hard drinking. He thinks that many men drink too much."

If all the remarks and discussions that were consequent upon the
organization of the Total Abstinence Society, could be collected, the
result would be a volume. But we must be satisfied with this single
illustration, and pass on.

The members of the society studied to know how to make it interesting
and prosperous. Various plans were suggested, and many opinions were
advanced.

"Let us invite Nat to deliver a lecture," said Frank to Charlie. "He
will prepare a good one, and it will interest the people in our
movement."

"I had not thought of that," answered Charlie. "Perhaps it would be a
good plan. But do you suppose he would do it?"

"I think we could urge him to it," replied Frank. "He likes to speak as
well as he does to eat, and a little better; and I know that he can give
a capital lecture if he will."

"I think it might be the means of inducing more of the young people to
join the society," continued Charlie. "The more popular we make it, the
more readily some of them will join us."

"I will go and see Nat at once about it if _you_ will," said Frank. "If
he does it, the sooner he knows about it the better."

They went to see Nat, and found him in his study. The subject was duly
opened, and, after some urging, he consented to deliver a public
lecture. At the meeting of the Society on that week, a formal invitation
was voted to Nat, and the time of the lecture appointed.

At that time, it required much more decision, perseverance, and moral
principle, to espouse the temperance cause than it does to-day. It was a
new thing, and many looked with suspicion upon it. Of course, it was a
better test of Nat's principles and purpose, than such a movement would
be now. That it was a good stand for him to take, and one suited to tell
upon his future character, we need scarcely say. It is an important
event when a youth of this day resolves that he will never tamper with
intoxicating drinks--and that he will pledge his word and honor to this
end. It was a far more important event _then_. And when we look upon
that group of youth, conferring together upon the claims of the total
abstinence principle, and their resolve to adopt it in the face of
opposition, we can but record it as one of the most hopeful and sublime
events of Nat's early life.


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE TEMPERANCE LECTURE.


The news that Nat would give a lecture on the subject of temperance soon
spread through the town, and both the friends and the foes of the cause
discussed the anticipated event.

"So it seems that Nat is going to preach temperance to us," said a
customer of Miles, the rumseller. "I should think the little upstart
thought he was going to reform the town."

"Nat is no upstart I assure you; but he is going a little too fast now,"
replied Miles. "He is young, however, and he will learn some things in a
few years that he don't know now."

"I 'spose every dog must have his day," continued the customer, "and so
it must be with timp'rance. It will have its run, and then die a nat'ral
death. But it makes me mad to see folks meddle with what is none of
their business. Just as if a man hadn't a right to drink when he is a
mind to!"

"It's a free country yet," answered Miles, "and all these reformers will
find it out before long. But shall you go to hear Nat lecture?"

"I go!" exclaimed the customer. "You won't ketch this child there, I can
tell you. Do you 'spose I would go to hear what I don't believe? It's
all nonsense, the whole of it, and it shan't have my support."

"I can't agree with you on that point," replied Miles. "_I_ sometimes go
to hear what I don't believe, and I guess _you_ do. I think I shall go
to hear Nat if I can leave. I want to see how he makes out!"

"You may go for all I care," added the customer, "and find yourself
insulted and abused as rumsellers usually are in such lectures."

On the evening of the lecture, Miles actually went to hear it, and there
was a good number of his customers present. Curiosity to hear Nat
overcame their opposition to the cause, for the time being, so that they
were drawn thither. A lecture by any one else would not have called them
out, but the attraction now was too great to be resisted. The hall was
crowded with the old and young, and there was not a vacant place for
another.

The subject of Nat's lecture was "THE FIFTEEN GALLON LAW,"
which was then agitating the public mind. It was a new movement by the
advocates of temperance, and its friends and foes were arrayed against
each other for a hard contest. Nat rejoiced in the movement, and
therefore prepared himself to defend the law. We will give, in
substance, his argument.

After portraying the evils of intemperance in language and eloquence
that riveted the attention of the audience, and confirming his
statements by unanswerable statistics, he proceeded to say:--

"That something must be done to stay this tide of evil, or we shall
become literally a nation of drunkards. It is vain to enact laws to
punish the drunkard, and still allow the vender of strong drink to dole
out his poison by the glass. For the poor, who need every farthing they
earn to purchase bread for their hungry families, will spend their wages
at the dram-shop, and leave their children to starve in poverty and
degradation. The 'Fifteen Gallon Law' is admirably adapted to save this
class. They are never able to purchase intoxicating drinks in larger
quantities than by the quart or gallon, so that this law will cut off
their supplies. It is true, another class, who possess the means, will
not be deterred from purchases by this law, but it is better to save the
poor than to save none at all. This appears to be the best thing that
can be done at the present time; perhaps sagacious minds will yet
discover a universal remedy for this mammoth evil. At any rate, we are
urged by the wants of suffering humanity to advocate this law, which
may redeem thousands of the poor from their cups and their misery."

The enemies of the law contended that it was introducing "a new
principle of legislation," and that while former laws had only
"_regulated_" the sale of strong drink, this Fifteen Gallon Law was
"_prohibitory_." To this Nat replied,

"That the legislature has power to restrain all trades which are
detrimental to the public welfare, and to regulate or prohibit them
according as the public good requires. Legislatures have always acted
upon this principle, not only in regard to other trades, but also in
respect to the traffic in alcoholic drinks. As long ago as 1680, when
the public attention was first directed to the evils of intemperance, a
law was enacted _prohibiting_ the sale of a less quantity than 'a
quarter cask,' by unlicensed persons. It also _prohibited_ all sales
after nine o'clock in the evening, and sales at any time to known
drunkards. By this law landlords were obliged to suppress excessive
drinking on their premises, and not to allow persons to sit in their
bar-rooms drinking and tippling. In 1682, intemperance prevailed to such
a degree among sailors, that a law was passed forbidding the sale of
liquors to this class, except on a written permit from the master or
ship-owner. In 1698, a statute was framed prohibiting all sales to 'any
apprentice, servant or negro,' without a special order from the master.
In 1721 another law was enacted prohibiting sales _on credit_ beyond the
amount of ten shillings; and the reason assigned for it was, 'for that
many persons are so extravagant in their expenses, at taverns and other
houses of common entertainment, that it greatly hurts their families,
and makes them less able to pay and discharge their honest, just debts.'
In 1787 this rule was rëenacted, and subsequently _all_ sales _on
credit_ were _prohibited_. Seven years after the adoption of the
constitution, a statute was passed limiting the sale to twenty-eight
gallons by unlicensed persons. The statute of 1818 prohibited the sale
of liquors 'to common drunkards, tipplers, and gamesters; and to persons
who so misspend, waste or lessen their estates, as to expose themselves
or their families to want, or the town to the burden of their support,
by the use of strong drink--or whose health is thus, in the opinion of
the selectmen, endangered or injured.' Here is prohibition with a
vengeance, going much beyond the provisions of the Fifteen Gallon Law,
and forbidding the sale to certain persons, and at certain times. A man
was even prohibited from asking for credit at the bar, and the landlord
could not grant it if he did, without violating a statute of the
Commonwealth. How, then, can the enemies of this measure be bare-faced
enough to assert that it is disregarding their inalienable rights? How
can they assert, with a shadow of truth on their side, that it is
introducing 'a new principle of legislation?' There is no other
principle involved in this law than that which is found in our statutes
controlling the shooting of certain birds, the sale of tainted meat, the
location of slaughter-houses, the existence of lotteries, and many other
things that might be named--all showing that the legislature has
authority to prohibit whatever the public good requires. That the public
good demands the suppression of intemperance, who can deny? It is the
greatest scourge of our land, and the world. It sends thirty thousand
annually, in our country, to a drunkard's grave. It tenants our
almshouses and prisons with its wretched victims, and causes three
fourths of all the crimes that fill the calendars of our courts. It
swells your taxes more than all other evils combined, and is the nursery
of blasted hopes and miseries that language cannot describe. If then,
the public good requires the suppression of any vice in our land, it is
this."

Thus he disposed of this plea of the rumsellers, to the happy surprise
and satisfaction of the friends of temperance. He discussed other topics
connected with the law, and which we have not space to consider. For an
hour or more he held his audience in breathless interest, by the strain
of argument and oratory that he poured forth from his fruitful mind and
earnest heart. A more delighted audience never listened before to a
temperance lecture. Its depth, power, and compass were more than they
expected. A round of hearty applause told plainly how it was received,
as Nat uttered the last word, and took his seat.

"There, Nat," said Marcus to him on the following evening, "you did more
good last night than all the temperance lecturers who have come to
town."

"How so?" inquired Nat, not understanding his meaning.

"They say you fairly convinced Miles, and he is going to stop selling
liquor."

"How do you know?" asked Nat, with a very incredulous look. "I shall
want pretty good evidence of that before I believe it."

"He has told a half dozen people so to-day, and one of his best
customers among the number."

"Who is that?"

"It was Johnson, who pays him as much money in a year as any other man.
Johnson got excited, and denounced him and all the friends of temperance
in strong language. He called you a 'fool,' and Miles cracked you up in
return, and so they had it for a while rather hot, much to the amusement
of Mr. Fairbanks, who happened to hear it."

This was gratifying news to Nat, and to all who sympathized with him in
the temperance cause; and it needs some further notice. This Johnson
was the customer with whom we became acquainted in another place, a
bitter opponent of the "Fifteen Gallon Law." Curiosity, as well as
appetite, led him into Miles's shop on the morning after the lecture,
for he wanted to hear about it. He had learned in some way that Miles
went, as he intimated to him, and therefore it was a good place to go
for information.

"So you went to hear Nat last night?" he said to Miles, as he entered
the shop. "Did he make a temperance man of you?" meaning this inquiry
for a jest.

"Nat spoke real well," answered Miles, "and his arguments were so good
that I can't answer them. He's a mighty smart chap."

"What did he harp on last night?" inquired Johnson.

"The Fifteen Gallon Law; and he showed how it would remove the evils of
intemperance, which he described so correctly and eloquently that I was
astonished. I don't see where he has ever learnt so much."

"Larnt it!" exclaimed Johnson; "he larnt it where he did his impudence.
I see that he has pulled the wool over your eyes, and you are more than
half timperance now."

[Illustration]

"All of that," replied Miles, coolly; "I am going to quit rum-selling at
once. If I can't get my living in an honest way, then I will go to the
poor-house."

"I hope you _will_ go there," answered Johnson, starting up from his
chair under great excitement. "A man who has no mind of his own ought to
go there. I----"

"I thought you was going to say," interrupted Miles, "that I ought to go
there to keep company with the paupers I have made. I am pretty sure I
should have you for a companion before long, if you don't alter your
hand."

"I never thought you was overstocked with brains," continued Johnson;
"but if you will be hoodwinked by that fool of a Nat, you have less than
I thought you had. It is great business for a man of your age to give up
beat to a boy, and that is all Nat is, though he thinks he's a man."

"Boy or not," answered Miles, "he spoke better last night than any man I
ever heard. He is a first-rate orator, and his defence of the 'Fifteen
Gallon Law' was unanswerable."

"A feller ought to speak well who has studied as much as he has," said
Johnson. "He hain't earnt his salt for two or three years, 'cause he's
too lazy to do any thing but look at a book."

"I don't care how much he has studied," answered Miles. "If I had a son
who could speak as well as he does, I should be proud of him, though he
had done nothing but study for ten years. Your talk is very
unreasonable, and you know it; and for that reason, it will not change
my opinion of Nat."

"Run arter him, then, to your heart's content," said Johnson, turning to
go out, "and be a timperance man if you will,--it'll take more than this
to make you decent;" and with these words he left the premises in a
rage.

Mr. Miles carried out his determination to cease the traffic in strong
drink, and engage in some more honorable business. His unexpected
espousal of the total abstinence principle, and the closing of his
dram-shop, offended many of the rum fraternity. It was a signal
achievement for the temperance cause, however, and for the welfare of
the village.

The lecture of Nat won for him an enviable reputation, not only at home,
but abroad, and he was soon invited to deliver it in the neighboring
towns. Wherever he consented to give it, it was received with decided
favor, and the anticipations of hearers were more than realized.

Subsequently he delivered other lectures on the subject of temperance in
his native village, and the people soon learned that no lecturer called
out so large audiences as he. There was always a desire to hear him; and
his sonorous voice, bewitching eloquence, and sensible thoughts, never
failed to entertain his auditors.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

SPEECH-MAKING.


At this time Nat occupied a position of honor and influence which few
persons of his age ever attain. But let not the reader suppose it was
the result of chance, or the consequence of superior talents alone. He
was more indebted for it to the studious habits which he formed from
twelve to fifteen years of age, than to any thing else. If he had wasted
his spare moments then in idleness,--as many boys do,--he never would
have surprised the lyceum with a speech of such eloquence, nor been able
to entertain an audience on the subject of temperance. The habits of
life are usually fixed by the time a lad is fifteen years of age. The
habits which Nat had established at this period of life, made him what
he was five years later. Those early years of industry and application
could not be thrown away without demolishing the fabric that was reared
upon them. They were the underpinning of the beautiful structure that so
many delighted to view when the busy architect was a little older. For,
if it could ever be truthfully said of any one, "he is the artificer of
his own fortune," it could be said of Nat. The bobbin boy was father of
the young and popular orator.

It is generally true, as we have intimated before, that the influence of
habits at ten or fifteen years of age, is distinctly traceable through
the whole career of eminent men. Sir James Mackintosh was thirteen years
of age when Mr. Fox and Lord North were arrayed against each other on
the subject of the American war. He became deeply interested in the
matter through their speeches, and from that time concentrated his
thoughts upon those topics that contributed to make him the
distinguished orator and historian that he became. He always considered
that the direction given to his mind, at that early period of his life,
settled his destiny. The great naturalist Audubon, was just as fond of
birds and other animals, when ten years old, as he was in manhood. He
studied natural objects with perfect admiration, and took the portraits
of such birds as he particularly fancied. When he was sent to Paris to
be educated, away from the beauty and freshness of rural objects, he
became tired of his lessons, and exclaimed, "What have I to do with
monstrous torsos and the heads of heathen gods, when my business lies
among birds?" The foundation of his success as a naturalist was laid in
his sparkling boyhood. Benjamin West was made a painter, as he said, by
his mother's kiss of approbation, when she saw a picture he sketched, at
seven or eight years of age. He became just what he promised to be in
his boyhood, when he robbed the old cat of the tip of her tail out of
which to manufacture a brush, to prosecute his delicate art. Thus it was
with Eli Whitney, who proved himself such a benefactor to mankind by his
inventive genius. His sister gives the following account of his boyhood:
"Our father had a workshop, and sometimes made wheels of different
kinds, and chairs. He had a variety of tools, and a lathe for turning
chair-posts. This gave my brother an opportunity of learning the use of
tools when very young. He lost no time; but, as soon as he could handle
tools, he was always making something in the shop, and seemed not to
like working on the farm. On a time, after the death of our mother, when
our father had been absent from home two or three days, on his return he
inquired of the house-keeper what the boys had been doing? She told him
what B. and J. had been about. 'But what has Eli been doing?' said he.
She replied that he had been making a fiddle. 'Ah!' added he
despondingly, 'I fear Eli will have to take his portion in fiddles.' He
was at this time about twelve years old. This fiddle was finished
throughout, like a common violin, and made tolerably good music. It was
examined by many persons, and all pronounced it to be a remarkable piece
of work for such a boy to perform. From this time he was employed to
repair violins, and had many nice jobs, which were always executed to
the entire satisfaction, and often to the astonishment of his customers.
His father's watch being the greatest piece of machinery that had yet
presented itself to his observation, he was extremely desirous of
examining its interior construction, but was not permitted to do so. One
Sunday morning, observing that his father was going to meeting, and
would leave at home the wonderful little machine, he immediately feigned
illness as an apology for not going to church. As soon as the family
were out of sight, he flew to the room where the watch hung, and, taking
it down, he was so much delighted with its motions, that he took it all
in pieces before he thought of the consequences of his rash deed; for
his father was a stern parent, and punishment would have been the reward
of his idle curiosity, had the mischief been detected. He, however, put
the work all so neatly together, that his father never discovered his
audacity until he himself told him many years afterwards."[A] Such was
the boyhood of one who invented the _cotton-gin_, made improvements in
the manufacture of fire-arms, by which the national government saved, as
Mr. Calhoun said "twenty-five thousand dollars per annum," and
contributed largely to advance other mechanical arts. How distinctly we
can trace, in all these examples, the moulding influence of boyhood upon
manhood! And how marked the correspondence between the early life of all
these men and that of Nat! Thus it is that the beautiful poem of
Longfellow, "The Village Blacksmith," is abundantly illustrated in the
biography of both the living and the dead! A few of the verses are:--

  "Under a spreading chestnut-tree
    The village smithy stands;
  The smith, a mighty man is he,
    With large and sinewy hands;
  And the muscles of his brawny arms
    Are strong as iron bands.

  "His hair is crisp, and black, and long,
    His face is like the tan;
  His brow is wet with honest sweat,
    He earns what e'er he can,
  And looks the whole world in the face,
    For he owes not any man.

  "Week in, week out, from morn till night,
    You can hear his bellows blow;
  You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,
    With measured beat and slow,
  Like a sexton ringing the village bell,
    When the evening sun was low.

       *       *       *       *       *

  "Toiling,--rejoicing,--sorrowing,
    Onward through life he goes;
  Each morning sees some task begin,
    Each evening sees it close;
  Something attempted, something done,
    Has earned a night's repose.

  "Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,
    For the lesson thou hast taught!
  Thus at the flaming forge of life
    Our fortunes must be wrought;
  Thus on its sounding anvil shaped
    Each burning deed and thought!"

But to return. For some time Nat's attention had been directed to
political subjects, and he had been hither and thither to listen to
various speakers. At length he became so enthusiastic in support of his
own political tenets, that he was urged to undertake political
speech-making. There was ample opportunity for the display of his
abilities in this way, since the political excitement was strong.

"What do you think," said he to Charlie, "about my engaging in politics?
I have been urged to speak at political meetings."

"You better do it," replied Charlie. "You are well qualified for it; and
you always have taken an interest in politics ever since you read the
Life of Jefferson. Where do they want you should speak?"

"Here, and in other places, too; and I scarcely know what to do about
it. In some respects I should like it, and in others I should not."

"Do it, by all means," added Charlie. "It will not interfere much with
your studies, as you will speak only in the evening."

"But that will interfere very much with my present plans. It will be on
my mind all the time, so that my interest will be divided at least. No
one can have too many irons in the fire, and attend to them all. One
thing at a time is about as much as any person can do well."

"That may be very true, but why not make that one thing politics? We
must have men to manage State affairs, as certainly as to be lawyers,
physicians, and ministers. Besides, if I can read you, Nat, you are
actually cut out for this sphere of action."

"You don't read me correctly if that is your opinion. There must be a
great many unpleasant things in such a life. If the speaking were all, I
should like that well enough, but that is a small part of political
experience."

"Try it, try it," added Charlie, "and see how you make it go. You need
not continue in it longer than you please. I want to see you take the
stump once. Perhaps you will make a Democrat of _me_."

Nat met the last remark with a laugh, and said "That is too much to
expect. You are a hopeless case,--too incorrigible to be won over to the
right side. I relinquished all hope of you a long time ago."

"Now, seriously," said Charlie, "I advise you to speak at political
meetings, and I hope you will speak here first. It will be the best
thing you can do. If I possessed your abilities for public speaking, I
would do it in a minute."

"Perhaps I shall conclude to do so," was Nat's reply, as they separated.

The result was, that Nat decided to address a political gathering in his
native town; and soon after he visited some neighboring places on the
same errand. He soon acquired a reputation, as the "young orator," and
committees waited upon him from towns near and remote. The adventure of
one of these committees rehearsed, will show what expectations were
awakened by his spreading fame.

A committee, in the town of ----, were instructed to wait upon him, and
secure his services at a great political gathering there. Accordingly
the committee put on their "Sunday suit," harnessed the horse into the
best carriage, and started for Nat's residence. Meeting a man, as they
entered the village.

"Where is Esquire ---- (meaning Nat)'s office?"

The person addressed did not understand who was meant at first, and
asked for the repetition of the inquiry, which was readily granted.

"Oh," answered he, "it is down yonder," at the same time pointing to a
street a quarter of a mile distant or more, and scarcely able to control
his risibles as he thought of the joke he was about to perpetrate.

"Very much obliged to you," responded the inquirer, at the same time
whipping up his horse.

"This is nothing but a carpenter's shop," said one of them, as they
reached the place. "We must have misunderstood him."

"It is very evident," said the other, "that we shall have to look
further yet. But let us go in and inquire."

So they alighted, and went in.

"We are looking for Esquire ----'s office. A gentleman directed us a
short distance back, but we find that we did not understand him."

"Whose office did you say?" inquired Nat's father, who happened to be
the person addressed.

"Esquire ----'s office, the young orator we have heard so much about."

Nat's father was very much amused at this turn of matters; but he kept
on a sober face, and replied, pointing to Nat, who was planing a board,

"That is the young man you want to see, I suppose."

The committee looked at each other, and then at the black-haired
board-planer, with perfect amazement. Their countenances told just what
they thought; and if we should write their thoughts out in plain
English, they would run thus:

"What! that young fellow the stump orator of which we have been told so
much. We better have staid at home, than to risk our party in his hands.
Why! he is nothing but a boy. There must be some mistake about the
matter."

While astonishment was evaporating from the tops of their heads, and
oozing out of the ends of their fingers, Nat had turned away from the
bench to welcome the official strangers. There he stood hatless, and
coatless, with his shirt-sleeves stripped up to his elbows, and his
noble brow wet with perspiration, looking little like one who could sway
an audience by the power of his eloquence.

"We are a committee from the town of----instructed to wait on you, and
engage you to address a political convention," said one of them,
breaking the silence.

"When is the convention?" inquired Nat.

"Two weeks from this time, the 15th day of October."

"I will be there," answered Nat, "and do the best I can for you."

The matter was adjusted, and the committee left, evidently thinking that
an orator whose office was a carpenter's shop could not be a remarkable
defender of democratic principles. On their way home, they spoke freely
to each other of their mistake in engaging one so inexperienced to
address the convention. They concluded that it would teach them a good
lesson, and that in future they would not risk the reputation of their
party in unskilful hands.

It is sufficient to say, that Nat filled the appointment to the
satisfaction of the crowd, and the surprise of the committee. Before he
had spoken fifteen minutes, the committee discovered that they had
misjudged the orator, and that he was, indeed, the youthful champion of
their party. His speech fully convinced them that he could address a
political assembly a little better than he could plane a board.

[Footnote A: A good sketch of Eli Whitney's Life, and the lives of some
other self-made men, spoken of in this volume, may be found in
"_Biography of Self-Taught Men_," by Professor B. B. Edwards. Every
youth in the land ought to read this work, not only for the information
it imparts, but for the incentives to "noble, godlike action," which it
presents on almost every page.]


CHAPTER XXIX.

THE EARLY VICTIM


"I have just heard," said Nat one morning to a neighbor, "that James
Cole was frozen to death last night while intoxicated. Is it true?"

"I had not heard of it," replied the neighbor. "Some people at the head
of the street were conversing about something that had occurred as I
passed, but I did not understand what it was. Perhaps it was that. He
has conducted badly for a year past, and I suppose he is a confirmed
drunkard, although he is so young."

Just then Frank came along, and, before Nat had time to inquire,
proceeded to say, "James Cole came very near freezing to death last
night, and the physician thinks it is doubtful whether he will recover."

"How did it happen?" asked Nat.

"He spent last evening at one of the grog-shops, I don't know which, and
staid drinking until it was very late; and he was badly intoxicated
when he started for home, so that he did not get far before he fell down
in the road, and was unable to get up. It was so late that no one came
along until this morning, and there he laid senseless all the while, and
was completely chilled through when Mr. Bates found him this morning."

"Then Mr. Bates found him?" said Nat.

"Yes; and he could scarcely tell whether he was dead or alive at first.
He carried him to his father's immediately, and sent for the doctor as
quickly as possible."

"Do you know what time it was when he left the grog-shop?"

"No; but I heard it was very late."

"Well," added Nat, "a man who will sell James Cole liquor until he makes
him drunk, and then send him home alone, on such a night as last night
was, has no more feeling than a brute. If he should die, that rumseller
would be the actual cause of his death."

"Certainly," answered Frank; "it would not have been half so bad to have
robbed him of his money, and turned him away without any drink. But I
wonder if Jim thinks now of the conversation we had with him about
forming the Total Abstinence Society?"

"He has probably found out by this time," replied Nat, "that he can't
stop drinking when he pleases, after an appetite for it is acquired. He
was very sure that he should never be a drunkard; and that was but
little more than two years ago."

"I never expected he would be much, but I had no idea he would come to
this so soon," added Frank. "I scarcely ever heard of a person going to
ruin so quick."

"James was a very smart fellow, naturally," said Nat. "I once thought he
was the most talented fellow of his age in town, and it would have
turned out so if he had tried to make anything of himself."

"I think so, too," said Frank. "But he never wanted to be respectable.
He always seemed to glory in drinking. He was earning five dollars a day
in the machine-shop when they turned him away, and was considered by far
the best workman there. He lost his place on account of his intemperate
habits; but it never seemed to trouble him. It is my opinion now, that
he had a strong appetite for intoxicating drinks at the time we
organized the Total Abstinence Society, and for that reason he opposed
it."

"His case will be a good defence of the temperance cause," continued
Nat, "and I hope the rumsellers will never hear the last of it. I can
scarcely see what a person can say in favor of the use and traffic in
strong drink, with such an illustration of the evil before them."

The news of James's condition spread through the village, and many
received it in a very exaggerated form. Some heard that he was dead, and
others that he was near dying, the latter rumor not being far from the
truth. Before night, however, it was announced that he was better, and
there was hope of his recovery. All sorts of stories were put in
circulation about the place of his drinking, and the circumstances
attending it. The rumseller very justly came in for his share of
condemnation, while he and his allies were disposed to say very little,
for the simple reason that there was not much for them to say. Such an
instance of degradation in the very dawn of manhood, when the dew of his
youth was still upon the victim, was an unanswerable argument for the
cause of temperance. He who could close his senses against such an
appeal in behalf of sobriety, would take the side of error in spite of
the plainest evidence to the contrary. It was not strange, then, that
much was said at the fireside, in the streets and shops, and everywhere,
concerning the event, nor that the foes of temperance were inclined to
be unusually silent.

"Doctor! how is James Cole now?" inquired a gentleman who met him some
three or four weeks after the fatal night of drunkenness.

"His case is hopeless," answered the doctor. "He has a hard cough, and
to all appearance is in a quick consumption."

"Do you consider it the consequence of his exposure on that night?"

"Certainly, it can be nothing else. If it had been a very cold night he
would have been frozen to death in the morning. I did not know that he
had become so much of a drunkard until this happened."

"I did," replied the gentleman. "I have seen a good deal of him, and
have known something of his habits. I was satisfied, when he was but
sixteen or eighteen years of age, that he had an appetite for liquor,
and I am not surprised at the result."

"The poor fellow will soon know the worst," added the doctor. "He can't
live many weeks at the longest."

"I hope it will prove a warning to the young here," said the gentleman.
"The fact is, I wonder sometimes that we do not have more of such cases
when the temptations to drink are so common. But _one_ ought to be
sufficient to move the whole town on the subject."

       *       *       *       *       *

Not quite twelve weeks have elapsed since the foregoing incident
occurred. The bell tolls out its solemn death-knell, and the sable
hearse is moving slowly on to the grave-yard. Sad, tearful mourners
follow, to lay all that remains of James Cole--the son, and brother--in
the silent "narrow house." For the demon-vice has done its worst, and
loosed the silver chord, and his youthful spirit has gone before the
drunkard's offended God. Alas! what painful memories throng the minds of
beholders at the sight of the long, mournful procession on its way to
the tomb! Never did a hearse convey more blasted hopes or wasted powers,
more abused and withered ties, or dishonored members, to the house of
the dead. Within that coffin is the bright promise of youth, the
strength of early manhood, parental expectations and love--all blighted
by the breath of the destroyer, and laid in as sad a winding-sheet as
ever wrapped a tenant of the grave. Oh! how great the woes of
intemperance appear, when these appalling realities dash earthly hopes,
and send the wretched victim away to that world "from whose bourne no
traveller returns!" So thought many as the lifeless form of James Cole
was consigned to its kindred dust.

"Another drunkard's grave," said the sexton, as the stones rattled upon
the coffin which he proceeded to cover, when the procession had retired;
and his remark was addressed to a neighbor who stood by his side.

"Not exactly a drunkard's grave," was the reply. "James was intemperate,
but he died of consumption."

"And was not that consumption the consequence of his drunkenness?"
inquired the sexton.

"I suppose it was; still I thought we could hardly call this a
drunkard's grave, though it is true enough."

"It is too painfully true," added the sexton. "Would that it might be
called otherwise; but it cannot be. When you and I are numbered with the
dead, this spot will be known by all who have seen James Cole buried
to-day, as the drunkard's grave. There are many of them in this yard,
but _I_ never dug a sadder one than this."

"And I hope you never will another," said the man.

