They walked around to the back of the house, between the rigid
gooseberry bushes. It was Zeena's habit, when they came back late
from the village, to leave the key of the kitchen door under the
mat. Ethan stood before the door, his head heavy with dreams, his
arm still about Mattie. "Matt-" he began, not knowing what he meant
to say.

She slipped out of his hold without speaking, and he stooped down
and felt for the key.

"It's not there!" he said, straightening himself with a start.

They strained their eyes at each other through the icy darkness.
Such a thing had never happened before.

"Maybe she's forgotten it," Mattie said in a tremulous whisper; but
both of them knew that it was not like Zeena to forget.

"It might have fallen off into the snow," Mattie continued, after a
pause during which they had stood intently listening.

"It must have been pushed off, then," he rejoined in the same tone.
Another wild thought tore through him. What if tramps had been
there-what if...

Again he listened, fancying he heard a distant sound in the house;
then he felt in his pocket for a match, and kneeling down, passed
its light slowly over the rough edges of snow about the doorstep.

He was still kneeling when his eyes, on a level with the lower panel
of the door, caught a faint ray beneath it. Who could be stirring in
that silent house? He heard a step on the stairs, and again for an
instant the thought of tramps tore through him. Then the door opened
and he saw his wife.

Against the dark background of the kitchen she stood up tall and
angular, one hand drawing a quilted counterpane to her flat breast,
while the other held a lamp. The light, on a level with her chin,
drew out of the darkness her puckered throat and the projecting
wrist of the hand that clutched the quilt, and deepened
fantastically the hollows and prominences of her high-boned face
under its ring of crimping-pins. To Ethan, still in the rosy haze of
his hour with Mattie, the sight came with the intense precision of
the last dream before waking. He felt as if he had never before
known what his wife looked like.

She drew aside without speaking, and Mattie and Ethan passed into
the kitchen, which had the deadly chill of a vault after the dry
cold of the night.

"Guess you forgot about us, Zeena," Ethan joked, stamping the snow
from his boots.

"No. I just felt so mean I couldn't sleep."

Mattie came forward, unwinding her wraps, the colour of the cherry
scarf in her fresh lips and cheeks. "I'm so sorry, Zeena! Isn't
there anything I can do?"

"No; there's nothing." Zeena turned away from her. "You might 'a'
shook off that snow outside," she said to her husband.

She walked out of the kitchen ahead of them and pausing in the hall
raised the lamp at arm's-length, as if to light them up the stairs.

Ethan paused also, affecting to fumble for the peg on which he hung
his coat and cap. The doors of the two bedrooms faced each other
across the narrow upper landing, and to-night it was peculiarly
repugnant to him that Mattie should see him follow Zeena.

"I guess I won't come up yet awhile," he said, turning as if to go
back to the kitchen.

Zeena stopped short and looked at him. "For the land's sake-what you
going to do down here?"

"I've got the mill accounts to go over."

She continued to stare at him, the flame of the unshaded lamp
bringing out with microscopic cruelty the fretful lines of her face.

"At this time o' night? You'll ketch your death. The fire's out long
ago."

Without answering he moved away toward the kitchen. As he did so his
glance crossed Mattie's and he fancied that a fugitive warning
gleamed through her lashes. The next moment they sank to her flushed
cheeks and she began to mount the stairs ahead of Zeena.

"That's so. It is powerful cold down here," Ethan assented; and with
lowered head he went up in his wife's wake, and followed her across
the threshold of their room.


III


There was some hauling to be done at the lower end of the wood-lot,
and Ethan was out early the next day.

The winter morning was as clear as crystal. The sunrise burned red
in a pure sky, the shadows on the rim of the wood-lot were darkly
blue, and beyond the white and scintillating fields patches of
far-off forest hung like smoke.

It was in the early morning stillness, when his muscles were
swinging to their familiar task and his lungs expanding with long
draughts of mountain air, that Ethan did his clearest thinking. He
and Zeena had not exchanged a word after the door of their room had
closed on them. She had measured out some drops from a
medicine-bottle on a chair by the bed and, after swallowing them,
and wrapping her head in a piece of yellow flannel, had lain down
with her face turned away. Ethan undressed hurriedly and blew out
the light so that he should not see her when he took his place at
her side. As he lay there he could hear Mattie moving about in her
room, and her candle, sending its small ray across the landing, drew
a scarcely perceptible line of light under his door. He kept his
eyes fixed on the light till it vanished. Then the room grew
perfectly black, and not a sound was audible but Zeena's asthmatic
breathing. Ethan felt confusedly that there were many things he
ought to think about, but through his tingling veins and tired brain
only one sensation throbbed: the warmth of Mattie's shoulder against
his. Why had he not kissed her when he held her there? A few hours
earlier he would not have asked himself the question. Even a few
minutes earlier, when they had stood alone outside the house, he
would not have dared to think of kissing her. But since he had seen
her lips in the lamplight he felt that they were his.

Now, in the bright morning air, her face was still before him. It
was part of the sun's red and of the pure glitter on the snow. How
the girl had changed since she had come to Starkfield! He remembered
what a colourless slip of a thing she had looked the day he had met
her at the station. And all the first winter, how she had shivered
with cold when the northerly gales shook the thin clapboards and the
snow beat like hail against the loose-hung windows!

He had been afraid that she would hate the hard life, the cold and
loneliness; but not a sign of discontent escaped her. Zeena took the
view that Mattie was bound to make the best of Starkfield since she
hadn't any other place to go to; but this did not strike Ethan as
conclusive. Zeena, at any rate, did not apply the principle in her
own case.

He felt all the more sorry for the girl because misfortune had, in a
sense, indentured her to them. Mattie Silver was the daughter of a
cousin of Zenobia Frome's, who had inflamed his clan with mingled
sentiments of envy and admiration by descending from the hills to
Connecticut, where he had married a Stamford girl and succeeded to
her father's thriving "drug" business. Unhappily Orin Silver, a man
of far-reaching aims, had died too soon to prove that the end
justifies the means. His accounts revealed merely what the means had
been; and these were such that it was fortunate for his wife and
daughter that his books were examined only after his impressive
funeral. His wife died of the disclosure, and Mattie, at twenty, was
left alone to make her way on the fifty dollars obtained from the
sale of her piano. For this purpose her equipment, though varied,
was inadequate. She could trim a hat, make molasses candy, recite
"Curfew shall not ring to-night," and play "The Lost Chord" and a
pot-pourri from "Carmen." When she tried to extend the field of her
activities in the direction of stenography and book-keeping her
health broke down, and six months on her feet behind the counter of
a department store did not tend to restore it. Her nearest relations
had been induced to place their savings in her father's hands, and
though, after his death, they ungrudgingly acquitted themselves of
the Christian duty of returning good for evil by giving his daughter
all the advice at their disposal, they could hardly be expected to
supplement it by material aid. But when Zenobia's doctor recommended
her looking about for some one to help her with the house-work the
clan instantly saw the chance of exacting a compensation from
Mattie. Zenobia, though doubtful of the girl's efficiency, was
tempted by the freedom to find fault without much risk of losing
her; and so Mattie came to Starkfield.

Zenobia's fault-finding was of the silent kind, but not the less
penetrating for that. During the first months Ethan alternately
burned with the desire to see Mattie defy her and trembled with fear
of the result. Then the situation grew less strained. The pure air,
and the long summer hours in the open, gave back life and elasticity
to Mattie, and Zeena, with more leisure to devote to her complex
ailments, grew less watchful of the girl's omissions; so that Ethan,
struggling on under the burden of his barren farm and failing
saw-mill, could at least imagine that peace reigned in his house.

There was really, even now, no tangible evidence to the contrary;
but since the previous night a vague dread had hung on his sky-line.
It was formed of Zeena's obstinate silence, of Mattie's sudden look
of warning, of the memory of just such fleeting imperceptible signs
as those which told him, on certain stainless mornings, that before
night there would be rain.

His dread was so strong that, man-like, he sought to postpone
certainty. The hauling was not over till mid-day, and as the lumber
was to be delivered to Andrew Hale, the Starkfield builder, it was
really easier for Ethan to send Jotham Powell, the hired man, back
to the farm on foot, and drive the load down to the village himself.
He had scrambled up on the logs, and was sitting astride of them,
close over his shaggy grays, when, coming between him and their
streaming necks, he had a vision of the warning look that Mattie had
given him the night before.

"If there's going to be any trouble I want to be there," was his
vague reflection, as he threw to Jotham the unexpected order to
unhitch the team and lead them back to the barn.

It was a slow trudge home through the heavy fields, and when the two
men entered the kitchen Mattie was lifting the coffee from the stove
and Zeena was already at the table. Her husband stopped short at
sight of her. Instead of her usual calico wrapper and knitted shawl
she wore her best dress of brown merino, and above her thin strands
of hair, which still preserved the tight undulations of the
crimping-pins, rose a hard perpendicular bonnet, as to which Ethan's
clearest notion was that he had to pay five dollars for it at the
Bettsbridge Emporium. On the floor beside her stood his old valise
and a bandbox wrapped in newspapers.

"Why, where are you going, Zeena?" he exclaimed.

"I've got my shooting pains so bad that I'm going over to
Bettsbridge to spend the night with Aunt Martha Pierce and see that
new doctor," she answered in a matter-of-fact tone, as if she had
said she was going into the store-room to take a look at the
preserves, or up to the attic to go over the blankets.

In spite of her sedentary habits such abrupt decisions were not
without precedent in Zeena's history. Twice or thrice before she had
suddenly packed Ethan's valise and started off to Bettsbridge, or
even Springfield, to seek the advice of some new doctor, and her
husband had grown to dread these expeditions because of their cost.
Zeena always came back laden with expensive remedies, and her last
visit to Springfield had been commemorated by her paying twenty
dollars for an electric battery of which she had never been able to
learn the use. But for the moment his sense of relief was so great
as to preclude all other feelings. He had now no doubt that Zeena
had spoken the truth in saying, the night before, that she had sat
up because she felt "too mean" to sleep: her abrupt resolve to seek
medical advice showed that, as usual, she was wholly absorbed in her
health.

As if expecting a protest, she continued plaintively; "If you're too
busy with the hauling I presume you can let Jotham Powell drive me
over with the sorrel in time to ketch the train at the Flats."

Her husband hardly heard what she was saying. During the winter
months there was no stage between Starkfield and Bettsbridge, and
the trains which stopped at Corbury Flats were slow and infrequent.
A rapid calculation showed Ethan that Zeena could not be back at the
farm before the following evening....

"If I'd supposed you'd 'a' made any objection to Jotham Powell's
driving me over-" she began again, as though his silence had implied
refusal. On the brink of departure she was always seized with a flux
of words. "All I know is," she continued, "I can't go on the way I
am much longer. The pains are clear away down to my ankles now, or
I'd 'a' walked in to Starkfield on my own feet, sooner'n put you
out, and asked Michael Eady to let me ride over on his wagon to the
Flats, when he sends to meet the train that brings his groceries.
I'd 'a' had two hours to wait in the station, but I'd sooner 'a'
done it, even with this cold, than to have you say-"

"Of course Jotham'll drive you over," Ethan roused himself to
answer. He became suddenly conscious that he was looking at Mattie
while Zeena talked to him, and with an effort he turned his eyes to
his wife. She sat opposite the window, and the pale light reflected
from the banks of snow made her face look more than usually drawn
and bloodless, sharpened the three parallel creases between ear and
cheek, and drew querulous lines from her thin nose to the corners of
her mouth. Though she was but seven years her husband's senior, and
he was only twenty-eight, she was already an old woman.

Ethan tried to say something befitting the occasion, but there was
only one thought in his mind: the fact that, for the first time
since Mattie had come to live with them, Zeena was to be away for a
night. He wondered if the girl were thinking of it too....

He knew that Zeena must be wondering why he did not offer to drive
her to the Flats and let Jotham Powell take the lumber to
Starkfield, and at first he could not think of a pretext for not
doing so; then he said: "I'd take you over myself, only I've got to
collect the cash for the lumber."

As soon as the words were spoken he regretted them, not only because
they were untrue-there being no prospect of his receiving cash
payment from Hale-but also because he knew from experience the
imprudence of letting Zeena think he was in funds on the eve of one
of her therapeutic excursions. At the moment, however, his one
desire was to avoid the long drive with her behind the ancient
sorrel who never went out of a walk.

Zeena made no reply: she did not seem to hear what he had said. She
had already pushed her plate aside, and was measuring out a draught
from a large bottle at her elbow.

"It ain't done me a speck of good, but I guess I might as well use
it up," she remarked; adding, as she pushed the empty bottle toward
Mattie: "If you can get the taste out it'll do for pickles."


IV


As soon as his wife had driven off Ethan took his coat and cap from
the peg. Mattie was washing up the dishes, humming one of the dance
tunes of the night before. He said "So long, Matt," and she answered
gaily "So long, Ethan"; and that was all.

It was warm and bright in the kitchen. The sun slanted through the
south window on the girl's moving figure, on the cat dozing in a
chair, and on the geraniums brought in from the door-way, where
Ethan had planted them in the summer to "make a garden" for Mattie.
He would have liked to linger on, watching her tidy up and then
settle down to her sewing; but he wanted still more to get the
hauling done and be back at the farm before night.

All the way down to the village he continued to think of his return
to Mattie. The kitchen was a poor place, not "spruce" and shining as
his mother had kept it in his boyhood; but it was surprising what a
homelike look the mere fact of Zeena's absence gave it. And he
pictured what it would be like that evening, when he and Mattie were
there after supper. For the first time they would be alone together
indoors, and they would sit there, one on each side of the stove,
like a married couple, he in his stocking feet and smoking his pipe,
she laughing and talking in that funny way she had, which was always
as new to him as if he had never heard her before.

The sweetness of the picture, and the relief of knowing that his
fears of "trouble" with Zeena were unfounded, sent up his spirits
with a rush, and he, who was usually so silent, whistled and sang
aloud as he drove through the snowy fields. There was in him a
slumbering spark of sociability which the long Starkfield winters
had not yet extinguished. By nature grave and inarticulate, he
admired recklessness and gaiety in others and was warmed to the
marrow by friendly human intercourse. At Worcester, though he had
the name of keeping to himself and not being much of a hand at a
good time, he had secretly gloried in being clapped on the back and
hailed as "Old Ethe" or "Old Stiff"; and the cessation of such
familiarities had increased the chill of his return to Starkfield.

There the silence had deepened about him year by year. Left alone,
after his father's accident, to carry the burden of farm and mill,
he had had no time for convivial loiterings in the village; and when
his mother fell ill the loneliness of the house grew more oppressive
than that of the fields. His mother had been a talker in her day,
but after her "trouble" the sound of her voice was seldom heard,
though she had not lost the power of speech. Sometimes, in the long
winter evenings, when in desperation her son asked her why she
didn't "say something," she would lift a finger and answer: "Because
I'm listening"; and on stormy nights, when the loud wind was about
the house, she would complain, if he spoke to her: "They're talking
so out there that I can't hear you."

It was only when she drew toward her last illness, and his cousin
Zenobia Pierce came over from the next valley to help him nurse her,
that human speech was heard again in the house. After the mortal
silence of his long imprisonment Zeena's volubility was music in his
ears. He felt that he might have "gone like his mother" if the sound
of a new voice had not come to steady him. Zeena seemed to
understand his case at a glance. She laughed at him for not knowing
the simplest sick-bed duties and told him to "go right along out"
and leave her to see to things. The mere fact of obeying her orders,
of feeling free to go about his business again and talk with other
men, restored his shaken balance and magnified his sense of what he
owed her. Her efficiency shamed and dazzled him. She seemed to
possess by instinct all the household wisdom that his long
apprenticeship had not instilled in him. When the end came it was
she who had to tell him to hitch up and go for the undertaker, and
she thought it "funny" that he had not settled beforehand who was to
have his mother's clothes and the sewing-machine. After the funeral,
when he saw her preparing to go away, he was seized with an
unreasoning dread of being left alone on the farm; and before he
knew what he was doing he had asked her to stay there with him. He
had often thought since that it would not have happened if his
mother had died in spring instead of winter...

When they married it was agreed that, as soon as he could straighten
out the difficulties resulting from Mrs. Frome's long illness, they
would sell the farm and saw-mill and try their luck in a large town.
Ethan's love of nature did not take the form of a taste for
agriculture. He had always wanted to be an engineer, and to live in
towns, where there were lectures and big libraries and "fellows
doing things." A slight engineering job in Florida, put in his way
during his period of study at Worcester, increased his faith in his
ability as well as his eagerness to see the world; and he felt sure
that, with a "smart" wife like Zeena, it would not be long before he
had made himself a place in it.

Zeena's native village was slightly larger and nearer to the railway
than Starkfield, and she had let her husband see from the first that
life on an isolated farm was not what she had expected when she
married. But purchasers were slow in coming, and while he waited for
them Ethan learned the impossibility of transplanting her. She chose
to look down on Starkfield, but she could not have lived in a place
which looked down on her. Even Bettsbridge or Shadd's Falls would
not have been sufficiently aware of her, and in the greater cities
which attracted Ethan she would have suffered a complete loss of
identity. And within a year of their marriage she developed the
"sickliness" which had since made her notable even in a community
rich in pathological instances. When she came to take care of his
mother she had seemed to Ethan like the very genius of health, but
he soon saw that her skill as a nurse had been acquired by the
absorbed observation of her own symptoms.

Then she too fell silent. Perhaps it was the inevitable effect of
life on the farm, or perhaps, as she sometimes said, it was because
Ethan "never listened." The charge was not wholly unfounded. When
she spoke it was only to complain, and to complain of things not in
his power to remedy; and to check a tendency to impatient retort he
had first formed the habit of not answering her, and finally of
thinking of other things while she talked. Of late, however, since
he had reasons for observing her more closely, her silence had begun
to trouble him. He recalled his mother's growing taciturnity, and
wondered if Zeena were also turning "queer." Women did, he knew.
Zeena, who had at her fingers' ends the pathological chart of the
whole region, had cited many cases of the kind while she was nursing
his mother; and he himself knew of certain lonely farm-houses in the
neighbourhood where stricken creatures pined, and of others where
sudden tragedy had come of their presence. At times, looking at
Zeena's shut face, he felt the chill of such forebodings. At other
times her silence seemed deliberately assumed to conceal
far-reaching intentions, mysterious conclusions drawn from
suspicions and resentments impossible to guess. That supposition was
even more disturbing than the other; and it was the one which had
come to him the night before, when he had seen her standing in the
kitchen door.

Now her departure for Bettsbridge had once more eased his mind, and
all his thoughts were on the prospect of his evening with Mattie.
Only one thing weighed on him, and that was his having told Zeena
that he was to receive cash for the lumber. He foresaw so clearly
the consequences of this imprudence that with considerable
reluctance he decided to ask Andrew Hale for a small advance on his
load.

When Ethan drove into Hale's yard the builder was just getting out
of his sleigh.

"Hello, Ethe!" he said. "This comes handy."

Andrew Hale was a ruddy man with a big gray moustache and a stubbly
double-chin unconstrained by a collar; but his scrupulously clean
shirt was always fastened by a small diamond stud. This display of
opulence was misleading, for though he did a fairly good business it
was known that his easygoing habits and the demands of his large
family frequently kept him what Starkfield called "behind." He was
an old friend of Ethan's family, and his house one of the few to
which Zeena occasionally went, drawn there by the fact that Mrs.
Hale, in her youth, had done more "doctoring" than any other woman
in Starkfield, and was still a recognised authority on symptoms and
treatment.

Hale went up to the grays and patted their sweating flanks.

"Well, sir," he said, "you keep them two as if they was pets."

Ethan set about unloading the logs and when he had finished his job
he pushed open the glazed door of the shed which the builder used as
his office. Hale sat with his feet up on the stove, his back propped
against a battered desk strewn with papers: the place, like the man,
was warm, genial and untidy.

"Sit right down and thaw out," he greeted Ethan.

The latter did not know how to begin, but at length he managed to
bring out his request for an advance of fifty dollars. The blood
rushed to his thin skin under the sting of Hale's astonishment. It
was the builder's custom to pay at the end of three months, and
there was no precedent between the two men for a cash settlement.

Ethan felt that if he had pleaded an urgent need Hale might have
made shift to pay him; but pride, and an instinctive prudence, kept
him from resorting to this argument. After his father's death it had
taken time to get his head above water, and he did not want Andrew
Hale, or any one else in Starkfield, to think he was going under
again. Besides, he hated lying; if he wanted the money he wanted it,
and it was nobody's business to ask why. He therefore made his
demand with the awkwardness of a proud man who will not admit to
himself that he is stooping; and he was not much surprised at Hale's
refusal.

The builder refused genially, as he did everything else: he treated
the matter as something in the nature of a practical joke, and
wanted to know if Ethan meditated buying a grand piano or adding a
"cupolo" to his house; offering, in the latter case, to give his
services free of cost.

Ethan's arts were soon exhausted, and after an embarrassed pause he
wished Hale good day and opened the door of the office. As he passed
out the builder suddenly called after him: "See here-you ain't in a
tight place, are you?"

"Not a bit," Ethan's pride retorted before his reason had time to
intervene.

"Well, that's good! Because I am, a shade. Fact is, I was going to
ask you to give me a little extra time on that payment. Business is
pretty slack, to begin with, and then I'm fixing up a little house
for Ned and Ruth when they're married. I'm glad to do it for 'em,
but it costs." His look appealed to Ethan for sympathy. "The young
people like things nice. You know how it is yourself: it's not so
long ago since you fixed up your own place for Zeena."

Ethan left the grays in Hale's stable and went about some other
business in the village. As he walked away the builder's last phrase
lingered in his ears, and he reflected grimly that his seven years
with Zeena seemed to Starkfield "not so long."

The afternoon was drawing to an end, and here and there a lighted
pane spangled the cold gray dusk and made the snow look whiter. The
bitter weather had driven every one indoors and Ethan had the long
rural street to himself. Suddenly he heard the brisk play of
sleigh-bells and a cutter passed him, drawn by a free-going horse.
Ethan recognised Michael Eady's roan colt, and young Denis Eady, in
a handsome new fur cap, leaned forward and waved a greeting. "Hello,
Ethe!" he shouted and spun on.

The cutter was going in the direction of the Frome farm, and Ethan's
heart contracted as he listened to the dwindling bells. What more
likely than that Denis Eady had heard of Zeena's departure for
Bettsbridge, and was profiting by the opportunity to spend an hour
with Mattie? Ethan was ashamed of the storm of jealousy in his
breast. It seemed unworthy of the girl that his thoughts of her
should be so violent.

He walked on to the church corner and entered the shade of the
Varnum spruces, where he had stood with her the night before. As he
passed into their gloom he saw an indistinct outline just ahead of
him. At his approach it melted for an instant into two separate
shapes and then conjoined again, and he heard a kiss, and a
half-laughing "Oh!" provoked by the discovery of his presence. Again
the outline hastily disunited and the Varnum gate slammed on one
half while the other hurried on ahead of him. Ethan smiled at the
discomfiture he had caused. What did it matter to Ned Hale and Ruth
Varnum if they were caught kissing each other? Everybody in
Starkfield knew they were engaged. It pleased Ethan to have
surprised a pair of lovers on the spot where he and Mattie had stood
with such a thirst for each other in their hearts; but he felt a
pang at the thought that these two need not hide their happiness.

He fetched the grays from Hale's stable and started on his long
climb back to the farm. The cold was less sharp than earlier in the
day and a thick fleecy sky threatened snow for the morrow. Here and
there a star pricked through, showing behind it a deep well of blue.
In an hour or two the moon would push over the ridge behind the
farm, burn a gold-edged rent in the clouds, and then be swallowed by
them. A mournful peace hung on the fields, as though they felt the
relaxing grasp of the cold and stretched themselves in their long
winter sleep.

Ethan's ears were alert for the jingle of sleigh-bells, but not a
sound broke the silence of the lonely road. As he drew near the farm
he saw, through the thin screen of larches at the gate, a light
twinkling in the house above him. "She's up in her room," he said to
himself, "fixing herself up for supper"; and he remembered Zeena's
sarcastic stare when Mattie, on the evening of her arrival, had come
down to supper with smoothed hair and a ribbon at her neck.

He passed by the graves on the knoll and turned his head to glance
at one of the older headstones, which had interested him deeply as a
boy because it bore his name.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF

ETHAN FROME AND ENDURANCE HIS WIFE,

WHO DWELLED TOGETHER IN PEACE

FOR FIFTY YEARS.

He used to think that fifty years sounded like a long time to live
together, but now it seemed to him that they might pass in a flash.
Then, with a sudden dart of irony, he wondered if, when their turn
came, the same epitaph would be written over him and Zeena.

He opened the barn-door and craned his head into the obscurity,
half-fearing to discover Denis Eady's roan colt in the stall beside
the sorrel. But the old horse was there alone, mumbling his crib
with toothless jaws, and Ethan whistled cheerfully while he bedded
down the grays and shook an extra measure of oats into their
mangers. His was not a tuneful throat-but harsh melodies burst from
it as he locked the barn and sprang up the hill to the house. He
reached the kitchen-porch and turned the door-handle; but the door
did not yield to his touch.

Startled at finding it locked he rattled the handle violently; then
he reflected that Mattie was alone and that it was natural she
should barricade herself at nightfall. He stood in the darkness
expecting to hear her step. It did not come, and after vainly
straining his ears he called out in a voice that shook with joy:
"Hello, Matt!"

Silence answered; but in a minute or two he caught a sound on the
stairs and saw a line of light about the door-frame, as he had seen
it the night before. So strange was the precision with which the
incidents of the previous evening were repeating themselves that he
half expected, when he heard the key turn, to see his wife before
him on the threshold; but the door opened, and Mattie faced him.

She stood just as Zeena had stood, a lifted lamp in her hand,
against the black background of the kitchen. She held the light at
the same level, and it drew out with the same distinctness her slim
young throat and the brown wrist no bigger than a child's. Then,
striking upward, it threw a lustrous fleck on her lips, edged her
eyes with velvet shade, and laid a milky whiteness above the black
curve of her brows.

She wore her usual dress of darkish stuff, and there was no bow at
her neck; but through her hair she had run a streak of crimson
ribbon. This tribute to the unusual transformed and glorified her.
She seemed to Ethan taller, fuller, more womanly in shape and
motion. She stood aside, smiling silently, while he entered, and
then moved away from him with something soft and flowing in her
gait. She set the lamp on the table, and he saw that it was
carefully laid for supper, with fresh doughnuts, stewed blueberries
and his favourite pickles in a dish of gay red glass. A bright fire
glowed in the stove and the cat lay stretched before it, watching
the table with a drowsy eye.

Ethan was suffocated with the sense of well-being. He went out into
the passage to hang up his coat and pull off his wet boots. When he
came back Mattie had set the teapot on the table and the cat was
rubbing itself persuasively against her ankles.

"Why, Puss! I nearly tripped over you," she cried, the laughter
sparkling through her lashes.

Again Ethan felt a sudden twinge of jealousy. Could it be his coming
that gave her such a kindled face?

"Well, Matt, any visitors?" he threw off, stooping down carelessly
to examine the fastening of the stove.

She nodded and laughed "Yes, one," and he felt a blackness settling
on his brows.

"Who was that?" he questioned, raising himself up to slant a glance
at her beneath his scowl.

Her eyes danced with malice. "Why, Jotham Powell. He came in after
he got back, and asked for a drop of coffee before he went down
home."

The blackness lifted and light flooded Ethan's brain. "That all?
Well, I hope you made out to let him have it." And after a pause he
felt it right to add: "I suppose he got Zeena over to the Flats all
right?"

"Oh, yes; in plenty of time."

The name threw a chill between them, and they stood a moment looking
sideways at each other before Mattie said with a shy laugh. "I guess
it's about time for supper."

They drew their seats up to the table, and the cat, unbidden, jumped
between them into Zeena's empty chair. "Oh, Puss!" said Mattie, and
they laughed again.

Ethan, a moment earlier, had felt himself on the brink of eloquence;
but the mention of Zeena had paralysed him. Mattie seemed to feel
the contagion of his embarrassment, and sat with downcast lids,
sipping her tea, while he feigned an insatiable appetite for
dough-nuts and sweet pickles. At last, after casting about for an
effective opening, he took a long gulp of tea, cleared his throat,
and said: "Looks as if there'd be more snow."

She feigned great interest. "Is that so? Do you suppose it'll
interfere with Zeena's getting back?" She flushed red as the
question escaped her, and hastily set down the cup she was lifting.

Ethan reached over for another helping of pickles. "You never can
tell, this time of year, it drifts so bad on the Flats." The name
had benumbed him again, and once more he felt as if Zeena were in
the room between them.

"Oh, Puss, you're too greedy!" Mattie cried.

